***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
COUNTY OF HAWAI 'I, a municipal corporation of the State of
Hawai'i, Respondent-/Plaintiff-/Counterclaim
Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
ALA LOOP HOMEOWNERS, an unincorporated association,
Respondent-/Defendant-/Counter-Claimant-/Cross-Claimant­
Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
 
and
 
WAI'OLA WATERS OF LIFE CHARTER SCHOOL, a public school
organized under the law of the State of Hawai 'i,
Respondent-/Defendant-/Cross-Claim Defendant­
Appellant/Cross-Appellee;
 
and
 
ALA LOOP COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION, an unincorporated non-profit
association, Petitioner-/Defendant-/Counter-Claimant-/
Cross-Claimant-/Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant;
 
vs.
 
LAND USE COMMISSION, STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-/
Third-Party Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellee.
 
NO. 27707
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CIV. NO. 03-1-0308)
 
JULY 9, 2010
 
MOON, C.J., NAKAYAMA, DUFFY, AND RECKTENWALD, JJ.;
WITH ACOBA, J., CONCURRING SEPARATELY AND DISSENTING
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, J.
 
Respondent Wai 'ola Waters of Life Charter School 
1
(Wai'ola) acquired land in an agricultural use district on Ala
Loop Road on the Island of Hawai 'i in 2003, with the intention of 
using it as a working farm and as a campus for its school. A 
dispute arose between Wai 'ola and neighboring residents regarding 
whether Wai 'ola should be required to obtain a special use permit 
under Hawai 'i Revised Statutes (HRS) chapter 205. The County of 
Hawai'i filed a complaint in the Circuit Court of the Third 
Circuit (circuit court) seeking declaratory relief with regard tothat issue, naming Wai
'ola and Petitioner Ala Loop Community  
2
Association (Ala Loop)  as defendants.  Ala Loop filed a cross-
claim against Wai 'ola, seeking to enforce the provisions of 
chapter 205. 
The circuit court subsequently entered default against 
Wai'ola on Ala Loop’s cross-claim, but denied Ala Loop’s request 
for an award of attorney’s fees.3 Both parties then appealed 
from the circuit court’s First Amended Final Judgment. 
The Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) filed a summary
 
disposition order (SDO) on March 12, 2009. The ICA, citing Pono
 
1
 Wai'ola is a new century charter school chartered pursuant to HRS
§ 302A-1181, et seq. 
2
 Ala Loop is a non-profit unincorporated association whose members
are residents and owners of lots abutting Ala Loop Road, and was formed
pursuant to Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) chapter 429. 
3
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided. 
2
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
v. Molokai Ranch, Ltd., 119 Hawai 'i 164, 194 P.3d 1126 (App. 
2008), cert. rejected, 2008 WL 5392320 (Haw. Dec. 29, 2008),
 
concluded that Ala Loop did not have a private right of action to
 enforce its HRS chapter 205 claims against Wai
'ola, and, 
therefore, the circuit court lacked jurisdiction to determine the
 claims. The ICA entered judgment pursuant to the SDO on
 April 22, 2009.
 
Ala Loop filed an application for writ of certiorari
 
(application), requesting this court to review the ICA’s
 judgment. In its application, Ala Loop argues, inter alia, that
 Pono was wrongly decided because it failed to consider article
 
XI, section 9 of the Hawai 'i State Constitution
5
  4
 and HRS § 607-25
(Supp. 2002).
4 Article XI, section 9 provides:
 
Each person has the right to a clean and
healthful environment, as defined by laws relating to
environmental quality, including control of pollution
and conservation, protection and enhancement of
natural resources. Any person may enforce this right
against any party, public or private, through
appropriate legal proceedings, subject to reasonable
limitations and regulation as provided by law.
 
5 HRS § 607-25 (Supp. 2002) provides in relevant part:
 
§607-25 Actions based on failure to obtain government
permit or approvals; attorney’s fees and costs. . . .
. . . .
 
(c) For purposes of this section, the permits
or approvals required by law shall include compliance
with the requirements for permits or approvals
established by chapters . . . 205, . . . and
ordinances or rules adopted pursuant thereto under
chapter 91. 
. . . .
 
(e) In any civil action in this State where a
private party sues for injunctive relief against
another private party who has been or is undertaking
 
3
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
On August 5, 2009, Wai 'ola filed a response in 
opposition (response) to the application, in which it contended
 
that this court should reject the application on mootness
 grounds. 
For the reasons set forth below, we conclude that this 
dispute is not moot, and that in any event review is appropriate under the public interest exception to the mootness doctrine. We further conclude that article XI, section 9 of the Hawai
'i 
Constitution creates a private right of action to enforce chapter 205 in the circumstances of this case, and that the ICA accordingly erred in its analysis in the SDO. Finally, we conclude that the circuit court erred in declining to set aside the entry of default against Wai
'ola. 
Accordingly, we vacate the April 22, 2009 judgment of
 
the ICA and the December 12, 2005 First Amended Final Judgment of
 the circuit court, and remand to the circuit court for further
 proceedings. In view of this disposition, we do not address the
 
any development without obtaining all permits or
approvals required by law from government agencies:
(1)	 The court may award reasonable attorneys’
fees and costs of the suit to the
 prevailing party.
(2)	 The court shall award reasonable
 attorneys’ fees and costs of the suit to
the prevailing party if the party bringing
the civil action: 
. . . . 
(B)	 Posts a bond in the amount of $2,500
to pay the attorneys’ fees and costs
provided for under this section if
the party undertaking the
development prevails. 
4
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
other issues raised by Ala Loop in its application, or by Ala 
Loop and Wai 'ola in their appeals to the ICA. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A.	 Dispute over whether Wai 'ola must obtain a special use
permit 
Wai'ola is a new century charter school, chartered 
pursuant to HRS chapter 302A (Supp. 1999). In July of 2003, Wai
'ola acquired ownership of a 28 acre parcel of land formerly 
known as the Sunshine Farm property, located in a district designated for agricultural use by the Land Use Commission (LUC) of the State of Hawai
'i. Wai 'ola intended to maintain the 
property as a working farm and to use it as a campus for its school. 
When residents in the area learned of the acquisition, 
they began contacting various county officials to express concern. On July 21, 2003, Ala Loop received a letter from the County of Hawai
'i Planning Department stating that: 
We have received your letter dated July 11, 2003
regarding the Waters of Life Charter School in escrow
to purchase the old Sunshine Farm property on Ala
Loop.
 
The Planning Department has received numerous
inquiries regarding the operation of charter schools
within the State Land Use Agricultural District in
6
regards to H.R.S. § 302A-1184,  which exempts charter
6
 HRS § 302A-1184 (Supp. 2002), provides in pertinent part, as
follows: 
New century charter schools; exemptions.
Schools designated as new century charter schools
shall be exempt from all applicable state laws, except
those regarding:
(1)	 Collective bargaining under chapter 89;
provided that:
 
5
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
schools from state laws, except those relating to
health and safety, and a few other exceptions. Based
 
on this law and a legal opinion received from the
County Corporation Counsel, we are exempting charter
schools from state land use laws not expressly related
to health and safety. 
The major effect of this exemption is that charter
schools located in the State Land Use Agricultural
District do not have to obtain special permits. 
Normally, a school in the agricultural district would
need a special permit with a process that requires
notice to nearby landowners and a public hearing. 
Charter school facilities may need other approvals and
permits, including those related to building, fire,
and sanitation. 
The law exempting the charter schools is open to
interpretation and the courts have the final say.
You, as homeowners concerned about the traffic impacts
this operation may have on your community, have the
right to take this matter to court to have a judge
decide if this charter school needs a special permit.
 
On August 14, 2003, Ala Loop through counsel wrote to
 
the County of Hawai 'i Office of the Corporation Counsel (Corp. 
Counsel), inquiring “whether the proposed operation of Waters of
 
Life Charter School upon land zoned for agriculture and accessed
 
(A)	 The exclusive representatives
defined in chapter 89 may enter into
agreements that contain cost and
noncost items to facilitate
 decentralized decisionmaking;
(B)	 The exclusive representatives and
the local school board of the new
 century charter school may enter
into agreements that contain cost
and noncost items;
(C)	 The agreements shall be funded from
the current allocation or other
 sources of revenue received by the
new century charter school; and
(D)	 These agreements may differ from the
master contracts;
(2)	 Discriminatory practices under section
378-2; and
(3) Health and safety requirements. 
. . . . 
This section was repealed in 2006 and reenacted as HRS § 302B-9
(Supp. 2006). 2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 298, §§2-3 at 1210-11, 1216.
 
6
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
through Ala Loop Road in the absence of a state or county land
 
use regulatory process was proper.” The letter also stated that
 Wai
'ola purchased the property for the purpose of operating a 
charter school, and included background on the property as well
 as the reasons for Ala Loop’s opposition to the operation of the
 charter school. Ala Loop requested that Corp. Counsel review HRS
 § 302A-1184 (Supp. 2002) which exempts new century charter
 schools from all applicable state laws except, inter alia,
 “health and safety requirements.” 
The letter explained Ala Loop’s disagreement with the
 
County’s interpretation of HRS § 302A-1184 as follows: 
As we understand, the County of Hawaii has
previously interpreted certain statutes, particularly
HRS Section 302A-1184, as exempting charter schools
from applicable State land use district law to the
effect that charter schools have been deemed exempt
from obtaining special permits for the operation of
charter schools on lands within the State agricultural
district. Based upon our review of Section 302A-1184
and other applicable law, we find that: 
1. There is no exemption from land use
regulatory law that has been established
for the purpose of protecting the public
health and safety, and
 
2. There is no express exemption from
or preemption of county land use laws and
regulations. 
We therefore believe that the County’s
interpretation is contrary to the plain language and
intent of Section 302A-1184 and that the failure to
 require the Waters of Life school to undergo the
scrutiny of a special permit or other land use
approval process will severely compromise the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Ala Loop
community, students and others who work at or visit
the proposed school, and the public at large. For
 this reason, we ask that you review the current
interpretation that the County has apparently adopted
in light of the [above] information and to provide us
with your position on the issue. 
7
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In summary, Ala Loop argued that 
a special permit was required for the charter school,
pursuant to HRS § 205-6 (2001), county zoning laws,and Land Use Commission (LUC) rules, because thespecial permit requirements specifically involve areview of health and safety issues before an otherwiseimpermissible use can be established on land withinthe state agricultural district. [Ala Loop’s]attorneys concluded that Wai' ola was not exempt from
compliance with State land use laws and county zoninglaws, and that a use permit was required under countyzoning laws in the absence of a special use permit. 
In a letter to the Hawai 'i County Council dated 
October 9, 2003, Corp. Counsel opined that HRS § 302A-1184
 
exempts new century charter schools from obtaining a special
 
7
 permit under HRS § 205-6,  but that such schools are required to
obtain a county use permit under Chapter 25 of the Hawai 'i County 
Code 1983 (1995 ed.). 
In a letter dated October 22, 2003, the Attorney
 
General (AG) of the State of Hawai 'i advised Corp. Counsel that 
7 HRS § 205-6 (2001) provides in pertinent part:
 
Special permit. (a) The county planning
commission may permit certain unusual and reasonable
uses within agricultural . . . districts other than
those for which the district is classified. Any
person who desires to use the person’s land within an
agricultural . . . district other than for an
agricultural . . . use, as the case may be, may
petition the planning commission of the county within
which the person’s land is located for permission to
use the person’s land in the manner desired. Each
 county may establish the appropriate fee for
processing the special permit petition.
 . . . .
 
(d) Special permits for land the area of which
is greater than fifteen acres shall be subject to
approval by the land use commission. The land use
 commission may impose additional restrictions as may
be necessary or appropriate in granting such approval,
including the adherence to representations made by the
applicant.
 
8
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Although the Office of the Attorney General has
not issued a formal opinion concerning [whether
charter schools are exempt from the special permit
requirement set forth in HRS chapter 205], our
position is that new century charter schools are
required to adhere to special permit requirements
prescribed in H.R.S. chapter 205. 
. . . . 
Based upon legislative intent and statutory
language, our interpretation of H.R.S. §302A-1184 is
that new century charter schools are exempted from
state laws that relate to the regulation of education.
However new century charter schools are subject to
laws that apply to the general public and other state
agencies and entities (i.e. criminal statutes, zoning
regulations, etc.). It would be inconceivable to
 conclude that H.R.S. §302A-1184 exempts new century
charter schools from laws that the general public and
other state agencies are required to adhere to. 
. . . . 
. . . As to the issue of whether new century
charter schools are required to adhere to county use
permit requirements, we would initially defer to the
Office of the Corporation Counsel, but note that in
considering the phrase “health and safety
requirements” and its applicability to county use
permit requirements, you may, of course, consider the
rationale of this letter.
 
On November 14, 2003, the County filed a Complaint for
 
Declaratory Relief against Ala Loop and Wai 'ola. The complaint 
sought, inter alia, judicial confirmation that new century
 
charter schools “are exempt from obtaining a State special
 permit, but are required to obtain a County use permit, pursuant
 to Chapter 25 of the Hawai
'i County Code[.]” 
On November 20, 2003, Ala Loop filed an answer to the
 
County’s complaint, a counterclaim against the County, and a
 cross-claim against Wai
'ola. Ala Loop’s counterclaim and cross-
claim included five counts. 
In Count I, Ala Loop requested declaratory relief
 
9
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“determining that [Wai 'ola] must obtain a special permit from the 
Planning Commission and the LUC pursuant to HRS Section 205-6 and
 
the applicable rules and regulations of the Planning Commission
 and the Land Use Commission, prior to operating a charter school
 on [the property].” 
In Count II, Ala Loop requested temporary and permanent
 
injunctive relief enjoining and restraining:
 
A. The County of Hawaii, its agencies, officers,
directors, and employees from issuing any building
permits, occupancy permits, or similar permits thatwould encourage, allow, or permit [Wai' ola] to operate
a charter school, or any components or activitiesconnected with the charter school, on [the property]until and unless a special permit has been issued for[the property] and [Wai' ola] has complied with all
applicable conditions and laws for the operation asmay be established by the Planning Commission and LUCand as may be required by applicable State and Countylaw. 
B. [Wai'ola], its agents, officers, directors,
employees, teachers or representatives from conducting
any classes or school related activities on [theproperty] until and unless a special permit has beenissued for [the property] and [Wai' ola] has complied
with applicable conditions for the operation as may beestablished by the Planning Commission and LUC. 
In Count III, Ala Loop alleged that it was entitled to
 
damages, attorneys’ fees, and costs from the County. In Count
 
IV, Ala Loop sought damages, attorneys’ fees, and costs from
 Wai
'ola based on nuisance per se and HRS § 607-25. Count V 
sought a production of documents from the County as well as
 attorneys’ fees and costs related to obtaining those records.
8
 
8
 On December 2, 2003, Ala Loop filed a joinder and third party
complaint against the LUC, alleging that the LUC has an interest in the
subject and disposition of this action because the LUC has jurisdiction over
the approval of special permits for land within the land use agricultural
 
10
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Ala Loop’s cross-claim was served on November 21, 2003. 
On November 24, 2003 Wai 'ola sought legal representation from the 
AG. 	In a letter dated January 21, 2004 to James Killebrew, Chair
 
of the Wai 'ola School Board, AG Mark Bennett stated that the 
Rules of Professional Conduct would preclude the Department of
 the Attorney General from representing Wai
'ola because, although 
“we have concluded that [HRS] § 302A-1184 does not exempt charter
 schools categorically from the State’s land use laws,” “[i]t is
 my understanding that [Wai
'ola] rejects this advice.” The letter 
advised Wai 'ola “to apply (through this Department) to the 
9
] so that [Wai 'ola] Governor for a waiver under [HRS] § 28-8.3[ 
may contract directly with a private attorney to represent it in
 
district consisting of more than 15 acres in area. 
9	 HRS § 28-8.3 (Supp. 2003) provides in relevant part: 
Employment of attorneys. (a) No department of
the State other than the attorney general may employ
or retain any attorney, by contract or otherwise, for
the purpose of representing the State or the
department in any litigation, rendering legal counsel
to the department, or drafting legal documents for the
department; provided that the foregoing provision
shall not apply to the employment or retention of
attorneys:
 
. . . . 
(19)	 By a department, in the event the attorney
general, for reasons deemed by the
attorney general good and sufficient,
declines, to employ or retain an attorney
for a department; provided that the
governor thereupon waives the provision of
this section. 
(b) For purposes of this section the term
“department” includes any department, board,
commission, agency, bureau, or officer of the State. 
11
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that litigation (at [Waiola’s] own expense).” 
On January 30, 2004, the parties stipulated to an 
extension for Wai 'ola to file an answer or responsive pleading 
from January 15, 2004 to February 16, 2004. The parties 
subsequently agreed to another extension giving Wai 'ola until 
February 25, 2004 to file an answer or responsive pleading. 
On February 25, 2004, Deputy Attorney General (DAG) 
Charleen Aina, appearing specially on behalf of Wai 'ola, filed a 
motion requesting an extension of time for Wai 'ola to answer or 
otherwise respond to the complaint and cross-claim. The motion explained that the AG “would ordinarily appear on behalf of Wai
'ola in this action, inasmuch as Wai 'ola is a state agency,” 
however, the AG’s position regarding whether HRS § 302A-1184 exempts Wai
'ola from obtaining a special permit under HRS chapter 
205 was contrary to Waiola’s position. The motion further 
explained that although Wai 'ola had been informed that the office 
would not be able to represent it and that it should avail itself 
of the provisions of HRS § 28-8.3, Wai 'ola disagreed that it must 
bear the cost of retaining legal services. As to the extension of time requested, DAG Aina reasoned that “[b]ecause this motion will not be heard until March 18, 2004, and that interval may be long enough to work out the differences that remain, we respectfully request an extension of no more than 30 days after the motion is decided for counsel to answer or otherwise file a responsive pleading to the complaint and cross-claim.” 
12
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
On March 10, 2004, Ala Loop filed a memorandum in 
opposition arguing that the “[AG] and [Wai 'ola] have had more 
than ample time to sort out any differences between them as to 
who should represent [Wai 'ola] and the terms of such 
representation” and that “[a]ny further delays in the case being at issue may result in irreparable harm to the public, the interests of the residents of Ala Loop, and possibly the students of [Wai
'ola].” 
After a March 18, 2004 hearing,10 the circuit court
 
entered an order on April 6, 2004 granting Waiola’s request for
 an extension of time to file an answer or responsive pleading. 
The order provided that: 
2. Defendant Wai' ola [has] until April 19, 2004 to
file an answer or other responsive pleading to the
complaint of the County of Hawaii, and the cross-complaint of Defendant-Cross Complainant Ala LoopHomeowners Association filed herein; and 
3. If an answer or other responsive pleading is not
timely filed, the County of Hawaii and the Ala Loop
Homeowners Association may take appropriate action forthe entry of default against Wai' ola. 
On April 19, 2004, Sandra Pechter Song, an attorney 
appearing specially for Wai 'ola, filed a motion for stay of 
proceedings, or in the alternative to extend time to file 
responsive pleadings (motion for a stay). Wai 'ola alleged in its 
motion that it has a “clear and definite right to representation by Bennett.” However, Bennett has “refused to defend Wai
'ola in 
10
 A transcript of the March 18, 2004 hearing is not included as part
of the record on appeal. 
13
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the subject action, either through his office or through special 
counsel appointed by his office” and that “[Wai 'ola] has no funds 
to hire private counsel; nor does it have the ability to represent itself in this case.” Accordingly, Wai
'ola requested 
that this “proceeding be stayed to permit it to obtain an order requiring Bennett to provide it with legal representation.” In an attached declaration, Song stated that she had agreed to “file a petition for a writ of mandamus in the Supreme Court on behalf of Wai
'ola,” directing Bennett and his office to represent Wai 'ola 
in the subject case. 
On April 29, 2004, Song filed a petition for writ of 
mandamus with this court. In the petition, Song argued that AG Bennett was obliged to provide legal representation to Wai
'ola, 
and requested that this court either compel him to defend Wai 'ola 
or pay for special counsel to represent Wai 'ola. In an attached 
declaration, the director of Wai 'ola stated the following: 
4. Although Wai' ola receives State and Federal 
funds, those funds are barely sufficient to provide
for the daily classroom needs. The State has never given any funds to Wai' ola that were specifically
earmarked for a school building or other capitalimprovement. To my knowledge, all non-conversioncharter schools are left to find facilities for their schools without any State assistance. 
. . . . 
16. Mr. Bennett has repeatedly offered to obtain the
consent of the governor to permit Wai' ola to hire 
private counsel to represent Wai' ola in Civil No. 03­
1-0308. However, Wai' ola has no funds to retain a 
private attorney. 
On May 4, 2004, Ala Loop opposed Waiola’s motion
 
for a stay on several grounds including that “[f]urther delay
 
14
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
would be unreasonable” because “[i]nstead of retaining 
special counsel to seek mandamus, [Wai 'ola] could as well 
have retained counsel to defend it in this proceeding” or alternatively “have its current special counsel provide representation in its defense, and also concurrently seek the mandamus action it has threatened.” 
On May 4, 2004, Ala Loop filed a request for entry 
of default against Wai
'ola because Wai 'ola did not file an 
answer to Ala Loop’s cross-claim. 
At a May 13, 2004 hearing,11 the circuit court
 
orally denied Waiola’s motion for a stay. The court entered
 a written order denying the motion on June 29, 2004, stating
 that:
 
in the event that a request for a hearing on any issue
[related to the entry of default judgment] isrequested by any party herein, [Wai' ola] should have
the opportunity to retain counsel for the purpose ofrepresentation of the school in any such hearing, andthe Court considers a 45-day period of time afterMay 13, 2004 to be a reasonable period of time for[Wai'ola] to retain counsel for that purpose, should
it choose to do so. 
Default was entered against Wai 'ola on May 24, 2004. 
On June 2, 2004, the AG sent a letter to Wai 'ola 
outlining the terms of its offer of representation, which 
included the stipulation that “in defending Wai 'ola against the 
default and in other aspects of the representation, the 
11
 A transcript of the May 13, 2004 hearing is not included as part
of the record on appeal. However, portions of what appears to be a transcript
were attached as an exhibit to a July 6, 2004 motion to set aside entry ofdefault filed by Wai' ola in the circuit court. 
15
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Department of the Attorney General will proceed without asserting
 
the defense that ‘State Land Use laws do not apply to charter
 schools.’” 
On June 2, 2004, Wai
'ola accepted the AG’s offer of 
representation. 
On June 10, 2004, this court issued an order denying
 
Waiola’s petition for writ of mandamus. 
On June 22, 2004, Wai 'ola, now represented by the AG, 
filed an answer to Ala Loop’s cross-claim. On July 6, 2004, Wai
'ola filed a motion to set aside entry of default. Wai 'ola 
argued that the entry of default should be set aside because the court may not have jurisdiction over the claims that Ala Loop asserts against Wai
'ola, Ala Loop has not proven all of its 
claims, Wai 'ola has made continuous efforts to secure counsel, 
Waiola’s defenses are meritorious, and defaults are generally disfavored. On July 14, 2004, Ala Loop filed a memorandum in opposition. 
On August 11, 2004, the circuit court entered an order
 
2
denying the motion,
'1 finding and concluding that: 
1. [Waiola] made a conscious choice not [to] be
represented by private legal counsel and therefore,
failed to answer Ala Loop’s cross-claim in a timely manner. Therefore, it cannot be said that [Wai' ola]
was guilty only of excusable neglect. 
2. If it is assumed that [Wai' ola] is a State
agency, Rule 55(e), Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure
(HRCP), does not prohibit a default judgment against aState agency. HRCP Rule 55(e) allows for a default 
12
 The motion was decided without a hearing. 
16
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
judgment against a State agency if the claimant State
agency establishes a claim or right to relief by
evidence satisfactory to the court. Therefore, where
there is an entry of default, a claimant may obtain a
default judgment against a State agency, if there is a
hearing in which the claimant presents sufficient
evidence establishing a claim or right to relief. 10
Moore’s Federal Practice § 55.3[2][a](Matthew Bender
3rd ed.)
 
3. [Wai'ola] has failed to satisfy the necessary
criteria for setting aside an entry of default, and
therefore, its Motion to Set Aside Entry of DefaultDated May 24, 2004, Filed Herein July 6, 2004, should
be denied.
 
On October 20, 2004, Ala Loop filed a Motion for Entry
 
of Default Judgment and Permanent Injunction Against Defendant
 
Wai'ola (motion for entry of default judgment). The motion was 
supported, inter alia, by the record, pleadings, attached
 declarations of neighbors, excerpts of depositions of Wai
'ola 
officials, and correspondence with county officials. 
The circuit court held a hearing on December 2, 2004.
 
With respect to the declaratory relief sought by Ala Loop, the
 circuit court stated the following:
 
The subject land abutting Ala Loop Road is
classified as agricultural. Consistent with the State
 
Deputy Attorney General’s position set forth in that
letter dated October 22nd, 2003, charter schools are
required to comply with chapter 205 of the Hawaii
Revised Statutes. As such, the subject real property
may be used only for the purposes permitted under HRS
Section 205-4 . . . unless a special permit is granted
pursuant to HRS Section 205-6.
Waiola has indicated that it will not undertake
 
construction on the land until a special permit is
secured. However this does not mean that the matter
 is not ripe for adjudication at this juncture. Waiola
 initially indicated that it did not intend to obtain a
special permit and now states that it will. The
 Court’s concern is that unless there’s a Court order
 in place, Waiola is free to change its mind and
generate another--create another generation of
litigation.
Also there is the issue of whether Waiola’s
 
ongoing activities are permitted under HRS Section
 
17
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
205-4 . . ., and we are here on a motion for entry of
default judgment.
So, the Court will order as follows.
One, declare that Waiola is subject to the
restrictions of Chapter 205 of the Hawaii Revised
Statutes.
 
Two, order that Waiola not construct facilities,
educational facilities, on the real property unless it
first receives a special permit.
And, third, will order that Waiola not violate
Chapter 205, HRS, with its ongoing activities. 
With respect to the injunctive relief sought by Ala
 
Loop, the circuit court stated that “no instruction or
 
educational meetings are to occur on the premises[,]” but that
 “farming activities” and a “once-a-week field trip per student
 would be acceptable.” 
On February 4, 2005, the circuit court entered Findings
 
of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Judgment which stated in
 pertinent part: 
I. Findings of Fact.
 
. . . .
 
12. Since the acquisition of the Subject
Property, Wai' ola has used the Subject Property for
the following purposes: (a) operating itsadministrative offices; (b) storing its officeequipment, files, computers and books; (c) holdinginstructional and laboratory classes; and (d) thegrowing of crops and associated activities, such astesting, conducting experiments and makingobservations. 
13. Wai'ola students have been bussed to the 
Subject Property.
14. It is Wai' ola’s intention to use the 
Subject Property for school activities and associatedfacilities, to include a school building, an athleticfield, athletic building, amphitheater and smallerstructures for classes. 
15. If Wai'ola is to use the Subject Property
as a school, certain improvements relating to healthand safety are necessary or appropriate: to include:(a) an expansion of the Ala Loop, (b) an increase in
water availability to fight fires, and (c) an
individual waste water system.
16. Members of [Ala Loop], as neighbors of the
Subject Property, may suffer injury if the Subject
Property is used as a school.
17. Initially, Wai' ola declined to obtain a 
18
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
special permit even though it understood from the
Attorney General, State of Hawai' i, pursuant to a
letter dated October 22, 2003, that it was theAttorney General’s Office’s opinion that Wai' ola, even
though it was a new century charter school, wassubject to the requirements of Chapter 205, HRS.
18. While Wai' ola now asserts that it intends 
to obtain a special permit, it seeks to use theSubject Property for uses other than permitted underChapter 205, HRS, while its application for a specialpermit is pending. 
II. Conclusions of Law.
 
1. [Ala Loop] has standing to assert its
claims regarding Wai' ola’s use of the Subject
Property. In particular, it has suffered an actual orthreatened injury as a result of Wai' ola’s conduct,
the injury is fairly traceable to the conduct ofWai'ola and a favorable decision would likely provide
relief for [Ala Loop’s] injury.
2. Since the Subject Property is located in
an agricultural use district, its use is limited by
HRS § 205-4.5. Schools and school activities are not
 permitted under HRS § 205-4.5.
3. HRS § 302A-1184 does not apply to so as
[sic] to exempt a new century charter school from
complying with the requirements and limitations of
Chapter 205, HRS.
4. Under HRS § 205-6, an entity may obtain
[a] special permit to make “unusual and reasonable
uses” of agricultural land which are not otherwise
permitted under HRS § 205-4.5.
5. Since the acquisition of the Subject
Property, Wai' ola has used the Subject Property in
violation of Chapter 205, HRS, at least in thefollowing ways: (a) operating its administrativeoffices; (b) storing its office equipment, files,computers and books; and (c) holding instructional andlaboratory classes.
6. There is a reasonable apprehension that
Wai'ola may use the Subject Property in violation of
the requirements and limitations of Chapter 205, HRS,unless it is enjoined from doing so.
7. [Ala Loop] is entitled to a permanent
injunction against Wai' ola enjoining Wai' ola from 
violating the requirements of Chapter 205, HRS.
8. There is an actual controversy regarding
the applicability of Chapter 205, HRS, to Wai' ola. 
[Ala Loop] is entitled to a declaratory judgmentagainst Wai' ola. 
9. [Ala Loop] has provided evidence
satisfactory to the Court that is entitled to relief
as required by Rule 55(e), HRCP. 
III. Judgment.
 
Based upon the foregoing, it is hereby ordered,
adjudged and decreed as follows: 
19
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
1. Notwithstanding HRS § 302A-1184, Wai' ola 
is subject to the limitations and requirements of
Chapter 205, HRS. Accordingly, Wai' ola may not
conduct school activities on the Subject Propertywhich would otherwise violate Chapter 205, HRS, unlessWai'ola first receives a special permit under HRS
205-6. 
2. Accordingly, Wai' ola, and its agents,
representatives, faculty and students, are permanentlyenjoined from undertaking school activities on theSubject Property which would otherwise violate Chapter205, HRS, unless Wai' ola first receives a special
permit under HRS § 205-6 which permits the otherwiseunpermitted activities. The prohibited schoolactivities on the Subject Property, include, but arenot limited to: 
a.	 Operating administrative offices;
b.	 Storing office equipment, files, computers
and books;
 
c.	 Holding instructional and laboratory
classes;
d.	 Holding parent-teacher conferences and
staff meetings; and
 
e.	 The construction of educational
 facilities.
 
However, Wai' ola, and its agents,
representatives, faculty and students are specificallyallowed use of the Subject Property as follows: 
a.	 A student may be bussed no more than once
a week to the Subject Property during
school hours for agricultural activities;
and 
b.	 Permitted agricultural activities by
students using the Subject Property
include the cultivation of crops, the
making of observations of crops, the
undertaking of individual tests or
experiments designed to improve the
cultivation of crops and the receipt of
individual advice from faculty members
regarding the cultivation of crops or the
[] individual tests or experiments. 
Final judgment was entered on March 4, 2005. Wai 'ola 
filed a notice of appeal on March 4, 2005. On July 29, 2005,
 
this court issued an order dismissing the appeal because the
 judgment did not comply with Jenkins v. Cades Schutte Fleming &
 Wright, 76 Hawai
'i 115, 119-120, 869 P.2d 1334, 1338-39 (1994). 
On August 23, 2005, Ala Loop filed a motion for an
 
award of attorney’s fees and costs against Wai 'ola. A hearing 
20
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
was held on the motion on September 13, 2005. On October 28,
 
2005, the circuit court entered an order granting Ala Loop all of
 its costs, but denying Ala Loop its attorney’s fees.
 
A First Amended Final Judgment was entered on 
December 12, 2005. The First Amended Final Judgment entered judgment in favor of Ala Loop and against Wai
'ola on Counts I and 
II. As to Count IV, the circuit court dismissed with prejudice 
Ala Loop’s cross-claim against Wai 'ola alleging damages on the 
basis of nuisance per se, and entered judgment in favor of Wai
'ola on Ala Loop’s claim for attorney’s fees, and against 
Wai'ola for costs in the sum of $3,878.64.13 
Wai'ola timely filed a Notice of Appeal on January 10, 
2006. Ala Loop filed a Notice of Cross-Appeal on January 24, 2006. 
B. ICA Appeal
 
On May 22, 2006, Wai
'ola filed its opening brief in 
which it raised the following points of error: 
1. “Because [Ala Loop] lacked standing and its
claim to require Wai' ola to obtain a special use
permit was either moot or not ripe, the circuit court
did not have subject matter jurisdiction, and erred byproceeding to adjudicate [Ala Loop’s] cross-claim tojudgment”; 
2. “The circuit court erred in failing to recognize
that [Ala Loop’s] claims for declaratory and
injunctive relief and for nuisance per se againstWai'ola as a state agency are barred by sovereign
immunity”; 
3. “The circuit court misapplied HRCP Rule 55(c)
 
13
 The court noted in a footnote that Counts III and V sought relief
solely from the County of Hawai' i. 
21
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
and abused its discretion in denying Wai' ola’s Motion 
to Set Aside Entry of Default”; 
4. “The circuit court lacked sufficient admissible,
competent evidence for, and therefore erred in
entering default judgment under [HRCP Rule] 55(e) in
[Ala Loop’s] favor”; and
 
5. “The circuit court erred in concluding that
Wai'ola was using its farm in violation of the State’s
and the County’s land use and zoning laws.” 
On June 2, 2006, Ala Loop filed its opening brief which
 
raised the following points of error on cross-appeal: 
1. “The Court erred in determining that [Ala Loop]
was required by HRS Section 607-25(e)(2) to post a
bond at the time it filed its Answer and Cross-Claim against [Wai' ola], thus denying [Ala Loop] a mandatory
award of attorneys’ fees and costs”; 
2. “The Court erred when it failed to award [Ala
Loop] attorneys[’] fees under HRS Section 607­
25(e)(1)”;
 
3. “The Court erred when it determined that HRS
 
Section 607-25 did not include [Waiola’s] activities
of operating the school on the Property and that such
activities did not constitute ‘development’ under the
statute”; and
 
4. “The Court erred when it determined that 
[Wai'ola] was not considered a private party under HRS
Section 607-25.” 
The ICA’s March 12, 2009 SDO reversed the circuit
 
court’s December 12, 2005 First Amended Final Judgment. The ICA
 
cited its decision in Pono v. Molokai Ranch, Ltd., 119 Hawai 'i 
164, 180-90, 194 P.3d 1126, 1142-52 (App. 2008), cert. rejected,
 
14
2008 WL 5392320 (Haw. Dec. 29, 2008),  for the proposition that
“private citizens do not have a private right of action to
 
enforce the provisions of HRS chapter 205 and, therefore, lack
 
14
 The parties in this action filed their opening briefs with the ICA
prior to the ICA’s decision in Pono. Pono was decided on October 21,
2008, and the ICA’s disposition in this case was filed on March 12, 2009.
 
22
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
standing to invoke a circuit court’s jurisdiction to determine 
their claims to enforce Chapter 205.” Accordingly, the ICA concluded that “[Ala Loop] did not have a private right of action to enforce their Chapter 205 claims and, therefore, the Circuit Court lacked subject matter jurisdiction over [Ala Loop’s] claims.” Based on that conclusion, the ICA did not “reach the merits of Wai
'ola’s other grounds for challenging the Circuit 
Court’s rulings in favor of [Ala Loop] and against Wai 'ola on 
[Ala Loop’s] cross-claim.” 
As for Ala Loop’s cross-appeal, the ICA noted that 
“[i]n light of our conclusion that [Ala Loop] has no authority to prosecute a private action against Wai
'ola to enforce HRS § 205­
6,” “we need not address the other issues raised by [Ala Loop] in conjunction with their request for an award of attorneys’ fees.” 
The ICA entered judgment on April 22, 2009.
 
C. Application
 
Ala Loop timely filed its application on July 21, 2009. 
In its application, Ala Loop stated that:
 
.... It is Petitioner's position that the ICA:
(1) ignored Petitioner’s standing under HRS
Section 632-1 based on the personal stake its members
had in the controversy relating to the exemption
issue,
(2) ignored the direct procedural injury
suffered by its members when they were deprived of the
opportunity to participate in public hearings and
contested case hearings which are available under the
applicable special permit procedures mandated under
HRS Section 205-6,
(3) ignored the provisions of Article XI,
Section 9 of the Hawaii State Constitution or the
 legislative intent of HRS Section 607-25, which
expressly provides private parties with the right to
 
23
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
sue for injunctive relief when a development is
undertaken without obtaining all permits or approvals
required by law, including permits required by Chapter
205, and
(4) did not account for the fact that
 
Petitioner was named as a defendant to the action, in
which both the County of Hawaii and the Land Use
Commission of the State of Hawaii (“LUC”) were
parties, and the County of Hawaii sought declaratory
relief as to the same issues.
 
Accordingly, Ala Loop characterized the “question for
 
decision” as 
[W]hen property is being used by an entity in
violation of Chapter 205, HRS and the entity claims an
exemption from the coverage of the land use statute,
does an association comprised of neighbors of the
entity named as a party have standing to obtain
declaratory relief as to the exemption issue
particularly when the public agencies provided with
express statutory authority to enforce the chapter
have failed to do so, or should the neighbors be
without a remedy?[ 15
]  
Wai'ola timely filed its response on August 5, 2009. 
In its response, Wai 'ola contends that this court should reject 
15 Ala Loop also raised the following subsidiary questions: 
1. Whether [Ala Loop has] established standing
based on injury in fact or procedural injury. 
2. Did the Circuit Court have jurisdiction to enter
a judgment in favor of [Ala Loop] when the County of
Hawaii and Land Use Commission have specific notice of
a violation of Chapter 205, . . .? 
3. Where as here, the neighbors also sought
injunctive relief based on the law of nuisance, did
the Circuit Court have jurisdiction to determine that
the activities upon which the nuisance claim is based
are in violation of Chapter 205 when the public
agencies provided express authority to enforce the
statute are named as parties and have the opportunity
to provide input on the issues?
 
4. As a matter of procedural due process, did the
circuit court have jurisdiction to consider the
position of [Ala Loop] on the issues raised by the
County in its Complaint, and by [Ala Loop] in its
Counterclaim and Cross-claim? 
24
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the application on mootness grounds. 
On August 6, 2009, this court ordered Ala Loop to show
 
cause why this case is not moot. On August 11, 2009, Ala Loop
 
filed its response to the order to show cause.
 
On July 28, 2009, the Native Hawaiian Legal Corporation
 
filed an amicus curiae brief (NHLC amicus brief) in support of
 
Ala Loop’s application for writ of certiorari. On July 29, 2009,
 Hawaii’s Thousand Friends filed an amicus curiae brief (HTF
 amicus brief) also in support of the application. 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Mootness
 
This court has stated that 
It is axiomatic that mootness is an issue of subject matter
jurisdiction. Whether a court possesses subject matter
jurisdiction is a question of law reviewable de novo. 
Hamilton ex rel. Lethem v. Lethem, 119 Hawai 'i 1, 4-5, 193 P.3d 
839, 842-43 (2008) (citation and internal quotation marks
 
omitted). 
B. Interpreting the Hawai 'i Constitution 
In interpreting constitutional provisions: 
“[W]e have long recognized that the Hawai' i 
Constitution must be construed with due regard to the
intent of the framers and the people adopting it, and
the fundamental principle in interpreting a
constitutional provision is to give effect to that
intent.” Hirono v. Peabody, 81 Hawai' i 230, 232, 915
P.2d 704, 706 (1996)(citation omitted). “This intent
 is to be found in the instrument itself.” State v.
 
Kahlbaun, 64 Haw. 197, 201, 638 P.2d 309, 314 (1981).
As we recently reiterated in State of Hawai' i,
ex rel. Bronster v. Yoshina, 84 Hawai' i 179, 932 P.2d
316 (1997), “[t]he general rule is that, if the words
 
25
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
used in a constitutional provision . . . are clear and
unambiguous, they are to be construed as they are
written.” Id. [at 186], 932 P.2d 323 (quoting Blair
[v. Cayetano], 73 Haw. [536,] 543, 836 P.2d [1066,]
1070, [(1992)] (citation omitted)). “In this regard,
the settled rule is that in the construction of a
 constitutional provision the words are presumed to be
used in their natural sense unless the context
 furnishes some ground to control, qualify, or enlarge
them.” Pray v. Judicial Selection Comm’n, 75 Haw.
333, 342, 861 P.2d 723, 727 (1993) (citation, internal
quotation marks, brackets, and ellipses omitted).
Moreover, “a constitutional provision must be
construed in connection with other provisions of the
instrument, and also in the light of the circumstances
under which it was adopted and the history which
preceded it[.]” Carter v. Gear, 16 Haw. 242, 244
(1904), affirmed, 197 U.S. 348, 25 S.Ct. 491, 49 L.Ed.
787 (1905). 
In re Water Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai 'i 97, 131, 9 P.3d 
409, 443 (2000) (brackets in the original) (quoting Hawaii State
 
AFL-CIO v. Yoshina, 84 Hawai 'i 374, 376, 935 P.2d 89, 91 (1997)). 
C.	 Motion to Set Aside An Entry of Default
 
The application of HRCP Rule 55, which governs the
 
entry of default judgment, is reviewed for abuse of discretion. 
See Gonsalves v. Nissan Motor Corp., 100 Hawai
'i 149, 158, 58 
P.3d 1196, 1205 (2002). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 Ala Loop’s chapter 205 claim is not moot and would, in any
event, fall within the “public interest” exception to the
mootness doctrine
 
In its response to Ala Loop’s application, Wai
'ola 
contends that this court should not accept the application
 
because the case is moot. Wai 'ola asserts that “Wai 'ola School no 
longer owns the property . . . on Ala Loop Road where the events
 
26
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
and controversies that spawned this case occurred,”16 and that it
 
“no longer conducts classes or other school activities on the Ala
 
Loop property, see declaration of Daniel Caluya, and would need
 the current owner’s permission before it could do so.”
17
 
Accordingly, Wai 'ola argued, “[b]ecause Wai 'ola School no longer 
owns the subject property, and no longer conducts classes or
 activities at that location, the issues and claims for relief
 raised by [Ala Loop] are moot.” 
However, we conclude that Wai
'ola failed to 
establish that Ala Loop’s cross-claim is moot, and even if this
 case is moot, the “public interest” exception applies.
 
This court has stated that:
 
A case is moot if it has lost its character as a
 
present, live controversy of the kind that must exist
if courts are to avoid advisory opinions on abstract
propositions of law. The rule is one of the
 prudential rules of judicial self-governance founded
in concern about the proper-and properly limited-role
of the courts in a democratic society. We have said
 the suit must remain alive throughout the course of
litigation to the moment of final appellate
 
16 Attached to Waiola’s response is a certified copy of a warranty
deed conveying the property back to its former owner.
 
17 The declaration of Daniel Caluya, which was attached to the
response, provides:
 
I, DANIEL CALUYA, declare as follows:
1.	 I have personal knowledge of the following facts
and am competent to testify to them.
2.	 I am the current director of Wai' ola Waters of 
Life Public Charter School (“Wai' ola School”).
3.	 Wai'ola School no longer owns the property that
is located at Ala Loop, and that is the subjectof this case. 
4.	 Wai'ola [S]chool no longer conducts classes or
activities at that location. 
I declare the foregoing to be true and correct
under penalty of perjury. 
27
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
disposition to escape the mootness bar. 
Kona Old Hawaiian Trails Group v. Lyman, 69 Haw. 81, 87, 734 P.2d
 
161, 165 (1987) (internal quotation marks, citations, and
 brackets omitted). 
In sum, “[a] case is moot if the reviewing court can no 
longer grant effective relief.” Kaho
'ohanohano v. State, 114 
Hawai'i 302, 332, 162 P.3d 696, 726 (2007) (brackets in original) 
(emphasis and citations omitted). 
Wai'ola failed to establish that Ala Loop’s cross-claim 
is moot. In its February 4, 2005 order, the circuit court found, inter alia, that Wai
'ola was storing computers and equipment at 
the property as well as using the property as the site for its administrative offices,
18 and concluded that these activities 
violated chapter 205 in the absence of a special use permit. However, Mr. Caluya’s declaration is silent as to whether Wai
'ola 
continues to store equipment or supplies at the site, or remains in possession of any portion of the property. 
Moreover, although Wai
'ola states that it “no longer 
owns the property” and “no longer conducts classes or other activities on the Ala Loop Property,” it does not assert that it has abandoned its attempts to operate a school there. Rather, Wai
'ola states that “it would need the current owner’s 
permission” before operating a school on the property. Thus, 
18
 These findings are supported by deposition testimony.
 
28
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Wai'ola could lease or otherwise secure the property for future 
school operations. Cf. Lathrop v. Sakatani, 111 Hawai 'i 307, 
313, 141 P.3d 480, 486 (2006) (holding that sale of property 
rendered appeal moot because the property plaintiffs sought to 
record a lis pendens upon was no longer owned by defendants). 
Even if Ala Loop’s claim is moot, it falls within the 
“public interest” exception to the mootness doctrine. Doe v.Doe, 
116 Hawai 'i 323, 327, 172 P.3d 1067, 1071 (2007). When analyzing 
the public interest exception, this court reviews the following 
three factors: “(1) the public or private nature of the question presented, (2) the desirability of an authoritative determination for future guidance of public officers, and (3) the likelihood of future recurrence of the question.” Id. (citations omitted). 
Wai
'ola argues that the “[public interest exception] is 
not implicated here because the neighbors[’] counterclaim against the county is still pending in the Third Circuit Court.” However, this argument is inconsistent with Waiola’s contention that the cross-claim is moot, since presumably the same mootness arguments would apply to the counterclaim as to the cross-claim. Moreover, Wai
'ola cites no authority for the proposition that the 
public interest exception should not apply to claims against one party based on the possibility that the issues could be litigated in connection with claims against another party. 
All three prongs of the public interest test are
 
satisfied here. First, even if this dispute is viewed as one
 
29
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
between two private parties, the ICA’s ruling that there is no
 
private right of action under chapter 205 “inject[ed] the
 requisite degree of public concern” in support of having the
 public interest exception apply. See id. (finding that, although
 
the underlying proceedings were private in nature, the family
 court’s invalidation of the grandparent visitation statute made
 the question public in nature). Second, because the availability
 of private enforcement is a potentially important consideration
 for public officers to take into account in performing their own
 duties under HRS chapter 205, public officials need guidance with
 regard to whether private citizens have a private right of action
 to enforce HRS chapter 205. As for the third prong, given the
 volume of land development activity in the State and the
 frequency with which issues relating to chapter 205 have been
 litigated, the question regarding whether a private party may
 seek to enforce HRS chapter 205 is likely to recur in the
 future.
19
 
This case is similar to Kona Old, where an
 
environmental group challenged the county planning director’s
 issuance of “special management area minor permit” to the owner
 of property situated within a special management area. The owner
 
19
 Wai'ola contends that “the plain language of HRS § 205-12 obviates
any need for a court to determine who is responsible for enforcing land use
classification laws.” However, this argument goes more to the merits ratherthan the question of mootness, and makes no attempt to address the argumentsregarding the significance of article XI, section 9, HRS § 607-25, or thiscourt’s previous decisions. See sections III(B)(4) and (5), infra. 
30
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
moved to dismiss the appeal as moot, arguing that no work
 
remained to be done under the minor permit. 69 Haw. at 86-87,
 734 P.2d at 165. Although it was unclear whether all
 construction was in fact complete, this court nevertheless
 proceeded to the merits of the group’s appeal reasoning that the
 questions raised were “of public concern.” Id. at 87-88, 734
 
P.2d at 165-166. 
Likewise, the question of whether there is a private 
right of action to enforce claims brought under chapter 205 is of equal “public concern.” Accordingly, we will address the merits of Ala Loop’s application even if Wai
'ola has sold the property 
where the events underlying this case took place. 
B.	 Ala Loop had a private right of action to enforce HRS
chapter 205 
1.	 Pono erred in failing to consider the effect of article
XI, section 9 of the Hawai 'i Constitution 
Since the ICA relied on Pono in determining that Ala
 
Loop did not have a private right of action, and that the circuit
 
court accordingly lacked subject matter jurisdiction, we begin
 our analysis there. The ICA held in Pono that private citizens
 do not have the authority to enforce the provisions of HRS
 chapter 205 and, therefore, lack standing to invoke a circuit
 court’s jurisdiction to adjudicate their claims under chapter
 
31
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
205.20 119 Hawai 'i at 167, 194 P.3d at 1129. The plaintiffs, an 
unincorporated association and several of its members
 
(collectively Pono), filed a complaint in circuit court against
 Molokai Ranch (MR) for allegedly violating HRS chapter 205 by
 developing fifteen overnight campgrounds on agricultural lands
 without obtaining a special use permit pursuant to HRS § 205-6.
21
 
The complaint alleged jurisdiction “pursuant to HRS §§ 6E-13,
 603-21.5, 603-21.7(b), 632-1, and Article XI, Sec. 9, Hawaii
 Constitution.” Id. at 173-74, 194 P.3d at 1135-36 (footnotes
 
omitted). The circuit court, relying on a Special Master’s
 
20 While the term “standing” is sometimes used to describe the
private right of action inquiry, see, e.g., Pono 119 Hawai' i at 167, 194 P.3d
at 1129, nevertheless, our cases make clear that the two inquiries involve
distinct policy considerations and distinct tests, see, e.g., Pele DefenseFund v. Paty, 73 Haw. 578, 591, 837 P.2d 1247, 1256-57 (1992) (finding that,in action under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 for alleged breach of trust by the state,this court separately analyzes whether plaintiff had a “right to sue” “toenforce federal rights created by § 5(f) of the Admission Act” and whetherplaintiff had “standing” under the injury-in-fact test). The private right ofaction inquiry focuses on the question of whether any private party can sue toenforce a statute, while the standing inquiry focuses on whether a particular
private party is an appropriate plaintiff. See Sierra Club v. Hawai' i Tourism 
Auth., 100 Hawai' i 242, 271, 59 P.3d 877, 906 (2002) (Moon, C.J., dissenting)
(“This court has long acknowledged that ‘[s]tanding is that aspect of
justiciability focusing on the party seeking a forum rather than on the issueshe [or she] wants adjudicated.’”) (brackets in the original) (quoting Citizensfor Prot. of N. Kohala Coastline v. County of Hawai' i, 91 Hawai' i 94, 100, 979
P.2d 1120, 1126 (1999)). 
21
 Prior to Pono filing its lawsuit, the Director of the Department
of Public Works and Waste Management stated in a letter dated December 11,
1995 to MR’s vice president that “camping is a permitted use in agricultural
districts having a soil classification rating of C, D, E, or U[.]” Id. at
 
170, 194 P.3d at 1132. Based on the director’s opinion, MR did not apply for
a special use permit for its proposed campgrounds. Id. at 170-71, 194 P.3d at
 
1132-33. Thereafter, MR applied to the Department of Public Works and Waste
Management (DPW) for, and was issued, approximately one hundred building
permits for construction of different camping facilities along the Great
Molokai Ranch Trail. Id. at 171, 194 P.3d at 1133. 
32
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
22
report,  dismissed the complaint and Pono appealed.  Id. at 179,
 
194 P.3d at 1141. 
The ICA began its analysis by noting that this court in 
Reliable Collection Agency v. Cole
, 59 Haw. 503, 584 P.2d 107 
(1978), had utilized the United States Supreme Court’s approach 
set forth in Cort v. Ash, 422 U.S. 66 (1975), to determine whether “‘a private remedy is implicit in a statute not expressly providing one’--an analysis that also involves the determination of whether a statute creates a right upon which a plaintiff may seek relief.” Pono, 119 Hawai
'i at 184-85, 194 P.3d at 1146-47. 
The ICA further noted that the Reliable court discussed the following three relevant factors used in Cort to make this determination: 
First, is the plaintiff ‘one of the class for whose
especial benefit the statute was enacted[’]...-that is,
does the statute create a...right in favor of the
plaintiff? Second, is there any indication of legislative
intent, explicit or implicit, either to create such a
remedy or to deny one?...Third, is it consistent with the
underlying purposes of the legislative scheme to imply such
a remedy for the plaintiff? 
Id. at 185, 194 P.3d at 1147 (emphasis and citations omitted). 
The ICA also cited to Rees v. Carlisle, 113 Hawai 'i 
446, 153 P.3d 1131 (2007), wherein this court stated that 
Subsequent to Cort, decisions of the United States
Supreme Court have emphasized that “the key inquiry is
 
22
 The Special Master, relying on Kona Old, in which this court held
 
that judicial relief is not available unless the party affected has taken
advantage of the procedures provided for in the administrative process,
concluded that the circuit court lacked jurisdiction over Pono’s HRS chapter
205 claims because Pono failed to appeal its chapter 205 claim to the Maui
County Board of Variances and Appeals (BVA). Id. at 178-79, 194 P.3d at 1140­
41. 
33
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
whether Congress intended to provide the plaintiff
with a private right of action.” Whitey’s Boat
Cruises, Inc. v. Napali-Kauai Boat Charters, Inc., 110Hawai'i 302, 313 n.20, 132 P.3d 1213, 1224 n.20 (2006)
(quoting First Pac. Bancorp, Inc. v. Helfer, 224 F.3d1117, 1121-22 (9th Cir. 2000)). Therefore, as werecognized in Whitey’s Boat Cruises, “we apply Cort’sfirst three factors in determining whether a statuteprovides a private right of action thoughunderstanding that legislative intent appears to bethe determinative factor.” Id. See also Gonzaga Univ.v. Doe, 536 U.S. 273, 284, 122 S.Ct. 2268, 153 L.Ed.2d
309 (2002) (For a statute to create private rights,
its text must be phrased in terms of the persons
benefitted.); Alexander v. Sandoval, 532 U.S. 275,
286, 121 S.Ct. 1151, 149 L.Ed.2d 517 (2001) (“The
judicial task is to interpret the statute Congress has
passed to determine whether it displays an intent to
create not just a private right but also a private
remedy.”). 
Pono, 119 Hawai 'i at 185, 194 P.3d at 1147 (quoting Rees, 113 
Hawai'i at 458, 153 P.3d at 1143). 
Applying the Rees/Reliable test, the ICA first
 
concluded that no statute expressly creates a private right to
 
enforce HRS chapter 205. Id. at 187, 194 P.3d at 1149. Unlike
 
other statutes enacted by the legislature which expressly
 authorize private causes of actions for violations of those
 statutes, the ICA noted that “there is no provision in HRS
 chapter 205 that expressly authorizes a private individual to
 enforce the chapter.” Id. at 187, 194 P.3d at 1149.
 
As to the second factor, the ICA concluded that there
 
was no indication of legislative intent, explicit or implicit, to
 create a private right of action to enforce chapter 205, and that
 implying a private right of action on the basis of legislative
 silence would be a “hazardous enterprise, at best.” Id. at 189,
 
194 P.3d at 1151 (quoting Touche Ross & Co. v. Redington, 442
 
34
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
U.S. 560, 571 (1979)).
 
Finally, as to the third factor, the ICA concluded that
 
recognizing a private right of action to enforce HRS chapter 205
 
is not consistent with the underlying purposes of HRS chapter
 205. Id. The ICA noted that pursuant to HRS § 205-12 (1993),
23 
“the legislature has delegated enforcement of the restrictions and conditions relating to land-use-classification districts in a county to the county official charged with administering the zoning laws for that county[.]” Id. Relying on Lanai Co. v. 
Land Use Commission, 105 Hawai
'i 296, 97 P.3d 372 (2004), in 
which this court held that HRS § 205-12 authorizes counties, but not the LUC, to enforce chapter 205, the ICA concluded that “it would be incongruous to hold that the legislature intended to grant private citizens a right to enforce the provisions of HRS chapter 205 against violators of the chapter.” Pono, 119 
Hawai
'i at 190-91, 194 P.3d at 1152-53. 
In a concurring opinion, Judge Foley, relying on Kona
 
Old, stated that, “I would hold that Pono did not exhaust its
 administrative remedies prior to bringing suit in the circuit
 court because Pono did not appeal [the DPW director’s] decision
 
23
 HRS § 205-12 (1993) provides: 
Enforcement. The appropriate officer or agency
charged with the administration of county zoning laws
shall enforce within each county the use
classification districts adopted by the land use
commission and the restriction on use and the
 condition relating to agricultural districts under
section 206-4.5 and shall report to the commission all
violations. 
35
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to the BVA.” Id. at 200, 194 P.3d at 1162. Judge Foley noted
 
that at the time of the events that led to Pono’s lawsuit,
 
Section 8-5.4(2) of the Maui County Charter provided that the BVA
 “[h]ear and determine appeals alleging error from any person
 aggrieved by a decision or order of any department charged with
 the enforcement of zoning, subdivision and building ordinances.” 
Id. at 199, 194 P.3d at 1161. Under the Maui County Code, the
 DPW was charged with the “enforcement of zoning, subdivision and
 building ordinances.” Id. at 200, 192 P.3d at 1162. Pursuant to
 
§ 8-5.4(2), the BVA had the authority “to hear and determine
 appeals alleging error from any person aggrieved by a decision or
 order” of the DPW director. Id. Accordingly, in Judge Foley’s
 
view, Pono was required to exhaust its administrative remedies,
 by appealing the DPW’s determination that camping was a permitted
 use and that a special use permit accordingly was not required,
 before it could seek judicial review. Id.
 
Ala Loop and the amicus fault the ICA’s analysis in 
Pono on several grounds. First, they note that the ICA did not consider the effect of article XI, section 9 of the Hawai
'i 
Constitution in its Rees/Reliable analysis. Second, they argue that the ICA failed to consider the effect of HRS § 607-25, which authorizes the award of attorneys’ fees in actions brought by private parties to enjoin development undertaken without permits, including permits required under Chapter 205. Finally, they argue that the ICA’s analysis is inconsistent with cases of this 
36
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
court that granted standing to plaintiffs in environmental cases,
 
and with cases of this court which have implicitly recognized
 private rights of action to enforce environmental laws, including
 chapter 205. 
We conclude that Ala Loop had a private right of action 
to enforce chapter 205 against Wai
'ola. While the Rees/Reliable 
test is appropriately used to determine whether the legislature intended to create a private right of action when it enacts a statute, it is not applicable when the state constitution creates the private right of action. In Reliable, the question was whether the legislature intended to create a private right of action when it enacted prohibitions on the unauthorized practice of law. 59 Haw. at 506, 584 P.2d at 109. In Rees, the question was whether the ordinances of the City and County of Honolulu created a private right of action by which a citizen could seek to enforce the provisions of the city’s ethics code against a public official. 113 Hawai
'i at 456-459, 153 P.3d at 1141-1144. 
Neither case addressed the question of whether a provision of the state constitution had created a private right of action. Thus, the ICA erred in Pono and here by applying the Rees/Reliable analysis to chapter 205, without also addressing the question of whether article XI, section 9 created a private right of action for the enforcement of that chapter. 
For the reasons set forth below, article XI, section 9
 
creates a private right of action to enforce chapter 205 in the
 
37
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
circumstances of this case, and the legislature confirmed the
 
existence of that right of action by enacting HRS § 607-25, which
 allows recovery of attorneys’ fees in such actions. 
2. Article XI, section 9
 
Article XI, section 9 of the Hawai
'i Constitution 
provides:
 
Each person has the right to a clean and
healthful environment, as defined by laws relating to
environmental quality, including control of pollution
and conservation, protection and enhancement of
natural resources. Any person may enforce this right
against any party, public or private, through
appropriate legal proceedings, subject to reasonable
limitations and regulation as provided by law.
 
This provision was proposed by the 1978 Constitutional
 
Convention, and approved by the voters in the November 7, 1978
 
general election. See Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 77, in 1 Proceedings
 
of the Constitutional Convention of 1978, at 689 (1980). It has
 both a substantive and a procedural component. First, it
 recognizes a substantive right “to a clean and healthful
 environment,” with the content of that right to be established
 not by judicial decisions but rather “as defined by laws relating
 to environmental quality.”
24 Second, it provides for the
 
24 As the committee report from the 1978 Constitutional Convention
observed regarding this section:
 
Your Committee believes that a clean and
 
healthful environment is an important right of every
citizen and that this right deserves constitutional
protection. The definition of this right would be
accomplished by relying on the large body of statutes,
administrative rules and ordinances relating to
environmental quality. Defining the right in terms of
present laws imposes no new legal duties on parties, a
point of fairness important to parties which have
 
38
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
enforcement of that right by “any person” against “any party,
 
public or private, through appropriate legal proceedings, subject
 to reasonable limitations and regulation as provided by law.”
 
In order to determine the relevance of article XI,
 
section 9 here, we must answer several questions. First, is
 chapter 205 a “law[] relating to environmental quality” within
 the meaning of article XI, section 9? Second, is article XI,
 section 9 self-executing, i,e., does the legislature need to act
 before the ability to “enforce this right” can be realized? 
Finally, if the provision is self-executing, has the legislature
 acted to impose “reasonable limitations and regulation” that are
 applicable in the circumstances of this case, and which would
 preclude Ala Loop from maintaining an action for alleged
 violations of Chapter 205? 
3.	 Chapter 205 is a “law[] relating to environmental
quality” within the meaning of article XI, section 9
 
invested or are investing large sums of money to
comply with present laws. 
Developing a body of case law defining the
content of the right could involve confusion and
inconsistencies. On the other hand, legislatures,
county councils and administrative agencies can adopt,
modify or repeal environmental laws or regulation laws
[sic] in light of the latest scientific evidence and
federal requirements and opportunities. Thus, the
right can be reshaped and redefined through statute,
ordinance and administrative rule-making procedures
and not inflexibly fixed. 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 77, in 1 Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention ofHawai'i of 1978, at 689. 
39
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Article XI, section 9 establishes the right to a clean
 
and healthful environment, “as defined by laws relating to
 
environmental quality.” The provision goes on to set forth
 examples of such laws, including laws relating to “control of
 pollution” and the “conservation, protection and enhancement of
 natural resources.” 
HRS chapter 205 is a law relating to the conservation, 
protection and enhancement of natural resources, and thus falls within the scope the enforcement right established by article XI, section 9. When the legislature enacted what became HRS chapter 205 in 1961, it stated that the purpose of the statute was “to preserve, protect and encourage the development of the lands in the State for those uses to which they are best suited for the public welfare[.]” 1961 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 187, § 1. A committee report on the bill stated that its purpose was to “protect and conserve through zoning the urban, and agricultural and conservation lands within all counties” in order to, inter alia, “conserve forests, water resources and land.” See H. 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 395, in 1961 House Journal, at 855. Moreover, in Curtis v. Board of Appeals, County of Hawai
'i, 90 
Hawai'i 384, 978 P.2d 822 (1999), this court examined the “reason 
and spirit” of the statute and concluded that its “overarching purpose . . . is to ‘protect and conserve’ natural resources and foster ‘intelligent,’ ‘effective,’ and ‘orderly’ land allocation and development.” Id. at 396, 978 P.2d at 834 (emphasis added, 
40
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
citation omitted). 
Consistent with that understanding, the provisions of
 
chapter 205 expressly require consideration of issues relating to
 
the preservation or conservation of natural resources. See HRS §
 
205-17(3) (requiring that the land use commission in reviewing
 any petition for reclassification of district boundaries consider
 among other things “[t]he impact of the proposed
 reclassification” on the “[p]reservation or maintenance of
 important natural systems or habitats,” the “[m]aintenance of
 valued cultural, historical, or natural resources” and the
 “[m]aintenance of other natural resources relevant to Hawaii’s
 economy, including, but not limited to, agricultural resources”);
 HRS § 205-2(e) (mandating that land classified as conservation
 districts include “areas necessary for protecting watersheds and
 water sources; preserving scenic and historic areas; providing
 park lands, wilderness and beach reserves; conserving indigenous
 or endemic plants, fish and wildlife....”). 
Finally, HRS § 607-25 reflects the legislature’s
 
determination that chapter 205 is an environmental quality law. 
That determination is particularly pertinent since article XI,
 section 9 does not itself define the substantive content of the
 right to a clean and healthful environment, but rather leaves it
 to the legislature to determine. HRS § 607-25 is a fee recovery
 statute that authorizes the recovery of attorneys’ fees and costs
 by private parties against other private parties who undertake
 
41
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
development without “obtaining all permits or approvals required
 
by law from government agencies[.]” HRS § 607-25(e). HRS § 607­25(c) provides that “[f]or purposes of this section, the permits
 or approvals required by law shall include compliance with the
 requirements for permits or approvals established by chapter[]
 . . . 205 . . . and ordinances or rules adopted pursuant thereto
 under chapter 91.” Thus, permits or approvals required by
 chapter 205 are expressly covered by the statute. 
The legislature explained the purpose of HRS § 607-25
 
as follows: 
The legislature finds that article XI, section
9, of the Constitution of the State of Hawaii has
given the public standing to use the courts to enforce
laws intended to protect the environment. However, the
legislature finds that the public has rarely used this
right and that there have been increasing numbers of
after-the-fact permits for illegal private
development. Although the legislature notes that some
government agencies are having difficulty with the
full and timely enforcement of permit requirements
against private parties, after-the-fact permits are
not a desirable form of permit streamlining. For these
reasons, the legislature concludes that to improve the
implementation of laws to protect health,
environmental quality, and natural resources, the
impediment of high legal costs must be reduced for
public interest groups by allowing the award of
attorneys' fees, in cases involving illegal
development by private parties.
 
1986 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 80, § 1 at 104-105 (emphasis added).
 
Thus, in enacting HRS § 607-25, the legislature 
recognized that chapter 205 implements the guarantee of a clean
 
and healthful environment established by article XI, section 9. 
Accordingly, we conclude that chapter 205 is a “law[] relating to
 environmental quality” within the meaning of article XI,
 
42
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
section 9.
 
4.	 Article XI, section 9 is self-executing in the
circumstances presented here
 
In State v. Rodrigues, 63 Haw. 412, 629 P.2d 1111
 
(1981), this court held that a constitutional provision is self-
executing “if it supplies a sufficient rule by means of which the
 right may be enjoyed and protected, or the duty imposed may be
 enforced[.]” Id. at 414, 629 P.2d at 1113 (citing Davis v.
 
Burke, 179 U.S. 399, 403 (1900)). However, a provision “is not
 self-executing when it merely indicates principles, without
 laying down rules by means of which those principles may be given
 the force of law.” Id.
 
The Hawai
'i Constitution itself addresses the subject 
of whether its provisions are self-executing, providing in article XVI, section 16 that “[t]he provisions of this constitution shall be self-executing to the fullest extent that their respective natures permit.” 
In Rodrigues, the question was whether article I,
 
section 11 relating to the appointment of independent grand jury
 counsel was self-executing.
25 Id. at 413-14, 629 P.2d at 1113. 
25	 That provision, which was adopted in 1978, provides:
 
Whenever a grand jury is impaneled, there shall
be an independent counsel appointed as provided by law
to advise the members of the grand jury regarding
matters brought before it. Independent counsel shall
be selected from among those persons licensed to
practice law by the supreme court of the State and
shall not be a public employee. The term and
 compensation for independent counsel shall be provided
by law. 
43
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
We evaluated the plain language of the provision, as well as the
 
intent of the framers as reflected in the standing committee
 reports from the 1978 Constitutional Convention. Id. at 416-17,
 
629 P.2d at 1114-15. We concluded that the provision’s reference
 to the appointment, term and compensation of the independent
 counsel “as provided by law” reflected the framers’ intent that
 “subsequent legislation was required to implement the
 amendment[,]” since at the time the amendment was adopted, “there
 [were] no other constitutional provisions or statutes to which
 the phrase could refer.” Id. at 415, 619 P.2d at 1114. 
We have revisited the analysis of Rodrigues in several 
subsequent cases. In In re Water Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai
'i 97, 131-32, 9 P.3d 409, 443-44 (2000), this court 
considered a challenge to actions taken by the Commission on Water Resource Management, including the apportionment of water for various uses. The Commission had cited the public trust doctrine, in addition to the State Water Code, as support for its decisions. Id. at 113, 9 P.3d at 425. We held that article XI, 
26 27
section 1  and article XI, section 7  adopted the public trust
 
26
 Article XI, section 1 provides:
 
For the benefit of present and future
generations, the State and its political subdivisions
shall conserve and protect Hawaii’s natural beauty and
all natural resources, including land, water, air,
minerals and energy sources, and shall promote the
development and utilization of these resources in a
manner consistent with their conservation and in
 furtherance of the self-sufficiency of the State. 
44
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
doctrine as a fundamental principle of constitutional law in 
Hawai'i, and rejected a claim that the doctrine was not self-
executing. Id. at 132 n.30, 9 P.3d at 444 n.30. We examined the 
history of the provisions, and concluded that “[w]hereas review of the history of article I, section 11 in Rodrigues evidenced the intent to require further legislative action, the same inquiry here reveals that the framers intended to invoke the public trust in article XI, section 7.” Id. We cited to article 
XVI, section 16 as further support for that conclusion. Id. 
In United Public Workers, AFSCME, Local 646 v. Yogi, 
101 Hawai
'i 46, 62 P.3d 189 (2002), this court considered whether 
a statute which prohibited public employers and public employee unions from collectively bargaining over cost items for the 1999­2001 biennium violated article XIII, section 2
28 of the Hawai 'i 
All public natural resources are held in trust
by the State for the benefit of the people. 
27 Article XI, section 7 provides:
 
The State has an obligation to protect, control
and regulate the use of Hawaii's water resources for
the benefit of its people.
 
The legislature shall provide for a water
resources agency which, as provided by law, shall set
overall water conservation, quality and use policies;
define beneficial and reasonable uses; protect ground
and surface water resources, watersheds and natural
stream environments; establish criteria for water use
priorities while assuring appurtenant rights and
existing correlative and riparian uses and establish
procedures for regulating all uses of Hawaii's water
 resources.
 
28
 Article XIII, section 2 [formerly Article XII, section 2] provides
that: 
45
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Constitution. Id. at 47, 62 P.3d at 190. This court noted that
 
at the time article XII, section 2 was amended in 1968,29
 
“collective bargaining as provided by law” had a well recognized
 
meaning, usage and application under both federal and state laws. 
Id. at 51, 62 P.3d at 194. Thus, we concluded that “Rodrigues is
 inapposite[,]” and explained:
 
The context in which the phrase “as provided by law”
in Rodrigues was used is factually distinguishable
from the situation presented in the instant case.
Unlike the amendment at issue in Rodrigues, when
article XII, section 2 was amended in 1968, there were
pre-existing federal and state statutes,
constitutional provisions, and court cases which give
meaning to the term “collective bargaining.”
 
Id. 
After evaluating the intent of the framers as reflected
 
in committee reports from the 1968 Constitutional Convention as
 
well as the voters’ understanding of the term “collective
 bargaining” as reflected by its common definition at the time,
 
Persons in public employment shall have the
right to organize for the purpose of collective
bargaining as provided by law.
 
29 In a footnote this court explained that: 
Prior to the 1968 amendment, article XII, section 2
provided that “[p]ersons in public employment shall
have the right to organize and to present their
grievances and proposals to the State, or any
political subdivision or any department or agency
thereof.” Article XII, section 2 was amended in 1968
to read, “[p]ersons in public employment shall have
the right to organize for the purpose of collective
bargaining as prescribed by law.” Ten years later, at
the 1978 Constitutional Convention, article XII,
section 2 was renumbered to article XIII, section 2,
and the phrase, “as prescribed by law” was replaced
with as “provided by law.” 
101 Hawai' i at 47 n.5, 62 P.3d at 190 n.5 (internal citations omitted). 
46
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
this court concluded that the provision’s reference to
 
“collective bargaining” had a clear meaning which entailed the
 “ability to engage in negotiations concerning core subjects such
 as wages, hours, and other conditions of employment.” Id. at 53,
 
62 P.3d at 196. Accordingly, this court held that lawmakers did
 not have the absolute discretion to define the scope of
 collective bargaining. Id.
 
In Save Sunset Beach Coalition v. City and County of 
Honolulu, 102 Hawai
'i 465, 78 P.3d 1 (2003), this court 
considered whether article XI, section 330 relating to the 
conservation and protection of agricultural land was self-executing. Id. at 474-76, 78 P.3d at 10-12. This court 
concluded that article XI, section 3 read as a whole required future action be taken by the legislature in order for the “two­thirds vote of the body responsible for the reclassification or rezoning action” provision to be effective. Id. This court 
explained that since the text imposes a duty on the legislature 
30 Article XI, section 3 provides:
 
The State shall conserve and protect
agricultural lands, promote diversified agriculture,
increase agricultural self-sufficiency and assure the
availability of agriculturally suitable lands. The
legislature shall provide standards and criteria to
accomplish the foregoing.
 
Lands identified by the State as important
agricultural lands needed to fulfill the purposes
above shall not be reclassified by the State or
rezoned by its political subdivisions without meeting
the standards and criteria established by the
legislature and approved by a two-thirds vote of the
body responsible for the reclassification or rezoning
action.
 
47
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to “provide standards and criteria to accomplish the foregoing
 
[mandate with respect to the preservation of agricultural
 lands],” it did not appear that the framers considered article
 XI, section 3 to be “complete in itself,” and instead required
 implementing legislation. Id. at 475-76, 78 P.3d at 11-12. 
Several principles emerge from these cases. First, we
 
closely review the language of the provision at issue to
 determine whether it indicates that the adoption of implementing
 legislation is necessary. While a reference to a right being
 exercised “as provided by law” may reflect an intent that
 implementing legislation is anticipated, see Rodrigues, 63 Haw.
 at 415, 629 P.2d at 1114, it can be interpreted in other ways,
 such as simply referring to an existing body of statutory and
 other law on a particular subject, see Yogi, 101 Hawai
'i at 51­
53, 62 P.3d at 194-96.31 Second, we review the history of the
 
31 Thus, we respectfully disagree with the dissent’s reliance on
Board of Education of State of Hawaii v. Waihee, 70 Haw. 253, 264 n.4, 768
P.2d 1279, 1286 n.4 (1989) for the proposition that “[t]he phrase ‘as provided
by law’ in the context of . . . state constitutional provisions [is a
directive] to the legislature to enact implementing legislation” in the
circumstances here. Dissenting opinion at 70-71 & 71 n.23 (ellipses and
brackets in the original). Waihee is distinguishable from the instant case
because Waihee concerned whether what had been “provided by law” was
consistent with the constitutional provisions, not whether the provisions were
self-executing.
Moreover, the case from which Waihee draws this proposition, State
v. Rodrigues, 63 Haw. 412, 415, 629 P.2d 1111, 1114 (1981) considered thephrase “as provided by law” in the context of a constitutional amendmentwhere, “[a]t the time the amendment was adopted, there was no otherconstitutional provision or statute to which the phrase could refer. Absent such provision, subsequent legislation was required to implement theamendment.” Id. However, in the instant case, the framers specifically noted
that “[d]efining the right in terms of present laws imposes no new legalduties on parties,” indicating that, at the time the amendment was adopted,there were other laws in existence to which the phrase “as provided by law”could refer. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 77, in 1 Proceedings of the ConstitutionalConvention of Hawai' i of 1978, at 689 (1980) (emphasis added); see discussion 
48
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
provision, to determine if the framers’ intent as reflected in
 
that history confirms our analysis of the plain language.
 
The plain language of article XI, section 9 suggests
 
that the right of enforcement described in the provision is self-
executing. While the right is “subject to reasonable limitations
 and regulation as provided by law,” that provision does not
 suggest that legislative action is needed before the right can be
 implemented. Put another way, although the provision preserves
 the ability of the legislature to impose reasonable limitations
 on the exercise of the right, the right exists and can be
 exercised even in the absence of such limitations. 
It is noteworthy that some limitations already existed
 
in the State’s environmental laws at the time the amendment was
 approved in 1978. For example, HRS § 343-7(a) (Supp. 1975)
 provided that judicial proceedings challenging the failure to
 prepare an environmental impact statement must be brought within
 180 days. Absent the final clause in article XI, section 9, it
 could be argued that such provisions would be unconstitutional
 because they restrict the right to enforce environmental quality
 laws. Thus, the situation here is similar to that in Yogi, where
 the phrase “as provided by law” in article XIII, section 2 was
 interpreted as a reference to the existing law of collective
 bargaining, rather than that in Rodrigues, where article I,
 
infra.
 
49
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
section 11 established a new right to grand jury counsel, and the
 
phrase “as provided by law” reflected the framers’ understanding
 that administrative details such as the compensation of the
 counsel needed to be addressed by the legislature first.
 
It is also worth noting that the right at issue here–­
i.e., the right to seek enforcement “through appropriate legal
 proceedings”–-is within the ability of the judiciary to implement
 without legislative action. Unlike the establishment of a new
 right to grand jury counsel, which raised issues of
 implementation such as who gets to serve as such counsel and how
 much they will be paid, establishing a right to enforce
 environmental rights does not raise practical issues of
 implementation.
 
This interpretation of the plain language of article
 
XI, section 9 is confirmed by an examination of the intent of its
 framers, as reflected in the proceedings of the 1978
 Constitutional Convention. The report of the Committee on
 Environment, Agriculture, Conservation and Land observed:
 
Your Committee believes that a clean and
 
healthful environment is an important right of every
citizen and that this right deserves constitutional
protection.
 
. . . .
 
Your Committee believes that this important
right deserves enforcement and has removed the
standing to sue barriers, which often delay or
frustrate resolutions on the merits of actions or
 proposals, and provides that individuals may directly
sue public and private violators of statutes,
 
50
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
ordinances and administrative rules relating to
environmental quality. The proposal adds no new
duties but does add potential enforcers. This private
enforcement right complements and does not replace or
limit existing government enforcement authority.
 
Your Committee intends that the legislature may
reasonably limit and regulate this private enforcement
right by, for example, prescribing reasonable
procedural and jurisdictional matters, and a
reasonable statute of limitations.
 
Your Committee believes that this new section
 
adequately recognizes the right to a clean and
healthful environment and at the same time would
 prevent abuses of this right. Concern was expressed
that the exercise of this right to a clean and
healthful environment would result in a flood of
 frivolous lawsuits. However, your Committee believes
that if environmental law enforcement by government
agencies is adequate in practice, then there should be
few additional lawsuits, given the barriers that
litigation costs present.
 
Moreover, your Committee is convinced that the
safeguards of reasonable limitations and regulations
as provided by law should serve to prevent abuses of
the right to a clean and healthful environment.
 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 77, in 1 Proceedings of the Constitutional
 
Convention of 1978, at 689-690 (1980).
 
The committee report does not indicate that the framers
 
understood that implementing legislation was needed before
 enforcement actions could be brought pursuant to article XI,
 section 9. To the contrary, the report explicitly recognizes
 that the provision “provides that individuals may directly sue
 public and private violators.”
32 Id. at 690. While the report
 
32
 A 1978 study prepared for the constitutional convention by the
Legislative Reference Bureau contained a section entitled “The Right to Sue
For Environmental Grievances.” Hawaii Constitutional Convention Studies,
Article X: Conservation and Development of Resources, Legislative Reference
Bureau, at 35-38 (May 1978). The study examined provisions from other states,
including one from Illinois which it characterized as “[p]erhaps the strongest
constitutional expression of the right to sue[.]” Id. at 35-36 (citing
Illinois Constitution, Art. XI, § 2, which provided in relevant part that
“Each person has the right to a healthful environment” and “[e]ach person may
enforce this right against any party, governmental or private, through
 
51
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
recognizes that the legislature retains the power to impose
 
reasonable limits on the right to bring suit, such as statutes of
 limitations,
33 it does not suggest that such limits must be in
 
place before actions can be brought.34 Id. at 689-90.
 
This interpretation is further confirmed by the
 
subsequent actions of the legislature, which reflect its
 understanding that the provision was self-executing. In 1979,
 the State House appointed the committees on Ecology and
 
appropriate legal proceedings subject to reasonable limitations and regulation
by law.”). The study did not indicate that implementing legislation would be
required; to the contrary, it clearly assumed the opposite. Id. at 36
 
(“[t]here are a number of advantages to the inclusion of a constitutional
provision, in contrast to a statute, granting the right to sue[.]”).
 
33 The standing committee report of the 1978 constitutional
convention provides that “the legislature may reasonably limit and regulatethis private enforcement right by, for example, prescribing . . . a reasonablestatute of limitations.” Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 77, in 1 Proceedings of theConstitutional Convention of Hawai' i of 1978, at 690 (1980) (emphasis added).
“[T]he term ‘may’ is generally construed to render optional, permissive ordiscretionary the provision in which it is embodied,” State v. Kahawai, 103Hawai'i 462, 465, 83 P.3d 725, 728 (2004) (citations omitted), and there is
nothing about the context of its use here to suggest a contrary meaning.Thus, we respectfully disagree with the dissent’s assertion that “the framersclearly intended that a specific statute of limitations be enacted” beforearticle XI, section 9 can be enforced. Dissenting opinion at 75 (emphasis inoriginal).
Thus, the legislature may, consistent with article XI, section 9, enact
a specific statute of limitations applicable to actions seeking to enforce the
provisions of HRS Chapter 205. Alternatively, statutes of limitations of
general application can be applied to such claims consistent with article XI,
section 9. Cf. Pele Defense Fund v. Paty, 73 Haw. 578, 595, 837 P.2d 1247,
 
1259 (1992). 
34 We respectfully disagree with the dissent’s suggestion that the
plain language of article XI, section 9 does not reflect the clearly-stated
intention in the committee report that the right of enforcement be self-
executing without further action by the legislature. To the contrary, for the
reasons set forth supra, the text of article XI, section 9 unambiguously
establishes a self-executing private right of action, and is therefore
completely consistent with the committee report’s understanding that by
recommending adoption of that provision, the committee “has removed the
standing to sue barriers” and thereby “provide[d] that individuals may
directly sue public and private violators.” Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 77, in 1
Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of 1978, at 689-690 (1980)
(emphasis added). 
52
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Environmental Protection and the Judiciary to serve as a joint
 
Interim Committee to review article XI, section 9 “to determine
 whether legislation is necessary to implement” the right to a
 clean and healthful environment established by the provision. H.
 Spec. Comm. Rep. No. 22, in 1980 House Journal, at 1247. The
 joint Interim Committee reviewed the provision and its history,
 and held a hearing at which various witnesses testified,
 including four former delegates who served on the committee that
 drafted the provision. Id. at 1247-48. The committee reported
 to the House as follows:
 
Your joint Interim Committee . . . finds that
both of the constitutional rights contained in the
environmental rights amendment took effect and were
granted to each person in Hawaii immediately upon
ratification, at the general election of November 7,
1978, of the amendment to the Hawaii State
Constitution now designated as Article XI, Section 9.
 
Your Committee relatedly finds and concludes
that the environmental rights amendment (Article XI,
Section 9) is self-executing or self-implementing, and
that no legislation is necessary at this time to
implement its provisions.
 
Id. at 1248.
 
The committee further reported that “[a]lthough Article 
XI, Section 9 does not mandate the legislature to enact 
limitations and regulations, testimonies presented by representatives from the private sector . . . expressed concern that the broad, liberalized standing-to-sue provision in the subject amendment will encourage a flood of lawsuits[.]” Id. at 
1250. The report noted that the experience to date in Hawai
'i 
with the provision, as well as that in other states (such as 
53
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Illinois) with similar provisions, did not justify those
 
concerns. Id. Thus, the report concluded that “your joint
 
Interim Committee on Environmental Rights recommends no
 legislation, at this particular time, to implement, limit or
 regulate the provisions of, or the rights granted by[]” article
 XI, section 9. Id. (emphasis in original).
 
The report is not dispositive in our analysis since it
 
cannot change the meaning of article XI, section 9 as approved by
 the voters in 1978, and since it sets forth the views only of the
 joint committee, rather than the legislature as a whole.
 Nevertheless, it is relevant to the extent that it provides an
 explanation for the non-action of the legislature, which is the
 body that would be charged with enacting legislation to implement
 the provision if it was not self-executing. 
Even stronger evidence of the legislature’s views on
 
the self-executing nature of article XI, section 9 came in 1986,
 when the legislature enacted Act 80, which was codified as HRS §
 607-25. When the legislature enacted Act 80, it specifically
 included chapter 205 among the list of provisions for which
 attorneys’ fees could be recovered in a suit by one private party
 against another for an injunction against development undertaken
 without permits or approvals. See 1986 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 80,
 
§ 607 at 105 (“[f]or purposes of this section, the permits or
 approvals required by law shall include compliance with the
 requirements for permits or approvals established by chapter[]
 
54
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
. . . 205 . . . and ordinances or rules adopted pursuant thereto
 
under chapter 91.”). 
Although one might read the inclusion of chapter 205
 
within HRS § 607-25 as creating a cause of action under HRS §
 607-25, the legislature’s findings and committee reports all
 suggest that the legislature understood that such causes of
 action already existed and were authorized by article XI, section
 9. See 1986 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 80, § 1 at 104-05 (“The
 
legislature finds that article XI, section 9 of the Constitution
 of the State of Hawaii has given the public standing to use the
 courts to enforce laws intended to protect the environment. 
However, the legislature finds that the public has rarely used
 this right . . . .”); H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 766-86, in 1986
 House Journal, at 1373 (“Your Committee further finds that if the
 bill is adopted, it will give fuller effect to Article XI,
 Section 9 of the State Constitution, which gives Hawaii’s people
 the right to bring lawsuits enforcing environmental laws.”); S.
 Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 450-86, in 1986 Senate Journal at 976 (“The
 bill will give fuller effect to Article XI, Section 9 of the
 Constitution of the State of Hawaii, which gives Hawaii’s people
 the right to bring lawsuits enforcing environmental laws.”). 
In sum, it appears that the legislature found in 1986
 
that article XI, section 9 was self-executing. Moreover, to
 ensure that the public was not dissuaded from asserting their
 rights under that provision, the legislature enacted HRS § 607-25
 
55
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to allow citizens to recover their attorneys’ fees for bringing a
 
successful civil action against a private party for a violation
 of the enumerated chapters (including chapter 205) contained
 within the statute. 
This view is consistent with this court’s discussion of 
HRS § 607-25 in Kahana Sunset Owners Association v. Maui County Council, 86 Hawai
'i 132, 948 P.2d 122 (1997). In Kahana, the 
plaintiffs failed to prevail on appeal in an action against a private defendant with regard to the approval of a rezoning application. Id. at 133, 948 P.2d at 123. After a review of the 
legislative history of HRS § 607-25, this court concluded “that the legislature intended that individuals and organizations would help the state’s enforcement of laws and ordinances controlling development by acting as private attorneys general and suing developers who did not comply with the proper development laws.” Id. at 134-35, 948 P.2d at 124-25. We concluded that an award of attorney’s fees to the defendants was not warranted, because the plaintiffs’ arguments were not frivolous. Id. at 135, 948 P.2d 
at 125. 
The conclusion that article XI, section 9 is self-
executing is also widely supported in the scholarly writing about
 the provision. See Susan Morath Horner, Embryo, Not Fossil:
 
Breathing Life into the Public Trust in Wildlife, 35 Land & Water
 L. Rev. 23, 65 (2000) (describing article XI, section 9 as
 expressing a “manifest self-executing nature”); Janelle P.
 
56
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Eurick, The Constitutional Right to a Healthy Environment:
 
Enforcing Environmental Protection Through State and Federal
 Constitutions, 11 Int’l Legal Persp. 185, 208 (2001) (noting that
 this court in Kahana found that “Hawaii’s environmental
 constitutional provision, Article XI, Section [9], gives citizens
 standing to use the court to protect the environment”); Carole L.
 Gallagher, The Movement to Create an Environmental Bill of
 Rights: From Earth Day, 1970 to the Present, 9 Fordham Envtl. L.
 Rev. 107, 139 (1997) (noting that this court in Kahana “affirmed
 that article XI, section 9 gives the Hawaiian people the right to
 bring lawsuits to enforce environmental laws”); David Kimo
 Frankel, Enforcement of Environmental Laws in Hawaii, 16 U. Haw.
 L. Rev. 85, 135 (1994) (noting that article XI, section 9 was
 “intended to be self-executing” and that “[t]he plain language
 and history of [that] provision declare that citizens have the
 right to sue, but that this right can be limited and regulated by
 the Legislature”). 
This court’s other decisions have not directly 
addressed whether article XI, section 9 is self-executing. See 
Sierra Club v. Dep’t of Transp. (Superferry I), 115 Hawai
'i 299, 
320 n.28, 167 P.3d 292, 313 n.28 (2007) (stating that “[a]lthough this court has cited [article XI, section 9] as support for our approach to standing in environmental cases, we have not directly interpreted the text of the amendment,” and declining to discuss the meaning of article XI, section 9 further because the 
57
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
environmental statute at issue contained specific language 
regarding who may enforce the law and the parties did not discuss the constitutional provision in their appellate briefs) (internal citations omitted)); Life of the Land v. Land Use Comm’n, 63 Haw. 166, 172 n.5, 623 P.2d 431, 438 n.5 (1981) (noting that standing requirements are “tempered” by article XI, section 9); see also Bremner v. City & County of Honolulu, 96 Hawai
'i 134, 145 n.3, 28 
P.3d 350, 361 n.3 (App. 2001) (addressing the text of article XI, section 9 to the extent it recognized that, “[i]n his complaint, Bremner asserts the omission of an environmental assessment violated his environmental rights under article XI, section 9 of the Hawai
'i Constitution. The manner in which Bremner’s rights 
under article XI may be enforced, however, is governed by section 9’s qualification that any such legal proceeding be ‘subject to reasonable limitations and regulation as provided by law.’ Haw. Const. art. XI, § 9. Because Hawai
'i Revised Statutes ch. 343 
provides reasonable limitations and regulations for adjudicating disputes involving environmental assessments, Bremner’s failure to comply with its provisions forecloses further consideration of his constitutional claim.”). While several of our decisions have touched upon the existence of private rights of action for violations of environmental laws, they did not consider article XI, section 9. See Citizens for the Prot. of the N. Kohala 
Coastline v. County of Hawai
'i, 91 Hawai 'i 94, 979 P.2d 1120 
(1999); Whitey’s Boat Cruises, Inc. v. Napali-Kauai Boat 
58
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Charters, Inc., 110 Hawai 'i 302, 132 P.3d 1213 (2006).35 
For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that article XI,
 
section 9 is self-executing. Having determined that article XI,
 
section 9 is self-executing, we turn to whether the legislature
 has acted to impose “reasonable limitations and regulation” that
 might preclude Ala Loop from maintaining an action for alleged
 violations of chapter 205. 
5. HRS § 205-12 does not preclude Ala Loop from bringing
an action to enforce chapter 205 against Wai
'ola 
Article XI, section 9 provides that the legislature has
 
the authority to impose “reasonable limitations and regulation”
 
on potential litigants, such as Ala Loop, who seek to bring
 private actions to enforce laws relating to environmental
 quality. In its response to the application, Wai
'ola argues that 
35 In Citizens for the Protection of North Kohala Coastline, a 
community group sought declaratory and injunctive relief alleging that the
county wrongfully failed to allow for proper state land use review as requiredby HRS chapter 205. 91 Hawai' i at 96, 979 P.2d at 1122. This court 
emphasized the state’s liberal standing doctrine “where the interests at stakeare in the realm of environmental concerns,” id. at 100, 979 P.2d at 1126(citation omitted), and reasoned that “[b]ecause a declaratory judgment willserve to terminate the uncertainty or controversy giving rise to thisproceeding and will foster ‘the needs of justice,’” the community group hadstanding to participate in the action for declaratory and injunctive relief,id. at 101-02, 979 P.2d at 1127-28. This court then reached the merits of the group’s claim and concluded that the county did not violate HRS chapter 205.Id. at 106, 979 P.2d at 1132.
In Whitey’s Boat Cruises, several commercial tour boat operators
brought common law tort claims against other operators and promoters, allegingthat their failure to obtain permits required by state and county regulationspromulgated under HRS chapters 200 and 205A amounted to unfair competition andtortious interference with prospective business advantage. This court found that the regulations in question did not provide the parties a private rightof action “in the circumstances of this case” because the regulations “werenot promulgated with the objective of protecting business interests orcompetition but rather with the objective of protecting and preserving theenvironment for the general public[.]” 110 Hawai' i at 313, 132 P.3d at 1224.
Whitey’s Boat Cruises is thus distinguishable from the circumstances here,where there are no allegations of commercial injury. 
59
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the legislature has expressly delegated enforcement of chapter
 
36
205 to the counties in HRS § 205-12,  and thereby precluded a
private right of action by Ala Loop. In support of its argument, 
Wai'ola cites to Lanai Co. v. Land Use Commission, 105 Hawai 'i 
296, 318, 97 P.3d 372, 394 (2004). 
Although the response does not discuss article XI,
 
section 9, Waiola’s argument amounts to a contention that HRS §
 205-12 is a “reasonable limitation[] and regulation” within the
 meaning of the provision. However, HRS § 205-12 does not
 preclude Ala Loop’s private right of action to enforce chapter
 205. In Lanai Co., this court considered the power of the Land
 
Use Commission (LUC) to enforce the provisions of chapter 205. 
After examining the authority granted to the LUC under chapter
 205, we concluded that “the LUC must necessarily be able to order
 that a condition it imposed be complied with, and that violation
 of a condition cease.” Id. However, we further concluded that
 
HRS § 205-12 gave the counties, rather than the LUC, the
 authority to enforce the provisions of chapter 205. Id. We
 
noted that although HRS § 205-12 expressly gave enforcement
 authority to the counties, “[t]here is no provision in HRS § 205­
36
 HRS § 205-12 (1993) provides:
 
Enforcement. The appropriate officer or agency
charged with the administration of county zoning laws
shall enforce within each county the use
classification districts adopted by the land use
commission and the restriction on use and the
 condition relating to agricultural districts under
section 205-4.5 and shall report to the commission all
violations. 
60
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
12 that expressly delegates enforcement power to the LUC.” Id. 
We added that “[i]f the legislature intended to grant the LUC
 
enforcement powers, it could have expressly provided the LUC with
 such power.” Id. 
Thus, the issue in Lanai Co. was which of two
 
governmental entities (the LUC, or the county) was authorized by
 the legislature to enforce chapter 205. There was no suggestion
 that article XI, section 9 was relevant to that analysis, or that
 HRS § 205-12 reflected any intent by the legislature to preclude
 private enforcement. Thus, Lanai Co. is not dispositive of the
 issues here.
 
In any event, if we were to interpret HRS § 205-12 as 
Wai
'ola suggests, it would exceed the power granted to the 
legislature in article XI, section 9 to impose “reasonable limitations and regulation” on the right of private enforcement. The inclusion of the word “reasonable” in that phrase clearly indicates that the power to limit or regulate is not unfettered. The abolishment of the private right altogether by HRS § 205-12, on the theory that the county would enforce the same underlying substantive interests, would not be a “reasonable” limitation within the meaning of the provision. 
This interpretation is supported by the history of
 
article XI, section 9. After discussing the right to a clean and
 healthful environment, the report of the 1978 Constitutional
 Convention’s Committee on Environment, Agriculture, Conservation
 
61
 Your Committee believes that this important
right deserves enforcement and has removed the
standing to sue barriers, which often delay or
frustrate resolutions on the merits of actions or
 proposals, and provides that individuals may directly
sue public and private violators of statutes,
ordinances and administrative rules relating to
environmental quality. The proposal adds no new
duties but does add potential enforcers. This private
enforcement right complements and does not replace or
limit existing government enforcement authority.
 
Your Committee intends that the legislature may
reasonably limit and regulate this private enforcement
right by, for example, prescribing reasonable
procedural and jurisdictional matters, and a
reasonable statute of limitations.
 
Your Committee believes that this new section
 
adequately recognizes the right to a clean and
healthful environment and at the same time would
 prevent abuses of this right. Concern was expressed
that the exercise of this right to a clean and
healthful environment would result in a flood of
 frivolous lawsuits. However, your Committee believes
that if environmental law enforcement by government
agencies is adequate in practice, then there should be
few additional lawsuits, given the barriers that
litigation costs present.
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
and Land observed:
 
Moreover, your Committee is convinced that the
safeguards of reasonable limitations and regulations
as provided by law should serve to prevent abuses of
the right to a clean and healthful environment.
 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 77, in 1 Proceedings of the Constitutional
 
Convention of 1978, at 690 (emphasis added). 
As the highlighted sections of the report indicate, the
 
framers understood that private enforcement would “complement”
 government enforcement, rather than be supplanted by it. The
 clear import of the passage is that “reasonable limitations and
 regulation” would encompass matters such as statutes of
 limitations or procedural or jurisdictional limitations. While
 such restrictions might preclude a particular plaintiff from
 
62
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
bringing suit in a particular circumstance, the framers did not
 
envision that they would be used to eliminate private enforcement
 altogether. 
Accordingly, we conclude that HRS § 205-12 does not 
limit or restrict the ability of Ala Loop to enforce the provisions of chapter 205 against Wai
'ola. 
Finally, we note that Wai 'ola has not identified 
any other “reasonable limitations or regulation.” Specifically, it has not suggested that exhaustion or primary jurisdiction applies. Accordingly, we do not address whether the application of those doctrines would constitute a reasonable limitation or restriction under the facts of this case. Cf. Pono, 119 Hawai
'i 
at 192-201, 194 P.3d at 1154-1163 (Foley, J., concurring) (concluding that Pono’s action was properly dismissed since Pono did not exhaust its administrative remedies prior to bringing suit in the circuit court, because Pono did not appeal the decision of the director of Public Works and Waste Management to the Board of Variances and Appeals). 
6. 	 The cases cited by the dissent address requirements for
standing and do not establish the existence of a
statutory private right of action
 
We respectfully disagree with the dissent’s suggestion
 
that this court has recognized a private right of action for
 
“adjoining landowners” who are affected by “land use decisions
 that interfere with the enjoyment of their property,” dissenting
 
-63­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
opinion at 10, based on our holdings in Dalton v. City and County
 
of Honolulu, 51 Haw. 400, 462 P.2d 199 (1969), East Diamond Head
 Association v. Zoning Board of Appeals of the City and County of
 Honolulu, 52 Haw. 518, 479 P.2d 796 (1971), Town v. Land Use
 Commission, 55 Haw. 538, 524 P.2d 84 (1974), Perry v. Planning
 Commission of the County of Hawaii, 62 Haw. 666, 619 P.2d 95
 (1980), and Mahuiki v. Planning Commission and Planning
 Department of the County of Kauai, 65 Haw. 506, 654 P.2d 874
 (1982). To the extent the cases cited by the dissent focus on
 the status of the plaintiffs as adjoining landowners, they did so
 in the context of assessing standing.
37 Moreover, the appeals in
 
East Diamond Head Association, Town, Perry, and Mahuiki were
 brought pursuant to chapter 91, and do not establish the
 existence of a private right of action outside of that context. 
In Dalton, the plaintiffs, who “apparently ‘live[d]
 
across the street from [the] real property’” at issue, sought a
 declaratory judgment that four Honolulu zoning ordinances were
 null and void. 51 Haw. at 400-01, 403, 462 P.2d at 201, 202. 
The defendants, lessees and developers of land rezoned under the
 ordinances, “argued that plaintiffs lacked standing to sue.” Id.
 
at 402, 462 P.2d at 202 (emphasis added). This court identified
 
37
 As noted in n.20, supra, while the term “standing” is sometimes 
used to describe the private right of action inquiry, see, e.g., Pono 119
Hawai'i at 167, 194 P.3d at 1129, nevertheless, our cases make clear that the
two inquiries involve distinct policy considerations and distinct tests, seee.g., Pele Defense Fund v. Paty, 73 Haw. 578, 591, 837 P.2d 1247, 1256-57(1992). 
-64­“the issues to be resolved” as “standing, laches, and the
 
validity of the ordinances.” Id. (emphasis added). In
 addressing the defendants’ standing argument, this court
 concluded that “[p]laintiffs’ interest in this case is that they
 ‘reside in very close proximity’ to the proposed
 development. . . . Clearly this is a ‘concrete interest’ in a
 ‘legal relation’.” Id. Accordingly, this court concluded that
 
“plaintiffs have standing to challenge the validity of the
 ordinances in question.” Id. (emphasis added). Without
 addressing whether the plaintiffs had a private right of action
 to challenge the ordinances,
38 this court went on to address the
 
plaintiffs’ contention that the ordinances were null and void,
 and concluded that the trial court’s grant of summary judgment in
 favor of defendants was erroneous. Id. at 408, 417, 462 P.2d at
 205, 209. 
***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In 
East Diamond Head Association, an association of 
neighboring landowners challenged the trial court’s order concluding that the association was not a “person aggrieved” within the meaning of the Hawai
'i Administrative Procedures Act 
(HAPA), and was therefore not entitled to judicial review of the 
38
 We note that Dalton was decided prior to the United States Supreme
 
Court’s decision in Cort v. Ash, 422 U.S. 66 (1975). This court first
 
utilized the Cort analysis for determining whether a statute authorized an
implied private right of action in Reliable Collection Agency v. Cole, 59 Haw.
503, 584 P.2d 107 (1978). Thus, our analysis of private rights of action has
been modified since our decision Dalton, and we therefore respectfully
disagree with the dissent’s assertion that Dalton should control our analysis
here. 
-65­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
zoning board’s issuance of a variance allowing a parcel of land
 
to be used for movie production.39 52 Haw. at 518-19, 479 P.2d
 
at 796-97. The zoning board had held a public hearing on the
 movie studio’s petition for the variance, at which members of the
 association had testified that “the movie operation interfered
 with the enjoyment of their property[.]” Id. at 520-21, 479 P.2d
 
at 797-98. After the zoning board’s decision to issue the
 variance, the association “instituted proceedings for a judicial
 review under [§] 91-14(a) (1968) of the [HAPA].” Id. at 521, 479
 
P.2d at 798. The trial court dismissed the association’s agency
 appeal, finding that the association was not “entitled to review
 as a person aggrieved by a final decision and order in a
 contested case as provided for in HRS Chapter 91 and HRS [§] 91­14(a)” because it had not “intervened in the board’s
 proceedings[.]” Id.
 
This court disagreed and concluded both that the
 
association was a “person aggrieved” and that the public hearing
 was a “contested case.” Id. at 522, 524, 479 P.2d at 798, 799. 
In concluding that the association was a “person aggrieved,” this
 court noted that the “[s]tudio’s industrial use within [the
 
39
 We have since characterized the determination of whether a party
is a “person aggrieved” for the purposes of chapter 91 as comprising part of
the standing inquiry. See Bush v. Hawaiian Homes Comm’n, 76 Hawai' i 128, 133­
34, 870 P.2d 1272, 1277-78 (1994) (“Appellants' standing to invoke judicialreview under the HAPA is contingent upon a showing that they are ‘person[s]aggrieved by a final decision and order in a contested case’ conducted beforean administrative agency”) (brackets in the original; citation omitted). 
-66­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
association members’] residential neighborhood as sanctioned by
 
the board’s zoning variance immediately and directly affects each
 homeowner[,]” and that the association members were therefore not
 “merely tangentially touched by the zoning change[.]” Id. at
 
522, 479 P.2d at 798. In holding that the public hearing was a
 “contested case,” this court concluded that the association had
 “done everything possible to perfect an appeal” by “comport[ing]
 with all board procedural dictates[.]” Id. at 524, 479 P.2d at
 
799. Accordingly, this court remanded the case for a new trial. 
Id. 
In Town, adjoining landowners challenged the trial 
court’s grant of a motion for summary judgment in favor of the
 Land Use Commission (LUC), where the LUC had approved a petition
 to amend the district designation for a parcel of land from 
agricultural to rural. 55 Haw. at 539, 524 P.2d at 85. The LUC
 had held a public hearing on the petition, at which the adjoining
 landowners “spoke in opposition to the [] petition.” Id. at 539,
 
524 P.2d at 86. Two subsequent meetings were held, at which a
 decision on the petition was deferred. Id. At a third meeting,
 
where the adjoining landowners were not present, the owner of the
 parcel spoke to “rebut all statements made by the opposition to
 his petition and submitted documents for the consideration of the
 [LUC.]” Id. at 540, 524 P.2d at 86. A motion to approve the
 
petition was carried, but the Vice-Chairman of the LUC noted that
 
-67­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the motion was “‘not based on anything that was said here today
 
because these facts were made known to us before.’” Id. The
 
adjoining landowners appealed, seeking reversal of the LUC’s
 decision. Id.
 
In the adjoining landowners’ agency appeal, this court
 
concluded that the meeting at which the petition was approved was
 a “contested case,” id. at 548, 524 P.2d at 91, the provisions of
 the HAPA were applicable, id. at 545, 524 P.2d at 89, and the LUC
 had violated the provisions of the HAPA in accepting the owner’s
 testimony and evidence, id. at 549, 524 P.2d at 91. In 
concluding that the meeting was a “contested case”40 within the 
meaning of HRS § 91-1(5), we noted that: 
The appellant has a property interest in the amending
of a district boundary when his property adjoins the
property that is being redistricted. Therefore, any
action taken on the petition for boundary change is a
proceeding in which appellant has legal rights as a
specific and interested party and is entitled by law
to have a determination on those rights. 
Id. at 548, 524 P.2d at 91 (citations and footnoted omitted).
 
This court further concluded that the approval of the
 
petition “was rendered in violation of HRS [§§] 205-3 and 205-4
 
as well as Land Use Regulation 2.35” because the LUC had failed
 to act on the petition within the prescribed statutory period. 
40
 We have also characterized a party’s participation in a “contested
case” as a standing requisite in an administrative appeal. See Bush, 76 
Hawai'i at 134, 870 P.2d at 1278 (noting that a party “‘must have participated
in [a] contested case before [an] administrative agency[,]’ to acquire
standing to challenge the decision in court”) (brackets in the original;citation omitted). 
-68­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Id. at 542-545, 524 P.2d at 87-89. 
In Perry, adjoining landowners challenged the grant of 
a special permit to Shield-Pacific, Ltd. and Kapoho Land and 
Development Company (hereinafter Applicants), who had filed an application with the County of Hawai
'i Planning Commission 
(planning commission) seeking permission to use a parcel of land for quarrying purposes. 62 Haw. at 669, 619 P.2d at 99. “Since the land was within an ‘agricultural’ district for purposes of Land Use Law, HRS Chapter 205, favorable actions upon the request by both the [planning commission] and the [LUC] were necessary before such use was permissible.” Id. The planning commission 
held a public hearing, at which opponents “object[ed] to the proposed quarrying operations[.]” Id. at 670-71, 619 P.2d at 
100. The planning commission later voted to permit the requested
 
use, and the planning commission’s decision was transmitted to
 the LUC pursuant to HRS § 205-6. Id. at 671, 619 P.2d at 100. 
Following a lengthy public meeting in which “opponents of the
 application again voiced their . . . concerns,” the LUC approved
 the special permit. Id. at 672, 619 P.2d at 101. The owners of
 
property adjoining the proposed quarry site appealed from the
 decision and order of the LUC, and the circuit court set aside
 the grant and approval of the special permit on several grounds,
 including that the planning commission had not acted on the
 application in a timely manner and that the LUC therefore lacked
 
-69­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
jurisdiction to act on the permit. Id. at 672-73, 619 P.2d at
 
101. The government agencies and the Applicants appealed the
 
circuit court’s judgment. Id. at 673, 619 P.2d at 101. 
On appeal of the circuit court’s judgment, this court
 
did not address jurisdiction, but instead proceeded directly to
 
address the appellants’ arguments on the merits and reversed the
 circuit court. Id. at 673-686, 619 P.2d at 101-108. Thus,
 
although Perry provides an example of adjoining landowners
 bringing a chapter 91 appeal of a LUC decision,
41 it contains no
 
discussion directly relevant to the issues here.
 
In Mahuiki, a limited partnership sought to develop a 
condominium and single family residence project at Haena on Kaua
'i. 65 Haw. at 508, 654 P.2d at 876. The partnership sought 
various approvals from the Kaua 'i Planning Commission, including 
a special management area use permit under the Coastal Zone Management Act (CZMA), HRS chapter 205A. Id. at 508, 654 P.2d at 876. The commission held a hearing on the request, and approved
 
the permit with conditions. Id. at 511, 654 P.2d at 877-78. The
 
appellants, who were “adjacent landowners or residents of Haena,”
 id. at 515, 654 P.2d at 880, appealed to the circuit court,
 
41
 Although Perry does not explicitly mention chapter 91, the court’s
 
discussion of the LUC proceedings clearly reflects that it was an
administrative appeal. 62 Haw. at 668, 672, 619 P.2d 98, 101 (noting that
“[t]his case is before us on an appeal from an order and judgment of the
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit reversing and vacating an order of the Land
Use Commission of the State of Hawaii” and that the appellees “filed a timely
Notice of Appeal from the foregoing decision and order [of the LUC] to the
circuit court”) (emphasis added).
 
-70­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
challenging the commission’s approval of the permit on numerous
 
grounds, id. at 512, 654 P.2d at 878. The circuit court
 dismissed the appeal “on the ground that appellants had not
 participated in the administrative proceedings.” Id. 
On appeal, this court first considered “the appellants’
 
standing to seek review of the administrative action[,]” and
 concluded that two of the appellants had satisfied the
 requirements of HRS § 91-14 since there was a final decision and
 order in a contested case, appellants’ interests were injured,
 and they had submitted written testimony in opposition to the
 permit request and thus were involved in the contested case
 proceedings. Id. at 508, 512, 514-15, 654 P.2d at 876, 878-80. 
With regard to the injury to the appellants’ interests, we noted
 that: 
The interests asserted by appellants were “special”
and “personal” unto themselves, as they are adjacent
landowners or residents of Haena. And a decision to
 permit the construction of multi-family housing units
on undeveloped land in the special management area
could only have an adverse effect on their
environment.
 
Id. at 515, 652 P.2d at 880.
 
We then concluded that the planning commission erred by
 
omitting a required finding, and accordingly vacated the
 
dismissal of the case. Id. at 519, 654 P.2d at 883.
 
In sum, each of these five cases addressed standing
 
requisites. Dalton expressly discussed its determination that
 
adjoining landowners had “a ‘concrete interest’ in a ‘legal
 
-71­42
 We have elsewhere characterized the discussion in Mahuiki and East 
Diamond Head Association as addressing the question of “standing.” Sierra 
Club v. Hawai' i Tourism Auth., 100 Hawai' i 242, 252, 59 P.3d 877, 887 (2002)
(plurality opinion) (finding that Mahuiki held that “adjacent landowners []had standing to invoke judicial review” and East Diamond Head Association heldthat neighboring landowners “had standing to challenge movie operation” basedon impacts that showed “each appellant was a person aggrieved”) (internalquotation marks omitted). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
relation’” in standing terms. 51 Haw. at 403, 462 P.2d at 202. 
Mahuiki, Town and East Diamond Head Association directly
 addressed questions relating to whether the adjoining landowners
 had standing to appeal an agency action in a contested case under
 HRS § 91-14.
42 Perry, similarly, was an agency appeal, and did
 
not directly discuss standing or private rights of action. 
Moreover, to the extent that Mahuiki, Town and East Diamond Head
 Association discussed the nature of the parties’ status as
 adjoining landowners, they did so in the context of determining
 whether they were “person[s] aggrieved” for purposes of HRS § 91­14. Because the landowners lived adjacent to the properties that
 
were the subject of the proposed land use action at issue in each
 case, we determined that they had a sufficient stake to be
 aggrieved persons. Thus while the nature of the impacts that the
 neighboring landowners alleged provided the basis for determining
 that they had standing under HRS § 91-14 as “persons aggrieved,”
 at no point in our discussion in those cases did we suggest that
 they had a cause of action independent of chapter 91 based on
 their status as neighboring landowners. See Ponohu v. Sunn, 66
 
Haw. 485, 487, 666 P.2d 1133, 1135 (1983) (holding that “it would
 
-72­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
be anomalous to permit a declaratory judgment action to be
 
substituted for an appeal from an agency determination in a
 contested case”). 
Accordingly, we respectfully disagree with the
 
dissent’s interpretation of these cases, and conclude that they
 did not recognize the existence of a private right of action in
 the circumstances here. 
7. Conclusion
 
Ala Loop had a private right of action under article
 
XI, section 9 of the Hawai
'i Constitution to enforce its chapter 
205 claims against Wai 'ola.43 Accordingly, the ICA erred in its 
43 Ala Loop also had standing to bring its claims. Hawai' i courts 
determine “whether a plaintiff has the requisite stake” in an action so as to
have standing by asking “(1) has the plaintiff suffered an actual orthreatened injury . . . ; (2) is the injury fairly traceable to thedefendant’s actions; and (3) would a favorable decision likely provide relieffor plaintiff’s injury.” See Sierra Club v. Dep’t of Transp., 115 Haw. 299,
319, 167 P.3d 292, 312 (2007) (“Superferry I”). (footnote and citationomitted; ellipses in original). Here, the record amply supports the circuitcourt’s conclusion that: 
[Ala Loop] has standing to assert its claims regardingWai'ola’s use of the Subject Property. In particular,
it has suffered an actual or threatened injury as aresult of Wai' ola’s conduct, the injury is fairly
traceable to the conduct of Wai' ola and a favorable 
decision would likely provide relief for [Ala Loop’s]injury. 
For example, the record includes declarations from residents of
Ala Loop detailing, inter alia, the impact of Waiola’s school operations on
traffic in the neighborhood, and the potential impacts that expanded
operations could have on sewage and water systems. Accordingly, Ala Loop has
shown that it suffered an “actual or threatened injury” that is “fairly
traceable” to Waiola’s use of the property without a permit, and that relief
could be provided by the court. See Superferry I, 115 Haw. at 319, 167 P.3d
 
at 312. 
Because we conclude that Ala Loop has standing under the
traditional injury-in-fact test, we need not reach whether the doctrine of
procedural standing is applicable in this case. 
-73­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
March 12, 2009 SDO, and the ICA’s April 22, 2009 judgment must be
 
vacated. 
C.	 The circuit court abused its discretion in denying the
motion to set aside default
 
Wai'ola argues that the circuit court abused its 
discretion in denying its motion to set aside the entry of
 
default. In denying the motion, the circuit court ruled in its
 August 11, 2004 order as follows:
 
1. [Wai'ola] made a conscious choice not [to] be
represented by private legal counsel and therefore,
failed to answer Ala Loop’s cross-claim in a timely manner. Therefore, it cannot be said that [Wai' ola]
was guilty only of excusable neglect. 
. . . . 
3. [Wai'ola] has failed to satisfy the necessary
criteria for setting aside an entry of default, andtherefore, its Motion to Set Aside Entry of DefaultDated May 24, 2004, Filed Herein July 6, 2004, shouldbe denied. 
HRCP Rule 55 governs the entry of default and default
 
judgments. With regard to the entry of default, it provides in
 
pertinent part as follows: 
(a) Entry. When a party against whom a
judgment for affirmative relief is sought has failed
to plead or otherwise defend as provided by these
rules and that fact is made to appear by affidavit or
otherwise, the clerk shall enter the party’s default. 
. . . .
 
(c) Setting Aside Default. For good cause
shown the court may set aside an entry of default and,
if a judgment by default has been entered, may
likewise set it aside in accordance with Rule 60(b). 
We review the denial of a motion to set aside default
 
for abuse of discretion. Hupp v. Accessory Distrib., Inc., 1
 
Haw. App. 174, 177, 616 P.2d 233, 235 (1980) (holding that “an
 
-74­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
application under Rule 55(c), Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure to 
set aside entry of default is addressed to the sound discretion 
of the court”); see also Gonsalves v. Nissan Motor Corp., 100 Hawai
'i 149, 158, 58 P.3d 1196, 1205 (2002). 
Defaults are generally disfavored. See Rearden Family 
Trust v. Wisenbaker, 101 Hawai 'i 237, 254, 65 P.3d 1029, 1046 
(2003) (holding that “defaults and default judgments are not favored and [] any doubt should be resolved in favor of the party seeking relief, so that, in the interests of justice, there can be a full trial on the merits”) (citations omitted). In BDM, Inc., v. Sageco, Inc., 57 Haw. 73, 549 P.2d 1147 (1976), this court held that a party seeking to set aside a default must demonstrate the following three factors: 
In general, a motion to set aside a default
entry or a default judgment may and should be granted
whenever the court finds (1) that the nondefaulting
party will not be prejudiced by the reopening, (2)
that the defaulting party has a meritorious defense,
and (3) that the default was not the result of
inexcusable neglect or a wilful act. 
Id. at 76, 549 P.2d at 1150 (citations omitted).
 
In BDM, we observed that the showing necessary to set
 
aside the entry of default was lower than that needed to set
 
aside a default judgment. Id. (“It should be noted that a motion
 
to set aside a default entry, which may be granted under Rule
 55(c) ‘for good cause shown’, gives the court greater freedom in
 granting relief than is available on a motion to set aside a
 default judgment where the requirements of Rule 60(b) must be
 
-75­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
satisfied.”) (citation omitted). This is a reasonable
 
distinction, since the entry of default occurs at a more
 preliminary stage of the case than does the entry of judgment.
 
Applying these principles here, we conclude that the 
circuit court abused its discretion in denying the motion to set aside the entry of default. In denying the motion, the circuit court appeared to find that Waiola’s conduct constituted inexcusable neglect. However, the circumstances here are dissimilar from those in which relief from default is typically denied. For example, this is not a case in which a defendant that was properly served with a complaint fails to answer without any reason, or for an improper reason. See, e.g., Pogia v. 
Ramos, 10 Haw. App. 411, 416-17, 876 P.2d 1342, 1345 (1994) (noting that the circuit court properly refused to set aside default when defendant claims that she did not answer because “she was having ‘problems with her marriage,’” claimed that she “did not understand what the legal papers meant,” and believed that when she signed the summons, “that was all she ‘had to do.’”). To the contrary, Wai
'ola wanted to defend against the 
cross-claim, tendered the defense to the AG within a few days of being served, and continued to aggressively pursue representation by the AG thereafter, culminating in the filing of the petition for writ of mandamus. 
Nor is this a case in which the defaulting party failed
 
-76­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to file an answer without seeking the approval of the court for 
the delay. See, e.g., Hupp v. Accessory Distrib., Inc., 1 Haw. 
App. at 178-79, 616 P.2d at 236 (holding that the circuit court properly refused to set aside default when defendant’s insurer failed to file an answer for nine months without seeking approval of the court, based on insurer’s understanding that it had an “‘open’ extension of time from [plaintiff’s] attorneys”). After stipulating with Ala Loop for two extensions to answer, Wai
'ola, 
with the AG specially appearing on its behalf, filed a motion on February 25, 2004, asking for an extension of time to answer or otherwise respond. The motion noted the existence of the conflict between Wai
'ola and the AG, and suggested that the court 
extend the deadline until approximately 30 days after the motion was heard on March 18, 2004, since “that interval may be long enough to work out the differences that remain[.]” The court granted the extension to April 19, 2004. On April 19, Wai
'ola 
filed the motion for a stay, noting that it had been unable to resolve the dispute with the AG and accordingly was about to file a petition for writ of mandamus. 
Nor is this a case in which there was a lengthy delay
 
between the entry of default and the filing of the motion to set
 the default aside. See, e.g., Pogia, 10 Haw. App. at 413-14, 876
 
P.2d at 1344 (noting that the motion to set aside entry of
 default and default judgment was not filed until more than 3
 
-77­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
years after entry of default and nine months after entry of 
judgment). Default was entered on May 24, 2004, Wai 'ola agreed 
to representation by the AG on June 2, 2004, and the motion to set aside default was filed on July 6, 2004. 
In the circuit court’s August 11, 2004 Order denying 
Waiola’s motion to set aside default, the court found that “[Wai
'ola] made a conscious choice not [to] be represented by 
private legal counsel and therefore, failed to answer [the] cross-claim in a timely manner. Therefore, it cannot be said that [Wai
'ola] was guilty only of excusable neglect.” However, 
the record does not support the conclusion that Wai 'ola could 
have retained private counsel to file an answer. To the contrary, the record contains a declaration from Waiola’s director that details the organization’s extremely limited financial resources, and states that Wai
'ola could not afford to 
retain private counsel. 
Ala Loop argues that Waiola’s ability to obtain
 
attorney Sandra Song to appear specially on its behalf to file
 the motion to stay and the petition for a writ of mandamus
 indicates that it could have retained private counsel to file an
 answer. However, it is unclear from the record whether Song was
 retained or acting pro bono, and whether she would have been
 willing to appear for the purpose of filing an answer, with the
 potentially more significant involvement in ongoing litigation
 
-78­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that such an appearance could entail. Ala Loop also contends
 
that in January of 2004, Waiola’s board authorized the
 expenditure of $10,000 to construct a temporary building on the
 site at issue here. However, the record does not establish that
 those funds were in fact expended. 
Finally, it is noteworthy that once default was 
entered, Wai
'ola agreed to the AG’s demand that it relinquish its 
potential HRS § 302A-1184 defense, and the AG entered the case on Waiola’s behalf. The fact that Wai
'ola eventually accepted 
representation from the AG under these circumstances belies the suggestion that it had the resources available to hire its own counsel. 
This is not to say that Wai
'ola was without fault in 
its approach to its dispute with the AG. Most notably, Wai 'ola 
should not have waited until April 19, 2004, the last day of the extension that had been granted by the circuit court, to file the motion for a stay so that it could pursue the mandamus petition. The circuit court, in its order granting the extension, had clearly warned Wai
'ola that it could be defaulted for failing to 
answer or otherwise respond by April 19. In those circumstances, the entry of default was appropriate, as would be other sanctions such as requiring Wai
'ola to pay Ala Loop’s attorneys’ fees and 
costs in connection with the ensuing motion to set aside default. However, the circuit court went further and denied the motion to 
-79­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
set aside, thereby imposing the ultimate sanction of denying 
Wai'ola the opportunity to defend on the merits. In the 
circumstances of this case, where Wai 'ola could not afford 
private counsel and could obtain representation by the attorney general only by relinquishing its primary defense on the merits, imposition of that sanction was an abuse of discretion.
44 
Rearden Family Trust, 101 Hawai 'i at 255, 65 P.3d at 1047 
(concluding that circuit court abused its discretion by defaulting defendant for failing to attend a settlement conference, since “lesser sanction[s]” would “better serve the interest of justice”) (citation and internal brackets omitted). This is particularly so given the fact that the court was being asked to set aside the entry of default, rather than a default judgment, see BDM, 57 Haw. at 76, 549 P.2d at 1150, and the relative promptness with which the motion was brought. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Ala Loop had a private right of action under article 
XI, section 9 of the Hawai
'i Constitution to enforce its chapter 
205 claims against Wai 'ola. Accordingly, we vacate the April 22, 
2009 Judgment of the Intermediate Court of Appeals. 
44
 The circuit court did not address the first two prongs of the
three-part BDM test, i.e., lack of prejudice to the non-defaulting party and
the existence of a meritorious defense. BDM, 57 Haw. at 76, 549 P.2d at 1150.
However, both of those requirements were satisfied here. There was no apparent prejudice to Ala Loop, other than the burden of having to litigateits claims, and Wai' ola raised significant issues concerning whether its
activities on the site at the time of the motion violated chapter 205 andwhether there was a ripe dispute. 
-80­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
We further conclude that the Circuit Court of the Third 
Circuit erred in failing to set aside the entry of default 
against Wai 'ola, and accordingly we vacate the circuit court’s 
First Amended Final Judgment entered on December 12, 2005, and remand to the circuit court for further proceedings. 
In view of this disposition, we need not address the 
other issues raised by Ala Loop in its application, or by Ala Loop and Wai
'ola in their appeals in the ICA. 
Thomas Yeh (Tsukazaki
Yeh & Moore) for
Petitioner Ala Loop
Community Association
 
Charlene M. Aina, Deputy
Attorney General, forRespondent Wai
'ola Waters 
of Life Charter School 
-81­