_________________________________________________________________ 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI» I,
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee
 
vs.
 
JASON KELIIKOAIKAIKA KALAOLA,
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant
 
NO. 29163
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CR. NO. 07-1-1337)
  
AUGUST 19, 2010
 
MOON, C.J., NAKAYAMA, AND
RECKTENWALD, JJ.; WITH ACOBA, J., CONCURRING
SEPARATELY AND DISSENTING, WITH WHOM DUFFY, J., JOINS
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, J.
 
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant Jason Keliikoaikaika
 
Kalaola was charged with one count of failure to disperse in
 
violation of Hawai
» i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 711-1102 (1993),1 
following an incident at Aloha Tower Marketplace (ATM) in which
 
police were called to respond to an unruly crowd. At trial, the
 
1
 HRS § 711-1102 (1993) provides in pertinent part:
 
Failure to disperse. (1) When six or more
persons are participating in a course of disorderly
conduct likely to cause substantial harm or serious
inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, a peace officer
may order the participants and others in the immediate
vicinity to disperse.
(2) A person commits the offense of failure to
disperse if the person knowingly fails to comply with
an order made pursuant to subsection (1).
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
State presented evidence concerning Kalaola s conduct on both the
 
second and first floors of ATM, and argued that Kalaola s failure
 
to disperse from either floor was independently sufficient to
 
support a conviction. The jury found Kalaola guilty, and a
 
timely appeal followed. On appeal, the ICA concluded that the
 
trial court erred in improperly instructing the jury, but held
 
that there was sufficient evidence to support the conviction. 
State v. Kalaola , No. 29163, 2009 WL 1507291, at *2-3 (App.
 
May 29, 2009). Accordingly, the ICA vacated the circuit court s
 judgment and remanded the case for a new trial. Id. at *3.
 
Kalaola timely petitioned this court for a writ of
 
certiorari to review the ICA s June 26, 2009 judgment. In his
 application, Kalaola argues that the conviction was not supported
 by sufficient evidence and that, accordingly, it should be
 
reversed rather than remanded for a new trial. The State did not
 
petition this court for review of the ICA s judgment remanding to
 
the circuit court for further proceedings, and did not file a
 
response to Kalaola s application to this court. Accordingly,
 
the ICA s finding of trial error with regard to the jury
 
instructions is undisputed. The remaining question is whether
 
the evidence presented at trial was sufficient to support
 
Kalaola s conviction.
 
We hold that sufficient evidence was presented to
 
establish that Kalaola failed to disperse from the first floor of
 
ATM, but that there was insufficient evidence to establish that
 
-2­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Kalaola failed to disperse from the second floor. We further 
hold that the double jeopardy clause of the Hawai» i Constitution 
does not bar a retrial of Kalaola with regard to his alleged failure to disperse from the first floor, for which there clearly 
was sufficient evidence adduced at trial to support a conviction 
under HRS § 711-1102. 
Although no Hawai» i cases address double jeopardy in 
the context of the specific factual situation at issue here, we 
are guided by our prior double jeopardy cases. In a variety of cases involving reprosecution after a jury verdict, this court 
has repeatedly recognized that, as long as there was sufficient 
evidence presented to support the conviction of the defendant for the charged offense, the double jeopardy clause bars a retrial only when there was in fact an acquittal, whether express or implied. Such was not the case here, since the jury convicted 
Kalaola. 
We therefore vacate Kalaola s conviction and remand for
 
a new trial with regard to the events that transpired on the
 first floor.
 
I. Background
 
The following facts, taken from the record on appeal
 
and the transcripts of the proceedings before the trial court,
 
are relevant to the consideration of the issues presented here.
2
 
2
 For the purposes of this analysis, we consider the evidence in the
light most favorable to the State. See State v. Richie, 88 Hawai »i 19, 33,
960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) ( Evidence adduced in the trial court must be
(continued...)
 
-3­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Kalaola was charged by way of complaint with one count
 
of failure to disperse in violation of HRS § 711-1102(1). The
 
complaint against Kalaola alleged:
 
On or about the 19th day of May, 2007, in the
City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii,
[Kalaola], as one (1) of six (6) or more persons
participating in a course of disorderly conduct likely
to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience,
annoyance, or alarm, or as a person in the immediate
vicinity, failed to obey a law enforcement officer s
order to disperse, in violation of Section 711-1102(1)
of the [HRS].
 
At trial, the State s only witnesses were police
 
officers who encountered Kalaola at ATM on the night of the
 
alleged incident. For example, Officer Keani Alapa (Officer
 Alapa) testified he was dispatched to ATM because of a report of
 approximately 50 people fighting.  Upon arriving at ATM,
 Officer Alapa and Officer Ryan Kaio (Officer Kaio) encountered
 multiple fights going on, approximately maybe 50 to 75 people
 fighting  on the second floor of ATM. Officer Alapa testified
 
that he observed fighting over pretty much the whole area  of
 the second floor. 
Officer Alapa testified that he observed Kalaola on the
 
second floor calling people out, challenging people to fight.  
Officer Alapa further testified that he addressed the general
 group  of which Kalaola was a part and ordered them to leave at
 
least ten times. Officer Alapa testified that Kalaola did not
 
2(...continued)
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate court
passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to support a conviction )
(quoting State v. Quitog , 85 Hawai »i 128, 145, 938 P.2d 559, 576 (1997))
(brackets omitted). 
-4­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
leave at that time, but that the officers eventually got a lot
 
of people to leave the second floor and (inaudible) proceed down
 
to the parking lot where some other incidents ignited down
 
there.  Officer Alapa testified that it took approximately 20
 
minutes before the crowd started to go downstairs, and that he
 
also eventually proceeded to the first floor, where he saw
 
[Kalaola] again on the sidewalk.  
Sergeant Albert Lee (Sergeant Lee) testified that, when
 
he arrived at ATM, he saw about 50  people streaming out, they
 were still all yelling at each other, had some small fights
 
breaking out.  He testified that he also saw Kalaola streaming
 
out  of the second floor, yelling and swearing. Sergeant Lee
 testified that he approached Kalaola and told him to leave the
 area.  Sergeant Lee further testified that, when he approached
 Kalaola, Kalaola was yelling and cursing at other people in the
 
area, and that Sergeant Lee had to tell [Kalaola] at least maybe
 ten more times  to leave. Sergeant Lee also testified that there
 
were other fights breaking out in the parking lot of ATM, with
 
which he had to assist. He further testified that, when he came
 back to the front of ATM, there were still other people fighting
 in the general area[,]  and that he again asked [Kalaola] to
 leave and he wouldn t.  Sergeant Lee testified that he then had
 
Kalaola arrested for failure to disperse. 
At the conclusion of the trial, the circuit court
 
instructed the jury, with regard to the offense of failure to
 
-5­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
disperse, as follows:
 
. . .
 
A person commits the offense of Failure to
Disperse if he is one of six or more persons
participating in a course of disorderly conduct likely
to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience,
annoyance, or alarm, or he is a person in the
immediate vicinity, and he knowingly fails to comply
with a law enforcement officer s order to disperse.
There are three material elements to the offense
 
of Failure to Disperse, each of which the prosecution
must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
These elements are:
 1. That, on or about the 19th day of May, 2007,
in the City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawai
»i,
[Kalaola] was one of six or more persons participating
in a course of disorderly conduct likely to causesubstantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance
or alarm, or he was a person in the immediate
vicinity; and
2. [Kalaola] failed to comply with a law
enforcement officer s order to disperse; and
3. [Kalaola] did so knowingly.
 
(Emphasis added). 
Although Kalaola requested that the circuit court
 
include the statutory definition of disorderly conduct  in the
 
jury instructions, the circuit court did not instruct the jury on
 
the definition of disorderly conduct. 
The circuit court also gave the jury the following
 
unanimity instruction, which was based on State v. Arceo , 84
 
Hawai» i 1, 928 P.2d 843 (1996): 
The law allows the introduction of evidence for
 
the purpose of showing that there is more than one act
upon which proof of an element of an offense may be
based. In order for the prosecution to prove an
element, all twelve jurors must unanimously agree that
the same act has been proved beyond a reasonable
doubt.
 
During closing argument, the Deputy Prosecuting
 
Attorney (DPA) referred to the Arceo  instruction in arguing that
 
there were multiple acts to support conviction. Specifically,
 
the DPA relied on the instruction to argue that  both  the events
 
-6­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
on the first floor and the events on the second floor could
 
support conviction:
 
In order for the Prosecution to prove an
element, all twelve jurors must unanimously agree that
the same act has been proved beyond a reasonable
doubt.
 
What this means, ladies and gentlemen, is
whenever there is more than one act upon which proof
of an element may be based.
Basically, ladies and gentlemen, what that means
is, number one, the incident on the second floor and,
number two, the incident on the first floor.
 
The incident on the second floor is when
 
[Kalaola] was engaging in  was calling people out and
Officer Alapa told [Kalaola] to disperse and [Kalaola]
did not so [sic].
Officer Alapa chose not to arrest [Kalaola] at
that time. He chose not to arrest anybody at that
time because he was outnumbered and it was not safe
 
for either him or Kaio to effectuate arrests.
 
Their priority at that particular point was
getting people  was to calm down the situation and
 
getting people to leave the second floor.
The second incident, this is the incident with
Sergeant Lee downstairs.
At that particular  and, ladies and gentlemen,
that (inaudible) that all twelve of you must agree
that one of these incidents happened.
 
Basically, you cannot (inaudible) where six of
you agree that the second floor incident happened, six
of you agree that the first floor incident happened
and [Kalaola] is guilty.
What that means is that twelve of you must agree
that the second floor incident happened or the first
floor happened or both happened.
Ladies and gentlemen, both did happen in this
 
case, [Kalaola] failed to comply with Officer Alapa s
orders to disperse on the second floor and he failed
to comply with Sergeant Lee s orders to disperse on
the first floor.[3]
 
3 Similarly, defense counsel argued in closing that the purpose of
the Arceo instruction was to ensure unanimity with regard to the alleged
failure to disperse from the first floor versus the alleged failure to
disperse from the second floor:
 
I want to bring you back to Instruction No. 17,
. . . and that would be the instruction in which you
must unanimously agree that the same act has been
proven beyond a reasonable doubt. So I do want to
 highlight that there are several allegations of what
happened and what transpired throughout the night, the
early morning of May 19th.
There s what supposedly happened on the second
floor and there s supposedly what happened on the
first floor. You all must unanimously agree to the
(continued...)
 
-7­   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(Emphasis added). 
On April 18, 2008, the jury found Kalaola guilty on one
 
count of failure to disperse. A timely appeal followed. In a
 
May 29, 2009 Summary Disposition Order, the ICA concluded that
 
the circuit court erred in (1) failing to properly instruct the
 
jury on the statutory definition of disorderly conduct  and (2)
 failing to adequately instruct the jury that the knowingly 
 
state of mind applied to all the elements of the offense.  State
 
v. Kalaola, No. 29163, 2009 WL 1507291, at *2 (App. May 29,
 2009). The ICA further concluded that there was sufficient
 evidence to establish each of the alternative means of committing
 
the offense that was presented to the jury.  Id. Finally, the
 
ICA concluded that, assuming arguendo  the case involved multiple
 
acts, the circuit court gave a specific unanimity instruction
 
which obviated the need for an election  and there was
 sufficient evidence to prove that Kalaola engaged in conduct
 constituting the charged offense.  Id. at *3. Accordingly, the
 
ICA vacated the circuit court s April 18, 2008 judgment and
 remanded the case for a new trial. Id.
 
II. Standards of Review
 
A. Sufficiency of the Evidence
 
We review the sufficiency of evidence on appeal as
 
3(...continued)
exact incident in which Jason Kalaola allegedly failed
to disperse and you ve got to agree upon that beyond a
reasonable doubt.
 
-8­  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
follows:
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution
when the appellate court passes on the legal
sufficiency of such evidence to support a conviction;
the same standard applies whether the case was before
a judge or jury. The test on appeal is not whether
guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
State v. Richie , 88 Hawai» i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) 
(quoting State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai» i 128, 145, 938 P.2d 559, 576 
(1997)).   Substantial evidence  as to every material element of 
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient 
quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable 
caution to support a conclusion." Id.  (citation omitted). 
B.	 Constitutional Questions
 We review questions of constitutional law de novo , 
under the right/wrong standard.  Jou v. Dai-Tokyo Royal State 
Ins. Co.
, 116 Hawai» i 159, 164-65, 172 P.3d 471, 476-77 (2007) 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
 
III. Discussion
 
A.	 The prosecution presented substantial evidence that Kalaola
failed to disperse from the first floor of ATM, but failed
to present substantial evidence that Kalaola failed to
disperse from the second floor of ATM
 
A person commits the offense of failure to disperse if
 
he or she (1) was one of six or more persons [] participating in
 
a course of disorderly conduct likely to cause substantial harm
 or serious inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm,  or  was in the
 
immediate vicinity  of such a disturbance; (2) was ordered by a
 
-9­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
law enforcement officer to disperse; (3) failed to comply with 
that order; and (4) acted knowingly with respect to the foregoing 
elements. HRS § 711-1102. Accordingly, the prosecution was 
required to prove the foregoing elements and state of mind beyond 
a reasonable doubt. See State v. Assaye, 121 Hawai» i 204, 216, 
216 P.3d 1227, 1239 (2009) ( HRS § 701-114(1)(a) and (b) (1993) requires proof beyond a reasonable doubt of each element of the offense, as well as the state of mind required to establish each element of the offense. ) (quoting State v. Manewa , 115 Hawai» i 
343, 357-58, 167 P.3d 336, 350-51 (2007)). 
In analyzing the evidence in this case, it is important 
to distinguish between alternative means  and multiple acts.  In State v. Jones , 96 Hawai» i 161, 183-84, 29 P.3d 351, 373-74 
(2001), this court explained that we use the term alternative means  to describe the legal concept of statutory alternatives 
for proving a single element  of the offense charged.  96 Hawai» i 
at 171 n.14, 29 P.3d at 361 n.14 (first emphasis in original; second emphasis added). Put another way, an alternative means 
case is one in which a single offense  may be committed in more 
than one way[.]  Id. at 170, 29 P.3d at 360 (emphasis added). 
Accordingly, the instant case is an alternative means  case in the sense that a single element  of the offense of failure to 
disperse may be committed in more than one way,  i.e., where the defendant is one of six or more persons participating in a course of disorderly conduct, or  where the defendant is in the 
-10­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
immediate vicinity  of such a disturbance. 
This is also a multiple acts  case.4 Multiple acts 
 
refer to 
 separate and distinct culpable acts  that could support 
separate counts  of an indictment or complaint[,]  but that are 
submitted to the jury in a single count. Jones, 96 Hawai» i at 
169, 29 P.3d at 359 (emphasis added). Thus, in multiple acts 
cases, 
[e]ach separate and distinct culpable act  or
 independent incident  that may be charged as a separate count
 includes the conduct, attendant circumstances, and result of
 conduct that may be present.  Id.  at 171, 29 P.3d at 361. 
The distinct multiple acts here are: (1) Kalaola s
 
alleged failure to leave the second floor of ATM after being
 ordered to do so by Officer Alapa, and (2) Kalaola s alleged
 failure to leave the first floor after being ordered to do so by
 Sergeant Lee. In sum, the jury was presented with two acts,
 
i.e., the alleged failures to disperse on the second and first
 floors of ATM, either of which could have been committed via two
 
statutory alternative means, i.e., participating in disorderly
 
conduct or being in the vicinity of disorderly conduct. 
With this framework as a background, we will evaluate
  
4 On appeal, the State argued that [Kalaola] was engaged in a
single violation of the statute through a continuing course of conduct
comprising failure to disperse in its totality[.]  However, in its closing
argument, the State argued that Kalaola s failure to disperse from either
floor was independently sufficient to support a conviction. Thus, the State
did not argue that Kalaola had engaged in a continuing course of conduct
constituting failure to disperse, but rather argued that either of two
separate incidents, number one, the incident on the second floor and, number
two, the incident on the first floor[,]  could support a conviction.
Accordingly, because the State argued this as a multiple acts case, we do not
consider whether Kalaola s alleged failure to disperse could constitute a
continuing course of conduct.
 
-11­  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the sufficiency of the evidence with regard to each floor. 
First, we conclude that there was insufficient evidence that
 
Kalaola violated HRS § 711-1102 by failing to disperse from the
 
second floor of ATM. Officer Alapa did not testify concerning
 
how long Kalaola remained on the second floor after Officer Alapa
 
ordered the crowd to disperse, other than observing that he saw
 
Kalaola again on the first floor at least 20 minutes later. 
Kalaola s presence on the first floor at least 20 minutes later
 indicates that Kalaola complied with Officer Alapa s order to
 disperse. Accordingly, there is not substantial evidence that
 
Kalaola knowingly failed to comply with Officer Alapa s order to
 
disperse on the second floor of ATM.
5
 
However, there was sufficient evidence that Kalaola
 
violated HRS § 711-1102 by failing to disperse from the first
 floor of ATM. First, there was substantial evidence as to both
 
of the statutory alternative means, i.e., that Kalaola was one of
 six or more persons [] participating in a course of disorderly
 
conduct  or that he was in the immediate vicinity  of such a
 
disturbance. See HRS § 711-1102(1). Sergeant Lee testified that
 
he saw about 50  people streaming out  of ATM, with some small
 fights breaking out[,]  and that he saw Kalaola streaming out 
 of the second floor, yelling and swearing. Sergeant Lee further
 
5
 Each element of the offense must be proved beyond a reasonable
doubt. HRS § 701-114(1)(a). Because we conclude that there was insufficient
 
evidence that Kalaola knowingly failed to comply with Officer Alapa s order to
disperse on the second floor, we need not address whether there was sufficient
evidence concerning each of the remaining elements as to the second floor,
including whether there was sufficient evidence of each of the statutory
alternative means.
 
-12­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
testified that, when he approached Kalaola on the first floor,
 
Kalaola was yelling and cursing at other people, and that there
 
were still other people fighting in the general area[.]  When
 
viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution, Sergeant
 
Lee s testimony is sufficient to enable a person of reasonable
 
caution to support a conclusion that six or more persons [were]
 
participating in a course of disorderly conduct,  and that
 Kalaola was either participating  in such conduct or in the
 immediate vicinity.  See HRS § 711-1102. 
Second, there is substantial evidence that Sergeant Lee 
ordered Kalaola to disperse. Sergeant Lee testified that he approached Kalaola and told him to leave the area.  He further testified that he had to tell [Kalaola] at least maybe ten more times  to leave. Accordingly, when viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution, Sergeant Lee s testimony provides 
substantial evidence that Kalaola was ordered to disperse. See 
In re Doe, 95 Hawai» i 183, 196, 20 P.3d 616, 629 (2001) (citation 
omitted) (noting that the testimony of a single witness, if found by the trier of fact to have been credible, will suffice  to provide substantial evidence). 
Third, there is substantial evidence that Kalaola
 
failed to comply with Sergeant Lee s order, because Sergeant Lee
 
testified that he had to tell [Kalaola] at least maybe ten more
 times  to leave, and that he asked [Kalaola] to leave and he
 wouldn t.  Accordingly, Sergeant Lee s testimony provides
 
-13­    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
substantial evidence that Kalaola failed to leave when ordered to
 
do so, i.e., that he failed to comply with Sergeant Lee s order
 
to disperse. See id.
 
Finally, there is substantial evidence that Kalaola 
acted knowingly with respect to the foregoing elements. [T]he 
mind of an alleged offender may be read from his or her acts or 
conduct and the inferences fairly drawn from all of the circumstances.  State v. Pudiquet , 82 Hawai» i 419, 425, 922 P.2d 
1032, 1038 (1996) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting 
State v. Leung , 79 Hawai» i 538, 544, 904 P.2d 552, 558 (App. 
1995)). In the instant case, Sergeant Lee testified that he 
approached Kalaola and told him to leave the area,  but that 
Kalaola refused. Thus, an inference may be fairly drawn from 
Sergeant Lee s testimony that Kalaola both knew of the order to disperse, and knowingly failed to comply with it.
 Accordingly, there is substantial evidence that
 
Kalaola failed to disperse from the first floor of ATM. 
B. Double jeopardy does not bar retrial of Kalaola
 
The remaining question is whether Kalaola can be
 
retried in these circumstances. Kalaola initially suggested, in
 
his opening brief to the ICA, that he could be retried on the
 alternative theor[y]  that was supported by sufficient evidence. 
However, during oral argument in this court, Kalaola suggested
 
-14­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
double jeopardy could bar retrial.6 In view of the fact that
 
this issue was eventually raised by Kalaola and is discussed at
 
length by the dissent, we address it to provide guidance to the
 
circuit court. As set forth below, we conclude that double
 
jeopardy does not bar retrial with regard to Kalaola s failure to
 
disperse from the first floor, for which there was clearly
 
sufficient evidence adduced to support a conviction. 
1. Double jeopardy principles
 
The double jeopardy clause of the Fifth Amendment to
 
the United States Constitution provides that no person shall be
 
subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life
 or limb[.]  Similarly, article I, section 10 of the Hawai» i 
Constitution provides that no person shall . . . be subject for
 
6 The question of whether double jeopardy precludes Kalaola s
retrial was not raised by Kalaola in his briefs to the ICA or application to
this court. To the contrary, after arguing in his opening brief that there
was insufficient evidence to support the conviction in its entirety, Kalaola
then argued:
 
Even if, however, the State adduced sufficient
evidence for one of the alternative theories, it is
impossible to determine which alternative theory the
jury based its verdict upon because the circuit court
did not provide an interrogatory to the jury. Based
 on the nature of the evidence and the arguments in the
case, it is probable that the jurors based their
decision on an alternative that was not supported by
sufficient evidence. As such, Kalaola s rights to a
unanimous verdict and due process under article I, § 5
of the Hawaii State Constitution have been violated
 
and Kalaola s conviction must remanded [sic] for trial
on the viable alternative.
 
Kalaola s counsel repeated that suggestion in his opening argument
to this court, MP3: Oral Argument, Hawaii Supreme Court, at 27:55-28:19,
29:58-30:20 (Jan. 7 2010), available at
http://www.courts.state.hi.us/courts/oral_arguments/archive/oasc29163.html, a
position with which the State agreed, id. at 48:51-49:14. It was not until
 
defense counsel s rebuttal closing that counsel suggested there might be a
double jeopardy issue. Id. at 59:04-1:00:17.
 
-15­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy[.] 
 
This court has described the purpose underlying the
 
prohibition against double jeopardy  as follows:
 
The underlying idea, one that is deeply ingrained in
at least the Anglo-American system of jurisprudence,
is that the State with all its resources and power
should not be allowed to make repeated attempts to
convict an individual for an alleged offense, thereby
subjecting him to embarrassment, expense and ordeal
and compelling him to live in a continuing state of
anxiety and insecurity, as well as enhancing the
possibility that even though innocent he may be found
guilty.
 
State v. Quitog , 85 Hawai» i 128, 140, 938 P.2d 559, 571 (1997) 
(quotation marks omitted) (quoting Green v. United States, 355
 
U.S. 184, 187-88 (1957)).
 
This court has also recognized that there are three
 
separate and distinct aspects to the protections offered by the
 
double jeopardy clause.  Id.  at 141, 938 P.2d at 572. Thus,
 [d]ouble jeopardy protects individuals against: (1) a second 
prosecution for the same offense after acquittal; (2) a second 
prosecution for the same offense after conviction; and (3) 
multiple punishments for the same offense.  Id. (citations and 
quotation marks omitted; emphasis added); see also State v. Whiting, 88 Hawai» i 356, 359, 966 P.2d 1082, 1085 (1998). 
Consistent with the prohibition against reprosecution following 
an acquittal, double jeopardy presents an absolute bar to retrial where, inter alia, the defendant has been acquitted, whether 
expressly or impliedly, notwithstanding a subsequent reversal of the judgment on appeal[,]  State v. Feliciano , 62 Haw. 637, 644, 
618 P.2d 306, 311 (1980), superseded by statute on other grounds 
-16­  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
as stated in State v. Rumbawa, 94 Hawai» i 513, 517, 17 P.3d 862, 
866 (App. 2001), and where the insufficiency of evidence is such 
that the appellate court finds that the government failed to 
prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt[,]  State v. Bannister , 
60 Haw. 658, 660, 594 P.2d 133, 135 (1979) (quoting Burks v. 
United States, 437 U.S. 1, 16 n.10 (1978)). 
However, the protections of the double jeopardy clause 
are not absolute.  State v. Miyazaki, 64 Haw. 611, 618, 645 P.2d 
1340, 1345 (1982); see also United States v. Tateo, 377 U.S. 463, 
466 (1964) ( Corresponding to the right of an accused to be given 
a fair trial is the societal interest in punishing one whose 
guilt is clear after he [has] obtained such a trial. It would be a high price indeed for society to pay were every accused granted immunity from punishment because of any defect sufficient to constitute reversible error in the proceedings leading to 
conviction. ).
7 For example, [t]he double jeopardy clause does 
not preclude retrial where a defendant was not acquitted of the 
charged offense[,]  Whiting , 88 Hawai» i at 359, 966 P.2d at 1085, 
and imposes no limitations whatever upon the power to retry a 
defendant who has succeeded in getting his first conviction set aside[,]  for reasons other than insufficiency of the evidence, 
7
 The dissent correctly observes that federal precedents set forth
minimum protections, and do not control the state constitution[.]  Dissenting
opinion at 55. However, this court has cited with approval the principles
derived from each of the federal cases relied upon herein. See, e.g., State
 
v. Hamala, 73 Haw. 289, 293, 834 P.2d 275, 277 (1992) (quoting Tateo, 377 U.S.
at 466), overruled on other grounds by State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai
»i 405, 984
P.2d 1231 (1999); Feliciano , 62 Haw. at 644, 618 P.2d at 311 (citing Green v. 
United States, 355 U.S. 184, 190-91 (1957)); Bannister, 60 Haw. at 660, 594
P.2d at 135 (quoting Burks , 437 U.S. at 16 n.10). 
-17­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
State v. Jess, 117 Hawai» i 381, 439 n.28, 184 P.3d 133, 191 n.28 
(2008) (quotation marks omitted) (quoting United States v. 
DiFrancesco, 449 U.S. 117, 131 (1980)). As set forth below, such 
reasons are typically referred to as trial error.  See, e.g. , 
Burks, 437 U.S. at 14-15 & n.8. (noting that reversal for trial 
error is a determination that a defendant has been convicted 
through a judicial process which is defective in some fundamental respect, e.g., incorrect receipt or rejection of evidence, incorrect instructions, or prosecutorial misconduct ). 
In the instant case, we conclude that the lack of
 
substantial evidence concerning Kalaola s failure to disperse
 from the second floor of ATM does not bar remand with regard to
 Kalaola s failure to disperse from the first floor of ATM, for
 which there clearly was sufficient evidence adduced at trial. 
2.	 The jury neither expressly nor impliedly acquitted
Kalaola of the charged offense
 
It is clear that a defendant may not be retried for 
any offense of which he has been acquitted, whether expressly or 
impliedly, notwithstanding a subsequent reversal of the judgment 
on appeal.  Feliciano , 62 Haw. at 644, 618 P.2d at 311; see also 
State v. Mundon, 121 Hawai» i 339, 355, 219 P.3d 1126, 1142 (2009) 
( That a jury s verdict of acquittal bars a subsequent retrial on 
those same offenses is perhaps the most fundamental rule in the 
history of double jeopardy jurisprudence.  ) (citation and some 
quotation marks omitted). In a case involving reversal of a conviction on a lesser included offense, this court has explained 
-18­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that two rationales support the prohibition against reprosecution
 
following an acquittal:
 
First, the concept of double jeopardy is enhanced in
that after an acquittal, a defendant is freed of the
threat of renewed prosecution on the more serious
offense. . . . Second, such a rule does not inhibit a
defendant in his decision of whether to appeal his
conviction
. The Commentary to HRS [§] 701-110 [8]
states, 
If the defendant faces reprosecution for an
offense of which he has been acquitted, he may be
unfairly hampered in his decision about whether to
contest the validity of the conviction for the lesser
offense.  Under the rule we discuss today, the
appellant would not be coerced into waiving his right
to appeal his conviction on the lesser included
offense for fear of being reprosecuted on the more
serious offense.
 
Feliciano , 62 Haw. at 644, 618 P.2d at 311 (emphasis added).
 
In the instant case, however, there was no express jury
 
verdict of acquittal. Kalaola was charged with one count of
 
failure to disperse in violation of HRS § 711-1102(1), and was
 
convicted on that count. Although the prosecution argued that
 Kalaola committed two distinct acts of failing to disperse, the
 
jury did not return an express verdict of acquittal with regard
 
8	 HRS § 701-110 (1993) provides, in pertinent part:
 
When prosecution is barred by former prosecution for
the same offense. When a prosecution is for an
offense under the same statutory provision and is
based on the same facts as a former prosecution, it is
barred by the former prosecution under any of the
following circumstances:
(1) 	The former prosecution resulted in an
acquittal which has not subsequently been
set aside. There is an acquittal if the
prosecution resulted in a finding of not
guilty by the trier of fact or in a
determination by the court that there was
insufficient evidence to warrant a
 conviction. A finding of guilty of a
lesser included offense is an acquittal of
the greater inclusive offense, although
the conviction is subsequently set aside
on appeal by the defendant.
. . .
 
-19­ 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to either act. Moreover, as discussed further infra, the jury s
 
guilty verdict did not impliedly acquit Kalaola with regard to
 
his alleged failure to disperse from either floor. 
In Green v. United States , 355 U.S. 184, 190-91 (1957), 
which this court cited with approval in, inter alia, Feliciano, 
see 62 Haw. at 644, 618 P.2d at 311, the United States Supreme 
Court explained that, in certain circumstances, a conviction on a 
lesser-included crime must, for double jeopardy purposes, be taken as an implied acquittal of the greater charge. Consistent with that holding, this court has concluded that a defendant who 
has been convicted of a lesser included offense than that charged 
is deemed to have been acquitted of the greater charge.  Feliciano , 62 Haw. at 644, 618 P.2d at 311; see also State v. 
Pesentheiner, 95 Hawai» i 290, 301, 22 P.3d 86, 97 (App. 2001) 
(noting that a criminal defendant is protected from being 
retried for an offense whenever a jury impliedly acquits  him of that offense by finding him guilty of a lesser included 
offense ). 
In Green , the defendant was indicted on two counts, one
 
of which charged that he had committed arson, and one of which
 
charged him with murder in the first degree. 355 U.S. at 185. A
 jury found the defendant guilty of arson and of the lesser-
included offense of second degree murder. Id. at 186. The jury
 did not find [the defendant] guilty on the charge of murder in
 the first degree[,]  and [i]ts verdict was silent on that
 
-20­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
charge.  Id. On appeal, the District of Columbia Circuit Court
 
of Appeals reversed the conviction for second degree murder
 
because it was not supported by sufficient evidence, and the case
 
was remanded for a new trial. Id.
 
On remand, the defendant was tried again for first
 
degree murder under the original indictment.  Id. He raised the
 
defense of former jeopardy, based [not] on his previous
 
conviction for second degree murder but instead on the original
 jury s refusal to convict him of first degree murder.  Id. at
 
186, 190 n.11. The defendant s double jeopardy defense was
 
rejected by the trial court, and a new jury found [the
 
defendant] guilty of first degree murder[.]  Id. at 186. On
 
appeal, the Court of Appeals rejected his defense of former
 jeopardy . . . and affirmed the conviction.  Id. The United
 
States Supreme Court granted certiorari, id. , and conclude[d]
 
that this second trial for first degree murder placed [the
 
defendant] in jeopardy twice for the same offense in violation of
 
the Constitution[,]  id.  at 190. 
In so doing, the Court noted that [a]t [the
 
defendant s] first trial the jury was authorized to find him
 
guilty of either first degree murder . . . or, alternatively , of
 
second degree murder . . . .  Id. at 189-90 (emphasis added). 
The Court concluded that, [i]n substance the situation was the
 
same as though [the defendant] had been charged with these
 different offenses in separate but alternative counts of the
 
-21­ 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
indictment. The constitutional issues at stake here should not
 
turn on the fact that both offenses were charged to the jury
 
under one count.  Id. at 190 n.10. The Court explained that:
 
[The defendant] was in direct peril of being convicted
and punished for first degree murder at his first
trial. He was forced to run the gauntlet once on that
charge and the jury refused to convict him.  When
 
given the choice between finding him guilty of either
first or second degree murder it chose the latter. In
 this situation the great majority of cases in this
country have regarded the jury s verdict as an
implicit acquittal on the charge of first degree
murder. . . . In brief, we believe this case can be
treated no differently, for purposes of former
jeopardy, than if the jury had returned a verdict
which expressly read: We find the defendant not
 
guilty of murder in the first degree but guilty of
murder in the second degree. 
 
Id. at 190-91 (emphasis added).
 
Similarly, in Feliciano , the defendant was charged with
 
attempted murder, and was found guilty of reckless endangering in
 
the second degree. 62 Haw. at 637-38, 618 P.2d at 307. This
 court concluded that the conviction for reckless endangering
 
resulted from an erroneous jury instruction, and reversed. Id.
 
at 638, 618 P.2d at 308. We further held that retrial on the
 
attempted murder charge [was] barred by HRS [§] 701-110.  Id.
 
This court noted that [t]he jury conviction in the first trial
 on the lesser included offense automatically acquitted the
 
appellant of the greater charge in the indictment and retrial on
 the greater offense is barred.  Id. at 644, 618 P.2d at 311
 
(emphasis added). 
Thus, the doctrine of implied acquittals has developed 
primarily in the context of reviewing convictions on lesser-included offenses. See id.; see also State v. Loa, 83 Hawai» i 
-22­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
335, 361, 926 P.2d 1258, 1284 (1996) (noting, where the circuit 
court instructed the jury on a non-existent lesser-included 
offense, [t]he jury having acquitted [the defendant] of [the] 
charge[d offense] by virtue of its verdict [of guilt on the 
lesser-included offense], we hold that [the defendant] may not be 
retried for it. ). The ICA has declined to extend the doctrine 
of implied acquittals to other contexts.  In State v. 
Pesentheiner, 95 Hawai» i 290, 291, 22 P.3d 86, 87 (App. 2001), 
cert. denied May 4, 2001 (no Westlaw citation available; 
available at http://www.state.hi.us/jud/opdate2001.htm), the 
defendant was charged with harassment, which required that he have acted with the intent to harass, annoy, or alarm any other person[.]  The district court, in a bench trial, found the defendant guilty as charged, but determined that the defendant s actions were reckless.  Id. The ICA determined that the 
district court s ruling demonstrates its genuine confusion as to 
the intent element of the harassment charge[,]  and therefore 
concluded that the conviction could not stand. Id.  at 301, 22 
P.3d at 97. 
The defendant urged that his conviction should be
 
reversed. In considering whether double jeopardy would bar
 
reprosecution of the defendant on the theory that the district
 
court had acquitted him of the harassment charge by not finding
 the requisite state of mind, the ICA explained:
 
[A]ny [] implication in this case that the court made
a finding of fact inconsistent with guilt must
founder. The court s erroneous assumption that
 
-23­ 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
recklessness was sufficient for conviction rendered it
 
unnecessary, under the assumption, to go further in
considering the evidence than a finding that [the
defendant] recklessly waved his arms. Had the court
 
applied the correct mens rea standard in its
 
consideration of the evidence, it would have been
further required to assess the weight and credibility
of [the police officer s] description of the actus
 
reus. As we have observed, the court s ruling is
devoid of any mention of the issue. Under these
 
circumstances, we cannot say that the court made a
definitive finding of fact, invariably inconsistent
with guilt, that might bar retrial.
Instead, having concluded that sufficient
evidence was adduced at trial to sustain the charge,
we apply the usual rule for trial error[.]
 
Id. (some emphasis in original and some added).
 
There are strong policy reasons in favor of requiring
 
that the trier of fact make some determination in a defendant s
 
favor before a reviewing court will presume an acquittal. 
In
 
addressing criticism that reversal for trial error may make it
 quite possible that the jury would have acquitted [the
 defendant] if not for the trial error that required reversal,  it
 
has been noted that:
 
while estimating the impact of a trial error always
presents uncertainties, whether the result is a
conviction or an acquittal, only in the latter
situation is there concrete evidence, in the form of a
not guilty verdict, that the jury may have resolved
factual issues in favor of the defendant s innocence . 
That concrete evidence entitles the defendant to the
 benefit of the doubt that conclusively presumes his
innocence, while a conviction, even where probably
influenced by trial error, offers no such starting
point for assuming the jurors would have found
defendant not guilty except for the error. 
Wayne R. LaFave, et al., Criminal Procedure § 25.3(b) at 631-32
 
(3d ed. 2007) (emphasis added).
 
In the instant case, as explained supra , Kalaola was
 
not expressly acquitted by the jury. Moreover, Kalaola s
 conviction on the charge of failure to disperse cannot be assumed
 
-24­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI# I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
9We therefore agree with the dissent’s conclusion that the holdings
in Feliciano, Whiting and Loa are inapposite, dissenting opinion at 62-64,
insofar as they concerned implied acquittals in the context of lesser-included
offenses.  However, this conclusion supports the inference that the doctrine
of implied acquittals does not extend to the circumstances of the instant
case.  
Although, the dissent speculates that "it is possible that
[Kalaola] could be retried for conduct the jury had rejected as a basis for
legal liability in the first trial[,]" since "[i]t is impossible to know for
which multiple acts the jury convicted [Kalaola]," dissenting opinion at 43
(emphasis added), such speculation is insufficient to implicate the
(continued...)
-25-to include an implied acquittal on either of the acts offered by
the prosecution to support his conviction.  Kalaola was not
convicted on a lesser-included offense, such that his conviction
must be interpreted as an implied acquittal on the greater
charge.  See Green, 355 U.S. at 190-91; Feliciano, 62 Haw. at
643-44, 618 P.2d at 311.  In addition, the jury did not refuse to
convict Kalaola on the basis of either act, nor was the jury
required to choose between the act on the first floor and the act
on the second floor in order to convict, such that a conviction
on one must be interpreted as an implied acquittal on the other. 
See Green, 355 U.S. at 190-91.  Finally, there is no indication
that the jury “made a definitive finding of fact, invariably
inconsistent with guilt, that might bar retrial.”  See
Pesentheiner, 95 Hawai# i at 301, 22 P.3d at 97.  Accordingly, the
purposes underlying the double jeopardy prohibition against
retrial following acquittal, i.e., avoiding the threat of renewed
prosecution and a chilling effect on the decision to appeal, are
not implicated in the circumstances of this case.  See Feliciano,
62 Haw. at 644, 618 P.2d at 311.  Based on the foregoing, cases
concerning implied acquittals are plainly inapposite.9  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI# I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
(...continued)9
protections of the double jeopardy clause.  Nevertheless, the dissent suggests
that remand is impermissible because “it is [] entirely possible that the jury
had in effect found [Kalaola] not guilty on the act[] supported by substantial
evidence.”  Dissenting opinion at 68.  With all due respect, the dissent’s
extension of the implied acquittal doctrine to the circumstances of the
instant case -- in which there is no basis for assuming that the jury “in
effect” acquitted Kalaola of the charged offense -- is without support in our
case law. 
-26-State v. Mundon, 121 Hawai #i 339, 219 P.3d 1126 (2009)
is not to the contrary.  Mundon was charged with, inter alia, two
counts of terroristic threatening in the first degree (TT1).  Id.
at 354, 219 P.3d at 1141.  The language of the indictment as to
each count was identical, and the prosecution adduced evidence as
to two separate acts of TT1 at trial.  Id.  However, “each
specific act was not assigned to a specific count[.]”  Id. at
355, 219 P.3d at 1142.  The jury “convicted Mundon of one count
of TT1 and acquitted him of the other.”  Id. at 354, 219 P.3d at
1141 (emphasis added).    
This court noted that, because no specific unanimity
instruction was given, “there is a ‘genuine possibility’ that
different jurors concluded that Mundon committed different acts.” 
Id.  Accordingly, this court held that “the trial court plainly
erred in failing to provide such an instruction.”  Id. at 355,
219 P.3d at 1142.  This court further noted that “Mundon’s
conviction on one of the TT1 counts and acquittal on another
(where the specific act supporting each count was never
specified) raises double jeopardy concerns.”  Id. (emphasis
added).  Even assuming that the jury was unanimous as to which of
the two alleged acts formed the basis for Mundon’s culpable***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI# I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
-27-conduct, “there [was] no way to know which specific act . . .
served as the basis for Mundon’s acquittal[.]”  Id. (emphasis in
original).  Accordingly, if this court had remanded one of the
counts for retrial, there would be “a distinct possibility that
Mundon could be retried for an offense involving the same conduct
for which he was acquitted.”  Id.  Since it is well-settled that
double jeopardy bars retrial for the same offense after an
express acquittal, this court reversed Mundon’s conviction.  Id.
In contrast, in the instant case, Kalaola was never
acquitted by a jury for either of the two alleged acts of failure
to disperse.  Thus, unlike Mundon, the retrial of Kalaola does
not present a distinct possibility that Kalaola could be retried
for an offense for which he was previously acquitted.  Moreover,
whereas the holding in Mundon relies on the well-established
proposition that double jeopardy bars retrial following an
express jury verdict of acquittal, nothing in Mundon purports to
resolve the distinct factual situation presented here, where the
jury expressly found the defendant guilty of the charged offense.
3. There was sufficient evidence to support Kalaola’s
conviction for failure to disperse
The reversal of a conviction for insufficiency of the
evidence constitutes a determination by the appellate court that
the defendant should have been acquitted in the trial court in
the first instance because, “as a matter of law [] the jury could
not properly have returned a verdict of guilty.”  See State v.
Bannister, 60 Haw. 658, 660, 594 P.2d 133, 135 (1979).  When ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
reviewing the sufficiency of evidence presented at trial, this
 
court has explained that:
 
evidence adduced in the trial court must be considered
 
in the strongest light for the prosecution when the
appellate court passes on the legal sufficiency of
such evidence to support a conviction; the same
standard applies whether the case was before a judge
or jury. The test on appeal is not whether guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether
there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
Jones, 96 Hawai» i at 181, 29 P.3d at 371 (emphasis added) 
(quoting Quitog , 85 Hawai» i at 145, 938 P.2d at 576). 
In the instant case, the evidence presented at trial
 
was insufficient to support a conclusion that Kalaola failed to
 
disperse from the second floor of ATM when ordered to do so by
 Officer Alapa. However, this evidentiary insufficiency does not
 bar retrial of Kalaola on his alleged failure to disperse from
 
the first floor, for which there was clearly sufficient evidence. 
Because there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion
 
of the trier of fact,  i.e., that Kalaola was guilty of the
 charged offense of failure to disperse, double jeopardy does not
 bar retrial with regard to the events on the first floor. See
 
id.
 
In Burks v. United States, 437 U.S. 1, 5 (1978), the
 
United States Supreme Court considered whether a defendant may
 
be tried a second time when a reviewing court has determined that
 
in a prior trial the evidence was insufficient to sustain the
 verdict of the jury.  The Court analogized an appellate court s
 
determination that the evidence was insufficient to support a
 
-28­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
conviction to a verdict of acquittal, noting:
 
It is unquestionably true that the Court of Appeals 
decision represente[d] a resolution, correct or not,
of some or all of the factual elements of the offense
 
charged.  By deciding that the Government had failed
to come forward with sufficient proof of petitioner's
capacity to be responsible for criminal acts, that
court was clearly saying that Burks  criminal
culpability had not been established. If the District
 Court had so held in the first instance, as the
reviewing  court said it should have done, a judgment
of acquittal would have been entered and, of course,
petitioner could not be retried for the same offense.
Consequently, as Mr. Justice Douglas correctly
perceived in Sapir  [v. United States, 348 U.S. 373
(1955)], it should make no difference that the
reviewing court, rather than the trial court,
determined the evidence to be insufficient. The
 
appellate decision unmistakably meant that the
District Court had erred in failing to grant a
judgment of acquittal. To hold otherwise would create
 a purely arbitrary distinction between those in
petitioner s position and others who would enjoy the
benefit of a correct decision by the District Court. 
Id. at 10-11 (internal citations and footnote omitted; some
 
brackets in original and some added; first emphasis in original,
 
second emphasis added).
 
The Court further explained that [t]he [d]ouble
 
[j]eopardy [c]lause forbids a second trial for the purpose of
 affording the prosecution another opportunity to supply evidence
 
which it failed to muster in the first proceeding.  Id. at 11. 
The Court also distinguished reversal for evidentiary
 insufficiency from that for trial error:
 
In short, reversal for trial error, as distinguished
from evidentiary insufficiency, does not constitute a
decision to the effect that the government has failed
to prove its case. As such, it implies nothing with
respect to the guilt or innocence of the defendant.
 
Rather, it is a determination that a defendant has
been convicted through a judicial process which is
defective in some fundamental respect, e.g., incorrect
receipt or rejection of evidence, incorrect
instructions, or prosecutorial misconduct. When this
occurs, the accused has a strong interest in obtaining
a fair readjudication of his guilt free from error,
just as society maintains a valid concern for insuring
 
-29­  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that the guilty are punished.
 
Id. at 15 (emphasis added). 
The court identified, inter alia, 
the failure to
 
dismiss a faulty indictment[,]  improper instruction,  absence
 
of the accused during a portion of the trial,  improper hearsay
 testimony received,  and failure to record jury instructions, 
 as trial errors. Id. at 14 & n.8.
 
Relying on Burks , this court has determined that [t]he
 
prohibition against double jeopardy applies where the reversal is
 based on insufficiency of evidence[.]  Bannister, 60 Haw. at
 
660, 594 P.2d at 135. In Bannister , this court reversed the
 
defendant s conviction for first degree theft due to a lack of
 
admissible evidence that he had committed theft of property or
 services the value of which exceeds $200[,]  and remanded for
 
entry of a judgment of acquittal. Id.  at 659-60, 594 P.2d at
 
134-35 (quotation marks omitted). This court explained that: 
Since we necessarily afford absolute finality to
a jury s verdict of acquittal no matter how
erroneous its decision it is difficult to
 conceive how society has any greater interest in
retrying the defendant when, on review, it is
decided as a matter of law that the jury could
not properly have returned a verdict of guilty.
 
[Burks, 437 U.S. at] 16[]. However, the prohibition
does not apply where judgment is reversed for a trial
error because the effect of the decision does not
 
constitute a failure of the government to prove its
 
case. Id. at 10[].
 
The prohibition against double jeopardy where reversal
is based on insufficiency of evidence is absolute.
The appellate court cannot remand the case even where
a new trial appears equitable. Id. at 11 n.6[].
Furthermore, this prohibition applies only where the
insufficiency of evidence is such that the appellate
court finds that the government failed to prove its
case beyond a reasonable doubt. Id. at 16 n.10[].
 
-30­ 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Id. at 660, 594 P.2d at 135 (emphasis added); see also State v. 
Hamala, 73 Haw. 289, 293, 834 P.2d 275, 277 (1992), overruled on other grounds by State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai» i 405, 984 P.2d 1231 
(1999). 
In the instant case, there was substantial evidence 
that Kalaola failed to disperse on the first floor. Thus, the 
determination that there was not substantial evidence that 
Kalaola failed to disperse on the second floor does not 
constitute a failure of the government to prove its case.  See 
Bannister, 60 Haw. at 660, 594 P.2d at 135. To the contrary, our conclusion demonstrates that there was substantial evidence to 
support the conclusion of the trier of fact[,]  i.e., that Kalaola was guilty of the charged offense of failure to disperse. See Jones, 96 Hawai» i at 181, 29 P.3d at 371. Moreover, our 
determination that there was insufficient evidence that Kalaola 
failed to disperse on the second floor does not constitute a determination that Kalaola should have been acquitted in the trial court, since the jury could properly have returned a verdict of guilty on the charged offense based on the events that took place on the first floor. Our determination therefore
 implies nothing with respect to the guilt or innocence of
 [Kalaola]  with regard to the charged offense of failure to
 disperse. See Burks, 437 U.S. at 15. 
This analysis is consistent with our holding in Jones , 
96 Hawai» i at 183-84, 29 P.3d at 373-74. The defendant in Jones 
-31­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
was charged with multiple counts of sexual assault relating to 
the 14 year old complaining witness (CW). 96 Hawai» i at 163-64, 
29 P.3d at 353-54. Each count related to a specific act of sexual penetration or sexual contact; in other words, the State 
did not rely on multiple acts of sexual conduct to support a 
single count, and thus Jones  was not a multiple acts  case. Id. 
at 172, 29 P.3d at 362. However, the State did rely on 
alternative means of proving the consent element of each offense, i.e., it argued both that the CW did not consent, and that if she did, her consent was invalid for various reasons. Id. at 164, 
174, 29 P.3d at 354, 364. The circuit court instructed the jury both on lack of consent, and on four different grounds by which it could find that any consent by the CW was invalid, pursuant to HRS § 702-235. Id. at 164-65, 29 P.3d at 354-55. Although the 
prosecution presented considerable argument and some evidence  
regarding two of the four grounds, this court found that there was insufficient evidence supporting any of the four grounds. 
Id. at 183, 29 P.3d at 373. There was, however, sufficient 
evidence to establish lack of consent by the CW. Id. at 182, 29 
P.3d at 372. 
We then phrased the issue as follows: in an 
alternative means case where it is impossible to tell which
 alternative the jury s verdict is based upon, does due process
 require that each of the alternative means presented to the jury
 be supported by legally sufficient evidence?  Id. at 178, 29
 
-32­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
P.3d at 368. We considered, but rejected, the approach taken by
 
the United States Supreme Court in Griffin v. United States , 502
 
U.S. 46 (1991), where the Court held that due process did not
 require that each alternative presented to the jury be supported
 
by sufficient evidence, since it could be assumed that the jury
 
had rejected any alternative that was not so supported. Id. at
 
178-81, 29 P.3d at 368-71. We concluded that unanimity is not
 
required where alternative means of establishing an element of an
 offense are submitted to the jury, provided that there is no
 reasonable possibility that the jury s verdict was based on an
 
alternative unsupported by sufficient evidence.  Id.  at 181, 29
 
P.3d at 371 (emphasis in original).
 
We emphasized that the trial court had instructed the 
jury that it could find that the consent element was satisfied if 
any one of four alternative theories of ineffective consent was 
established by the State, and observed that based on that instruction being given, the jurors understandably might believe 
that there must be some evidence to support that theory.  Id. at 
183, 29 P.3d at 373 (quoting Commonwealth v. Plunkett , 664 N.E.2d 
833, 837 (Mass. 1996)). We also noted that there was some 
evidence and argument to the jury supporting some of the grounds 
of ineffective consent[,]  Jones , 96 Hawai» i at 167, 178, 29 P.3d 
at 357, 368 (emphasis in original), but that the evidence 
adduced in support of those grounds was legally insufficient[,]  id. at 178, 29 P.3d at 368. Thus, we concluded that the 
-33­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
instruction as to ineffective consent prejudicially affected
 
Defendant s right to due process[,]  and added that the
 
erroneous jury instruction regarding ineffective consent was not
 
harmless because there was a reasonable possibility that the
 
verdict was based on an alternative that was unsupported by
 
legally sufficient evidence.  Id.
 
In sum, this court determined that:
 
(1) the jury was instructed that it could convict
Defendant based on the absence of consent or  any of
the four grounds of ineffective consent, (2) there was
a reasonable possibility that the verdict was based
upon at least one of the four grounds of ineffective
consent, and (3) there was legally insufficient
evidence to support any of the four grounds of
ineffective consent presented to the jury. 
Id. (first emphasis in original, second emphasis added).
 
Accordingly, we determined that the defendant s
 
conviction could not stand. Id. However, despite determining
 
that there was a possibility that the verdict was based on an
 
alternative means of establishing guilt not supported by legally
 
sufficient evidence,  this court concluded that the double
 jeopardy clause does not bar retrial on the means of establishing
 
guilt for which there was sufficient evidence presented at trial 
 
because the error in this case was trial error.  Id. at 184
 
n.30, 29 P.3d at 374 n.30. 
It is well-settled that, even where this court finds
 
trial error, challenges to the sufficiency of the evidence must
 
always be decided on appeal. This is because the [d]ouble
 [j]eopardy [c]lause bars retrial of a defendant once a reviewing
 
court has found the evidence at trial to be legally insufficient
 
-34­  A  careful reading of this court s discussion of double
 
jeopardy in Jones is instructive:
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to support a conviction.   State v. Malufau , 80 Hawai» i 126, 
132, 906 P.2d 612, 618 (1995), vacated in part on other grounds
 
on reconsideration, 80 Hawai» i 126, 134-38, 906 P.2d 612, 620-24 
(1995). Although this court determined that there was trial
 
error in Jones , double jeopardy would have barred retrial had
 
this court found that the evidence at trial [was] legally
 insufficient to support a conviction.  Jones  96 Hawai» i at 184 
n.30, 29 P.3d at 374 n.30. Thus, Jones is not distinguishable on
 the ground that the outcome was based on trial error.
10
 
The double jeopardy clause bars retrial of a defendant
once a reviewing court has found the evidence at trial
to be legally insufficient to support a conviction.
However, retrial is not barred when the reviewing
court reverses a case due to trial error, such as
erroneous jury instructions. Although our holding in
this case is based, in part, on our conclusion that
the jury instruction regarding ineffective consent
raised the possibility that the verdict was based on
an alternative means of establishing guilt not
supported by legally sufficient evidence, it is
undisputed that there was legally sufficient evidence
of the other alternative of establishing guilt and,
thus, the error in this case is trial error.
 
10 The dissent maintains that the instant case hinges on the
 
prosecution s failure to adduce sufficient evidence, and not on the court s
failure to properly instruct the jury.  Dissenting opinion at 49 (emphasis
added). The dissent further asserts that because the basis for reversal [in
Jones] was trial error  and not insufficiency of the evidence, double
jeopardy was not implicated[.]  Dissenting opinion at 49.
However, the instant case does not hinge on  insufficiency of the
evidence to any greater extent than Jones . It is undisputed that trial error
occurred in the instant case, insofar as the circuit court failed to properly
instruct the jury. Although the dissent attempts to discount the presence of
trial error in this case by apparently contending that the disposition in
Jones is proper only where insufficiency of the evidence occurs as a direct
result of trial error, dissenting opinion at 53-54, nothing in this court s
analysis in Jones  requires such a result. Moreover, the dissent does not
explain why requiring a nexus between trial error and insufficiency of the
evidence is necessary in light of the principle that, so long as there was
sufficient evidence presented to support a conviction, double jeopardy bars
retrial only when there was an acquittal, whether express or implied.
 
-35­   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Accordingly, the double jeopardy clause does not bar
retrial on the means of establishing guilt for which
there was sufficient evidence presented at trial.
 
Id. at 184 n.30, 29 P.3d at 374 n.30 (citations omitted)
 
(emphasis added).
 
This court s reasoning indicates that because there was
 
sufficient evidence of one of the alternative means of
 
establishing guilt but insufficient evidence of the other, the
 error in Jones  was properly analyzed under the double jeopardy
 
principles applicable to trial error. Put another way, the
 
double jeopardy clause was not implicated because there was
 
sufficient evidence to support a conviction. 
11 Id.; see also
 
Arceo, 84 Hawai» i at 33 n.40, 928 P.2d at 875 n.40. Similarly 
here, the double jeopardy clause is not implicated with regard to
 Kalaola s failure to disperse from the first floor of ATM since
 there was sufficient evidence to support a conviction based on
 
those acts. 
Arceo is not to the contrary. Arceo was charged with
 
11 We respectfully disagree with the dissent s attempt to distinguish
Jones on the ground that, in Jones, the prosecution charged each act or
incident in a separate count, and the jury s decision as to each act was
readily discernable.  Dissenting opinion at 51. Although there was no basis
by which to confirm the jury s verdict as to each alternative means in Jones,
we nevertheless remanded the defendant s case for retrial on the alternative 
means that was supported by sufficient evidence. 96 Hawai »i at 184, 29 P.3d
374. Thus, for double jeopardy purposes, confirmation as to the basis for the
jury s verdict is not required where there is substantial evidence to support
a conviction. See id at 184 n.30, 29 P.3d at 374 n.30 (noting that, when
reviewing a conviction for sufficiency of the evidence, we consider whetherthe evidence was legally insufficient to support a conviction ); see also 
Arceo, 84 Hawai
»i at 33 n.40, 928 P.2d at 875 n.40. The dissent provides no
explanation for its contrary assertion that double jeopardy bars remand in theinstant case, but did not present any risks to the double jeopardy rights  of 
the defendant in Jones[,]  dissenting opinion at 52 (emphasis added), despite
the fact that there was a genuine possibility that the jury may haveacquitted  the defendant in Jones of the alternative means that were remanded. 
-36­  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
one count of sexual assault in the third degree (Count I), and 
one count of sexual assault in the first degree (Count II). 84 
Hawai» i at 2-3, 928 P.2d at 844-45. Count I involved multiple 
acts of sexual contact  between Arceo and his six-year-old son (the minor). Id.  at 3-4, 928 P.2d at 845-46. Count II involved 
multiple acts of sexual penetration  with the minor. Id. 
At trial, the minor testified inconsistently concerning
 
the number of sexual assaults he was subjected to. Id. at 24
 
n.25, 928 P.2d at 867 n.25 ( the [m]inor purported to recall
 seven separate, distinct, and specific sexual assaults ); id. at
 
10, 928 P.2d at 852 (the minor acknowledged telling a detective
 that his father had touched him approximately twelve times ). 
With regard to Count I, the minor testified at trial that
 [Arceo] put his penis on mine  I think once.  Id.  at 8, 928
 
P.2d at 850. The minor clarified, [m]aybe it s more or maybe
 
it s once.  The minor further testified that Arceo put his
 penis  on the minor s back. Id.  at 9, 928 P.2d at 851. With
 
regard to Count II, the minor testified that [Arceo p]ut his
 finger in my butt  [t]wice I think[,]  and that [Arceo] put his
 penis in my butt[.]  Id. The minor further testified that Arceo
 
touched the minor s penis with his mouth [t]wice, I think.  Id.
 
at 9, 928 P.2d at 851. On cross-examination, the minor
 
acknowledged telling a detective that his father had touched him
 approximately twelve times, but that, at trial, he could only
 guess as to the number of separate instances because he could not
 
-37­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
presently remember.  Id. at 10, 928 P.2d at 852 (emphasis
 
added). 
This court held, inter alia:
 
that when separate and distinct culpable acts are
subsumed within a single count charging a sexual
assault-any one of which could support a conviction
thereunder-and the defendant is ultimately convicted
by a jury of the charged offense, the defendant s
constitutional right to a unanimous verdict is
violated unless one or both of the following occurs:
(1) at or before the close of its case-in-chief, the
prosecution is required to elect the specific act upon
which it is relying to establish the conduct  element
 
of the charged offense; or (2) the trial court gives
the jury a specific unanimity instruction, i.e. , an
instruction that advises the jury that all twelve of
its members must agree that the same underlying
criminal act has been proved beyond a reasonable
doubt
.
 
Id. at 32-33, 928 P.2d at 874-75 (footnote omitted).
 
Accordingly, this court concluded that the trial court
 
erred in failing to give the jury a specific unanimity
 
instruction, and that the error was not harmless beyond a
 
reasonable doubt. Id.  at 33, 928 P.2d at 875. We therefore
 vacate[d] Arceo s judgment of conviction and remand[ed] the
 
matter for a new trial[.]  Id. We further concluded that,
 [b]ecause our disposition of the present appeal is grounded in
 trial error  and the evidence adduced at trial was clearly
 
sufficient to support Arceo s convictions , double jeopardy
 
concerns are not implicated by a new trial.  Id. at 33 n.40, 928
 
P.2d at 875 n.40 (emphasis added).
 
Our opinion in Arceo  clearly states that we found the 
evidence presented at trial sufficient to support Arceo s convictions[,]  84 Hawai» i at 33 n.40, 928 P.2d at 875 n.40 
-38­  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(emphasis added), and did not address whether there was
 
sufficient evidence to support each and every act presented to
 
the jury.12 There is no indication that this court concluded,
 
based on the minor s equivocal testimony, that there was
 substantial evidence to support, for example, the twelve acts of
 
sexual contact the minor reported to the detective, id . at 10,
 
928 P.2d at 852, more than one incident of Arceo putting his
 
penis on the minor s penis, id.  at 8, 928 P.2d at 850, more than
 
one incident of Arceo putting his finger in the minor s butt, 
 id. at 9, 928 P.2d at 851, or more than one incident of fellatio,
 
id. at 9, 928 P.2d at 851.
13
 
12 We therefore respectfully disagree with the dissent s contention
that this passage in Arceo  indicates that this court had determined that each
 
of the underlying acts it had discussed as supporting the convictions rested
on substantial evidence.  Dissenting opinion at 47 (emphasis added). In
 
support of this assertion, the dissent contends that this court discussed
each individual act as it related to the elements of the two charged
offenses[,]  thereby leav[ing] no question that there was substantial
evidence . . . as to each  underlying act[.]  Dissenting opinion at 40
(emphasis in original). However, the dissent s assertion is incorrect,insofar as this court merely discussed five types of prohibited conduct,  asopposed to the seven acts argued by the dissent. Arceo, 84 Hawai
»i at 14-15,
928 P.2d at 856-57. The dissent also cites to a stipulation by theprosecution that the indictment against Arceo covered all alleged sexualassaults of [the minor witness] by [the defendant] during the specifiedperiod[.]   Dissenting opinion at 38 (brackets in original) (some quotationmarks omitted) (quoting Arceo , 84 Hawai
»i at 24, 928 P.2d at 866). However,
the stipulation concerning the indictment was made to avoid double 
jeopardy[,]  Arceo, 84 Hawai »i at 6, 928 P.2d at 848, since defense counsel
was concerned that the minor made at least nine separate allegations  of 
sexual abuse  during his grand jury testimony, id. at 5, 928 P.2d at 847, and
testified on two different occasions that there were 12 separate instances  
 
of sexual assault, id.  at 7, 928 P.2d at 849. Thus, the parties  stipulation
in Arceo does not suggest that this court found that each of the seven acts
the minor testified to at trial were supported by substantial evidence. 
13
 The dissent correctly notes that the law regarding testimony on
dates, times, and places, is a separate area of law and does not go to the
sufficiency of the evidence.  Dissenting opinion at 46 & n.10. However, theminor s testimony in Arceo went beyond the mere inability to recall those
details, and instead extended to an inability to recall whether distinct
culpable acts had even occurred on more than one occasion. 84 Hawai
»i at 8­
10, 928 P.2d at 850-52. 
-39­  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In the instant case, the evidence presented at trial
 
concerning Kalaola s conduct on the first floor of ATM was
 
clearly sufficient to support a conviction for failure to
 
disperse. Accordingly, the double jeopardy clause is not
 
implicated with regard to Kalaola s failure to disperse from the
 
first floor of ATM, since there was sufficient evidence to
 
support a conviction based on that act.14
 
However, double jeopardy precludes the State from again
 
seeking a conviction of Kalaola based on his failure to disperse
 from the second floor of ATM. In order to obtain a conviction on
 
retrial based on that act, the prosecution would necessarily be
 
required to introduce additional evidence beyond that presented
 in the first trial. In the circumstances of this case, where the
 prosecution specifically argued that Kalaola s conduct on the
 second floor could independently support conviction, allowing the
 
prosecution an opportunity to present necessary evidence that it
 failed to muster in the first proceeding  would implicate double 
jeopardy. See Quitog, 85 Hawai» i at 140, 938 P.2d at 571 ( [t]he 
Double Jeopardy Clause forbids a second trial for the purpose of 
affording the prosecution another opportunity to supply evidence 
14 The dissent asserts that the prosecution is in a position, and
has been since before Arceo was decided, to avoid this problem by either 1)
presenting each act as a separate charge or 2) electing the specific act upon
which it is seeking a conviction.  Dissenting opinion at 71. However, as wenoted in Arceo , requiring either a unanimity instruction or an election is 
not intended . . . to encourage the bringing of multiple charges when, in theprosecutor s judgment, they are not warranted. The criteria used to determine that only a single charge should be brought[] may indicate that the electionof one particular act for conviction is impractical.  84 Hawai
»i at 31, 928
P.2d at 873 (quoting State v. Petrich , 683 P.2d 173, 178 (Wash. 1984),
overruled on other grounds by State v. Kitchen, 756 P.2d 105, 107 (Wash.
1988)). 
-40­ 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
which it failed to muster in the first proceeding. This is 
central to the objective of the prohibition against successive 
trials. ) (quoting Green , 355 U.S. at 187); cf. Jones, 96 Hawai» i 
at 184 n.30, 29 P.3d at 374 n.30 ( the double jeopardy clause does not bar retrial on the means of establishing guilt for which 
there was sufficient evidence presented at trial ). 
IV. Conclusion
 
It is undisputed that trial error occurred in the
 
instant case, insofar as the circuit court failed to properly
 instruct the jury concerning (1) the statutory definition of
 disorderly conduct  and (2) the applicability of the knowingly  state of mind to each element of the offense of failure to 
disperse. State v. Kalaola , No. 29163, 2009 WL 1507291, at *2 
(App. May 29, 2009). The two remaining questions are whether the 
evidence was sufficient to support Kalaola s conviction, and 
whether retrial is permissible under the double jeopardy clause of the Hawai» i Constitution. We hold that sufficient evidence 
was presented at trial to establish that Kalaola failed to disperse from the first floor of ATM, but not from the second. 
Because we hold there was sufficient evidence to support 
Kalaola s conviction with regard to his conduct on the first 
floor of ATM, there was sufficient evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact  that Kalaola had committed the charged offense. See Jones, 96 Hawai» i at 181, 29 P.3d at 371. 
Thus, the double jeopardy clause does not bar retrial with regard 
-41­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to that conduct.
 
Accordingly, we affirm the judgment of the ICA, and
 
remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this
 
opinion. 
Henry P. Ting, Deputy
Public Defender for
 respondent/defendant­
appellant
 
Anne K. Clarkin, Deputy
Prosecuting Attorney
for petitioner/
plaintiff-appellee
 
-42­