*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
--- o0o --­
STATE OF HAWAI» I, Petitioner-Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
KENNETH DELOS SANTOS, Respondent-Defendant-Appellant.
 
NO. 29337
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(FC-CR NO. 08-1-1310)
 
AUGUST 19, 2010
 
MOON, C.J., NAKAYAMA, DUFFY AND RECKTENWALD, JJ.
AND ACOBA, J., CONCURRING SEPARATELY
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAYAMA, J.
 
On April 1, 2010, this court accepted a timely 
application for a writ of certiorari filed by petitioner­plaintiff-appellee, the State of Hawai
» i ( the prosecution ), on 
February 18, 2010, requesting that this court review the Intermediate Court of Appeals  ( ICA ) November 24, 2009 judgment 
on appeal, entered pursuant to its November 9, 2009 Memorandum 
Opinion reversing the Family Court of the First Circuit s ( family court ) August 6, 2008, Judgment of Conviction and 
Sentence.
1 Oral argument was held on June 3, 2010. 
In its application for writ of certiorari before this
 
1 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
court,2 the prosecution presents the following question:
 
Did the ICA gravely err in holding the family court
was wrong by admitting into evidence a police officer s
testimony regarding the complainant s hearsay statement as
an excited utterance?
 
For the following reasons, we hold that the ICA gravely 
erred by determining that the complainant s statement that my 
boyfriend beat me up  was not admissible as an excited utterance. We also hold that the admission of this statement does not 
violate the confrontation clause of article I, section 14 of the Hawai» i Constitution. Therefore, we vacate the ICA s judgment on 
appeal and remand to the family court for a new trial. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Kenneth Delos Santos ( Delos Santos ) was convicted of 
Abuse of Family or Household Members, in violation of Hawai» i 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 709-906 (Supp. 2008).
3 The prosecution 
claimed that on March 26, 2008, Delos Santos struck his 
girlfriend ( the Complainant ) in the face and stomped on her 
thigh in their apartment in Waikiki. The crucial piece of 
2 Delos Santos did not file a memorandum in opposition to
certiorari. 
3 HRS § 709-906 provides in relevant part:
 
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, singly or in
concert, to physically abuse a family or household member .
 
. . .
 
For the purposes of this section, family or household
member  means . . . persons jointly residing or formerly
residing in the same dwelling unit.
 
2
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
evidence supporting Delos Santos  conviction was Officer Jason
 
Kubo s ( Officer Kubo ) testimony summarizing the Complainant s
 
statements when he arrived at the scene shortly after the
 
incident. The family court admitted these statements as excited
 
utterances. The relevant testimony is described below.
 
A. August 5, 2008, Hearing
 
The family court held a Hawai» i Rules of Evidence (HRE) 
Rule 104 hearing in part to determine the admissibility of the 
Complainant s statements to the police. At the hearing, two 
witnesses testified. 
The Complainant testified that Delos Santos was her
 
boyfriend and that they were living together in a hotel in
 
Waikiki at the time of the incident. She recalled that she and
 
Delos Santos were involved in an incident on March 26, 2008. She
 
did not remember calling the police, making a written statement
 
to the police, or anything that happened that night[.]  
The prosecution then called Jason Kubo, an officer of
 
the Honolulu Police Department. He testified that he responded
 
to an argument type call  at approximately 1:07 in the morning. 
When he arrived, he met with [s]ecurity down stairs.  He then
 
went up to the room. When he arrived at the room with security,
 
he knocked on the door, entered the room, and observed the
 
Complainant and Delos Santos. Officer Kubo described the
 
Complainant s emotional state as clearly in a state of fear and
 
crying.  Officer Kubo immediately  spoke with her, and she
 basically said that her boyfriend beat her up.  The deputy
 
prosecuting attorney also elicited the following testimony from
 
3
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
4The written statement was not entered into evidence at trial and
neither party has cited to the written statement in the application to this
court or in their briefs to the ICA.  Officer Kubo testified that the written
statement was consistent with what the Complainant told him.
4Officer Kubo:
Q.Is that specifically what she said?
A.Yes -- well, after speaking with her and getting
the full facts and circumstances, basically she said she was
arguing with Mr. Delos Santos about some other matters and
while in the room he struck her once in her face hitting her
in her jaw with enough force to cause her to fall.
While on the ground, the victim actually said
that while lying on the ground he was -- he had stomped on
her right thigh several times causing pain.
Officer Kubo testified that her emotional state did not
change at any point during this interaction, and that she
 continued crying and at all times [he] kept trying to calm her
down.   Officer Kubo also obtained a signed written statement
from the Complainant.4  He testified that he  had to keep calming 
the Complainant down.
On cross-examination, Officer Kubo testified that the
incident occurred at 1:00 a.m. and that he arrived at the hotel
at around 1:10 in the morning.  During his interview with the
Complainant, he asked a series of questions listed on the written
statement, including the question  what happened.   He also
testified that  being a police officer,  he wanted the
Complainant to answer the questions on the written statement.
At the close of the hearing, the trial court determined
preliminarily that the prosecution laid the proper foundation to
admit the statements under the excited utterance exception to
hearsay.  The court stated that:
What we have down is the Complaining Witness  demeanor*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
during her utterances. It was not the situation where this
 
is a lengthy narrative or lengthy recitation, that he did
observe her demeanor, that she was continuously crying, that
he attempted to calm her down.
 
B. August 6, 2008, Trial
 
At trial, the prosecution called the Complainant and
 
Officer Kubo as witnesses. The Complainant testified that Delos
 
Santos was her boyfriend at the time of trial and the incident. 
They lived together at the time of the incident at a hotel in
 
Waikiki. She testified that she did not remember anything that
 
happened on the night of the incident. She testified that she
 
woke up the next afternoon in Delos Santos  car feeling pain from
 
a hangover and that her legs were sore from rollerblading.
 
On cross-examination, she testified that she did not
 
remember anything because she drinks a lot, and was drinking on
 
the night of the incident. She did not remember how much she
 
drank that night, but remembered drinking at a hotel and then a
 
bar.
 
Officer Kubo also testified at the trial. His
 
testimony was similar to the Rule 104 hearing, with some
 
differences. He testified that he received a call from dispatch
 
at [a]pproximately 1 -- about 1:05  and that it took him a few
 
minutes  to get to the hotel. He testified that he arrived at
 
the hotel shortly after about 1:05.  He met with security
 
downstairs and took the elevator to the room with security and
 
5
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
other officers.5 When arriving at the room, he met with the
 
Complainant, Delos Santos, and another waiting security officer. 
When he arrived, Delos Santos was in the threshold of the door to
 
the hotel room. He testified that he went in the room to
 
investigate a crime. After entering the room, Officer Kubo
 
noticed that the Complainant was really shaken, crying and
 
appeared to be in a lot of pain.  He also observed her limping. 
Officer Kubo testified that before the Complainant said anything,
 
he asked her what happened when [he] went in there . . . .  
Officer Kubo testified that he asked her what happened  because
 
of the apparent pain that she was in and also for officer safety
 
reasons . . . .  At the time he asked, the Complainant was
 crying  and shaken[.]  Over objection, Officer Kubo testified
 
that she responded that my boyfriend beat me up.  He then
 walked with her further into the room, [and] knowing that she
 
was in pain also, [he] wanted to sit her down.  He walked her to
 
a table inside the room  and sat her down.  He then asked
 what do you mean[.]  The deputy prosecuting attorney elicited
 
the following testimony about the conversation:
 
Q. And at the time you asked her, what do you mean,
why did you ask her that question?
A. I need to know what happened, especially for our
safety-wise also in there.
Q. And at the time that you asked her what
happened, what was her emotional state like?
A. Still she was shaken, crying. And I needed a
 
lot of time to try to calm her down also.
Q. And how did she respond to your question, what
do you mean?
* * * 
5 He testified that none of the other officers met with the
 
Complainant.
 
6
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
A. She basically said that she got into an argument
with her boyfriend and while inside the apartment -- hotel
room, rather, he punched her once in the face with enough
force to her to fall onto the ground. While on the ground,
he stomped on her right thigh.
6
 
During his conversation with the Complainant at the
 
table, he could see the right side of her lower chin area
 
starting to swell  and that her chin had a red mark . . . .  
She also kept favoring her leg  and he noticed a two-inch-by­
two-inch red mark  on her right thigh area. The mark was
 circular.  He also noticed slight abrasions to her knee.  
Officer Kubo left the room approximately forty-five minutes after
 
he met the Complainant, and testified that the Complainant s
 
emotional state did not change during that period. He testified
 
that the Complainant had no smell of alcohol and she -- other
 
than being scared, frightened, crying and in pain, . . . appeared
 
totally sober to me.  Additionally, he testified that the
 
Complainant was unsteady on her feet when he left because of the
 
pain to her right thigh.
 
At the close of trial, the jury found Delos Santos
 
guilty of Abuse of Family and Household Members, and the family
 
court subsequently placed Delos Santos on probation for two years
 
and sentenced him to ten days in prison with credit for time
 
already served. The family court stayed the sentence pending
 
appeal. Delos Santos subsequently appealed the trial court s
 
judgment.
 
6 We refer to the Complainant s initial statement that my boyfriend
beat me up  as her first statement  and her response to the question what do
 
you mean  as her second statement. 
 
7
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
C. The ICA s November 24, 2009, Judgment On Appeal
 
Delos Santos appealed to the ICA raising three points
 
of error: 1) the family court erroneously admitted [the
 
Complainant] s purported statements to Officer Kubo as an excited
 
utterance under HRE 803[;]  2) Delos Santos was not afforded
 
meaningful opportunity to cross-examine [the Complainant], [and]
 
the family court erred in admitting the statement[;]  and 3)
 
absent the admission of [the Complainant] s purported statements
 
to Officer Kubo, the State failed to adduce any evidence that
 
Delos Santos had abused [the Complainant]. 
 
Without addressing Delos Santos  second point of error,
 
the ICA, in its majority opinion,7 held that the family court was
 
wrong and violated Delos Santos  rights to a fair trial and due
 
process by admitting into evidence Officer Kubo s testimony
 
regarding Complainant s hearsay statements as excited utterances,
 
under HRE 803(b)(2).  State v. Delos Santos , No. 29337 (Haw.
 
App. Nov. 9, 2009) (mem.) at 8-9. It correctly laid out the
 foundational requirements for the excited utterance exception to
 
the hearsay rule: 1) a startling event or condition occurred; 2)
 the statement was made while the declarant was under the stress 
of excitement caused by the event or condition;  and 3) the 
statement relates to the startling event or condition.  Id. at 5 
(block quote formatting omitted) (quoting State v. Machado , 109 
Hawai» i 445, 451, 127 P.3d 941, 947 (2006)). 
7 The Honorable Daniel R. Foley and Katherine G. Leonard signed the
majority opinion, and the Honorable Alexa D.M. Fujise filed a dissent, which
is described below.
 
8
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
The ICA held that the prosecution failed to establish 
the second requirement. Id. at 7. It held that the nature and 
circumstances of the Complainant s statement indicated non-
spontaneity. Id. at 6. The ICA focused on Officer Kubo s 
testimony that he asked the Complainant what happened before she made her statements, he needed to calm the Complainant down when 
he asked her what happened, and a security officer was already 
waiting at the scene when Officer Kubo arrived . . . .  Id. at 
6-7. Although the ICA recognized that the Complainant was in a 
state of agitation throughout Officer Kubo s investigation and 
there was a short interval of time between the incident and the 
arrival of the officer at the scene[,]  the ICA held that those 
factors did not mitigate against [its] conclusion.  Id. at 7 
(citing State v. Moore , 82 Hawai» i 202, 221-22, 921 P.2d 122, 142­
43 (1996)). 
Additionally, the ICA analogized Machado , 109 Hawai» i at 
451, 127 P.3d at 947. It noted that in Machado , the complaining 
witness was pretty emotional  when the officers arrived and that the complaining witness remained visibly upset as she described 
to the sergeant what had transpired.  Delos Santos , mem. op. at 
8. Furthermore, only a short time had passed when the
 
complainant in Machado gave her statement to the police. Id.
 
This court held that the statements were not excited utterances
 
because the complaining witness s statement involved a lengthy
 
narrative of the events of an entire evening,  was detailed,
 
logical, and coherent,  and was not delivered under . . . life
 
threatening physical conditions.   Id. at 8 (quoting Machado,
 
9
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
109 Hawai» i at 452, 127 P.3d at 948). The ICA held that the
 facts underlying Machado were substantially similar to the facts
 
in this case.  Id.
 
After holding that the Complainant s statements should
 
not have been admitted as excited utterances, the ICA held that
 without Officer Kubo s testimony about Complainant s hearsay
 
statements, the State can not adduce substantial evidence to
 
sustain Delos Santos  conviction.  Id. at 9. The ICA reversed
 
the family court s August 6, 2008, Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence.
 
While the dissent agree[d] that the more detailed
 
statement made by the complaining witness . . . to the police
 
officer in this case did not qualify for the excited utterance 
 
exception to the hearsay rule, [the dissent] would [have held]
 
that [the Complainant] s initial statement that my boyfriend
 
beat me up,  made upon the officer s arrival, was admissible
 
under this exception.  Delos Santos , dissenting op. at 1
 
(Fujise, J., dissenting) (citing Hilyer v. Howat Concrete Co. ,
 
578 F.2d 422, 424 (D.C. Cir. 1978) (held bystander s statements,
 
describing fatal accident in response to police officer s
 
questions as he was so excited  he could not remember the
 
officer s questions, admissible as excited utterances); Bosin v.
 
Oak Lodge Sanitary District No. 1, 447 P.2d 285, 290 (Or. 1968)
 
(that statement was elicited by an inquiry is one factor to
 
consider; the trial judge must be given considerable lee-way of
 
decision ) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted);
 
United States v. Joy , 192 F.3d 761, 766 (7th Cir. 1999) ( [A]
 
10
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
court need not find that the declarant was completely incapable
 
of deliberative thought at the time he uttered the
 
declaration. )).
 
The dissent would also have held that admission of 
this initial statement was not a violation of the confrontation 
clauses of either the Hawai» i or United States constitutions  
because the Complainant appeared at trial and Delos Santos had the opportunity to cross-examine her, notwithstanding her 
testimony that she could not remember the incident in question or 
her statements to police.  Id. at 1-2 (footnote omitted) (citing 
United States v. Owens , 484 U.S. 554, 559-60 (1988); People v. 
Garcia-Cordova, 912 N.E.2d 280 (Ill. App. Ct. 2009); State v. 
Fields, 115 Hawai» i 503, 523, 168 P.3d 955, 975 (2007)). 
Finally, the dissent would have held that there was
 
sufficient evidence to remand to the family court for a new trial
 
because the Complainant s statement that my boyfriend beat me
 
up,  her testimony that she and Delos Santos were living together
 
at the time and the police officer s observations of her swelling
 
and marked chin, limp, and two-inch by two-inch circular red mark
 
on her thigh were sufficient to support a conviction for Abuse of
 
Family or Household Member.  Id. at 2 (citing HRS § 709-906
 
(Supp. 2007)).
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Application For Writ Of Certiorari
 
The acceptance or rejection of an application for writ
 
of certiorari is discretionary. HRS § 602-59(a) (Supp. 2009). 
In deciding whether to accept an application, this court reviews
 
11
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
the decisions of the ICA for (1) grave errors of law or of fact 
or (2) obvious inconsistencies in the decision of the ICA with 
that of the supreme court, federal decisions, or its own 
decisions and whether the magnitude of such errors or 
inconsistencies dictate the need for further appeal.  State v. 
Wheeler, 121 Hawai» i 383, 390, 219 P.3d 1170, 1177 (2009) (citing 
HRS § 602-59(b)). 
B. Excited Utterance Exception To Hearsay Rule
 
This court reviews the admissibility of evidence by 
application of the hearsay rules under the right/wrong  
standard. State v. Machado , 109 Hawai» i 445, 450, 127 P.3d 941, 
946 (2006); State v. Moore , 82 Hawai» i 202, 217, 921 P.2d 122, 137 
(1996). Thus, this court reviews whether the ICA gravely erred  
by determining that the trial court s decision to admit Officer 
Kubo s testimony was wrong.  
C. Constitutional Questions
 We answer questions of constitutional law by exercising our
 
own independent judgment based on the facts of the case . . . .
 
Thus, we review questions of constitutional law under the
 right/wrong  standard.  State v. Fields , 115 Hawai» i 503, 511, 
168 P.3d 955, 963 (2007) (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting State v. Feliciano, 107 Hawai» i 469, 475, 115 P.3d 648, 
654 (2005)). 
D. Sufficiency of the Evidence
 
We review the sufficiency of the evidence under the
 
following standard:
 
12
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution when
the appellate court passes on the legal sufficiency of such
evidence to support a conviction; the same standard applies
whether the case was before a judge or jury. The test on
 
appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a
reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence
to support the conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
State v. Richie , 88 Hawai» i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) 
(quoting State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai» i 128, 145, 938 P.2d 559, 576 
(1997)).  Substantial evidence  as to every material element of 
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient 
quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable 
caution to support a conclusion.  Id. (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (quoting State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai» i 131, 135, 913 P.2d 
57, 61 (1996)). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
The prosecution argues that Officer Kubo s testimony
 
was admissible under the excited utterance exception to hearsay
 for two reasons. First, the prosecution asserts that Officer
 
Kubo s entire summary of the Complainant s statements was
 
admissible. Alternatively, the prosecution asserts that, at the
 
very least, [the] initial statement by the complainant that
 
[Delos Santos] beat her up, made upon Officer Kubo s arrival, was
 
admissible as an excited utterance. 
 
We agree with the ICA that the trial court should not
 
have admitted the Complainant s second statement as an excited
 
utterance under Machado , 109 Hawai» i at 452, 127 P.3d at 948 
(holding that the complainant s statement was not admissible as 
an excited utterance in part because it involved a lengthy 
13
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
narrative of the events of an entire evening ). However, the 
Complainant s initial statement that my boyfriend beat me up  
was admissible as an excited utterance, and the ICA gravely erred 
by holding that this statement was not an excited utterance. 
Furthermore, the admission of the Complainant s initial statement 
did not violate the confrontation clause of the Hawai» i 
Constitution. Therefore, we reverse the ICA s judgment on appeal, and remand to the family court for a new trial. 
A.	 The Complainant s More Detailed Statement Was Not an Excited
Utterance.
 
HRE 803(b)(2) (2002) provides that a statement 
relating to a startling event or condition made while the 
declarant was under the stress of excitement caused by the event 
or condition  is not excluded by the hearsay rule. To qualify as an excited utterance, the proponent of a statement must establish 
that: (1) a startling event or condition occurred; (2) the statement was made while the declarant was under the stress of excitement caused by the event or condition; and (3) the statement relates to the startling event or condition.  Machado, 
109 Hawai» i at 451, 127 P.3d at 947 (citing HRE 803(b)(2) (2002)). 
Delos Santos did not assert that a startling event  did not 
occur or that the Complainant s statement related to the 
14
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
8Additionally, under  generally prevailing practice, the statement
itself is considered sufficient proof of the exciting event, and therefore the
statement is admissible despite absence of other proof that an exciting event
occurred.   2 Kenneth S. Broun et al., McCormick on Evidence  § 272 at 256-57
(6th ed. 2006) (footnote omitted).
15startling event.8  Thus, the crucial issue on appeal is whether
the Complainant s statement was made under the stress of
excitement caused by Delos Santos  physical altercation with her.
The  ultimate question in these cases is  whether the
statement was the result of reflective thought or whether it was
rather a spontaneous reaction to the exciting event.    Machado,
109 Hawai i at 451, 127 P.3d at 947 (quoting Moore, 82 Hawai i at
221, 921 P.2d at 141).  The  time span between the  startling
event  and the statement to be admitted as an excited utterance 
is a factor in the determination, but a short time period is not
a foundational prerequisite.  Id. (quoting Moore, 82 Hawai i at
221, 921 P.2d at 141).   Other factors that courts often look to
in determining whether a statement was the product of excitement» »
»
include . . . the nature of the event, the age of the declarant,
the mental and physical condition of the declarant, the
influences of intervening occurrences, and the nature and
circumstances of the statement itself.   Id. (citing Moore, 82
Hawai i at 221, 921 P.2d at 141).»
The prosecution asserts that the ICA gravely erred by
concluding that the Complainant did not make her statement under*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
the stress of excitement. Additionally, the prosecution asserts 
that the ICA s reliance on the facts underlying  State v. Machado, 109 Hawai» i 445, 127 P.3d 941 (2006) as substantially 
similar to the facts of this case  is misplaced  because Machado
 involved a lengthy narrative of the events of the entire evening 
. . . .  (Emphasis and italics in original.) After considering 
the relevant factors, the prosecution s argument is not persuasive because the prosecution failed to establish when the statement was made and whether it was a brief spontaneous comment 
or a lengthy narrative which was then summarized by Officer Kubo. 
Therefore, the nature and circumstances of the statement indicate that the Complainant s second statement could have been the product of reflective thought.  Machado , 109 Hawai» i at 451, 127 
P.3d at 947 (quoting Moore, 82 Hawai» i at 221, 921 P.2d at 141). 
1. Nature of the event
 
The prosecution correctly asserts that the nature of
 
the event  was violent, which supports its argument that the
 
Complainant s statement was an excited utterance. Officer Kubo
 
testified that the Complainant told him that Delos Santos hit her
 
in the face hard enough to fall to the ground. While on the
 
ground, Delos Santos stomped on her thigh. During their
 
conversation, Officer Kubo noticed that the Complainant s lower
 chin started to swell, she had slight abrasions on her knee, and
 
16
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
had a two-inch by two-inch red mark on her thigh area. Thus, the 
nature of the event was violent, which supports the prosecution s assertion that the Complainant s statement was made without reflective thought. See generally State v. Clark, 83 Hawai» i 289, 
297-98, 926 P.2d 194, 202-03 (1996) (holding that a complainant s statements that her husband stabbed her were admissible as an 
excited utterance in part because of the violent nature of the 
startling event ); Moore , 82 Hawai» i at 222, 921 P.2d at 142 
(holding that the complainant s statement that her husband shot her was an excited utterance in part because of the violent nature of the startling event ); People v. Swinger , 180 Misc.2d 
344, 350, 689 N.Y.S.2d 336, 341 (N.Y. Crim. Ct. 1998) ( The 
nature of the attack on the complainant - abuse by a family 
member - was undeniably traumatic and could have triggered the excited utterance  by the complainant. ). Although the incident
 did not rise to the level of the stabbing in Clark  and the
 
shooting in Moore, the incident was still violent, which supports
 
admitting it as an excited utterance.
 
2. The mental and physical condition of the declarant
 
The mental and physical condition of the Complainant
 
supports the prosecution s argument that her statement was not
 the product of reflective thought. For instance, when Officer
 Kubo arrived, he noticed that the Complainant was really shaken,
 
17
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
18crying and appeared to be in a lot of pain.    Additionally, at
the time he asked the Complainant  what happened,  the
Complainant was still  shaken  and  crying.    Finally, the
Complainant s emotional state did not change during the forty-
five minute period that Officer Kubo was at the hotel.  This
court has held that a declarant s statements five minutes after
being stabbed were excited utterances in part because the
declarant was  really shaken,  obviously  scared  and
 terrified,  and was  trembling  and  starting to cry.   Clark,
83 Hawai i at 297, 926 P.2d at 202; see also  Machado, 109 Hawai i
at 451, 127 P.3d at 947 (noting that the complaining witness
 remained visibly upset as she described what had transpired ). 
Additionally, as discussed above, the Complainant s lower chin
swelled and she had slight abrasions on her knee and a red mark
on her thigh area.  Thus, the Complainant s mental and physical
condition supports the prosecution s argument that her statement
was an excited utterance.» »
3.Time span between the  startling event  and the  
statement
The prosecution asserts that the  elapsed time between
the abuse and the Complainant s statements was short as Officer
Kubo was on the scene within minutes . . . .    (Footnote
omitted.)  In State v. Moore , this court stated that  a statement*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
made within minutes of a startling event can often fairly be 
characterized as the product of excitement rather than of deliberation.  82 Hawai» i at 221, 921 P.2d at 141; see also 
Machado, 109 Hawai» i at 447, 451, 127 P.3d at 943, 947 (describing 
ten minute time period between violent incident and police officer s arrival as short ). The ICA did not address this 
factor in detail, but held that the short interval of time 
between the incident and the arrival of the officer at the scene 
does not mitigate against our conclusion.  Delos Santos , mem. 
op. at 7. 
The amount of time does not weigh in favor of admitting
 
the second statement because the prosecution did not establish
 when the Complainant made the second statement. Officer Kubo
 
arrived at the apartment shortly after about 1:05. 
9 At the
 
hearing, he testified that the incident occurred at 1:00. 
Although it is impossible to know exactly when the Complainant
 made her initial statement, at the time Officer Kubo met the
 Complainant, he immediately spoke with her. Because the
 
Complainant s initial statement was the first part of their
 forty-five minute interaction, it is reasonable to infer that her
 
9 At trial, Officer Kubo testified that he arrived at the hotel at
shortly after about 1:05 . . . .  At the hearing, he testified that he
received the call from the dispatcher at approximately 1:07 a.m., and that he
arrived at the complex at 1:10.
 
19
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
initial statement occurred a short time after the incident. 
Thus, a short amount of time elapsed between the Complainant s
 initial statement and the incident.
 
However, the prosecution never established when the
 
second statement occurred. At the hearing, Officer Kubo
 testified that he talked with the Complainant for at least thirty
 
minutes. The prosecution never established when in this thirty
 
minute window the Complainant s second statement occurred. Thus,
 
the time period between the incident and the second statement
 
does not support admitting the second statement as an excited
 utterance.
 
4. Nature and circumstances of the statement
 
The nature and circumstances of the Complainant s
 
second statement illustrate that her statement was the product of
 
reflective thought for two reasons.
 
First, the Complainant made her statements under
 
circumstances which could indicate reflective thought. That the
 Complainant responded to a question after officer Kubo attempted
 
to calm her down weighs in favor of concluding that her statement
 was the product of reflective thought, but does not automatically
 
bar its admissibility as an excited utterance. See infra at 26­
28; 30B Michael Graham, Federal Practice & Procedure  § 7043 at
 
417-18 (2006) (stating that one factor in evaluating whether a
 
20
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
statement is an excited utterance is whether the statement was
 
volunteered or in response to a question ) (footnote omitted). 
Thus, the nature and circumstances of the statement weigh against
 admitting the second statement as an excited utterance partly
 
because the statement was made in response to a police officer s
 
question.
 
Second, the nature and circumstances of the statement 
weigh against admitting the second statement as an excited 
utterance because the record does not clearly establish whether 
the statement is a recitation of the events of the evening rather than a disjointed  or spontaneous  outburst. See Machado, 109 
Hawai» i at 451-52, 127 P.3d at 947-48. For instance, in Machado , 
this court recognized that other courts have held that lengthy, narrative statements are not admissible as excited utterances.  Id. at 451, 127 P.3d at 947. It held that a witness  detailed 
statement was not admissible as an excited utterance because the statement, made in response to questioning by the police, exceeded a truly spontaneous outburst.   Id. at 452, 127 P.3d 
at 948 (quoting West Valley City v. Hutto , 5 P.3d 1, 4 (Utah Ct. 
App. 2000)). Instead, this court noted that the statement was a specific and inclusive rendition of the circumstances leading up to the incident and of the incident itself  and described the statement as detailed, logical, and coherent.  Id. This court 
21
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
contrasted the inadmissible statements in Machado  with those in 
State v. Moore , noting that the statements in Moore were several 
brief and disjointed remarks  such as he shot me,  he s a good 
man[,] I told him I was leaving him,  and keep him away from me 
. . . .  Id. (quoting Moore, 82 Hawai» i at 217, 921 P.2d at 137). 
Similar considerations in this case indicate that the
 
Complainant s statements were not excited utterances, because it
 
appears that the testimony by Officer Kubo may have paraphrased
 
some or all of a thirty minute conversation. Officer Kubo
 
testified at trial that the Complainant 
basically  said that she
 
got into an argument with her boyfriend and while inside the
 
apartment -- hotel room, rather, he punched her once in the face
 with enough force to her to fall onto the ground. While on the
 
ground, he stomped on her right thigh. 
10 (Emphasis added.) This
 statement  may have been Officer Kubo s synopsis of a lengthy
 
conversation rather than a discrete or disjointed  statement, as
 in Moore . Thus, the nature and circumstances as adduced by the
 
prosecution do not support admitting the statement as an excited
 
utterance.
 
10 Officer Kubo s testimony at the pretrial hearing also suggested
that he was summarizing the Complainant s comments: 
[A]fter speaking with
her and getting the full facts and circumstances, basically she said she was
arguing with Mr. Delos Santos about some other matters and while in the room
he struck her once in her face hitting her in her jaw with enough force to
cause her to fall.  (Emphasis added .)
 
22
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
The prosecution attempts to distinguish Machado by
 
asserting that the statements in Machado  involved a lengthy
 
narrative of the events of the entire evening . . . .  (Emphasis
 
and italics in original.)  The prosecution also notes that
 
Officer Kubo was not allowed to recount an entire 30 to 45
 
minute interview with the complainant, but rather, was limited to
 particular utterances of the complainant while under the stress
 of excitement caused by [Delos Santos ] assault on her. 
 
The prosecution correctly observes that the police 
officer s statement in Machado  is much longer than Officer Kubo s 
and Officer Kubo did not recount every detail of the 
Complainant s statement. See Machado, 109 Hawai» i at 447-48, 127 
P.3d at 943-44 (quoting State v. Machado, 109 Hawai» i 424, 425-26, 
127 P.3d 84, 85-86 (App. 2005)). However, this argument is not 
persuasive given the record in the instant case, which does not establish whether Officer Kubo was repeating a short, disjointed  statement of the type at issue in Moore , or whether
 
he was summarizing a thirty minute narrative similar to that in
 
Machado.
 
5. The age of the declarant
 
The age of the declarant does not have any bearing on
 
whether the statement is likely the product of reflective thought
 
in this case. Courts evaluate the age of the declarant because
 
23
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
child victims of sexual abuse are generally allowed more time
 
between the event and the statement . . . .  Boyd v. City of
 
Oakland, 458 F. Supp.2d 1015, 1026 (N.D. Cal. 2006). This issue
 
is not present in this case.
 
6.	 The influences of intervening occurrences
 
Courts evaluate the influences of intervening 
occurrences  between the event and the statement. Machado , 109 
Hawai» i at 451, 127 P.3d at 947 (citing Moore, 82 Hawai» i at 221, 
921 P.2d at 141). The prosecution argues that there were no 
intervening occurrences other than the police being called . . . .  Delos Santos did not argue in his Opening Brief that 
intervening occurrences influenced the Complainant to make her statement. Intervening occurrences  did not dull the 
Complainant s excitement from the startling event.  Officer 
Kubo arrived at the apartment a few minutes  after receiving the call from dispatch. Although a security guard waited with the 
Complainant before Officer Kubo arrived, there is no evidence that the security guard or Delos Santos took any action to dull 
the Complainant s excitement during that period of time. Therefore, there is no evidence that intervening occurrences 
dulled the Complainant s excitement. 
7.	 Totality of the circumstances
 
Evaluating the totality of the circumstances, Clark, 83
 
24
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
Hawai» i at 297, 926 P.2d at 202, the Complainant s second 
statement was not admissible as an excited utterance because the 
prosecution failed to lay adequate foundation that the statement was not the product of reflective thought. Although the incident 
was violent and the Complainant was crying and appeared upset, 
the prosecution failed to adduce evidence regarding when the 
Complainant made the second statement and the nature and 
circumstances  of the statement. Machado , 109 Hawai» i at 451, 127 
P.3d at 947. Officer Kubo may have summarized a lengthy narrative with the Complainant rather than reiterating a discrete statement. Therefore, under State v. Machado , 109 Hawai» i at 451, 
127 P.3d at 947, the ICA did not gravely err by holding that the 
prosecution failed to establish the foundational requirements to 
admit the second statement as an excited utterance. 
B.	 The Complainant s Initial Statement That My boyfriend beat
me up  Is Admissible As an Excited Utterance.
 
Although Officer Kubo s summary of the witness  second
 
statement does not qualify as an excited utterance, his testimony
 
regarding the Complainant s initial statement that my boyfriend
 
beat me up  does. As discussed above, the violent nature of the
 event, the short period of time between the incident and Officer
 
Kubo s arrival, and the Complainant s physical and mental state
 
support admitting the Complainant s initial statement as an
 
25
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
26excited utterance.  See supra at 16-20 .  There are three reasons
that the Complainant s initial statement is admissible as an
excited utterance while her later statements are not:  1) her
initial statement does not summarize a longer conversation; 2)
evidence that her statement was made in response to a police
officer s question does not bar its admissibility as an excited
utterance; and 3) the totality of the circumstances indicates
that her statement was made under the stress of excitement.
1.The Complainant s initial statement does not summarize  
a lengthy conversation .
The Complainant s initial statement is admissible as an
excited utterance because it is not a  lengthy narrative  as
discussed in Machado.  See supra at 21-23.
2.Evidence that a statement was made in response to a 
police officer s question does not bar its  
admissibility as an excited utterance.
Although the Complainant s statement was made in
response to Officer Kubo s question, this does not automatically
bar its admissibility as an excited utterance.  30B Michael
Graham, Federal Practice & Procedure  § 7043 at 417-18 & n.13
(2006); People of Territory of Guam v. Cepeda, 69 F.3d 369, 372
(9th Cir. 1995) ( The fact that a statement is made in response
to a question is one factor to weigh in considering the
statement s admissibility, but it does not per se bar 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
admission. ). In Machado , this court noted that the
 
complainant s statement 
made in response to questioning by the 
police, exceeded a truly spontaneous outburst.   Machado, 109 
Hawai» i at 452, 127 P.3d at 948 (emphasis added) (quoting Hutto, 5 
P.3d at 4). However, it did not explicitly hold that responses 
to police questions cannot be excited utterances. 
Other Hawai» i courts and scholars have concluded that 
evidence that the statement is made in response to an inquiry 
does not automatically bar admitting the statement as an excited 
utterance. See State v. Konohia, 106 Hawai» i 517, 524, 107 P.3d 
1190, 1197 (App. 2005) ( The fact that some of Coral-Sands  
statements were made in response to questions by the 911 dispatcher did not prevent them from qualifying as excited 
utterances. ) (citing People v. Roybal , 19 Cal. 4th 481, 79 Cal. 
Rptr. 2d 487, 966 P.2d 521, 542-43 (1998)); see also State v. Dunn, 8 Haw. App. 238, 246, 798 P.2d 908, 912-13 (App. 1990) (holding that the complainant s statements, made in response to a police officer s question, were admissible as excited 
utterances);
11 2 Kenneth S. Broun et al., McCormick on Evidence  § 
11 Although not expressly overruled, the validity of Dunn was called 
into question in State v. Moore . 82 Hawai »i 202, 219, 921 P.2d 122, 139
(1996) ( It is therefore worth examining how our interpretation of the excited
utterance exception has evolved to the point where, rather than looking to a
short time interval between event and statement as an indicator that the declarant was still excited by the event, the ICA, in State v. Dunn , 8 Haw. 
(continued ...) 
27
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
272 at 259 (6th ed. 2006); C.f. Territory v. Lewis, 39 Haw. 635, 
640 (Haw. Terr. 1953) (holding that defendant s statements, made 
in response to questions by a police officer, were part of the res gestae because they were made under the exciting influence 
of said events, reasonably contemporaneous thereto and without 
prior opportunity for deliberation or manufacture ), superceded 
by rule as recognized in State v. Fetelee, 117 Hawai» i 53, 175 
P.3d 709 (2008). Therefore, the fact that the Complainant s 
statement responded to Officer Kubo s question does not 
automatically bar its admission as an excited utterance. 
At the ICA, Delos Santos also asserted that the
 
questions posed by Officer Kubo were done with investigative
 
intent and objective.  The ICA also held that the fact that
 
Officer Kubo s investigatory  questioning prompted Complainant s
 
statements about the incident with Delos Santos strongly supports
 an inference that Complainant was in a reflective state at the
 time she described the incident to Officer Kubo.  Delos Santos,
 
mem. op. at 7 (emphasis added). However, the intent behind
 
Officer Kubo s questions is not legally relevant in establishing
 
11(...continued) 
App. 238, 246, 798 P.2d 908, 912 (1990), pointed to the fact that the
declarant was 
crying and visibly upset  to establish that the event had
occurred only a short time before the statement was made. ). Dunn is still 
valid for the proposition that a response to a police officer s question can
constitute an excited utterance. 
28
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
29whether a statement was made under the stress of excitement.  In
State v. Machado , this court assessed whether a statement, made
in response to a police officer s question, was an excited
utterance.  109 Hawai i at 452, 127 P.3d at 948.  This court did
not analyze whether the question was asked with  investigative
intent and objective  and we decline to adopt it as a criteria in
determining whether a statement is an excited utterance.  Id.  
Therefore, the fact that the Complainant responded to a question
posed by Officer Kubo does not require concluding that the
Complainant s initial statement was not an excited utterance.»
3.The totality of the circumstances indicates that the  
Complainant s statement was made under the stress of  
excitement.
Evaluating the totality of the circumstances, it
appears that the statement was not the product of reflective
thought and therefore qualifies as an excited utterance.
Other courts have held statements made in similar
circumstances are excited utterances.  For instance, in State v.
Fowler, 829 N.E.2d 459, 463 (Ind. 2005), police officers
responded to a domestic violence call and arrived at the home
approximately five minutes after the incident occurred.  They
asked the complainant what happened, and she responded that
 everything was alright.   Id.  at 462 (internal quotation marks
omitted).  The complainant then told the police that Fowler, the*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
assailant, was upstairs. Id. The police officers found Fowler
 
and arrested him. Id. When the police officers came back to
 
talk to the complainant approximately fifteen minutes after the
 
incident, she stated that Fowler punched her in the face multiple
 
times and choked her. Id. at 462, 463. While making this
 
statement, she claimed to be in pain and was still crying,
 bleeding from the nose, and having trouble catching her breath.  
Id. at 463. The court held that the trial court did not abuse
 
its discretion in admitting the statement as an excited
 utterance.
 
Similarly, in State v. Robinson , 773 A.2d 445, 447 (Me.
 
2001), police officers responded to a domestic violence incident. 
When the officers arrived, they observed the complainant in a
 
terrified state, crying,  upset,  and frazzled.   Id. They
 
also noticed that her face was red and puffy, and that she had
 visible red marks on her neck.  Id. An officer asked [her]
 
what had happened, and she responded that [the defendant] had hit
 her and that he was in the bedroom.  Id. at 448 (footnote
 
omitted).
12 The officers arrested the defendant and interviewed
 
the complainant approximately three to twelve minutes after they
 initially talked with the complainant. Id. The complainant was
 
12 The defendant did not challenge the admissibility of this first
statement. Robinson , 773 A.2d at 448 n.2.
 
30
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
still crying and appeared terrified and very, very upset.   Id.
 
She again told the police officer that the defendant had hit her
 
and this time, more specifically, that he had thrown [her] onto
 the living room floor  and had punched, kneed, kicked and
 
choked  her.  Id. (footnote omitted).
 
The court held that the complainant s statements were
 
admissible as excited utterances because the complainant was
 
still very, very upset  at the time that she made the
 
statement[,]  and appeared terrified and was still sobbing from
 
the events of that night . . . .  Id. at 450. Additionally, the
 
court noted that the complainant had visible bodily injuries[,] 
 
and did not have the time nor the opportunity to consult with
 anyone, and there was no evidence that she had had the time for
 
reflection.  Id. Thus, in a situation similar to this case, the
 
court concluded that a complainant s response to an inquiry from
 a police officer was admissible as an excited utterance.
 
These cases are analogous to this case and indicate
 
that statements made to police officers, even if in response to a
 
question, are admissible as excited utterances if the complainant
 is still under the stress of excitement. See also People v.
 
Gwinn, 851 N.E.2d 902, 916-17 (Ill. App. 2006) (holding that the
 
trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting as an
 excited utterance the complainant s statement to a police officer
 
31
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
approximately fifteen minutes after the father of her children
 
punched her in the face).
 
In the present case, under the totality of the
 
circumstances, the Complainant s first statement to the police
 
officers was an excited utterance. The nature of the event was
 
violent. The Complainant was still in a state of excitement as
 
indicated by Officer Kubo s testimony that she was crying,
 
scared, and had a red mark on her thigh and a swollen lower chin.
 
Furthermore, the statement was made a short time after the
 
incident. Thus, although the statement was given in response to
 
Officer Kubo s question, the factors outlined in State v. Machado
 
indicate that the Complainant s initial statement was admissible
 
as an excited utterance.
 
The ICA also held that the fact that a security
 
officer was already waiting at the scene when Officer Kubo
 
arrived, suggesting that order had been restored there, and
 Officer Kubo s testimony that he needed to calm Complainant down
 when he asked her what happened suggests that Complainant s
 
statements were not spontaneous.  Delos Santos , mem. op. at 7.
 
These facts do not require concluding that the statement was not
 
an excited utterance.
 
The ICA s discussion of the security guard waiting with
 
the Complainant until Officer Kubo s arrival does not negate the
 
32
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
Complainant s mental and physical state when Officer Kubo arrived
 
shortly after the incident. Officer Kubo testified that the
 Complainant was shaken  and crying when he arrived. He
 testified that the Complainant was scared  and frightened 
 
throughout the interview. Additionally, Delos Santos was in the
 
threshold of the door to the room when Officer Kubo arrived,
 
which also indicates that the Complainant was under the stress of
 
excitement when she made her initial statement.
 
Furthermore, although Officer Kubo testified that he
 
tried to calm the Complainant down for a lot of time,  this does
 
not indicate that her statements lacked spontaneity. Officer
 
Kubo testified that despite his attempts to calm the Complainant
 down, her emotional state remained the same throughout the
 
interview, and that she was scared, frightened, crying, and in
 pain. Therefore, Officer Kubo s attempt to calm the Complainant
 down does not indicate that her statement was the product of
 reflective thought.
 
Although neither party nor the ICA cited to it, in 
State v. Beyer , this court held that a complainant s statement to 
police officers after being questioned was not an excited utterance. 72 Haw. 469, 472, 822 P.2d 519, 521 (1991), overruled 
by, State v. Moore, 82 Hawai» i 202, 220-21, 921 P.2d 122, 140-41 
(1996) (holding that a very short  time interval between a 
33
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
startling event and an excited utterance . . . is not a
 
foundational prerequisite to the admissibility of the statement
 under HRE Rule 803(b)(2) ). At first, the complainant was
 extremely nervous and upset and would not answer the police
 
officer s questions but, after 10 or 15 minutes and smoking . . .
 
two cigarettes, she calmed down and stated that she and the
 
[defendant] had been living together for about four months, that
 
he had not paid his share of the rent, that he had disappeared
 
for several days and so she threw his belongings out in the yard,
 
and that later, while she was sleeping, the appellant came in and
 struck her in the face.  Id. at 470-71, 822 P.2d at 520. This
 
court held that the statement was not proximately caused by the
 
excitement generated from the event, but as a result of
 
questioning by the police after they had calmed the person down.  
Id. at 472, 822 P.2d at 521. Beyer is distinguishable because in
 
Beyer the complainant had calmed down, while the Complainant in
 this case was still crying and shaken  when she made the
 
statement. Although Officer Kubo attempted to calm the
 
Complainant down, she made her statement under the stress of
 
excitement. Thus, Officer Kubo s attempt to calm the Complainant
 down does not indicate her statement was not spontaneous.
 
Therefore, we hold that the ICA gravely erred by
 
concluding that the Complainant s initial statement was not an
 
34
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
excited utterance.
 
C.	 The Admission Of the Complainant s Statements Did Not
Violate the Confrontation Clause Of the Hawai» i 
Constitution. 
The ICA did not reach Delos Santos  argument that the
 
admission of Officer Kubo s testimony violated his right to
 
confront the Complainant. Delos Santos , mem. op. at 2. Because
 
we conclude that the Complainant s first statement was admissible
 as an excited utterance, we address this argument.
 
Delos Santos asserts that admission of the statement 
violated his right to confrontation under article I, sections 5 and 14 of the Hawai» i Constitution because Hawai» i s confrontation 
clause requires a meaningful opportunity  to cross-examine the 
declarant about the subject matter of a hearsay statement. (Citing State v. Fields , 115 Hawai» i 503, 528, 168 P.3d 955, 980 
(2007.)) Delos Santos argues that: 1) the Complainant s 
statements were testimonial; 2) the Complainant was unavailable at trial; and 3) he did not have a meaningful opportunity  to cross-examine the Complainant at trial due to her claimed memory loss.  In response, the prosecution asserts that the admission of 
the Complainant s hearsay statements did not violate the 
confrontation clause because Delos Santos had a sufficient 
opportunity to cross-examine the Complainant at trial.  (Citing 
Fields, 115 Hawai» i at 523-24, 168 P.3d at 975-76.) As discussed 
35
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
below, we hold that the admission of the Complainant s hearsay 
statements did not violate the confrontation clause because the Complainant appeared for cross-examination at trial. Therefore, we do not decide whether the Complainant s statements were 
testimonial, and the application of the two-part tests in 
Crawford  or Roberts is unnecessary. See Fields, 115 Hawai» i at 
528, 168 P.3d at 980. 
Article I, section 14 of the Hawai» i Constitution 
provides the accused with the right to be confronted with the witnesses against the accused . . . .  Haw. Const. art. I, § 14. In State v. Fields , this court adopted the following standard for 
assessing whether testimonial hearsay violates the confrontation 
clause: where a hearsay declarant s unavailability has been 
shown, the testimonial statement is admissible for the truth of the matter asserted only if the defendant was afforded a prior opportunity to cross-examine the absent declarant about the statement.  Fields , 115 Hawai» i at 516, 168 P.3d at 968 (citing 
Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36, 68 (2004)). Importantly, 
this court also held that Hawai» i s confrontation clause, like 
its federal counterpart, is not implicated where . . . the hearsay declarant attends trial and is cross-examined about his or her prior out-of-court statement.  Id.  at 517, 168 P.3d at 
969. This court found the following language in Crawford
 
36
   
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
compelling: 
[W]e reiterate that, when the declarant appears for
cross-examination at trial, the Confrontation Clause places
no constraints at all on the use of his prior testimonial
statements. See California v. Green, 399 U.S. 149, 162, 90
S.Ct. 1930, 26 L.Ed.2d 489 (1970). . . . The Clause does
 not bar admission of a statement so long as the declarant is
present at trial to defend or explain it.
 
Id. (footnote omitted) (emphasis added) (quoting Crawford, 541
 
U.S. at 60 n.9).
 
Relying on numerous cases from other jurisdictions,
 
this court held that 
Crawford  does not preclude the admission of
 
a prior out-of-court statement where the hearsay declarant is
 
cross-examined at trial about the out-of-court statement.  Id.
 
at 523, 168 P.3d at 975 (footnote omitted). Under Fields, the
 
relevant inquiry is whether the Complainant appear[ed] at trial
 
and [was] cross-examined about [her] statement.  See Fields, 115
 
Hawai» i at 517, 168 P.3d at 969.13 
Neither this court nor the United States Supreme Court
 
has specifically determined whether a witness who is cross-
examined by the defendant but testifies that she cannot remember
 
the subject matter of her out-of-court statements or making her
 prior statements appears for cross-examination at trial  under
 
13 Any difference between Fields  and Crawford s formulations is 
aesthetic. A witness that appears for cross-examination at trial  under
Crawford is a witness that appeared at trial and was cross-examined about her
statement  under Fields. See Crawford, 541 U.S. at 60 n.9; Fields, 115
Hawai»i at 517, 168 P.3d at 969. 
37
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
Crawford and Fields. See Crawford, 541 U.S. at 60 n.9; Fields, 
115 Hawai» i at 517, 168 P.3d at 969. Delos Santos asserts that 
Fields extended Crawford s holding  by requiring substantive 
and meaningful  cross-examination. He asserts that he did not 
have a meaningful  opportunity to cross-examine the Complainant 
because, unlike the declarant in Fields , the Complainant could 
not remember anything about the incident. See Fields, 115 Hawai» i 
at 523-24, 168 P.3d at 975-76. He points to footnote 13 of our 
opinion in Fields , where we observed that the dispositive 
question becomes whether the witness can nevertheless recall the 
subject matter of the statement, notwithstanding the loss of memory as to the statement itself.  Id.  at 526 n.13, 168 P.3d at 
978 n.13 (emphasis added). This court noted that if the accused 
has the opportunity to elicit the witness  testimony as to the subject matter of the statement on cross-examination at trial, the accused s right of confrontation has been satisfied.  Id. 
This argument is not persuasive because language in 
Fields also supports concluding that a witness need not recall 
the subject matter of her statements to appear for cross-
examination at trial, and our adoption of Crawford  supports 
interpreting Fields in this manner.  For instance, this court 
held that Hawai» i s confrontation clause, like its federal 
counterpart, is not implicated where, as here, the hearsay 
38
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
declarant attends trial and is cross-examined about his or her
 
prior out-of-court statement.  Id. at 517, 168 P.3d at 969
 
(emphasis added). When analogizing Robinson v. State, 610 S.E.2d
 194, 195 (Ga. App. 2005), this court also observed:
 
In the case at bar, as in Robinson , the reluctant
witness testified to an extent, despite claiming memory loss
as to material elements of the alleged crime. Furthermore,
neither Staggs nor the hearsay declarants in Robinson
testified as to the subject matter of their prior
out-of-court statements. Insofar as the Robinson court thus
 concluded that Crawford was inapplicable, we are similarly
persuaded that the same result should be reached here.
 
Fields, 115 Hawai» i at 519, 168 P.3d at 971 (emphasis added). 
Although Fields  is ambiguous regarding whether a
 
witness must recall the subject matter of her statements, our
 
adoption of Crawford as the test for whether a witness appears
 
at trial for cross-examination  resolves this ambiguity. See id.
 
at 517 & n.9, 168 P.3d at 969 & n.9. To the extent that Fields
 
can be interpreted as indicating that a witness must testify
 
about the subject matter of a statement to satisfy the
 confrontation clause, we reject this interpretation and instead
 
hold that, under Crawford , a witness who appears at trial and
 
testifies satisfies the confrontation clause, even though the
 
witness claims a lack of memory that precludes them from
 
testifying about the subject matter of their out-of-court
 statement. As discussed below, this conclusion is supported by
 United States Supreme Court precedent, the precedent of other
 
39
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
jurisdictions applying Crawford , and the policies espoused in
 
Fields.
 
First, concluding that a witness appears for cross-
examination at trial despite a memory loss is supported by United 
States Supreme Court precedent, which this court relied on to 
interpret the Hawai» i Constitution s confrontation clause in 
Fields. Id. Although Delos Santos  challenge comes under the 
Hawai» i Constitution, we have relied on Crawford in determining 
whether a witness appears for cross-examination at trial. Id. 
Thus, the Supreme Court s construction of the federal confrontation clause is persuasive on this issue.
14 
The Supreme Court s construction of the federal
 
confrontation clause indicates that a witness who forgets both
 the underlying events and her prior statements nonetheless
 appears for cross-examination at trial.  For instance, in
 Crawford , the Supreme Court drew the following inference from the
 
historical application of the confrontation clause: the Framers
 
14 The concurring opinion asserts that federal and state case law
applying Crawford  is immaterial  because it does not implicate the
established jurisprudence construing our state constitution s confrontation
clause.  Concurring opinion at 19. We respectfully disagree because inFields this court adopted Crawford as this jurisdiction s test for whether awitness appears for cross-examination at trial. See Fields, 115 Hawai
»i at 
517 & n.9, 168 P.3d at 969 & n.9. Fields also examined the case law of other 
jurisdictions applying Crawford . Therefore, case law of the United States
Supreme Court and other jurisdictions applying Crawford is not wholly
irrelevant  to whether Delos Santos  right to confront the Complainant wasviolated in this case. See Concurring opinion at 19. 
40
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
would not have allowed admission of testimonial statements of a
 
witness who did not appear at trial  unless he was unavailable to
 
testify, and the defendant had had a prior opportunity for
 cross-examination.  Crawford, 541 U.S. at 53-54 (emphasis
 
added). The Supreme Court also observed that [o]ur cases have
 thus remained faithful to the Framers  understanding: 
Testimonial statements of witnesses absent from trial  have been
 
admitted only where the declarant is unavailable, and only where
 the defendant has had a prior opportunity to cross-examine.  Id.
 
at 59 (emphasis added). In a footnote, the Supreme Court
 
confirmed that when the declarant appears for cross-examination
 at trial, the Confrontation Clause places no constraints at all
 on the use of his prior testimonial statements.  Id. at n.9
 
(emphasis added) (citing California v. Green, 399 U.S. 149, 162
 
(1970)). Thus, Crawford  indicates that regardless of a witness 
 
inability to remember the subject matter of her statements, the
 witness  appearance for cross-examination at trial  satisfies
 the confrontation clause.
15
 
15 Delos Santos asserts that this court required that the declarant 
must not only be present at trial, but must be able to address the statement
by defending or explaining it.  (Citing Fields, 115 Hawai »i at 517, 168 P.3d
at 969.) Delos Santos refers to our quotation of the following sentence in
Crawford : The Clause does not bar admission of a statement so long as the
declarant is present at trial to defend or explain it.  Fields, 115 Hawai »i 
at 517, 168 P.3d at 969 (quoting Crawford , 541 U.S. at 60 n.9). This argument
is not persuasive because such an interpretation both ignores the fact that
the Court s language still focuses on presence and ability to act without
(continued ...) 
41
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
The Supreme Court s pre-Crawford  decisions support a
 
similar conclusion. For instance, in California v. Green , the
 
Supreme Court held that the Confrontation Clause does not
 
require excluding from evidence the prior statements of a witness
 
who concedes making the statements, and who may be asked to
 
defend or otherwise explain the inconsistency between his prior
 
and his present version of the events in question, thus opening
 
himself to full cross-examination at trial as to both stories.  
399 U.S. at 164. The Supreme Court did not reach the question of
 
whether the witness  apparent lapse of memory so affected [the
 defendant] s right to cross-examine as to make a critical
 
difference in the application of the Confrontation Clause . . .
 .  Id. at 168-69. However, it stated that:
 
[W]e note that none of our decisions interpreting the
Confrontation Clause requires excluding the out-of-court
statements of a witness who is available and testifying at
trial. The concern of most of our cases has been focused on
 precisely the opposite situation-situations where statements
have been admitted in the absence of the declarant and
 without any chance to cross-examine him at trial.
 
Id. at 161 (emphasis added).
 
Justice Harlan filed a concurring opinion, and would
 
15(...continued) 
requiring that the record show the declarant actually did defend or explainthe statement,  . . . , and is at odds with the Court s more explicitassertion that when the declarant appears for cross-examination at trial, theConfrontation Clause places no constraints at all on the use of his priortestimonial statements,  . . . .  
State v. Holliday , 745 N.W.2d 556, 565-66
(Minn. 2008) (internal citation omitted) (quoting Crawford, 541 U.S. at 59
n.9). Thus, under Crawford  and Fields, a declarant need not actually defend  
or explain  the statement. 
42
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
have reached the issue of whether the witness  failure to
 
remember the events affected the defendant s right to confront
 the witness. Justice Harlan would have held that:
 
The fact that the witness, though physically
available, cannot recall either the underlying events that
are the subject of an extra-judicial statement or previous
testimony or recollect the circumstances under which the
statement was given, does not have Sixth Amendment
 consequence. The prosecution has no less fulfilled its
obligation simply because a witness has a lapse of memory.
The witness is, in my view, available.
 
Id. at 188 (Harlan, J., concurring) (emphasis added).
 
In Owens, the Supreme Court observed that the question
 
left unanswered in Green  was squarely presented,  and the Court
 
agreed with the answer suggested 18 years ago by Justice
 
Harlan.  United States v. Owens, 484 U.S. 554, 559 (1988).
 
The Supreme Court held that the Confrontation Clause guarantees
 only an opportunity  for effective cross-examination, not
 
cross-examination that is effective in whatever way, and to
 
whatever extent, the defense might wish.   Id. (internal
 
quotation marks omitted) (quoting Kentucky v. Stincer , 482 U.S.
 
730, 739 (1987)). The Court also held that it is sufficient
 
that the defendant has the opportunity to bring out such matters
 
as the witness  bias, his lack of care and attentiveness, his
 
poor eyesight, and even (what is often a prime objective of
 cross-examination, see 3A J. Wigmore, Evidence § 995, pp. 931-932
 (J. Chadbourn rev. 1970)) the very fact that he has a bad
 
43
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
memory.  Id. Finally, the Court found it unnecessary to apply
 
Roberts:
 
We do not think such an inquiry is called for when a
hearsay declarant is present at trial and subject to
unrestricted cross-examination. In that situation, as the
Court recognized in Green, the traditional protections of
the oath, cross-examination, and opportunity for the jury to
observe the witness  demeanor satisfy the constitutional
requirements.
 
Id. at 560 (emphasis added) (citing Green, 399 U.S. at 158-161).
 
Although the factual scenario in Owens is
 
distinguishable from this case because the witness in Owens
 
remembered making his prior identification, the principles
 
elucidated in these decisions support concluding that a witness
 
appears for cross-examination at trial despite her inability to
 recall the incident and making her prior statements. See State
 
v. Holliday, 745 N.W.2d 556, 566 (Minn. 2008) (acknowledging that
 
Owens and Green are distinguishable but concluding that these
 
cases suggest what was settled in Crawford-that when the
 
declarant appears for cross-examination at trial, the
 Confrontation Clause places no constraints at all on the use of
 his prior testimonial statements.  ). The Supreme Court s
 
adoption of the reasoning in Justice Harlan s concurring opinion
 in Green  indicates that the confrontation clause is satisfied
 
when the witness appears at trial and is available for
 
unrestricted cross-examination. See Owens, 484 U.S. at 560;
 
44
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
Crawford, 541 U.S. at 60 n.9. Thus, Supreme Court precedent, 
which this court has relied upon in delineating the requirements of the Hawai» i Constitution s confrontation clause, indicates 
that a witness appears for cross-examination  despite a nearly 
total loss of memory regarding the incident and her statements. 
Second, courts in other jurisdictions applying Crawford
 
have held that a testifying witness appears for cross-examination
 
at trial despite a nearly total lapse in memory.
 
For instance, in State v. Holliday , the defendant
 
chased and shot at a person, but killed a different person than
 the one he intended. 745 N.W.2d at 560. The prosecution called
 
the intended victim at trial as a witness to testify as to
 information he gave in an interview with Sergeant Charles Adams
 
in April 2006 and in his meetings with Assistant Hennepin County
 Attorney Robert Streitz in May 2006 and September 2006.  Id. at
 
561. The witness claimed he could not remember his interview
 
with the police officer or the May meeting with the county
 attorney, and, after viewing a document from the September
 
meeting, [the witness] said he remembered talking to someone in
 the county attorney s office but could not remember what the
 
conversation was about.  Id. On cross-examination, the witness
 agreed that his regular ecstasy use possibly affected his
 ability to remember.  Id. The police officer testified as to
 
45
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
what [the witness] said in the April 2006 interview, including
 
[his] claim that he was appellant s intended victim when Reitter
 was shot.  Id. A legal services specialist was present at the
 
September meeting between the witness and the county attorney. 
Id. She testified that, at the September meeting, the county
 
attorney read the witness a report of the witness  April
 interview with the police officer and two memoranda documenting
 
the county attorney s meetings with the witness. Id. She
 
testified that the witness affirmed the contents of these
 documents at the meeting. Id. At trial, the legal service
 
specialist read portions of these documents into evidence. Id.
 
On appeal, the defendant claimed that the admission of
 
[the witness] s prior statements violated the Confrontation
 Clause because [the witness] s memory loss precluded the
 opportunity to cross-examine [the witness] about the
 circumstances surrounding his prior statements and the contents
 of those statements.  Id. at 565. The court observed that
 
language from the Supreme Court s Crawford decision indicates
 
that the admission of a witness s prior statements does not
 violate the Confrontation Clause where the witness appears for
 
cross-examination and claims that he or she cannot remember
 either making the statements or the content of the statements. 
 Id. Applying Crawford, the court held that the admission of the
 
46
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
witness  statements did not violate the confrontation clause
 
because [t]he Confrontation Clause is satisfied by a declarant s
 appearance at trial for cross-examination, and it is for the
 factfinder to evaluate a declarant s credibility.  Id. at 567­
68. Thus, despite the witness  failure to testify regarding the
 
underlying events or recall his prior statements, the admission
 
of his prior statements did not violate the confrontation clause.
 
In State v. Bush , the Supreme Court of Wyoming held
 
that the admission of prior statements from a witness that had no
 
recollection of her father killing her mother did not violate the
 confrontation clause. 193 P.3d 203, 212 (Wyo. 2008). After the
 
witness  mother died when the witness was very young, the witness
 was placed with the department of family services. Id. at 207. 
The witness  grandparents noticed that the witness exhibited
 
unusual behavior, and sought treatment for her at a mental health
 hospital. Id. During her treatments, when the witness was
 
almost three years old, the witness made statements to her
 counselor and psychiatrist implicating her father in the murder
 
of her mother. Id. At trial, the witness was eighteen years
 
old, and testified that she could not remember any of the events
 
in 1990.  Id. at 207-08. She also testified that the
 
counseling she had as a child pretty much made her unable to
 remember what had happened.  Id. at 208. Defense counsel did
 
47
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
not cross-examine her. Id. The prosecution called the witness 
 
psychiatrist and counselor, and they testified about the witness 
 
incriminating statements. Id.
 
The court held that the admission of the witness 
 
hearsay statements did not violate the confrontation clause
 because the witness appeared at trial, was placed under oath and
 
testified. Thus, [defendant] was confronted with the witness and
 
had the opportunity to cross-examine her and the Sixth Amendment
 
was satisfied.  Id. at 211. Relying on persuasive cases, the
 
court held that what is important for purposes of the Sixth
 
Amendment is that the defendant is confronted by the witnesses
 
against him at trial and has the opportunity to cross-examine
 them.  Id. at 212. 
Thus, other courts have held that the admission of
 
hearsay statements does not violate the confrontation clause
 
despite the declarant s complete failure to remember the subject
 matter of the statements. See also Mercer v. United States, 864
 
A.2d 110, 113, 114 & n.4 (D.C. 2004) (holding that the the
 
requirements of Crawford  were met  where the witness was unable
 
to recall in any meaningful way the events of the day of the
 
shooting, her testimony before the grand jury, or her testimony
 in the first trial ); People v. Perez , 82 Cal. App. 4th 760, 766,
 
98 Cal. Rptr. 2d 522, 526 (2000) ( Even though [the witness]
 
48
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
professed total inability to recall the crime or her statements 
to police, and this narrowed the practical scope of cross-examination, her presence at trial as a testifying witness gave the jury the opportunity to assess her demeanor and whether 
any credibility should be given to her testimony or her prior 
statements. This was all the constitutional right to 
confrontation required. ); United States v. Keeter , 130 F.3d 297, 
302 (7th Cir. 1997) (holding that the admission of a witness  affidavit and grand jury testimony did not violate the 
confrontation clause even though the witness claimed an inability to remember anything but his own name). The cases discussed 
above indicate that when a witness is presented for cross-examination, the Confrontation Clause does not bar the 
admission of a prior statement.  State v. Legere , 958 A.2d 969, 
978 (N.H. 2008); Bush , 193 P.3d at 211, 212 (holding that the 
admission of a witness  out-of-court statements did not violate the confrontation clause because the witness appeared at trial, was placed under oath and testified ). Therefore, the admission 
of the Complainant s testimony did not violate the Hawai» i 
Constitution s confrontation clause. 
Finally, the policies outlined in State v. Fields  are
 
not undermined in this case. In distinguishing the factual
 
circumstances of Fields, Delos Santos generally asserts that he
 
49
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
did not have an adequate opportunity to test the credibility and 
veracity  of the Complainant s prior statements. In Fields, this court noted that the trier of fact was provided with adequate information to test the credibility and veracity of Staggs  prior 
statement insofar as it could have reasonably inferred that (1) 
Staggs  drunken state rendered her prior statement inaccurate or 
unreliable, and/or (2) Staggs was not an innocent victim but an 
aggressive participant in the incident who, while angry at 
Fields, gave a false statement to the police.  Fields, 115 
Hawai» i at 523, 168 P.3d at 975. This policy of providing the 
trier of fact with adequate information to test the credibility of an out-of-court declarants  statements is not undermined by allowing a witness with no recollection of the incident or her 
statements to testify. For instance, in this case, Delos Santos was able to show that the Complainant was drunk that evening. Thus, although a witness may not recall the incident or her prior statements, the defendant may still impugn the credibility of the witness. 
Based on the analysis above, we hold that the admission 
of the Complainant s first statement that my boyfriend beat me up  did not violate the Hawai» i Constitution s confrontation 
clause. 
The concurring opinion observes that HRE Rule 802.1
 
50
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
requires that the declarant is subject to cross-examination at
 
trial about the subject matter of the statement.16 Concurring
 
opinion at 38-40. The concurring opinion then asserts that
 Hawai» i case law and the commentary to HRE 802.1 suggest[] that 
the same definition of the phrase subject to cross-examination 
 should be employed for purposes of the confrontation clause.  
Id. at 40-41. We respectfully disagree.
 
Initially, the concurring opinion asserts that the
 
16 The concurring opinion also asserts that under this court s 
precedent interpreting the Hawai »i Constitution, the proposition that the mere
physical presence of a hearsay declarant at trial does not take the defendant
out of the realm of protection afforded him or her by the confrontation clause
has been established.  Concurring opinion at 20. The concurring opinionrejects this court s reading of State v. Sua , 92 Hawai
»i 61, 75, 987 P.2d 959,
973 (1999), in Fields . Respectfully, these arguments are not persuasive in
light of our opinion in Fields. 
First, the concurring opinion asserts that this court misread Sua
 
in Fields because if the declarant s mere physical presence at trial was
dispositive, as the majority holds in the instant case, Sua II s analysis
regarding the two-prong test is a lengthy and preliminary discussion amounting
to dicta -- Roberts  should not have been addressed.  Concurring opinion at
24. However, Fields  established that a fair reading of Sua indicates that 
this court rejected Sua s confrontation clause argument on two independent anddispositive, but coequal grounds: (1) both prongs of the Roberts test were 
met; and (2) Sua had a sufficient opportunity for cross-examination.  Fields,
115 Hawai
»i at 526, 168 P.3d at 978 (citing Sua, 92 Hawai »i at 75, 987 P.2d at
973). This opinion has not altered our interpretation of Sua  in Fields, and
we decline to overrule Fields  interpretation of Sua. 
Second, the concurring opinion asserts that this court s
interpretation of Sua  in Fields is erroneous because it ignores that this
court has held that unavailability may be demonstrated by loss of memory.
Concurring opinion at 25, 26. The concurring opinion then concludes that our
confrontation clause jurisprudence necessarily contemplates reaching the two-
pronged tests stemming from Roberts  and Crawford, where the hearsay declarant
is physically present at trial but suffers from a loss of memory.  Id. at 25. 
This argument was rejected in Fields. In Fields, this court held thatHawai
»i s confrontation clause is not implicated where . . . the hearsay
declarant attends trial and is cross-examined about his or her priorout-of-court statement.  Fields, 115 Hawai
»i at 517, 168 P.3d at 969. Thus,
this court s confrontation clause jurisprudence does not necessarily
contemplate  reaching the unavailability prong of Roberts  and Crawford when a 
witness claims a loss of memory. 
51
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
commentary to HRE 802.1 suggests that the same definition of the
 
phrase subject to cross-examination  should be employed for
 
purposes of the confrontation clause.  Id. However, the
 
commentary to HRE Rule 802.1,17 on its own, cannot bind this
 
court s construction of a constitutional provision.
 
The concurring opinion next asserts that, in Fields  and
 
pre-Fields  cases, this court adopted HRE Rule 802.1 as its test
 
for whether a witness appeared at trial for cross-examination. 
Concurring opinion at 42-43. However, Fields   adoption of
 
Crawford indicates that this court has not adopted HRE Rule 802.1
 
as its test for whether a witness appears at trial for cross-
examination. See supra at 38-39. As discussed above, courts
 
applying Crawford  have concluded that a witness without
 
recollection of the subject matter of her statements still
 
appears for cross-examination. Therefore, we do not interpret
 Fields to require cross-examination regarding the subject matter
 
of the statement to satisfy the confrontation clause. To the
 extent that our cases have concluded otherwise, they were
 
displaced by our adoption of Crawford  in Fields.
 
17 Additionally, we note that Officer Kubo s summary of the
Complainant s statements was admitted as an excited utterance under HRE Rule
803(b)(2).
 
52
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
D. The Proper Relief Is To Remand For a New Trial.
 
At the ICA, Delos Santos asserted that [a]part from
 
the inadmissible evidence regarding Officer Kubo s testimony of
 
what [the Complainant] purportedly told him, the State failed to
 adduce any evidence that Delos Santos had abused [the
 
Complainant]. As such, there was no admissible evidence that
 
Delos Santos had intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly
 
physically abused [the Complainant], a family or household
 member.  In light of the discussion above, this argument is not
 persuasive and therefore we remand the case to the family court
 
for a new trial.
 
When considering whether sufficient evidence supports a 
conviction, courts consider the evidence in the strongest light for the prosecution  and the test on appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact.  State v. Richie , 88 Hawai» i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 
(1998) (block quote formatting omitted) (quoting State v. Quitog, 
85 Hawai» i 128, 145, 938 P.2d 559, 576 (1997)).   Substantial 
evidence  as to every material element of the offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative 
value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.  Id.  (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting 
53
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***
 
Eastman, 81 Hawai» i at 135, 913 P.2d at 61). 
Even disregarding the Complainant s more detailed
 
statement, her statement that 
my boyfriend beat me up,  her
 
testimony that she and Delos Santos were living together at the
 
time and the police officer s observations of her swelling and
 
marked chin, limp, and two-inch by two-inch circular red mark on
 
her thigh were sufficient to support a conviction for Abuse of
 
Family or Household Member.  Delos Santos , dissenting op. at 2
 
(Fujise, J., dissenting). Therefore, we remand this case to the
 family court for a new trial.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Based upon the foregoing analysis, we vacate the ICA s
 
judgment on appeal and remand to the family court for a new
 trial.
 
Stephen K. Tsushima
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
for petitioner-plaintiff-appellee
 
Kirsha K.M. Durante, Deputy
Public Defender, (Taryn R.
Tomasa, Deputy Public Defender,
on the briefs) for respondent­defendant-appellant
 
54
 