*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
---o0o---
MARION EVERSON, JAMES DANNENBERG, BILLY SOUTHWOOD,
 VALERIE YAMADA SOUTHWOOD, DUANE PREBLE, SARAH PREBLE, 
Appellants-Appellees,
vs.
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Appellee-Appellant,
and
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE HAWAII EMPLOYER-UNION HEALTH BENEFITS
TRUST FUND, Appellee-Cross-Appellant
and
The Administrator of the Hawaii Employer-Union Health Benefits
Trust Fund, Appellee-Appellee.
 
NO. 29359
APPEAL FROM THE FIRST CIRCUIT COURT
(CIV. NO. 07-1-1872)
MARCH 25, 2010
MOON, C.J., NAKAYAMA AND DUFFY, JJ.,
CIRCUIT JUDGE KIM, IN PLACE OF RECKTENWALD, J., RECUSED,
AND ACOBA, J. CONCURRING SEPARATELY
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAYAMA, J.
Appellee-Appellant, State of Hawai #i (“the State”), and
Appellee-Cross-Appellant, Board of Trustees of the Hawai# i
Employer-Union Health Benefits Trust Fund (“the Board of the
EUTF”) (collectively, “Appellants”), appeal from the Circuit*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided.1
Article XVI, section 2 of the Hawai# i Constitution, which is also2
known as the “non-impairment clause,” provides:  “Membership in any employees’
retirement system of the State or any political subdivision thereof shall be a
contractual relationship, the accrued benefits of which shall not be
diminished or impaired.”
2Court of the First Circuit’s1 (“circuit court’s”) August 18, 2008
final judgment in favor of Appellants-Appellees Marion Everson,
James Dannenberg, Billy Southwood, Valerie Yamada Southwood,
Duane Preble, and Sarah Preble (collectively, “Appellees”).  On
appeal, Appellants assert that the circuit court erred by
concluding that (1) health benefit plans available to retired
public employees from the Hawai #i Employer-Union Health Benefits
Trust Fund (“the EUTF”) are constitutionally protected by article
XVI, section 2 of the Hawai #i Constitution,2 and (2) Hawai# i
Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 87A requires the EUTF to provide
retirees with the same or similar health benefit plans as it
provides to active employees.  For the following reasons, we
hold:  (1) the circuit court did not err in concluding that a
retired state and county government employee’s health benefits
are protected by article XVI, section 2 of the Hawai# i
Constitution as “accrued benefits” arising from a retiree’s
membership in the employees’ retirement system; and (2) the
circuit court erred by concluding that HRS Chapter 87A requires
that retiree health benefits reasonably approximate those of
active workers.  Accordingly, we affirm in part and reverse in
part the circuit court’s August 18, 2008 final judgment.
I.  BACKGROUND
Appellees are a group of retired state and county*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided over this portion of the3
circuit court proceedings.  The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided over
the direct appeal from the administrative proceedings.
3government employees.  On June 30, 2006, Appellees filed a
complaint in the circuit court3 on behalf of themselves and
others alleging that Appellants had failed to provide health care
benefits to them as required by law (“the Class Action”).  
On August 9, 2006, Appellants filed a motion to dismiss
that asserted that primary jurisdiction over Appellees’ claims
resided with the Board of the EUTF.  A hearing on Appellants’
motion was held on December 15, 2006.  Apparently, the circuit
court orally granted Appellants’ motion at this hearing by
concluding that primary jurisdiction over Appellees’ claims
resided with the Board of the EUTF.  As a result, the circuit
court stayed the Class Action pending the outcome of the
proceedings before the Board of the EUTF.  
On May 15, 2007, Appellees filed a petition for
declaratory relief with the Board of the EUTF requesting that it
decide two questions, as follows:
A.  Is the EUTF permitted, notwithstanding Article
XVI, Section 2 of the Hawaii Constitution and the
requirements of HRS Chapter 87A, to provide health care
benefits to State and County retirees and their dependents
which are inferior to the health care benefits provided to
active State and County workers and their dependants?
B.  If your answer to question A is “yes,” what is the
minimal array of the health care benefits that must be
provided to retirees and their beneficiaries?
On June 15, 2007, Appellees amended their petition to
include two additional questions, as follows:
C.  Did the EUTF health benefits plans in effect from
July 1, 2003 to the present comply with the requirements of*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
During the proceedings, the State and James Williams, as the4
Administrator of the EUTF, intervened.
4the Hawai# i Constitution and HRS Chapter 87A?
D.  If your answer to Question C is “no,” are retirees
and/or their dependents entitled to either monetary
compensation/damages or any other form of relief (legal or
equitable)?  If so, how is it to be calculated and for what
period of time?
On September 7, 2007, the Board of the EUTF issued its
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order.4  Therein it
concluded that (1) HRS Chapter 87A “permits the EUTF to provide
health benefits to State and County retirees and their dependents
that are different from and/or inferior to those provided to
State and County active employees and their dependents,” and (2)
the EUTF health benefits plan satisfies HRS Chapter 87A’s
statutory requirements.  However, the Board of the EUTF declined
to answer any question that required an interpretation of the
Hawai#i Constitution because it concluded that it lacked
jurisdiction to do so.  
On October 5, 2007, Appellees filed a timely notice of
appeal to the circuit court.  
On July 23, 2008, the circuit court filed its Decision
and Order.  Therein the circuit court reversed  the Board of the
EUTF’s decision for the following reasons:  (1) the non-
impairment clause of the Hawai #i Constitution “protects . . .
accrued benefits,” which includes “those health benefits that
became established by enactment of [HRS] Chapters 87 and 87A and
amendments thereto,” “but by so doing does not and has not
prohibited the State legislature from changing the benefits for*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
HRS § 87A-23, which is entitled “Health benefits plan supplemental5
to medicare,” provides in its entirety:
(1) There shall be no duplication of benefits payable
under medicare.  The plan under this section, which shall be
secondary to medicare, when combined with medicare and any
other plan to which the health benefits plan is subordinate
under the National Association of Insurance Commissioners’
coordination of benefit rules, shall provide benefits that
approximate those provided to a similarly situated
beneficiary not eligible for medicare;
(2) The State, through the department of budget and
finance, and the counties, through their respective
departments of finance shall pay to the fund a contribution
equal to an amount not less than the medicare part B
premium, for each of the following who are enrolled in the
medicare part B medical insurance plan:  (A) an employee-
beneficiary who is a retired employee, (B) an employee-
beneficiary’s spouse while the employee-beneficiary is
living, and (C) an employee-beneficiary’s spouse, after the
death of the employee-beneficiary, if the spouse qualifies
as an employee-beneficiary.  For purposes of this section, a
“retired employee” means retired members of the employees’
retirement system; county pension system; or a police,
firefighters, or bandsmen pension system of the State or a
county as set forth in chapter 88.  If the amount reimbursed
by the fund under this section is less than the actual cost
of the medicare part B medical insurance plan due to an
increase in the medicare part B medical insurance plan rate,
the fund shall reimburse each employee-beneficiary and
employee-beneficiary for the cost increase within thirty
days of the rate change.  Each employee-beneficiary and
employee-beneficiary’s spouse who becomes entitled to
reimbursement from the fund for medicare part B premiums
after July 1, 2006, shall designate a financial institution
account into which the fund shall be authorized to deposit
reimbursements.  This method of payment may be waived by the
fund if another method is determined to be more appropriate.
(3) The benefits available under this plan, when
combined with benefits available under medicare or any other
coverage or plan to which this plan is subordinate under the
National Association of Insurance Commissioners’
coordination of benefit rules, shall approximate the
benefits that would be provided to a similarly situated
employee-beneficiary not eligible for medicare;
(4) All employee-beneficiaries or dependent-
beneficiaries who are eligible to enroll in the medicare
part B medical insurance plan shall enroll in that plan as a
condition of receiving contributions and participating in
benefits plans under this chapter.  This paragraph shall
apply to retired employees, their spouses, and the surviving
(continued...)
5prospective employees”; (2) HRS § 87A-23 (Supp. 2006)5 requires*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
(...continued)
spouses of deceased retirees and employees killed in the
performance of duty; and
(5) The board shall determine which of the employee-
beneficiaries and dependent-beneficiaries, who are not
enrolled in the medicare part B medical insurance plan, may
participate in the plans offered by the fund.
(Emphases added.)
The circuit court also concluded that the Board of the EUTF erred6
in allowing the Administrator of the EUTF to intervene in the proceedings.
6that the words “similarly situated beneficiary” to “invoke[]
comparison between retirees and active employees, not Medicare
eligible retirees and early retirees who by age do not yet
qualify for Medicare[,]” and health benefits that are provided to
retirees must “reasonably approximate” those benefits provided to
active employees; and (3) some of the retiree’s health benefits
included in the plan did not “reasonably approximate” those
benefits provided to active employees.6  
On August 18, 2008, the circuit court filed its final
judgment.  On September 15, 2008, Appellants timely filed their
notices of appeal.
On May 21, 2009, Appellants filed an application to
transfer its appeal from the Intermediate Court of Appeals to
this court.  On June 10, 2009, this court granted Appellants’
application for transfer.
II.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW
A. Secondary Administrative Appeal
“On secondary judicial review of an administrative
decision, Hawai[ #]i appellate courts apply the same standard of
review as that applied upon primary review by the circuit court.” *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
7Kaiser Found. Health Plan, Inc. v. Dep’t of Labor & Indus.
Relations, 70 Haw. 72, 80, 762 P.2d 796, 800-01 (1988).  For
administrative appeals, the applicable standard of review is set
forth in Hawai #i Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 91-14(g) (1993),
which provides:
Upon review of the record the court may affirm the decision of the
agency or remand the case with instructions for further
proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the decision and order if
the substantial rights of the petitioners may have been prejudiced
because the administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or
orders are:
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction
of the agency; or
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or
(4) Affected by other error of law; or
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative,
and substantial evidence on the whole record; or
(6) Arbitrary, capricious, or characterized by abuse of
discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of
discretion.
HRS § 91-14(g).  Pursuant to HRS § 91-14(g)(5), administrative
findings of fact are reviewed under the clearly erroneous
standard, which requires this court to sustain its findings
“unless the court is left with a firm and definite conviction
that a mistake has been made.”  Bumanglag v. Oahu Sugar Co.,
Ltd., 78 Hawai #i 275, 279, 892 P.2d 468, 472 (1995) (block format
and citation omitted).  Administrative conclusions of law,
however, are reviewed under the de novo standard inasmuch as they
are “not binding on an appellate court.”  Id. (block format and
citation omitted).  “Where both mixed questions of fact and law
are presented, deference will be given to the agency’s expertise
and experience in the particular field and the court should not
substitute its own judgment for that of the agency.”  Dole Hawaii
Div.-Castle & Cooke, Inc. v. Ramil, 71 Haw. 419, 424, 794 P.2d*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
81115, 1118 (1990).  “To be granted deference, however, the
agency’s decision must be consistent with the legislative
purpose.”  Camara v. Agsalud, 67 Haw. 212, 216, 685 P.2d 794, 797
(1984).
B. Statutory Interpretation
“Questions of statutory interpretation are questions of
law reviewable de novo.”  Gump v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 93
Hawai#i 417, 420, 5 P.3d 407, 410 (2000).  In our review of
questions of statutory interpretation, this court follows certain
well-established principles, as follows:
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.  Second,
where the statutory language is plain and unambiguous, our sole
duty is to give effect to its plain and obvious meaning.  Third,
implicit in the task of statutory construction is our foremost
obligation to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the language
contained in the statute itself.  Fourth, when there is doubt,
doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an
expression used in a statute, an ambiguity exists.  And fifth, in
construing an ambiguous statute, the meaning of the ambiguous
words may be sought by examining the context, with which the
ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may be compared, in order
to ascertain their true meaning.
Awakuni v. Awana, 115 Hawai# i 126, 133, 165 P.3d 1027, 1034
(2007) (citation omitted).
C. Constitutional Law
“[T]his court reviews questions of constitutional law
de novo, under the right/wrong standard.”  Jou v. Dai-Tokyo Royal
State Ins. Co., 116 Hawai #i 159, 164-65, 172 P.3d 471, 476-77
(2007) (quoting Onaka v. Onaka, 112 Hawai #i 374, 378, 146 P.3d
89, 93 (2006)) (internal quotation marks omitted).*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
9III.  DISCUSSION
A. Health Benefits Included In a Health Benefits Plan For
Retirees Constitute an Accrued Benefit Arising From a
Person’s Membership In an Employees’ Retirement System Of
the State Or Any Political Subdivision Thereof.
Based on certain authorities described below,
Appellants essentially assert that the non-impairment clause of
the Hawai #i Constitution protects pension and other retirement
allowances only, and does not protect health benefit plans.  
Appellees assert that the circuit court properly concluded that
the non-impairment clause applies to retirees’ health benefits
included in a health benefits plan because these benefits
constitute “accrued benefits” under the language of the
constitutional provision.
In interpreting constitutional provisions, “[t]he
general rule is that, if the words used in a constitutional
provision . . . are clear and unambiguous, they are to be
construed as written.”  Watland v. Lingle, 104 Hawai# i 128, 139,
85 P.3d 1079, 1090 (2004) (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted) (brackets and ellipsis in original).  In this regard,
“the words are presumed to be used in their natural sense unless
the context furnishes some ground to control, qualify, or enlarge
them.”  Id. (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
However, “[w]hen resolving an ambiguity, we have repeatedly held
‘that the fundamental principle in construing a constitutional
provision is to give effect to the intention of the framers and
the people adopting it.’”  Pray v. Judicial Selection Comm’n of
the State of Hawai #i, 75 Haw. 333, 343, 861 P.2d 723, 728 (1993)*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
10(citation omitted, brackets added).  “[I]n gleaning the intent of
the framers and the people, . . . ‘an examination of the debates,
proceedings and committee reports [of the Constitutional
Convention] is useful.’  Such evidence, however, ‘do[es] not have
binding force on this court and its persuasive value depends on
the circumstances of each case.’”  Id. (citation omitted,
ellipsis added, some brackets added and in original).  
“Another established rule of construction is that a
court may look to the object sought to be accomplished and the
evils sought to be remedied by the [constitutional] amendment,
along with the history of the times and the state of being when
the constitutional provision was adopted.”  State v. Kahlbaun, 64
Haw. 197, 202, 638 P.2d 309, 315 (1981) (brackets added). 
Additionally, “we can also look to the understanding of the
voters who adopted the constitutional provision, . . . and the
legislative implementation of the constitutional amendment.”  Id.
(ellipsis added).
To reiterate, article XVI, section 2 of the Hawai #i
Constitution provides:  “Membership in any employees’ retirement
system of the State or any political subdivision thereof shall be
a contractual relationship, the accrued benefits of which shall
not be diminished or impaired.”  None of the parties dispute that
Appellees are members of an “employees’ retirement system of the
State or any political subdivision thereof” (“ERS”).  See id. 
The issue here, then, is whether health benefits for retirees
that are included in a health benefits plan constitute an
“accrued benefit[]” that arises from that retirees’*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
11“[m]embership” in an ERS.  See id.
Appellants assert that health benefits for retirees do
not arise from a person’s membership in an ERS in light of (1)
the statutory framework and history of the ERS, (2) the intent of
the framers of Hawaii’s non-impairment clause, and (3) the New
York case of Lippman v. Board of Education, 66 N.Y.2d 313, 496
N.Y.S.2d 987, 487 N.E.2d 897 (1985), Appellants also assert that,
essentially, health benefits for retirees do not constitute
“accrued benefits” because, unlike pension and retirement
allowances, health benefits neither accumulate nor accrue.  
1. Pertinent statutory history of the ERS
Since 1925, the ERS has been enacted in some form in
Hawai#i.  See 1925 Haw. Sess. L. Act 55, § 1-14 at 51-70.  At the
time the non-impairment clause was ratified, the ERS was known as
the “Employees’ Retirement System of the Territory of Hawaii”
(“the Territorial ERS”).  Revised Laws of Hawai# i (“RLH”) § 6-21
(1955).  Its purpose was to provide “retirement allowances for
employees.”  Id.  A “retirement allowance” was defined as “the
sum of the annuity and the pension or any benefits in lieu
thereof granted to a member upon retirement.”  RLH § 6-20 (1955). 
Comparatively, the purpose of the ERS today is to
“provid[e] retirement allowances and other benefits for
employees.”  HRS § 88-22 (1993).  However, a “retirement
allowance” is now defined as “the benefit payable for life as
originally computed and paid a member at the point of the
member’s retirement in accordance with the retirement allowance
option selected by the member, exclusive of any bonus or*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
12bonuses.”  HRS § 88-21 (Supp. 2008).  A “pension” is defined as a
“benefit payment for life derived from money provided by the
State or county, as the case may be.”  Id.
2. Hawaii’s non-impairment clause
The intent of the framers of article XVI, section 2 of
the Hawai #i Constitution was described by this court in
Kaho#ohanohano v. State, 114 Hawai #i 302, 162 P.3d 696 (2007). 
Therein this court observed that “the proceedings of the 1950
Constitutional Convention demonstrate that article XVI, section 2
was introduced to ensure that the State and local governments
would provide a sound retirement system for their employees,
largely because of the Territory’s past lapses in funding such
benefits.”  Id. at 339-40, 162 P.3d at 733-34.  In this regard,
this court observed further that, “[i]n the delegates’ view, an
ERS member’s constitutional right under article XVI, section 2
that the accrued benefits shall not be diminished or impaired is
inextricably tied to protecting the source of such benefits.” 
Id. at 341, 162 P.3d at 735 (brackets added).  In other words,
the “ERS funds must be secure in order to ensure that the ERS
will be able to fulfill its obligations to its members into the
future.”  Id. at 342, 162 P.3d at 736.  In light of some of the
delegates’ concerns regarding adequate funding for the retirement
benefits of future employees, this court observed that the intent
of the non-impairment clause “was in part to provide the
legislature with the flexibility to ‘reduce benefits as to . . .
persons already in the system [insofar] as their future services
were concerned,’ but ‘[i]t could not, however, reduce the*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
13benefits attributable to past services.’”  Id. (quoting Comm. of
the Whole Rep. No. 18 in 1 Proceedings of the Constitutional
Convention of Hawai #i of 1950, at 330 (1960)) (some brackets
added and in original, emphasis omitted).  Accordingly, this
court held that it would be “inconsistent with the delegates’
statements and the Committee of the Whole report to conclude that
the delegates intended to afford legislative flexibility to the
extent that the legislature could ultimately diminish or impair
the benefits already accrued and contractually guaranteed.”  Id.
(emphasis in original).
Elaborating further, during the proceedings of the 1950
Constitutional Convention, Delegate Trask stated, “I believe that
the government employees are entitled to a constitutional
protection of a system that has gone a long way in contributing
to the welfare of our community.”  Id. at 340, 162 P.3d at 734
(quoting 2 Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of
Hawai#i of 1950, at 493 (1961)) (emphasis and internal quotation
marks omitted).  
Delegate Ohrt stated:
I was interested in Proposal 129 which I think is the
type of proposal that this Convention should adopt.  The
retirement system really gives protection to some 16,000
employees and fixes the benefits through a trust fund.  That
is, the retirement system has been set up as a trust fund,
and as I understand it, there is a statutory contractual
relationship at the present time, and I think the employees
would like to see it as a constitutional contractual
relationship.
Id. (quoting 2 Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of
Hawai#i of 1950, at 493) (emphases in original).
During the debates, the prevailing view among the*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
14delegates was that the “constitutional provision was needed in
large part to ensure that the Hawai #i legislature continued to
meet its funding obligation.”  Id.  By protecting government
employees in this manner, Delegate Sakakihara “very strongly”
felt that “the government should in good faith keep their
obligation with the employees of the territory.”  Id. at 341, 162
P.3d at 735 (citation and block format omitted).  
In explaining his position, Delegate Sakakihara
characterized “the retirement system” as “a sacred trust by the
government of funds entrusted by the employees of this Territory
and the counties.”  Id. at 340, 162 P.3d at 734 (citation and
block format omitted).  Indeed, Delegate Sakakihara recalled a
period of time past “when the legislature of the Territory of
Hawai#i absolutely defaulted on their share of the contribution
towards this obligation” to maintain and fund the retirement
system.  Id. (citation and block format omitted).  Delegate
Sakakihara continued:
[T]he employees of the county, City and County and the
Territory today are by law required to become members of the
retirement system as long as they are employed by the
government.  They have no choice.  They have no alternative
but to become a member of the retirement system.  I feel
very strongly that there should be a contractual
relationship, there should be between the government, if the
government desires to maintain this system in good faith
with the employees of the government.
Id. (citation omitted, brackets added, and emphases in original).
However, Delegate Tavares “expressed concern that the
provision may have meant that ‘the legislature guarantees that no
employee in the future will ever be given less benefits
proportionately than the employees today . . . .’”  Id. (citation*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
15omitted).  “In response, Delegate Ohrt explained that the
‘benefits of which shall not be diminished or impaired,’ applied
to the benefits of ‘all those that are now members of the
system.’”  Id. (citation omitted).  Delegate Ohrt “clarified that
the existing members of the system ‘have made their contributions
and the benefits are a fixed benefit plan.  And it’s just such a
reduction or the impairment of those benefits that the employees
should be concerned with.’”  Id. (citation omitted).
By adding the word “accrued” before “benefits,” this
court observed that “the delegates only sought to indicate that
there ‘can be no impairment of past benefits, but that [the]
future benefits can be changed by the legislature[.]’”  Id.
(citation omitted, brackets in original).  As this court
explained:
This is because[,] as noted before, Delegate Tavares
had expressed concern that the amendment would require the
ERS to be continued perpetually.  [2 Proceedings of the
Constitutional Convention of Hawai# i of 1950, at 497.] 
Likewise, Delegate White was concerned that the amendment
did not draw a clear distinction between past benefits and
future benefits.  Id. at 497-98.  To alleviate this
uncertainty and clearly differentiate between past and
future benefits, Delegate Anthony “suggest[ed] that the word
‘accrued’ be inserted before the word ‘benefits.’”  Id. at
498.  Delegate Anthony explained, “I was trying to get rid
of the impasse and I think the insertion of the word
‘accrued’ will do it.”  Id.
After the Chairman accepted the addition of “accrued,”
Delegate Anthony stated, “The purpose of the amendment will
be to preserve the accrued benefits but still leave the
legislature free as to the future.  In other words, the fear
that Delegate White and Delegate Tavares had, I think, are
met by this insertion.”  Id. at 499 (emphasis added). 
Delegate Tavares confirmed that the addition of “accrued”
satisfied his initial concerns.  Id.  Delegate White did not
object.  Id.
Delegate Tavares further stated that the final version
of the amendment agreed with Delegate Mau’s interpretation
of the amendment which was made prior to the addition of the
term “accrued.”  Id.  Delegate Mau’s interpretation was that
“the State can [at] any time cut out [the] retirement*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
16system, but those who belong to the system before it is
terminated, their rights and the benefits accrued to them
still remain under this provision.”  Id. at 498 (emphasis
added).  The Committee of the Whole incorporated this
objective in its report stating,
It should be noted that the above provision
would not limit the legislature in effecting a
reduction in the benefits of a retirement system
providing the reduction did not apply to benefits
already accrued.  In other words, the legislature
could reduce benefits as to (1) new entrants into a
retirement system, or (2) as to persons already in the
system in[]so[]far as their future services were
concerned.  It could not, however, reduce the benefits
attributable to past services.  Further, the section
would not limit the legislature in making general
changes [to the] system, applicable to past members,
so long as the changes did not necessarily reduce the
benefits attributable to past services.
[Comm. of the Whole Rep. No. 18 in 1 Proceedings of the
Constitutional Convention of Hawai# i of 1950, at 330]
(emphases added).
Id. at 343-44, 162 P.3d at 737-38 (brackets added and in
original).
“[I]n order to achieve the goal of protecting the
integrity of the ERS system, the delegates to the 1950
Constitutional Convention clearly manifested the intent to adopt
and follow the then New York system.”  Id. at 342, 162 P.3d at
736 (brackets added).  Similar to Hawaii’s non-impairment clause,
New York’s version states:  “After July first, nineteen hundred
forty, membership in any pension or retirement system of the
state or of a civil division thereof shall be a contractual
relationship, the benefits of which shall not be diminished or
impaired.”  Id. at 343, 162 P.2d at 737 (quoting N.Y. Const. art.
V, § 7) (internal quotation marks and emphasis omitted).  Because
the delegates clearly intended to follow the “then New York
system,” this court found New York case law interpreting its own*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
17constitutional provision persuasive in interpreting Hawaii’s
similar provision.  See id. at 345-47, 162 P.3d at 739-41.
This court also found Alaska’s case law “instructive in
interpreting our own clause” because “Alaska’s constitutional
pension provision is nearly identical in wording and substance to
Hawaii’s provision.”  Id. at 347, 162 P.3d at 741.  Alaska’s
provision states:  “Membership in employee retirement systems of
the State or its political subdivisions shall constitute a
contractual relationship.  Accrued benefits of these systems
shall not be diminished or impaired.”  Id. (quoting Alaska Const.
art. XII, § 7) (internal quotation marks omitted).  This court
observed that Alaska “adopted the New York constitutional model a
few years after Hawai #i did and added the word ‘accrued’ before
the term ‘benefits.’”  Id.  However, “[d]espite this addition,
Alaska has generally interpreted its provision in line with New
York case law.”  Id.
3. The Hawai #i Public Employees Health Fund
Prior to July 1, 2003, both active and retired
government employee health benefits plans were administered by
the Hawai #i Public Employees Health Fund (“PEHF”).  Established
in 1961, see 1961 Haw. Sess. L. Act 146, §§ 1-6 at 191-96, the
PEHF defined an “employee” as both an active employee of,
inter alia, “the state or county government or the legislature”
and a “retired member of the employees’ retirement system, the
county pension system or the police, firefighters, or bandsmen
pension system of the State or county[.]”  HRS § 87-1(5)(A)(v)
(Supp. 2000), repealed by 2001 Haw. Sess. L. Act 88, § 3 at 150. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
18An “employee-beneficiary” was defined in pertinent part as 
an employee, . . . an employee who retired prior to the
establishment of the fund, or the beneficiary of a retired
member of the employees’ retirement system, a county pension
system, or a police, firefighters, or bandsmen pension
system of the State or county, upon the death of the retired
member and, which beneficiary, if a child, does not marry,
or if a surviving spouse, does not remarry . . . and
provided further that the employee, the employee’s
beneficiary, or the beneficiary of the deceased retired
member is deemed eligible by the board to receive health or
dental services of a health benefits plan or a long-term
care benefits plan[.]
HRS § 87-1(6).  A “dependent-beneficiary” was defined as “an
employee-beneficiary’s spouse and any unmarried child, including
an adoptive child, stepchild, foster child, or recognized natural
child who lives with the employee-beneficiary, deemed eligible by
the board to receive health or dental services of a health
benefits plan.”  HRS § 87-1(4).  A “health benefits plan” was
defined as 
(A) a group insurance contract or medical, hospital,
surgical, prescribed drugs, vision, or dental service
agreement in which a carrier agrees to provide, pay for,
arrange for, or reimburse the cost of medical, hospital,
surgical, prescribed drugs, vision, or dental services as
determined by the board; or (B) a similar schedule of
benefits established by the board and provided through the
fund on a self-insured basis[.]  
HRS § 87-1(8).
Pursuant to HRS § 87-21 (1993), repealed by 2001 Haw.
Sess. L. Act 88, § 3 at 150, the board of trustees of the PEHF
“shall administer and carry out the purpose of the fund[,]”
which, pursuant to HRS § 87-3(a) (Supp. 2000), repealed by 2001
Haw. Sess. L. Act 88, § 3 at 150, was, in pertinent part, to
“provid[e] employee-beneficiaries and dependant-beneficiaries
with a health benefits plan . . . .”  As such, “[t]he board may
contract for [certain] health benefits plans[] provided that*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
These benefit plans included:7
(1) A statewide indemnity benefit plan under which a
carrier agrees to pay certain sums of money not in excess of
the actual expenses incurred for health services.
(2) A statewide service benefit plan under which
payment is made by a carrier under contracts with
physicians, hospitals, or other providers of health
services, or, under certain conditions, payment is made by a
carrier to an employee-beneficiary.
(3) Health maintenance organization plans, which
provide or arrange health services for members on a prepaid
basis, with professional services provided by physicians
practicing individually or as a group in a common center or
centers.
(4) Plans to offer dental benefits through a statewide
indemnity plan, a statewide service benefit plan, dental
maintenance organization plans, or combination thereof.
(5) Plans to offer prescription drug benefits through
a statewide indemnity plan, a statewide service benefit
plan, health maintenance organization plans, or combinations
thereof.
(6) Plans to offer vision care benefits through a
statewide indemnity plan, a statewide service benefit plan,
health maintenance organization plans, or combination
thereof.
(7) A noninsured schedule of benefits similar to any
of the schedule of benefits set forth in the health benefits
plans authorized in paragraphs (1) to (6).
HRS § 87-22(b)(1) to (b)(7). 
19benefits provided under any respective plan shall be equally
available to all employee-beneficiaries and dependent-
beneficiaries selecting the plan regardless of age[.]”7  HRS §
87-22(b) (Supp. 2000) (emphasis and brackets added), repealed by
2001 Haw. Sess. L. Act 88, § 3 at 150.
After the federal government established Medicare in
1966, Hawaii’s legislature amended the statutes governing health
benefits plans to eliminate “duplication of benefits payable
under federal Medicare” to an “employee-beneficiary and his
spouse,” and direct the board of trustees of the PEHF to
establish a health benefits plan that “shall be supplemental to*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
20the federal medicare plan.”  1966 Haw. Sess. L. Act 13, § 2 at
36; see id. § 1(c) at 35 (“With the advent of federal Medicare,
it is necessary to avoid extra expense to the State, to provide
the board with the means of establishing a supplemental plan and
to provide that employee beneficiaries enrolled in the federal
medicare plan may participate in the supplemental plan.”).  The
PEHF’s establishment of a “supplemental” health benefits plan was
subject to the following pertinent condition:
The benefits available under the plan, when taken
together with the benefits available under the federal
Medicare plan, as nearly as is possible, shall approximate
the benefits available under the plans set forth in section
87-22.  If, for any reason, a situation develops where the
benefits available under the supplemental plan and the
federal Medicare plan substantially differ from those that
would otherwise be available, the board may correct this
inequity to assure substantial equality of benefits[.]
HRS § 87-27(3) (Supp. 2000) (emphases added), repealed by 2001
Haw. Sess. L. Act 88, § 3 at 150.
Apparently, the health benefits plans that were
available to active employees contained benefits that were
similar to those benefits available to retired employees.  
Eventually, however, the health benefits plans that were
available for unionized active employees changed, as follows:
Beginning in 1984, eligible employees were given the
option of obtaining health benefit coverage through union-
sponsored plans, instead of the [PEHF].  Since then, the
percentage of active employees participating in union plans
has grown dramatically.
Under the [PEHF], the State and counties pay 60
percent of the premiums for active employees and their
dependents.  Active employees pay the remaining 40 percent
of the premiums.  Retirees do not pay for their premiums.
On the other hand, the [PEHF] contributes roughly 70
to 90 percent of active employee insurance premiums under
union plans.  The unions have been able to attract more
employees because they have been able to negotiate more
competitive benefit packages with insurance carriers. 
Moreover, the unions have been able to keep costs down*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
21because they do not offer coverage to retirees, who are
generally higher risks than younger, active employees.   
This inequity is further compounded when unions are
refunded for the overpayment of premiums.  Even though the
[PEHF] pays for the bulk of union-plan premiums, none of the
refunded money is returned to the [PEHF].
Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 124, in 2001 House Journal, at 1098
(brackets added).  
Moreover, it was recognized that
the system of providing health benefits to public employees
operates by paying for benefits contracted for by the [PEHF]
on a “pay as you go” basis, without any limits on cost.  In
the past, when health care costs were minimal and health
benefits were not considered a significant component of an
employee’s compensation, this was not an issue.  However, as
more advanced treatment, procedures, and medication are
developed, their costs have also increased.  Health benefits
are now considered an extremely important part of an
employee’s compensation precisely because health care now
costs so much.  In addition, as more employees begin to live
longer and as they learn to demand to use more benefits, the
system is proving unable to keep up.  The reality is that
the State and the counties will be unable to pay for health
benefits for their employees in the future without seriously
cutting from other portions of governmental budgets if no
changes are made.
Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 139, in 2001 House Journal, at 1105
(brackets added).
In 2001, Hawaii’s legislature repealed HRS Chapter 87
(the PEHF) and enacted HRS Chapter 87A (the EUTF).  See 2001 Haw.
Sess. L. Act 88, §§ 1, 3 at 138, 150.  According to the
legislative history of Act 88, the purpose of doing so was “to
establish a single health benefits delivery system for State and
county employees, retirees, and their dependents.”  Conf. Comm.
Rep. No. 124, in 2001 House Journal, at 1097.  The Committee on
Conference “ensure[d]” that by making the proposed changes, both
the EUTF and the State “will remain solvent” and explained:  “If
nothing is done now, the spiraling cost of the [PEHF] will create*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
22significant financial hardships for state taxpayers.”  Conf.
Comm. Rep. No. 124, in 2001 House Journal, at 1098 (brackets
added).  In recommending that Senate Bill number 1044 pass Final
Reading, it declared:  
It is not the intention of your Committee on
Conference that public employees and retirees suffer a
diminishment of existing health benefits.  This bill will
give the governing boards of the [EUTF] and [PEHF], during
the transition period, complete discretion, authority, and
flexibility to devise and maximize the levels and types of
benefits available for public employees and retirees.
Id.
Although the effective date that established the EUTF
was July 1, 2001, Hawaii’s legislature postponed repealing HRS
Chapter 87 and, consequently, the PEHF, until July 1, 2003, in
order to give adequate time for a transition from the PEHF to the
EUTF.  See id.; see also 2001 Haw. Sess. L. Act 88, §§ 4-8, 10 at
150-52.  As such, the legislature amended certain portions of HRS
Chapter 87 in order to (1) “address the issue of spiraling costs
by instituting a ceiling on public expenditures for health
benefits for public employees and retirees[,]” (2) “allow the
[PEHF] to work within the employer’s fiscal limitations,” and (3)
“provide[] the [PEHF] with greater flexibility to, among other
things, determine the types of plans, the design of plans, and
the delivery of plan services.”  2001 Haw. Sess. L. Act 89, § 1
at 152 (brackets added).  The amendments to HRS Chapter 87 became
effective on July 1, 2001.  Id. § 9 at 155.
Significant among the amendments was the removal of
certain language from HRS §§ 87-22(b) and 87-27(3).  HRS § 87-
22(b) (Supp. 2001) was amended to read, as follows:  “The board
may contract for health benefits plans, including but not limited*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
23to” many different plans described by statute.  Removed from the
statute was any language requiring the board to contract for
health benefits plans that provided benefits that “shall be
equally available to all employee-beneficiaries and dependent
beneficiaries selecting the plan regardless of age[.]”  2001 Haw.
Sess. L. Act 89, § 1 at 154 (brackets added).
HRS § 87-27(3) (Supp. 2001) was amended to read, as
follows:
The benefits available under the plan, when taken
together with the benefits available under the federal
Medicare plan, as nearly as is possible, shall be comparable
to the benefits available to employee-beneficiaries and
spouses who are not eligible for the federal Medicare plan. 
If, for any reason, a situation develops where the benefits
available under the supplemental plan and the federal
Medicare plan substantially differ from those that would
otherwise be available, the board may correct this inequity
to assure substantial equality of benefits[.]
(Emphases and brackets added.)  Replaced therein was, inter alia,
the word “approximate” for the words “be comparable to,” and the
words “under the plans set forth in section 87-22” was replaced
with the words “to employee-beneficiaries and spouses who are not
eligible for the federal Medicare plan.”  2001 Haw. Sess. L. Act
89, § 1 at 155.  
4. The Hawai #i Employer-union Health Benefits Trust Fund
Under HRS Chapter 87A, both active and retired public
employee health benefits plans are currently administered by the
EUTF, which is characterized by statute as a “trust fund” that
“consist[s] of contributions, interest, income, dividends,
refunds, rate credits, and other returns[,]” and is “under the
control of” the Board of the EUTF.  2001 Haw. Sess. L. Act 88, §
1 at 145 (brackets added); see HRS § 87A-30 (Supp. 2008) (same).*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
8HRS § 87A-15 provides:   The board shall administer and carry out
the purpose of the fund.  Health and other benefit plans shall be provided at
a cost affordable to both the public employers and the public employees. 
9HRS § 87A-31(a) provides:  
The fund shall be used to provide employee-
beneficiaries and dependant-beneficiaries with health and
other benefit plans, and to pay administrative and other
expenses of the fund.  All assets of the fund are and shall
be dedicated to providing health and other benefits plans to
the employee-beneficiaries and dependant-beneficiaries in
accordance with the terms of those plans and to pay
administrative and other expenses of the fund, and shall be
used for no other purposes except for those set forth in
this section.
24Ever since its establishment in 2001, the Board of the
EUTF has been mandated to  administer and carry out the purpose
of the fund,  which is, among other things, to use the EUTF  to
provide employee-beneficiaries and dependent-beneficiaries with
health and other benefit plans, and to pay administrative and
other expenses of the fund.   2001 Haw. Sess. L. Act 88, § 1 at
141, 145; see HRS §§ 87A-15,8 -31(a)9 (Supp. 2008).  In carrying
out the purpose of the EUTF, the Board of the EUTF is required to
provide  [h]ealth and other benefit plans . . . at a cost
affordable to both the public employers and public employees.  
HRS § 87A-15.  
The words  employee,   employee-beneficiary, 
 dependent-beneficiary,  and  health benefits plan  are all
defined very similarly to, if not exactly the same as, the
definitions provided by HRS Chapter 87, as quoted above.  See HRS
§ 87A-1 (Supp. 2008).  Importantly, however, an  employee-
beneficiary  is defined in HRS Chapter 87A as including, inter
alia, both an  employee  and a  beneficiary of a retired member*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
25of the employees’ retirement system[.]”  Id.  An “employee” is
defined as including both (1) an active employee “of the State,
county, or legislature” and (2) a “retired member of the
employees’ retirement system[.]”  Id.
Similar to the 2001 amendments to the PEHF, the most
recent version of HRS Chapter 87A does not include language
requiring that the benefits available under the health benefits
plan be “equally available to all employee-beneficiaries and
dependant-beneficiaries . . . regardless of age.”  See HRS § 87-
22(b).  Additionally, with regard to health benefits plans that
are supplemental to medicare, HRS § 87A-23(1) and (3) (Supp.
2008), as quoted supra in footnote 5, requires the Board of the
EUTF to “establish a health benefits plan, which takes into
account benefits available to an employee-beneficiary and spouse
under medicare,” and “shall provide benefits that approximate
those provided to a similarly situated beneficiary,” or a
“similarly situated employee-beneficiary,” “not eligible for
medicare.”  
5. A retired state or county employee’s health benefits
are derived from a retiree’s membership in an ERS.
Notwithstanding whether a retired state or county
employee’s health benefits constitute an “accrued benefit,” which
is addressed infra in section III.A.6, Appellants assert that a
retired state or county employee’s health benefits are
unprotected by the non-impairment clause because (1) health
benefits are not included as a benefit of membership in an ERS in
light of the mandated purpose of both the Territorial ERS and the
ERS today, as quoted above, and (2) the framers of Hawaii’s non-*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
26impairment clause intended to protect only those benefits
conferred by the ERS.  Appellees assert that the plain language
of HRS § 87A-21 (Supp. 2008) expressly conditions a retiree’s
health benefits on membership in an ERS, and such a condition is
sufficient to conclude that health benefits are included as a
benefit of membership in an ERS.  
HRS § 87A-21, entitled “Eligibility,” provides in
pertinent part:
(a) The [Board of the EUTF] shall establish
eligibility criteria to determine who can qualify as an
employee-beneficiary, dependent-beneficiary, or qualified-
beneficiary, consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
(b) A retired member of the employees’ retirement
system; a county pension system; or a police, firefighters,
and bandsmen pension system of the State or county, shall be
eligible to qualify as an employee-beneficiary:
(1) Regardless of whether the retired member was
actively employed by the State or county at the time
of the retired employee’s retirement; and
(2) Without regard to the date of the retired
member’s retirement.
(Brackets and emphases added.) 
Additionally, as discussed supra in section III.A.4, an
“employee” is defined to include, inter alia, a “retired member
of the employees’ retirement system[,]” and an “employee-
beneficiary” is defined to include, inter alia, an “employee” and
a “beneficiary of a retired member of the employees’ retirement
system[.]”  HRS § 87A-1 (brackets added). 
Appellants’ first assertion emphasizes that the
“benefits of membership in the ERS do not include health
benefits” because “nothing in [HRS] Chapter 88 requires or allows
the ERS, as the ‘employees’ retirement system of the State,’ to
provide health insurance or health benefits plans for its*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
27members.”  (Brackets added.)  Although a retired state or county
employee’s health benefits are not provided for in HRS Chapter
88, and are instead provided for in HRS Chapter 87A, we believe
that Appellants place too much emphasis on those benefits
provided by the ERS pursuant to HRS Chapter 88.  
As Appellants point out, the ERS, through HRS Chapter
88, provides for pension and other retirement benefits, and does
not provide for a retiree’s health benefits.  However, contrary
to Appellants’ belief, the non-impairment clause clearly and
unambiguously states that it is those “accrued benefits” arising
from a state or county employee’s membership in an ERS that
“shall not be diminished or impaired,” and not simply those
“accrued benefits” provided by an ERS.  See Haw. Const. art. XVI,
§ 2; see also Watland, 104 Hawai# i at 139, 85 P.3d at 1090.  In
other words, based on the plain language of Hawaii’s non-
impairment clause, the subject matter of the “contractual
relationship” established by article XVI, section 2 includes the
“accrued benefits” arising from a state or county employee’s
“membership” in an ERS, and it is these “accrued benefits” that
“shall not be diminished or impaired.”  See Haw. Const. art. XVI,
§ 2; see also Watland, 104 Hawai# i at 139, 85 P.3d at 1090. 
Accordingly, the overlooked distinction here is that Hawaii’s
non-impairment clause does not refer to any specific governmental
entity per se, as Appellants suggest, but rather refers to
membership therein.  See Haw. Const. art. XVI, § 2; see also
Watland, 104 Hawai# i at 139, 85 P.3d at 1090.
Indeed, as described above, Delegate Sakakihara*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
28explained that it is membership therein that is mandatory upon
employment of every state or county employee, and, as a result of
this mandatory requirement, protection from diminishment or
impairment should be accorded to those accrued benefits arising
therefrom “if the government desires to maintain [the] system in
good faith with the employees of the government.”  See 2
Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawai# i of 1950,
at 495 (brackets added).  Mandatory membership in the ERS
continues today.  See HRS § 88-42 (Supp. 2008) (“Except as
otherwise provided in this part, all employees of the Territory
or any county on July 1, 1945, shall be members of the system on
that date, and all persons who thereafter enter or reenter the
service of the State or any county shall become members at the
time of their entry or reentry.”); see also HRS § 88-21 (defining
a “member” as “any person included in the membership of the
system”); id. (defining “system” as “the employees’ retirement
system of the State of Hawai# i”). 
Furthermore, Appellants’ second assertion that the
framers of Hawaii’s non-impairment clause intended to protect
only those benefits conferred by the ERS is based on the debates
of the 1950 Constitutional Convention.  However, the EUTF’s
predecessor, the PEHF, was not enacted until 1961, which is
eleven years after the 1950 Constitutional Convention. 
Obviously, then, the Constitutional Convention could not consider
whether protection should be provided to health benefits for
retired state and county employees pursuant to the PEHF. 
Moreover, as discussed above, it is those “accrued benefits”*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
In the 1950 Constitutional Convention, Delegate King stated:10
KING:  I’d like to ask Delegate Ohrt a question. 
Assuming the legislature changes the form of the retirement
system for future employees at some date five or ten years
from now, sets up what is in effect a different system, then
it’s not obligated under this provision of the Constitution
to retain the same contractual relation, but can establish a
new one?
OHRT:  That is correct.
KING:  Well then, that agrees with Mr. Mau.  In other
words this provision only protects those who are in the
system as it now exists, and if the legislature reorganized
the system it could apply to all new employees.  But the
contract would remain in existence for all of those who had
entered prior to that change.
2 Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawai #i of 1950, at
498.
29arising from membership in an ERS, and not simply those benefits
provided by an ERS, that is protected by article XVI, section 2.
Additionally, the delegates considered the possibility
that the legislature may, sometime in the future, change the
“form of the retirement system for future employees . . . .”10  2
Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawai# i of 1950,
at 498.  In fact, as described supra in section III.A.2, it was
precisely this possibility of future change that led the
delegates to add the word “accrued” before “benefits.”  See 2
Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawai# i of 1950,
at 498-99; see also Kaho #ohanohano, 114 Hawai #i at 342, 162 P.3d
at 736 (“[A]s described by the Committee of the Whole, the intent
of article XVI, section 2 was in part to provide the legislature
with the flexibility to ‘reduce benefits as to . . . persons
already in the system in[]so[]far as their future services were
concerned[,]’ but ‘[i]t could not, however, reduce the benefits
attributable to past services.’”  (Emphases added and in*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
30original, ellipsis and brackets in original, citation omitted.)). 
Although the delegates were clearly concerned with the
possibility that an employee’s accrued benefits could be
diminished or impaired at a future point in time, see 2
Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawai# i of 1950,
at 493-99, nowhere is it indicated that the framers intended to
prevent an extension of constitutional protection to any
additional benefits that the legislature may, at some future
time, decide to provide to state and county government employees.
As such, we hold that article XVI, section 2 evinces an
intent to protect a state or county government employee’s
“accrued benefits” that are derived from that employee’s
“membership” in an ERS.  As we observed in Kaho# ohanohano, the
framers of article XVI, section 2 intended to provide the
legislature with flexibility to make changes to the system so
long as the changes neither diminished nor impaired a member’s
accrued benefits.  See 114 Hawai# i at 342, 162 P.3d at 736; Comm.
of the Whole Rep. No. 18 in 1 Proceedings of the Constitutional
Convention of Hawai #i of 1950, at 330.  Accordingly, although
article XVI, section 2 provides protection for any additional
benefits that the legislature may decide to provide to state and
county government employees as members of an ERS, consistent with
the framers’ intent, the legislature may also “‘reduce benefits
as to . . . persons already in the system in[]so[]far as their
future services were concerned[,]’ but ‘[i]t could not, however,
reduce the benefits attributable to past services.’”  See
Kaho#ohanohano, 114 Hawai #i at 342, 162 P.3d at 736 (quoting Comm.*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
31of the Whole Rep. No. 18 in 1 Proceedings of the Constitutional
Convention of Hawai #i of 1950, at 330) (emphases, ellipsis, and
brackets in original).
With regard to health benefits included in a health
benefits plan, the legislature recognized that “[h]ealth benefits
are now considered an extremely important part of an employee’s
compensation precisely because health care now costs so much.” 
Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 139, in 2001 House Journal, at 1105
(brackets added).  As such, the legislative history to the 2001
amendments to HRS Chapters 87 and 87A evinces an intent not only
to address the “spiraling costs” associated with the PEHF, but
also to prevent a “diminishment of existing health benefits” for
“public employees and retirees.”  Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 124, in
2001 House Journal, at 1097.
Viewed in this manner, “if the government desires to
maintain [the] system in good faith with the employees of the
government,” see 2 Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention
of Hawai
#i of 1950, at 495 (brackets added), we hold that a
retired employee’s health benefits that are included in a health
benefits plan falls within the constitutional protection
contemplated by article XVI, section 2 inasmuch as HRS § 87A-
21(b) clearly and unambiguously conditions a retired state or
county government employee’s eligibility for health benefits on,
inter alia, being “a retired member of the employees’ retirement
system[.]”  (Brackets added.)  Therefore, Appellants’ assertion
to the contrary and their interpretation of the framers’ intent
are unpersuasive.*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
32Appellants also contend that their interpretation of
article XVI, section 2 “as protecting only pension and retirement
allowances” is supported by Lippman.  In Lippman, a board of
education adopted a resolution directing payment by it of 100% of
the health insurance premiums for its retired employees, and 50%
of the premiums for dependents of retirees.  66 N.Y.2d at 316,
496 N.Y.S.2d at 988, 487 N.E.2d at 898.  Eventually, the board of
education adopted a subsequent resolution that reduced the
contribution for retired employees from 100% to 50% of the health
insurance premium, and dependents of retirees from 50% to 35% of
the premium.  Id.  The plaintiffs sought a declaratory judgment
that the reduction in contributions was made in violation of
article V, section 7 of the New York Constitution.  Id.
Similar to our holding here, the New York court
observed that article V, section 7 “protects only the benefits of
membership in a retirement system[.]”  Id. at 317, 496 N.Y.S.2d
at 989, 487 N.E.2d at 899 (brackets added).  However, the New
York court continued by stating:  “[O]ther employment conditions,
though they may be protected by statute, resolution or individual
or collective bargaining agreement, are not within [article V,
section 7's] coverage.”  Id. (brackets added).  Consistent with
the intent of the framers of article V, section 7, the New York
court determined that “more than an incidental relationship to
the retirement system must be found before an employee benefit
will be held to be within the area of action prohibited by the
[New York] Constitution.”  Id.  Instead, there must be either a
“direct relationship to retirement benefits” or a “real and*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
33important nexus” to the same.  Id. at 318, 496 N.Y.S.2d at 990,
487 N.E.2d at 900.  
In Lippman, the New York court found that “the only
relation between health benefits and retirement benefits” in that
case was “the purely incidental one that the latter provides the
means by which the former is paid in those instances where the
employer has elected to pay less than the full premium.”  Id.  As
such, the New York court determined:
Payment of part or all of his or her health insurance
premium is a benefit that comes to a retired employee not as
a benefit of membership in the retirement system but because
he or she was an employee of the State of New York or
participating employer, as to whom the Legislature has
provided, in Civil Service Law § 167, that part of the
premium shall be paid by the employer and that the employer
may, if it so chooses, increase the portion of the premium
that it pays.
Id. at 319, 496 N.Y.S.2d at 990, 487 N.E.2d at 900 (emphasis
added).
Significantly, however, the pertinent laws at issue in
Lippman do not indicate that a retired employee’s eligibility for
health benefits is conditioned in part on membership in a
retirement system.  See id. (quoting Civil Service Law § 167(3)
as stating:  “Contributions, if any, required to be paid by an
employee or a retired employee for his coverage and for the
coverage of his dependents, if any, shall be deducted from his
salary payments or from his retirement allowance, as the case may
be” (emphasis added)).  Unlike Lippman, such a condition exists
in the EUTF.  See HRS § 87A-21(b). 
Moreover, the health benefits at issue in this case is
different from Lippman.  In Hawai# i, and similar to the board of*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
HRS 87A-40(a) provides, in pertinent part:  “Each employee-11
beneficiary shall make a monthly contribution to the fund amounting to the
difference between the monthly charge of the health benefits plan selected by
the employee-beneficiary and the contribution made by the State or county for
the employee-beneficiary to the fund.”
34education in Lippman, the state and county governments contribute
a certain amount of money every month to the EUTF on behalf of
each active employee and retired member of an ERS as an
“employee” or “employee-beneficiary.”  See HRS §§ 87A-32 to -36
(Supp. 2008); see also HRS § 87A-1 (defining “employee” and
“employee-beneficiary”).  “The monthly contribution by the State
or county shall not exceed the actual cost of the health benefits
plan or plans.”  HRS § 87A-33(b) to (c).  If the amount
contributed by the state or county government is insufficient to
cover all of the monthly premium for the employee-beneficiary’s
selected health benefits plan, the active employee or retired
member of an ERS, as an “employee-beneficiary,” is required to
cover the difference.  See HRS § 87A-40(a) (Supp. 2008);11 see
also HRS § 87A-1 (defining an “employee-beneficiary”).  
However, unlike Lippman, whether the state or county
government’s contribution to the EUTF is protected by Hawaii’s
non-impairment clause is not the issue in this case.  Indeed,
unlike the state or county government contributions mentioned
above, the health benefits in this case are provided by a
“carrier,” which is defined as “a voluntary association,
corporation, partnership, or organization engaged in providing,
paying for, arranging for, or reimbursing the cost of, health
benefits or long-term care benefits under group insurance
contracts.”  HRS § 87A-1 (defining, also, a “health benefits*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
The “carriers” in this case appear to be Hawaii Medical Service12
Association (“HMSA”) and Kaiser Permanente.
35plan” as “a group insurance contract or service agreement that
may include medical, hospital, surgical, prescribed drugs,
vision, and dental services, in which a carrier agrees to
provide, pay for, arrange for, or reimburse the cost of the
services as determined by the board” (emphasis added)).12  The
Board of the EUTF is required to “establish the health benefits
plan, which takes into account benefits available to an employee-
beneficiary and spouse under medicare, subject to [certain]
conditions[.]”  HRS § 87A-23 (brackets added).  Accordingly, the
issue in this case is whether the health benefits that are
provided by a “carrier” and included in a health benefits plan
are protected from diminishment or impairment once “accrued” by
article XVI, section 2 of the Hawai #i constitution.  Therefore,
for these reasons Lippman is unpersuasive.
6. Health benefits for retirees constitute an “accrued
benefit” arising from a person’s membership in an ERS.
Appellants essentially contend that, unlike pension and
retirement allowances, “neither the level nor type of retiree
health benefits accumulate or grow based on the number of years
that an employee works.”  As such, Appellants assert that a
retiree’s health benefits are “not constitutionally protected
because they are not ‘accrued benefits.’”  
More specifically, Appellants point out that, under the
ERS, both the employer and employee contribute a certain amount
“to fund future retirement benefits.”  These contributions,
according to Appellants, “are accumulated in annuity savings and*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
36pension annuity funds and are invested so that they grow over
time.”  
Comparatively, Appellants point out that, under the
EUTF, the employer, active employee, and retired employee “make
contributions [to the EUTF] that are intended to fund only the
current costs of active employee and retiree health benefits
plans, i.e., pay-as-you-go funding.”  (Brackets added.)  
Because, according to Appellants, the contributions made to the
EUTF neither accumulate nor grow in the same manner as the
contributions made to an ERS, Appellants assert that a retiree’s
health benefits cannot constitute “accrued benefits” pursuant to
article XVI, section 2.  
However, as discussed above, the issue here is whether
the health benefits that are included in a health benefits plan
constitute “accrued benefits.”  The issue is not whether the
contributions made by the state or county governments to the EUTF
constitute “accrued benefits.”
Additionally, as discussed supra in section III.A.2,
this court observed in Kaho# ohanohano that by adding the word
“accrued” before “benefits,” “the delegates only sought to
indicate that there ‘can be no impairment of past benefits, but
that [the] future benefits can be changed by the legislature[.]’” 
114 Hawai #i at 341, 162 P.2d at 734 (quoting 2 Proceedings of the
Constitutional Convention of Hawai #i of 1950, at 498) (emphasis
added and brackets in original).  Accordingly, article XVI,
section 2 was intended in part to provide the legislature with
flexibility to make future changes to the retirement system,*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
Appellants rely on Studier v. Michigan Public School Employees’13
Retirement Board, 698 N.W.2d 350, 355 (Mich. 2005) as support for their
assertion.  However, the Michigan Constitution “prohibits the state or a
political subdivision from diminishing or impairing the ‘accrued financial
benefits’ of any pension plan or retirement system it offers.”  Id. at 354
(quoting Mich. Const. art. 9, § 24) (emphasis added).  Unlike the Michigan
Constitution, Hawaii’s non-impairment clause uses the words “accrued benefits”
without qualifying the word “benefits” with “financial.”  See Haw. Const. art.
XVI, § 2.  Therefore, Studier is unpersuasive.
Discerning whether health benefits accrue at one point in time or14
another (i.e. either upon employment or at some time after employment) is
unnecessary and has not been argued by Appellants.  Therefore, we express no
opinion on this issue.
37which included changing the benefits that are provided to members
of an ERS, as long as the changes did not reduce an employee’s
benefits attributable to past services.  See id.  There is also
nothing to suggest that any additional benefits, once “accrued,”
cannot be provided protection from diminishment or impairment
pursuant to article XVI, section 2 “if the government desires to
maintain [the] system in good faith with the employees of the
government.”  See 2 Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention
of Hawai# i of 1950, at 495 (brackets added).  Therefore,
Appellants’ interpretation of the word “accrued” is
unpersuasive.13  
Instead, as described supra in section III.A.2, the
word “accrued” was added before “benefits” to refer to a
particular point in time in order to ensure that any future
change to the benefits provided to a retired state or county
employee would not diminish or impair those benefits that have
already “accrued.”14  See Kaho #ohanohano, 114 Hawai #i at 343-44,
162 P.2d at 737-38.  As such, with regard to future changes, “the
legislature could reduce benefits as to (1) new entrants into a*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
We decline to address any issues raised by the concurring opinion15
because they have not been argued on appeal in this case.
38retirement system, or (2) as to persons already in the system
in[]so[]far as their future services were concerned.  It could
not, however, reduce the benefits attributable to past services.” 
Id. (quoting Comm. of the Whole Rep. No. 18 in 1 Proceedings of
the Constitutional Convention of Hawai# i of 1950, at 330) (block
format omitted, emphasis omitted and in original, brackets in
original).  Therefore, Appellants’ assertions are unpersuasive,
and we hold that health benefits for retired state and county
employees constitute “accrued benefits” pursuant to article XVI,
section 2 of the Hawai# i Constitution.15
B. The Circuit Court Erred By Concluding That HRS Chapter 87A
Requires That Retiree Health Benefits Reasonably Approximate
Those Of Active Workers.
Based on the plain language and legislative history of
HRS Chapter 87A, Appellants assert that HRS Chapter 87A does not
require that retired state and county employees be given the same
or similar health benefits as active employees.  Based on HRS §
87A-23 in particular, Appellants assert that the words “similarly
situated beneficiary not eligible for medicare,” as those words
are used in HRS § 87A-23(1), or “similarly situated employee-
beneficiary not eligible for medicare,” as those words are used
in HRS § 87A-23(3), does not require a comparison between all
retired members of an ERS on the one hand and all active
employees on the other hand, as the circuit court determined.  
Instead, Appellants assert that the words “similarly situated”
require a comparison between a Medicare eligible retiree and an*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
39early retiree who by age does not yet qualify for Medicare.  
More specifically, Appellants contend that the circuit
court’s interpretation renders the words “similarly situated”
superfluous and meaningless.  Although the statutory definition
of “employee-beneficiary” is broad and includes both an active
and a retired employee, see HRS § 87A-1, the words “similarly
situated” are not defined by HRS Chapter 87A or HRS § 87A-23. 
Looking to extrinsic aids, the word “similar” is defined as
“having likeness or resemblance, esp. in a general way[.]”  The
Random House College Dictionary 1226 (rev. ed. 1979) (brackets
added); see Singleton v. Liquor Comm’n, County of Hawai #i, 111
Hawai#i 234, 243-44, 140 P.2d 1014, 1023-24 (2006) (“[W]here a
term is not statutorily defined . . . we may rely on extrinsic
aids to determine such intent.  Legal and lay dictionaries are
extrinsic aids which may be helpful in discerning the meaning of
statutory terms.”  (Brackets added, ellipsis in original,
internal quotation marks and citation omitted.)).  The word
“situated” is defined as “located[,] placed” or “placed in a
particular position or condition[.]”  The Random House College
Dictionary at 1230 (brackets added).  Based on these definitions,
Appellants assert that Medicare eligible retirees and retirees
who by age do not yet qualify for Medicare are “similarly
situated” for the following reasons:  (1) “they both share the
same employment status”; (2) “unlike active employees, both are
subject to specific statutory percentage and dollar limitations
on employer contributions for the health benefits” pursuant to
HRS §§ 87A-33 to -36; (3) “both are rated together for*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
40underwriting purposes”; and (4) “both are more likely to share
common characteristics related to medical needs.”  
Appellees admit that Kaiser Permanente’s “EUTF health
benefits plan” offered retired state and county employees the
same benefits as active employees.  However, Appellees point out
that the active employees who are insured by HMSA are “getting
substantially better benefits” than retirees under HMSA.  
Pursuant to the legislative history of HRS Chapter 87A, Appellees
assert that the legislature intended that HRS Chapter 87A was to
provide “parity of benefits” between active and retired
employees.  
To reiterate, the circuit court determined not only
that the words “similarly situated beneficiary not eligible for
medicare” or “similarly situated employee-beneficiary not
eligible for medicare” “invokes comparison between retirees and
active employees,” but also that the health benefits that are
provided to retirees must “reasonably approximate” those benefits
provided to active employees.  The circuit court found that the
following benefits provided to retirees “exemplify benefits that
are not reasonably approximate” to those benefits provided to
active employees, which it concluded was “in violation of state
law”:  (1) active employees were provided with a $2,000 maximum
dental benefit while retirees had $1,000; (2) active employees
were provided with 80% coverage for endodontic treatment while
retirees had 60% coverage; and (3) active employees were provided
with 90% radiation therapy coverage while retirees were provided
with 80% outpatient radiation therapy after payment of an annual*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
We note that the circuit court observed in its decision and order16
that “[Appellees] . . . concede[d] . . . that the [health benefits] plans need
not be identical, so long as they are reasonably approximate; i.e. near or
close.”  
41deductible.  We disagree with the circuit court’s conclusion. 
The 2001 amendments to the HRS omitted or changed any
pertinent statutory language that required the Board of the EUTF
to provide health benefits to retirees that are “reasonably
approximate”16 to those benefits provided to active employees. 
For example, the 2001 amendments to the HRS that pertained to the
PEHF, as discussed supra, amended HRS § 87-22(b) by removing any
language that required the board to contract for health benefits
plans that provided benefits that “shall be equally available to
all employee-beneficiaries and dependent beneficiaries selecting
the plan regardless of age[.]”  2001 Haw. Sess. L. Act 89, § 1 at
154 (brackets added).  Moreover, HRS Chapter 87A no longer
required the Board of the EUTF to “assure substantial equality of
benefits” or ensure that the health benefits available under a
health benefits plan supplemental to Medicare, “when taken
together with the benefits available under the federal Medicare
plan, as nearly as is possible, shall approximate the benefits
available under the plans set forth in section 87-22.”  See 2001
Haw. Sess. L. Act 89, § 1 at 155; see also HRS § 87A-23. 
In light of these changes, had the legislature intended
to maintain the “reasonably approximate” benefits requirement, it
could have left the pertinent statutory language unamended.  See
Lanai Co. v. Land Use Comm’n, 105 Hawai #i 296, 318-19, 97 P.3d
372, 394-95 (2004) (“There is no provision in HRS § 205-12 that*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
42expressly delegates enforcement power to the [Land Use
Commission].  If the legislature intended to grant the [Land Use
Commission] enforcement powers, it could have expressly provided
the [Land Use Commission] with such power.”).  “By empowering the
[Board of the EUTF] to establish the health benefits plan, the
legislature granted the [Board] discretion in developing the
plan.”  Awakuni, 115 Hawai #i at 135, 165 P.3d at 1036 (brackets
added).  This discretion is “broad,” id., and apparently must
take into consideration the cost of the health benefits plan. 
See Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 124, in 2001 House Journal, at 1098 (“If
nothing is done now, the spiraling cost of the Health Fund will
create significant financial hardships for state taxpayers. 
Recognizing the urgency of this matter, . . . reforming the
Health Fund is the responsible thing to do.”).  By expressly
changing any reference to a “reasonably approximate” benefits
requirement, it is apparent that the legislature did not intend
to continue to impose such a restriction upon the Board of the
EUTF’s discretion.  See id. at 1097-99; Lanai Co., 105 Hawai #i at
319, 97 P.3d at 395; see also Camara v. Agsalud, 67 Haw. 212,
215-16, 685 P.2d 794, 797 (1984) (explaining that “courts are
bound, if rational and practicable, to give effect to all parts
of a statute, and that no clause, sentence, or word shall be
construed as superfluous, void, or insignificant if a
construction can be legitimately found which will give force to
and preserve all the words of the statute”).  Therefore, we hold
that the words “similarly situated beneficiary not eligible for
medicare,” as those words are used in HRS § 87A-23(1), or*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
We note that Appellees do not assert that any of the pertinent17
2001 amendments to the HRS are unconstitutional in light of Hawaii’s non-
impairment clause.  Instead, they (1) aver that the circuit court “properly
held that the Board’s decision was unconstitutional” but made no finding with
regard to whether the statutes themselves are unconstitutional, and (2) assert
in the alternative that, “[e]ven if the Non-Impairment Clause did not exist .
. . , Retirees’ health benefits would still be . . . protected” by the
contracts clause of the state and federal constitutions.  
43“similarly situated employee-beneficiary not eligible for
medicare,” as those words are used in HRS § 87A-23(3), invoke a
comparison between Medicare eligible retirees and retirees who do
not qualify for Medicare.  See Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 124, in 2001
House Journal, at 1097-99; Lanai Co., 105 Hawai# i at 318-19, 97
P.3d at 394-95; see also Singleton, 111 Hawai #i at 243-44, 140
P.2d at 1023-24.  Because we hold as such, HRS Chapter 87A does
not require the Board of the EUTF to provide health benefits
plans to retirees whose benefits “reasonably approximate” those
benefits provided to active employees.17*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
44IV.  CONCLUSION
Based upon the foregoing analysis, we affirm in part
and reverse in part the circuit court’s August 18, 2008 final
judgment.
Mark J. Bennet, Attorney
  General, (Dorothy Sellers,
  Solicitor General, and
  Rebecca A. Copeland,
  Deputy Solicitor General, with
  him on the briefs) for Appellee
  Appellant State of Hawai #i and
  Appellee-Cross-Appellant Board
  of Trustees of the Hawaii
  Employer-Union Health Benefits
  Trust Fund
Paul Alston (Eric G. Ferrer and
  Maren L. Calvert with him on the
  brief) of Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing
  and Charles K.Y. Khim for
  Appellants-Appellees Marion Everson,
  James Dannenberg, Billy Southwood,
  Valerie Yamada Southwood, Duane
  Preble and Sarah Preble