  * * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
--- o0o --­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
SEAN K. HITCHCOCK, Defendant-Appellant.
 
NO. 29847
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
(CR. NO. 1P509-00092)
 
JULY 30, 2010

 
MOON, C.J., NAKAYAMA, DUFFY, AND RECKTENWALD, JJ.;
ACOBA, J., CONCURRING SEPARATELY
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY MOON, C.J.
 
Defendant-appellant Sean K. Hitchcock appeals from the
 
District Court of the First Circuit’s1
 April 27, 2009 judgment
convicting him of and sentencing him for illegal camping, in
 
violation of Revised Ordinances of Honolulu (ROH) § 10-1.2(a)(13)
 (2009) [hereinafter ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13) or the ordinance], quoted
 infra. Upon application by Hitchcock, the case was transferred
 
1
 The Honorable Lono J. Lee presided over the underlying proceedings. 
-1­  * * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter
to this court, pursuant to Hawai 'i Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 602-58(b)(1) (Supp. 2009).2
 
Briefly stated, Hitchcock is a homeless man who, at the 
time of trial, permanently camped at the Kea 'au Beach Park [also 
referred to as the beach park, or the park] in Wai 'anae, on the 
island of O 'ahu. Every three weeks for approximately twenty 
months, Hitchcock was issued a camping permit from the City and 
County of Honolulu that allowed him to continue camping at the beach park. On the night of Wednesday, January 14, 2009, Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Officer Dennis Carino (Officer Carino) entered the beach park and cited Hitchcock for illegal camping, in violation of ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13).
3 The citation was 
based on a rule set forth in camping permits that prohibited camping on Wednesdays and Thursdays to allow the Department of Parks and Recreation to perform park maintenance. On April 27, 2009, Hitchcock was orally charged with illegal camping and pleaded not guilty. At the conclusion of a one-day bench trial, Hitchcock was convicted of illegal camping and fined $25. 
2
 HRS § 602-58(b)(1) provides that:
 
The supreme court, in a manner and within the time
provided by the rules of court, may grant an application to
transfer any case within the jurisdiction of the
intermediate appellate court to the supreme court upon the
grounds that the case involves:
(1)	 A question of first impression or a novel legal
question.
 
3
 ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13) provides that, “[w]ithin the limits of any
public park, it is unlawful for any person to . . . [c]amp at any park not
designated as a campground[.]”
 
-2­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
On appeal, Hitchcock argues that his conviction should
 
be reversed because: (1) his oral charge was defective in that
 
it failed to state an offense; (2) there was no “substantial
 evidence of the requisite attendant circumstance element” of the
 ordinance that Hitchcock camped “at a park not designated as a
 campground”; and, (3) assuming there was sufficient evidence to
 convict him, the trial court erred when it failed to apply the
 “choice of evils” defense to his case. Hitchcock further argues
 that, in any event, ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13) is unconstitutional as
 applied to him because it is vague, overbroad, and constitutes
 cruel and unusual punishment. Although there were other offenses
 that could have been charged in this case, see infra note 5, we
 conclude that there was insufficient evidence to show that
 Hitchcock violated ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13).
 
Thus, for the reasons discussed infra, we reverse the
 
trial court’s April 27, 2009 judgment and sentence. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On April 27, 2009, Hitchcock was orally charged during 
arraignment with illegal camping, in violation of ROH § 10­1.2(a)(13), based on his presence at Kea
'au Beach Park after 
10:00 p.m. on Wednesday, January 14, 2009. Specifically, the
 prosecution orally charged Hitchcock as follows: 
Mr. Hitchcock, on January 14, 2009, within the limits of a
public park, you did intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly
camp in any area not designated as a campground thereby
committing the offense of illegal camping in violation of
Section 10-1.2(a)(13) of the [ROH].
 
-3­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
Hitchcock indicated that he understood the charges against him
 
and, thereafter, pleaded not guilty. 
A bench trial then commenced and lasted one day. 
Plaintiff-appellee State of Hawai 'i’s (the prosecution) case-in­
chief consisted of one witness, Officer Carino. 
On direct examination, Officer Carino testified that, 
on the night of January 14, 2009, he was working near Kea 'au 
Beach Park in the City and County of Honolulu, and his assignment was “basically to give citations to people that [were] not supposed to be camping in the park.” When asked how he knew Hitchcock was camping in a public park, Officer Carino stated that he encountered Hitchcock in a tent in the beach park and saw that Hitchcock was going in and out of the tent. Officer Carino indicated that Hitchcock expressly admitted that the tent belonged to him. Officer Carino additionally testified that he ascertained the limits of the beach park from the signs “all over the park.” According to Officer Carino, there were signs in the park that “g[a]ve the rules of the park, no camping, um, no golfing, no alcohol.” However, he testified that there is an area designated for camping in the park and admitted that Hitchcock’s tent, which was set up “right next to the restroom” and “right near the parking lot,” was “within the campsite area” of the beach park. 
When asked about his interaction with Hitchcock,
 
Officer Carino indicated that he asked Hitchcock for his camping
 
-4­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
permit, but Hitchcock did not give him a permit. He indicated
 
that he could not remember whether Hitchcock actually had a
 permit. Officer Carino explained that:
 
Basically, [Hitchcock] was . . . in the park at a time where
. . . no one’s supposed to be camping. Even if you have a
permit, the permit’s only good for so much -- for certain
days of the week. And, uh, on Wednesday nights and Thursday
nights no one’s supposed to be in the park for maintenance
of the park. So even if they have a permit, the permit does
not state those days that you are allowed to stay in there
with a permit.
 
When asked why he did not issue Hitchcock a “closed park 
citation,” Officer Carino testified that Kea 'au Beach Park does 
not have “closed hours.” Finally, he indicated that, based on his observations, he issued Hitchcock a citation for illegal camping in violation of ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13), but did not arrest him. 
During cross-examination, Officer Carino reiterated
 
that Hitchcock was “in one of the designated camping areas” of
 the beach park when he issued Hitchcock a citation. 
Additionally, Officer Carino testified that he was familiar with
 Hitchcock and that he had “run into him” prior to the night in
 question. He stated that Hitchcock had informed him that he was
 homeless and essentially lived at the beach park. 
With respect to Hitchcock’s permit on the night in
 
question, Officer Carino again stated that he could not remember
 whether Hitchcock presented a permit when he issued the citation,
 but indicated that Hitchcock “usually does have a permit.” He
 indicated that, in any event, “there’s absolutely no way you can
 
-5­   * * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
get a permit there [at the beach park] on Wednesday and Thursday”
 
because the State does maintenance on those days. Also during
 Officer Carino’s cross-examination, the trial court took judicial
 notice of the fact that January 14, 2009 was a Wednesday night. 
The prosecution conducted a brief re-direct
 
examination, during which time it sought to enter into evidence a
 certified letter from the Department of Parks and Recreation (the
 department) stating that no camping is allowed at the beach park
 on Wednesdays and Thursdays. The prosecution argued that such
 letter should be entered into evidence as a self-authenticating
 document, and Hitchcock did not object. The trial court granted
 the prosecution’s request to enter the letter into evidence.
4
 
The prosecution also questioned Officer Carino about
 
Hitchcock’s history in the park, to which Officer Carino
 reiterated that he had encountered Hitchcock in the park before
 and that he usually has a permit. Officer Carino explained that
 the citation at issue was the only time he had cited Hitchcock
 and that “generally everybody there [in the park]” has permits
 “for the days allowed for camping there.” 
During re-cross examination, Hitchcock asked Officer
 
Carino whether the “Wednesday/Thursday” no camping rule was
 statewide. Officer Carino stated, “I don’t know if it[‘]s
 
4
 Although the transcript indicates that the prosecution’s request was
granted and seems to indicate that the letter was entered into evidence, there
is no such letter contained in the record on appeal, nor is there any
indication that the exhibit was, in fact, received into evidence. 
-6­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
statewide. I don’t know that. I know for the parks for that -­
for Kea 'au Beach Park it is.” Officer Carino additionally 
indicated that “the permit will state . . . what days they’re allowed there and what days they’re not allowed there.” Finally, he stated that, “to [his] knowledge,” the Wednesday and Thursday camping restriction was the result of a new camping statute that took effect in September 2008. No further inquiries or explanations regarding the “new camping statute” were provided at that time. 
Immediately following Officer Carino’s testimony, the
 
prosecution rested its case. Hitchcock then made an oral motion
 for judgment of acquittal, arguing that:
 
Although it seems the [prosecution] has met all the
elements, uh, to prove this crime and especially in the
light most favorable to the [prosecution] . . ., I would
just say that, uh, and it will become clear after Mr.
Hitchcock has a chance to testify, the statute itself is
unfair. It unfairly targets the homeless people who have
nowhere else to go. On Wednesday and Thursday they’re
basically, uh -- they’re basically out of luck.
 
The prosecution rested on the evidence presented, expressing its
 
belief that it had “met all the elements prima facie.” The trial
 court orally denied Hitchcock’s motion, stating that the
 prosecution “has made a prima facie case. Viewed in the
 strongest light, they’ve made their case.” 
Hitchcock then elected to testify on his own behalf and 
was the sole witness for the defense. Regarding his background, Hitchcock stated during direct examination that he was 41 years old, born in Hawai
'i, and held a master’s degree in traditional 
-7­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
Chinese medicine. He indicated that he served “eight years
 
active duty” in the army as a special forces operative and
 “previous to that . . . served four years Air Force Auxiliary as
 a search and rescue individual.” During his military career, he
 suffered injuries, including a broken back and multiple head
 traumas, that rendered him permanently ninety percent disabled. 
Hitchcock testified that he was employed until May of 2001, but
 became unable to work due to his disability. He indicated that
 he subsequently entered a vocational rehabilitation program and
 tried to find employment, but, when he became homeless, he was
 removed from the program. 
When asked about his homelessness, Hitchcock testified 
that he had been living in an apartment in Wai
'anae, but was 
evicted when his landlord found out that he was on probation for committing a class C felony. According to Hitchcock, he then went to several rental companies, but none of them would rent an apartment to him, even though he had good credit, because of “other circumstances,” which, in Hitchcock’s view, meant they did not want to rent to a person who was on probation. He further testified that he tried to get into shelters run by the military and other programs, but was rejected because he is on narcotic pain medication for his disability and that shelters have a “zero tolerance policy” for narcotic use, regardless of the reason or necessity. Upon being asked whether there were “any other avenues to find housing” that he had not yet exhausted, he 
-8­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
indicated that he was the first veteran on O 'ahu to apply for the 
“HUD-C” veteran housing program initiated by President Obama, but 
stated that such request was still pending and that, at the time of trial, there was no affordable housing available to him. 
Hitchcock then testified that he currently resided at 
“Campsite 13 at Kea
'au Beach Park.” He explained that, in order 
to stay at the beach park, he “go[es] down to the Satellite City Hall every three weeks on a Friday, and they issue three[]weeks worth of permits. And, um, I’ve done that now for about the past [nineteen, twenty] months.” Hitchcock further indicated, with respect to the “new camping statute” mentioned during Officer Carino’s testimony, that “nothing has changed from the old statute. . . . [The restriction on camping has] always been Wednesday/Thursday. That has never changed.” He explained that, although the parks and recreation department claims that Wednesdays and Thursdays are reserved for park maintenance: (1) there has been no maintenance done for the past five years or
 more at the beach park; (2) “last summer they took away both of
 our park employees”; and (3) it is “up to [the people staying at
 the beach park] to . . . help clean the park.” 
As to the citation he received, Hitchcock testified
 
that he understood that he was taking a risk by being at the
 beach park on Wednesday and Thursday, but stated that he
 “honestly ha[d] nowhere else to go.” He explained that, in the
 past, he has asked the HPD where he can go on Wednesday and
 
-9­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
Thursday and, in response, the officers have told him to go to a
 
shelter or “go in the bush somewhere maybe” because that area
 would not be handled by the HPD; thus, Hitchcock indicated that
 the HPD “just kinda [sic] pushed the issue around.” 
During cross-examination, Hitchcock admitted that he
 
was camping at the beach park on the night he received the
 citation and admitted that the beach park is a public park. When
 asked if he had a permit, he stated that “nobody has a permit on
 those days.” On re-direct, Hitchcock reiterated that the beach
 park had been his residence for the past nineteen or twenty
 months and stated that “[a]ll the police officers know me there.” 
At the close of his testimony, Hitchcock rested his case. 
The prosecution then presented its closing argument,
 
stating that:
 
Your Honor, I believe [the prosecution] has met beyond a
reasonable doubt its burden not only based on the officer’s
testimony but also on the defendant’s own admission during
testimony. He knew he was camping . . . . He knew it was a
 park camping ground or a public park and it wasn’t -- and
camping wasn’t allowed at that time. There’s no doubt that
 he violated the statute. I think the question the defense
raises is a broader constitutional question which definitely
should be raised. I’m just not sure that this court has -­can address it.
 
In response, Hitchcock stated:
 
Your Honor, that’s true. The statute, as applied to
people in Mr. Hitchcock’s circumstances, is totally
unconstitutional and leaves him with no options but to break
the law. Based on the fact that he is . . . in these
 circumstances as he testified, he simply has no other
choice. I’m going to ask the [trial] court to find him not
guilty on that basis.
It’s also a choice of evils thing, Your Honor. He’s
 
got no other options but to break the law. He’s asked where
 can he go. There’s nowhere else to go. He can’t go to the
shelters, as he testified, because he’s on this medication.
He’s clearly, uh, taken many measures to try not to break
 
-10­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
the law. He gets his permit every day for the days that the
State allows him to be there. He’s simply left with no
other option but to be living where he’s living. There’s
 nowhere for him to go, and he has tried.
So I would raise a constitutional basis by just
stating simply it is a choice of evils thing. He has no
 choice. His circumstances are such that he is forced to
 live in the park on Wednesdays and Thursdays, and that
subjects him to these penalties. And, uh, Your Honor, I’d
ask the [trial] court to find him not guilty. The intent is
 not there. He’s simply left without a choice. 
In rebuttal, the prosecution addressed Hitchcock’s
 
choice of evils argument, stating that 
[Hitchcock] has failed to specify what the alternate evil
is, so I’m not sure I can clearly address it because the
evil that’s being prevented by the law has to -- or the evil
that is avoided by breaking the law has to clearly outweigh
the evil being prevented by the law. Unless defense
 articulates the second evil, I’m not sure the [prosecution]
can clearly respond.
 
The trial court “found first of all the [prosecution]
 
is correct that the choice of evils defense is not applicable
 
[be]cause there is no other alternative evil that is facing Mr.
 Hitchcock.” The trial court went on to conclude that:
 
Certainly this [trial] court is sensitive to your
position, Mr. Hitchcock, but on the issue of the ordinance
it was clearly violated. And even in your testimony you
admit that. I don’t see that there’s a discriminatory basis
or a constitutional issue before this [trial] court. Okay.
The [trial] court does find that the [prosecution] has
made its case, proved its case beyond a reasonable doubt,
and you’re guilty as charged.
 
The trial court then asked Hitchcock if he wanted to address the
 
trial court as his “right of allocution.” 
Hitchcock chose to address the trial court, stating, in
 
relevant part, that:
 
There are many points about this case that I would
like to bring up with the [trial] court but probably isn’t
applicable [sic] at this time about how this is done. But
 this is being driven by political forces. The task force
 that comes down is directed by the mayor at this time. They
 
-11­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
only come down on the Wednesday and Thursday and they only
target the grassed area of the park, the actual park.
They don’t give tickets to the people who live to the
north of the park which there’s over two hundred people on a
mile-long stretch of beach doing the same thing we’re doing.
They never go in there to ticket them ever. So I mean there
 are many issues at hand here.
I’d like to again reiterate what counsel here has said
about the constitutional issue about the criminalization of
 the homeless. And I feel this is why I brought this before
Your Honor, to this court, to your attention that it does
seem cruel and unusual under the Fourth Amendment to
 criminalize the homeless. And that’s been a federal and
 national prerequisite -- not prerequisite, but that is what
has been happening now across the nation in various criminal
courts.
 
There’s an abundance of case law on this subject and
other things like the Fourteenth Amendment, freedom of
movement, et cetera, and that’s what we are trying to
establish here. But that’s exactly why I pled not guilty to
try to get out of the park. And I think all the police
officers who the task force say no, we’ve talked at
considerable length. . . . I rest my case on that.
 
The prosecution did not respond, but requested that the mandatory
 
fine of $25 be imposed. Hitchcock then requested that the fine,
 if imposed, be suspended. The trial court then imposed a $25
 fine on Hitchcock, but suspended the fine “for a period of seven
 days on the condition no other similar violations [sic].” On the
 same day (April 27, 2009), the trial court entered its written
 judgment and sentence in accordance with its oral ruling. 
On May 22, 2009, Hitchcock filed a timely notice of
 
appeal from the trial court’s April 27, 2009 judgment. Upon
 motion by Hitchcock pursuant to HRS § 602-58(b)(1), the case was
 transferred to this court on February 24, 2010. Oral argument
 was held on May 6, 2010.
 
-12­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Oral Charge 
“It is well settled that an accusation must
 
sufficiently allege all of the essential elements of the offense
 
charged.” State v. Sprattling, 99 Hawai 'i 312, 316, 55 P.3d 276, 
280 (2002) (citing State v. Merino, 81 Hawai 'i 198, 212, 915 P.2d 
672, 686 (1996)). Stated differently, 
the sufficiency of the charging instrument is measured,
inter alia, by whether it contains the elements of the
offense intended to be charged, and sufficiently apprises
the defendant of what he or she must be prepared to meet. A
 charge defective in this regard amounts to a failure to
state an offense, and a conviction based upon it cannot be
sustained, for that would constitute a denial of due
 process. Whether an indictment sets forth all the essential
 elements of a charged offense is a question of law, which we
review under the de novo, or “right/wrong,” standard.
 
Id. (citing State v. Kaakimaka, 84 Hawai 'i 280, 293-94, 933 P.2d 
617, 630-31 (1997)) (other citations, internal brackets, and
 
ellipses omitted).
 B. Sufficiency of the Evidence
 
This court has repeatedly stated that, in reviewing the
 
legal sufficiency of evidence to support a conviction, 
evidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
 
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
case was before a judge or a jury. The test on appeal is
not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt,
but whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact
. 
State v. Hicks, 113 Hawai 'i 60, 70, 148 P.3d 493, 503 (2006) 
(citation omitted). “Substantial evidence” is “credible evidence
 
which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a
 
-13­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.” Id.
 
(citation omitted).
 
C. Statutory Interpretation
 
“The interpretation of a statute is a question law 
reviewable de novo.” State v. Woodfall, 120 Hawai 'i 387, 391, 
206 P.3d 841, 845 (2009) (citations omitted). Further, statutory construction is guided by the following rules: 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.
Second, where the statutory language is plain and
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain
and obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task of
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself. Fourth, when
there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness
or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an
ambiguity exists. And fifth, in construing an ambiguous
statute, the meaning of the ambiguous words may be sought by
examining the context, with which the ambiguous words,
phrases, and sentences may be compared, in order to
ascertain their true meaning.
 
Id. (quoting Carlisle v. One (1) Boat, 119 Hawai 'i 245, 256, 195 
P.3d 1177, 1188 (2008)) (other citations omitted).
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
As previously indicated, Hitchcock argues that the
 
trial court erred and that his conviction should be reversed
 
because: (1) his oral charge was defective in that it failed to
 state an offense; (2) there was no “substantial evidence of the
 requisite attendant circumstance element” of the ordinance that
 Hitchcock camped “at a park not designated as a campground”; and,
 (3) assuming there was sufficient evidence to convict him, the
 trial court erred when it failed to apply the “choice of evils”
 
-14­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
defense to his case. Hitchcock further argues that, in any
 
event, ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13) is unconstitutional as applied to him
 because it is vague, overbroad, and constitutes cruel and unusual
 punishment. 
A. Oral Charge 
On appeal, Hitchcock argues that the prosecution’s oral
 
charge prior to the start of trial was defective inasmuch as “the
 charge contained language fatally different from the ordinance[]
 when it alleged that the camping occurred ‘in any area not
 designated as a campground’” and “failed to specify the essential
 element of ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13)[] that camping occur ‘at any park
 not designated as a campground.’” (Emphases in original.) 
According to Hitchcock, “the distinction between ‘park’ and
 ‘area’ was a material difference, because the [prosecution’s]
 proof was that Hitchcock camped in an ‘area’ where camping was
 prohibited on that particular day.” Thus, Hitchcock argues that
 “the conviction herein, based on the defective charge, violated
 Hitchcock’s constitutional rights to fair notice of the charge
 against him and his due process right to a fair trial” as
 provided in both the federal and state constitutions. Finally,
 Hitchcock acknowledges that he did not object to the oral charge
 at trial, but claims that the “fatal charging error” affected
 Hitchcock’s substantial rights and should be addressed by this
 court based on plain error. 
-15­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
In response, the prosecution argues that, because 
Hitchcock’s objection to his oral charge was raised for the first 
time on appeal, this court’s decision in State v. Motta, 66 Haw. 89, 91, 657 P.2d 1019, 1020 (1983) (providing that the charge should be “liberally construed in favor of validity” and that the conviction thereon will not be reversed without the defendant’s showing of prejudice) should apply in this case. (Citing Motta, 66 Haw. 90-91, 657 P.2d 1019-20; Merino, 81 Hawai
'i at 212, 915 
P.2d at 686) (other citations omitted)). Applying the test set forth in Motta, the prosecution argues that the oral charge “can reasonably be construed to charge illegal camping in a public park” because Hitchcock “represented at trial that he understood the charge, entered a plea of not guilty to the charge, and admitted to camping illegally at the public park on the night he received a citation.” The prosecution further contends that Hitchcock “has failed to even allege, much less demonstrate, any prejudice resulting from the oral charge’s incomplete reference.” As such, the prosecution argues that “[Hitchcock]’s claim that the oral charge was insufficient and the case reversed on that basis should be rejected.” 
In his reply, Hitchcock avers that the prosecution
 
“misapplies the [Motta] liberal construction rule to the instant
 case” because the Motta rule applies only to a charge that
 “merely omits a word rather than an essential element, or to a
 defect of mere form and not substance; [such] defects . . . are
 
-16­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
subject to [a] harmless error analysis, and a defendant who 
challenges such defects for the first time on appeal must demonstrate substantial prejudice.” Because (in Hitchcock’s view) the defect in the oral charge “was clearly not one of mere form, but is one of ‘substantive subjective [sic] matter jurisdiction, which may not be waived or dispensed with, and that is per se prejudicial,’” (citing State v. Cummings, 101 Hawai
'i 
139, 143, 63 P.3d 1109, 1113 (2003)) (other citations omitted), Hitchcock argues that the Motta liberal construction analysis “is inapposite.” In the alternative, Hitchcock argues that the Motta test has been met in this case because: (1) the defective oral charge was prejudicial in that it was “indisputably material, and the improper substitution [of] ‘area’ for the term ‘park’[] caused [Hitchcock] to be convicted rather than acquitted”; and (2) “[t]he oral charge, which does not track the ordinance as to
 the critical term ‘park,’ cannot within reason be construed to
 charge a crime.” 
Article I, section 14 of the Hawai
'i Constitution 
provides in relevant part that, “[i]n all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right . . . to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation.” See also U.S. Const. amend. 
VI. “[I]t is well settled that an ‘accusation must sufficiently
 
allege all of the essential elements of the offense charged,’ a
 requirement that ‘[applies] whether an accusation is in the
 nature of an oral charge, information, indictment, or
 
-17­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
complaint.’” State v. Ruggiero, 114 Hawai 'i 227, 239, 160 P.3d 
703, 715 (2007) (quoting State v. Jendrusch, 58 Haw. 279, 281, 
567 P.2d 1242, 1244 (1977)) (other citations omitted). As such, “the sufficiency of the charging instrument is measured, inter alia, by ‘whether it contains the elements of the offense intended to be charged, and sufficiently apprises the defendant of what he or she must be prepared to meet.’” Ruggiero, 114 
Hawai
'i at 239, 160 P.3d at 715 (citing State v. Wells, 78 Hawai 'i 
373, 379-80, 894 P.2d 70, 76-77 (1995)) (internal brackets omitted). 
As pointed out by the prosecution, this court has 
adopted a “liberal construction approach” when the sufficiency of an indictment was challenged for the first time on appeal. See 
Motta, 66 Haw. at 90, 657 P.2d at 1020. In Motta, this court explained that the “adoption of this liberal construction standard for post-conviction challenges to indictments means we will not reverse a conviction based upon a defective indictment unless the defendant can show prejudice or that the indictment cannot within reason be construed to charge a crime. Id. at 91, 
657 P.2d at 1020. In State v. Elliott, 77 Hawai
'i 309, 884 P.2d 
372 (1994), this court extended the Motta “liberal construction” approach to the sufficiency of oral charges, holding that, because the defendant did not challenge the sufficiency of his oral charges until after the trial, the review of the defendant’s argument would be governed by the “liberal construction standard” 
-18­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
set forth in Motta, id. at 311, 884 P.2d at 374. The Elliott 
court additionally provided guidance in applying the liberal construction standard, concluding that “[o]ne way in which an otherwise deficient count can be reasonably construed to charge a crime is by examination of the charge as a whole.” Elliott, 77 
Hawai
'i at 312, 884 P.2d at 375 (emphasis added). Further, in 
State v. Sprattling, 99 Hawai 'i 312, 55 P.3d 276 (2002), this 
court expressed that the Motta “post-conviction liberal construction standard” “essentially prescribes a presumption of validity on indictments that are challenged subsequent to a conviction.” Id. at 318, 55 P.3d at 282. Relying on Motta, the 
Sprattling court stated that, “[i]n determining whether an offense has been sufficiently pleaded, this court has departed from strict technical rules construing the validity of an oral charge. . . . Rather, we now interpret a charge as a whole, employing practical considerations and common sense.” 
Despite Hitchcock’s claims that Motta applies only to
 
“a defect of mere form and not substance,” we found no such
 limitation in Motta or the cases applying it. Thus, inasmuch as
 it is undisputed that Hitchcock did not object to the oral charge
 at the trial level and, instead, raises his argument for the
 first time on appeal, the Motta liberal construction approach
 applies in this case. 
As previously indicated, the prosecution entered the
 
following oral charge on the record: 
-19­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
Mr. Hitchcock, on January 14, 2009, within the limits of a
public park, you did intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly
camp in any area not designated as a campground thereby
committing the offense of illegal camping in violation of
Section 10-1.2(a)(13) of the [ROH].
 
(Emphasis added.) ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13) provides that, “[w]ithin
 
the limits of any public park, it is unlawful for any person to
 . . . [c]amp at any park not designated as a campground[.]” 
(Emphasis added.) Comparing the plain language of the oral
 charge to the ordinance, it is clear that, as Hitchcock points
 out, the prosecution used the word “area,” instead of “park” and,
 thus, misstated a word in ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13). However, the
 prosecution also stated that Hitchcock was being charged for
 conduct that was committed “within the limits of a public park.” 
By indicating that the conduct for which Hitchcock was charged
 had to have occurred within the limits of a public park, the oral
 charge can be read (and liberally construed) as indicating that
 Hitchcock was illegally camping in a park that was not designated
 as a campground (not merely an area not designated as a
 campground). Thus, examining the charge as a whole, it cannot be
 said that the prosecution’s alteration of a single word, i.e.,
 “area” instead of “park,” rendered the oral charge so defective
 that it did not state an offense. Thus, applying the liberal
 construction standard, the oral charge can, within reason, be
 construed to charge the offense of illegal camping pursuant to
 ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13). 
-20­  * * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
Given the aforementioned conclusion, we now turn to
 
examine whether, in the alternative, Hitchcock demonstrated that
 
he was prejudiced by the oral charge. We observe, as stated by
 the prosecution, that Hitchcock has not presented any evidence
 that the prosecution’s use of the word “area” instead of “park”
 prejudiced, surprised, or hampered his defense in any way. 
Indeed, we fail to see how the substitution of the word “park”
 could materially affect or harm Hitchcock’s right to be informed
 of the charges against him, especially given that the prosecution
 included the phrase “public park” within the charge. Therefore,
 Hitchcock failed to demonstrate that he was somehow prejudiced by
 the prosecution’s misstatement in his oral charge. In sum, it
 cannot be said that the prosecution’s use of the word “area”
 rather than “park” rendered the oral charge so unclear that it
 “by no reasonable construction can . . . be said to charge the
 offense for which conviction was had.”
 
Moreover, this court has stated that,
 
in determining whether the accused’s right to be informed of
the nature and cause of the accusation against him [or her]
has been violated, we must look to all of the information
supplied to him [or her] by the State to the point where the
court passes upon the contention that the right has been
violated.
 
State v. Israel, 78 Hawai 'i 66, 70, 890 P.2d 303, 307 (1995) 
(emphasis added) (citing State v. Treat, 67 Haw. 119, 120, 680 
P.2d 250, 251 (1984; State v. Robins, 66 Haw. 312, 317, 660 P.2d 39, 42-43 (1983)) (other citation omitted) (brackets in original). This court additionally stated that a defendant’s 
-21­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
right to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation
 
can be deemed satisfied if the record “clearly demonstrate[s] the
 defendant’s actual knowledge” of the charges against him or her. 
Id. at 71, 890 P.2d 308.
 
Inasmuch as Hitchcock argued the oral charge was
 
defective (and his constitutional rights had been violated) for
 the first time on appeal, we turn to examine the information
 provided or “supplied” by the prosecution to Hitchcock prior to
 appeal. The record indicates that Officer Carino testified at
 trial that Hitchcock was within the limits of a beach park at the
 time he was issued a citation. Officer Carino further testified
 that 
[Hitchcock] was . . . in the park at a time where . . . no
one’s supposed to be camping. Even if you have a permit,
the permit’s only good . . . for certain days of the week.
And, uh, on Wednesday nights and Thursday nights no one’s
supposed to be in the park for maintenance of the park. 
(Emphasis added.) Officer Carino indicated that, based on his
 
observations of Hitchcock camping in the beach park on a
 prohibited night, he issued Hitchcock a citation for illegal
 camping in violation of ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13). 
Such testimony by Officer Carino clearly informed
 
Hitchcock that he was being charged with camping in the beach
 park when the park itself was not designated as a campground. 
Indeed, it would be absurd for Hitchcock (or anyone) to believe
 he was being charged with camping merely in an area of a park not
 designated as a campground when Officer Carino specifically
 
-22­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
stated that the basis for his citation of Hitchcock was 
Hitchcock’s presence in the beach park at a time the park was not designated as a campground. Consequently, the prosecution provided Hitchcock with information such that he could understand the nature of the charges against him. Furthermore, Hitchcock indicated during his arraignment that he understood the charges against him. He testified at length regarding his presence at the beach park, admitted that no one has a permit to camp in the beach park on Wednesdays and Thursdays, and indicated that he understood he was taking a risk by remaining in the beach park on the night in question. Such testimony shows that Hitchcock was aware that his citation was based, at least in part, on his continued presence at a public park -- not merely in any “area.” Therefore, the record “clearly demonstrates” that Hitchcock had “actual knowledge of the charges against him.” Israel, 78 
Hawai
'i at 71, 890 P.2d at 308. 
Inasmuch as: (1) the oral charge, when liberally
 
construed, states the offense of illegal camping and provided
 Hitchcock with notice that he was being charged with camping in a
 “park” not designated as a campground; (2) there is no evidence
 in the record that the prosecution’s use of the word “area”
 instead of “park” “substantially prejudiced” Hitchcock; and,
 (3) in any event, the record indicates that Hitchcock had actual
 knowledge of the nature of the charges against him, we conclude
 the oral charge was not defective. Consequently, we cannot agree
 
-23­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
with Hitchcock that his constitutional rights to a fair trial and
 
to have fair notice of the charge against him were violated.
 B. Sufficiency of the Evidence
 
On appeal, Hitchcock argues that there was insufficient
 
evidence to support his conviction because the prosecution “had
 to prove, as an attendant circumstance of the offense, that
 Kea
'au Beach Park was ‘not designated as a campground,’” and the 
prosecution “failed to meet its burden.” More specifically,
 Hitchcock contends that 
[t]he overwhelming evidence at trial established the
converse of what the [prosecution] was supposed to prove.All testimony adduced on this point[] supported theindisputable conclusion[] that Kea' au Beach Park was 
designated as a campground -- the opposite of the attendant­circumstance-element of a non-campground designated parkthat the [prosecution] was supposed to prove. [OfficerCarino] described how camping was permitted at designatedcampsites throughout the park, and that Hitchcock’s tent waswithin such a campsite. The city department issued campingpermits for camping in this park, and the officer saidHitchcock had such a permit. The very fact that a citydepartment issued permits allowing for camping in the park[]establishes that the park is designated as a campground.
Even when viewed in the light most favorable to the
[prosecution], the reference that there were “no camping”
signs throughout the park, and that camping permits
generally were not valid on the particular day Hitchcock was
cited . . . did not prove that the park was “not designated
as a campground.” . . . There was no notice within the
 ordinance[] conveying the supposed prohibitions . . ., i.e.,
that absolutely no camping was allowed on Wednesdays and
Thursdays, or that camping within the designated campsite
areas of the park was otherwise allowed on all other days,
or that the permit contained a specific advisement regarding
the Wednesday/Thursday camping ban. 
Hitchcock further argues that Officer Carino’s “reference to
 
permits not being valid on the day that Hitchcock was cited only
 
shows that Hitchcock appears to have violated the terms of the
 
permit, and is not material to the issue . . . whether Kea 'au 
-24­  * * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
Beach Park was designated as a campground[] or not.” (Emphases
 
added).5 Thus, Hitchcock claims that the prosecution’s evidence
 
“fails to establish guilt, even in the light most favorable to
 the [prosecution]” and that the lack of substantial evidence
 “violated Hitchcock’s due process right not to be convicted
 except on proof of every element beyond a reasonable doubt.” 
In its answering brief, the prosecution argues that
 
there was substantial evidence adduced at trial that, “on the
 evening [Hitchcock] was cited for illegal camping at Kea
'au Beach 
Park, the area in which [Hitchcock] pitched his tent was not
 designated as a campground” because, although the evidence
 
5
 Before the ICA, Hitchcock observed that
 
[o]ther pertinent provisions exist within the
statutory scheme of [the] ROH, which clearly address the
conduct the prosecution was attempting to prosecute herein.
ROH § 10-1.3(a)(2) states that a permit is required for
camping: “Any person using the recreational and other areas
and facilities under the control, maintenance, management
and operation of the department of parks and recreation
shall first obtain a permit from the department for the
following uses: . . . (2) Camping[.]” ROH § 10-1.3(c)
clearly articulates the consequence for violation of the
terms of a permit, as follows: “Any violation . . . of the
terms or condition contained in the permit which violation
is caused by the permittee, . . . []shall constitute ground
for revocation of the permit by the director of parks and
recreation.” ROH § 10-1.6(a) provides for the penalty of
criminal prosecution for “any person convicted of a
violation of any section or provision of this article shall
be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.”
 
If Hitchcock’s permit had indeed stated that the
permit was not valid on Wednesdays and Thursdays, and
Hitchcock then violated the terms of the permit by camping
in the park on those days, the State could both revoke the
permit under ROH § 10-1.3(c), and the State could attempt
prosecution under ROH § 10-1.6(a) for the permit violation,
which appears to be the appropriate charging mechanism under
the facts herein, rather than ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13).
 
-25­    * * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
established that Hitchcock’s tent “was in a designated camping
 
area,” it also showed that “camping was not permitted on
 Wednesday and Thursdays [in that] those days were designated as
 maintenance times at that park.” The prosecution additionally
 points to the evidence that Hitchcock “understood that he risked
 citation by remaining at the park on Wednesdays and Thursdays”
 and that he “conceded that the [prosecution] had ‘met all the
 elements . . . to prove this crime and especially in the light
 most favorable to the [prosecution]’” while arguing in support of
 his motion for a judgment of acquittal.
6
 
HRS § 701-114 (1993) provides, in relevant part, that
 
“no person may be convicted of an offense unless the following
 are proved beyond a reasonable doubt: . . . [e]ach element of the
 offense [and t]he state of mind required to establish each
 element of the offense.” ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13), the offense for
 which Hitchcock was charged, has two elements: (1) the conduct
 element of “camping”; and (2) the attendant circumstance that
 such camping may not be done in “any park not designated as a
 campground.” See HRS § 702-205 (1993) (stating that the elements
 
of an offense consist of conduct, attendant circumstances, and
 results of conduct). Thus, the prosecution had the burden to
 
6
 The prosecution additionally relies upon the trial court’s admission
of the certified letter from the Department of Parks and Recreation into
evidence “which indicated that camping was not allowed on Wednesdays and
Thursdays.” However, as previously indicated, the certified letter is not
contained in the record on appeal. 
-26­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
prove, as an attendant circumstance of the offense, that Kea 'au 
Beach Park was “any park not designated as a campground.” 
Here, the record indicates that there are areas in 
Kea'au Beach Park where camping is permitted. Although Officer 
Carino testified that there are signs in the park saying “no 
camping,” he later admitted that certain areas in the park are “designated for camping” and that Hitchcock’s tent was in one of the appropriate camping areas on the night in question. The record additionally shows that the city issued permits to Hitchcock to camp at Kea
'au Beach Park and, that, at the time of 
trial, the city had been issuing Hitchcock such permits every three weeks for about nineteen or twenty months. As such, the evidence adduced at trial sufficiently established that the Kea
'au Beach Park is, generally, “designated as a campground.” 
However, all parties acknowledge that camping was not permitted at the beach park on Wednesdays and Thursdays because, according to the terms of the camping permits, the city performed park maintenance on those days. Indeed, Hitchcock admitted that “nobody has a permit” to camp at the beach park on Wednesdays and Thursdays. 
The prosecution takes the position that the camping
 
prohibition on Wednesdays and Thursdays established that, on
 those days, the beach park was “not designated as a campground.” 
On the other hand, Hitchcock claims, as indicated supra, that the
 fact that camping permits are not valid on Wednesdays and
 
-27­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
Thursdays “only shows that Hitchcock appears to have violated the 
terms of the permit, and is not material to the issue . . . whether Kea
'au Beach Park was designated as a campground[] or 
not.” Consequently, the inquiry whether sufficient evidence was adduced at trial to sustain Hitchcock’s conviction turns on whether the beach park is “designated as a campground” on Wednesdays and Thursdays, when camping is prohibited. 
Because the evidence adduced regarding the beach park
 
and the relevant camping restrictions is not in dispute, the
 question whether the beach park was “designated as a campground”
 on Wednesdays and Thursdays becomes a question of law. A review
 of the ROH reveals that the term “designate” is not defined in
 ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13), nor is it defined in chapter 10 of the ROH
 governing “parks and park facilities.” However, this court has
 stated that “[t]he words of law are generally to be understood in
 their most known and usual signification, without attending so
 much to the literal and strictly grammatical construction of the
 words as to their general or popular use or meaning.” Stallard
 
v. Consolidated Maui, Inc., 103 Hawai
'i 468, 476, 83 P.3d 731, 
739 (2004) (citing HRS § 1-14 (1993)); cf. State v. Bayly, 118 Hawai
'i 1, 11, 185 P.3d 186, 196 (2008) (citation omitted) 
(holding that this court “must heed the ‘plain and obvious meaning’ of the statute in order to give effect to the intention of the legislature”). 
-28­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
Webster’s dictionary defines “designate,” inter alia, 
as follows: (1) “to declare to be: characterize,” as in, “areas 
designated as strategic”; and (2) “to choose and set apart,” e.g., “control dams designated for construction.” Webster’s 
Third New International Dictionary 612 (3rd ed. 1993) (emphases in original). The aforementioned definitions, however, do not aid in interpreting the term “designate” in the context of the phrase “designated as a campground.” Indeed, the definitions provide no guidance as to whether Kea
'au Beach Park was 
continuously “designated as a campground” during the two days each week it was closed to campers for maintenance because such definitions could be used to support either of the aforementioned interpretations submitted by Hitchcock and the prosecution. 
Because the “plain and obvious meaning” of the word
 
“designate” cannot be gleaned from the ordinance itself or the
 dictionary definitions, and the parties essentially present
 different interpretations, the word “designate,” as used in ROH
 § 10-1.2(a)(13), is ambiguous. We, therefore, turn to ROH
 § 1-2.1, which governs the construction of ambiguous words in
 ordinances and provides in relevant part: 
In the construction of ordinances . . . the following
rules shall be observed unless it shall be apparent from the
context that a different construction is intended:
 . . . .
 
(b)	 Construction of Ambiguous Words. Where the words are 
ambiguous:
 
-29­ * * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
(1)	 The meaning of the ambiguous words may be sought
by examining the context, with which the
ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may be
compared, in order to ascertain their true
meaning.
(2)	 The reason and spirit of the ordinance,
resolution, rules and regulations, and the cause
which induced enactment or promulgation may be
considered to discover its true meaning.
(3)	 Every construction which leads to an absurdity
shall be rejected.
 
Additionally, this court has stated that, “[i]f [a] statute is
 
ambiguous, and no such plain or obvious meaning emerges, it is
 permissible for the court to resort to context and extrinsic
 aids.” Bayly, 118 Hawai
'i at 11, 185 P.3d at 196 (citing HRS 
§§ 1-15(1) and 1-15(2) (1993) (governing the construction of
 ambiguous words and phrases)). Accordingly, we look to the
 context of the word “designate” in the ordinance and the “reason
 and spirit” of ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13).
 
With regard to context, we observe that “designate” is
 
used in section 10-1.2(a)(2), which prohibits “[c]limb[ing] onto
 any tree, except those designated for climbing.” (Emphasis
 added.) It is also used in ROH § 10-1.7, which governs
 “[a]nimals in public parks.” ROH § 10-1.7(b) provides in
 relevant part that 
[t]he director [of parks and recreation] is authorized to
designate areas in public parks for use by persons having
custody and control of dogs on a leash and to designate
public parks for use as off-leash parks for dogs. In
 designating parks as off-leash parks and in designating
parks or areas therein for leashed dogs, the director shall
consider the park’s size, location, and frequency of use by
members of the public, as well as the primary actual or
designed use of each park or area included in the
designation. The director shall post signs that notify the
public of such designation that describe or map the park or
park areas so designated. 
-30­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
(Emphases added.) Because such ordinance requires the director
 
to (1) consider size, location, frequency of use, and original
 design for the park prior to making a designation and (2) inform
 the public of the designation, providing them with adequate
 notice of the location of areas “so designated,” the director’s
 designation appears to be one that is intended to be of a lasting
 and permanent nature. In other words, using a common sense
 approach, a “designation” by the director of a dog park (or, as
 here, a “campground”), although not entirely unalterable, is
 likely unchanged by periodic closures due to maintenance or other
 proffered reasons. 
For example, if the director were to post a sign in
 
designated dog parks stating that the presence of dogs for two
 days each week is prohibited due to the need for maintenance,
 such prohibition would not change the designation of the park as
 a “dog park” -- that is, the park would not lose its designation
 as a “dog park” merely because a temporary restriction on the
 presence of dogs in the park had been imposed. Indeed, once the
 maintenance was finished, the use of the park for dogs would
 resume and would not require a new “designation” or approval from
 the director. 
Similarly, the terms of Hitchcock’s camping permit, 
prohibiting camping on Wednesdays and Thursdays, do not change the “designation” of the beach park as a campground. To the contrary, Kea
'au Beach Park, or at least specific areas therein, 
-31­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
remained “designated as a campground” during those two days and
 
that the beach park (like the dog park merely became temporarily
 unavailable to the public for camping. Indeed, it would be
 nonsensical to conclude that the beach park is “designated as a
 campground” for five days out of the week and not so “designated”
 during the other two days. 
As to the “reason and spirit” of the ordinance, ROH
 
§ 10-1.2(a)(13) is contained in chapter 10, which governs the use
 of public parks. Surrounding provisions in ROH § 10-1.2
 similarly prohibit certain activities in a public park,
 including, but not limited to: (1) willful damage or injury to
 property, ROH § 10-1.2(a)(1); (2) polishing or repairing a car,
 ROH § 10-1.2(a)(11); (3) entering or remaining during the night
 hours that the park is closed, ROH § 10-1.2(12); and (4) building
 or kindling of a fire, other than in a grill or brazier, ROH
 § 10-1.2(a)(4). Given the nature of the surrounding
 prohibitions, section 10-1.2 seems to set forth rules primarily
 designed to protect the safety of park users, as well as preserve
 the integrity of public park areas. Accordingly, the prohibition
 against camping in any park “not designated as a campground” in
 ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13) is a rule designed to promote safety and
 protect public parks and their users. 
Such interpretation is supported by the broad
 
definition of “public park” included in ROH § 10-1.1. The
 ordinance defines public park as “any park, park roadway,
 
-32­* * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
playground, athletic field, beach, beach right-of-way, tennis
 
court, golf course, swimming pool, or other recreation area or
 facility under the control, maintenance[,] and management of the
 department of parks and recreation.” Applying such definition to
 the ordinance at issue, it is reasonable to infer that the
 prohibition of camping in “any park not designated as a
 campground” was enacted to prevent persons from sleeping on park
 roadways, golf courses, tennis courts, and other places that are
 arguably unsafe for persons to occupy overnight and/or for any
 length of time. As a result, it appears that ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13)
 was promulgated to prohibit persons from occupying areas that
 were never intended for use as a campground, i.e., for overnight
 occupancy. 
However, as previously indicated, the evidence adduced 
at trial established that Kea
'au Beach Park was designated as a 
campground and, thus, intended for use as a campground. Indeed, Officer Carino admitted that there are campground areas and restroom facilities at the beach park and testified that the park does not have any “closed hours,” even at night. Hitchcock additionally indicated that the city had been providing Hitchcock permits to camp at the beach park for almost two years. As a result, it would be consistent with the “reason and spirit” of the ordinance, i.e., safety of park users, to interpret the phrase “designated as a campground” as a continuing 
-33­  * * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
classification, even when periodic restrictions are imposed on
 
camping for maintenance purposes. 
Based on the foregoing, we agree with Hitchcock that, 
although Officer Carino’s testimony that permits were not valid on the day that Hitchcock was cited may show that Hitchcock violated the terms of a permit issued to him, it “is not material to the issue . . . whether Kea
'au Beach Park was designated as a 
campground so as to support his conviction for the offense the prosecution elected to charge.”
7 We, therefore, conclude that 
there was insufficient evidence adduced at trial to show that Hitchcock illegally camped “in any park not designated as a campground” because: (1) the evidence at trial established that (a) the beach park was designated as a campground and
 (b) Hitchcock was in the designated camping area on the night he
 was cited; (2) the park’s “designation” as a campground did not
 change on Wednesdays and Thursdays; and (3) the prosecution
 relied solely on the Wednesday/Thursday camping prohibition to
 prove that the beach park was “not designated as campground” on
 the day that Hitchcock was cited. Consequently, we hold that the
 trial court erred in convicting Hitchcock for illegal camping
 pursuant to ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13).
 
7
 As noted supra note 5, there are other provisions within ROH Chapter
 
10, Article 1 that could have been applicable to his conduct.
 
-34­  * * *   FOR PUBLICATION   * * * 
in West’s Hawai' i Reports and the Pacific Reporter 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we reverse the trial court’s
 
April 27, 2009 judgment convicting Hitchcock of illegal camping
 
under ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13).8
 
Karen T. Nakasone,
Deputy Public Defender,
for defendant-appellant
 
James M. Anderson, Deputy
Prosecuting Attorney,
for plaintiff-appellee
 
8
 In light of our reversal of Hitchcock’s conviction, we need not
address Hitchcock’s remaining contentions regarding the “choice of evils”
defense or the constitutionality of ROH § 10-1.2(a)(13).
 
-35­