*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
29988 21-JUL-2011 
11:23 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
MICHAEL RAY, Individually and as Next Friend for ALYSSA RAY,
a minor, and DEBBIE RAY,
Plaintiffs-Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
 
vs.
 
KAPIOLANI MEDICAL SPECIALISTS;
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
 
and
 KAPIOLANI MEDICAL CENTER FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN,
Defendant. 
NO. 29988
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIV.
 NO. 06-1-1150)
 
JULY 21, 2011
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, DUFFY, AND McKENNA, JJ.,
AND CIRCUIT JUDGE WILSON, IN PLACE OF ACOBA, J., RECUSED
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAYAMA, J. 
This appeal stems from an incident where Alyssa Ray 
(“Alyssa”), who has lupus, received treatment from Dr. Kara 
Yamamoto (“Dr. Yamamoto”), an employee of Kapi
'olani Medical 
Specialists (“KMS”). Michael and Debbie Ray brought this action *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court) against
 
KMS for negligent treatment and failure to obtain informed
 consent. The jury found that Dr. Yamamoto’s treatment of Alyssa
 was negligent, but that it was not a legal cause of Alyssa’s
 injuries. The jury also found that Dr. Yamamoto failed to
 properly inform the Rays, and that her failure was a legal cause
 of Alyssa’s injuries. The circuit court granted judgment as a
 matter of law in favor of the Rays on their negligent treatment
 claim, and entered judgment in favor of the Rays for a total of
 $4,525,000. KMS appealed, asserting in part that the circuit
 court erred by granting judgment as a matter of law in favor of
 the Rays on negligent treatment, denying its motion for judgment
 as a matter of law on informed consent, and admitting the
 testimony of Dr. Bram Bernstein (“Dr. Bernstein”) that Hawaii’s
 informed consent law required Dr. Yamamoto to inform the Rays of
 her and the medical community’s experience with the proposed
 treatment. For the following reasons, we hold that: 1) the
 circuit court erred by granting judgment as a matter of law in
 favor of the Rays on their negligent treatment claim, and a new
 trial is required because the negligent treatment and informed
 consent verdicts are irreconcilable; 2) the circuit court did not
 err by denying KMS’ motion for judgment as a matter of law on the
 issue of informed consent; and 3) the circuit court erred by
 admitting Dr. Bernstein’s testimony and failing to adequately
 
2
           
              
              
            
           
            
          
         
           
          
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
cure the error. Therefore, we vacate the circuit court’s
 
judgment and remand for a new trial. In light of this
 conclusion, it is unnecessary to address KMS’ remaining points of
 error and the points of error raised in the Rays’ cross-appeal.
1
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. Factual and Procedural Background
 
In December 2003, the Rays were on vacation in 
Honolulu. Prior to their vacation, Alyssa, who was fourteen years old at the time, had developed rashes, sores, and shaky movements. These symptoms worsened on their vacation, and the Rays took Alyssa to Kapi' olani Medical Center for Women and 
Children (“KMCWC”). An MRI revealed that Alyssa had brain lesions. 
1. Dr. Kara Yamamoto’s treatment
 Dr. Yamamoto was consulted on December 24, 2003,
 
regarding Alyssa’s condition and concluded that Alyssa had severe
 lupus with brain involvement. Lupus is a disease that involves
 the inflammation of any part of the human body. Lupus patients
 
1
 KMS also asserts that the circuit court erred by allowing rebuttal
 
testimony as a sanction. In their cross-appeal, the Rays assert that: 1) the
“court below erred in failing to grant a new trial based on an ambiguous jury
verdict that may have mixed its award for physical pain and suffering with
other forms of compensatory damages, resulting in [a] reduction of the verdict
not authorized by law[;]” 2) the “court below erred when it declined to
 declare the cap imposed under Haw. Rev. Stat. [(HRS)] § 663-8.7
unconstitutional and amend the judgment to reflect the jury’s proper
verdict[;]” and 3) the “court below erred when it declined to award
 prejudgment interest from the date Alyssa first suffered her serious and
debilitating complication (January 2005) until the date of trial.”
 
3
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
with brain involvement have a higher risk of dying.
 
Dr. Yamamoto discussed possible treatments with the
 
Rays and proposed a four-week intravenous pulsing regimen using
 
the medication Solu-Medrol. The plan called for Alyssa to
 receive one gram of Solu-Medrol a day for three consecutive days,
 followed by a maintenance dose of forty milligrams of Prednisone
 on the four off days. She was to repeat this process for four
 weeks. Dr. Yamamoto explained to the Rays that the steroid
 treatment was effective at reducing inflammation. She also
 explained that steroids carried the risk of steroid myopathy, a
 form of muscle weakness. She gave the Rays an informational
 pamphlet indicating that the risks of side effects from steroids
 generally increase with a higher dosage. Dr. Yamamoto did not
 believe that lower doses of steroids would control Alyssa’s
 disease and did not advise the Rays of alternative dosing
 regimens.
 
Alyssa began her first series of pulses on December 25. 
Alyssa’s condition quickly improved, and she was discharged on
 December 29, 2003, with instructions to receive the remaining
 three weeks of pulses as an outpatient. 
Alyssa received the second series of pulses between
 
December 31 through January 2, and Dr. Yamamoto noticed that
 Alyssa’s symptoms had improved greatly, although she still had
 some mouth sores, residual left-sided weakness, and rashes. She
 
4
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
received her third series of pulses between January 8 through
 
January 10, 2004, and several days later began experiencing
 significant muscle weakness. On January 13, 2004, Alyssa saw Dr.
 Yoshio Futatsugi (“Dr. Futatsugi”), who thought the weakness
 could be due to steroids, but could not confirm it. Alyssa saw
 Dr. Yamamoto the next day, and Dr. Yamamoto stated that she
 thought the weakness might be due to the lupus. On January 15,
 2004, Alyssa had an MRI taken that showed she had a new brain
 lesion. Dr. Yamamoto agreed with Alyssa’s mother not to give the
 fourth series of pulses, and Alyssa was readmitted to KMCWC on
 January 17. Shortly thereafter, Alyssa was transported to New
 York Presbyterian Hospital. 
2.	 Alyssa’s condition in New York
 Dr. Thomas Lehman (“Dr. Lehman”) assumed care over
 
Alyssa when she arrived in New York, and after running tests,
 concluded that Alyssa’s muscle weakness was caused by the high
 doses of steroids she received rather than her lupus. Alyssa’s
 condition worsened and she lost muscle strength. Her muscle
 weakness progressed from her hips and shoulders to her hands and
 legs. Alyssa returned home after approximately six months in a
 rehabilitation hospital, and has limited use of her hands and
 feet. 
3.	 Instant lawsuit
 In July 2003, the Rays, individually and as next friend
 
5
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
for Alyssa, filed a complaint alleging negligent treatment and
 
failure to obtain informed consent against KMS and KMCWC.2
 
4. Testimony concerning causation
 With respect to the cause of Alyssa’s injuries, the
 
parties adduced the following relevant testimony. Dr. Yamamoto
 testified that she eventually concluded that the weakness Alyssa
 developed after the third series of pulses was from the steroids
 she administered. 
The court played the video deposition of Dr. Lehman. 
He said he needed to ascertain the cause of Alyssa’s weakness in
 order to effectively treat her. He initially suspected that the
 large amount of steroids that Alyssa received probably caused her
 muscle weakness, because it is well known that steroids can cause
 myopathy while lupus does not result in “diffuse weakness.” 
After running tests, he determined that Alyssa’s weakness was
 caused by the steroids she received at KMS. 
After being discharged from New York Presbyterian
 
Hospital, Dr. Anne Liebling (“Dr. Liebling”) later assumed care
 
of Alyssa at Gaylord Rehabilitation Hospital. When Dr. Liebling
 
first encountered Alyssa on May 7, Alyssa could not breathe on
 
her own, was “profoundly weak,” and was “severely limited in her
 ability to move.” Dr. Liebling ascertained the cause of Alyssa’s
 weakness in order to effectively treat Alyssa and determined that
 
2
 The  claims  against  KMCWC  were  dismissed  with  prejudice.
 
6
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
the steroids Alyssa received at KMS caused her weakness. 
Dr. Liebling also testified that she consulted with a
 
neurologist, Dr. Jonathan Goldstein, who determined that the
 
weakness was not related to her lupus. Alyssa was also treated
 by Dr. Gerstenhaber at Gaylord, and Dr. Gerstenhaber concluded
 that Alyssa was suffering from steroid myopathy. Dr. Liebling
 testified that Dr. Rose Malfa, an attending physician at Gaylord,
 concluded that Alyssa had steroid myopathy. 
At trial, the Rays called Dr. Moris Danon (“Dr. Danon”)
 
as an expert in neurology and muscle pathology. Dr. Danon
 examined Alyssa prior to trial in August. He concluded that
 “it’s fairly obvious that [Alyssa’s] weakness occurred because of
 the steroid administration.” He based his opinion on his
 examination of Alyssa and Alyssa’s medical records. Dr. Danon
 concluded that Alyssa’s muscle weakness was permanent. Dr. Danon
 opined that the nine grams of Solu-Medrol given by Dr. Yamamoto
 caused Alyssa’s acute steroid myopathy to a reasonable degree of
 medical certainty. 
Numerous witnesses testified that lupus was typically
 
treated with steroids, but that there was not a “set protocol”
 for the dose of steroids. Dr. Lehman testified that he had never
 heard of a case of permanent muscle weakness resulting from
 steroid myopathy. 
7
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Dr. Yamamoto testified that she was taught about
 
steroid treatment from Dr. Chester Fink (“Dr. Fink”). Dr.
 
Marilynn Punaro (“Dr. Punaro”) testified that she had worked with
 Dr. Fink and applied the “three pulses” treatment to hundreds of
 patients, and that she had only seen a small number of patients
 develop life-threatening side effects. She testified that, in
 the hundreds of patients she had treated using this method, she
 “never encountered any muscle weakness that [she] thought was
 induced by the treatment[.]” Dr. Punaro also testified about a
 study which used Solu-Medrol more aggressively than Dr. Yamamoto. 
The 213 patients in that study did not suffer acute steroid
 myopathy. Dr. Punaro testified that she had not examined
 Alyssa’s medical records and was not commenting on whether Alyssa
 suffered steroid myopathy. 
In her deposition testimony, which was played for the
 
jury, Dr. Pascual testified that she had not seen any of her
 patients using the three pulse steroid treatment develop
 permanent distal muscle weakness. Dr. Pascual also testified
 that she had not examined Alyssa’s medical records and that she
 was not opining as to what caused Alyssa’s injuries.
 
5. Testimony concerning informed consent
 The Rays conceded that Dr. Yamamoto advised them that
 
steroids can cause myopathy and that Dr. Yamamoto was not
 
8
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
required to warn them of permanent steroid myopathy. Instead,
 
the Rays claimed that Dr. Yamamoto should have advised of lower
 dose options. The following relevant testimony was introduced
 regarding the failure to inform of alternative doses of steroids.
 
Dr. Bernstein testified that he had never seen the
 
treatment plan proposed by Dr. Yamamoto. He testified that there
 were different ways of treating a lupus patient with steroids: 
1) giving the initial three grams of steroids, and then
 “back[ing] off immediately and perhaps put[ting] the patient on a
 small dose of Prednisone or Solu-Medrol daily[;]” 2) giving the
 first three grams, and then giving one gram a week for several
 weeks in a row; and 3) giving three grams in the first week of a
 month, and then repeating once a month; and 4) not using pulses
 at all, but giving regular maintenance doses. He testified that
 these were recognized alternatives because they had been peer
 reviewed and published in textbooks. Dr. Bernstein testified
 that the lower doses of steroids were less risky and that the
 risk of steroids is proportionate to the dose given.
 
Dr. Kurahara, the Chief of Pediatric Rheumatology at
 
KMS, testified that one gram of steroids for three days in a row
 to treat severe lupus is a recognized alternative treatment, and
 that doctors are required to inform patients of alternative
 treatments. 
9
         
       
         
         
         
           
     
        
           
         
          
          
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Dr. Lehman testified that one gram for three days
 
repeated monthly was a different therapy than Dr. Yamamoto’s
 
treatment. He testified that there were a variety of standard
 treatments for lupus, but no universal treatment method. 
Dr. Yamamoto also acknowledged that Dr. Elga Rabinovich
 
testified in her deposition that most pediatric rheumatologists
 in the United States would give three grams the first week,
 followed by one gram in each of the next three weeks. Dr.
 Yamamoto admitted that this method was a reasonable method of
 treatment, which had potentially less risk from steroids. 
6.	 Testimony concerning a physician and medical
community’s experience with a treatment option
 
Dr. Bernstein testified that a physician should tell
 
the patient about the physician and medical community’s lack of
 experience with a treatment option. Defense counsel objected to
 this testimony, but the trial court allowed Dr. Bernstein to
 continue testifying on that subject. Before proceeding, the
 trial court issued the following warning:
 
All right. Ladies and gentlemen before Dr. Bernstein
continues testifying, I have some directions for you.
And as you’ve been told from the beginning of this
trial, when I say something you got to follow it.
You’re going to be getting an instruction from me at
the end of this case on informed consent because it’s one of
 
the claims of the plaintiffs here.
You’re going to be getting a specific instruction on
what informed consent is. It’s going to have a number of
specific elements as to what a doctor specifically has to
tell a patient in order to fulfill the doctrine of informed
consent in Hawaii, in this jurisdiction, and that is the law
that you’re going to have to follow as the jury in this
 case.
 
10
        
        
       
           
    
         
           
 
          
          
         
            
 
            
  
       
          
     
          
       
          
         
         
      
          
         
        
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
The reason I’m instructing you now specifically is
because Dr. Bernstein, in response to some of [plaintiff
counsel]’s questions now, is talking about informed consent,
and in his opinion what it requires, what he would tell the
patient, et cetera, et cetera.
I’m going to allow him to answer those questions for
the most part because he has been qualified as a doctor in
this area.
 
It’s going to be your job to take his testimony, along
with the testimony of all the other witnesses that you hear,
that I admit into evidence, and the documents, et cetera,
and put that together with the law I give you and follow the
law, okay.
So I want that really clear to you, and I think it is
at this point.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Dr. Bernstein testified that “a very important part of
 
informed consent is for the doctor to tell the patient or the
 
parents what his or her experience has been with that form of
 treatment.” The court denied KMS’ motion for mistrial, or in the
 alternative, to strike the testimony. 
The Rays testified that they would not have consented
 
to Dr. Yamamoto’s treatment had they known of Dr. Yamamoto and
 the medical community’s lack of experience with her treatment
 procedure. 
Dr. Danon testified that:
 
[Plaintiff’s counsel]: All right, doctor, one last
 
question for you. I’d like you to assume that Dr.
Bernstein, pediatric rheumatologist, gave his opinion,
testified in court that it was a deviation from standard of
 care that Dr. Yamamoto did not provide sufficient
information to the parents to allow them to make an informed
consent to the protocol, the nine grams of Solu-Medrol, and
that had, assume further, that had they been so informed
they would not have agreed to that .
Now tell me if you have an opinion to a reasonable
degree of medical certainty whether or not that failure to
provide informed consent was a substantial factor in causing
the steroid myopathy, the resulting condition Alyssa has?
 
11
          
         
           
      
      
  
       
    
       
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
A. If it’s assumed by Dr. Bernstein, that’s a -­
Q. No, I’m asking you to assume. You have to
 
assume that. You assume that. Was it a substantial factor
 
in causing the myopathy and resulting condition?
A. Well, the steroids were substantial reason to
cause the myopathy .
Q. All right. So is the answer yes?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Why do you say that?
 
A. Because of -- there’s no other evidence that
 
anything else caused the myopathy.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
The circuit court later precluded the Rays from arguing
 
that Dr. Yamamoto did not properly inform them by failing to
 
disclose her experience with the treatment. The circuit court
 struck Dr. Bernstein and the Rays’ testimony regarding Dr.
 Yamamoto and the medical community’s experience with Dr.
 Yamamoto’s treatment. The circuit court refused to strike Dr.
 Danon’s testimony because the question encompassed all of
 plaintiffs’ theories about informed consent and the question did
 not parse out Dr. Yamamoto’s personal experience with the
 protocol. The circuit court provided the following instruction
 prior to closing arguments:
 
You  have  heard  testimony  on  the  issue  of  informed
consent  from  the  plaintiffs’  expert  witness,  Dr.  Bram
Bernstein,  that  in  his  opinion,  among  other  things,  Dr.  Kara
Yamamoto  was  required  to  inform  Alyssa  Ray’s  parents
specifically  about  both  the  extent  of  her  personal
experience  and  of  the  medical  community  in  general  with  the
steroid  treatment  protocol  which  she  used  to  treat  Alyssa  in
this  case.   This  specific  testimony  by  Dr.  Bernstein  is
stricken  from  the  record  and  you  are  hereby  instructed  to
disregard  it  on  the  issue  of  informed  consent.
Likewise,  any  testimony  from  Michael  and  Debra  Ray  in
which  they  stated  that  if  informed  by  Dr.  Yamamoto
specifically  about  the  extent  of  her  personal  experience  and
of  the  medical  community  in  general  with  the  subject  steroid
treatment  protocol,  they  would  not  have  consented  to  its  use
 
12
           
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
in treating Alyssa is stricken from the record and you are
hereby instructed to disregard it on the issue of informed
consent.
 
During closing arguments, defense counsel referred to
 
the above instruction. 
7.	 Verdict and renewed motion for judgment as a matter of
law
 
On February 23, 2009, the jury returned its special
 
verdict. The jury found that Dr. Yamamoto was negligent in her
 treatment of Alyssa, but that her negligence was not a legal
 cause of the plaintiffs’ injuries. The jury also found that Dr.
 Yamamoto failed to properly inform the Rays, and that her failure
 to do so was a legal cause of the plaintiffs’ injuries. The Rays
 moved for judgment as a matter of law on the issue of causation
 on their negligent treatment claim, and the circuit court granted
 the motion on the grounds that: 1) given the evidence adduced at
 trial, a reasonable juror could not have answered this question
 “no;” and 2) the verdict was irreconcilable. The jury awarded
 the Rays a total of $6,150,000 in damages. 
8.	 Judgment, post-judgment motions, amended judgment, and
appeal
 
On March 25, 2009, the trial court entered its
 
judgment, sua sponte awarding the Rays $4,525,000 to reflect the
 adjustment of Alyssa’s pain and suffering damages from $2 million
 to $375,000 “in accordance with” HRS § 663-8.7 (1993). The court
 denied KMS’ motion for a new trial and renewed motion for
 
13
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
judgment as a matter of law. On April 6, 2009, the Rays filed
 
three motions: 1) a motion to amend the circuit court’s judgment
 claiming that HRS § 663-8.7 is unconstitutional, 2) a motion for
 a new trial on damages, and 3) a motion to amend the judgment to
 add prejudgment interest. The circuit court denied these motions
 following a hearing on July 7, 2009. On July 17, 2009, the
 circuit court entered an amended judgment awarding the Rays costs
 against KMS and dismissing KMCWC from the case. KMS subsequently
 appealed from the judgment, the denial of KMS’ post-judgment
 motions, the award of costs, and the amended judgment. The Rays
 
cross-appealed from the denial of their post-judgment motions.
 
The Rays applied for a mandatory and discretionary
 
transfer from the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) to this
 
court of their cross-appeal from the circuit court’s March 25,
 2009, judgment on their complaint for medical malpractice. On
 April 19, 2010, this court entered an order accepting the Rays’
 application for transfer pursuant to HRS § 602-58(b)(1) (Supp.
 2010). Oral argument was held on October 21, 2010.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Judgment As a Matter Of Law
 
A trial court’s ruling on a motion for judgment as a 
matter of law is reviewed de novo. Miyamoto v. Lum, 104 Hawai' i 
1, 6-7, 84 P.3d 509, 514-15 (2004) (citing In re Estate of 
14
   
  
       
         
         
          
      
         
          
          
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Herbert, 90 Hawai' i 443, 454, 979 P.2d 39, 50 (1999)). “A 
[motion for judgment as a matter of law] may be granted only when
 
after disregarding conflicting evidence, giving to the non-moving
 party’s evidence all the value to which it is legally entitled,
 and indulging every legitimate inference which may be drawn from
 the evidence in the non-moving party’s favor, it can be said that
 there is no evidence to support a jury verdict in his or her
 
favor.” Id. at 7, 84 P.3d at 515 (block quote formatted omitted)
 
(quoting Tabieros v. Clark Equipment Co., 85 Hawai' i 336, 350, 
944 P.2d 1279, 1293 (1997).
 
B. Questions of Law
 
“Questions of law are reviewed de novo under the 
right/wrong standard.” Gump v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 93 Hawai' i 
417, 420, 5 P.3d 407, 410 (2000) (quoting Roes v. FHP, Inc., 91 
Hawai'i 470, 473, 985 P.2d 661, 664 (1999)). 
C. Evidentiary Errors
 
This court has adhered to the following standard to
 
determine whether a trial court has erred in admitting evidence:
 
As a general rule, this court reviews evidentiary
rulings for abuse of discretion. Kealoha v. County of 
Hawai'i, 74 Haw. 308, 319, 844 P.2d 670, 676 (1993).
However, when there can only be one correct answer to the
admissibility question, or when reviewing questions ofrelevance under HRE Rules 401 and 402, this court appliesthe right/wrong standard of review. Id. at 319, 844 P.2d at
676; State v. White , 92 Hawai 'i 192, 204-05, 990 P.2d 90, 
102-03 (1999). 
Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai' i 92, 104, 
15
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008).
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 The Circuit Court Erred By Granting Judgment As a Matter Of
Law On the Rays’ Negligent Treatment Claim.
 
KMS asserts that the circuit court erred in granting
 
judgment as a matter of law to the Rays because: 1) “evidence
 
existed from which the jury could have concluded that Alyssa’s
 myopathy was not caused by Dr. Yamamoto’s steroid treatment, but
 by Alyssa’s pre-existing lupus or some other undetermined
 cause[;]” and 2) “the jury could have found that although
 prescribing a four-week steroid treatment was negligent, the
 three-week treatment actually administered was not.” In
 response, the Rays assert that judgment as a matter of law was
 appropriate because: 1) the jury’s verdict was not supported by
 substantial evidence; and 2) the jury’s verdict was
 irreconcilable. We hold that the circuit court wrongly granted
 judgment as a matter of law in favor of the Rays on negligent
 treatment. Additionally, we hold that the jury’s verdict is
 irreconcilable because the jury found that Dr. Yamamoto’s
 treatment did not cause Alyssa’s injuries in the negligence
 claim, but it also found that Dr. Yamamoto’s failure to properly
 inform the Rays was a legal cause of Alyssa’s injuries. The
 verdict is irreconcilable under the facts of this case because,
 in both interrogatories, the jury was called upon to decide
 
16
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
whether the second and third pulses of steroids caused Alyssa’s
 
injuries and gave different responses. Therefore, we remand this
 case for a new trial.
 
1.	 There is substantial evidence supporting the jury’s
verdict of no causation. 
KMS asserts that there was substantial evidence 
supporting the jury’s verdict of no causation. This court reviews the trial court’s granting of a renewed motion for judgment as a matter of law de novo. Miyamoto, 104 Hawai' i at 
6-7, 84 P.3d at 514-15. “A [motion for judgment as a matter of law] may be granted only when after disregarding conflicting evidence, giving to the non-moving party’s evidence all the value to which it is legally entitled, and indulging every legitimate inference which may be drawn from the evidence in the non-moving party’s favor, it can be said that there is no evidence to support a jury verdict in his or her favor.” Id. at 7, 84 P.3d 
at 515 (quoting Tabieros, 85 Hawai' i at 350, 944 P.2d at 1293). 
“[V]erdicts based on conflicting evidence will not be set aside where there is substantial evidence to support the jury’s findings.” Richardson v. Sport Shinko (Waikiki Corp.), 76 
Hawai'i 494, 502, 880 P.2d 169, 177 (1994) (internal quotation 
marks omitted) (quoting Tsugawa v. Reinartz, 56 Haw. 67, 71, 527 P.2d 1278, 1282 (1974)). Substantial evidence is “credible
 evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to
 
17
  
         
           
           
          
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
enable a [person] of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.” 
Id. (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting In re Doe, Born on January 5, 1976, 76 Hawai' i 85, 93, 869 P.2d 1304, 1312 
(1994)). Thus, the dispositive question on appeal is whether substantial evidence supports KMS’ assertion that Dr. Yamamoto’s treatment did not cause Alyssa’s injuries. The Rays bore the burden of proving that Alyssa’s injuries resulted from Dr. Yamamoto’s treatment. Miyamoto, 104 Hawai' i at 15, 84 P.3d at 
523 (“It is well-settled that, in any negligence action, the plaintiff - not the defendant - has the burden of proving the requisite elements, including legal causation.”). 
Substantial evidence supported the jury’s verdict. For
 
instance, Dr. Futatsugi’s deposition testimony was admitted into
 evidence, and he testified that he could not confirm whether the
 steroids administered by Dr. Yamamoto caused Alyssa’s weakness.
3
 
Dr. Yamamoto testified that shortly after her appointment with
 Dr. Futatsugi, she could not confirm whether her steroids caused
 Alyssa’s weakness. Although Dr. Yamamoto testified that she
 concluded that Alyssa’s weakness was due to the steroids she
 administered, and that steroids were the “highest level of
 
3
 The Rays assert that Dr. Futatsugi eventually came to the
 
conclusion that steroids caused Alyssa’s muscle weakness. The Rays cite to
Dr. Yamamoto’s summary of her discussions with Dr. Futatsugi to support this
conclusion. This argument is not persuasive because Dr. Futatsugi testified
that he was unsure of whether steroids caused Alyssa’s muscle weakness.
 
18
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
suspicion” for Alyssa’s weakness, she also testified that at
 
various points she could not confirm the cause of Alyssa’s muscle
 weakness. Dr. Pascual and Dr. Punaro testified that they
 employed a similar treatment to the one performed by Dr. Yamamoto
 and it had not caused permanent steroid myopathy. Although they
 testified that they were not opining as to whether Alyssa
 suffered from steroid myopathy, their testimony is some evidence
 that Alyssa’s injuries were not caused by Dr. Yamamoto’s
 treatment. Other witnesses also testified that they had not
 heard of permanent muscle weakness as a result of steroid
 myopathy and that it had not been reported in medical literature. 
The evidence adduced by KMS may not be convincing, but a
 reasonable juror could have inferred that the steroids that Dr.
 Yamamoto administered did not cause Alyssa’s injuries.
 
Furthermore, the Rays had the burden of proving that
 
Alyssa’s injuries were caused by Dr. Yamamoto’s negligent
 treatment. Id. Although the Rays produced testimony from Dr.
 
Danon that Dr. Yamamoto’s treatment caused Alyssa’s injuries,
 expert “testimony is not conclusive and like any testimony, the
 jury may accept or reject it.” Bachran v. Morishige, 52 Haw. 61,
 
67, 469 P.2d 808, 812 (1970). The jury was also instructed that
 the plaintiffs were required to prove causation by expert
 testimony, and that they could reject expert testimony in whole
 
19
           
            
          
           
            
          
             
           
           
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
or in part. In light of the evidence noted above, the jury
 
reasonably could have chosen not to believe Dr. Danon and the
 plaintiffs’ witnesses.
4 Thus, we reverse the circuit court’s
 
grant of judgment as a matter of law because KMS produced
 substantial evidence such that a reasonable juror could have
 concluded that Alyssa’s injuries were not caused by Dr.
 Yamamoto’s treatment.
 
2.	 The verdict is irreconcilable, and we therefore remand
the case for a new trial.
 
The circuit court also granted judgment as a matter of
 
law because it determined that the jury’s verdict was
 irreconcilable. KMS asserts that the trial court erroneously
 granted judgment as a matter of law because: 1) the verdict was
 not irreconcilable; and 2) even if it was, the proper remedy was
 a new trial. In response, the Rays assert that the circuit court
 did not err in granting judgment as a matter of law because the
 verdict was irreconcilably inconsistent. We hold that: 1) the
 verdict is irreconcilable because the jury found that Dr.
 Yamamoto’s treatment did not cause Alyssa’s injuries, but reached
 
4
 The Rays also assert that KMS failed to produce expert testimony
 
about an alternative cause for Alyssa’s weakness. The Rays cite to cases
holding that defendants attempting to prove an alternative cause of the
plaintiff’s injury must adduce expert testimony. See Stinson v. England , 633
N.E.2d 532, 538 (Ohio 1994) (holding that a defendant seeking to prove an
alternative cause of the plaintiff’s injury must “adduce expert testimony of
its probable nature”); Smith v. German , 253 A.2d 107, 109 (Pa. 1969). The
 
Rays’ argument misses the point because KMS did not attempt to specifically
attribute Alyssa’s injury to an alternative cause. Instead, KMS raised doubt
about whether Dr. Yamamoto’s treatment caused Alyssa’s injuries.
 
20
  
         
            
           
          
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
the opposite conclusion on informed consent; and 2) the proper
 
remedy is to remand for a new trial.
 
KMS asserts that the verdict is not inconsistent
 
because “the jury may have concluded that the steroid treatment
 caused the injury, but that the particular aspect of Dr.
 Yamamoto’s treatment that was negligent (her decision to
 prescribe steroids for four weeks rather than three) was not the
 legal cause of that injury because the pulses were discontinued
 after the third week.” In response, the Rays assert that: 1)
 KMS waived this argument because it did not raise it before the
 trial court; 2) “the jury instructions given would not have
 supported a finding of negligence based on something Dr. Yamamoto
 planned but did not do[;]” and 3) the Rays “never argued, and the
 jury was never asked to consider, whether Dr. Yamamoto was
 
negligent for planning to administer four pulses.”
5
 
“A conflict in the answers to questions in a special
 
verdict does not automatically warrant a new trial; a new trial
 
will be ordered only if the conflict is irreconcilable.” Dunbar
 
v. Thompson, 79 Hawai' i 306, 312, 901 P.2d 1285, 1291 (App. 1995) 
(internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Kalilikane v. 
5
 The Rays raise these arguments when asserting that the jury’s
 
finding of negligence was based on Dr. Yamamoto’s failure to reassess the need
for steroids after she administered the first pulse. We address these
 arguments in the context of whether the jury’s verdict is irreconcilable
because they are also relevant to that analysis.
 
21
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
McCravey, 69 Haw. 145, 152, 737 P.2d 862, 867 (1987)). “In 
determining whether an irreconcilable conflict exists between answers to special verdict questions, the answers ‘are to be construed in the context of the surrounding circumstances and in connection with the pleadings, instructions, and issues submitted.’” Id. (quoting 9A C. Wright and A. Miller, Federal 
Practice and Procedure: Civil 2d § 2510, at 203 (1995)). “The theory, however, must be supported by the trial court’s instructions to the jury.” Carr v. Strode, 79 Hawai' i 475, 489, 
904 P.2d 489, 503 (1995) (citing Toner v. Lederle Laboratories, 828 F.2d 510, 512 (9th Cir. 1987)). 
First, KMS asserts that the verdict is not 
irreconcilable because the jury was analyzing distinct causation issues. This argument is not persuasive because both negligent treatment and informed consent require a finding that the treatment was a substantial factor in bringing about the plaintiff’s injuries. Barcai v. Betwee, 98 Hawai' i 470, 483, 50 
P.3d 946, 959 (2002) (holding that a plaintiff in an informed consent action must prove that “the physician’s treatment was a substantial factor in bringing about the patient’s injury”). At trial, the Rays asserted that Dr. Yamamoto negligently treated Alyssa by providing the second and third pulses. The negligent treatment and informed consent verdicts are irreconcilable 
22
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
because the jury found that Dr. Yamamoto’s treatment did not
 
cause Alyssa’s injuries, but reached the opposite conclusion on
 informed consent.
 
KMS now asserts that the verdict is not irreconcilable 
because Dr. Yamamoto’s prescription of the fourth pulse could have constituted her negligent treatment, and the fourth pulse did not cause Alyssa’s injuries. KMS waived this argument. KMS asserts that in “the trial court, [it] argued that if prescribing the four weeks was negligent, ‘that negligence could not have been a legal cause of Alyssa’s injuries’ and ‘[t]his fact could explain the jury’s no-causation finding.’” However, KMS made this argument in its reply brief in its motion for judgment as a matter of law on the grounds that Dr. Yamamoto’s treatment was not negligent as a matter of law. KMS never argued its interpretation of the jury’s verdict when challenging the circuit court’s grant of judgment as a matter of law in favor of the Rays on the issue of causation. KMS’ argument, which was made in a different context, did not alert the circuit court that it was asserting that the circuit court erred by granting judgment as a matter of law based on its newfound interpretation of the jury’s verdict. See Kawamata Farms, Inc. v. United Agri Products, 86 
Hawai'i 214, 248, 948 P.2d 1055, 1089 (1997) (“It is unfair to 
the trial court to reverse on a ground that no one even suggested 
23
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
might be error.”) (quoting Ellis v. State, 821 S.W.2d 56, 57
 
(Ark. Ct. App. 1991)); see also Child Support Enforcement Agency
 v. Doe, 109 Hawai' i 240, 246, 125 P.3d 461, 467 (2005); Scallen 
v. Comm’r of Internal Revenue, 877 F.2d 1364, 1375 (8th Cir.
 1989) (describing the purpose of the waiver rule as “to enforce
 the policy that requires litigants to inform the trial court
 promptly of any possible errors that it may have made so that it
 may have an opportunity to correct them.”). Therefore, the
 jury’s verdict is irreconcilable, because KMS waived the theory
 under which it attempts to reconcile the jury’s verdict.
 
Second, KMS asserts that the proper remedy for an 
irreconcilable verdict is to grant a new trial. This argument is persuasive because a new trial is generally the remedy for an irreconcilable verdict. See Carr, 79 Hawai' i at 489, 904 P.2d at 
503 (“A conflict in the jury’s answers to questions in a special verdict will warrant a new trial only if those answers are irreconcilably inconsistent, and the verdict will not be disturbed if the answers can be reconciled under any theory.”) (emphasis added); Charles A. Wright & Authur R. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure § 2510 at 166-71 (2008) (“If the jury’s answers are inconsistent with each other even when the presiding judge views them in the most generous way to avoid such a conclusion, a new trial under Rule 59(a) ordinarily is the proper 
24
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
pathway for the trial judge to follow and may be the required
 
course, as numerous federal district courts and courts of appeal
 have concluded.”).
 
The Rays assert that judgment as a matter of law is the
 
proper remedy because the jury’s finding of no causation was not
 supported by substantial evidence. As discussed above, this
 argument is not persuasive because the jury’s no causation
 finding was supported by substantial evidence.
 
Finally, the Rays assert that KMS waived its objection
 
to the inconsistency in the jury’s verdict by failing to object
 before the jury was excused. (Citing Kosmynka v. Polaris Indus.,
 Inc., 462 F.3d 74, 83 (2d Cir. 2006) (“It is well established
 that a party waives its objection to any inconsistency in a jury
 verdict if it fails to object to the verdict prior to the
 excusing of the jury.”)) The Rays rely on cases holding that an
 objecting party cannot raise the irreconcilability of the verdict
 as a ground for a new trial after the jury has been dismissed. 
Coralluzzo v. Education Mgmt. Corp., 86 F.3d 185, 186 (11th Cir.
 1996) (“To allow a new trial after the objecting party failed to
 seek a proper remedy at the only time possible [i.e., before the
 jury is discharged] would undermine the incentives for efficient
 trial procedure and would allow the possible misuse of Rule 49
 procedures . . . by parties anxious to implant a ground for
 
25
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
appeal should the jury’s opinion prove distasteful to them.”)
 
(quoting Skillin v. Kimball, 643 F.2d 19, 20 (1st Cir. 1981)). 
This argument is not persuasive because the circuit court raised
 the irreconcilability of the verdict sua sponte and granted
 judgment as a matter of law in favor of the Rays on that ground. 
KMS did not have a duty to argue for a new trial based on the
 irreconcilability of the jury’s verdict before the jury was
 dismissed because it was not seeking a new trial on that ground
 and the circuit court raised the issue sua sponte. Therefore, we
 hold that the circuit court erred by granting judgment as a
 matter of law in favor of the Rays, and remand the case for a new
 trial because the jury’s verdict is irreconcilable.
 
B.	 The Circuit Court Did Not Err By Denying KMS’ Motion For
Judgment As a Matter Of Law On Informed Consent.
 
During and after trial, KMS moved for judgment as a 
matter of law on the Rays’ informed consent claim asserting 
Hawai'i case law requires a plaintiff in an informed consent case 
to show that he or she was not informed of a risk of injury that in fact occurred. Because the Rays admitted that Alyssa was informed of steroid myopathy, KMS asserted that it was entitled to judgment as a matter of law. The trial court denied these motions, and concluded that “there may very well be a disconnection legal [sic] and analytically between what the cases have told us so far about this, the elements are, and what the 
26
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
statute provides for.” The circuit court denied the motions
 
because HRS § 671-3 (Supp. 2009) requires the physician to inform
 patients of recognized alternatives. 
On appeal, KMS asserts that it is entitled to judgment
 
as a matter of law on the Rays’ informed consent claim because: 
1) Dr. Yamamoto disclosed the possibility of the injury that
 Alyssa suffered; and 2) Dr. Yamamoto’s decision not to inform the
 Rays of a different dosage of the same medication is not a
 “recognized alternative treatment or procedure” under HRS § 671­3(b)(4). In response, the Rays assert that: 1) a plaintiff can
 maintain an informed consent action for failure to disclose an
 alternative treatment even if the physician disclosed the risk of
 the injury that actually occurred; 2) KMS waived its argument
 that a different dose was not an alternative treatment; and 3)
 the administration of fewer pulses of steroids was an alternative
 treatment. KMS’ arguments are not persuasive and we therefore
 affirm the circuit court’s denial of its motions for judgment as
 a matter of law.
 
1.	 Hawai'i courts have not explicitly required
plaintiffs claiming the failure to disclose an
alternative treatment to prove that they were injuredby a risk that was not disclosed to them. 
KMS correctly notes that Dr. Yamamoto informed the Rays
 
of the risk of steroid myopathy, and that the Rays claimed that
 Alyssa eventually suffered from steroid myopathy. KMS asserts
 
27
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
that the following language from Hawai' i cases requires granting 
KMS judgment as a matter of law:
 
Claims  for  negligent  failure  to  obtain  informed
consent  typically  arise  when  a  plaintiff  patient  alleges
that  the  defendant  physician  failed  to  warn  the  patient  of  a
particular  risk  associated  with  the  procedure  and  the
particular  risk  ultimately  occurred.   To  establish  a  claim
 
of  negligent  failure  to  obtain  informed  consent  under
Hawai'i  law,  the  plaintiff  must  demonstrate  that:   (1)  the
physician  owed  a  duty  to  disclose  the  risk  of  one  or  more  of
the  collateral  injuries  that  the  patient  suffered;  (2)  the
physician  breached  that  duty;  (3)  the  patient  suffered
injury;  (4)  the  physician’s  breach  of  duty  was  a  cause  of
the  patient’s  injury  in  that  (a)  the  physician’s  treatment
was  a  substantial  factor  in  bringing  about  the  patient's
injury  and  (b)  a  reasonable  person  in  the  plaintiff
patient’s  position  would  not  have  consented  to  the  treatment
that  led  to  the  injuries  had  the  plaintiff  patient  been
properly  informed;  and  (5)  no  other  cause  is  a  superseding
cause  of  the  patient’s  injury.
 
Barcai v. Betwee, 98 Hawai' i 470, 483-84, 50 P.3d 946, 959-60 
(2002) (emphasis added) (citing Bernard v. Char, 79 Hawai' i 362, 
365, 371, 903 P.2d 667, 670, 676 (1995)).
 
HRS § 671-3(b) requires physicians to inform patients
 
of the “recognized alternative treatments or procedures,
 
including the option of not providing these treatments or
 procedures[,]” the “recognized material risks of serious
 complications or mortality associated with” those procedures, and
 the “recognized benefits of the recognized alternative treatments
 or procedures.” HRS § 671-3(b)(4)-(6). Hawai' i courts have also 
concluded that an element of informed consent is providing
 information about “recognized possible alternative forms of
 treatment.” Barcai, 98 Hawai' i at 483, 50 P.3d at 959 (citing 
28
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
HRS § 671-3); Keomaka v. Zakaib, 8 Haw. App. 518, 524, 811 P.2d
 
478, 482-83 (App. 1991) (stating that a physician is required to
 inform the patient of the items in HRS § 671-3(b)).
 
As the circuit court observed, although the general 
language in Hawai' i case law supports KMS’ argument, KMS has not 
shown that Hawai' i courts have directly held that plaintiffs 
claiming the failure to disclose an alternative treatment are required to show that they suffered an injury that the physician failed to disclose. For instance, in Barcai, this court observed that claims “for negligent failure to obtain informed consent typically arise when a plaintiff patient alleges that the defendant physician failed to warn the patient of a particular risk associated with the procedure and the particular risk ultimately occurred.” Barcai, 98 Hawai' i at 483, 50 P.3d at 959 
(emphasis added). 
KMS asserts that Keomaka v. Zakaib is a case involving
 
the failure to disclose an alternative treatment where the ICA
 held that plaintiffs are required to prove that they suffered an
 injury not disclosed to them. 8 Haw. App. at 524-25, 811 P.2d at
 483. This argument is not persuasive because Keomaka did not
 
directly confront the issue of whether a plaintiff claiming a
 failure to properly inform of alternative treatments must also
 prove that she “would not have undergone the treatment had he
 
29
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
known of the risk of harm that in fact occurred.” See id. at 
527, 811 P.2d at 484. Although the court cited that rule, it did 
not hold that a different causation standard does not apply to alternative treatment claims. Thus, Hawai' i courts have not 
required plaintiffs claiming the failure to disclose an alternative treatment to prove that they were injured by a risk that was not disclosed to them. 
KMS’ interpretation of Hawaii’s informed consent law is 
incorrect for three reasons. First, this court has interpreted HRS § 671-3(b) as supplying the standard for a physician’s duty to disclose information to the patient. Barcai, 98 Hawai' i at 
483, 50 P.3d at 959 (noting that the elements of informed consent commonly consist of informing the patient about recognized possible alternative forms of treatment, including non-treatment); Keomaka, 8 Haw. App. at 524, 811 P.2d at 483; Ditto v. McCurdy, 86 Hawai' i 84, 90, 947 P.2d 952, 958 (1997) 
(“It is well established that the doctrine of informed consent imposes an affirmative duty upon physicians or surgeons to fully disclose to a patient ‘the types of risks and alternatives’ to a proposed treatment or surgery.”). Because this court has interpreted HRS § 671-3(b) as requiring a physician to disclose an alternative treatment to a patient, requiring a plaintiff to prove that she suffered an injury that the physician failed to 
30
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
disclose conflicts with Hawaii’s informed consent statute.
 
Second, other courts have held that an informed consent
 
action for failure to properly inform of alternative treatments
 
requires a plaintiff to “show causation by establishing that a
 ‘prudent person in the patient’s position would have decided
 differently if adequately informed.’” Caputa v. Antiles, 686
 
A.2d 356, 363 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 1996) (internal
 quotation marks omitted) (quoting Largey v. Rothman, 540 A.2d
 504, 510 (N.J. 1988)). This standard more fully comports with
 Hawaii’s case law because it allows a plaintiff to prove that the
 physician’s failure to inform of an alternative treatment caused
 the injury.
 
Third, KMS asserts that the legislative history of HRS
 
§ 671-3(b) indicates that the purpose of enacting the statute was
 to lessen physicians’ liability and decrease medical malpractice
 insurance premiums. (Citing Keomaka, 8 Haw. App. at 528, 811
 P.2d at 484-85.) The general purpose of HRS § 671-3 does not
 override this court’s interpretation of that statute as supplying
 the standard for informed consent. Furthermore, the report KMS
 refers to in Keomaka states that even “if the patient actually
 does consent to the particular procedure or operation, liability
 may be predicted on the basis that he was not made fully aware of
 the risks involved or the alternatives available.” Hse. Stand.
 
31
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Comm. Rep. No. 417-76, in 1976 House Journal, at 1459 (emphasis
 
added). This language undermines KMS’ interpretation by
 indicating that the failure to disclose an alternative treatment
 gives rise to a cause of action for failure to provide informed
 consent.
 
KMS also asserts that the legislature failed to respond 
to this court’s interpretation of HRS § 671-3. It observes that when “the legislature fails to act in response to our statutory interpretation, the consequence is that the statutory interpretation of the court must be considered to have the tacit approval of the legislature and the effect of legislation.” State v. Dannenberg, 74 Haw. 75, 83, 837 P.2d 776, 780 (1992), superceded by statute on other grounds as stated in, State v. Klie, 116 Hawai' i 519, 174 P.3d 358 (2007). This argument is not 
persuasive because this court has never established the interpretation of HRS § 671-3 urged by KMS. Therefore, the circuit court did not err by denying KMS’ motion for judgment as a matter of law on the Rays’ informed consent claim. 
2.	 An alternative dosage of the same medication can be a
“recognized alternative treatment” under HRS § 671­3(b)(4).
 
KMS asserts that “a different dose option for the same
 
medication that was actually administered is not an alternative
 treatment or procedure that must be disclosed to a patient under
 
32
            
             *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
HRS section 671-3(b)(4).” In response, the Rays assert that: 1)
 
KMS waived this argument; and 2) administering fewer pulses to
 treat lupus was an alternative treatment.
6 We agree with the
 
Rays.
 
First, the Rays assert that KMS waived this argument
 
because it was not raised in any of its three motions for
 judgment as a matter of law. KMS responds that it raised this
 argument in its reply brief in support of its renewed motion for
 judgment as a matter of law. Because KMS did not raise this
 argument until its reply brief, it has waived it. See Abrams v.
 
Ciba Specialty Chemicals Corp., 663 F. Supp.2d 1220, 1232 n.16
 (S.D. Ala. 2009) (“[N]ew arguments are impermissible in reply
 briefs.”).
 
Second, even assuming KMS properly preserved this 
argument, alternative doses of the same medication can constitute “recognized alternative treatments.” Whether a different dose of the same medication can constitute an alternative treatment is an issue of first impression in this jurisdiction. Hawai' i courts 
have adopted the patient-oriented standard for determining whether particular information must be disclosed to a patient. This court has held that the “dispositive inquiry regarding the 
6
 The Rays also assert that KMS invited the error. It is
 
unnecessary to reach this issue in light of our conclusion that KMS has waived
it.
 
33
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
physician’s duty to disclose in an informed consent case, 
therefore, is not what the physician believes his or her patient needs to hear in order for the patient to make an informed and intelligent decision; the focus should be on what a reasonable person objectively needs to hear from his or her physician to allow the patient to make an informed and intelligent decision regarding proposed medical treatment.” Carr v. Strode, 79 
Hawai'i 475, 485-86, 904 P.2d 489, 499-500 (1995). 
Under the foregoing standard, an alternative dosage can
 
constitute a “recognized alternative treatment” within the
 meaning of HRS § 671-3(b)(4). If a reasonable patient would need
 to hear the information to make an informed decision, the
 physician is required to disclose that information. In the
 instant case, the plaintiffs adduced evidence that recognized
 alternative dosing regimens had a lower risk of steroid myopathy. 
Thus, the Rays adduced evidence that a reasonable person would
 need to hear about the different recognized pulsing methods to
 make an informed decision.
 
KMS asserts that “requiring a physician to disclose
 
such information would not only dramatically expand the
 physician’s liability (because a patient could always claim, in
 hindsight, that the physician should have disclosed the option of
 receiving a lower dose), it would likely overwhelm the patient
 
34
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
and interfere with the patient’s ability to make an informed and 
intelligent decision about his or her healthcare.” KMS’ concerns are overstated. Section 671-3(b)(4) requires a physician to inform a patient of “recognized alternative treatments or procedures.” (Emphasis added.) This court has held that “expert testimony will ordinarily be required to establish the ‘materiality’ of the risks, i.e., ‘the nature of risks inherent in a particular treatment, the probabilities of therapeutic success, the frequency of the occurrence of particular risks, and the nature of available alternatives to treatment.’” Barcai, 98 
Hawai'i at 484, 50 P.3d at 960 (quoting Carr, 79 Hawai' i at 486, 
904 P.2d at 500). Thus, healthcare providers will not be overwhelmed by our holding because the plaintiff will need to show that the medical community recognizes the different dosage as an alternative treatment. Therefore, we hold that the circuit court properly denied KMS’ motion for judgment as a matter of law. 
C.	 The Circuit Court Erred By Admitting Dr. Bernstein’s
Testimony and the Error Was Not Cured By the Circuit Court’s
Instructions To the Jury.
 
KMS asserts that the circuit court erroneously allowed
 
the plaintiffs’ standard of care expert, Dr. Bernstein, to
 
testify that Dr. Yamamoto owed a duty to disclose her and the
 medical community’s experience with the treatment, and that she
 
35
           
          
            
         
    
          
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
failed to meet that obligation.7 We hold that the circuit court
 
erred by admitting Dr. Bernstein’s testimony regarding Dr.
 
8
Yamamoto’s experience with the treatment,  and that its error was
not cured by its instructions to the jury.
 
At the time the Rays consented to treatment, Hawaii’s 
informed consent statute did not explicitly require a physician to disclose her or the medical community’s experience with a treatment option. See HRS § 671-3 (1993). “The elements of 
informed consent commonly consist of ensuring that the patient consents to the prescribed procedure only after being made aware of the: (1) condition being treated; (2) nature and character of the proposed treatment or surgical procedure; (3) anticipated results; (4) recognized possible alternative forms of treatment; and (5) recognized serious possible risks, complications, and anticipated benefits involved in the treatment or surgical procedure, as well as the recognized possible alternative forms of treatment, including non-treatment.” Barcai, 98 Hawai' i at 
483, 50 P.3d at 959 (emphasis added) (citing HRS § 671-3). After Barcai, the legislature amended HRS § 671-3 by deleting the 
7
 KMS also asserts that the circuit court erred by admitting Dr.
 
Danon’s testimony that Dr. Yamamoto’s failure to properly inform the Rays
caused Alyssa’s injuries. Because we hold that the trial court erred by
admitting Dr. Bernstein’s testimony, it is unnecessary to address KMS’
argument regarding Dr. Danon’s testimony.
 
8
 In light of this conclusion, it is unnecessary to address the
 
medical community’s experience with the treatment.
 
36
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
requirement that a physician disclose the “nature and character”
 
of the proposed treatment, and replacing it with a requirement to
 provide a “description of the proposed treatment or procedure.” 
HRS § 671-3 (Supp. 2010).
 
The Rays assert that the circuit court did not err by 
admitting Dr. Bernstein’s testimony, because at the time they consented to the treatment, HRS § 671-3 required a physician to disclose the “nature and character” of the treatment. They assert that the physician’s experience falls within the nature and character of the treatment. This argument is not persuasive because, even assuming that the prior version of HRS § 671-3 applies, the Rays point to no authority interpreting the “nature and character” language as inclusive of a physician’s experience with a particular treatment. Additionally, the plain language of HRS § 671-3 indicates that this interpretation is untenable. The term “character” is not defined by HRS § 671-3, however, this court “may resort to legal or other well accepted dictionaries as one way to determine the ordinary meaning of certain terms not statutorily defined.” Nuuanu Valley Ass’n v. City and County of 
Honolulu, 119 Hawai' i 90, 98, 194 P.3d 531, 539 (2008) (internal 
quotation marks omitted) (quoting Leslie v. Bd. of Appeals of the County of Hawai' i, 109 Hawai' i 384, 393, 126 P.3d 1071, 1080 
(2006)). Character, in this context, is defined as “the 
37
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
aggregate of features and traits that form the individual nature 
of some person or thing.” Webster’s Unabridged Dictionary 346 
(2d ed. 2001). Similarly, nature means “having the character or qualities of” a thing. Id. at 1281. Dr. Yamamoto’s experience 
with pulse therapy is not a distinguishing feature or attribute of steroid pulse therapy. Therefore, the plain language of HRS § 671-3 rejects the Rays’ interpretation of the term “nature and character” and Dr. Bernstein’s testimony that a physician should disclose her experience with a treatment to properly obtain informed consent was contrary to Hawai' i law. 
The circuit court’s error in admitting Dr. Bernstein’s 
testimony was not cured by its instructions to the jury. “When a court has admonished a jury to disregard an improper statement, the ordinary presumption is that the jury will do so.” Chung v. 
Kaonohi Center Co., 62 Haw. 594, 599, 618 P.2d 283, 287 (1980), abrogated on other grounds by, Francis v. Lee Enterprises, Inc., 89 Hawai' i 234, 244, 971 P.2d 707, 717 (1999). However, “this 
court has held that when improper testimony is prejudicial to the opposing party, the ordinary presumption prevails ‘only if there is a reasonable certainty that the impression upon the jury could be or was dispelled by the court’s admonition.’” Id. (quoting 
Young v. Price, 48 Haw. 22, 27, 395 P.2d 365, 368 (1964)). In the instant case, Dr. Bernstein’s testimony was referred to 
38
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
numerous times by multiple witnesses. For instance, Michael and
 
Debbie Ray testified that they would not have consented to the
 treatment had they known Dr. Yamamoto’s inexperience with it. 
Additionally, the curative instruction came nearly a month after
 the admission of Dr. Bernstein’s testimony. Under these
 circumstances, the presumption does not apply because there was
 not a reasonable certainty that the impression could be or was
 dispelled by the court’s admonition. See id. at 599-600, 618
 
P.2d at 288 (holding that the admission of testimony was cured by
 the trial court’s instruction where “there was not a series of
 improper statements throughout the trial, nor was the improper
 testimony allowed to stand, thereby permitting emotional and
 irrelevant testimony to influence the jury”).
 
The Rays also assert that the cautionary instruction
 
issued when Dr. Bernstein testified indicates that the jury “did
 not absorb [his] testimony uncritically.” This argument is
 unpersuasive because the cautionary instruction did not tell the
 jury that Dr. Bernstein’s testimony was inadmissible. 
Furthermore, the circuit court allowed multiple witnesses to
 refer to that testimony before issuing a curative instruction
 more than three weeks after the inadmissible testimony. Because
 the cautionary instruction was incomplete, it did not cure the
 circuit court’s error. Therefore, we reverse the circuit court’s
 
39
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
judgment because Dr. Bernstein’s inadmissible testimony about Dr.
 
Yamamoto’s experience with steroid pulse therapy was not cured by
 the circuit court’s instructions to the jury.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the circuit
 
court’s judgment and remand for a new trial.
 Kenneth S. Robbins of Robbins 
 /
and Associates (John­
Anderson L. Meyer and Sergio
 /Rufo of Robbins & Associates 
and Andrea M. Gauthier of 
 /Horvitz & Levy LLP, with
with him on the briefs) for
 /Defendant-Appellant/Cross­Appellee Kapiolani Medical
 /Specialists
 
Robert S. Peck of the Center
 for Constitutional Litigation,
P.C., pro hac vice, (Collin M.
(Marty) Fritz and Allen K.
Williams of Trecker & Fritz,
Philip Russotti of Wingate,
Russotti & Shapiro, LLP,
pro hac vice , and Margaret C.
Jenkins with him on the
 briefs) for Plaintiffs­
Appellees/Cross-Appellants
 
Girard D. Lau, Solicitor General,
Kimberly Tsumoto Guidry and
Deirdre Marie-Iha, DeputySolicitors General, forAmicus Curiae AttorneyGeneral of the State of
 Hawai'i s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
s/ Paula A. Nakayama
s/ James E. Duffy, Jr.
s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
s/ Michael D. Wilson 
40
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Arthur F. Roeca, April Luria, and
Jodie D. Roeca of Roeca, Louie
& Hiraoka for Amicus Curiae 
Hawaii Medical Association 
and American Medical Association 
41
 