   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
                                                                 
                                                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
---o0o--­
BLUEEARTH BIOFUELS, LLC, Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
HAWAIIAN ELECTRIC COMPANY, INC.; MAUI ELECTRIC
COMPANY, LTD.; ALOHA PETROLEUM, LTD.; and
KARL E. STAHLKOPF, Individually, Defendants-Appellants.
 
NO. 30144
 
CERTIFIED QUESTION FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
FOR THE DISTRICT OF HAWAI» I
 
(CIV. NO. 09-00181)
 
JULY 20, 2010
 
MOON, C.J., NAKAYAMA, ACOBA, DUFFY, AND RECKTENWALD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY DUFFY, J.
 
The United States District Court for the District of
 
Hawai» i (District Court) certified the following questions of law 
to the Hawai» i Supreme Court: 
1. When are tort, restitutionary, and other law[s] of
this state  displaced because they conflict  with [the
Hawai»i Uniform Trade Secrets Act (HUTSA)], Hawaii Revised
Statutes ( HRS ) § 482B? 
2. When a claim is found to conflict  with HUTSA, what
 
is the scope of the preemption, or displacement, of that
claim under HRS § 482B-8?
 
3. May a claim that is found not to conflict  with HUTSA
 
still be preempted, or displaced, under HRS § 482B-8?
 
4. Does HUTSA also preempt, or displace, claims based
upon the alleged misuse of confidential information,  which
 
is determined, before or during trial, not to meet the
definition of trade secret  under HRS § 482B-2? 
   
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. Factual Background
 
This case involves plans to create and construct a
 
biodiesel production facility on Maui. Plaintiff-Appellee
 
BlueEarth Biofuels, LLC (BlueEarth) specializes in the production
 
of biodiesel production facilities. In or around March 2006,
 BlueEarth began talks with Hawaiian Electric Company, Inc. (HECO)
 and Maui Electric Company, Ltd. (MECO) to jointly and
 
exclusively develop a biodiesel production facility to be located
 on the Island of Maui[(the Project).]  
In furtherance of their discussions regarding the
 
Project, BlueEarth executed a Mutual Non-Circumvention and Non-
Disclosure Agreement (NDA) with both HECO and MECO.
1 BlueEarth,
 
HECO, and MECO also signed a confidential memorandum of
 understanding (Project Agreement), which set forth how the
 Project would be planned, developed, permitted, funded,
 
constructed, maintained, and operated. 
In 2007, BlueEarth, HECO, and MECO began discussions
 
related to potential fuel subcontractors who would manage and run
 
1
 The NDAs established, inter alia, that: 1) confidential
information given by one party to another would remain the property of the
originating party; 2) confidential information of the originating party would
be kept confidential by the receiving party and would not be disclosed or used
for any purpose other than evaluating the Project; 3) any contacts revealed by
one party to the other would be the exclusive contacts of the disclosing
party; 4) the receiving party would not enter into direct negotiations or
transactions with contacts revealed by the disclosing party; and 5) neither
party would solicit or accept any business from sources made available by one
party to the other without the express written permission of the party who
made the source available. 
2
    
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
logistics for a fuel terminal, which would be used to store raw
 
materials and fuel in connection with the Project. BlueEarth
 
approached Aloha Petroleum, Ltd. (Aloha) as a potential
 
subcontractor. In furtherance of their discussions, BlueEarth
 
and Aloha executed a NDA on January 28, 2008. As with the HECO
 
and MECO NDAs, the Aloha NDA contained a provision that
 information furnished by one of the parties would be kept
 confidential by the receiving party and its representatives. On
 
July 14, 2008, BlueEarth and Aloha also executed a Mutual
 Confidentiality Agreement (Confidentiality Agreement), which
 
provided that neither party shall use or disclose each other s
 
confidential information to third parties or solicit business
 from each other s clients. 
BlueEarth alleges that, contrary to the terms of the
 
previously described Project Agreement, NDAs, and Confidentiality
 Agreement, HECO
2, MECO and Aloha engaged in undisclosed
 
negotiations with each other concerning the development,
 
investment, and ownership of the Project with the intent to cut
 
BlueEarth out of the Project altogether. Though the Project has
 yet to be built, BlueEarth claims that it expended in excess of
 $1.2 million working to develop the Project pursuant to the
 
Project Agreement. 
2
 HECO was allegedly represented in these negotiations by its Senior
Vice President and Chief Technology Officer Karl Stahlkopf (Stahlkopf), who is
named as an individual defendant in the action. 
3
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. Procedural Background
 
In October of 2008, BlueEarth filed suit in the 
Northern District of Texas. On April 21, 2009, the case was 
transferred to the District of Hawai» i. On May 29, 2009, 
BlueEarth filed its Second Amended Complaint (SAC), alleging the following causes of action: 1) breach of contract against HECO (HECO NDA); 2) breach of contract against MECO (MECO NDA); 3) breach of contract against HECO and MECO (Project Agreement); 
4) quantum meruit/unjust enrichment against HECO and MECO; 5) breach of contract against Aloha (Aloha NDA and Confidentiality 
Agreement); 6) unfair competition against under Hawai» i Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 480-2, et seq. against HECO, MECO, Stahlkopf, 
and Aloha; 7) tortious interference with existing contracts against HECO, MECO, Stahlkopf, and Aloha (all NDAs and the 
Confidentiality Agreement); 8) tortious interference with existing contract against Aloha (Project Agreement); 9) 
misappropriation of trade secrets against HECO, MECO, Stahlkopf, and Aloha; 10) conversion against HECO, MECO, Stahlkopf, and 
Aloha; and 11) breach of fiduciary duty against HECO and MECO. 
On June 29, 2009, Aloha moved to dismiss the Sixth
 
through Tenth causes of action. On the same day, HECO, MECO, and
 
Stahlkopf (collectively the HECO defendants) moved to dismiss
 
4
    
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
BlueEarth s SAC.3 On September 17, 2009, BlueEarth filed 
oppositions to both motions. Aloha and the HECO defendants filed 
their respective reply briefs on September 24, 2009. A hearing 
was held on the motions to dismiss on October 5, 2009. The District Court issued its Certified Questions on November 2, 
2009. This court issued its Order On Certified Question on 
November 9, 2009, allowing the parties to file briefs regarding the Certified Questions in accordance with Hawai» i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28. 
Aloha filed its opening brief on January 27, 2010. The
 
HECO defendants also filed their opening brief on January 27,
 2010. BlueEarth filed its answering brief on April 5, 2010. 
Aloha and the HECO defendants filed their respective reply briefs
 
on April 29, 2010. 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Certified Question
 The supreme court shall have jurisdiction and powers .
 
. . [t]o answer, in its discretion . . . any question or
 
proposition of law certified to it by a federal district or
 
3
 As observed by the District Court,
 
[a]lthough the motion was styled as moving for dismissal of
the SAC in its entirety, the arguments set forth in the
motion only sought dismissal of [BlueEarth s] Fourth, Sixth,
Ninth, Tenth, and Eleventh causes of action, the tort- and
restitutionary-based causes of action.
 
5
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
appellate court if the supreme court shall so provide by rule[.]  
HRS § 602-5(a)(2) (Supp. 2009).
 When a federal district or appellate court certifies 
to the Hawai» i Supreme Court that there is involved in any 
proceeding before it a question concerning the law of Hawai» i 
that is determinative of the cause and that there is no clear controlling precedent in the Hawai» i judicial decisions, the 
Hawai» i Supreme Court may answer the certified question by 
written opinion.  HRAP 13(a) (2000).
 An issue of law presented by a certified question is 
reviewed by this court de novo under the right/wrong standard of 
review.  Lee v. HSBC Bank USA, 121 Hawai» i 287, 289, 218 P.3d 
775, 777 (2009) (citing Francis v. Lee Enter., Inc. , 89 Hawai» i 
234, 236, 971 P.2d 707, 709 (1999)). B. Statutory Construction
 
It is a well-established rule of statutory construction that
this court s
 
foremost obligation is to ascertain and give effect to
the intention of the legislature, which is to be
obtained primarily from the language contained in the
statute itself. And [this court] must read statutory
language in the context of the entire statute and
construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose.
 
Aluminum Shake Roofing, Inc. v. Hirayasu , 110 Hawai
»i 248, 
251, 131 P.3d 1230, 1233 (2006) (citation omitted) (formataltered). 
Kaho» ohanohano v. Dep t of Human Servs., State of Haw., 
6
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
117 Hawai» i 262, 288, 178 P.3d 538, 564 (2008) (brackets in 
original). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
In answering the Certified Questions, this court is 
required to determine the preemptive4 scope of the Hawai» i 
Uniform Trade Secrets Act (HUTSA) in HRS section 482B-1 et seq., 
which is an issue of first impression in this jurisdiction. The 
HUTSA s preemption provision reads as follows: 
Effect on other law.  (a) Except as provided in subsection
(b) this chapter displaces conflicting tort, restitutionary,
and other law of this State providing civil remedies for
misappropriation of a trade secret.
 
(b) This chapter does not affect:
 
(1) Contractual remedies, whether or not based upon
misappropriation of a trade secret;
(2) Other civil remedies that are not based upon
misappropriation of a trade secret; or
(3) Criminal remedies, whether or not based upon
misappropriation of a trade secret.
 
HRS § 482B-8 (2008). 
In order to answer the Certified Questions, it is
 
necessary to first review the background of the Uniform Trade
 
Secrets Act (UTSA) and HUTSA and analyze the decisions of other
 jurisdictions that have considered the scope of the UTSA s
 preemptive effect. 
4
 Courts that have considered this issue use the terms preempt  and
displace  interchangeably. This opinion uses the terms interchangeably as
well.
 
7
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
A. Background of the UTSA and HUTSA
 
The UTSA was drafted by the National Conference of
 
Commissioners on Uniform State Laws (Commissioners) in 1979 and
 
amended in 1985. UTSA (amended 1985) 14 Uniform Laws Annotated
 (U.L.A.) 529, 530 (historical notes) (2005). The Commissioners
 
gave the rationale behind drafting the UTSA as follows:
 
Notwithstanding the commercial importance of state trade
secret law to interstate business, this law has not
 developed satisfactorily. In the first place, its
development is uneven . . . Secondly, even in states in
which there has been significant litigation, there is undue
uncertainty concerning the parameters of trade secret
protection, and the appropriate remedies for
misappropriation of a trade secret. One commentator
 
observed:
 Under technological and economic pressures, industry
continues to rely on trade secret protection despite
the doubtful and confused status of both common law
 
and statutory remedies. Clear, uniform trade secret
 
protection is urgently needed . . . . 
 
Comment, Theft of Trade Secrets: The Need for a Statutory
Solution , 120 U. Pa. L. Rev. 378, 380-81 (1971).
 
Id. at 531.
 
To this end, the UTSA created a model statutory cause
 
of action for misappropriation of trade secrets. Id. The UTSA
 
defined trade secret 5 and misappropriation 6, id. § 1 at 537­
5
 The UTSA defines trade secret  as follows:
 
(4) Trade secret  means information, including a formula,
pattern, compilation, program, device, method, technique, or
process, that:
 
(i) derives independent economic value,  actual or 
(continued...)
 
8
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
5(...continued)
potential, from not being generally known to, and not 
being readily ascertainable by proper means by, other 
persons who can obtain economic value from its 
disclosure or use, and
(ii) is the subject of efforts that are reasonable 
under the circumstances to maintain its secrecy.
14 U.L.A. § 1 at 538. 
6The UTSA defines  misappropriation  as follows:
(2)  Misappropriation  means:
(i) acquisition of a trade secret of another by a person who
knows or has reason to know that the trade secret was
acquired by improper means; or
(ii) disclosure or use of a trade secret of another without
express or implied consent by a person who
(A) used improper means to acquire knowledge of the
trade secret; or
(B) at the time of disclosure or use, knew or had
reason to know that his knowledge of the trade secret
was
(I) derived from or through a person who had
utilized improper means to acquire it;
(II) acquired under circumstances giving rise to
a duty to maintain its secrecy or limit its use;
or
(III) derived from or through a person who owed
a duty to the person seeking relief to maintain
its secrecy or limit its use; or
(C) before a material change of his [or her] position,
knew or had reason to know that it was a trade secret
and that knowledge of it had been acquired by accident
or mistake.
14 U.L.A. § 1 at 537 (brackets in original).
938, established a three-year statute of limitations, id. § 6 at
649, and provided for damages, id.  § 3 at 633-34, and injunctive
relief, id. § 2 at 619.  The Commissioners intended that the UTSA   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
be applied and construed to effectuate its general purpose to
 
make uniform the law with respect to the subject of this Act
 
among states enacting it.  Id. § 8 at 656 (brackets omitted). 
The HUTSA became law in 1989. See 1989 Haw. Sess. Laws
 
Act 221, § 1 at 523-25. The HUTSA incorporates nearly verbatim
 the UTSA s definitions of trade secret  and misappropriation ,
 
as well as its remedies, statute of limitations and preemption
 provisions. HRS §§ 482B-2 to -4, -7, -8 (2008). Though the
 HUTSA does not contain a uniformity provision of its own, HRS
 section 1-24 states that
 
[a]ll provisions of uniform acts adopted by the State shall
be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate their
general purpose to make uniform the laws of the states and
territories which enact them. 
Id. § 1-24 (2009). 
B. The Scope of Preemption
 
Courts that have considered the UTSA s preemption 
provision have uniformly interpreted [it] to preempt previously 
existing misappropriation of trade secret actions, whether 
statutory or common law.  Hauck Mfg. Co. v. Astec Indus., Inc. , 
375 F. Supp. 2d 649, 654 (E.D. Tenn. 2004); see also Allied 
Erecting & Dismantling Co., Inc. v. Genesis Equip. & Mfg., Inc., 649 F. Supp. 2d 702, 720 (N.D. Ohio 2009) (citing Hauck). All the parties agree that HUTSA displaces Hawai» i s existing 
statutory and common law causes of action for misappropriation of 
10
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
a trade secret. Two questions regarding the scope of preemption
 
remain: (1) whether the HUTSA displaces non-contract civil
 
claims, where such claims are based on allegations of
 
misappropriation of a trade secret; and (2) whether a non-
contract civil claim is preempted when it is based on the
 
misappropriation of confidential information that does not rise
 
to the level of a statutorily-defined trade secret.
 
1.	 A non-contract civil claim conflicts with the HUTSA,
and is therefore displaced, to the extent that it is
based upon misappropriation of a trade secret.
 
a.	 BlueEarth s argument
 
BlueEarth argues that the HUTSA applies only to the
 
duty not to improperly acquire, use, or disclose commercially
 valuable secret information.  Thus, [b]ecause BlueEarth s non-
contract causes of action remedy the breach of duties that are
 
not dependent upon the existence of competitively significant
 secret information, none are affected by the [HUTSA].  
BlueEarth bases its argument on the comment to the UTSA s Effect
 
on Other Law  section, which states as follows:
 
This Act does not deal with criminal remedies for trade
 
secret misappropriation and is not a comprehensive statement
of civil remedies. It applies to a duty to protect
competitively significant secret information that is imposed
by law. It does not apply to a duty voluntarily assumed
through an express or an implied-in-fact contract. The
 enforceability of covenants not to disclose trade secrets
and covenants not to compete that are intended to protect
trade secrets, for example, is governed by other law. The
 Act also does not apply to a duty imposed by law that is not
dependent upon the existence of competitively significant
 
11
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
secret information, like an agent s duty of loyalty to his
or her principal.
 
14 U.L.A. § 7 at 651 (comment). BlueEarth claims that the
 
comment is dispositive  and that it indicat[es] the clear
 
answer to the questions before the Court.  
For these reasons, BlueEarth encourages this court to
 
apply the elements test  to determine whether a claim is
 
preempted by the HUTSA. That is, claims are only preempted if
 they have the same elements or same underlying duty as a
 misappropriation of trade secrets claim.  Thus, BlueEarth
 argues, its non-contract claims are not preempted because they
 provide civil remedies for breaches of other duties and
 
accordingly have qualitatively different elements describing a
 
breach of those duties.  BlueEarth further notes that, this is
 a legal test inquiring into the nature of rights, duties, and
 
remedies, not a factual test inquiring into the details of a
 
plaintiff s notice pleading.  
b. the defendants  arguments
 
In contrast, Aloha and the HECO defendants argue that a
 
factual inquiry into the pleadings is necessary to determine
 whether the plaintiff s various non-contract claims seek remedy
 for misappropriation of a trade secret, regardless of how the
 plaintiff has labeled these claims. Aloha points to the
 preemption provision of the UTSA, which states: 
12
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
This Act does not affect:
 
(1) contractual remedies, whether or not based upon
misappropriation of a trade secret;
(2) other civil remedies that are not based upon
misappropriation of a trade secret; or
(3) criminal remedies, whether or not based upon
misappropriation of a trade secret.[7]
 
14 U.L.A. § 7 at 651 (brackets omitted).  Given the conditional
 
language that applies to [o]ther civil remedies , as opposed to
 
the total exclusion of contractual and criminal remedies, Aloha
 argues that non-contract civil remedies which are  based upon a
 
misappropriation of a trade secret are preempted. In turn, the
 phrase based upon  suggests a factual inquiry into the
 allegations underlying the claim. If those allegations reveal
 
that the underlying injury is the misappropriation of a trade
 
secret, then the claim should be preempted. 
Similarly, the HECO defendants argue for application of
 
the same proof  test as articulated in Hauck , in which the court
 
concluded that
 
perhaps a better formulation of the UTSA preemption standard
would be a same proof  standard under which a claim will be
preempted when it necessarily rises or falls based on
whether the defendant is found to have misappropriated  a
trade secret  as those two terms are defined in the UTSA. 
Stated another way, if proof of a non-UTSA claim would also
simultaneously establish a claim for misappropriation of
trade secrets, it is preempted irrespective of whatever
surplus elements or proof were necessary to establish it.
The UTSA defines misappropriation  broadly enough to cover
a wide range of conduct, including the sort of conduct 
7
 The HUTSA s preemption provision contains the same language. See
 
HRS § 482B-8(b) (2008).
 
13
    
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
contemplated by the various claims which are often involved
in preemption disputes. If a proven claim, whether in whole
or in part, constitutes misappropriation of a trade secret,
it is that and that alone . . . The UTSA explicitly exempts
from preemption only those claims not based upon
misappropriation of a trade secret,  implying the UTSA s
preemptive force reaches more than just claims of  or for
 
misappropriation of a trade secret. Thus, Plaintiff s non-
UTSA claims against [defendant] will be preempted if, as
plead, they would succeed or fail dependent on proof
[defendant] acquired, disclosed, or used Plaintiff s trade
secrets or otherwise confidential information . . . .
 
Hauck, 375 F. Supp. 2d at 658 (footnote and internal citations
 
omitted) (emphases in original).
 
c. analysis
 
The preemption provision of the HUTSA, like that of the
 
UTSA, states that [t]his chapter does not affect . . . [o]ther
 
civil remedies that are not based upon the misappropriation of a
 
trade secret[.]  HRS § 482B-8(b)(2) (2008). We agree with the
 Hauck court s analysis that the phrase based upon  implies that
 the UTSA s preemptive force reaches more than just claims of  or
 
for misappropriation of a trade secret.  Hauck, 375 F. Supp. 2d
 
at 658 (emphases in original). Otherwise, a plaintiff could
 
state multiple different claims, all stemming from the same
 
misappropriation of trade secret injury. This would undermine
 the purpose of the UTSA, which was to resolve the uncertainty
 concerning the parameters of trade secret protection  and create
 a uniform law to remedy trade secret misappropriation. See 14 
14
    
   
 
  
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
U.L.A. at 531 (prefatory note); see also id. § 8 at 656; HRS § 1­
24 (2009).
 
The elements  test advocated by BlueEarth faces
 
precisely the problem stated above. It would allow a party to
 
raise multiple different claims based on the same trade secret
 
misappropriation injury. Only a minority of courts apply the
 elements  test to determine preemption. See Nucor Corp. v.
 
Bell, 482 F. Supp. 2d 714, 725 (D.S.C. 2007) ( To determine
 whether a particular cause of action involves rights equivalent
 to those protected by the Trade Secrets Act, the elements of the
 
causes of action should be compared, not the facts pled to prove
 
them. ); see also Powell Products, Inc. v. Marks, 948 F. Supp.
 
1469, 1474 (D. Colo. 1996) ( [H]ere, plaintiff alleges that
 
defendants conspired to misappropriate its trade secrets, which
 
requires an agreement, which is not an element of a
 misappropriation claim under the UTSA. This claim . . . does not
 
conflict with the UTSA and will not be preempted. ).
8
 
8
 Some courts have employed the language of the elements  test, but
have then gone on to analyze the underlying factual basis for each claim to
determine whether it is based on misappropriation of a trade secret. For
 example, in Mortgage Specialists, Inc. v. Davey , 904 A.2d 652, 665 (N.H.
2006), the court stated that it agree[d] with the courts that have concluded
that a claim is not preempted where the elements of the claim require some
allegation or factual showing in addition to that which forms the basis for a
claim of misappropriation of a trade secret.  Id. However, the court went on
to find plaintiff s claim for breach of fiduciary duty, which required
different elements than a trade secret misappropriation claim, to be
preempted. Id. at 667. See Powell, 948 F. Supp. at 1475 (holding
plaintiff s conversion claim was preempted to the extent it sought recovery
for misappropriation of a trade secret, but was not preempted to the extent it
(continued...)
 
15
    
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
The majority of courts, however, have rejected the
 elements  test and have instead examined the factual allegations
 
underlying each claim to determine whether a claim, whatever its
 
label, is based upon misappropriation of a trade secret.9
 
8(...continued)
sought recovery for physical items stolen); see also LaFrance Corp. v.
Werttemberger
, No. C07-1932Z, 2008 WL 5068653, *4 (W.D. Wash. Nov. 24, 2008)
( Conspiracy requires an element in addition to that required to make out a
UTSA cause of action. In addition, LaFrance alleges facts that are not
necessary to the UTSA claim . . . Therefore, this claim cannot be dismissed at
this time. ) As the court in Hauck  observed
 
[t]he variations in language employed by courts to
articulate a test for UTSA preemption can be misleading when
considered in the abstract . . . In the end, all of these
cases turn on their respective factual circumstances as
reflected by the plaintiff s pleadings. In fact, in several
instances courts have stated the law in divergent manners
but proceeded to apply those seemingly contrary standards in
similar, if not identical, fashion.
 
375 F. Supp. 2d at 657-58. 
9
 See, e.g., Hauck, 375 F. Supp. 2d at 657 (surveying cases and
concluding that [i]n the end, all of these cases turn on their respective
factual circumstances as reflected by the plaintiff s pleadings ); Allied
Erecting, 649 F. Supp. 2d at 721 ( the appropriate scope of displacement
should be defined by the same facts  or same proof  standard ); Auto
 
Channel, Inc. v. Speedvision Network, LLC, 144 F. Supp. 2d 784, 789 (W.D. Ky.
2001) ( [the] Court must first examine each of Plaintiffs  noncontractual
claims and determine whether the claim seeks a remedy for the misappropriation
of trade secrets ); Thomas & Betts Corp. v. Panduit Corp. , 108 F. Supp. 2d
968, 972 (N.D. Ill. 2000) ( [W]e must review the challenged counts of T&B s
complaint to determine whether they are based on a misappropriation of trade
secrets, or on something more. ); Mortgage Specialists , 904 A.2d at 666 ( to
determine whether a plaintiff s claims are preempted by the NHUTSA, a court
must examine the facts alleged in support of each claim to determine the
extent to which the claim is based upon the misappropriation of trade secrets
or other information. ); Weins v. Sporleder , 605 N.W.2d 488, 491 (S.D. 2000)
( the court is to look beyond the label to the facts being asserted in support
of the claims ); Chatterbox, LLC v. Pulsar Ecoproducts, LLC, No. CV
06-512-S-LMB, 2007 WL 1388183, *4 (D. Idaho May 9, 2007) ( Plaintiff s claims
for unjust enrichment and unfair competition are based on the same nucleus of
facts as its trade secrets claim and, therefore, these should be dismissed as
preempted by the Idaho Trade Secrets Act. ); Bliss Clearing Niagara, Inc. v.
Midwest Brake Bond Co., 270 F. Supp. 2d 943, 949-51 (W.D. Mich. 2003) (court
(continued...)
 
16
    
analyzed factual allegations underlying each claim to determine if claim was
based upon misappropriation of a trade secret); Ethypharm S.A. France v.
Bentley Pharm., Inc., 388 F. Supp. 2d 426, 434-35 (D. Del. 2005) (same);
Diamond Power Int l, Inc. v. Davidson , 540 F. Supp. 2d 1322, 1345-47 (N.D. Ga.
2007) (same). 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
BlueEarth s arguments to the contrary are not supported
 
by the comment to the UTSA s preemption provision. BlueEarth
 
contends that the comment s statement that [t]his Act . . . is
 
not a comprehensive statement of civil remedies[,]  means that
 [b]eyond displacing previously existing common law actions for
 
trade secret misappropriation . . . the Act does not displace
 
other civil remedies.  However, it appears that the comment is
 merely restating the substance of the preemption provision. The
 UTSA is not a comprehensive statement of civil remedies because
 [i]t does not apply to a duty voluntarily assumed through an
 
express or implied-in-fact contract.  14 U.L.A § 7 at 651
 
(comment); see also id. § 7(b) at 651 ( This Act does not affect
 
. . . contractual remedies, whether or not based upon
 
misappropriation of a trade secret[.] ) (brackets omitted). 
The comment further states that [t]he Act also does
 
not apply to a duty imposed by law that is not dependent  upon the
 
existence of competitively significant secret information, like
 
an agent s duty of loyalty to his or her principal.  Id. § 7 at
 
651 (comment) (emphasis added). BlueEarth argues that the
 comment s reference to duties  implies a legal, rather than a
 
9(...continued)
17
    
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
factual, inquiry, and that the duty to refrain from
 
misappropriating trade secrets is unrelated to and independent
 
from, for example, the duty not to intentionally interfere with
 
the contracts of others. Contrary to BlueEarth s argument, the
 language of the comment implies that the UTSA does  apply to
 
duties that are  dependent upon the existence of competitively
 
significant secret information, whatever their label. In
 analyzing whether a claim is preempted by the UTSA, the court is
 to look beyond the label to the facts being asserted in support
 of the claims.  Weins, 605 N.W.2d at 491; see also Mortgage
 
Specialists, 904 A.2d at 665 ( The majority of courts that have
 
examined this issue have not relied upon the label attached to
 the claim, but have examined the facts underlying the claim to
 
determine whether it is preempted by the UTSA. ).
 
BlueEarth states that, [d]espite its obvious
 
importance, no case reviewed by counsel for BlueEarth has
 discussed or even noted this comment  to the UTSA s preemption
 
provision. Respectfully, it is unlikely that this dispositive 
 comment has been simply overlooked by every court to have
 considered the scope of the UTSA s preemption. Instead, it is
 more likely that these courts found that the comment did not
 support arguments similar to those made by BlueEarth.
 
Though the majority of courts agree that an analysis of
 
the plaintiff s allegations is necessary to determine whether a
 
18
    
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
claim is based upon misappropriation of a trade secret, courts
 
have differed on how the presence of facts relating to the
 
improper acquisition, disclosure, or use of trade secrets within
 
non-UTSA claims affects preemption. Some courts have imposed
 broad preemption, going so far as to wholly preempt claims that
 
include trade secret misappropriation allegations. See Thomas &
 
Betts Corp. v. Panduit Corp., 108 F. Supp. 2d 968, 972-73 (N.D.
 
Ill. 2000) (holding that claims for conversion and breach of
 fiduciary duty for theft of computers, disks and documents were
 preempted by the Illinois Trade Secrets Act because these
 
physical items have little value apart from the information
 
contained therein[.] ); see also Learning Curve Toys, L.P. v.
 
Playwood Toys, Inc., No. 94 C 6884, 1999 WL 529572, *3 (N.D. Ill.
 
July 20, 1999) ( [I]f the operative facts are arguably cognizable
 
under the ITSA, any common law claim that might have been
 available on those facts in the past now no longer exists in
 
Illinois. ). Other courts suggest that the mere presence of
 
facts in a claim that go beyond trade secret misappropriation
 prevents preemption. See Micro Display Sys., Inc. v. Axtel,
 
Inc., 699 F. Supp. 202, 205 (D. Minn. 1988) ( [T]he court will
 allow plaintiff to go forward and maintain its separate causes of
 action to the extent that the causes of action have more  to
 their factual allegations than the mere misuse or
 misappropriation of trade secrets . . . If the facts at trial
 
19
    
  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
disclose that the whole of plaintiff s case involves the
 
misappropriation of trade secrets, those counts will be dismissed
 
which are merely duplicative of the MUTSA.  (Emphasis added.));
 
see also LaFrance Corp. v. Werttemberger, No. C07-1932Z, 2008 WL
 
5068653, *3 (W.D. Wash. Nov. 24, 2008) ( LaFrance alleges facts
 
that are not necessary to the UTSA claim. Therefore, this common
 
law claim is not dismissed.  (Internal citation omitted.)).
 
The UTSA s unitary definitions of trade secret  and
 misappropriation , its statutory remedies and statute of limitations for misappropriation of a trade secret, and its 
uniformity provision all evince the goal of eliminating 
uncertainty and creating a single action for misappropriation of a trade secret. See Burbank Grease Servs., LLC v. Sokolowski, 
693 N.W.2d 89, 98 (Wis. Ct. App. 2005), rev d in part by  717 
N.W.2d 781 (Wis. 2006) (hereinafter Burbank Grease I) ( [T]he 
purpose of the preemption provision is to preserve a single tort 
action under state law for misappropriation of a trade secret as 
defined in the statute[.] ); see also Auto Channel, 144 F. Supp. 
2d at 789 (The UTSA arose to create a uniform business environment that created more certain standards for protection of commercially valuable information. ). The HUTSA was adopted by the Hawai» i State Legislature in furtherance of these goals, as 
evidenced by the fact that the language of the HUTSA is virtually identical to the UTSA. See Kaho» ohanohano, 117 Hawai» i at 288, 
20
    
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
178 P.3d at 564 (stating that this court must read statutory 
language in the context of the entire statute and construe it in 
a manner consistent with its purpose  (brackets omitted)); see 
also Bateman Constr., Inc. v. Haitsuka Bros., Ltd., 77 Hawai» i 
481, 485, 889 P.2d 58, 62 (1995) (finding that because the 
pertinent language of certain Hawai» i arbitration statutes was
 virtually identical to the language of the federal arbitration
 
statute . . . we review federal authority for guidance. ); HRS §
 1-24 (2009). We find that the best approach to preemption,
 consistent with the goals of the UTSA and HUTSA, is the same
 
proof  standard articulated in Hauck . Under this standard, if
 
proof of a non-UTSA claim would also simultaneously establish a
 
claim for misappropriation of trade secrets, it is preempted
 
irrespective of whatever surplus elements of proof were necessary
 
to establish it.  Hauck, 375 F. Supp. 2d at 658. To the extent,
 
however, that the claim is based upon wrongful conduct[,]
 
independent of the misappropriation of trade secrets[,]  it will
 
not be preempted by the HUTSA.
10 Bliss Clearing , 270 F. Supp. 2d
 
10
 See, e.g., Hauck, 375 F. Supp. 2d at 659-60 (holding that
plaintiff s tortious interference with contract claim survived to the extent
that it did not rely on allegations that defendant misappropriated plaintiff s
trade secrets); see also Smithfield Ham & Prods. Co. v. Portion Pac, Inc., 905
F. Supp. 346, 350 (E.D. Va. 1995) ( The question is not whether success on the
misappropriation claim would provide the relief sought by the common law
counts, but whether failure of the misappropriation claim would doom the
remaining counts as well. ); Mortgage Specialists , 904 A.2d at 666-67 (holding
that claims for tortious interference with advantageous relations and breach
of the New Hampshire Consumer Protection Act were not preempted to the extent
that they were supported by more than the misuse of plaintiff s customer
(continued...)
 
21
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
at 950. In this way, the HUTSA will be the sole noncontractual
 
civil remedy for misappropriation of a trade secret, while
 preserving tort, restitutionary, and other law[s,]  HRS § 482B­8, that seek[] to remedy an injury caused not by the
 misappropriation of proprietary information, but by separate
 conduct[.]  Diamond Power , 540 F. Supp. 2d at 1345.
 
2. A non-contract civil claim that is based upon
confidential  information which does not rise to the
 
level of a statutorily-defined trade secret is
preempted.
 
a. BlueEarth s argument
 
BlueEarth argues that 
the plain language of the preemption provision . . . refers
only to trade secrets  as defined by the Act. The
 
preemption provision nowhere refers to other confidential
 
information.  It follows, then, that the statute only
anticipates preemption of common law claims involving trade
 
secrets. Since there is no statutory language regarding
preemption of other confidential information not rising to
 
10(...continued)
information); Glynn v. Edo Corp. , 641 F. Supp. 2d 476, 484 (D. Md. 2009)
(holding that a conversion claim 
survives as to any claim for tangible items
and property that is not based on improper use of information or trade
secrets. ); Allied Erecting
, 649 F. Supp. 2d at 724 ( where a claim for breach
of fiduciary duty has an independent factual basis, which is not solely
dependent on misappropriation-of-trade-secret facts, courts have concluded
there is no preemption. ); Lucini Italia Co. v. Grappolini , 231 F. Supp. 2d
764, 771 (N.D. Ill. 2002) ( MG Capital v. Sullivan  [, No. 01 C 5815, 2001 WL
1609382, at *4 (N.D. Ill. Dec. 17, 2001)] is a good example of how to resolve
these issues. There, the court struck only the portion of a fraud claim
relying on the misappropriation of trade secrets; any portion independent of
the trade secret was retained. ); Diamond Power , 540 F. Supp. 2d at 1345 ( if
a claim seeks to remedy an injury caused not by the misappropriation of
proprietary information, but by separate conduct - such as the
misappropriation of physical  property or the improper interference with
contractual relationships respecting something other than proprietary
information - such a claim cannot be said to be in conflict  with the GTSA 
 
(emphasis in original)).
 
22
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
the level of trade secrets, there is no reason to think such
 
preemption was intended.
 
For this reason, BlueEarth contends that determination of whether
 
its claims are preempted by the HUTSA is not proper on a motion
 to dismiss. Rather, BlueEarth argues, the court should delay the
 preemption inquiry until sufficient discovery has occurred, after
 which the court may properly determine whether the information at
 issue rises to the level of a statutorily-defined trade secret. 
b. the defendants  arguments
 
Aloha argues that the relief provided by the HUTSA is
 
the sole noncontractual remedy when the underlying injury is the
 
improper acquisition, disclosure or use of commercially valuable
 
information; if the information does not constitute a trade
 secret, there is no remedy.  This is so because there is no
 
property right in information [that] is already generally known,
 
readily ascertainable or not the subject of reasonable efforts to
 maintain its secrecy.  Defining the scope of the HUTSA s
 
preemption in this manner is, according to Aloha, [t]he only way
 
to accord the Uniform Act its intended scope, preserve uniformity
 
and avoid duplicative results[.]  
Similarly, the HECO defendants argue that the weight
 
of authority  holds that the UTSA s preemption provision
 eliminates non-contract claims founded on the alleged misuse of
 confidential information, regardless of whether that information
 is a statutory trade secret.  The HECO defendants contend that
 
23
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
this is because the UTSA was intended to preserve a single tort
 
action for allegations of misappropriation of information. 
c. analysis
 
Courts holding that non-UTSA, non-contract claims based
 
upon confidential  or commercially valuable 11 information are
 
not preempted have generally stated that their analysis is based
 on the plain language  of the UTSA s preemption provision. See,
 
e.g., Stone Castle Fin., Inc. v. Friedman, Billings, Ramsey &
 
Co., 191 F. Supp. 2d 652, 656-59 (E.D. Va. 2002) (holding that
 
the plain reading  of the Virginia UTSA compelled a decision
 that claims based on information not determined to be a trade
 secret were not preempted); Combined Metals of Chicago Ltd.
 
P ship v. Airtek, Inc., 985 F. Supp. 827, 830 (N.D. Ill. 1997)
 
( By its plain language . . . the [Illinois ]TSA preemption
 provision applies only if the claim is based on the
 misappropriation of a trade secret  . . . Thus, if the Airtek
 
die and specifications is not a trade secret or secrets, the ITSA
 preemption provision is inapplicable. ); Nucor , 482 F. Supp. 2d
 
11
 Confidential  information has been described as data,
technology, or know-how that is known by a substantial number of persons in a
particular industry (such that its status as a technical trade secret  is in
 doubt) but that, nonetheless, retains some economic and/or competitive value
by virtue of the fact that it is unknown to certain industry participants. 
Robert Unikel, Bridging the Trade Secret  Gap: Protecting Confidential
 
Information  Not Rising to the Level of Trade Secrets , 29 Loy. U. Chi. L.J.
841, 844 (Summer 1998). Courts have used the term commercially valuable  as
well as confidential  to describe this type of information. This opinion
uses these terms interchangeably as well.
 
24
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
at 726 ( The causes of action at issue[12], unlike a cause of
 
action under [South Carolina ]TSA, are not dependant upon a
 
finding that the misappropriated information constitutes trade
 secrets.  ). 
In Burbank Grease Services, LLC v. Sokolowski , 717
 
N.W.2d 781, 788 (Wis. 2006) (hereinafter Burbank Grease II), for
 example, the Wisconsin Supreme Court noted at the outset that the
 allegedly misappropriated information underlying the plaintiff s
 claims did not qualify as a trade secret under the WUTSA s
 
definition. The preemption provision of the WUTSA, similar to
 
that of the HUTSA, states that it does not affect [a]ny civil
 remedy not based upon misappropriation of a trade secret.  Id.
 
(quoting Wis. Stat. § 134.90(6)(b)2.). The Wisconsin Supreme
 Court held that the plain language of the WUTSA s preemption
 provision
 
excepts from the class of unaffected remedies only those
remedies based on the misappropriation of a statutorily-
defined trade secret. It leaves available all other
 
remaining civil remedies for the protection of confidential
information.
 
Id. at 789. The court added that in order to hold that the WUTSA
 
preempts claims based on confidential information which does not
 
rise to the level of a statutorily-defined trade secret, it would
 
12
 The causes of action at issue were: breach of duty of loyalty,
tortious interference with relations, unfair trade practices, conspiracy,
conversion, unjust enrichment, and imposition of constructive trust. Nucor,
482 F. Supp. 2d at 726-27.
 
25
    
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
have to read the following underlined language into the statute:
 This section does not affect . . . [a]ny civil remedy not based
 upon misappropriation of a trade secret and not based on
 confidential business information.  Id. at 790 (emphasis in
 
original). The court declined to so interpret the statute. Id.
 
The court acknowledged that uniformity with other jurisdictions
 was one of the goals of the WUTSA; however, the court found that
 its plain meaning interpretation of the preemption provision was
 more persuasive than jurisdictions which had determined that the
 
UTSA preempted claims based on allegations of non-trade secret
 
confidential information. Id. at 792-94. 
The purported plain language  approach, exemplified in
 
Burbank Grease II , has been criticized for disregarding the
 
UTSA s uniformity directive. The dissent in Burbank Grease II
 
described the majority s analysis as 
pay[ing] lip service to UTSA s uniformity goal and the
corresponding legislative directive. It fails to engage in
the necessary analysis to determine what is the uniform
interpretation of the preemption provisions in UTSA or how
cases decided by courts in other UTSA jurisdictions analyze
the language in these provisions.
 
Burbank Grease II , 717 N.W.2d at 799 (Bradley, J., dissenting);
 
see also id. (quoting Wis. Stat. § 134.90(7), which provides: 
This section shall be applied and construed to make uniform the
 
law relating to misappropriation of trade secrets among states
 
enacting substantially identical laws. ). The dissent found
 that, in contrast, the Wisconsin Court of Appeals analyzed the
 
26
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
decisions of other jurisdictions to have considered the question
 
and determined that the prevailing rule in most UTSA
 jurisdictions is that UTSA is meant to replace tort claims for
 unauthorized use of confidential information with a single
 statutory cause of action.  Burbank Grease II, 717 N.W.2d at 800
 
(Bradley, J., dissenting) (citing Burbank Grease I, 693 N.W.2d at
 101). 
In Mortgage Specialists, the court noted that although
 
the Wisconsin Supreme Court overturned the Court of Appeals 
 
decision in Burbank Grease I , it still found Burbank Grease I
 
well-reasoned, particularly for its adherence to the
principles of uniformity and clarity that motivated the
creation of the UTSA, in light of the legislative directive
that the UTSA be construed to make uniform the law among the
jurisdictions enacting it. We find the opinion of the
Wisconsin Court of Appeals persuasive.
 
Mortgage Specialists , 904 A.2d at 664 (internal citations
 
omitted). Commentators have also criticized the Burbank Grease
 
II decision for failing to conduct a uniformity analysis. 
The view of the dissenting opinion in Burbank Grease
Services and [similar opinions] may be regarded as the most
restrictive approach to preemption. In spite of the
majority s protestations to the contrary, it is also the
most reasonable . . . refusing to preempt claims for the
misappropriation of confidential information effectively
negate[s] the UTSA s goal of promoting uniformity  and
render[s] the statutory preemption provision effectively
meaningless. 
 
Michael Ahrens, Wisconsin Confidential: The Mystery of the
 
Wisconsin Supreme Court s Decision in Burbank Grease Services v.
 
Sokolowski and Its Effect Upon the Uniform Trade Secrets Act,
 
27
    
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Litigation, and Employee Mobility , 2007 Wis. L. Rev. 1271, 1302
 
(2007) (footnotes omitted) (quoting Unikel, Bridging the  Trade
 
Secret  Gap, 29 Loy. U. Chi. L.J. at 888); see also Sarah
 Gettings, Burbank Grease Services, LLC v. Sokolowski: Frustrating
 Uniformity in Trade Secret Law, 22 Berkeley Tech. L.J. 423, 438­39 (2007) ( The Burbank majority is dangerously misguided . . .
 Indeed, the plain language of the WUTSA's uniformity clause
 directs the court to conduct a uniformity analysis . . . The
 majority of courts interpreting the preemption provision have
 
found that the UTSA must preempt some claims involving the
 
protection of confidential, but not trade secret, information. 
 (Footnotes omitted)).
 
The majority of the courts to have considered the issue
 
have held that the UTSA s preemption provision 
abolish[es] all free-standing alternative causes of action
for theft or misuse of confidential, proprietary, or
otherwise secret information falling short of trade secret
status (e.g.  idea misappropriation, information piracy,
theft of commercial information, etc. ).
 
Hauck, 375 F. Supp. 2d at 655.13 The rationale for these
 
13
 See also, e.g., Mortgage Specialists, 904 A.2d at 664 (holding
that the NHUTSA preempts claims that are based upon the unauthorized use of
information, regardless of whether that information meets the statutory
definition of a trade secret. ); Auto Channel , 144 F. Supp. 2d at 789 ( KUTSA
replaces other law relating to the misappropriation of trade secrets,
regardless of whether the Plaintiffs demonstrate that the information at issue
qualifies as a trade secret. ); Burbank Grease I, 693 N.W.2d at 98 ( [T]he
purpose of the preemption provision is to preserve a single tort action under
state law for misappropriation of a trade secret as defined in the statute and
thus to eliminate other tort causes of action founded on allegations of
misappropriation of information that may not meet the statutory standard for a
(continued...)
 
28
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
decisions has been explained as follows:
 
States adopting statutory provisions analogous to the UTSA s
section 7 intend that at least some prior law relating to
the protection of commercial information be displaced.
Permitting litigants in UTSA states to assert common-law
claims for the misappropriation or misuse of confidential
data would reduce the UTSA to just another basis for
recovery and leave prior law effectively untouched.
Further, by expressly exempting contractual remedies,
 whether or not based upon misappropriation of a trade
secret  and other civil remedies that are not based upon
misappropriation of a trade secret  from its preemptive
penumbra, the UTSA makes clear that only those claims
addressing or arising out of wrongs distinct from pure
information piracy survive passage of the trade secret
 statute. Indeed, contrary interpretations of the UTSA s
Effect on Other Law  provision . . . effectively negate the
UTSA s goal of promoting uniformity in trade secrets  law. 
Additionally, these contrary interpretations render the
statutory preemption provision effectively meaningless.
 
Unikel, Bridging the Trade Secret  Gap , 29 Loy. U. Chi. L.J. at
 
887-88 (footnotes omitted). The UTSA creates a two-tiered 
 
approach to protection of commercial knowledge, under which
 information is classified only as either a protected trade 
secret  or unprotected general skill and knowledge.   Id.  at 
867-68 (footnote omitted). 
trade secret. ); Composite Marine Propellers, Inc. v. Van Der Woude, 962 F.2d
13(...continued)
1263, 1265 (7th Cir. 1992) ( Illinois has abolished all common law theories of
misuse of such [confidential] information. Unless defendants misappropriated
a (statutory) trade secret, they did no legal wrong. ); Thomas & Betts , 108 F.
Supp. 2d at 971 (holding that the Illinois TSA was meant to codify all the
various common law remedies for theft of ideas.   (quoting Learning Curve
Toys, 1999 WL 529572 at *3)); Diamond Power, 540 F. Supp. 2d at 1345 ( If a
plaintiff could alternatively recover for misappropriation of non-proprietary
information or misappropriation of unguarded proprietary information, the
legislative judgment contained in the GTSA- that such information should
otherwise flow freely in the public domain- would be subverted. ); Ethypharm ,
388 F. Supp. 2d at 433 (same); Allied Erecting , 649 F. Supp. 2d at 720 (same);
Bliss Clearing, 270 F. Supp. 2d at 948-49 (same). 
29
    
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Courts and commentators have recognized the argument
 
that [b]y adopting this approach, courts would be leaving
 
businesses without an effective remedy for the misappropriation
 of information they viewed as valuable but that did not rise to
 the level of a trade secret.  Ahrens, Wisconsin Confidential,
 2007 Wis. L. Rev. at 1302; see also Mortgage Specialists, 904 A.
 2d at 664 (noting that its holding that non-contract claims based
 on confidential information are preempted may seem harsh ). 
However, the HUTSA does not preempt claims for the
 
misappropriation of such information when it is protected by
 
contract. See HRS § 482B-8(b)(1) (2008) ( This chapter does not
 
affect . . . [c]ontractual remedies, whether or not based upon
 
misappropriation of a trade secret[.] ). 
Further, commentators have cautioned that information
 
which is broader than the scope of information defined as a
 trade secret  by the UTSA, and not the subject of reasonable
 
efforts to maintain its secrecy does not deserve protection in
 the form of non-contract tort claims. The UTSA s definition of
 trade secret  is more inclusive than the previous definitions of
 trade secret  at common law. See 14 U.L.A. §1 at 538 (comment)
 
(noting that the UTSA s definition of trade secret  is broader
 
and more inclusive than the definition in the Restatement of
 Torts (First)); see also James Pooley, Trade Secrets, §
 
2.03[2][a] (2009) ( The Uniform Act definition [of a trade
 
30
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
secret] is thus considerably broader than that of Section 757 of
 
the original Restatement of Torts . . . . ). Professor Mark
 Lemley, in discussing how courts should treat the overlap between
 trade secret law and other torts such as breach of confidence,
 unfair competition, unjust enrichment and interference with
 contract, has stated that
 
[t]rade secret law should preempt these torts when they are
applied to protect information that would, if secret, have
been protected by trade secret law. That is, a plaintiff
who complains of the defendant s use of its information, but
who cannot prove that the information is secret, should not
be able to rely on one of these torts (or any other common
law variants) to bypass the requirement that it prove
 
secrecy. If trade secret law does not preempt these torts,
the point of the secrecy requirement will be lost, and with
it the benefits of dissemination of new inventions. 
Companies will be unable to rely on the presence of ideas in
the public domain; any information might potentially be
subject to one of these torts. As a result, companies will
be less willing to compete vigorously on the merits.
Departing employees will be less willing to rely on
information in the public domain to start new companies, and
as a result more reluctant at the margins to start those
companies. As Jim Pooley notes, there is arguably little
social utility  in allowing state claims based on
misappropriation of trade secrets to go forward if the
plaintiff cannot prove the elements of a trade secret claim.
 
Mark A. Lemley, The Surprising Virtues of Treating Trade Secrets
 
as IP Rights, 61 Stanford L. Rev. 311, 345-46 (Nov. 2008)
 
(footnotes omitted) (quoting Pooley, Trade Secrets, § 3.04[4],
 
3-43 to -44). 
Similar to the court in Burbank Grease II , BlueEarth
 
argues that 
the plain language of the preemption provision . . . refers
only to trade secrets  as defined by the Act . . . Since
 
31
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
there is no statutory language regarding preemption of other
confidential information not rising to the level of trade
secrets, there is no reason to think such preemption was
intended.
 
However, the HUTSA s preemption provision should not be 
considered in a vacuum.  Burbank Grease II, 717 N.W.2d at 798 
(Bradley, J., dissenting). Rather, this court must read statutory language in the context of the entire statute and construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose.  Kaho» ohanohano, 117 Hawai» i at 288, 178 P.3d at 564 (brackets 
omitted). Here, the Hawai» i State Legislature has directed that
 [a]ll
 provisions of uniform acts adopted by the State shall be
 
so interpreted and construed as to effectuate their general
 purpose and to make uniform the laws of the states and
 territories which enact them.  HRS § 1-24 (2009). As the
 
foregoing analysis shows, courts in other jurisdictions have not
 
been absolutely uniform in deciding whether non-contract claims
 based on information which does not rise to the level of a
 
statutorily-defined trade secret are preempted under the UTSA. 
However, the conclusion that such claims are preempted, reached
 
by the majority of courts to have considered the issue, comports
 with the HUTSA s goal of uniformity in the area of trade secret
 misappropriation.
 
The UTSA Commissioners made clear that the general
 
purpose  of the UTSA was uniformity of trade secret law. 14
 U.L.A § 8 at 656. 
32
     
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
A common law claim premised on information that fails to
qualify as a trade secret would seemingly undercut the
statute s primary goal of uniformity, potentially render
parties liable for using information that is not secret when
the UTSA would not impose liability, and potentially pose
Supremacy Clause problems. Likewise, it is not clear if
 such alternative claims would permit different results on
matters such as the statute of limitations, punitive
damages, attorneys  fees, and the like.
 
Pooley, Trade Secrets, § 2.03[6] (footnote omitted). The court
 
in Mortgage Specialists  noted that, along with the contribution
 
of unitary definitions of trade secret  and misappropriation 
 
[t]he UTSA also arose to create a uniform business
 
environment that created more certain standards for
 protection of commercially valuable information.  [ Auto
Channel, 144 F. Supp. 2d at 789.] [T]he purpose of the
preemption provision is to preserve a single tort action
under state law for misappropriation of a trade secret as
defined in the statute and thus to eliminate other tort
 
causes of action founded on allegations of misappropriation
of information that may not meet the statutory standard for
a trade secret.  [ Burbank I , 693 N.W.2d at 98.] As such,
 
the UTSA was meant to codify all the various common law
remedies for theft of ideas.  [ Thomas & Betts , 108 F. Supp.
2d at 971 (quotation omitted)]; see also [Bliss Clearing,
 
270 F. Supp. 2d at 948]. With the enactment of the UTSA,
 confidential information not rising to the level of a
statutory trade secret was left largely unprotected by the
law. See [N.H. Rev. Stat. §] 350-B:7, I. . . . If a common
 
law claim for unauthorized use of information that did not
 
meet the statutory definition of a trade secret were
permitted, the result would undermine the uniformity and
clarity that motivated the creation and passage of the
[UTSA].   Burbank Grease I , 693 N.W.2d at 99 (quoting Auto
 
Channel, 144 F. Supp. 2d at 789).
 
Mortgage Specialists , 904 A.2d at 663. The Mortgage Specialists
 
court s analysis is persuasive and consistent with the Hawai» i 
State Legislature s goals in adopting the HUTSA. See HRS § 1-24
 
(2009); see also Kaho» ohanohano, 117 Hawai» i at 288, 178 P.3d at 
33
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
564. Accordingly, we hold that the HUTSA preempts non-contract,
 
civil claims based on the improper acquisition, disclosure or use
 
of confidential and/or commercially valuable information that
 does not rise to the level of a statutorily-defined trade secret.
 
3.	 Preemption analysis is appropriate at the motion
to dismiss stage
 
In BlueEarth s view, preemption is proper only when
 
allegations are based upon trade secrets  as that phrase is
 
defined in the UTSA. Thus, BlueEarth argues that it is premature
 to consider preemption at the motion to dismiss stage because the
 
court does not yet have sufficient information to determine
 whether the allegations in the complaint rise to the level of
 
statutorily-defined trade secrets. However, as analyzed above,
 we hold that the HUTSA preempts claims when the alleged injury is
 
based on the improper acquisition, disclosure, or use of
 
confidential and/or commercially valuable information, whether or
 not that information rises to the level of a statutorily-defined
 
trade secret. As the court in Hauck  stated:
 
Plaintiff argues, at least in part, certain of its non-UTSA
claims against [defendant] are not preempted because they do
not depend on the information at issue qualifying as a
trade secret.  While some courts have employed language
seemingly indicating as much, a plaintiff surely cannot use
general tort causes of action to revive claims which would
otherwise not be cognizable in light of the UTSA (i.e. ,
 
claims alleging theft of non-trade secret information). It
 is a legal non sequitor to suggest general tort causes may
be employed to protect legal rights which otherwise do not
exist . . . such an approach would be wholly inconsistent
with the UTSA s goals of promoting uniformity and
predictability . . . A claim cannot be preempted or not
 
34
    
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
preempted based entirely upon whether or not the information
at issue qualifies as a trade secret. If the information is
 a trade secret, the plaintiff s claim is preempted; if not,
the plaintiff has no legal interest upon which to base his
or her claim. Either way, the claim is not cognizable.
 
Hauck, 375 F. Supp. 2d at 656-57 (internal citations omitted).14
 
Accordingly, we hold that a court need not wait to determine if
 
the allegedly misappropriated confidential and/or commercially
 valuable information constitutes a trade secret , as that term
 is defined in the HUTSA, before considering preemption.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Based on the analysis above, we answer the certified
 
questions as follows.
 
1.	 When are tort, restitutionary, and other law[s] of
this state  displaced because they conflict  with
 
HUTSA, [HRS] § 482B-8?
 Tort, restitutionary, and other law[s] of this state 
 
conflict with the HUTSA, are therefore displaced, to the extent
 
that they are based upon misappropriation of a trade secret. 
That is, if proof of a [non-HUTSA] claim would also
 
14
 See also Ethypharm, 388 F. Supp. 2d at 433 ( Because all claims
stemming from the same acts as the alleged misappropriation are intended to be
displaced, a claim can be displaced even if the information at issue is not a
trade secret. Thus, a determination of whether the information at issue
constitutes a trade secret under the DUTSA need not be addressed prior to
making a determination of displacement. ); Bliss Clearing , 270 F. Supp. 2d at
948-49 ( [T]he Court concludes that the disputed status of information as a
trade secret does not preclude a court from determining whether a claim or
claims are displaced by the MUTSA. ); Allied Erecting, 649 F. Supp. 2d at 722
( [T]he Court joins the majority view in finding that displacement of common-
law claims may precede the Court s determination of whether the information at
issue constitutes a trade secret. ); Mortgage Specialists , 904 A.2d at 666-668
(finding that a preemption analysis was proper at the motion to dismiss
stage).
 
35
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
simultaneously establish a claim for misappropriation of trade
 
secrets, it is preempted irrespective of whatever surplus
 elements or proof were necessary to establish it.  Hauck, 375 F.
 
Supp. 2d at 658. 
2.	 When a claim is found to conflict  with HUTSA, what is
the scope of preemption, or displacement, of that claim
under HRS § 482B-8?
 
For those claims found to conflict with the HUTSA, the
 
scope of displacement is complete. However, a claim may survive
 to the extent it alleges wrongful conduct independent of the
 
misappropriation of trade secrets.
 
3.	 May a claim that is found not to conflict  with HUTSA
 
still be preempted, or displaced, under HRS § 482B-8?
 
Only claims that are found to conflict with the HUTSA
 
are preempted. 
4.	 Does HUTSA also preempt, or displace, claims based upon
the alleged misuse of confidential information,  which
is determined, before or during trial, not to meet the
definition of trade secret  under HRS § 482B-8?
 
The HUTSA displaces non-contract civil claims based
 
upon the alleged acquisition, disclosure, or use of confidential
 information that does not rise to the level of a statutorily-
defined trade secret. Accordingly, it is unnecessary to
 
determine whether or not the information at issue meets the 
36
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST  S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
definition of a trade secret before addressing displacement under
 
the HUTSA.
 
On the briefs: 
Paul Alston and 
Clyde J. Wadsworth
(of Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing)
for Defendants-Appellants
Hawaiian Electric Company,
Inc.; Maui Electric Company,
Ltd.; and Karl E. Stahlkopf
 
C. Michael Heihre,
Calvert G. Chipchase,
and Teri-Ann E.S. Nagata
(of Cades Schutte) for
Defendant-Appellant
Aloha Petroleum, Ltd.
 
John S. Edmunds,
Ronald J. Verga,
and Joy S. Omonaka (of
Edmunds Verga & Omonaka),
Michael K. Hurst, Tonya
Parker, and Jaime Olin
(of Gruber Hurst Johansen &
Hail, LLP) for Plaintiff-
Appellee BlueEarth
Biofuels, LLC
 
37
 