NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000132
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
RYAN-SETH KIAHA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 13-1-1053)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.;

and Nakamura, C.J., concurring and dissenting)
 
Defendant-Appellant Ryan-Seth Kiaha (
Kiaha) appeals
 
from the February 3, 2016 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
 
(Judgment) filed in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
1
(Circuit Court).  Following a jury trial, Kiaha was convicted of
 
two counts of Ownership or Possession Prohibited [of any Firearm

 
or Ammunition by a Person Convicted of Certain Crimes] (Counts 2
 and 3), under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 134-7(b) and (h)
 
2
(2011) (Felon in Possession).  The Circuit Court sentenced Kiaha
 
1
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided. 
2
 HRS § 134-7 states, in relevant part: 
§ 134-7 
Ownership or possession prohibited, when;
penalty. . . .
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to concurrent terms of incarceration, each ten years, for Counts
 
2 and 3.
 
On appeal, Kiaha raises three points of error,
 
contending that the Circuit Court's jury instructions were
 prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
 misleading because the Circuit Court declined Kiaha's requests
 for jury instructions for a mistake of fact defense, for a
 defense based on HRS § 134-11 (2011), and for a defense of
 entrapment, as provided in HRS § 702-237 (2014).
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Kiaha's points of error as follows: 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court "has consistently held that a 
defendant is entitled to an instruction on every defense or theory of defense having any support in the evidence, provided such evidence would support the consideration of that issue by the jury, no matter how weak, inconclusive, or unsatisfactory the evidence may be." State v. Locquiao, 100 Hawai
'i 195, 205, 58 
P.3d 1242, 1252 (2002) (citations and quotation marks omitted). However, "where evidentiary support for an asserted defense, or 
2(...continued)
(b) No person who is under indictment for, or has
waived indictment for, or has been bound over to the circuit
court for, or has been convicted in this State or elsewhere
of having committed a felony, or any crime of violence, or
an illegal sale of any drug shall own, possess, or control
any firearm or ammunition therefor.
. . . .
 
(h) Any person violating subsection (a) or (b) shall
be guilty of a class C felony; provided that any felon
violating subsection (b) shall be guilty of a class B
felony.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
for any of its essential components, is clearly lacking, it would 
not be error for the trial court to refuse to charge on the issue or to instruct the jury not to consider it." State v. Sawyer, 88 
Hawai
'i 325, 333, 966 P.2d 637, 645 (1998) (citation and brackets 
omitted). 
(1) HRS § 702-218 (2014) sets forth the mistake of
 
fact defense as follows:
 
§ 702-218 Ignorance or mistake as a defense. In any
prosecution for an offense, it is a defense that the accused
engaged in the prohibited conduct under ignorance or mistake
of fact if:
 
(1)	 The ignorance or mistake negatives the state of
mind required to establish an element of the
offense; or
(2)	 The law defining the offense or a law related
thereto provides that the state of mind
established by such ignorance or mistake
constitutes a defense
.
 
Kiaha was convicted of committing two counts of Felon
 
in Possession, under HRS § 134-7(b), which states in relevant
 
part that "[n]o person who . . . has been convicted in this State
 or elsewhere of having committed a felony . . . shall own,
 possess, or control any firearm or ammunition therefor." 
Pursuant to HRS § 702–204 (2014), "[w]hen the state of mind
 required to establish an element of an offense is not specified
 by the law, that element is established if, with respect thereto,
 a person acts intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly." HRS §
 134–7(b) does not specify a state of mind; thus, pursuant to HRS
 § 702–204, the requisite state of mind necessary to convict a
 person of the offense proscribed by HRS § 134–7(b) is established
 if the accused owns, possesses, or controls a firearm or
 ammunition intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Here, Kiaha stipulated to the fact that he was
 
previously convicted of a felony. In addition, Kiaha points to
 
no evidence that he did not intentionally, knowingly, or
 recklessly possess a firearm (Count 2) and ammunition (Count 3). 
On the contrary, Kiaha testified that he got a gun and ammunition
 from Mana Bagio (Bagio) and stored it in his car. There is no
 
dispute that Kiaha knowingly possessed a gun and ammunition.
 
Kiaha's argument is, rather, that he had a mistaken
 
belief that he could possess a firearm and ammunition if his
 
purpose was to turn it in to the police as evidence, as part of
 his confidential informant activity. However, a mistaken belief 
that he could possess a firearm and ammunition does not negative
 the state of mind required to establish, pursuant to HRS § 702­218, an element of the offense of Felon in Possession. Thus,
 Kiaha was not entitled to a mistake of fact instruction. We
 conclude, therefore, the Circuit Court did not err in declining
 to give a mistake of fact instruction.
 
(2) HRS § 134-11(a) provides exemptions to, inter
 
alia, the application of HRS § 134-7(b) to specified individuals
 under certain circumstances. HRS § 134-11(a) states, in relevant
 part:
 
§ 134-11 Exemptions.  (a) Sections 134-7 to 134-9 and
134-21 to 134-27, except section 134-7(f), shall not apply:
. . . . 
(4)	 To persons employed by the State, or
subdivisions thereof, or the United States while
in the performance of their respective duties or
while going to and from their respective places
of duty if those duties require them to be
armed[.]
 
Kiaha argues that he was entitled to an instruction
 
regarding this exemption because he was "employed" by the State,
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or a subdivision thereof, as a confidential informant and was
 
compensated by the police for his work. As the State argues,
 however, the statute only exempts the specified persons if they
 are "in the performance of their respective duties or while going
 to and from their respective places of duty if those duties
 
require them to be armed[.]" HRS § 134-11(a)(4) (emphasis
 added). There was no evidence adduced at trial showing that
 
Kiaha's "duties" as a confidential informant required him to be
 armed, regardless of whether he could be considered as employed
 by the police. Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 did not err in declining to instruct the jury regarding the 
HRS § 134-11(a) exemption.
 
(3) HRS § 702-237 states, in relevant part:
 
§ 702-237 Entrapment. (1) In any prosecution, it is
an affirmative defense that the defendant engaged in the
prohibited conduct or caused the prohibited result because
the defendant was induced or encouraged to do so by a law
enforcement officer, or by a person acting in cooperation
with a law enforcement officer, who, for the purpose of
obtaining evidence of the commission of an offense, either:
(a)	 Knowingly made false representations designed to
induce the belief that such conduct or result
 was not prohibited; or
(b)	 Employed methods of persuasion or inducement
which created a substantial risk that the
 offense would be committed by persons other than
those who are ready to commit it.
 
There was scant evidence adduced at trial that a law
 
enforcement officer, or a person acting in cooperation with a law
 
enforcement officer, knowingly made false representations
 designed to induce Kiaha's belief that his possession of a
 firearm or ammunition was not prohibited, as stated in HRS § 702­237(1)(a). More clearly, however, there was evidence that would
 support the consideration of the entrapment defense stated in HRS
 § 702-237(1)(b), i.e., that a law enforcement officer, or a
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
person acting in cooperation with a law enforcement officer,
 
employed methods of persuasion or inducement which created a
 substantial risk that an offense would be committed by Kiaha, as
 a person who was not otherwise ready to commit the offense.
 
At trial, Kiaha testified that members of the Honolului
 
Police Department (HPD) told him to "get close to" and "befriend"
 
suspects, and if suspects "committed any crimes while in my
 
presence or while I'm there, then to retrieve some form of
 evidence that can link this person to the actual crime." Kiaha
 testified that he "got paid" for turning in evidence. Officer
 Hayes Marumoto testified that Kiaha was asked to assist with the
 investigation of firearm offenses, the goal of which is to obtain
 the firearm. Kiaha testified that Officer Donald Marumoto asked
 Kiaha to help make a case against Bagio, the person from whom
 Kiaha obtained the firearm and ammunition. 
Kiaha testified that there was a time he turned in a
 
gun to Officer Donald Marumoto and another HPD officer he knew as
 "Taz." Kiaha testified that the officers were "happy" and "glad"
 that Kiaha turned the gun in, said thank you, and "seemed
 pleased." Kiaha testified that he was given money in
 compensation for turning in the gun. Kiaha testified that he was
 not told by the officers to not turn in the gun. Kiaha testified
 that he thought the officers, by complimenting his work,
 authorized him to handle a firearm if he was going to turn it in
 as evidence. 
Kiaha testified that he had the firearm and ammunition
 
so he "could turn them in to HPD and get some kind of
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
compensation for it." Kiaha testified that he believed he could
 
do this because he "had done so before" and "was told to do that,
 that it was okay." Kiaha testified that he could not have just
 dropped off the gun at the Kaneohe Police Station after he
 obtained the gun because he "was instructed to only deal with the
 crime reduction unit." Kiaha's testimony sufficiently invokes
 the proposition that police officers used methods of persuasion
 or inducement that create a substantial risk that a Felon in
 Possession offense would be committed by Kiaha, when he was not
 otherwise ready to commit it, entitling Kiaha to an instruction
 based on HRS § 702-237(b). In addition, Kiaha's testimony that,
 in reference to his retrieval of a weapon or ammunition "was told
 to do that, that it was okay," entitled Kiaha to an instruction
 based on HRS § 702-237(b).
 
As noted above, "a defendant is entitled to an 
instruction on every defense or theory of defense having any support in the evidence[.]" Locquiao, 100 Hawai
'i at 205, 58 
P.3d at 1252 (emphasis added). Kiaha specifically requested entrapment instructions. There was evidence to support such an instruction. The Circuit Court thus erred in refusing to give an entrapment defense instruction. 
The State argues that, even if an entrapment
 
instruction was warranted, the error is harmless because the
 Circuit Court instructed the jury on the execution of public duty
 defense, as follows:
 
Execution of public duty is a defense to the charges
of Ownership or Possession Prohibited of Any Firearm by a
Person Convicted of Certain Crimes, Ownership or Possession
Prohibited of Any Ammunition for a Firearm by a Person
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Convicted of Certain Crimes, and Place to Keep Pistol or
Revolver. The burden is on the prosecution to prove beyond
a reasonable doubt that the Defendant's conduct was not
 justified. If the prosecution does not meet its burden,
then you must find the Defendant not guilty.
Conduct is justifiable when the person reasonably
believes his conduct to be required or authorized to assist
a public officer in the performance of the officer's duties.
 
However, the public duty defense and entrapment defense
 
are not the same. Pursuant to HRS § 703-303 (2014), the public
 
duty instruction stated that a person's "[c]onduct is justifiable
 when the person reasonably believes his conduct to be required or
 authorized to assist a public officer in the performance of the
 officer's duties." (Emphasis added). Thus, to establish a
 public duty defense, the defendant has the burden to show not
 only his belief, but that his belief was reasonable. The
 entrapment defense, however, does not require the defendant's
 belief to be reasonable. Instead, the defense is based on the
 conduct of the law enforcement officer – whether an officer
 knowingly made certain false representations or whether an
 officer employed certain methods that created a substantial risk
 of a crime that would not otherwise have been committed, as set
 forth above. HRS § 702-237. Accordingly, we reject the State's
 argument that the jury's rejection of the public duty defense
 renders harmless the Circuit Court's failure to give an
 entrapment instruction.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore, the Circuit Court's February 3, 2016
 
Judgment is vacated and this case is remanded to the Circuit
 
Court for a new trial.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 30, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Keith S. Shigetomi,
for Defendant-Appellant. Associate Judge 
Brandon H. Ito,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
9
 