         
 
       
        
         
        
         
        
         
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACI FIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000552 13-JUN-2025 08:30 AM Dkt. 56 SO 
NO.  CAAP-23-0000552 
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE  COURT  OF  APPEALS 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
STATE  OF  HAWAI I,  Plaintiff-Appellee,   v.  
ARTHUR  ONG,  Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL  FROM  THE  DISTRICT  COURT  OF  THE  FIRST  CIRCUIT 
HONOLULU  DIVISION 
(CASE  NO.  1DTC-22-026436) 
SUMMARY  DISPOSITION  ORDER 
(By:   Leonard,  Acting  Chief  Judge,  Wadsworth  and  Nakasone,  JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant  Arthur  Ong  (Ong)  appeals  from  the 
August  25,  2023  Notice  of  Entry  of  Judgment  And/Or  Order  and 
Plea/Judgment  (Judgment ),  entered  by  the  District  Court  of  the 
First  Circuit  (District  Court)  in  favor  of  Plaintiff-Appellee 
State  of  1
Hawai i  (State). 
Ong
 raises a single point of error on appeal, 
contending that the District Court erred in finding and 
concluding that there was sufficient evidence to convict Ong of 
Collisions Involving Damage to Vehicle or Property, in violation 
of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291C-13 (Supp. 2021). 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
1 The Honorable Karin L. Holma presided.          
         
     
        
          
         
         
         
          
         
         
          
        
          
            
          
         
           
        
   
        
         
            
            
           
         
           
           
           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Ong's 
point of error as follows: 
This case stems from a vehicle collision that occurred 
in Honolulu on July 8, 2022, involving Ong and William Nakamura 
(Nakamura ). During a bench trial, Nakamura testified that the 
accident occurred in front of Maryknoll School, just before the 
freeway on-ramp going westbound. Nakamura testified that he "got 
sideswiped," and that the back corner of Ong's vehicle, which was 
a white truck, collided with the front corner of Nakamura's 
vehicle, which caused damage which could be seen on Nakamura's 
vehicle as a blue and possibly black scratch. Nakamura further 
testified that, after the collision, he continued driving behind 
Ong, then alongside Ong, honked multiple times at him, that Ong 
looked at him, and that even after driving over half a mile, Ong 
did not stop or pull over, despite that there were "shoulder 
lanes along the freeway [where they] could have possibly pulled 
over." Nakamura testified that he had to drive someone to the 
airport, drove to the airport, and subsequently reported the 
incident to the police. 
Ong, the only other witness to testify at trial, 
testified that sometime later, while he was in the Philippines, 
he received a call from police and was informed that he had been 
in an accident. He testified that he was asked whether his truck 
was blue, to which he replied "no, it's white," but that the 
bolts under his vehicle were blue. Additionally, Ong testified 
that he recalled that on the day in question, a vehicle suddenly 
stopped on his right side, that he did not remember any honking, 
that the driver "stuck his finger at [him]," passed him, and that 
2          
   
    
   
       
         
   
      
 
      
         
        NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
finally,  Ong  took  the  Vineyard  off-ramp,  went  to  Lowe's  and 
checked  his  vehicle  and  saw  "there  was  no  damage."   Ong  also 
testified  that  it  was  not  the  first  time  he  had  been  in  a  car 
accident,  and  that  he's  "always  called  the  police." 
After closing arguments, the District Court found Ong 
guilty as charged, stating: 
Mr. Ong, the Court does find you guilty. 
Court  finds  that  the  State  presented  evidence  beyond  a 
reasonable  doubt  that  .  .  .  you  did  violate  291C-13.   Court 
finds  that  on  July  8,  2022,  as  presented  by  the  testimony  of 
Mr.  Nakamura,  whom  the  Court  found  to  be  credible,  that  he 
was  driving,  and  that  he  was  sideswiped  by  you.   Mr. 
Nakamura  credibly  testified  that  you  were  the  person  that  he 
identified  as  the  person  who  sideswiped  him.   He  testified 
that  he  tried  –- essentially,  he  honked  at  you.   You  said  he 
flipped  the  finger  at  you.   He  may  have  done  that.   But  in 
any  event,  he  tried  to  get  your  attention,  and  you  did  not 
take  any  action  whatsoever.   So,  the  Court  does,  again,  find 
him  to  be  credible. 
Mr.  Ong,  you  testified  that  you  kept  driving,  and  you 
went  to  the  Lowe's  parking  lot  where  you  checked  your  truck, 
and  you  determined  that  there  was  no  damage  to  the  truck,  so 
you  assumed  nothing  had  happened.   That  leads  the  Court  to 
believe  that,  in  fact,  you  knew  something  had  happened  on 
July  8th,  2022. 
Bu
t in any event, the Court is persuaded by the 
testimony of Mr. Nakamura. 
And the Court does find you guilty. 
Ong  argues  that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  that 
the  collision  damaged  Nakamura's  vehicle  and/or  that  Ong  could 
have  stopped  at  or  near  the  scene  of  the  collision  "without 
obstructing  traffic  more  than  is  necessary,"  in  part  because 
"Nakamura  was  not  asked,  nor  did  he  testify  that  the  damage  he 
saw  and  photographed  was  the  result  of  the  collision,"  and 
because  the  statute  plainly  requires  that  the  collision  must 
result  in  damage  to  either  vehicle. 
We
 review the sufficiency of evidence as follows: 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in 
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate 
3          
         
        
             
        
       
     
        
        
         
    
         
         
        
       
         
         
        
        
        
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to 
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the 
case was before a judge or jury. The test on appeal is not 
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but 
whether there was substantial evidence to support the 
conclusion of the trier of fact. 
'Substantial evidence' as to every material element of the 
offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient 
quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable 
caution to support a conclusion. 
State v. Kalaola, 124  Hawai i 43, 49,  237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010)
(cleaned  up).
             
Verdicts based on conflicting evidence will not be set aside 
where there is substantial evidence to support the trier of 
fact's findings. We have defined substantial evidence as 
credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and 
probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to 
support a conclusion. It is well-settled that an appellate 
court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the 
credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; 
this is the province of the trier of fact. 
State  v.  Mattiello,   90  Hawai i   255,  259,   978  P.2d  693,  697  (1999) 
(cleaned  up). 
HRS §
 291C-13 states: 
§  291C-13  Collisions  involving  damage  to  vehicle  or 
property.   The  driver  of  any  vehicle  involved  in  a  collision 
resulting  only  in  damage  to  a  vehicle  or  other  property  that 
is  driven  or  attended  by  any  person  shall  immediately  stop 
the  vehicle  at  the  scene  of  the  collision  or  as  close 
thereto  as  possible,  but  shall  forthwith  return  to,  and  in 
every  event  shall  remain  at,  the  scene  of  the  collision 
until  the  driver  has  fulfilled  the  requirements  of  section 
291C-14.   Every  stop  shall  be  made  without  obstructing 
traffic  more  than  is  necessary.   For  any  violation  under 
this  section,  a  surcharge  of  up  to  $100  may  be  imposed,  in 
addition  to  other  penalties,  which  shall  be  deposited  into 
the  trauma  system  special  fund. 
Here,  evidence  was  adduced  at  trial  to  support  that  Ong 
was  involved  in  a  collision  resulting  in  damage  to  the  driver's 
side  front  fender  of  Nakamura's  vehicle,  and  that  Ong  understood 
he  had  been  involved  in  a  collision  as  evidenced  by  him  checking 
his  truck  for  damage  at  the  Lowe's  parking  lot,  and  although  he 
could  have,  Ong  did  not  stop  at  the  scene  of  the  collision  or 
close  thereto.   Ong  testified  largely  to  the  contrary;  however, 
the  District  Court  found  Nakamura's  testimony  to  be  credible,  and 
4
          
  
      
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
expressed  doubt  concerning  Ong's  testimony.   This  court  will  not 
pass  upon  the  credibility  of  these  testifying  witnesses.   We 
conclude  that  there  is  substantial  evidence  to  support  the 
District  Court's  conclusion.  
For these
 reasons, the District Court's August 25, 2023 
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED:   Honolulu,  Hawai i,  June  13,  2025. 
On  the  briefs: /s/  Katherine  G.  Leonard 
Acting  Chief  Judge 
William  H.  Jameson,  Jr., 
Deputy  Public  Defender, /s/  Clyde  J.  Wadsworth 
for  Defendant-Appellant. Associate  Judge 
Stephen  K.  Tsushima, /s/  Karen  T.  Nakasone 
Deputy  Prosecuting  Attorney, Associate  Judge 
for  Plaintiff-Appellee. 
5
 