NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000824
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
RUDRA TAMM, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
BART SNYDER and MING FANG, Defendants-Appellees, 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 16-1-0075)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.)
This case arises from a dispute between Plaintiff-
Appellant Rudra Tamm (Tamm ) and Defendants-Appellees Bart Snyder
(Snyder) and Ming Fang (Fang ) involving an easement over real
property owned by Jeffrey Sargent ( Sargent) and Mary Sargent
(collectively, the Sargents).  The Sargents are not parties to
this action.  The Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit ( Circuit
Court) held that the Sargents were indispensable parties and
dismissed Tamm's complaint pursuant to Rule 19 of the Hawai#i
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP ) (eff. 2000).  The Circuit Court
also awarded attorneys' fees and costs to Snyder and to Fang. 
Tamm appeals from the Judgment  entered by the Circuit Court on
July 22, 2019. We vacate the Judgment and the awards of
attorneys' fees and costs and remand this case for further
proceedings as discussed below.1/
1/The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
I.
The following findings of fact made by the Circuit
Court are not challenged on appeal and are binding on the parties
and this appellate court, Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai# i 43, 63, 85
P.3d 150, 170 (2004): Tamm is the trustee and beneficiary of the
Rudra Tamm Revocable Trust ( Trust).  The Trust owns real property
in Hanalei on the island of Kaua #i (the Tamm Property).  The
Sargents own real property (the Sargent Property ) adjacent to the
Tamm Property.  Fang owns real property (the Fang Property)
adjacent to the Tamm Property and the Sargent Property.  The
Sargent Property is burdened by recorded easements in favor of
the Tamm Property (the Tamm Easement ) and the Fang Property (the
Fang Easement).  The Tamm Easement overlaps a portion of the Fang
Easement.  The document establishing the Tamm Easement (the Grant
of Easement ) contains language requiring that Tamm obtain the
Sargents's approval before improving the Tamm Easement.  The
Grant of Easement also provides that any dispute concerning the
application, interpretation, or enforcement of the document's
provisions is subject to mandatory mediation and arbitration.
II.
Tamm's complaint contains the following allegations:  
Tamm purchased his property in a foreclosure auction some time
before January 2014.  Sargent gave Tamm verbal permission to walk
across the Sargent Property to access the Tamm Property.   In
January 2014 Tamm installed 8-inch diameter culverts covered with
heavy gauge galvanized steel plate in an intermittent stream to
create a walking pathway over the Sargent Property.3/2/
Tamm left Kaua#i in March 2014.  He returned to Kaua #i
in January 2015.  The culverts and steel plate were gone.  The
intermittent stream had become an extended wet area filled with
debris.  Tamm removed the debris and created a crude swale by
2/We recite the allegations in the complaint only to provide
context; we do not endorse the veracity of the allegations.
3/A map attached to Tamm's complaint shows that the Tamm Property
and the Fang Property are landlocked.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
placing concrete blocks filled with gravel in the bed of the
intermittent stream.
Tamm purchased the Tamm Easement from Sargent in
February 2015.  Tamm left Kaua#i in April 2015.  When he returned
in December 2015, Sargent told him to remove the swale and to
install a culvert in the easement where the swale was located. 
Tamm installed culverts, concrete slabs, dirt, and gravel to
create an all-weather road that provided vehicle access across
the Sargent Property to the Tamm Property and to the Fang
Property.  Tamm did not send Sargent a drawing of the culvert
installation.4/
In January 2016 Fang informed Tamm that the culverts
were substandard, obstructing Fang's access to the Fang Property,
and interfering with Fang's installation of underground
utilities.  In February 2016 Fang informed Tamm and Sargent that
the culvert placement was unacceptable, demanded the return of
his concrete slabs, and threatened litigation.  In March 2016
Sargent informed Tamm that the culverts were substandard.  On
March 14, 2016, Sargent wrote to Tamm: "I have spent hundreds of
dollars on [an attorney] this week defending myself against Ming
Fang and will spend thousands more as this drags on all because
of your actions."
On April 5, 2016, Snyder removed the culverts from the
easement, tore up the all-weather road, and placed the concrete
slabs on the Fang Property.  Snyder's activity created a mud hole
that deprived Tamm of vehicular access to the Tamm Property,
prevented Tamm from using or selling the Tamm Property, and
decreased the value of the Tamm Property.
Tamm's complaint prays for an award of unspecified
damages and "[a]n Order that [Snyder and Fang] restore [Tamm's]
vehicular access to [the Tamm Property] via an all-weather,
driveable road along [the Tamm Easement]."
4/The Grant of Easement, attached as Exhibit 1 to Tamm's complaint,
required that Tamm obtain Sargent's prior approval of plans and drawings for
improvements to the easement, including a site plan showing the location of
all construction work (including staging areas) and construction plans with
sufficient detail to allow Sargent to determine whether Tamm's proposed
improvements are engineered on a professional and workmanlike basis.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
III.
Tamm's complaint was filed on April 18, 2016.  On
August 16, 2016, Snyder filed a motion to dismiss the complaint
pursuant to HRCP Rules 12(b)(7) (eff. 2000) and 19.  Fang filed a
joinder on August 29, 2016. Snyder's motion was supported by
Sargent's declaration stating, among other things:
11.Mr. Tamm has admitted in his Complaint against
Ming Fang and Bart Snyder that he entered our Property
before he obtained the Grant of Easement and modified the
drainage stream crossing our Property.  Mr. Tamm did this
without my wife or my knowledge or permission.  Mr. Tamm's
actions blocked the drainage stream causing standing water
over a significant portion of our Property for over a year.
12.In early December of 2015, I spoke with Mr. Tamm
and told him that, because of the problems he caused when he
modified the drainage stream on our Property, I wanted him
to consult with a licensed professional prior to installing
any improvements over the easement.  I referred him to
[Snyder] to discuss the installation of culverts.  Mr. Tamm
has misinterpreted our conversation and now appears to
believe that I told him that he could single-handedly
install culverts over the easement.
. . . .
16.On Feb. 1, 2016, I sent Mr. Tamm a letter via
Registered Mail wherein I explained that when I granted him
access I carefully constructed our Easement Agreement to
avoid the kinds of conflicts he was now causing with his co-
grantee Mr. Fang.  I demanded that Mr. Tamm provide me with
plans for the culverts, so I could manage what he was doing,
and also share this information with Mr. Fang.  Mr. Tamm
ignored this letter and did not provide me with any plans.
. . . .
21.On March 16, 2016, I emailed Mr. Tamm that (1)
that his impermissible installation of the culverts violated
the terms of the Grant of Easement and (2) that I was going
to have the culverts removed. . . .
22.Soon after my March 16, 2016 email, I hired
[Snyder] to remove the culverts that Mr. Tamm had improperly
installed on the easement. I instructed Mr. Snyder to leave
the concrete slabs that Mr. Tamm had incorporated into the
structure of his culverts on Mr. Ming Fang (another
neighbor's) property, based upon Mr. Tamm's previous
representations to me that these slabs belonged to Mr. Fang.
. . . .
25.On May 4, 2016, [my attorney] sent a demand
letter to Rudra Tamm informing him that Bart Snyder was
acting on behalf of myself and my wife when he removed the
culverts and again demanding mediation. . . .
26.To date, Rudra Tamm has refused to mediate this
dispute, despite my demands that he do so in accordance with
the mandatory mediation and arbitration provision in the
Grant of Easement.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Fang also submitted a declaration in support of his joinder in
Snyder's motion stating, among other things:
7.[Tamm's] easement and my easement through the Sargent
parcel overlap; therefore, I am concerned about any
construction, improvements, or other activities by
[Tamm] on the easement premises which would adversely
affect my use and enjoyment of the easement.  I
previously shared these concerns with Mr. Sargent.
8.In early 2016, [Tamm] installed two culverts in the
easement premises, which obstructed my access.
. . . .
10.Although I did not approve of [Tamm's] culverts, I did
not take the liberty of moving the culverts myself. 
Instead, I contacted Mr. Sargent to relay my concerns
and ask that he, as the owner of the servient estate,
remedy the situation.
The Circuit Court entered findings of fact, conclusions of law,
and an order granting Snyder's motion to dismiss and Fang's
joinder on November 7, 2016.  This appeal followed.5/
IV.
HRCP Rule 19 provides, in relevant part:
(a) Persons to be joined if feasible .  A person who is
subject to service of process shall be joined as a party in
the action if (1) in the person's absence complete relief
cannot be accorded among those already parties, or (2) the
person claims an interest relating to the subject of the
action and is so situated that the disposition of the action
in the person's absence may (A) as a practical matter impair
or impede the person's ability to protect that interest or
(B) leave any of the persons already parties subject to a
substantial risk of incurring double, multiple, or otherwise
inconsistent obligations by reason of the claimed interest. 
If the person has not been so joined, the court shall order
that the person be made a party.  If the person should join
as a plaintiff but refuses to do so, the person may be made
a defendant, or, in a proper case, an involuntary plaintiff.
(b) Determination by court whenever joinder not
feasible .  If a person as described in subdivision
(a)(1)-(2) hereof cannot be made a party, the court shall
determine whether in equity and good conscience the action
should proceed among the parties before it, or should be
dismissed, the absent person being thus regarded as
indispensable.  The factors to be considered by the court
include: first, to what extent a judgment rendered in the
person's absence might be prejudicial to the person or those
5/Tamm's notice of appeal was filed on November 21, 2016.  We
remanded the case twice for entry of a final judgment pursuant to Waikiki v.
Ho#omaka Vill. Ass'n. of Apartment Owners, 140 Hawai #i 197, 204, 398 P.3d 786,
793 (2017).
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
already parties; second, the extent to which, by protective
provisions in the judgment, by the shaping of relief, or
other measures, the prejudice can be lessened or avoided;
third, whether a judgment rendered in the person's absence
will be adequate; fourth, whether the plaintiff will have an
adequate remedy if the action is dismissed for nonjoinder.
(c) Pleading reasons for nonjoinder .  A pleading
asserting a claim for relief shall state the names, if known
to the pleader, of any persons as described in subdivision
(a)(1)-(2) hereof who are not joined, and the reasons why
they are not joined.
The Hawai#i Supreme Court has held:
HRCP Rule 19 addresses the joinder of a nonparty determined
to be necessary for a just adjudication.  We have generally
recognized a two-step analysis under Rule 19, corresponding
with subsections (a) and (b) of this rule:
First, the court must determine whether an
absent party should be joined if feasible
according to the factors listed in subsection
(a).  Second, if the party meets the
requirements under subsection (a) but it is not
feasible to join the party to the lawsuit, the
court must proceed to Rule 19(b) to determine
whether it may decide the case without the
nonparty.  If the court must dismiss the lawsuit
rather than moving forward without the absent
party, the nonparty is labeled "indispensable."
Under subsection (a) of Rule 19, an absent person will be
necessary for a just adjudication if one or more of the
following apply:
(1) in the person's absence complete relief
cannot be accorded among those already parties,
or (2) the person claims an interest relating to
the subject of the action and is so situated
that the disposition of the action in the
person's absence may (A) as a practical matter
impair or impede the person's ability to protect
that interest or (B) leave any of the persons
already parties subject to a substantial risk of
incurring double, multiple, or otherwise
inconsistent obligations by reason of the
claimed interest.
Civil Beat Law Ctr. for the Pub. Interest, Inc. v. City & Cty. of
Honolulu, 144 Hawai#i 466, 484–85, 445 P.3d 47, 65–66 (2019)
(citations omitted).  "Where the trial court has made a determi-
nation as to a party's indispensability, appellate courts must
review the trial court's decision for an abuse of discretion." 
Id. at 474, 445 P.3d at 55 (brackets and citation omitted).  A
trial court abuses its discretion "if it bases its ruling on an
erroneous view of the law or on a clearly erroneous assessment of
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the evidence."  Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 Hawai#i 490, 495, 280
P.3d 88, 93 (2012) (citations omitted).
We initially note that Tamm's statement of the points
of error does not challenge the Circuit Court's conclusion of law
no. 13, which states:
13.Under Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule
19(a), complete relief cannot be afforded in this case
without the presence of the Sargents.
Since the Circuit Court's determination that the Sargents were
parties who should be joined if feasible is not challenged,6/ the
issue presented by this appeal is whether it was feasible to join
the Sargents as parties.
The Circuit Court concluded:
14.It is not feasible to join the Sargents to this
proceeding, because the underlying dispute concerns the
application, interpretation or enforcement of [Tamm]'s Grant
of Easement, which is subject to mandatory mediation and
arbitration under Article II, Section 21 of the same.
Tamm contends that the Circuit Court erred because it was
feasible for the Sargents to be joined as parties to the lawsuit
(by Snyder and Fang, as third-party joint tortfeasor defendants). 
We agree that the Circuit Court erred in concluding that it was
not feasible to join the Sargents, but not for the reasons
advanced by Tamm.
The Circuit Court held that it was not feasible to join
the Sargents because of the mandatory mediation and arbitration
provision in the Grant of Easement.  That provision states that
arbitration is "subject to the provisions of Hawaii Revised
Statutes Chapter 658A."  HRS Chapter 658A is the Uniform
Arbitration Act as adopted by Hawai#i.  The Uniform Arbitration
Act does not immunize a party to an arbitration agreement from
being sued.  The Sargents own real property located in the State
of Hawai# i and are thus subject to the jurisdiction of the
6/Tamm's complaint specifically prays for "[a]n Order that [Snyder
and Fang] restore [Tamm]'s vehicular access to [the Tamm Property] via an all-
weather, driveable road along [the Tamm Easement]."  The Grant of Easement
requires that the Sargents approve all plans and drawings before such a road
can be constructed.  Thus the Circuit Court correctly ruled that the relief
sought by Tamm cannot be afforded without the presence of the Sargents in the
case.
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Circuit Court under HRS § 634-35(a)(3) (1993).  It was feasible 
for Tamm to have joined them as parties.  Once joined the
Sargents could, if they wished, initiate arbitration pursuant to
HRS § 658A-9 (2016)  and move to compel Tamm to mediate and
arbitrate any dispute "regarding the application, interpretation
or enforcement of any provision of this Grant [of Easement]"
pursuant to HRS § 658A-7 (2016).   See Ueoka v. Szymanski, 107
Hawai#i 386, 394-95, 114 P.3d 892, 900-01 (2005).  Because it was
feasible for Tamm to have joined the Sargents as parties, the
Circuit Court should not have dismissed Tamm's complaint.  The
Circuit Court should instead have issued an "order that the8/7/
7/HRS § 658A-9 provides, in relevant part:
(a)A person initiates an arbitration proceeding by
giving notice in a record to the other parties to the
agreement to arbitrate in the agreed manner between the
parties or, in the absence of agreement, by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested and obtained, or
by service as authorized for the commencement of a civil
action. The notice shall describe the nature of the
controversy and the remedy sought.
8/HRS § 658A-7 provides, in relevant part:
(a)On motion of a person showing an agreement to
arbitrate and alleging another person's refusal to arbitrate
pursuant to the agreement:
(1)If the refusing party does not appear or does
not oppose the motion, the court shall order the
parties to arbitrate; and
(2)If the refusing party opposes the motion, the
court shall proceed summarily to decide the
issue and order the parties to arbitrate unless
it finds that there is no enforceable agreement
to arbitrate.
. . . .
(e)If a proceeding involving a claim referable to
arbitration under an alleged agreement to arbitrate is pending in
court, a motion under this section shall be made in that
court . . . .
(f)If a party makes a motion to the court to order
arbitration, the court on just terms shall stay any judicial
proceeding that involves a claim alleged to be subject to the
arbitration until the court renders a final decision under this
section.
(g)If the court orders arbitration, the court on just
terms shall stay any judicial proceeding that involves a claim
subject to the arbitration.  If a claim subject to the arbitration
is severable, the court may limit the stay to that claim.
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
person be made a party."  HRCP Rule 19(a); Civil Beat, 144
Hawai#i at 486, 445 P.3d at 67 (instructing circuit court on
remand to order necessary party to be joined).  As noted above,
Tamm did not appeal from the Circuit Court's conclusion of law
no. 13 that the Sargents were necessary parties — that is, that
complete relief cannot be afforded in this case without their
presence.  Accordingly, on remand the Circuit Court should enter
an order dismissing Tamm's complaint, but with leave to amend to
name the Sargents as parties.
Because of our ruling, we also vacate the Circuit
Court's orders and judgments awarding attorneys' fees and costs
to Snyder and Fang, without prejudice to future motions, if any,
that may become appropriate after remand.
V.
Based upon the foregoing, the Circuit Court's order
dismissing the complaint entered on November 7, 2016, the orders
and judgments awarding attorneys' fees and costs to Snyder and
Fang entered on January 6, 2017, and the Judgment entered on
July 22, 2019, are all vacated and this matter is remanded for
entry of an order dismissing Tamm's complaint, but with leave to
amend to name the Sargents as parties.
DATED:  Honolulu,  Hawai#i, October 2, 2019.
On the briefs:
Rudra Tamm,
Self-Represented Plaintiff-
Appellant.
Katherine A. Caswell,
for Defendant-Appellee Bart
Snyder.
Sherman Shiraishi,
for Defendant-Appellee Ming
Fang.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
9