NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000904
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
INDE COGGINS, JERRY COGGINS and COGGINS, INC.,
a Hawaii corporation, dba SPLASHER'S GRILL,
Plaintiffs/Counterclaim Defendants-Appellees,
v.
 
KONA SEASIDE, INC., a Hawaii corporation,
Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff-Appellant,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE ENTITIES,
Defendants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-252K)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
 
Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff-Appellant Kona
 
Seaside, Inc. (Kona Seaside) appeals from the Final Judgment and
 
Order Granting Plaintiffs/Counterclaim Defendants Inde Coggins,
 Jerry Coggins and Coggins, Inc., dba Splasher's Grill's
 (collectively, the Coggins Plaintiffs) Motion for Summary
 Judgment (Judgment) filed on October 28, 2015 in the Circuit
 Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).
1
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Kona Seaside is a Hawai' i corporation that owns and 
leases real property located in Kailua-Kona, Hawai' i. Coggins, 
Inc. (the Coggins Corporation), represented by Jerry and Inde 
1
 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Coggins as President and Vice-President, respectively, executed a
 
lease agreement on or about May 27, 2010 to lease a portion of
 real property (Property) from Kona Seaside (Lease) for the
 purpose of operating a restaurant. The Coggins Corporation
 currently operates a restaurant business on the Property under
 the name Splasher's Grill. The Lease term commenced on June 1,
 2010 and will expire on August 31, 2021. Kona Seaside and the
 Coggins Corporation are the only parties to the Lease.
 
A number of conditions were stipulated in the Lease.
 
As relevant to this appeal, Condition F. provided that "[i]f the
 restaurant is sold by [the Coggins Corporation] from September 1,
 2011 - August 31, 2016, [Kona Seaside] shall receive 40% of gross
 selling price, 35% from September 1, 2016 - August 31, 2021"
 (Sale Condition). The Lease also included the stipulation that
 Kona Seaside has "the right, whether reasonable or unreasonable,
 to reject a new Lessee, if the type of operation or financial
 picture of Lessee is different enough to change the entire type
 of operation and equal financial picture of seller" (Consent
 Provision). Finally, the Lease included a standard non-
assignment clause stating:
 
Lessee shall not assign this lease, or any interest
therein, and shall not sublet the said premises or any
part thereof, or any right or privilege appurtenant
thereto, or suffer any other person (the agents and
servants of Lessee expected) to occupy or use the said
premises, or any portion thereof, without the written
consent of Lessor first had and obtained, and a
consent to one assignment, subletting, occupation or
use by any other person, shall not be deemed to be a
consent to any subsequent assignment, subletting,
occupation or use by another person. Any such
assignment or subletting without such consent shall be
void, and shall, at the option of the Lessor,
terminate this lease. This lease shall not, nor shall
any interest therein, be assignable, as to the
interest of Lessee, by operation of law, without the
written consent of the Lessor.
 
(Non-Assignment Clause).
 
The entirety of the shares of the corporate stock of
 
the Coggins Corporation are owned by Inde and Jerry Coggins as
 
individuals (collectively, the Shareholders). On or about
 February 11, 2014, the Shareholders executed a Stock Sale and
 Purchase Agreement (Purchase Agreement), in which they contracted
 to sell the entirety of their stock in the Coggins Corporation to
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
two other individuals.
 
Kona Seaside, having learned of the Purchase Agreement,
 
sent a letter to the Coggins Corporation's counsel, on or about
 
March 20, 2014, informing him that Kona Seaside expected
 information regarding the proposed purchaser of the stocks so it
 could determine whether it would consent to the assignment of the
 Lease. Kona Seaside also notified counsel of its expectation
 that it would receive 40% of the gross selling price of the
 stocks sold pursuant to the Sale Condition in the Lease. Kona
 Seaside informed the Coggins Corporation that it would pursue
 "all of its available remedies" if its requests were not
 satisfied.
 
The Coggins Corporation responded to Kona Seaside and
 
explained that it understood that the sale of corporate stock was
 not a sale of the restaurant pursuant to the terms of the Lease.
 The Coggins Corporation argued that no provision in the Lease
 specified that the sale of a controlling interest through the
 sale of stock of the Coggins Corporation would be considered an
 assignment of the Lease and that Kona Seaside had no claim to any
 portion of the gross selling price of the Coggins Corporation's
 stock. As a result of the impasse between the Coggins
 Corporation and Kona Seaside, the Purchase Agreement was
 terminated.
 
The Coggins Corporation filed a complaint seeking a
 
declaratory judgment regarding the construction and
 interpretation of the Lease (Complaint). The Complaint sought a
 declaratory judgment holding that:
 
(1)	 The sale of the Shareholders' shares of stock in the
 
Coggins Corporation is not a sale of the "restaurant,"
 its good will, assets, furnishings and/or equipment, or
 an assignment of the Lease, within the meaning of the
 Lease; and
 
(2) 	Kona Seaside is not entitled to a commission from the
 
sale of the Shareholders' shares of stock in the
 Coggins Corporation.
 Kona Seaside answered the Complaint and filed its own
 
counterclaim (Counterclaim), seeking a declaratory judgment
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
holding that:
 
(1) the sale of all the stock of the Coggins Corporation is
 
a sale of the restaurant, entitling Kona Seaside to 40%
 of the gross selling price, if the sale was completed
 prior to August 31, 2016;
 
(2) Kona Seaside's written consent is required for any
 proposed sale of the stock because that is an
 assignment of "any interest" in the lease and would
 result in other persons occupying or using the premises
 as set forth in Paragraph 11 of the Lease; and 
(3) The Coggins Corporation and the Shareholders breached
 the duty of good faith and fair dealing by not
 notifying Kona Seaside of its intended sale of the
 restaurant, and their intention to turn over possession
 and the use of the premises to other persons, refusing
 to share information regarding the proposed purchaser
 with Kona Seaside, and threatening Kona Seaside and its
 president and director, Alan Kimi (Kimi), with criminal
 sanctions if Kona Seaside did not withdraw its demand
 for 40% of the gross selling price of the restaurant.
 Both parties sought summary judgment on their
 
respective claims. Final judgment was entered by the Circuit
 Court on or about October 28, 2015 (Judgment). The Judgment
 granted the Coggins Corporation's two motions for summary
 judgment on all counts in the Complaint and denied Kona Seaside's
 motion for summary judgment on all counts in the Counterclaim.
 The Circuit Court entered a declaratory judgment as follows:
 
(1)	 The Lease provisions do not require Plaintiffs
Inde Coggins and Jerry Coggins to obtain the
prior consent of [Kona Seaside] for the sale of
their corporate stock in [the Coggins
Corporation];
(2)	 The Lease provisions contain no restriction on
the right of Plaintiffs Inde Coggins and Jerry
Coggins to sell their shares of stock in [the
Coggins Corporation];
(3)	 Under the provisions of the Lease, [Kona
Seaside] is not entitled to a "commission" or
any other payment or compensation for any sale
of corporate stock by Plaintiffs Inde Coggins
and Jerry Coggins; and
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
(4) 	The Plaintiffs attempts to sell their corporate
stock in [the Coggins Corporation] do not
constitute a breach of implied covenant of good
faith and fair dealing under the terms of the
Lease.
 
Kona Seaside now appeals.
II.	 POINTS ON APPEAL
 
Kona Seaside asserts two points of error. In Point
 
One, Kona Seaside argues that the Circuit Court erred in granting
 
summary judgment in favor of the Coggins Plaintiffs "because the
 restaurant is clearly being sold and their interest in the Lease
 is being assigned." Alternatively, in Point Two, Kona Seaside
 argues that the Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment
 "because there were genuine issues of material fact as to the
 parties' intentions in the arguably vague and ambiguous language
 of the Lease." Kona Seaside argues that the language of the
 Lease's Sale Condition stating that it is entitled to a certain
 percentage of the gross selling price "[i]f the restaurant is
 sold" was made vague and ambiguous by the Coggins Plaintiffs'
 claim that the sale of the stock of the Coggins Corporation is
 not a sale of the restaurant.
 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
"On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is
 
reviewed de novo." First Ins. Co. of Hawai' i v. A & B Props., 
Inc., 126 Hawai' i 406, 413, 271 P.3d 1165, 1172 (2012) (citing 
Nuuanu Valley Ass'n v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 119 Hawai' i 90, 
96, 194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008)). Furthermore,
 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions
on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show
that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact
and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law. A fact is material if proof of that
fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting
one of the essential elements of a cause of action or
 defense asserted by the parties. The evidence must be
 viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving
party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Id. at 413–14, 271 P.3d at 1172–73 (citation omitted).
IV.	 DISCUSSION
 At issue in both points on appeal is the construction
 
and interpretation of the Lease and the decision (1) whether the
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
sale of the stock of the Coggins Corporation by the Shareholders
 
requires the Shareholders to pay a commission from the gross
 selling price to Kona Seaside and (2) whether the sale of the
 stock without the consent of Kona Seaside is a violation of the
 Consent Provision and/or Non-Assignment Clause.
 
Regarding the court's review of a lease agreement, the
 
Hawai'i Supreme Court has instructed that 
[l]eases are essentially contractual in nature and are
reviewed under principles of contract law. Cho Mark
 
Oriental Food v. K & K Int'l, 73 Haw. 509, 519, 836
P.2d 1057, 1063 (1992); Maui Land & Pineapple Co. v.
Dillingham Corp., 67 Haw. 4, 10, 674 P.2d 390, 394
(1984) (leases should be analyzed under principles of
contract law); Lau v. Bautista, 61 Haw. 144, 149, 598
P.2d 161 Haw. P.2d 161, 165 (1975) ("a lease is
essentially a contractual relationship"); Lemle v. 
Breeden, 51 Haw. 426, 433, 462 P.2d 470, 475 (1969) (a
lease is "more importantly[ ] a contractual
relationship"). "Absent an ambiguity, contract terms
should be interpreted according to their plain,
ordinary, and accepted sense in common speech." Cho
 
Mark, 73 Haw. at 520, 836 P.2d at 1064. Moreover, the
"construction and the legal effect to be given a
contract is a question of law freely reviewable by an
appellate court." Id. at 519, 836 P.2d at 1063.
 
Aickin v. Ocean View Invs. Co., Inc., 84 Hawai' i 447, 457, 935 
P.2d 992, 1002 (1997). 
The Lease is an agreement between the Coggins
 
Corporation and Kona Seaside. The Shareholders, Inde and Jerry
 
Coggins, as individuals, are not parties to the Lease. The Sale
 Condition provides: "[i]f the restaurant is sold by [the Coggins
 Corporation] from September 1, 2011 - August 31, 2016, [Kona
 Seaside] shall receive 40% of gross selling price, 35% from
 September 1, 2016 - August 31, 2021. Kona Seaside argues that
 the proposed sale of the Shareholders' stock to new purchasers
 constitutes a sale of the restaurant triggering the obligation to
 pay a commission to Kona Seaside pursuant to the Sale Condition. 
We disagree for two reasons. First, a stock sale is not a sale
 of the "restaurant" under any reasonable construction. Second,
 the Shareholders are not parties to the Lease. We will address
 each issue in turn. 
The general rule in Hawai' i is that "when a corporation 
has been legally formed, it has an 'existence as a separate and distinct entity.'" Evanston Ins. Co. v. Luko, 7 Haw. App. 520, 
522, 783 P.2d 293, 295 (1989) (quoting Henry Waterhouse Tr. Co. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
v. Home Ins. Co. of Hawaii, 27 Haw. 572, 581 (1923)).
 
Accordingly, a corporation and its shareholders are distinct
 legal entities; this is true even where one individual owns all
 of the corporation's stock. See 18 C.J.S. Corporations § 6
 
(2018). Generally, a corporation, as a distinct legal entity,
 has the ability to lease property and otherwise enter into
 contracts in its own name. Id. at § 737 ("Corporations generally
 
have the same power as natural persons to make contracts"). 
There is no allegation by Kona Seaside that the Coggins
 Corporation was unable to contract in its own right and no
 allegation that there is any defect regarding the manner the
 Lease was executed. 
The Coggins Corporation is a distinct legal entity and
 
is the only lessee pursuant to the Lease. The Shareholders, as
 individuals, are distinct legal entities from the corporation
 and, in this case, are not parties to the Lease. Shareholders
 neither own the assets or property of the corporation nor are
 they personally liable for the debts of the corporation. 18A Am.
 Jur. 2d Corporations § 623, 717 (2018); see also 18 C.J.S.
 Corporations § 7. Rather, the shares of stock held by a
 shareholder represent the acquisition by that shareholder of "a
 fractional or proportional interest in the corporation's capital
 stock, assets, profits, and liabilities." 18A Am. Jur. 2d
 Corporations § 623. Of course, a shareholder may expressly
 guarantee an obligation of a corporation. See id. at § 723. 
However, no such guarantee was provided in the present case.
 
The sale of stock in the Coggins Corporation by its
 
shareholders, therefore, is not and cannot be considered a "sale"
 of corporate assets or the "restaurant" under any reasonable
 interpretation. If the Shareholders in this case were to proceed
 to sell all of their stock in the Coggins Corporation to another
 individual or legal entity, the Coggins Corporation would remain
 the owner of all its assets and responsible for its contractual
 obligations. 
In addition, Kona Seaside's assertion that it is
 
entitled to a forty percent "commission" from the sale of the
 Stockholders' gross selling price of the Coggins Corporation's
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
stock presumes that the Coggins Corporation, in signing the
 
Lease, could bind the Shareholders, as individuals, to the
 contractual obligation to pay the commission provided in the Sale
 Condition. As explained above, the Coggins Corporation is a
 distinct legal entity from its Shareholders. Kona Seaside has
 presented no argument that the Coggins Corporation could so bind
 the Shareholders as individuals to such an agreement, absent the
 explicit agreement of the Shareholders. 
We find (1) there is no ambiguity in the Sale Condition
 
and (2) the Sale Condition is not applicable to the Shareholders'
 proposed stock sale in the Coggins Corporation. Therefore, the
 Circuit Court did not err in granting summary judgment in favor
 of the Coggins Plaintiffs on this basis. 
Kona Seaside also argues that the alleged "sale" of the 
restaurant through the sale of stock in the Coggins Corporation would violate the Non-Assignment Clause and Consent Provision. The issue of whether the sale of stock of a corporation constitutes an assignment under the terms of a lease has been addressed by a number of courts but appears to be an issue of first impression in Hawai' i. 
The general rule is that the sale of some or even all
 
the stock issued by a tenant corporation to new shareholders does
 not constitute an assignment of the corporate tenant's lease
 unless the lease provides the contrary. See 1 Andrew R. Berman,
 
Friedman on Leases § 7:3.3 (6th ed. 2018). As explained by a
 leading treatise on the subject, 
The ordinary restriction against tenant transfer is
aimed at transfers of the leasehold interest. It does
 not bar transfer of stock control of a corporate
tenant. Thus, the ordinary non-assignment clause, no
matter how well drawn otherwise, may be circumvented
in the case of a corporate tenant by a change in stock
control.
 
Id.; see also In re Ames Dept. Stores, Inc., 127 B.R. 744, 748­
749 (Bankr. S.D. N.Y. 1991) (rule adopted in Illinois); Alabama
 Vermiculite Corp. v. Patterson, 124 F.Supp. 441, 445 (W.D.S.C.
 1954) (same in Alabama); Ser-bye Corp. v. C.P. & G. Markets,
 Inc., 179 P.2d 342, 345-46 (Cal. 2d Dist. 1947) (same in
 California); Branmar Theater Co. v. Branmar, Inc., 264 A.2d 526,
 527-28 (Del. Ch. 1970) (same in Delaware); Posner v. Air Brakes
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
& Equip. Corp., 62 A.2d 711, 714 (N.J. Super. Ct. Ch. Div. 1948)
 
(same in New Jersey); Dennis' Nat. Mini-Meals, Inc. v. 91 Fifth
 Ave. Corp., 172 A.D.2d 331, 334-35 (N.Y. App. Div. 1991) (same in
 New York). 
As explained by one court, this rule makes sense
 
because 
[a] landlord entering a lease with a corporate tenant
should be presumed to know that it is an artificial
entity with a life distinct from the individuals who
may from time to time be its owners. If a landlord
 wished to protect itself against such vicissitude, it
could easily write into the lease a condition
subsequent. One can certainly not be implied,
however.
 
Rubinstein Bros. v. Ole of 34th St., Inc., 421 N.Y.S.2d 534, 538
 
(N.Y. Civ. Ct. 1979). We hold that the same rule is applicable
 under Hawai' i law. The sale of a corporation's stock by the 
corporation's shareholders, even if it constitutes a controlling
 interest thereof, is not an assignment of the corporation's lease
 unless the lease explicitly provides the contrary.
2
 
Landlords may, of course, take action to protect
 
themselves from this eventuality by including a provision in the
 lease stating that a change of control of the corporate tenant
 constitutes an assignment under the lease. See e.g., Nat'l Bank
 
of Albany Park in Chicago v. S.N.H., Inc., 336 N.E.2d 115, 123
 (Ill. App. Ct. 1975) (a lease may by express provision prohibit
 the sale of corporate stock when it changes the control of the
 corporation); see also Friedman on Leases § 7:3.3 (lease may make
 the transfer of stock control the equivalent to the assignment of
 the lease); Assoc. Cotton Shops, Inc. v. Evergreen Park Shopping
 Plaza of Delaware, Inc., 170 N.E.2d 35, 38-39 (Ill. App. Ct.
 
2
 Kona Seaside has not alleged any misrepresentation or fraud by the
Coggins Plaintiffs and has made no allegation that the Coggins Corporation was
used by the Shareholders to perpetuate any fraud on Kona Seaside. No
 allegations have been made to suggest that the Coggins Corporation was not
acting as a legitimate corporation at all times. Kimi's Declaration, attached
to his memorandum opposing summary judgment, merely states that Kimi expected
that Jerry and Inde Coggins would be personally involved in the day-to-day
operations of the business. While it may not have been Kimi's intent or
desire that Jerry and Inde Coggins would sell their shares in the Coggins
Corporation and no longer be active in management of the restaurant, there is
no evidence that Jerry and Inde Coggins, as individuals, ever agreed to such a
stipulation. We see no evidence creating a genuine issue of material fact
from Kimi's Declaration, or the exhibits attached thereto, that would preclude
the entry of summary judgment in the Coggins Plaintiffs' favor. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
1960) (enforcing lease provision allowing landlord to terminate
 
lease if change in share ownership resulted in change of control
 of corporate tenant). No such provision was included in the
 lease at issue in this case.
 
Also, because the tenant corporation would remain the
 
same before and after the stock sale, Kona Seaside would not have
 the right to consent a new lessee as there would be no new
 lessee. The lessee is and would remain the Coggins Corporation. 
Therefore, the proposed stock sale would not violate the Lease's
 Consent Provision. 
We find no ambiguity in the terms of the Lease. 
According to its plain terms, Kona Seaside is not entitled to a
 percentage of the gross selling price from the sale of the
 Shareholders' stock in the Coggins Corporation. In addition,
 such a stock sale would be in violation of neither the Non-
Assignment Clause nor the Consent Provision. 
The Circuit Court did not err in granting summary
 
judgment in favor of the Coggins Plaintiffs.
V. CONCLUSION
 
The Final Judgment and the Order Granting
 
Plaintiffs/Counterclaim Defendants Inde Coggins, Jerry Coggins
 
and Coggins, Inc., dba Splasher's Grill's Motion for Summary
 Judgment, both filed on October 28, 2015, in the Circuit Court of
 the Third Circuit are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 13, 2018. 
On the briefs: 
Francis L. Jung,
and Carol Monahan Jung,(Jung & Vassar, P.C.),for Plaintiffs/CounterclaimDefendants-Appellees. Presiding Judge 
Gary G. Grimmer,and Ann C. Kemp,(Gary G. Grimmer & Associates),for Defendant/CounterclaimPlaintiff-Appellant. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
10
 