NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000691
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
RAJ KUMAR, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
SUNITA KUMAR, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 10-1-2108)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Raj Kumar ("Husband") appeals from
 
the following orders entered by the Family Court of the First
 
1
Circuit ("Family Court")  : the Decree Granting Divorce and
Awarding Child Custody, filed on July 2, 2012 ("Decree"); the
 
Order Denying Motion for Relief, filed on February 1, 2012
 ("February 1, 2012 Order"); the Order Denying Plaintiff's Motion
 for Reconsideration, filed on March 9, 2012; and the order
 awarding attorney's fees, filed on April 2, 2012 ("April 2, 2012
 Order"). 
Husband challenges various rulings made by the Family
 
Court. We vacate certain portions of the Decree and that portion
 of the February 1, 2012 Order awarding fees, and affirm in all
 other respects.
 
1
 The Honorable Catherine H. Remigio presided over the proceedings
germane to this appeal, except where stated otherwise.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On September 9, 2010, Husband initiated a divorce
 
action against his wife, Sunita Kumar ("Wife"), with whom he had
 
one daughter ("Daughter"). Over the ensuing months, the parties
 filed and litigated various motions, and the Family Court issued
 several orders. 
On November 23, 2011, at a hearing scheduled to address
 
some of these motions, the parties indicated that they were close
 to settling. The court proceeded to hold a settlement conference
 off the record, followed by a hearing ("Settlement Hearing")
 where the parties put the terms of the settlement agreement
 ("Settlement Agreement") on the record. 
The terms relevant to this appeal, per the Settlement
 
Agreement, were as follows (with the transcript quoted where
 relevant):
 
- Each party keeps his or her own possessions (e.g.,
 
clothes, furniture, jewelry, etc.), retirement
 accounts, debts in his or her name, and vehicle subject
 to any debt thereon.
 
- Each party keeps his or her own personal injury
 
claim(s), and waives any consortium claims related to
 the other's claim(s).
 
- Wife gets sole legal and physical custody of Daughter
 
but will consult with Husband regarding major decisions
 including education, change of religion, marriage, and
 foreign travel, although Wife is the ultimate decision-
maker.
 
-
Husband pays child support per the guidelines (amount
 expressly left unresolved).
 
- Wife has full authority to relocate with Daughter,
 
subject to sixty days notice to Husband.
 
-	
"[Husband] agrees to pay $455.00 a month for 25
 months. . . . [T]his is towards her educational
 expenses. After that, [Wife] is responsible for
 post-high school education. So this amount is payable
 regardless of whether [Daughter] is actually going to
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
private school. It is fully anticipate[d] that she'll
 
finish [private school in Hawaii] this coming year. 
Depending on [Wife's] job situation, she may be here,
 she may be somewhere else. You know, she may be in New
 York where the tuition is more but [Husband's] only on
 the hook for $455.00. Or . . . if for some reason
 [Daughter's] not in a private school, then the 455
 should go into that educational fund for college. So,
 in other words, it's always going to be 455 for 25
 months and after that he's off the hook."
2
 
- Husband will maintain a refundable $5,000 escrow
 
account sufficient to fund his educational expense
 obligation, deposited within thirty days after the
 decree is signed and filed.
 
- Husband has reasonable visitation rights. The parties
 
discussed travel expenses incident to visitation,
 agreeing that a vacationing spouse bears
 responsibility, with Husband saying "[i]f I take her to
 any mainland, Vegas, California or India, I'll pay, you
 know."
 
- Husband and Wife will split "[j]oint debts totalling
 
[$]1600[.]"
 
- Each party will keep their own life insurance
 
policies.
3
 
- Wife will make an equalization payment to Husband of
 
$40,000 within thirty days after the decree is signed
 and filed.
 
2
 Husband queried at this point why he should pay if Daughter
attends public school, to which Wife's counsel replied, "[b]ecause you're off
the hook for everything else." Husband retorted that "[Wife is] off the hook
for a lot of things, too." Husband did not press the issue further, and did
not object when the court clarified that in any event the money "goes into the
educational account, it's not going to [Wife]."
 
3
 Apparently, the parties had also discussed a particular life
insurance policy—a Banner Life insurance policy—that Husband was to attempt to
reinstate and then transfer ownership to Wife. References were made later in
 the proceedings and on appeal to obligations regarding this policy; no such
obligations were put on the record, however, although the parties do not
appear to dispute that the discussion occurred.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
After the terms had been recited, the court set a
 
review hearing for December 28, 2011, to determine the unresolved
 
amount of child support and to have the anticipated decree signed
 and filed. The court then queried the parties regarding their
 agreement to these terms; each agreed. 
Two days after the Settlement Hearing, Wife gave notice
 
to Husband's counsel that she would be relocating to New York.
 Husband had left the country the previous day, returning on
 December 23, 2011.
 
At the review hearing on December 28, 2011, Husband
 
orally withdrew his request to correct an error in the child
 
4
support calculations. The Family Court  entered the
corresponding order that same day.5
 
On January 24, 2012, Husband filed a Motion for Relief
 
in which he sought to litigate matters related to his payment
 obligations for Daughter's high school tuition, her enrollment in
 private school, custody, retrieval of personal belongings in
 Wife's storage unit, proposed escrow of Wife's equalization
 payment, payment towards a line of credit account, and additional
 payments including "GE tax for the investment property,"
 "outstanding medical co-payments [Wife] incurred," and an
 "outstanding bill from Loveleen Saree $200 for her personal
 clothes orders[.]" His declaration in support of the Motion for
 Relief expressed, in part, various concerns with Wife's
 anticipated relocation to New York and Daughter's enrollment in
 public school there. Wife's memorandum in opposition asserted,
 in part, that 
Because [Husband] has filed this frivolous motion and
disagreed with the wording of the final decree, the filing
of the decree has been delayed pending the outcome of this
motion. The parties reached an agreement. The [Family
Court] is not in a position to modify the terms of the
agreement.
 
On February 1, 2012, the Family Court held a hearing on
 
4
 The Honorable James H. Hershey presided.
 
5
 Neither the record nor the parties' briefs clarify why the
anticipated divorce decree was not pursued that day. Presumably it related to
Husband having learned of Wife's relocation plans.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Husband's Motion for Relief. Husband apprised the court that he
 
had "decided that, given the difficulty in getting cooperation,
 he is relinquishing any claim to [his] items in [Wife's]
 storage[.]" The court then addressed the remainder of Husband's
 motion in a colloquy with Husband's counsel:
 
THE COURT:  And I had indicated that . . . I believe
 
this motion was premature, and that I do not like to see a
motion contesting an agreement that has not even been placed
and filed. There's no decree that's been filed.
 
And if I had to make a decision today on the motion,
the only issue that I could see was possibly the storage
issue, which has been withdrawn, basically, by your client.
The rest of the items are either moot or should have been
 addressed during the time we were in court the last time,
and are better as a postdecree motion.
 
. . . .
 
[Husband's counsel:] Your Honor, actually . . . at the
time, it was contemplated that she would be moving in the
summer, and at the time, the agreement was that she will
continue to try to enroll [Daughter] in a private school,
and only if [Daughter] cannot be accepted into a private
school, that's when she would consider public school option.
So therefore, this is not a frivolous request . . . , but
because of this motion, . . . [Wife] has changed her
actions.
[ 6
]
. . . .
 
Additionally, there are issues that were not
contemplated at the time of the agreement, including the
issue of the GE tax for the investment property.
 
THE COURT:  Was it not contemplated, or did you guys
just forget?
 
[Husband's counsel:]  We forgot about it. And we could
 
not get an agreement from [Wife], and therefore, there was
also no agreement regarding the medical (indiscernible)
payment issue. So we thought that these are not frivolous
issues, and we want the Court to address these issues.
 
. . . .
 
THE COURT: . . . .
  
. . . [J]ust because the things you took into
consideration might not be exactly what you thought they
were, that doesn't mean that the agreement no longer stands,
especially when it hasn't even been submitted to the Court.
And so I find it to be a frivolous motion.
 
So attorney's fees and costs to [Wife's counsel].
 
6
 Husband alleged that he learned shortly before the hearing that
Wife would have Daughter finish the current quarter at her school and finish
the remaining quarter online from New York.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The court then engaged in a colloquy directly with
 
Husband, in which Husband expressed his understanding of
 
decisions made regarding private versus public school and payment
 concerns. The court responded:
 
I'm not going to redo the divorce decree. And I'm certainly
not going to redo it when I don't even have a decree. The
 first thing that should have happened was I should have
gotten decrees from both of you, if you folks can't agree to
it. The last thing I want is another motion. We don't have
 a decree. 
The court denied Husband's motion, ordered Husband to pay $1,000
 
in attorney's fees, and ordered the parties to submit proposed
 decrees within seven days.
 
Husband filed a Motion for Reconsideration of 2/1/2012
 
Order ("Motion for Reconsideration") on February 10, 2012,
 alleging that the court's earlier threat of sanctions relating to
 pursuit of his Motion for Relief (a threat it followed through
 on, see supra) violated his due process rights, and otherwise
 seeking to rehash his original arguments. On March 9, 2012, the
 court entered an order denying Husband's Motion for
 Reconsideration and granted Wife's request for attorney's fees
 related to that motion. The April 2, 2012 Order ordered Husband
 to pay $750 in attorney's fees.
 
Meanwhile, on February 7, 2012, Husband signed his
 
proposed decree and submitted it to the court. On February 9,
 2012, one day after the court's deadline, Wife submitted her
 proposed decree.
7 Thereafter, the parties, through counsel,
 
submitted a series of letters to the court alleging and arguing
 about differences between the Settlement Agreement and each
 other's proposed decree. These differences included:
 
- Wife's proposed decree specified that no visitation
 
occur outside the United States.
 
- Regarding the school tuition payments, Wife proposed
 
7
 Wife's proposed decree does not appear in the record. However, as
discussed infra, apart from a few changes incorporated from Husband's proposed
decree and some of the court's own acknowledged changes or additions, the
court adopted Wife's proposed decree. Therefore, the contents of Wife's
decree can be fairly inferred from the record.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that payments commence the first month following filing 
of the decree, while Husband proposed that they commence on December 1, 2011, "based on the months remaining for [Daughter] to finish [school in Hawai
'i]." 
- The parties each proposed language regarding medical
 
expenses not covered by insurance, which had not been
 addressed by the Settlement Agreement. Husband
 proposed that Wife pay the first $500 of uncovered
 "ordinary medical and dental expenses," and that they
 share equally the cost of any uncovered extraordinary
 expenses exceeding $500 per year. Wife proposed that
 they share uncovered expenses based on relative income
 percentages.
 
- Wife's proposed decree specified that "portions of
 
[Husband's] personal injury claim that have already
 been paid and been distributed by prior order of the
 Court should not be considered any further," while
 Husband contended that prior distributions paid to Wife
 should be reimbursed to Husband.
 
-
Wife's proposed decree specified that each party pay
 one-half of items related to an Aloha Surf investment
 property that had been sold, including "GET taxes."
 Husband's proposed decree omitted any mention of the
 Aloha Surf property, which, he maintained, was
 consistent with the Settlement Agreement.
 
In one of the letters, Husband proposed that the court
 
hold a Hawai 'i Family Court Rules ("HFCR") Rule 16 conference to 
address the discrepancies. Wife objected. The court did not
 hold any conference or hearing prior to issuing the Decree.
 
On April 3, 2012, the Family Court contacted Wife's
 
counsel to apprise him that the Decree would incorporate certain
 language from Husband's proposed decree. On April 24, 2012, the
 Family Court apprised Husband's counsel of its conversation with
 Wife's counsel.
 
On May 31, 2012, Husband's counsel sent the court a
 
letter seeking "expeditious entry of the Decree[,]" noting that
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the court was adopting Wife's proposed decree "with
 
modification[,]" objecting to the school tuition payment
 commencement date, and alleging unfair treatment. On June 8,
 2012, the court notified the parties that it would commence the
 school tuition payments effective March 8, 2012, being thirty
 days after the deadline for submission of the proposed decrees. 
On June 15, 2012, Husband sent a letter to the court explaining
 his reasons for refusing to sign the expected Decree. 
On July 2, 2012, the court entered the Decree. Of
 
note, it specified that:
 
- No visitation occur outside the United States. 
- The twenty-five school tuition payments were to
 
commence on March 8, 2012.
 
- Medical and similar expenses not covered by insurance
 
would be shared by the parties according to their
 relative incomes, and that Husband would enable Wife to
 obtain continuation insurance coverage (i.e., "COBRA"
 coverage) but that Wife would be responsible for the
 premium payments.
 
- Wife would not be required to reimburse Husband for any
 
personal injury claim proceeds that had already been
 distributed.
 
- Each party was to pay one-half of items related to the
 
Aloha Surf investment property, including "GET taxes."
 
-
Any party declaring bankruptcy would be liable to the
 other party for "such amounts as are necessary to put
 the non-bankrupt party in a position as favorable as he
 or she would have otherwise enjoyed under the terms of
 this Decree."
 
On July 31, 2012, Husband filed his Notice of Appeal.
 
On August 22, 2012, Husband filed a Motion to Enforce
 
the Decree, seeking, among other things, to compel Wife to make
 her equalization payment pursuant to the Decree, along with
 penalties and interest. The court subsequently held hearings on
 these and other matters, eventually issuing an oral ruling on
 November 14, 2012. The record on appeal does not contain any
 orders that the court may have issued as a result of these
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
9subsequent hearings.
On September 21, 2012, the court issued its Findings of
Fact and Conclusions of Law Re: Divorce Decree Granting Divorce
Awarding Child Custody Filed July 2, 2012 ("FOF/COL").  It
provided, in relevant part:
FINDINGS OF FACT
1. On November 23, 2011, the parties reached a divorce
settlement in this case and placed the settlement on the
record.  The settlement provided, in relevant part, as
follows:
[The details of the original settlement were
enumerated, in accordance with the transcript, with
the addition of a provision stating that "[Husband]
[shall] reinstat[e] his Banner Life insurance policy
to be transferred to [Wife] who will be responsible
for the premium payments subsequent to reinstatment
[sic] and beneficiary designation (as owner)."] 
2. On December 28, 2011, [Husband] withdrew his
request to adjust the child support calculation.
. . . .
4. On February 1, 2012, the parties settled their
disagreements regarding the items in storage.  The
settlement was that [Husband] relinquished everything in
storage to [Wife] who is free to dispose of the items as she
chooses.
. . . .
6. There was some delay in filing the final decree as
both parties submitted proposed decrees, and there were
several letters from both parties to the Court regarding the
parties' positions on certain proposed provisions of the
decree. . . . 
7. On April 24, 2012, this Court, upon reviewing the
proposed decrees submitted by the parties, directed that
[Wife's] proposed decree would be adopted with the addition
of language submitted by [Husband] regarding section 3.1 of
the decree (relating to major decisions regarding
[Daughter]), section 3.2 of the decree (relating to
relocation), section 3.3 of the decree (relating to
supporting [Husband's] relationship with [Daughter]),
section 4.3 of the decree (relating to notification by
[Wife] to [Husband] of accounting for the higher educational
funds), and other minor items.
8. Upon request by both parties to clarify the date on
which [Husband's] $455 per month educational payments were
to begin, based on the agreement of the parties and the
substantial delay caused by [Husband's] motions for
reconsideration, this Court ordered, by minute order on June
8, 2012, that payments would begin 30 days after proposed
decrees were to be submitted so that the starting date would
be March 8, 2012.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
109. [Wife's] proposed decree with modifications as
requested by the Court as noted above was signed and filed
on July 2, 2012.
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
1. The parties knowingly, intentionally, and
voluntarily reached a settlement of all issues in this case
on November 23, 2011, and placed the terms of the settlement
on the record.
. . . .
3. The [Decree] accurately reflected the agreement of
the parties to the terms of the divorce as follows:
. . . .
Paragraph 3 - sole legal and physical custody of 
[Daughter] was awarded to [Wife]
. . . .
- visitation shall not occur outside the
United States of America - this provision was
requested by [Wife] and was reasonable for a
minor.
Paragraph 3.1 - [Wife] to consult with [Husband] on
all major decisions regarding [Daughter] with
[Wife] having authority to make the final
decision . . . .  Most of this language was
adopted from [Husband's] proposed decree over
objection of [Wife] that only limited matters
were discussed on the record at settlement.
. . . .
Paragraph 3.3 - relating to [Daughter's] relationship 
to both parents.  This language was requested by
[Husband], was reasonable, and was within the
agreement of the parties although not explicitly
stated on the record.
. . . .
Paragraph 4.2 - educational expenses (see . . . 
[finding of fact #8] above).
. . . .
Paragraph 5 - . . . .  Out of pocket medical, dental, 
vision, and drug expenses not covered by
insurance or orthodontic expenses shall be
shared by percentage according to income of the
parties - standard language. 
. . . .
Paragraph 11 - real property - this paragraph merely 
described the history of the case stating that
the parties' residential apartment and
investment property had been sold and that the
net proceeds of sales had been divided equally.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
-this paragraph also provided for payment
of GET taxes and penalty and interest for the
investment property sold, as payment of joint
debts was agreed by the parties. 
. . . .
 
Paragraph 16 - personal injury claims - each party
kept their own personal injury claims and waived
consortium claims on the other's claims.
 
. . . [Wife] does not owe [Husband] any
monies related to prior distributions of
[Husband's] personal injury claim that were made
prior to the signing and filing of this
Decree. . . .
 
. . . .
 
Paragraph 19(a), (b), (d), (f) [bankruptcy provision],
and (h) - standard language
 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
Husband's points of error do not all allege error, nor
 
are all errors he later argues reflected in the points of error. 
Nevertheless, enumerated below are the errors he asserts or
 argues.
 
- "The Family Court Failed The Appearance of Impartiality
 
In Treating Party Litigants";
 
-
The Settlement Agreement was induced by fraud;
 
- The Family Court's delay in entering the Decree "led to
 
[Husband's] financial losses and emotional stress";
 
-
Various provisions were erroneously inserted or
 modified into the Decree that were not part of the
 Settlement Agreement;
 
-
The court violated Husband's due process rights by
 deeming his Motion for Relief frivolous;
 
- The court erroneously sanctioned Husband for his Motion
 
for Relief and Motion for Reconsideration;
 
- The court wrongfully denied [Husband] visitation
 
outside of the United States; 
-
The court erred by not sanctioning Wife;
 
- The court erred by not "appoint[ing] a Master to review
 
Family's Assets and Debts and distribut[ing] proceeds
 from the sale of the property without addressing the
 family's debts"; 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
- The court erred by "revers[ing] previous rulings about
 
joint legal custody and health insurance";
 
- The court erred "in calculating and increasing child
 
support payments without an explanation or an increase
 
in personal income, not giving the calculation
 worksheet to [Husband] after ruling and not giving him
 the credit for the health insurance he paid for
 [Daughter] from July 1, 2012 to the present";
 
- The court erred by "distributing family assets . . .
 
without reviewing Income and Expenses, and Assets and
 Debts statements[.]"
 
III.
 STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion in
making its decisions and those decisions will not be set aside
unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus, [an
appellate court] will not disturb the family court's decisions on
appeal unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant
and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of reason.
 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(quoting In re Doe, 95 Hawai 'i 183, 189-90, 20 P.3d 616, 622-23 
(2001)). "Furthermore, the burden of establishing abuse of
 
discretion is on appellant, and a strong showing is required to
 establish it." Ek v. Boggs, 102 Hawai
'i 289, 294-95, 75 P.3d 
1180, 1185-86 (2003) (internal quotation marks, citation, and
 brackets omitted). 
The family court's [findings of facts ("FOF")] are
reviewed on appeal under the "clearly erroneous" standard.
A FOF is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks
substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) despite
substantial evidence in support of the finding, the
appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm
conviction that a mistake has been made. "Substantial
 evidence" is credible evidence which is of sufficient
 quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable
caution to support a conclusion.
 
On the other hand, the family court's [conclusions of
law ("COL")] are reviewed on appeal de novo, under the
right/wrong standard. COLs, consequently, are not binding
upon an appellate court and are freely reviewable for their
correctness.
 
Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360 (citations, some 
internal quotations marks, brackets, and ellipsis omitted)
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(quoting In re Doe, 95 Hawai 'i at 190, 20 P.3d at 623). 
Additionally, "[t]he imposition of a sanction is generally within 
the discretion of the trial court." Weinberg v. Dickson-
Weinberg, 123 Hawai 'i 68, 71, 229 P.3d 1133, 1136 (2010) (quoting 
Ek, 102 Hawai 'i at 299, 75 P.3d at 1190). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
As an initial matter, Husband's opening brief fails to 
comply with Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate Procedure ("HRAP") Rule 
28(b)(4). There are numerous instances where Husband fails to cite to the record. See Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(3), (b)(4), 
(b)(7). Husband also fails to confine and correlate his arguments to his points of error, see Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(4), (b)(7), resulting in a scattershot of alleged error and untethered arguments that, at times, verges on the incomprehensible. Nevertheless, consistent with our "policy of affording pro se litigants the opportunity 'to have their cases heard on the merits, where possible,'" Hawaiian Properties, Ltd. v. Tauala, 125 Hawai
'i 176, 181 n.6, 254 P.3d 487, 492 n.6 (App. 
2011) (quoting O'Connor v. Diocese of Honolulu, 77 Hawai 'i 383, 
386, 885 P.2d 361, 364 (1994)), we proceed to address Husband's arguments. 
A. Husband fails to demonstrate judicial bias.
 
Husband contends that the Family Court judge "failed
 
the appearance of impartiality," resting on the court's handling
 
of his Motion for Relief, for which Husband was ultimately
 sanctioned, and the court's substantial adoption of Wife's
 proposed divorce decree. Because Husband cites nothing more than
 
8
the court's rulings,  he fails to establish any lack of
impartiality or the appearance thereof. See State v. Ross
, 89
 
8
 Husband suggests that Judge Remigio was predisposed to adopt
Wife's decree, citing a statement she made at the hearing on Husband's Motion
for Relief: "I may or may not sign that or add it to [Wife's] decree." In
 context, however, "that" and "it" refer to a waiver exchange provision, and
"that" also refers to Husband's expected decree. Thus, it appears she was not
indicating an inclination to sign either decree; the statement therefore
reflects no bias.
 
13
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Hawai'i 371, 379, 974 P.2d 11, 19 (1998) ("[A]dverse rulings, 
even if erroneous, do not establish bias . . . ." (citing Peters 
v. Jamieson, 48 Haw. 247, 257, 397 P.2d 575, 583 (1964))).
 
B.	 Husband effectively waived his argument that his
agreement to settle was induced by fraud or
misrepresentation. 
Husband alleges that Wife misrepresented her intentions
 
regarding relocation. He argues that the timing of her notice of
 
relocation—two days after the Settlement Hearing—is proof of that
 misrepresentation, and that part of his motivation to settle was
 to spend time with Daughter without "the stress of litigation on
 both parents." Husband, however, has waived this argument by
 failing to raise it below.
9 See Child Support Enforcement Agency
 
v. Doe, 109 Hawai 'i 240, 246, 125 P.3d 461, 467 (2005) ("An issue 
which was not raised in the lower court will not be considered on appeal." (citing Kernan v. Tanaka, 75 Haw. 1, 35, 856 P.2d 1207, 1224 (1993), cert. denied, 510 U.S. 1119 (1994))).
C.	 Wife's delay in making her equalization payment, and
damages flowing from the timing of the Family Court's
entry of the Decree, or any alterations, are not issues
for this court to resolve. 
Husband argues that he suffered economic and emotional
 
harm from the Family Court's alleged delay in entering and
 
altering the Decree, and from Wife's delay in satisfying her
 obligation to make an equalization payment to him. He asks this
 court to consider "[w]hether [the Family C]ourt's failure to
 timely file a Decree caused [him] substantial damages[,]" and
 invites us to consider the Family Court's post-notice of appeal
 decisions regarding the respective payments owed by the parties
 to each other. While Husband's assertions of error are not
 clearly set forth—he discusses Wife's equalization payment, the
 commencement of a fixed number of school payment obligations, and
 the exchange of personal injury claim waivers—the thrust of his
 argument appears to be that the Family Court abused its
 
9
 Husband asserts that he "attempted to bring this issue before the
court in his [Motion for Relief]." Nowhere in that motion, however, did he
assert his reliance on her alleged misrepresentation, nor did he seek therein
to undo the parties' agreement.
 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
discretion in both the timing of its entry of the Decree and its 
determination of how the parties' payment obligations should be enforced. See Thomas-Yukimura v. Yukimura, 130 Hawai
'i 1, 6, 304 
P.3d 1182, 1187 (2013) ("Construing [a pro se party's] arguments liberally . . . ." (citing Dupree v. Hiraga, 121 Hawai
'i 297, 
315, 219 P.3d 1084, 1102 (2009))). 
With respect to the allegedly delayed filing of the 
Decree, even were the delay unjustifiable, there does not appear to be any authority supporting an award of damages payable by the Family Court, and Husband cites to none. To the extent that he seeks to adjust the parties' obligations under the terms of the Decree, or impose new ones apart from the Decree, as compensation for the alleged harm caused by delayed receipt of the equalization payment or delayed execution of personal injury waivers, such harm is similarly non-compensable; nothing in the Settlement Agreement was predicated upon timely entry of the Decree. With respect to Wife's alleged delay in making her equalization payment and the Family Court's handling of this issue, these are matters to be pursued with the Family Court in the first instance. See Child Support Enforcement Agency, 109 
Hawai
'i at 246, 125 P.3d at 467. Regarding Husband's school 
payment obligation, this issue is discussed in Part IV.D.9, infra. 
D.	 Several of the Family Court's modifications to the
Settlement Agreement must be vacated.
 
Husband challenges as error several provisions of the
 
Decree that were not specified or agreed to as part of the
 
Settlement Agreement. These provisions were included either
 because Wife included them in her proposed decree or upon the
 court's own initiative. Husband does not seek to undo the
 Settlement Agreement, but, rather, he seeks to invalidate the
 provisions that he contends were not part of the Settlement
 Agreement.
10
 
10
 The manner in which the Family Court adopted the Decree calls into
question whether there had been a meeting of the minds on all essential terms
comprising the Settlement Agreement. See Honolulu Rapid Transit Co. v.
 
Paschoal, 51 Haw. 19, 26, 449 P.2d 123, 127 (1968) ("[T]here must be mutual
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Under a prior decision of this court, a family court,
 
having approved a settlement agreement, may not freely vary or
 
augment the terms of that agreement when subsequently entering
 the divorce decree. In Bienvenue v. Bienvenue, this court
 addressed a situation substantially similar to that at hand:
 
In this case, (1) Suzanne filed a proposed decree; (2)
Michael expressly disagreed with specific provisions in
Suzanne's proposed decree; (3) after a hearing on a motion
to set attended by the attorneys for both parties, the court
entered an order noting that there was no dispute regarding
the division and distribution of any personal property other
than "retirement"; (4) the parties stated on the record, and
the family court approved, a final settlement agreement
resolving the case; (5) in the final settlement agreement,
the parties expressly resolved some issues created by
Michael's express disagreements and did not expressly
reserve the final division of any property of the parties
for further hearing, decision, and order; and (6) the family
court entered a divorce decree containing more details
regarding the division and distribution of the personal
property. 
102 Hawai 'i 59, 65, 72 P.3d 531, 537 (App. 2003). To address 
"whether the family court was authorized to insert . . .
 
additional details in the . . . Decree," id. at 65, 72 P.3d at
 538, we reviewed those portions of the decree that were
 extraneous or contrary to the parties' settlement agreement. In
 two instances, we vacated provisions inserted by the family court
 that addressed issues left unaddressed by the settlement
 agreement. Id. at 69-70, 72, 72 P.3d at 541-42, 544 (survivor
 
assent or a meeting of the minds on all essential elements or terms in order
to form a binding contract."). The Family Court, apparently to its credit,
succeeded in having the parties enter into the Settlement Agreement. The
 parties thereafter identified additional issues about which the agreement was
silent and made clear their differing views on those issues. The parties'
positions also differed regarding the onset of periodic school payments. See
 
infra Part IV.D.9.
 
Despite these differences, the Family Court adopted in its Decree
one or the other party's proposed modifications without determining that the
parties agreed to its adoptions, despite the fact that Husband had requested
an HFCR Rule 16 conference (to which Wife objected). Ultimately, the Family
Court stated in its FOF/COL that "[t]he Decree Granting Divorce Awarding Child
Custody filed by this Court on July 2, 2012, accurately reflected the
agreement of the parties to the terms of the divorce"; it then recited the
terms of the agreement, including those which it had introduced over
objection. Neither party has argued, however, that the Settlement Agreement
or the Decree is therefore unenforceable. Nevertheless, a Family Court should
exercise caution when effectuating a settlement agreement; it ought to ensure
that the parties do in fact agree to all of the essential terms of that
settlement agreement.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
benefit plan premium payment provision and jurisdiction/alimony
 
recharacterization provisions). Furthermore, we vacated a
 provision that was both prejudicial and contrary to what one of
 the parties had agreed. Id. at 70, 72, 72 P.3d at 542, 544
 
(restrictive merger/waiver provision). On the other hand, we let
 stand unchallenged provisions that were "reasonable,
 nonsubstantive enforcement provision[s]." Id. at 71-72, 72 P.3d
 
at 543-44 (indemnification, constructive trust, and bankruptcy
 provisions).
 
Thus, a family court, proceeding pursuant to an 
approved settlement agreement, is not authorized to enter a provision that is either contrary to the settlement agreement or prejudicial to a party regarding an issue on which the agreement was silent. See id. at 69-70, 72, 72 P.3d at 541-42, 544; see 
also Nakata v. Nakata, 3 Haw. App. 51, 56, 641 P.2d 333, 336 (1982) ("If at the time the divorce was granted the lower court decided to change the Agreement before incorporating it into the decree, it would have been required to obtain the consent of both parties or to move the case from the uncontested calendar to the contested calendar."). A family court is authorized, however, to augment the settlement agreement by adding reasonable, nonsubstantive enforcement provisions. Bienvenue, 102 Hawai
'i at 
71-72, 72 P.3d at 543-44. 
1. General excise taxes
 
The issue of payment of general excise taxes (referred
 
to in the record and elsewhere herein as "GE" or "GET" taxes) on
 
the parties' investment property was never specifically discussed
 at settlement. Wife, however, apparently requested via her
 proposed decree that the parties split the obligation. Between
 the time of the Settlement Hearing and the parties' submission of
 their respective proposed decrees, the parties staked out
 contrary positions regarding liability for the tax obligation.
 The court did not make any findings on this issue; rather, in the
 Decree, it regarded the obligation as a joint debt and,
 consistent with the parties' agreement as to joint debts,
 directed that the tax obligation be shared equally. However
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
equitable or reasonable its determination, it was not authorized
 
to resolve the dispute by simply adopting Wife's position that
 this should be treated as a joint debt, particularly where
 Husband disagreed.
11 Therefore, we vacate that portion of the
 
decree assigning responsibility for general excise taxes. Id. at
 
70-72, 72 P.3d at 542-44.
 
2. Child custody
 
Husband argues that it was error for the Family Court
 
to include in the Decree a provision that visitation not be
 
permitted outside the United States. He also argues that he
 should be awarded joint custody and, separately, asks that this
 court "write a letter allowing [Husband] to be able to talk to
 [Daughter's] teachers/counselors regarding her progress in
 studies [and] extracurricular activities." Husband's first point
 has merit; the other two do not.
12
 
At the Settlement Hearing, Husband mentioned the
 
possibility of traveling to India with Daughter. While the
 parties agreed that Wife would have sole legal and physical
 custody, they also agreed that Wife would consult Husband
 regarding major decisions, which expressly included international
 travel. In Wife's proposed decree, however, she apparently
 requested that the court prohibit any visitation outside the
 United States; the court included this provision in the Decree.
 The court reasoned that such a restriction "was reasonable for a
 
11
 The court stated in its FOF/COL that the Decree "accurately
reflected the agreement of the parties." The court was effectuating a
settlement agreement, where each party gave up certain rights and benefits in
exchange for others; to that end, regarding disputed issues, it should have
worked for or with the parties to resolve those disputes. See Haw. Fam. Ct.
 
R. 16. Where they would not come to terms, the court could have omitted such
issues from the Decree or, if those terms were necessary to decide, reset the
case on the contested divorce calendar. In this case, because the parties had
agreed to equally divide all joint debts, it would have been reasonable to
omit the specific issue and to address it on a subsequent post-decree motion.
 
12
 Husband agreed to an award to Wife of sole legal and physical
custody. Even if he has not waived any subsequent claim to custody, he didnot move below for modification of custody, and he cannot ask this court to
rule on that matter in the first instance. Child Support Enforcement Agency,
109 Hawai' i at 246, 125 P.3d at 467. Similarly, he did not move below for
access to Daughter's record, teachers, or counselors; he is therefore likewisebarred from requesting that relief in this appeal. Id. 
18
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
minor." 
This restriction was inconsistent with the provision
 
that Wife would consult Husband regarding Daughter's
 
international travel and addressed a matter about which the
 Settlement Agreement was silent. While Mother might be well
 within her rights as the custodial parent to deny an
 international visitation request, it was contrary to the
 Settlement Agreement, not to mention unduly restrictive, for the
 court to unilaterally foreclose such visitation. This provision,
 too, is vacated. Id.
 
3. Child support
 
Husband seeks to have the child support provision
 
reworded, asserting that it is "confusing" with respect to when
 
his obligation terminates and on what conditions it might
 continue past Daughter's eighteenth birthday.  He then proposes a
 
substantively different version, but does not provide any further
 
argument as to why the court should or must adopt it. Husband's
 argument does not establish error.
 
4. Medical and dental insurance
 
Husband argues that it was error for the court to adopt
 
Wife's provision requiring the parties to pay an income-based
 
percentage of medical costs not reimbursed by insurance,
 including those arising from elective procedures. Following the
 Settlement Agreement, which had been silent on such costs,
 Husband and Wife presented the court with differing positions on
 this issue. Therefore, pursuant to Bienvenue, the court erred by
 summarily adopting Mother's position, and that portion of the
 provision addressing medical costs not covered by insurance is
 vacated. Cf. discussion supra Part IV.D.1. 
5. Life insurance
 
The Settlement Agreement specified that the parties
 
would "keep their own" life insurance policies. While it does
 
not appear in the Settlement Hearing transcript, the parties
 apparently also agreed that Husband would attempt to reinstate a
 
19
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
particular life insurance policy and transfer ownership of it to
 
Wife. Husband disputes, and disputed below, the requirement in
 that provision that he bear responsibility for any reinstatement
 costs. Wife responds that, pursuant to a hearing held after
 Husband's Notice of Appeal, the issue is moot. Whether the issue
 is moot or not, we vacate the disputed requirement that Husband
 bear the reinstatement costs; if, upon remand, the Family Court
 concludes that the policy reinstatement provision is indeed moot,
 it can strike the provision entirely.
 
6. Division of vehicles
 
Husband contends that it was unfair to award the 
parties their respective vehicles subject to any existing loans. 
His argument fails, however, because he agreed to those terms at the Settlement Hearing, and he does not argue that the agreement was unconscionable or otherwise unenforceable. See Chen v. 
Hoeflinger, 127 Hawai
'i 346, 356, 279 P.3d 11, 21 (App. 2012) 
("[M]arital agreements are enforceable if the agreement 'is not unconscionable and has been voluntarily entered into by the parties with knowledge of the financial situation of the prospective spouse.'" (quoting Epp v. Epp., 80 Hawai
'i 79, 85, 
905 P.2d 54, 60 (App. 1995))). He cannot now claim error.13 
7. Health insurance continuation coverage ("COBRA")
 
Husband requests that the provision requiring him to
 
enable Wife to "obtain medical insurance coverage under [his
 
employer's] COBRA plan" be stricken. Wife argues that this "is a
 standard provision in divorce decrees," is consistent with
 requirements under federal law, and does not disadvantage Husband
 since Wife pays all premiums. Wife does not provide authority to
 support her assertion that the provision is "standard," but her
 other reasons are sufficient for this court to conclude that it
 
13
 Husband also contends that the decision to distribute the vehicles 
and accompanying loans "was made with [Wife's] counsel and [Wife] without the
presence of [Husband] in the court room." He did not raise this argument
below, however, and has therefore waived it. See Child Support Enforcement 
Agency, 109 Hawai' i at 246, 125 P.3d at 467. 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is a reasonable, nonsubstantive enforcement provision. See 29
 
U.S.C. §§ 1161-1166 (2012) (requiring employer health insurance 
plans to offer continuation coverage upon certain qualifying events, including divorce); cf. Bienvenue, 102 Hawai
'i at 71-72, 
72 P.3d at 543-44. 
8.
 Bankruptcy clause
 
Husband argues that since a bankruptcy provision was 
never discussed, it was error to include one. Husband's argument fails, as Bienvenue holds just the opposite. Bienvenue, 102 
Hawai
'i at 71-72, 72 P.3d at 543-44 (holding that a substantially 
identical bankruptcy provision was a "reasonable, nonsubstantive enforcement provision"). 
9. School tuition payments
 
Husband contends that it was error to require him to 
make twenty-five monthly payments of $455 regardless of whether 
Wife enrolled Daughter in public or private school and regardless of when his payment obligations commenced. Regarding public versus private school, he specifically agreed at the Settlement Hearing to make the payments regardless of what type of school Daughter attended. He cannot now argue on appeal that he intended a different agreement. See Chen, 127 Hawai
'i at 356, 
279 P.3d at 21; see also State v. Ngo, 129 Hawai 'i 30, 39-40, 292 
P.3d 1260, 1269-70 (2013) (applying the doctrine of judicial estoppel to preclude a party from advancing a position directly contrary to an earlier one). 
The parties, however, failed to specify a start date
 
for the payments. Husband argued below, and argues again on
 appeal, that the determination of the number of payments to be
 made derived from the number of expected months remaining in
 Daughter's high school education as of the Settlement Hearing.
 Accordingly, his proposed decree posited a start date of
 December 1, 2011. He asserts prejudice because the Family Court
 specified a start date of March 8, 2012, despite the fact that he
 was already making ongoing monthly $455 payments to Daughter's
 school apart from any settlement agreement; in his view, he was
 
21
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
therefore making double payments for five months. Wife, on the
 
other hand, argued below that Husband's obligation simply
 required him to pay $11,375 in twenty-five monthly payments
 toward Daughter's educational costs, which were to commence once
 the Decree became effective.
14
 
The dispute regarding the commencement date persisted
 
by way of letters to the court, as finalization of the Decree was
 delayed while Husband's purported double payments continued. On
 June 8, 2012, the Family Court notified the parties that it would
 use a payment commencement date of March 8, 2012, as that was
 thirty days after proposed decrees were to be submitted. Husband
 renewed his objection. On July 2, 2012, the Family Court entered
 the Decree, including the March 8 start date, and stated in its
 subsequent FOF/COL that:
 
[FOF] 8. Upon request by both parties to clarify the
date on which [Husband's] $455 per month educational
payments were to begin, based on the agreement of the
 parties and the substantial delay caused by [Husband's]
motions for reconsideration, this Court ordered, by minute
order on June 8, 2012, that payments would begin 30 days
after proposed decrees were to be submitted so that the
starting date would be March 8, 2012. 
(Emphasis added.) As the parties had plainly not agreed to this 
term, this finding is clearly erroneous.15 Therefore, we vacate 
this FOF and, pursuant to Bienvenue, vacate as well the Decree's March 8, 2012 payment commencement date. 102 Hawai
'i at 69-70, 
72, 72 P.3d at 541-42, 544. On remand, the Family Court should determine the total amount due and what date, if any, the parties had agreed to at the time of the Settlement Hearing, or 
14
 Wife argues on appeal that, after acknowledging that the
commencement date was not specified at the Settlement Hearing, "[b]oth the
. . . Decree actually entered and [Husband's] proposed decree provided that it
was effective when signed and filed. As such, the Family Court could have
ordered that the monthly payments started upon the filing of the . . .
Decree." This argument, however, ignores the fact that Husband's proposed
payment commencement date was independent of the decree filing date.
 
15
 To the extent that the rationale for the start date might
essentially be a sanction occasioned by "the substantial delay caused by
[Husband's] motions for reconsideration," the Family Court had already twice
sanctioned Husband for that delay; the Family Court's rationale therefore
appears to be that the parties agreed to that start date.
 
22
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
thereafter.16
 
E.	 The Family Court abused its discretion in sanctioning
Husband for pursuing an allegedly frivolous motion.
 
Husband argues that the Family Court erroneously
 
determined that his Motion for Relief was frivolous. Husband
 
filed his motion after learning that Wife intended to relocate
 sooner than he expected, and before either party had submitted a
 proposed decree. The issues he sought to litigate involved
 either reconsideration of certain provisions of the Settlement
 Agreement in light of Wife's imminent relocation or additional
 terms he wanted added that were not previously discussed. One of
 the issues—the only one the Family Court deemed meritorious—was
 withdrawn prior to the hearing.
 
While some aspects of Husband's motion appear to 
revisit settled issues, the fact that his motion was prompted by the proposed immediate relocation of Daughter, which Husband had not expected or anticipated, suggests that his motion was not frivolous. Furthermore, while the Family Court viewed parts of Husband's motion as essentially seeking to amend a decree that had not been entered, let alone even proposed by either party, he was instead seeking to address matters unaddressed by the Settlement Agreement. While a Family Court is generally afforded wide discretion, see Fisher, 111 Hawai
'i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360, 
in light of the reasons for Husband's motion and the evident problems with attempting to finalize an incomplete and disputed settlement without a hearing, see supra Part IV.D, the Family Court abused its discretion in sanctioning Husband for pursuing his Motion for Relief. Based on the foregoing analysis, we also conclude that the Family Court erred in sanctioning Husband for filing his subsequent Motion for Reconsideration. 
F.	 Husband has waived or is estopped from asserting
several additional points of error.
 
16
 If the Family Court cannot determine that the parties agreed to a
total amount due or start date, it should address whether those terms were
essential terms of the Settlement Agreement, and, if so, what effect that has
on the school tuition payment provision and the overall Settlement Agreement.
See Honolulu Rapid Transit Co., 51 Haw. at 26, 449 P.2d at 127.
 
23
   
     
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Husband submits that the court erred by failing to 
appoint a special master to review assets and debts, and by 
distributing property sale proceeds without first addressing the family's debts. He fails, however, to offer any argument to support his assertion, and, therefore, waives the point.
17 See 
Simmons, 129 Hawai 'i at 511, 304 P.3d at 652. 
Husband contends that unspecified rulings made prior to
 
the Settlement Agreement regarding custody and health insurance
 were erroneous. Here too, he fails to advance any argument, and
 has waived the point. Id. 
Husband contends that the Family Court erred in its 
calculation of his child support obligations. While Husband initially moved the court to correct its calculations, he expressly withdrew that objection several weeks later; the child support payment was then finalized pursuant to the Decree. He cannot now renew his argument on appeal.
18 See Ngo, 129 Hawai 'i 
at 39-40, 292 P.3d at 1269-70. 
Husband contends that the Family Court erred in 
distributing various assets. Husband provides no discernable argument that the distribution was erroneous. Furthermore, the Decree's asset distribution provision was consistent with the Settlement Agreement. Accordingly, we find no error. See 
Simmons, 129 Hawai
'i at 511, 304 P.3d at 652. 
Husband lists several different bases upon which he 
alleges the Family Court's failure to levy sanctions against Wife was error. It is not apparent, however, that Husband moved below for sanctions on these grounds. Moreover, the decision to award sanctions is entrusted to the Family Court's sound discretion. Cf. State v. Ahlo, 79 Hawai
'i 385, 398, 903 P.2d 690, 703 (App. 
1995). For these reasons, we find no error. See Haw. R. App. P. 
28(b)(4) ("Each point [of error] shall state . . . where in the 
17
 In his reply brief, Husband appears to redefine his assertion of
error as relating to his request for Wife to deposit $40,000 in escrow before
moving to New York in light of the court's order that Husband keep $5,000 in
escrow. How these considerations relate to his original assertion of error is
indiscernible and, in any event, they do not constitute argument.
 
18
 In his reply brief, Husband refers to hearings with the Child
Support Enforcement Agency, but he does not explain their relevance.
 
24
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
record the alleged error occurred; and . . . where in the record
 
the alleged error was objected to or the manner in which the
 alleged error was brought to the attention of the court or
 agency.").
 
Finally, Husband attempts to argue issues relating to
 
the personal injury claims and/or waivers. Specifically, he
 seeks reimbursement of $11,553.18. His supporting argument,
 however, goes so far afield as to render it incomprehensible.
19
 
He has therefore waived any error relating to the personal injury
 claims.
20 See Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(7); Ala Moana Boat Owners'
 
Ass'n v. State, 50 Haw. 156, 158, 434 P.2d 516, 518 (1967). 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For the reasons expressed above, we vacate 1) the
 
following provisions of the Decree: a) paragraph 3, regarding the
 
limitation on international visitation, b) paragraph 4.2,
 regarding the March 8, 2012 payment commencement date, c)
 paragraph 5, regarding out-of-pocket medical, dental, vision, and
 drug expenses, d) paragraph 6, regarding the requirement that
 Husband bear the reinstatement costs, and e) the final sentence
 of paragraph 11, regarding general excise taxes; 2) FOF 8 from
 the FOF/COL; and 3) those portions of the February 1, 2012 Order
 and April 2, 2012 Order that awarded attorney's fees to Wife.
 
The Decree; the February 1, 2012 Order; the Order
 
Denying Plaintiff's Motion for Reconsideration, filed on March 9,
 2012; and the April 2, 2012 Order, are affirmed in all other
 respects. The case is remanded to the Family Court for further
 proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
19
 Wife argues that Husband confirmed that he understood that he was
giving up certain rights to Wife's claims. Whether or not this is dispositive
of Husband's argument is not determinable in light of the argument's
incomprehensibility.
 
20
 While the parties disputed below whether the Family Court should
have revisited distributions of personal injury claim proceeds occurring prior
to the Settlement Agreement, and the Family Court agreed with Wife's proposed
decree on this point, Husband does not appear to argue that the Family Court's
decision was erroneous in this regard.
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, April 21, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Raj Kumar,
Pro Se Plaintiff-Appellant. 
 
Chief Judge
Glenn N. Taga
(Park & Taga)
for Defendant-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
26
 