NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000663
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
ALOHA SPORTS INC., A HAWAII CORPORATION,
Plaintiff-Appellant, 
v.
THE NATIONAL COLLEGIATE ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION,
AN UNINCORPORATED ASSOCIATION,
Defendant-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-1832)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellant Aloha Sports Inc. (Aloha) appeals
from the (1) "Judgment" entered August 11, 2015 (Judgment); (2)
"Order Granting In Part And Denying In Part Defendant The
National Collegiate Athletic Association's Motion To Reinstate
Order Awarding Attorneys' Fees And Costs" entered August 4, 2015
(Reinstatement Order); (3) "Order Granting In Part And Denying In
Part Defendant The National Collegiate Athletic Association's
Motion For Attorneys' Fees And Costs, Filed January 31, 2012"
entered August 4, 2015 (2015 Order Awarding Fees and Costs); and
(4) the June 9, 2015 "Order Granting Defendant The National
Collegiate Athletic Association's Motion For Judgment On The
Pleadings, Or In The Alternative, For Summary Judgment On The
Sole Remaining Claim For Unfair Competition Alleged In
Plaintiff's Third Amended Complaint, Filed May 27, 2011, FiledNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
September 25, 2014" (Summary Judgment Order) all entered in the
Circuit Court of the First Circuit1 (circuit court).
The circuit court entered judgment in favor of
Defendant-Appellee The National Collegiate Athletic Association
(the NCAA) and against Aloha and awarded attorneys' fees and
costs to the NCAA consistent with its oral findings and
conclusions during the February 27, 2012 hearing on the NCAA's
Motion for Attorneys' Fees and Costs, filed January 31, 2012.
On appeal Aloha contends the circuit court:
(1) erroneously granted summary judgment based on the
finding that Aloha was judicially estopped from pursuing its
unfair methods of competition (UMOC) claim pursuant to Hawaii
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 480-2, Aloha waived its UMOC claim at
the pretrial hearing, Aloha's UMOC claim was barred by issue
preclusion, and that Aloha failed to present facts to prove a
genuine issue of material fact existed as to the "nature of the
competition," an element necessary for a UMOC claim.
(2) erred when it entered its Reinstatement Order and
2015 Order Awarding Fees and Costs because the NCAA's January 31,
2012 motion for attorneys' fees and costs was deemed denied based
upon Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 4(a)(3) since no
order was entered upon the record within 90 days after the date
the motion was filed and because the NCAA did not submit
sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the attorneys' fees
awarded complied with the terms of the 2015 Order Awarding Fees
and Costs.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Aloha's
points of errors as follows, and affirm.
I.
Aloha is a Hawai #i corporation and former bowl-
sponsoring agency that produced NCAA division 1-A post season
1The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
football bowl games.  The NCAA is a voluntary, non-profit,
unincorporated association of approximately 1,200 colleges,
universities, athletic conferences, and sports organizations.
The NCAA regulates and coordinates rules of play governing
intercollegiate athletic competition among its member
institutions, including certification of postseason football bowl
games.  The NCAA formulates rules governing Bowl Games and
annually certifies those Bowl Games that meet its criteria.
The NCAA does not own or operate the Bowl Games.  Bowl
Games are operated by third-party promoters (bowl-sponsoring
agencies).  Each Bowl Game must be certified annually by the NCAA
in order for collegiate teams to be eligible to participate in
them.  Bowl-sponsoring agencies that own and operate NCAA
Certified Postseason Football Bowl Games, among other things:
propose to the NCAA the name, site, date and time for the game
and arrange for a suitable facility, which are subject to the
approval of the NCAA; market the game in accordance with the
requirements of the NCAA; and raise revenues to cover the costs
of the game through the sale of sponsorship rights, the sale of
tickets to attend the game, the sale of concessions, programs,
and other products at the game, and the sale of rights associated
with the game, including television broadcasts rights.
Aloha filed suit against the NCAA for claims of unfair
methods of competition in violation of HRS § 480-2, tortious
interference with prospective economic advantage (tortious
interference), and breach of contract arising from the NCAA's
decertification of Aloha's two owned and operated NCAA Certified
Postseason Football Bowl Games.  This decertification led to the
termination of a prospective sale agreement to transfer control
of Aloha to Pro Sports Entertainment, Inc. (Pro Sports).
In Aloha's Second Amended Complaint, paragraph 23(f),
Aloha further alleged that the NCAA engaged in unfair methods of
competition by refusing to permit a transfer of ownership of
Aloha's NCAA Certified Postseason Football Bowl Games "without
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
good cause" (Paragraph 23(f) Claim).  The circuit court2
dismissed Aloha's Paragraph 23(f) Claim in its "Order Granting in
Part and Denying in Part the [NCAA's] Motion to Dismiss [Aloha's]
Second Amended Complaint with Prejudice" entered February 26,
2008.  Aloha then agreed to proceed solely on its claim for
tortious interference.
A jury trial was held on Aloha's claim that the NCAA
improperly interfered with Aloha's prospective sale of itself to
Pro Sports.  The jury returned a unanimous verdict in the NCAA's
favor.  Thereafter, the circuit court granted in part the NCAA's
Motion for Attorneys' Fees and Costs filed on January 31, 2012
(2012 Motion for Fees and Costs) and entered its Order Granting
in Part and Denying in Part NCAA's Motion for Attorneys' Fees and
Costs on June 19, 2012 (June 19, 2012 Order Awarding Fees and
Costs).
Aloha appealed, challenging both the adverse jury
verdict, the pretrial dismissal of Aloha's Paragraph 23(f) Claim,
and the NCAA's attorneys' fees and costs.  This court affirmed
the jury verdict and reversed the pretrial dismissal of the
Paragraph 23(f) Claim, finding that sufficient evidence was
provided for the claim to survive a motion to dismiss.  Aloha
Sports, Inc. v. The National Collegiate Athletic Association,
CAAP-12-0000512 (Oct. 30, 2013) (mem. op.).  Additionally, this
court concluded that the circuit court lacked jurisdiction to
enter the award for attorneys' fees because the appeal had
already been pending when the circuit court entered its June 19,
2012 Order Awarding Fees and Costs.  Aloha Sports, Inc, mem. op.
at *9.
On remand, after the close of renewed discovery, the
NCAA moved for judgment on the pleadings or, in the alternative,
for summary judgment on Aloha's Paragraph 23(f) Claim.  The
circuit court granted the NCAA's motion for summary judgment
concluding that Aloha failed to present facts showing either an
2The Honorable Karen S. S. Ahn presided.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
antitrust injury or injury to competition that was caused by the
NCAA's decision not to certify the Seattle Bowl.
The NCAA moved to reinstate the June 19, 2012 Order
Awarding Fees and Costs that had been vacated by the ICA solely
on jurisdictional grounds.  The circuit court held that "there is
sufficient evidence before the Court to issue a written order
awarding attorneys' fees and costs to the NCAA that is consistent
with the Court's oral findings and conclusions" during the
February 27, 2012 hearing on the NCAA's 2012 Motion for Fees and
Costs, which was reflected by the 2015 Order Awarding Fees and
Costs and denied the motion to the extent that it sought to
reinstate the void order.
II.
The circuit court granted summary judgment in favor of
the NCAA concluding, inter alia , that Aloha had failed to show
the existence of a genuine issue of material fact regarding the
“nature of the competition,” a required element of a UMOC claim
pursuant to HRS § 480-2.  See Hawaii Med. Ass'n v. Hawaii Med.
Serv. Ass'n, Inc., 113 Hawai# i 77, 148 P.3d 1179 (2006) (HMA ) and
Davis v. Four Seasons Hotel Ltd., 122 Hawai #i 423, 228 P.3d 303
(2010).
The party moving for summary judgment bears the burden
of proof to show the absence of genuine issues of material fact
entitling the moving party to judgment as a matter of law. 
Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House Inc. , 111 Hawai #i 286,
295-96, 141 P.3d 459, 468-69 (2006).  However, "[w]here . . . the
moving party is the defendant and does not bear the burden of
proof at trial, he may prevail on a motion for summary judgment
by demonstrating that the plaintiff 'fails to make a showing
sufficient to establish the existence of an element essential to
that party's case, and on which that party will bear the burden
of proof at trial.'"  Thomas v. Kidani, 126 Hawai #i 125, 267 P.3d
1230 (2011) (citations omitted).
Paragraph 23(f) of Aloha’s Second Amended Complaint
alleges that the NCAA engaged in unfair methods of competition by
“refusing to permit a transfer of ownership of Plaintiff’s NCAA
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Certified Postseason Football Bowl Games without good cause.”  In
Aloha’s first appeal, this court concluded that the alleged facts
supporting Aloha’s tortious interference claim were sufficient to
discern Aloha’s Paragraph 23(f) Claim for unfair methods of
competition:
Aloha alleged the NCAA knew about the pending sale to Pro Sports
and the significance of certification to the pending transaction.
Aloha further alleged the NCAA disrupted the transaction by
encouraging Pro Sports to abandon the deal with Aloha and apply
for a bowl game independent of Aloha.  These alleged facts are
sufficient to discern Aloha’s claim that the NCAA employed an
unfair method of de-certification to gain an advantage in the
competition with Aloha to obtain a deal with Pro Sports. 
Aloha Sports Inc., mem. op. at *6.
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 480-2 (2008) provides:
(a) Unfair methods of competition and unfair or deceptive
acts or practices in the conduct of any trade or commerce
are unlawful.
(b) In construing this section, the courts and the office of
consumer protection shall give due consideration to the
rules, regulations, and decisions of the Federal Trade
Commission and the federal courts interpreting section
5(a)(1) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C.
45(a)(1)), as from time to time amended.
(c) No showing that the proceeding or suit would be in the
public interest (as these terms are interpreted under
section 5(b) of the Federal Trade Commission Act) is
necessary in any action brought under this section.  
(d) No person other than a consumer, the attorney general or
the director of the office of consumer protection may bring
an action based upon unfair or deceptive acts or practices
declared unlawful by this section.
(e) Any person may bring an action based on unfair methods
of competition declared unlawful by this section.
To prove the “nature of the competition,” a plaintiff
must show that “defendants' conduct negatively affects
competition” and that he or she was harmed as a result of the
actions of the defendant that negatively affects competition. 
Gurrobat v. HTH Corp. , 133 Hawai #i 1, 22-23, 323 P.3d 792, 813-14
(2014).  Proof of the “nature of the competition” is required in
order to “ensure that the injury results from a competition-
reducing aspect of the defendant’s behavior.”  Davis , 122 Hawai# i
at 445, 228 P.3d at 325.
In this case, the NCAA argues that the circuit court
correctly granted summary judgment on Aloha’s Paragraph 23(f)
Claim for unfair methods of competition because Aloha failed to
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
present any evidence that the NCAA’s alleged conduct affected
competition.  We agree.
Aloha has not identified evidence showing that
competition is being harmed, within a relevant market, identified
the competitive effects in that market, or shown harm to
consumers.  See Wadsworth v. KSL Grand Wailea Resort, Inc., 818
F. Supp. 2d 1240, 1268 (D. Haw. 2010); Gough v. Rossmoor Corp.,
585 F.2d 381, 389 (9th Cir. 1978) (explaining that before a court
can consider an antitrust claim, it “must know with what field of
competition [the court] is concerned and the dimensions of that
field.  Market definition is essential.”).  It is not sufficient
for Aloha to claim that it has been injured because it could not
sell its business to Pro Sports.  See JBL Enterprises, Inc. v.
Jhirmack Enterprises, Inc., 509 F. Supp. 357, 364 (N.D. Cal.
1981), aff’d, 698 F.2d 1011 (9th Cir. 1983) (“[T]he plaintiff
must show something more than simply an adverse effect on his own
business; he must show an adverse impact on the competitive
conditions in general as they exist within the field of commerce
in which the plaintiff is engaged.”) (internal quotations and
citation omitted).
Aloha argues that there was " competition between the
NCAA and Aloha  to obtain a deal with Pro Sports" and that "[t]he
NCAA eliminated Aloha as a participant in that competition by
employing the unfair method of de-certification of Aloha to gain
an advantage in the competition with Aloha to obtain a deal with
Pro Sports."  However, the NCAA serves as a standard setting
body, which certifies organizations to participate in its post
season football bowl games.  In contrast, Aloha is a bowl-
sponsoring agency, which independently contracts with
participating teams, television stations, and sponsors in its
operation of an NCAA certified bowl game.  Aloha has not
demonstrated how the two entities are competitors with one
another.
Aloha contends that a genuine issue of material fact
exists as to the “nature of the competition” requirement because
this court had already determined that Aloha sufficiently pled a
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
UMOC claim.  See Aloha Sports, Inc. , mem. op. at *5-6.  However,
this court's analysis in the first appeal was limited to whether
Aloha had sufficiently pled a claim for relief as a matter of
law.  Aloha Sports Inc., mem. op. at *6.  On remand, Aloha did
not offer evidence of how the NCAA's refusal to permit a transfer
of ownership of Aloha's Certified Postseason Football Bowl Game
negatively affected competition and that Aloha was harmed as a
result of the NCAA's actions that negatively affected
competition.  Moreover, Aloha failed to specify the relevant
market and an anti-competitive effect within the market.  See
Wadsworth v. KSL Grand Wailea Resort, Inc., 818 F. Supp. 2d 1240,
1268 (D. Haw. 2010).
Finally, Aloha argues that the NCAA had prior knowledge
of its preliminary agreement with Pro Sports conditioned upon,
inter alia , recertification of the Seattle Bowl and acted with an
improper motive when it “refus[ed] to permit a transfer of
ownership.”  Aloha’s contentions are primarily based on the
NCAA’s conduct during the 2003 NCAA Football Certification
Subcommittee Meeting (certification meeting) held on the dates of
April 28, through May 1, 2003.  Aloha submits that, during the
certification meeting, the NCAA denied certification of the 2003
Seattle Bowl to induce Pro Sports to abandon its agreement with
Aloha and to instead submit an independent bid to operate the
bowl game in the future.  Prior to the certification meeting,
Aloha and Pro Sports executed an “Irrevocable Binding Letter of
Intent” in which Pro Sports was to acquire the stock and pay
specified outstanding liabilities of Aloha upon certification of
the 2003 Seattle Bowl.  The letter of intent was negotiated
without any input or participation by the NCAA.  The subcommittee
holds its annual certification meeting during which
representatives of the various bowl games are in attendance to
respond to the NCAA’s questions regarding certification or
recertification.  However, Terry Daw (Mr. Daw), owner of Aloha,
did not attend the 2003 certification meeting to address the
concerns of the NCAA despite all the apprehensions and negative
press surrounding the Seattle Bowl.  Instead, the 2003
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
certification meeting was attended by Paul Feller (Mr. Feller),
the CEO of Pro Sports, and James Haugh (Mr. Haugh), Executive
Director of the Seattle Bowl, at which time both were informed
that the NCAA would not be recertifying the Seattle Bowl.  Mr.
Haugh testified that “in the best interest with Pro Sports
purchasing the game” Mr. Daw, did not attend.
Aloha provided testimony of Mr. Feller and Mr. Haugh to
support its contention that the NCAA engaged in unfair methods of
competition.  However, the deposition testimony from Paul Feller
only revealed that Mr. Feller was informed by the NCAA that Pro
Sports, like any other entity that wanted to put on a bowl game,
could submit an initial certification application for a new bowl
game after the NCAA had informed Aloha and Pro Sports that Aloha
would not receive recertification.  Further, the deposition
testimony of Mr. Haugh only provided support that the NCAA
inquired whether Mr. Feller was interested in submitting a bowl
application the following year.  This evidence does not create a
triable issue concerning the "nature of the competition” and that
the NCAA refused to allow transfer of ownership.  Instead, the
NCAA’s decision to deny certification was justified under the
terms of the NCAA Handbook.
The NCAA has specific requirements for certification of
all bowl games which are set forth in its Handbook.  The 2001-02
Handbook provided: "If the management of a certified game fails
to comply with . . . the NCAA’s approved policies and procedures,
the subcommittee has the option to withhold certification for 
. . . one year or fine it a percentage of its gross receipts."
The terms of the Handbook allowed the NCAA to withhold
certification from a bowl game for one year if management failed
to meet certification requirements.  Aloha failed to comply with
the NCAA's policies, which legitimately entitled NCAA to withhold
certification.  The NCAA asserts that there is no permanent
decertification of bowl games and that the Seattle Bowl was
decertified for a period of one year, at which time Aloha would
have been eligible to seek recertification.
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
The NCAA submitted evidence to support the showing that
it acted with legitimate business reason when it decertified the
Seattle Bowl.  Reasons for the decertification included but were
not limited to: Aloha missing two deadlines for providing a
Letter of Credit to the NCAA for the 2002 game; Aloha failing to
reimburse the participating teams pursuant to its contracts with
them; Aloha’s failure to pay its vendors; Aloha’s failure to pay
sales tax for its ticket sales to the State of Washington; Aloha
had soured its relations with the Seattle Chamber of Commerce;
Aloha was late in paying its application/certification fee; and
Aloha had failed to refund Mountain West Conference its deposit
of $250,000 per its contract with the conference because there
was no bowl eligible team from that conference in 2002.  The NCAA
has authority to oversee the operation of the bowl games and has
broad latitude to make rules that affect the nature of athletic
competition and to preserve the nature of intercollegiate
athletics.  Gaines v. National Collegiate Athletic Association ,
746 F. Supp. 738, 747 (M.D. Tenn. 1990) (NCAA eligibility rules
"are overwhelmingly procompetitive, are justified by legitimate
business reasons, and consequently cannot be viewed as having any
unreasonably exclusionary or anticompetitive effect.").
After review of the evidence presented, taken in the
light most favorable to Aloha, we conclude that Aloha has failed
to provide any evidence that the NCAA’s conduct negatively
affected competition.  Accordingly, Aloha did not raise a genuine
issue of material fact regarding the “nature of the competition,”
necessary to establish its UMOC claim and the circuit court did
not err in granting summary judgment.  Based on the foregoing, we
need not address the other grounds for the circuit court's
Summary Judgment Order.
III.
Aloha contends that the circuit court erred when it
entered its Reinstatement Order and 2015 Order Awarding Fees and
Costs based on the NCAA's 2012 Motion for Fees and Costs because
the 2012 Motion for Fees and Costs had already been deemed
denied.  Aloha argues that the 2012 Motion for Fees and Costs was
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
deemed denied because no order was entered upon the record within
90 days after the date the motion was filed as required by HRAP
Rule 4(a)(3)3.  We find this argument without merit.
The NCAA filed its original motion for attorneys' fees
and costs on January 31, 2012.  The circuit court heard the
NCAA's motion on February 27, 2012 and granted the motion with a
few exceptions.  The circuit court entered its order granting the
2012 Motion for Fees and Costs on June 19, 2012, more than 90
days after the filing of the motion, which was subsequently
vacated by the ICA for lack of jurisdiction.
On June 12, 2015 the NCAA filed its motion to reinstate
the June 19, 2012 Order Awarding Fees and Costs requesting that
the court grant the NCAA's reasonable and necessary attorneys'
fees and costs from the initial civil proceeding.  This court
"look[s] to the substance of [a] motion to determine its nature." 
Jaylo v. Jaylo, 124 Hawai #i 488, 496, 248 P.3d 1219, 1227 (App.
2011) (citation omitted); Madden v. Madden , 43 Haw. 148, 149-50
(1959) ("Under the rules, the substance of the pleading controls,
not the nomenclature given to the pleading."  (Citation
omitted)).  Under the circumstances of this case, it appears that
the substance of the NCAA's motion to reinstate the June 19, 2012
Order Awarding Fees and Costs was essentially a renewed motion
for attorneys' fees and costs.  Accordingly, we construe the
Reinstatement Order and 2015 Order Awarding Fees and Costs as an
order granting the renewed motion for attorneys' fees and costs.
Therefore, the issue of whether the 2012 Motion for Fees and
Costs was deemed denied pursuant to HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) is moot.
3HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) (as amended in 2012), provides:
(a) Appeals in Civil Cases
. . . .
(3) If any party files a timely motion for . . .
attorney's fees or costs, the time for filing the
notice of appeal is extended until 30 days after entry
of an order disposing of the motion; provided, that
the failure to dispose of any motion by order entered
upon the record within 90 days after the date the
motion was filed shall constitute a denial of the
motion.
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Aloha's contention that the circuit court erred when it
entered its 2015 Order Awarding Fees and Costs because the NCAA
did not submit or file a spreadsheet or other demonstration that
the $451,607.85 in attorneys' fees actually complied with the
terms of the order is also without merit.
The circuit court entered its Order Awarding Fees and
Cost based on the circuit court's oral findings and conclusions
during the February 27, 2012 hearing on the 2012 Motion for Fees
and Costs.  The NCAA submitted attorney declarations and
spreadsheets detailing the time entries with its original 2012
motion.  At the hearing on February 27, 2012, the circuit court
granted the NCAA's motion and disallowed certain fees, set the
NCAA's attorneys and paralegal rates, and removed block-billed
entries, federal court litigation entries, bankruptcy litigation
entries, and entries related to litigating the HRS Section 480
claims lowering the NCAA's fees from $1,290,367.18 to
$451,607.85.  The NCAA submitted a proposed order to the circuit
court with the new fee amount in compliance with Hawai #i Rules of
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 54(d)(2)(B)4.  The NCAA did not seek
any additional attorneys' fees or costs in its motion to
reinstate the June 19, 2012 Order Awarding Fees and Costs.
Therefore, it appears that the circuit court was provided
sufficient information to determine a reasonable attorney's fee
award in favor of the NCAA that was in compliance with the terms
of the order.  Accordingly, the circuit court did not abuse its
discretion when it entered its Reinstatement Order and 2015 Order
Awarding Fees and Costs.
4HRCP Rule 54(d)(2)(B) provides:
Unless otherwise provided by statute or order of the court,
the motion must be filed and served no later than 14 days
after entry of an appealable order or judgment; must specify
the judgment and the statute, rule, or other grounds
entitling the moving party to the award; and must state the
amount or provide a fair estimate of the amount sought. If
directed by the court, the motion shall also disclose the
terms of any agreement with respect to fees to be paid for
the services for which claim is made.
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
IV.
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the (1) "Judgment"
entered August 11, 2015; (2) "Order Granting In Part And Denying
In Part Defendant The National Collegiate Athletic Association's
Motion To Reinstate Order Awarding Attorneys' Fees And Costs"
entered August 4, 2015; (3) "Order Granting In Part And Denying
In Part Defendant The National Collegiate Athletic Association's
Motion For Attorneys' Fees And Costs, Filed January 31, 2012"
entered August 4, 2015; and (4) the June 9, 2015 "Order Granting
Defendant The National Collegiate Athletic Association's Motion
For Judgment On The Pleadings, Or In The Alternative, For Summary
Judgment On The Sole Remaining Claim For Unfair Competition
Alleged In Plaintiff's Third Amended Complaint, Filed May 27,
2011, Filed September 25, 2014."
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 30, 2017.
On the briefs:
Frederick W. Rohlfing, III,
Maxwell M. Blecher, Pro Hac
Vice, (Blecher Collins
Pepperman & Joye, P.C.),
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
William C. McCorriston,
Jordon J. Kimura,
(McCorriston Miller Mukai
MacKinnon LLP),
Gregory L. Curtner, Pro Hac
Vice, (Schiff Hardin LLP),
for Defendant-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
13