  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000007
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
PAUL C.K. KAEO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 09-1-0719)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Paul C.K. Kaeo (Kaeo) appeals from
 
the "Judgment Of Conviction And Sentence" entered December 5,
 
1
2011, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court). 
The circuit court convicted Kaeo of Reckless Manslaughter in
 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-702 (Supp. 2012)
 
in the death of Charles Kahumoku (Kahumoku), and sentenced him to
 
twenty years of imprisonment. 
On appeal, Kaeo contends the circuit court erred when
 
it:
 
(1) failed to properly instruct the jury as to the 
1
 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
included offense of assault;
 
(2) excluded relevant evidence; and
 
(3) interrupted Kaeo's closing argument to disagree on
 
the issue of assault.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude Kaeo's
 
appeal is without merit.
 
(1) Kaeo contends the circuit court erred by failing to 
properly instruct the jury on the included offense of Assault in 
the First and Second Degree. A trial court must instruct the 
jury on any included offense "when there is a rational basis in 
the evidence for a verdict acquitting the defendant of the 
offense charged and convicting the defendant of the included 
offense[.]" State v. Haanio, 94 Hawai' i 405, 413, 16 P.3d 246, 
254 (2001). However, when the jury convicts the defendant of the charged offense or a greater included offense, a trial court's 
failure to instruct on a lesser included offense is a harmless 
error. State v. Pauline, 100 Hawai' i 356, 381, 60 P.3d 306, 331 
(2002) (quoting Haanio, 94 Hawai' i at 415-16, 16 P.3d at 256-57). 
(2) Kaeo contends the circuit court abused its 
discretion when it granted the State of Hawai' i's (State) motion 
in limine and excluded relevant evidence that Kahumoku and Kaeo's 
wife (Wife) were first cousins involved in a romantic 
relationship. At a hearing held July 29, 2011, Kaeo offered this 
evidence to refute any premeditation on his part to harm 
Kahumoku. Under his theory, the familial relationship made it 
easier for Kaeo to find Kahumoku if Kaeo had wanted to previously 
hurt Kahumoku. On appeal, Kaeo contends the circuit court 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
omitted a crucial piece of evidence supporting his theory that he 
was protecting himself or Wife at the time of the incident.
 
A trial court's decision on a motion in limine is an 
evidentiary ruling that determines the relevance and potential 
prejudice of the evidence at issue. Kobashigawa v. Silva, 129 
Hawai'i 313, 321-22, 300 P.3d 579, 587-88 (2013). Relevant 
evidence is any evidence that tends to make a fact of consequence 
more or less probable. Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 401 
(1993). Generally, "[a]ll relevant evidence is admissible[.]" 
HRE 402 (1993). "Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if 
its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of 
unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the 
jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or 
needless presentation of cumulative evidence." HRE 403 (1993). 
"The determination of the admissibility of relevant 
evidence under HRE 403 is eminently suited to the circuit court's 
exercise of its discretion because it requires a cost-benefit 
calculus and a delicate balance between probative value and 
prejudicial effect." State v. Uyesugi, 100 Hawai' i 442, 463, 60 
P.3d 843, 864 (2002) (brackets omitted). To determine the balance, the circuit court weighs such factors such as "the need 
for the evidence, the efficacy of alternative proof, and the 
degree to which the evidence will probably rouse the jury to 
overmastering hostility." Id. The trial court must ensure the 
evidence does not create an unfair prejudice, leaving the trier of fact to decide on an improper, often emotional, basis. State 
v. Calaro, 107 Hawai' i 452, 465, 114 P.3d 958, 971 (App. 2005). 
In this case, the circuit court found the relationship
 
between first cousins highly prejudicial and irrelevant to
 establish Kaeo and Kahumoku knew each other prior to the
 
incident. With alternative proof that Kaeo knew Kahumoku's 
3
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
identity readily available, the circuit court reasoned the 
intimate relationship between first cousins would unfairly
 
prejudice the jurors against Kahumoku and Wife without offering
 
any probative value. There was no abuse of discretion or
 
disregard for principles of law by the circuit court in granting
 
the State's motion in limine.
 
(3) Kaeo contends the circuit court violated his
 
constitutional right to present a complete defense when the court
 
interrupted his closing argument. During closing arguments, the
 
following exchange took place. 
[Defense Counsel]:  Now, generally speaking, you guys
know where this line goes, right? 
There's –- I mean, you
know, there's assaults but you have no instructions for
assaults so you cannot consider any kind of assault. Okay?
So even if you say to yourselves, and this is just an
assault, I mean, I don't think he intended to kill him or
anything like that, I don't think he acted recklessly,
that's an assault. But you don't have an instruction, okay?
So that would mean you're here, okay? You're not guilty.
 
Now if anywhere along this line you stop, you say,
okay –-
The Court:  Assault is not be –- assault is not a
 
consideration. 
[Defense Counsel]: That's right. 
That's what I said. 
Okay. 
So if you stop anywhere along this line, you say
murder or manslaughter, then you gotta consider the defenses
that were raised. Okay? 
The guarantee of due process within the Federal and 
Hawai'i constitutions protects each defendant's right to present 
a complete defense. State v. Kaulia, 128 Hawai' i 479, 487, 291 
P.3d 377, 385 (2013). The circuit court's interruption neither 
disturbed nor disputed Kaeo's theory that the jury must acquit if 
they believe Kaeo did not act with the requisite intent for 
murder or manslaughter, and did not violate Kaeo's right to 
present a complete defense. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Judgment Of Conviction
 
And Sentence" entered December 5, 2011, in the Circuit Court of
 the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 30, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Randall K. Hironaka 
(Miyoshi & Hironaka)for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 Stephen K. Tsushima
Deputy Procecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
5
 