    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000060 16-JUL-2025 07:56 AM Dkt. 98 OP 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI #I 
---o0o---
DEUTSCHE BANK NATIONAL TRUST COMPANY, AS TRUSTEE UNDER
THE POOLING AND SERVICING AGREEMENT DATED AS OF DECEMBER 1,
2006, GSAMP TRUST 2006-FM3, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
DALE SCOTT WINTERS; DALE SCOTT WINTERS, TRUSTEE UNDER THAT
CERTAIN UNRECORDED REVOCABLE LIVING TRUST DATED AUGUST 30, 1993,
MADE BY DALE SCOTT WINTERS, WITH FULL POWERS TO SELL, MORTGAGE,
LEASE OR OTHERWISE DEAL WITH THE LAND, AS TO AN UNDIVIDED 1/2
INTEREST; and DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION, STATE OF HAWAI #I,
Defendants-Appellees, and JOHN and MARY DOES 3-10, Defendants
and 
EILEEN MARIE WINTERS; EILEEN MARIE WINTERS TRUSTEE UNDER THAT
CERTAIN UNRECORDED REVOCABLE LIVING TRUST DATED AUGUST 30, 1993,
MADE BY EILEEN MARIE WINTERS, WITH FULL POWERS TO SELL,
MORTGAGE, LEASE OR OTHERWISE DEAL WITH THE LAND,
AS TO AN UNDIVIDED 1/2 INTEREST, Defendant-Appellant 
EILEEN MARIE WINTERS, TRUSTEE UNDER THAT CERTAIN UNRECORDED
REVOCABLE LIVING TRUST DATED AUGUST 30, 1993, MADE BY EILEEN
MARIE WINTERS, WITH FULL POWERS TO SELL, MORTGAGE, LEASE OR
OTHERWISE DEAL WITH THE LAND, AS TO AN UNDIVIDED 1/2 INTEREST,
Defendant/Counterclaimant-Appellant,
v. 
DEUTSCHE BANK NATIONAL TRUST COMPANY, AS TRUSTEE UNDER
THE POOLING AND SERVICING AGREEMENT DATED AS OF DECEMBER 1,
2006, GSAMP TRUST 2006-FM3, Plaintiff/Counterclaim
Defendant-Appellee, and DOES 1-10, Counterclaim-Defendants 
NO. CAAP-22-0000060 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 5CC111000093) 
JULY 16, 2025 
NAKASONE, CHIEF JUDGE, HIRAOKA AND WADSWORTH, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY HIRAOKA, J. 
Deutsche Bank  National Trust Company nonjudicially 
foreclosed a residential mortgage on property owned by Eileen 
Marie Winters and Dale Scott Winters, as trustees of their 
respective revocable living trusts. Deutsche Bank purchased the property at the foreclosure auction. It then sued the Winterses — individually, not as trustees — for ejectment and other relief. Deutsche Bank amended its complaint and identified the Winterses, as trustees of their respective revocable living trusts, as defendants. Eileen, as trustee, counterclaimed for wrongful 
foreclosure and quiet title, among other things. The Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit granted partial summary judgment for Deutsche Bank on its claim for ejectment and on Eileen's counterclaims for wrongful foreclosure and quiet title, and dismissed Eileen's other counterclaims.  Eileen appeals from the 
January 18, 2022 Final Judgment  for Deutsche Bank.
 21
We hold that the Circuit Court erred by dismissing 
Eileen's counterclaims and granting summary judgment for Deutsche Bank. Eileen's counterclaims, viewed in the light most favorable 
1 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided. 
2 Dale Scott Winters isn't a party to this appeal. 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to her, alleged facts which entitled her to legal relief. 
Eileen's opposition to Deutsche Bank's motion for partial summary judgment, viewed in the light most favorable to her, created genuine issues of material fact about whether Deutsche Bank and its agents and predecessor in interest breached the Winterses' mortgage, breached Eileen's payment plan, and violated state and federal law. We vacate the Final Judgment in part as to Eileen, individually and as trustee, and remand for further proceedings. 
I. BACKGROUND 
Deutsche Bank sued the Winterses on May 25, 2011. The 
complaint alleged that Deutsche Bank had purchased property in Kapa#a, Kaua #i in a nonjudicial foreclosure, and sought to eject 
the Winterses from the property. Deutsche Bank amended its complaint on December 30, 2014. The amended complaint added claims for foreclosure, unjust enrichment, and an equitable lien on the Kapa #a property. 
On October 12, 2020, the Circuit Court granted Deutsche 
Bank's motion to identify "Eileen Marie Winters, Trustee under that certain unrecorded Revocable Living Trust dated August 30, 1993" as a defendant. Eileen as trustee answered and counterclaimed for (1) wrongful nonjudicial foreclosure; (2) unfair and deceptive acts and practices in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 480-2 ( UDAP); (3) rescission 
under the federal Truth in Lending Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1601, et seq. (TILA); (4) violation of the federal Real Estate Settlement 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Procedures Act, 12 U.S.C. §§ 2601, et seq. ( RESPA); (5) breach of 
contract; and (6) quiet title. 
Deutsche Bank moved to dismiss counts 2-5 of the 
counterclaim. The Circuit Court granted the motion. Deutsche 
Bank then moved for partial summary judgment on its claim for ejectment and on counts 1 (wrongful foreclosure) and 6 (quiet title) of Eileen's counterclaim. The Circuit Court granted the motion. The Final Judgment was entered. This appeal followed. Eileen contends the Circuit Court erred by granting Deutsche Bank's motion to dismiss and motion for partial summary judgment. 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Motion to Dismiss 
We review a ruling on a motion to dismiss de novo. 
Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo , 143 Hawai #i 249, 263, 428 P.3d 
761, 775 (2018), overruled on other grounds by Wilmington Sav. 
Fund Soc'y, FSB v. Domingo , 155 Hawai #i 1, 556 P.3d 347 (2024). 
We assume the facts alleged in Eileen's counterclaim are true and view them in the light most favorable to Eileen to see if they warrant relief under any legal theory. See id. at 256-57, 428 
P.3d at 768-69. 
B. Motion for Summary Judgment 
We review a grant of summary judgment de novo. 
Pflueger, Inc. v. AIU Holdings, Inc.
, 152 Hawai#i 260, 265, 526 
P.3d 237, 242 (2023). Deutsche Bank had the burden to establish the material facts, show there is no genuine issue as to any of them, and explain why it is entitled to a judgment as a matter of 
4  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
law. Id. A fact is material if it would establish or refute an 
element of a cause of action or defense. Id. We view the 
evidence in the light most favorable to Eileen. Id. 
III. DISCUSSION 
A. The Circuit Court erred by dismissing
Eileen's counterclaim counts 2-5. 
Counts 2-5 of Eileen's counterclaim alleged UDAP, 
violation of TILA and RESPA, and breach of contract. It made the 
following allegations which, for this appeal, we deem true and view in the light most favorable to Eileen: 
Eileen created her revocable living trust ( RLT) in 2002 
and transferred title to her Kapa #a home to herself as trustee. 
She refinanced debt on her home in 2006 and signed a mortgage, but the mortgage did not identify her as a trustee or name her RLT as a mortgagor.
3 The lender, Fremont, failed to deliver two 
completed and signed notice-of-right-to-cancel documents at the closing, as required under TILA. 
In February 2008 Fremont informed Eileen her loan was 
being transferred to Wells Fargo  and she would receive written 
instructions for making future payments. Eileen didn't receive instructions. She called Wells Fargo. She was told Wells Fargo did not own her loan. She called Fremont. She was told to make her March 2008 payment over the phone. She did. That happened 
3 The mortgage identified the "Borrower" as "Dale Scott Winters and
Eileen Marie Winters, husband and wife, as tenants by the entirety." We 
express no opinion about the legal effect of the mortgage's failure to nameEileen and Dale Scott Winters as trustees of their respective revocable livingtrusts. 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
again in April 2008. In May 2008 Fremont informed Eileen it was 
closing and would not accept further payments. Eileen did not receive instructions for making her May 2008 payment. 
In June 2008 Litton informed Eileen it was the new loan 
servicer, Wells Fargo owned her loan, she was in default, and she needed to call to get the payoff amount. Eileen left messages at the phone number she was given, but never received a return call. 
Eileen was able to contact Litton in August 2008. She 
signed a Repayment Plan Agreement  on August 27, 2008, and wired 
the required $5,000 initial payment. A few days later, Litton informed her it was proceeding with a foreclosure and keeping her initial payment because it was $100 less than required. 
Litton also force-placed property insurance on the 
Kapa#a property and charged the premium to the Winterses' loan, 
even though the property was insured. Litton verbally quoted a reinstatement amount, but never verified it in writing. Litton also told Eileen to apply for a loan modification. Eileen did so by fax. 
On December 16, 2008, Eileen faxed and mailed a letter 
disputing the debt and requesting an accounting and the name of the original creditor. She never received the information, in violation of RESPA. Litton's foreclosure counsel sent a letter telling Eileen she had to dispute her debt in writing by December 17, 2008. 
In January 2009 Litton informed Eileen her house would 
be sold at auction in March. Eileen called Litton's counsel. 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
She requested a payoff number and an accounting. She followed up 
in writing. Litton's counsel told Eileen her house was scheduled for auction in two weeks. 
By letter dated January 10, 2009, Litton informed 
Eileen her loan could not be modified. But in early February 2009 Litton told Eileen it had no record of receiving loan modification documents, and she should resubmit them. In late February 2009, Litton's counsel gave Eileen a written reinstatement amount that was "almost double any previous quote[.]" 
On June 24, 2009, Eileen exercised her TILA rescission 
right. She received no response. Deutsche Bank proceeded with a nonjudicial foreclosure, sold the Winterses' house to itself, and recorded a quitclaim deed on August 30, 2010. 
Deutsche Bank's motion to dismiss argued that Eileen 
lacked standing to assert the UDAP, TILA, RESPA, and breach-of-contract claims because they were based on loan documents she signed individually, not as trustee of her RLT. Deutsche Bank alternatively argued the claims were time-barred. 
(1) Count 2 alleged UDAP. A UDAP claim may only be 
brought by a consumer. HRS § 480-2(d) (2008). A "consumer" is "a natural person who, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, purchases, attempts to purchase, or is solicited to purchase goods or services or who commits money, property, or services in a personal investment." HRS § 480-1 (2008). 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Deutsche Bank argues Eileen's RLT is not a "natural 
person," citing Association of Apartment Owners of Newtown 
Meadows v. Venture 15, Inc. , 115 Hawai#i 232, 252, 167 P.3d 225, 
245 (2007) (holding that an unincorporated association is not a "consumer" under HRS § 480–1). But a trust is not comparable to an unincorporated association; it is an instrument creating a relationship. HRS § 554A-1 (2018), 
repealed by  2021 Haw. Sess. 
Laws Act 32, § 9 at 92; HRS § 554D-1104 (Supp. 2021). 
Eileen's counterclaim alleged she was the trustee 
holding title to her Kapa #a home under her RLT when the loan 
documents, including the mortgage that encumbered the home, were executed. If she were the RLT's beneficiary, she would be the real party in interest and have standing to maintain a claim for unfair or deceptive acts and practices that affected her RLT's ownership of and title to her home. Tradewinds Hotel, Inc. v. 
Cochran, 8 Haw. App. 256, 265, 799 P.2d 60, 66 (1990) (noting 
general rule that a trustee having the right sought to be enforced is the real party in interest). Deutsche Bank did not show that Eileen was not the beneficiary of her RLT. Viewed in the light most favorable to Eileen, her counterclaim alleged standing to assert the UDAP claim. 
Deutsche Bank argues Eileen's UDAP claim was time-
barred. A consumer suit under HRS § 480-13(b) (2008) must be filed "within four years after the cause of action accrues[.]" HRS § 480-24 (Supp. 2016). The last unfair or deceptive act or practice alleged in the counterclaim was the recording of 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Deutsche Bank's quitclaim deed on August 30, 2010. A UDAP action 
had to have been filed by August 30, 2014. Eileen's counterclaim wasn't filed until November 25, 2020. But Eileen argues her counterclaim relates back to May 25, 2011, when Deutsche Bank's complaint was filed. 
HRS § 657-3 (2016) concerns counterclaims. It 
provides, in relevant part: 
(a) In the cases enumerated in subsection (b), . . .
any . . . statute of limitations, shall apply to a claim
stated as a counterclaim against an opposing party in thesame manner as if an action thereon had been commenced at the time when the opposing party commenced the opposingparty's action . . . . 
(b) Subsection (a) shall apply if the claim stated
as a counterclaim: 
. . . . 
(2) Arises out of the transaction or occurrence that is the subject matter of the opposing party'sclaim. 
Citing Mauian Hotel, Inc. v. Maui Pineapple Co. , 52 
Haw. 563, 567, 481 P.2d 310, 313–14 (1971) (applying Hawai #i 
Rules of Civil Procedure ( HRCP) Rule 15(c) concerning amendment 
of a pleading), Deutsche Bank argues that "counterclaims, as with 
all other claims, will relate back only if they arose out of a situation previously described in timely pleadings." That statement in Mauian Hotel  was dicta; the claim at issue in that 
case was third-party defendant Napili-Kai's amended answer to the third-party complaint. The third-party complaint alleged that third-party defendant Napili-Kai was liable for third-party defendant Austin-Smith's negligent design of a dam at Napili-
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kai's request. Napili-Kai's amended answer asserted a new cross-
claim against Austin-Smith for Napili-Kai's own property damage, which was not a subject of the third-party complaint. The supreme court ultimately held that Austin-Smith was estopped from pleading the statute of limitations as a defense. 
HRS § 657-3(b)(2), not HRCP Rule 15(c), applies here. 
Deutsche Bank's complaint alleged that Eileen and Dale Scott Winters were "remaining on the property as trespassers and/or uninvited guests and lessees" after Deutsche Bank sold the Winterses' property to itself in a nonjudicial foreclosure. It was reasonably foreseeable that Eileen would defend against the ejectment claim by claiming the nonjudicial foreclosure upon which it was based was unfairly and deceptively engineered by Deutsche Bank and its agents and predecessors in interest. See 
Kondaur Cap. Corp. v. Matsuyoshi , 136 Hawai #i 227, 241, 361 P.3d 
454, 468 (2015) (noting, in ejectment action where plaintiff obtained title after non-judicial foreclosure, "the strength and validity of Kondaur's title is unavoidably intertwined with the validity of the foreclosure sale"). 
Deutsche Bank apparently realized this; its motion for 
partial summary judgment stated it "commenced this action in May 2011 to confirm the validity of the nonjudicial foreclosure  and 
obtain a writ of ejectment." (Emphasis added.) Thus, the Winterses' loan and mortgage, alleged default, Litton's alleged breach of the mortgage and the Repayment Plan Agreement, and the validity of Deutsche Bank's nonjudicial foreclosure were 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unavoidably intertwined with the subject matter of Deutsche 
Bank's complaint. The complaint was filed before Eileen's UDAP claim became time-barred. The counterclaim relates back under HRS § 657-3(b)(2). The Circuit Court erred by dismissing counterclaim count 2. 
(2) Count 3 alleged TILA violations. Deutsche Bank 
doesn't argue Eileen lacked standing; it argues only that her TILA claim was time-barred. 
TILA does not contain its own statute of limitations. 
"In the absence of a controlling federal limitations period, the general rule is that a state limitations period for an analogous cause of action is borrowed and applied to the federal claim[.]" Cnty. of Oneida v. Oneida Indian Nation , 470 U.S. 226, 240 
(1985). 
HRS § 657-1(1) (2016), the six-year breach-of-contract 
statute of limitations, is the most analogous. Cf. Hoang v. Bank 
of Am., N.A. , 910 F.3d 1096, 1098-99 (9th Cir. 2018) (applying 
Washington's six-year contract statute of limitations to TILA rescission enforcement claims). Eileen's counterclaim alleged she exercised her TILA rescission right on June 24, 2009, but the nonjudicial foreclosure nevertheless proceeded. Deutsche Bank's complaint was filed before Eileen's TILA rescission claim became time-barred. The Circuit Court erred by dismissing count 3. 
(3) Count 4 alleged RESPA violations. Deutsche Bank 
argues the RLT was not a "borrower" authorized to sue under RESPA because Eileen signed the loan documents individually, not as the 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trustee of her RLT. 12 U.S.C. § 2605(f) ("Whoever fails to 
comply with any provision of this section shall be liable to the 
borrower  for each such failure[.]" (emphasis added)). 
Deutsche Bank relies on Keen v. Helson , 930 F.3d 799 
(6th Cir. 2019). Keen is inapposite. There, Tara and Nathan 
Keen bought a house. Both signed the mortgage, but only Nathan signed the note. Tara got title to the house when they divorced. Nathan died. The loan servicer foreclosed. Tara sued the loan servicer for violating RESPA. The federal district court held that Tara was not a "borrower" under RESPA because she was never obligated under the note. Tara appealed. The Sixth Circuit affirmed, holding that a "'borrower' is someone who is personally obligated on a loan — i.e., someone who is actually borrowing money. Tara Keen does not fit that description, so she does not have a cause of action under RESPA." Id. at 800. 
Here, Eileen was the borrower. Her counterclaim 
alleged she owned her home as trustee of her RLT when she signed the note. Viewing the counterclaim allegations in the light most favorable to Eileen, she had standing as her RLT's trustee to assert the RESPA violation because Deutsche Bank did not show she was not the beneficiary of her RLT. Cochran, 8 Haw. App. at 265, 
799 P.2d at 66. 
RESPA has a three-year statute of limitations for 
violations involving servicing a mortgage loan. 12 U.S.C. § 2614. The counterclaim alleged RESPA violations in June, October, and December 2008. Deutsche Bank's complaint was filed 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
before the earliest RESPA claim became time-barred. The Circuit 
Court erred by dismissing count 4. 
(4) Count 5 alleged breach of the Repayment Plan 
Agreement. Deutsche Bank argues the RLT was not a party to the agreement because it was not a signatory. Viewing the counterclaim allegations in the light most favorable to Eileen, she signed the Repayment Plan Agreement as the real party in interest under her RLT. Deutsche Bank does not argue the breach of contract claim was time-barred. The Circuit Court erred by dismissing count 5. 
B. The Circuit Court erred by granting summary
judgment on Deutsche Bank's ejectment claim. 
To prevail on its ejectment claim, Deutsche Bank had to 
prove it had "title to and right of possession of" the Kapa #a 
property. Kondaur
, 136 Hawai#i at 241, 361 P.3d at 468. In 
Kondaur the supreme court noted: "Because the title to the 
Property deeded by RLP [(the foreclosing mortgagee)] to Kondaur 
derives from a non-judicial foreclosure sale of the Property, the strength and validity of Kondaur's title is unavoidably intertwined with the validity of the foreclosure sale." Id. at 
241, 361 P.3d at 468. 
Deutsche Bank submitted the Adjustable Rate Note, the 
Mortgage, and recorded copies of the Mortgagee's Affidavit of Foreclosure Under Power of Sale and Quitclaim Deed to support its motion for partial summary judgment. 
The burden then shifted to 
Eileen to show there were genuine issues of material fact 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
precluding summary judgment. Pflueger , 152 Hawai#i at 265, 526 
P.3d at 242. 
The Mortgage provided: 
20. Sale of Note; Change of Loan Servicer; Notice of
Grievance . . . . If there is a change of the Loan Servicer,
Borrower will be given written notice of the change which
will state the name and address of the new Loan Servicer,the address to which payments should be made and any otherinformation RESPA requires in connection with a notice oftransfer of servicing. 
Eileen submitted a 15-page declaration explaining in 
more detail the facts alleged in her counterclaim. She also 
submitted copies of correspondence she received from Litton, the Repayment Plan Agreement, a $5,000 check to "Litton Mortgage," a Litton billing statement, correspondence with Litton and its foreclosure counsel, her December 16, 2008 letter disputing the debt, Litton's call logs, another 2-page declaration, and her June 24, 2009 TILA rescission letter. 
Viewed in the light most favorable to Eileen, her 
evidence raised genuine issues of material fact about Fremont's, Litton's, and Deutsche Bank's breaches of the Mortgage; violations of 12 U.S.C. § 2605 and 12 C.F.R. § 1024.33 (mortgage servicing transfers); Litton's and Deutsche Bank's breaches of the Repayment Plan Agreement; Litton's and Deutsche Bank's violations of 12 U.S.C. § 2605 (force-placed insurance); and Litton's and Deutsche Bank's violations of former HRS § 667-5(c) (Supp. 2008) (right to cure default). If proven, the breaches and violations could invalidate the nonjudicial foreclosure, and 
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
thus should have precluded summary judgment for Deutsche Bank on 
its ejectment claim. 
C. The Circuit Court erred by granting summary
judgment for Deutsche Bank on Eileen'swrongful foreclosure counterclaim. 
Deutsche Bank argues that Eileen's wrongful foreclosure 
claim lacked merit because she failed to establish actual damages 
as required by Lima v. Deutsche Bank National Trust Company
, 149 
Hawai#i 457, 494 P.3d 1190 (2021). In 
Lima the supreme court 
answered a question certified by the federal district court: 
When (a) a borrower has indisputably defaulted on a mortgage
for real property, (b) a lender has conducted a nonjudicialforeclosure sale but has not strictly complied with therequirements governing such sales, and (c) the borrower suesthe lender over that noncompliance after the foreclosuresale and, if the property was purchased at foreclosure bythe lender, after any subsequent sale to a third-partypurchaser, may the borrower establish the requisite harm forliability purposes under the law of wrongful foreclosureand/or section 480-2 of Hawai #i Revised Statutes by
demonstrating the loss of title, possession, and/orinvestments in the property without regard to the effect ofthe mortgage on those items? 
Id. at 460, 494 P.3d at 1193. The supreme court held that "a 
borrower with no pre-foreclosure rights in property except as encumbered by a mortgage bears the burden of accounting for the effect of the mortgage in establishing the element of harm." Id. 
at 469, 494 P.3d at 1202. 
Eileen argues that Lima  is distinguishable on its 
facts. There, the borrowers had no pre-foreclosure rights in property except as encumbered by a mortgage, while Eileen contends "she absolutely had pre-foreclosure rights in the [P]roperty, including the right to make monthly payments towards 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
her debt under the mortgage loan, which she absolutely could do." 
Her opening brief asserts: "She is not asking for a free house, release of mortgage, or to be excused from her obligations under the mortgage loan contract. Instead, she is asking that her rights under the parties' contract be upheld." 
A supreme court case decided after briefing was 
completed lends credence to her argument. In Llanes v. Bank of Am., N.A.
, 154 Hawai #i 423, 555 P.3d 110 (2024), several 
borrowers sued their lenders for nonjudicial foreclosures that didn't comply with statutory requirements. The foreclosed 
properties were sold to third parties. 
Id. at 426, 555 P.3d at 
113. Discussing Lima, the supreme court explained: 
Accounting for the effect of the mortgage in
establishing the element of harm means . . . factoring in
the mortgage's value[.] This reading comports with thegeneral rule in measuring damages, which is to give a sum ofmoney to the person wronged which as nearly as possible,will restore him or her to the position he or she would bein if the wrong had not been committed. . . . 
Moreover, under Borrowers' own theory, they did not
walk away empty-handed — their initial "invested debt" wasreturned to them on the backend when it was forgiven. The satisfaction of Borrowers' mortgage debts, which they do notcontest here, represents a return of their "investment" ontheir own theory. If the "invested debt" was theirs on the front end, it was also theirs on the backend. 
Id. at 432-33, 555 P.3d at 119-20 (cleaned up). 
The supreme court contrasted the facts in Llanes  and 
Lima with those in Santiago v. Tanaka , 137 Hawai#i 137, 366 P.3d 
612 (2016). There, the Santiagos bought a tavern from Tanaka 
with a purchase money mortgage that didn't contain a power of sale. Tanaka had misrepresented the tavern's sewer costs during 
16 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
negotiations. The Santiagos initially withheld payments from 
Tanaka after discovering the sewer fees, but later cured their default. Four months later, Tanaka sold the tavern to herself in a nonjudicial foreclosure, then resold it to a third party. In Llanes, the supreme court summarized its Santiago decision: 
We held that Tanaka improperly foreclosed upon the
Santiagos' tavern because (1) her misrepresentations and
non-disclosures induced the Santiagos to purchase thetavern, (2) the mortgage altogether lacked a power of sale,and (3) the Santiagos cured their default. Because the tavern could not be returned to the Santiagos, having beenresold, we concluded that they were entitled toout-of-pocket losses of $1,412,790.79 as a result of theseller's wrongful foreclosure of the mortgage and subsequentsale of the tavern. 
. . . . 
Here [in Llanes], Borrowers were in different pre-
foreclosure positions than were the Santiagos for two
reasons. 
First, Lender had the right to foreclose upon
their properties under powers of sale. Thus, their pre-tortposition still includes a looming foreclosure. Second,Borrowers were not current on their mortgages. Thus, to theextent that they were improper at all, the foreclosures atissue here appear from the record to have been merelyprocedurally defective. Indeed, the circuit court noted inits summary judgment order that Borrowers claim that Lenderconducted the foreclosures in a wrongful manner by notcomplying with the technical requirements of the nonjudicialforeclosure statute and power of sale, instead of claimingthat the foreclosures were wrongful because they should nothave happened at all. 
154 Hawai# i at 430, 431, 555 P.3d at 117, 118 (cleaned up). 
Here, Eileen's declaration — which we must view in the 
light most favorable to her — showed that the nonjudicial 
foreclosure was not "looming." Not only was she current on her mortgage, she tried to stay current after her mortgage was assigned to Wells Fargo. The nonjudicial foreclosure would not have happened but for Fremont's, Litton's, and Deutsche Bank's alleged breaches of the Mortgage, alleged statutory violations, 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and alleged breaches of the Repayment Plan Agreement. Eileen's 
declaration states she tried to timely pay what she was told she owed, even incurring pay-by-phone and Western Union fees to do so, and had "the ability to pay the reinstatement charges if we could ever get an exact amount in writing." Thus, as in Santiago , assuming Eileen's allegations are true "the 
foreclosures were wrongful because they should not have happened at all." Llanes, 154 Hawai #i at 431, 555 P.3d at 118. 
In addition, in Llanes  and Lima , the mortgaged 
properties had been sold to good-faith purchasers. The foreclosure sales, even if wrongful, could not be set aside and the borrowers could not recover their properties. Wilmington 
Sav. Fund Soc'y, FSB v. Domingo , 155 Hawai #i 1, 10, 556 P.3d 347, 
356 (2024) (noting that "vacatur or reversal of a foreclosure judgment cannot affect title conveyed to the good faith purchaser"). But the borrowers' loan debts were also discharged. 
That is why they had to account "for the effect of the mortgage in establishing the element of harm." Lima, 149 
Hawai#i at 469, 
494 P.3d at 1202. 
Here, the record does not show that Deutsche Bank sold 
the Kapa# a property to a third party. If Eileen invalidated the 
nonjudicial foreclosure, she would regain the property. Llanes, 
154 Hawai# i at 434, 555 P.3d at 121. She would still be liable 
to repay her mortgage loan over time, but she would be entitled to some recovery under "the general rule in measuring damages, which is to give a sum of money to the person wronged which as 
18 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
nearly as possible, will restore . . . her to the position . . . 
she would be in if the wrong had not been committed." Id. at 
432, 555 P.3d at 119 (brackets omitted). The Circuit Court erred by granting summary judgment on Eileen's wrongful foreclosure counterclaim. 
D. The Circuit Court erred by granting summary
judgment for Deutsche Bank on Eileen's quiettitle claim. 
Deutsche Bank argued to the Circuit Court that Eileen 
had to allege she paid, or tendered, what she owed on her 
mortgage loan to maintain her quiet title counterclaim, citing Delapinia v. Nationstar Mortgage LLC , 146 Hawai #i 218, 228, 458 
P.3d 929, 939 (App. 2020) ( Delapinia I ), vacated in part by 
Delapinia v. Nationstar Mortgage LLC , 150 Hawai #i 91, 497 P.3d 
106 (2021) ( Delapinia II ). 
A week before the hearing on Deutsche Bank's motion for 
partial summary judgment, the supreme court decided Delapinia II . 
The party who asserted the tender rule in Delapinia II
 was the 
mortgagee of the third party who had purchased the property in an allegedly wrongful nonjudicial foreclosure. 
The supreme court 
"decline[d] to opine whether the tender rule applies in Hawai #i 
wrongful foreclosure cases generally." 150 Hawai#i at 92, 497 
P.3d at 107. It then held "that the tender rule is not an absolute bar to a quiet title action against a party to whom the plaintiff is not indebted[.]" 
Id. at 100, 497 P.3d at 115. 
A quiet title action "may be brought by any person 
against another person who claims, or who may claim adversely to 
19 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the plaintiff, an estate or interest in real property, for the 
purpose of determining the adverse claim." HRS § 669-1(a) (2016). "Hawai #i case law explicitly provides that a plaintiff 
seeking relief under HRS Chapter 669 must demonstrate that he or she has title to the land, either via paper title or adverse possession, and that he or she has superior title compared to the defendant." Ibbetson v. Kaiawe , 143 Hawai #i 1, 17, 422 P.3d 1, 
17 (2018). 
Deutsche Bank incorrectly argues that Eileen's quiet 
title claim "was premised solely upon alleged defects in the foreclosure process." Eileen actually claimed her default was 
caused by Fremont's, Litton's, and Deutsche Bank's breaches of the Mortgage, statutory violations, and Litton's and Deutsche Bank's breaches of the Repayment Plan Agreement. She contends the nonjudicial foreclosure was wrongful because it should never have happened. She seeks reinstatement of her loan and title to the Kapa #a Property, subject to Deutsche Bank's mortgage. 
Deutsche Bank did not show why the tender rule should apply under these circumstances. We hold it does not. On this record, the Circuit Court erred by granting summary judgment for Deutsche Bank on Eileen's quiet title claim. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
We vacate in part the Circuit Court's March 23, 2021 
order granting Deutsche Bank's motion for partial dismissal of Eileen's counterclaim; November 19, 2021 order granting Deutsche Bank's motion for partial summary judgment; and January 18, 2022 
20 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Final Judgment, all as against Eileen Marie Winters individually 
and as Trustee under that certain unrecorded Revocable Living Trust dated August 30, 1993, made by Eileen Marie Winters. This case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
On the briefs: /s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Chief Judge
Frederick J. Arensmeyer,
for Defendant-Appellant /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Eileen Marie Winters. Associate Judge 
Jade Lynne Ching, /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
David A. Nakashima, Associate Judge
Ryan B. Kasten,for Plaintiff-AppelleeDeutsche Bank National Trust Company. 
21 