FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAI# I 
---o0o---
SPAR MARKETING SERVICES, INC., Appellant-Appellee,
v. 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS,
EMPLOYMENT SECURITY APPEALS REFEREES' OFFICE,
Appellee-Appellant,
and 
THAD J. INOKUCHI, Appellee-Appellee 
NO. CAAP-13-0001140 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-2084) 
F
EBRUARY 22, 2019 
FUJISE, PRESIDING JUDGE, REIFURTH AND HIRAOKA, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY HIRAOKA, J. 
Appellant State of Hawai# i Director of Labor and 
Industrial Relations (Director)  appeals from the April 29, 2013 
Order Reversing Employment Security Appeals Referees' Office 
Decision 1101663 (Order) and the Final Judgment (Judgment) in 
favor of Appellee Spar Marketing Services, Inc. (Spar) entered by 1
1 The Director is deemed to be a party in any proceeding, such as
this, arising from the Hawaii Employment Security Law, Hawaii Revised Statutes
(HRS) Chapter 383. HRS §§ 383-41, 383-42 (2015). FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)2 on May 7, 
2013. The Director contends that the Circuit Court erred when it 
reversed the State of Hawai# i Department of Labor and Industrial 
Relations (DLIR) Employment Security Appeals Office Decision 
1101663 (the Agency Decision) that held Spar liable for 
unemployment insurance contributions. We agree that the Circuit 
Court erred by re-weighing the evidence presented to the DLIR hearings officer. 
We reverse the Order and the Judgment and 
affirm the Agency Decision for the reasons set forth below.3 
I. Procedural History 
Spar and Thad Inokuchi (Inokuchi) were parties to an 
Independent Merchandiser Agreement (Agreement). The Agreement 
states in bold type that "[i]t does NOT create any 
employer/employee relationship" (capitalization and underscoring in original). Inokuchi accepted the Agreement on October 21, 2010. Inokuchi performed services (restocking and maintaining DVD rental kiosks) for three of Spar's clients at various Safeway and Office Depot stores in Honolulu pursuant to written instructions he received from Spar. Inokuchi was paid by Spar and received an IRS Form 1099-MISC from Spar. 
On January 6, 2011, Inokuchi filed a claim for 
unemployment benefits under the Hawaii Employment Security Law (HRS Chapter 383) with DLIR. On April 26, 2011, DLIR's Employer Services Section determined that Inokuchi was engaged in covered employment and issued a notice of assessment for $29.38 to Spar, representing Spar's unemployment insurance contributions pursuant to HRS Chapter 383, Part III. 
By letter dated May 4, 2011, Spar contested DLIR's 
determination and requested a hearing. An administrative hearing 
2 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided. 
3 The Director's May 29, 2014 request that we take judicial notice
of the Third Circuit Court's decision in Spar Mktg. Servs., Inc. v. State of
Hawaii Dep't of Labor & Indus. Relations, Civil No. 13-1-0121, is granted butit is not clear why the request was made. The Third Circuit Court's decision is not binding on us in this appeal. Spar's appeal from the Third CircuitCourt's decision is currently pending before us in CAAP-14-0000500. No partyhas moved to consolidate that appeal with this one. 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was conducted on January 24, 2012. The hearings officer admitted 
fourteen exhibits into evidence without objection by any party. The hearings officer heard testimony from Heidi Savage, Director of Human Resources for Spar Marketing Force,  a DLIR Unemployment 
Insurance Division auditor named Jason Hara, and Inokuchi. On May 21, 2012, DLIR issued the Agency Decision which stated, in relevant part: 
4
The Department's decision is affirmed. The services 
performed by [Inokuchi] for [Spar] constitute employmentpursuant to Haw. Rev. Stat. §§ 383-1, 383-2, 383-6, and383-10. 
Spar's application to reopen the agency proceeding was denied. 
On August 1, 2012, Spar timely appealed to the Circuit Court pursuant to HRS § 91-14 (2012).
5 
The Circuit Court heard oral arguments on February 15, 
2013. On April 29, 2013, the Circuit Court entered the Order. The Order did not articulate which standard of review the Circuit Court had applied. It contained eleven findings of fact and concluded: 
The Court finds that the reliable, probative, and
substantial evidence in the record set forth above warrants 
a reversal of the Appeals Office Decision. Therefore,Employment Security Appeals Referees' Office Decision1101663 dated May 21, 2012, and the denial of theApplication for Reopening of Appeals Officer's Decision,dated July 3, 2012, are reversed. 
4 Savage testified that Spar Marketing Force contracts to provide
some administrative services to Spar Marketing Services. She also testified on behalf of Spar in the administrative proceedings underlying Spar Mktg.Serv., Inc. v. New Jersey Dep't of Labor & Workforce Dev., 2013 WL 890071(N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 2013) and Spar Mktg Servs., Inc. v. UnemploymentIns. Appeal Bd., 2012 WL 1414097 (Del. Super. Ct. 2012). 
5 The statute provides, in relevant part: 
(a) Any person aggrieved by a final decision and
order in a [proceeding in which the legal rights, duties, orprivileges of specific parties are required by law to bedetermined after an opportunity for agency hearing] isentitled to judicial review thereof under this chapter[.] 
. . . . 
(f) The review shall be conducted by the appropriate
court without a jury and shall be confined to the record[.] 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Judgment was entered on May 7, 2013. This appeal followed. 
II. Standard of Review 
"Review of a decision made by the circuit court upon 
its review of an agency's decision is a secondary appeal. 
The 
standard of review is one in which this court must determine 
whether the circuit court was right or wrong in its decision, applying the standards set forth in HRS § 91-14(g) [1993] to the agency's decision." Flores v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 143 Hawai# i 114, 120, 424 P.3d 469, 475 (2018) (brackets in original) 
(citation omitted). 
HRS § 91–14, entitled "Judicial review of contested 
cases," provides in relevant part: 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may affirm
the decision of the agency or remand the case with
instructions for further proceedings; or it may reverse ormodify the decision and order if the substantial rights ofthe petitioners may have been prejudiced because theadministrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or ordersare: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutoryprovisions; or 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority orjurisdiction of the agency; or 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or 
(4) Affected by other error of law; or 
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,probative, and substantial evidence on the wholerecord; or 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized byabuse of discretion or clearly unwarrantedexercise of discretion. 
"Under HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law are reviewable under 
subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions regarding procedural defects under subsection (3); findings of fact under subsection (5); and an agency's exercise of discretion under subsection (6)." Del Monte Fresh Produce (Hawaii), Inc. v. Int'l Longshore & Warehouse Union, Local 142, 128 
Hawai# i 289, 302, 287 
P.3d 190, 203 (2012) (citation omitted). 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
An agency's conclusions of law are reviewed de novo, while
an agency's factual findings are reviewed for clear error.A conclusion of law that presents mixed questions of factand law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standardbecause the conclusion is dependent upon the facts andcircumstances of the particular case. 
As a general matter, a finding of fact or a mixed
determination of law and fact is clearly erroneous when(1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support thefinding or determination, or (2) despite substantialevidence to support the finding or determination, theappellate court is left with the definite and firmconviction that a mistake has been made. Substantial evidence is credible evidence which is of sufficient qualityand probative value to enable a person of reasonable cautionto support a conclusion. 
Id. (format altered) (citation omitted). 
III. Discussion 
The statute at issue in this case is the Hawaii 
Employment Security Law, HRS Chapter 383. "The statute's purpose 
is to protect workers from the economic insecurity of unemployment. Courts therefore liberally construe the statute and the rules implementing it in order to avoid the unwarranted deprivation of benefits." Int'l Bhd. of Elec. Workers, Local 1357 v. Hawaiian Tel. Co., 68 Haw. 316, 326, 713 P.2d 943, 952 (1986) (citing Camara v. Agsalud, 67 Haw. 212, 216-17, 685 P.2d 794, 797 (1984)); see also, Berkoff v. Hasegawa, 55 Haw. 22, 27, 514 P.2d 575, 579 (1973) (same) and Bailey's Bakery v. Tax Commissioner, 38 Haw. 16, 28 (1948) (same). 
Under the Hawaii Employment Security Law, each 
employer  must pay contributions to an unemployment compensation 
fund "with respect to wages for employment." HRS § 383-61 (Supp. 1991), et. seq. 
See, Homes Consultant Co. v. Agsalud, 2 
Haw. App. 421, 423, 633 P.2d 564, 567 (1981). "Wages" is defined to include "all remuneration for services from whatever source, including commissions and bonuses[.]" HRS § 383-10 (2015). "Employment" is defined as "service . . . performed for wages or under any contract of hire, written or oral, express or implied." 6
6 HRS § 383-1 (2015) defines "employer" to include any organization
which had one or more individuals performing services for it within the State
of Hawai #i. 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 383-2(a) (2015). In the DLIR proceeding there was no 
dispute that Spar had paid money to Inokuchi for performing "merchandising-related services projects" for Spar's clients pursuant to the Agreement. Accordingly, for purposes of the Hawaii Employment Security Law, Inokuchi's relationship with Spar is deemed to be "employment" unless Spar proves each of the three elements of HRS § 383-6 "to the satisfaction of the [DLIR]." HRS § 383-6 (1985); Homes Consultant Co., 2 Haw. App. at 423-24, 633 P.3d at 567. 
HRS § 383-6 provides: 
Services performed by an individual for wages or under
any contract of hire shall be deemed to be employment
subject to [the Hawaii Employment Security Law] irrespectiveof whether the common law relationship of master and servantexists unless and until it is shown to the satisfaction of the department of labor and industrial relations that: 
(1) The individual has been and will continue to be free from control or direction over the performance of such service, both under theindividual's contract of hire and in fact; and 
(2) The service is either outside the usual course of the business for which the service is performed or that the service is performedoutside of all the places of business of theenterprise for which the service is performed;and 
(3) The individual is customarily engaged in anindependently established trade, occupation,profession, or business of the same nature asthat involved in the contract of service. 
Spar agrees that it had the burden "of overcoming the presumption 
of employment by establishing that its business relationship with Mr. Inokuchi satisfied all three elements of HRS section 383-6." But Spar incorrectly argues that "it bore the burden before the Appeals Office and the Circuit Court." (Emphasis added.) Under HRS § 383-6 Spar had the burden of proving the three elements "to the satisfaction of the [DLIR.]" By contrast, "[a] court reviewing an agency's decision cannot consider the weight of the evidence to ascertain whether it weighs in favor of the administrative findings, or review the agency's findings of fact by passing upon the credibility of witnesses or conflicts in testimony, especially the finding of an expert agency in dealing 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with a specialized field." Sierra Club v. D.R. Horton-Schuler 
Homes, LLC, 136 Hawai# i 505, 522, 364 P.3d 213, 230 (2015) 
(emphasis added) (citation, quotation marks and ellipsis omitted). 
DLIR's determinations under HRS § 383-6 present mixed 
questions of fact and law, which are "reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard because the conclusion is dependent upon the facts and circumstances of the particular case." 
Del Monte Fresh 
Produce, 128 Hawai# i at 302, 287 P.3d at 203 (emphasis added). 
Where mixed questions of fact and law are presented, "deference will be given to the agency's expertise and experience in the particular field and the court should not substitute its own judgment for that of the agency." 
Dole Hawaii Div.-Castle & 
Cooke, Inc. v. Ramil, 71 Haw. 419, 424, 794 P.2d 1115, 1118 (1990) (emphasis added) (citation omitted). As we explain in more detail below, the Agency Decision was not clearly erroneous and we accordingly reverse the Circuit Court's Order and Judgment. 
A. Control or Direction 
To pass the first part of the HRS § 383-6 test, Spar 
had to satisfy DLIR that Inokuchi "has been and will continue to 
be free from control or direction over the performance of such service [for Spar], both under the [Agreement] and in fact[.]" The application of HRS § 383-6 is a subject of Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR
) § 12-5-2 (eff. 2006). That rule 
provides in relevant part: 
"Control or direction over the performance of such service"
means general control and need not extend to all details ofthe performance of service. The employer need not actuallyexercise control; it is sufficient that there is a right todo so. 
In addition, we have noted: 
On the question of control, our supreme court has statedthat in order to satisfy the requirement of HRS § 383-6(1)(1976), 
[T]he control reserved to the principal forunemployment compensation purposes need not extend toall the details of the physical performance of theservice by the worker that may be essential to the 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
master-servant relationship but may be merely a
general one exercisable, directly or indirectly, overthe physical activities and time surrendered by theworker. 
Bailey's Bakery v. Tax Commissioner, 38 Haw. 16, 50 (1948). 
Homes Consultant Co., 2 Haw. App. at 425-26, 633 P.2d at 568 
(brackets in original). 
Spar contends that the Circuit Court correctly weighed 
the evidence presented to DLIR and decided in favor of Spar. However, the Circuit Court's function in an agency appeal is not to re-weigh the evidence. Sierra Club, 136 
Hawai# i at 522, 364 
P.3d at 230. The Circuit Court should have reviewed the evidence presented to the hearings officer not to make its own findings or conclusions, but to determine whether the Agency Decision was clearly erroneous. 
The Agency Decision stated: 
Pursuant to its contract with its Clients, [Spar] was
ultimately responsible for ensuring that its Clients'merchandising needs were met at the retail locations wherethe Clients' products were sold. [Spar] offered [Inokuchi]the same assignments on an ongoing basis, which isindicative of an employer-employee relationship. [Spar]directed [Inokuchi] by providing him with detailedinstructions about each assignment. [Spar] exercisedcontrol by requiring [Inokuchi] to conform to a specifiedstandard of behavior and by requiring [Inokuchi] to reporthis work via forms provided by [Spar]. [Spar] determined[Inokuchi]'s rate of pay based on information it receivedfrom its Clients. If [Inokuchi] was unable to complete anassignment, [Spar] was responsible for finding anothermerchandizer [sic] to complete the work for [Spar]'sClients. Although [Inokuchi] had a great deal of autonomyin the performance of his duties, this is not sufficient toestablish that [Inokuchi] performed his services free from[Spar]'s direction and control. Because [Spar] wasobligated to provide merchandising services to its Clients,[Spar] had the inherent right to direct and control[Inokuchi]'s performance of merchandising services.Regardless of whether [Spar] contracted with [Inokuchi] onan independent contractor basis, [Spar] has failed toestablish that the first prong of the three-part test issatisfied. 
There was substantial evidence in the record to support this 
determination. It was not clearly erroneous. 
The three parts of HRS § 383-6 are cumulative. Because 
Spar had the burden of proving all three parts to DLIR's satisfaction to overcome the statutory presumption, Homes 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Consultant Co., 2 Haw. App. at 423-24, 633 P.3d at 567, we need 
proceed no further. However, in the event of further appellate review, we discuss the other two parts of the HRS § 383-6 test. 
B. Service Performed 
To pass the second part of the test, Spar had to 
satisfy DLIR that the service performed by Inokuchi "is either 
outside the usual course of the business [of Spar] . . . or that the service is performed outside of all the places of business of the enterprise [of Spar.]" HAR § 12-5-2(a)(3) provides: 
(A) "Outside the usual course of the business" refers to 
services that do not promote or advance the businessof the employer, or services that are merelyincidental to, and not an integral part of, thatbusiness. 
(B) "Outside of all the places of business of theenterprise" refers to places other than thebusiness[']s home office, headquarters or territory inwhich the business operates[.] 
The Agency Decision stated: 
[Spar] is in the business of providing merchandisingservices for its Clients and the merchandising services that[Inokuchi] performed were integral to [Spar]'s business.Further, although [Spar]'s offices are located in Michigan,it has a contractual obligation to provide merchandisingservices for its Clients at the retail locations in Hawaii where [Inokuchi] performed his services. The retail locations in Hawaii where the Clients' products are soldbecame extensions of [Spar]'s place of business. [Spar] hasfailed to establish that [Inokuchi]'s services were outside[Spar]'s usual course of business or outside [Spar]'s placeof business. 
There was substantial evidence in the record to support the 
determination that Inokuchi's services promoted and advanced Spar's business, and that Spar's clients' kiosks – which Inokuchi was contracted to restock and maintain – were located in Hawai# i. 
The hearings officer's determination was not clearly erroneous. 
C. Independent Trade, Occupation,
Profession or Business 
To pass the third part of the test, Spar had to satisfy 
DLIR that Inokuchi was "customarily engaged in an independently established trade, occupation, profession, or business of the 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
same nature as that involved in the [Agreement]." HAR § 12-5-
2(a)(4) provides: 
"The individual is customarily engaged in an independently
established trade, occupation, profession, or business"refers to an individual who is performing services and isestablished in the business of performing these servicesindependent of whatever connection the individual may havewith an employer and that the individual must have aproprietary interest in such business, something in whichthe individual has a right of continuity, which theindividual can sell or give away, and which is not subjectto cancellation or destruction upon severance of therelationship with the employer. 
The Agency Decision stated: 
[Spar] has failed to show that [Inokuchi] has a G.E.T.license or a registered business name as a provider ofmerchandising services or offers or advertises his servicesto the general public. [Inokuchi] was performing servicesfor remuneration rather than engaging in a businessenterprise. [Spar] has failed to establish that [Inokuchi]was customarily engaged in an independently establishedbusiness as a provider of merchandising services. 
During the agency hearing Inokuchi testified that he had a 
Hawai# i general excise tax (GET) license since 2008 or 2009, but 
that he used it for his mortgage processing work, not for his 
work for Spar. There was no evidence presented that Inokuchi could not have reported the payments he received from Spar on his GET license. However, Inokuchi also testified that his work assignments from Spar were computer generated and he would have to log in to Spar's system to receive his assignments. There was no evidence presented that Inokuchi could have received assignments directly from Spar's clients, or that Inokuchi could have gone around Spar to contract directly with Spar's clients. Inokuchi was paid by Spar, not by Spar's clients whom Inokuchi serviced. Since Inokuchi was dependent upon Spar for work, could not obtain his assignments directly from Spar's clients, and was paid by Spar rather than by Spar's clients, there was substantial evidence in the record to support the hearings officer's determination that Inokuchi was performing services for Spar for remuneration rather than engaging in his own business enterprise which was "not subject to cancellation or destruction upon 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
severance of" his relationship with Spar. The hearings officer 
did not clearly err.7 
IV. Conclusion 
The issue before the Circuit Court on Spar's appeal, 
and before us on this secondary appeal, is not whether the evidence presented to the hearings officer supported Spar's position more than that of the Director. The issue is whether the hearings officer clearly erred because either (1) the record lacked substantial evidence to support the agency's finding or determination, or (2) despite substantial evidence to support the finding or determination, we are left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. We conclude that there was substantial evidence in the record supporting the Agency Decision. We are not left with a definite or firm conviction that the hearings officer made a mistake. Accordingly, the Circuit Court's Order and Judgment are reversed, and the Agency Decision is affirmed. 
On the briefs: 
Li-Ann Yamashiro,
Deputy Attorney General,for Appellee-Appellant. 
John S. Mackey,
for Appellant-Appellee. 
7 HRS § 383-6 provides that a determination of "employment" subject
to the Hawaii Employment Security Law is purely regulatory in nature andindependent of the existence of a common law master-servant relationship. We reiterate that neither the Agency Decision nor this opinion establishes thatSpar could be vicariously liable for any act or omission by Inokuchi under thetort law doctrine of respondeat superior. 
11 