NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000014
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
RUTH TANAKA,
Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
v.
 
LOUIS ROBERT SANTIAGO and YONG HWAN SANTIAGO,
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. RC-12-1-0299)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
  
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J. and Leonard, J.
with Ginoza, J. concurring separately)
 
Plaintiff/Appellant/Cross-Appellee Ruth Tanaka (
Tanaka)
 
appeals from the (1) November 13, 2012 "Memorandum"; (2) December
 
21, 2012 "Order Granting Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment
 on Ruth Tanaka's First Amended Complaint," (3) December 21, 2012
 "Final Judgment," and (4) December 21, 2012 "Order Denying
 Plaintiff Ruth Tanaka's Motion for Reconsideration."
 Defendants/Appellees/Cross-Appellants Louis Robert Santiago and
 Yong Hwan Santiago (together, Santiagos) appeal from the (1)
 
December 21, 2012 "Order Denying Defendants Louis Robert Santiago
 
and Yong Hwan Santiago's Motion for Attorney Fees and Costs," and
 (2) December 21, 2012 "Final Judgment." The memorandum, orders,
 and judgment were entered in the District Court of the Fifth
 
1
Circuit  (district court).
 
On appeal, Tanaka contends the district court erred
 
when it (1) granted summary judgment in favor of the Santiagos,
 
1
 The Honorable Edmund D. Acoba presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and (2) denied Tanaka's motion for reconsideration. On cross-
appeal, the Santiagos contend the court erred when it denied their motion for attorneys' fees under Hawai
'i Revised Statutes 
(HRS) §§ 607-14 (Supp. 2013) and 607-14.5 (Supp. 2013).
I. DISCUSSION
 
(A) Tanaka's appeal is without merit.
 
We review summary judgments de novo. See Kamaka v. 
Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai 'i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 
91, 103 (2008). Under Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 
Rule 56(c), the district court must grant a motion for summary 
judgment when the moving party: (1) has shown that there is no genuine issue regarding any material fact, and (2) is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Id. "A fact is material if proof 
of that fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties." Id. If the moving party meets its 
burden of production, the non-moving party must present admissible evidence showing specific facts about essential elements of each claim to avoid summary judgment. See Celotex 
Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986). We view the evidence and factual inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. See Kamaka, 117 Hawai
'i 
at 104, 176 P.3d at 103. 
Tanaka contends the district court erred by granting
 
the Santiagos' motion for summary judgment because the district
 court denied an "essentially identical motion two weeks earlier,"
 and genuine issues of material fact were established by Tanaka's
 declaration and exhibits. Tanaka also contends the motion to
 dismiss was automatically converted into a motion for summary
 judgment because matters outside the pleadings were considered. 
The basis of the district court's denial of the motion to dismiss
 is unclear: 
Mr. Goldberg [(Tanaka's Counsel)]: What I'm saying,
your Honor -- and I just want to point out it's a little bit
confusing. 
Judge Rothschild heard the motion. As far as I
 
know, he decided the motion, but your Honor signed the
order.
 
THE [DISTRICT] COURT: 
The reason I signed it . . . is
because what I saw is a note by Judge Rothschild saying
prepare the order -- motion denied. Prepare the order. The
 
2
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
order was prepared, signed by Mr. Arensmeyer [(counsel for
the Santiagos)]. Rather than bringing Judge Rothschild for
$500 to have him sign the order being that I just saw his
note, saw an agreement as to the proposed order signed by
Mr. Arensmeyer, so I just signed it. 
MR. GOLDBERG:
 That's exactly what I figured. So when I
make that assumption that Judge Rothschild denied the
motion, I think the [district court] -- we're saying the
same thing.
 
But my point is, they then file what they call a
motion for summary judgment. But, your Honor, it's the
exact same motion, same grounds, most of the same exhibits.
There's nothing different about it. And, I mean, we kind of
assumed the motion would be summarily denied out of hand
because it had already been denied two weeks earlier.
 
I understand [the district court] went through and
wanted to do a diligent job and make the appropriate
decision, but my point is that it had already been decided
by Judge Rothschild two weeks earlier.
 
And when they come back now and say well, this is
[HRCP] Rule 56, and this is [HRCP] Rule 12, no. It's the
 same because. [sic] [HRCP] Rule 12(b) is mandatory. They
attached matters outside the pleadings. 
So my point, your Honor, is when they then file[d]
that motion for summary judgment, it was really a motion for
reconsideration of the [district court's] denial of their
motion to dismiss which automatically was disposed of in
summary judgment. 
THE [DISTRICT] COURT:
 Do you think maybe Judge
Rothschild should have sat on the motion for summary
judgment then? If you're saying it was a reconsideration. 
MR. GOLDBERG:  You know --
THE [DISTRICT] COURT:  That was your -- that was your
theory. 
MR. GOLDBERG: There's no such requirement. I mean, to
answer your Honor's question, I know as a matter of routine,
it's typical for one judge to let the original judge hear
the motion for reconsideration. I understand that, but
that's not a requirement. 
And by the way, the opposite is true. If [the district
court] felt that Judge Rothschild erred, [the district
court] has the power to rule differently. I understand that.
But I don't think -- that's not my understanding of what
[the district court] did.
 
And so when they filed what I'm calling a de facto
motion for reconsideration, and they come into a new judge
and say here's our motion for summary judgment, and I say
hold on, that's already been decided by another judge in
[the district court], that's a motion for reconsideration,
and so they need grounds. 
THE [DISTRICT] COURT:
 But without making findings as
to what Judge Rothschild was thinking, then how is [the
district court] supposed to know if it's the same -- or same
type of motion or -- because the motion to dismiss could be
 
3
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
based on just pleadings. Just on the pleadings, he could
have said okay, denied.
 
MR. GOLDBERG: Except that [HRCP] Rule 12(b) precludes
that assumption, your Honor. [HRCP] Rule 12(b) says -- it's
a two-parter: Shall be treated as one for summary judgment,
and shall be disposed of pursuant to [HRCP] Rule 56. 
So I got to assume that Judge Rothschild did what the
Rule says, and I can't assume that he didn't follow the
Rules. They're assuming that he didn't follow the Rules. I
don't think that's a fair assumption. 
Now, I suppose if [the district court] wanted to say,
you know what, this motion should have been heard by Judge
Rothschild, fair enough.
 
But the point is, that was essentially a motion for
reconsideration. And we came in and said that's already been
decided. You know, here's the argument. 
Regardless of whether the court's denial of the motion
 
to dismiss was actually a denial of summary judgment, or whether
 
the subsequent grant of summary judgment was actually a grant of
 a motion to reconsider, we would disturb the decisions only if
 the Santiagos were not entitled to judgment as a matter of law. 
See generally Towse v. State, 64 Haw. 624, 629, 647 P.2d 696, 701
 (1982) (appellate court is not foreclosed from recognizing the
 true nature of an order by the label put on it by the circuit
 court; the Towse court reviewed a motion to dismiss under the
 summary judgment standard where the order granting dismissal
 provided "this Court having considered all memoranda of law, the
 record on file herein and argument of counsel").
 
The Santiagos are entitled to judgment as a matter of
 
law because Tanaka failed to present admissible evidence showing
 the existence of a legal obligation entitling her to the
 requested relief. See Celotex, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (if the
 
moving party meets its burden of production, the non-moving party
 must present admissible evidence showing specific facts about
 essential elements of each claim to avoid summary judgment).
 
In 2006, the Santiagos purchased real property located 
on Kaua
'i, Hawai 'i (the Property) from Tanaka. On August 5, 2008, 
the Santiagos sued Tanaka in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (Fifth Circuit Court), Civil No. 08-1-0094, ultimately 
raising one claim against Tanaka for allegedly failing to 
disclose the existence of a private sewer system (Disclosure 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2
Case).  Tanaka counter-sued, raising claims for breach of
 
mortgage, breach of the covenant of good faith and fair dealing,
 
judicial foreclosure, and ejectment. Tanaka's counterclaim arose
 from the parties' agreements concerning the purchase and sale of
 the Property, specifically the sales contract, promissory note,
 and mortgage for the Property (collectively, Purchase and Sale
 
Instruments).
3
 
In the case at bar, Tanaka asserted two claims, one for
 
sewer arrearages and the other for reimbursement of related legal
 
fees and costs Tanaka paid to James Jasper Enterprises, Ltd.
 (together, Jasper fees), allegedly so she could sell the
 
Property.
4 Tanaka contends the Santiagos' legal obligation to
 
reimburse her for the Jasper fees arises from the Purchase and
 
Sale Instruments, as well as the decision in the Disclosure Case:
 
6. [The Santiagos] purchased the Property from
[Tanaka] in 2006 pursuant to seller financing. See Exhibit"
 
A" (Contract) (incorporated by reference as if fully set
forth herein). [The Santiagos] signed the Contract.
 
7. Per the promissory note and a standard mortgage,
[The Santiagos] were the borrowers/mortgagors, and [Tanaka]
was the lender/mortgagee, with respect to a $500,000 debt on
the Property. See Exhibit "B" (Promissory Note) and Exhibit
 "C" (Mortgage) (both incorporated by reference as if fully
set forth herein). [The Santiagos] signed the Promissory
Note and the Mortgage.
 
8. On March 10,2008 (the monthly payment deadline),
Mr. Santiago announced in his own handwriting that he was
halting all payments to [Tanaka]. [The Santiagos] did not
make the required payment. Accordingly, [Tanaka] noticed
their default, accelerated full payment on the Promissory
Note and initiated a non-judicial foreclosure pursuant to
the Mortgage and applicable law. See
 HRS § 667-5
 
2
 The Santiagos' first amended complaint asserted seven claims
against Tanaka: (1) Breach of Agreement, (2) Breach of Good Faith and Fair
Dealing, (3) Negligent Misrepresentation, (4) Non-Disclosures, (5) Violation
of Due Process, (6) Breach of Duty of Good Faith Mediation, (7) Violation of
HRS § 667-42.
 
3
 The Fifth Circuit Court found Louis Robert Santiago received ample
notice of the private sewer system during the purchasing process, and entered
judgment on June 8, 2011, concluding the foreclosure was proper, and that
Tanaka was entitled to possession of the Property and reimbursement for
attorneys' fees. This decision is currently before our court in case no.
CAAP-11-0000697.
 
4
 Per an agreement with Tanaka, James Jasper Enterprises, Ltd.
operated a private sewer system servicing the Property. In the Disclosure
 Case, the Santiagos alleged Tanaka failed to disclose the existence of this
agreement. A separate agreement was formed between James Jasper Enterprises,
Ltd. and the Santiagos to cover past and future payments for servicing the
Property while the Santiagos held title.
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Foreclosure under power of sale). (Effective June 3, 2008,
three months after the instant default, the Legislatureamended Section 667-5. Such changes are inapplicable here.See 2008 Hawai' i Laws Act 138 (S.B. 2454), Section 5.) 
9. [The Santiagos] filed another related case against
[Tanaka] in the [Fifth Circuit Court], asserting disclosure
claims regarding the tavern's sewer service. See Verified
Complaint (filed May 5,2008), Santiago v. Tanaka, Civ. No.
08-1-0094 (Watanabe, J.).
 
10. In response to [the Santiagos'] non-payment,
[Tanaka] asserted counterclaims for breach and ejectment.
See [Tanaka's] Answer to First Amended Verified Complaint
Filed August 5, 2008 and Counterclaim (filed Oct. 24, 2008).
 
11. The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided
over a bench trial on May 2-5, 2011. [Tanaka] prevailed in
almost all respects: (1) the [Fifth Circuit Court] rejected
all of [the Santiagos'] claims; (2) the [Fifth Circuit
Court] granted most of [Tanaka's] counterclaims; and (3) the
[Fifth Circuit Court] awarded attorneys' fees and costs to
[Tanaka]. See Exhibit "D" (Decision) and Exhibit "E"
 
(Judgment) (both incorporated by reference as if fully set
forth herein). The [Fifth Circuit Court's] Decision and
Judgment are final and legally binding on [the Santiagos] at
this time.
 
12. [Tanaka] respectfully refers [the district court]
to the [Fifth Circuit Court's] Decision, which sets forth
detailed findings of fact and conclusions of law to support
the Judgment. Such findings and conclusions are legally
binding on [the Santiagos] in this case, pursuant to the
doctrines of res judicata (claim preclusion) and collateral
estoppel (issue preclusion).
 
. . . .
 
19. After months of efforts, [Tanaka] sold the
Property to a third party on or about May 1,2012. See
Declaration of [Tanaka] (filed May 2, 2012), CAAP-11-0000697
(ICA). In connection with such sale, James Jasper
Enterprises, Ltd. ("Jasper"), the owner of the private sewer
system, required [Tanaka] to pay the sewer arrearages from
August 1,2011 through March 1,2012 in the amount of
$4,884.94.
 
. . . .
 
21. Mrs. Tanaka was forced to pay such amount, and
she did so, in order to enable sewer service to the
Property.
 
. . . .
 
24. The sewer arrearages arise directly from, were
proximately caused by and are the natural and foreseeable
consequences of [the Santiagos'] conduct in this matter
(including, but not limited to, [the Santiagos'] material
breaches of their contractual obligations pursuant to the
Contract, the Promissory Note and the Mortgage).
 
25. The [Fifth Circuit Court's] Decision and Judgment
confirm that [the Santiagos], and not [Tanaka], should pay
the sewer arrearages.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
26. Pursuant to the letter, the spirit and the intent
of the Contract, the Promissory Note, the Mortgage, the
Decision and the Judgment, [the Santiagos] are jointly and
severally liable for the sewer arrearages.
 
. . . .
 
29. After months of efforts, [Tanaka] sold the
Property to a third party on or about May 1, 2012. See
Declaration of [Tanaka] (filed May 2, 2012), CAAP-ll-0000697
(ICA). In connection with such sale, Jasper required
[Tanaka] to pay Jasper's reasonable attorneys' fees and
costs in the amount of $23,028.23 (including, but not
limited to, fees and costs associated with providing sewer
service to the Property).
 
. . . .
 
31. [Tanaka] was forced to pay such amount, and she
did so, in order to enable sewer service to the Property.
 
32. [Tanaka] was not and is not liable for [Jasper's legal
 
fee].
 
33. In connection with paying [Jasper's legal fee],
[Tanaka] specifically and expressly reserved her rights to
seek reimbursement of same from [the Santiagos].
 
34. The [claim for Jasper's legal fee] arise[s]
directly from, [was] proximately caused by and [is] the
natural and foreseeable consequences of [the Santiagos']
conduct in this matter (including, but not limited to, [the
Santiagos'] material breaches of their contractual
obligations pursuant to the Contract, the Promissory Note
and the Mortgage).
 
35. The [Fifth Circuit Court] Decision and Judgment
confirm that [the Santiagos], and not [Tanaka], should pay
[Jasper's legal fee].
 
36. Pursuant to the letter, the spirit and the intent
of the Contract, the Promissory Note, the Mortgage, the
Decision and the Judgment, [the Santiagos] are jointly and
severally liable for [Jasper's legal fee].
 
(Emphases added.) In addition to the exhibits mentioned above,
 
Tanaka attached to her complaint invoices for the Jasper fees. 
To the extent Tanaka bases her claim for Jasper fees on
 
the Santiagos' breach of the Purchase and Sale Instruments, she
 is barred by claim preclusion. Claim preclusion applies when a
 party shows that "(1) there was a final judgment on the merits,
 (2) both parties are the same or in privity with the parties in
 the original suit, and (3) the claim decided in the original suit
 is identical with the one presented in the action in question." 
Eastern Savings Bank, FSB v. Estaban
, 129 Hawai 'i 154, 159, 296 
P.3d 1062, 1067 (2013) (citing Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai 'i 43, 
54, 85 P.3d 150, 161 (2004)). The doctrine also prohibits a new
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
action in any court between the same parties "concerning the same
 
subject matter, and precludes the relitigation, not only of the
 issues which were actually litigated in the first action, but
 also of all grounds of claim and defense which might have been
 properly litigated in the first action but were not litigated or
 decided." Id. at 159, 296 P.3d at 1067 (emphasis in original).
 
The Disclosure Case was a final judgment on the merits
 
and was litigated by the same parties as in the instant case. 
Consequently, we ask whether the present claims are identical to
 the counterclaims decided in the Disclosure Case, or might have
 properly been litigated in the Disclosure Case. "To determine
 whether a litigant is asserting the same claim in a second
 action, the court must look to whether the 'claim' asserted in
 the second action arises out of the same transaction, or series
 of connected transactions, as the 'claim' asserted in the first
 action." Kauhane v. Acutron Co., Inc., 71 Haw. 458, 464, 795
 
P.2d 276, 279 (1990) (citing Restatement (Second) of Judgments
 § 24 (1982)). Kauhane held claims in two suits were identical
 
where both suits' claims arose from the same contractual
 agreement:
 
As in the prior action, Plaintiff premises his claims in the
present action solely upon violations of the terms of the
Apprenticeship Agreement. Specifically, Plaintiff asserts
that Acutron breached the Apprenticeship Agreement by
terminating him without good cause in violation of the terms
of that Agreement. Plaintiff also asserts in both actions
 that Acutron improperly fired him without the prior approval
of the DLIR, again in violation of the terms of the
Apprenticeship Agreement. Plaintiff's claims thus allege
violations of the same Agreement. Plaintiff's claims in the
 prior action and in the present action, therefore, all arise
out of the same transaction and accordingly, constitute the
same "claims" for res judicata purposes.
 
Id. at 464, 795 P.2d at 279.
 
The present matter is analogous. Tanaka contends the
 
Santiagos' obligation to reimburse her for the Jasper fees arises
 
from their breach of the Purchase and Sale Instruments, or more
 simply, that the Jasper fees Tanaka paid were damages which
 flowed from the Santiagos' breach. The Disclosure Case already
 adjudicated Tanaka's breach of contract claim:
 
II. Defendant's Counterclaim
 
. . . .
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
AN. Defendant provided seller financing to
Plaintiffs. When Plaintiffs announced the halting of
payments, and halted payments, Plaintiffs posed a threat to
Defendant's financial security. She had no way of knowing
that Plainthffs would seek to return to monthly payments.
She exercised her legal rights. Given Plaintiffs' conduct,
she was unwilling to agree to monthly payments, and she was
under no obligation to do so.
 
. . . .
 
AZ.
 The foreclosure is complete. 
Title was conveyed
pursuant to statute. Defendant is entitled to possession
without further delay. 
BA. 
Mr. Richardson is an experienced real estate
broker (he served as President of the Hawai' i Association of 
Realtors), a teacher of Hawai' i real estate professionals
(he is Founder and President of the Hawaii Academy of RealEstate, LLC) and a former Hawai' i Certified Public 
Accountant. See Exhibit D-13. 
As Defendant's property
manager, he handled the 
accounting for this property.
Based on his own personal knowledge, he testified thatPlaintiffs are indebted to Defendant in the amount of $79,441.55. While his testimony is credible, and Plaintiffsdid not offer evidence to the contrary, the Court declinesto award damages in this case. 
(Emphasis added.) And assuming Tanaka was required to pay the
 
Jasper fees to sell the Property, invoices for sums paid after
 the Disclosure Case decision do not create a legal obligation
 requiring the Santiagos to reimburse Tanaka for the Jasper fees. 
Nor do mere allegations. See Henderson v. Prof'l Coatings Corp.,
 
72 Haw. 387, 401, 819 P.2d 84, 92 (1991) (party opposing a motion
 for summary judgment cannot discharge his or her burden by
 alleging conclusions.
 
Claim preclusion's requirement that a claim be actually
 
litigated, or at a minimum, could have been litigated, extends
 the doctrines' preclusive effect to rights that were in existence
 at the time of the first suit. See generally Eastern Savings
 
Bank. By this logic, the preclusive effect does not reach rights
 that had not accrued at the time of the earlier proceeding, nor
 would the doctrine prohibit examination of the same question
 between the same parties when new facts have occurred which would
 alter the legal rights between the parties. Tanaka, however, has
 failed to show the existence of any such right, i.e., an
 entitlement to reimbursement for the Jasper fees that did not
 exist at the time of the first suit. 
Tanaka declared a new fact that (she was required to
 
pay the Jasper fees to sell the property) altered the legal
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rights of the parties such that a new entitlement (reimbursement
 
for the Jasper fees) arose from the breach established in the
 Disclosure Case. However, Tanaka's asserted conclusion is
 contradicted by her own complaint and declaration, which provided
 that her alleged new right, and the Santiagos' obligation, was a
 "foreseeable consequence" of the Santiagos' breach. 
Consequently, the purported right could have been properly
 litigated in the first suit and Tanaka's present claim is
 precluded as a matter of law. 
Tanaka contends further that per Ralston v. Yim, 129 
Hawai
'i 46, 292 P.3d 1276 (2013), the Santiagos were not entitled 
to summary judgment before the commencement of discovery because the Santiagos, as the movant, failed to demonstrate that Tanaka would be unable to carry her burden of proof at trial. Tanaka's reliance on Ralston is misplaced. Ralston held 
In sum, this court's case law indicates that a summary
judgment movant may satisfy his or her initial burden of
production by either (1) presenting evidence negating an
element of the non-movant's claim, or (2) demonstrating that
the nonmovant will be unable to carry his or her burden of
proof at trial. Where the movant attempts to meet his or
her burden through the latter means, he or she must show not
only that the non-movant has not placed proof in the record,
but also that the movant will be unable to offer proof at
trial. Accordingly, in general, a summary judgment movant
cannot merely point to the non-moving party's lack of
evidence to support its initial burden of production if
discovery has not concluded.
 
Ralston, 129 Hawai 'i at 60-61, 292 P.3d at 1290-91 (citations and 
emphasis omitted). Since Tanaka's claims were barred as a matter 
of law, she could not carry her burden of proof at trial. 
Because Tanaka's claims are barred as a matter of law, 
the district court did not abuse its discretion by denying the motion for reconsideration. See Cho v. State of Hawai
'i, 115 
Hawai'i 373, 381, 168 P.3d 17, 25 (2007) ("The trial court's 
ruling on a motion for reconsideration is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard.").
(B) The Santiagos' appeal.
(1) The district court abused its discretion when it
denied the Santiagos' motion for attorneys' fees and costs under
HRS § 607-14 District Court Rules of Civil Procedure (DCRCP) Rule
54.
 
On cross appeal, the Santiagos contend the district
 
court "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason and disregarded [HRS
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§§] 607-14 and 607-14.5 . . . as well as [DCRCP Rule 54]" when it 
denied their motion for attorneys' fees. The district court's grant or denial of attorneys' fees and costs is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard. See Sierra Club v. Dep't of 
Transp. of State of Hawai
'i, 120 Hawai 'i 181, 197, 202 P.3d 1226, 
1242 (2009). A trial court's conclusion that a claim was "made in good faith" and was not frivolous presents mixed questions of fact and law. See Coll v. McCarthy, 72 Haw. 20, 28, 804 P.2d 
881, 886 (1991). Where the trial court's conclusions are dependent upon the facts and circumstances of each individual case, the clearly erroneous standard of review applies. See id. 
The Santiagos contend that since Tanaka sued for
 
$25,000, "at a minimum, the Santiagos as the prevailing parties
 could recover up to $6,250.00 in attorneys' fees pursuant to [HRS
 §] 607-14 . . . as well as their entire costs pursuant to Rule
 54." The Santiagos also allege Tanaka's claims are "frivolous,
 having no sound basis in law or fact," and therefore are not
 confined to the 25% limitation under HRS § 607-14. 
Tanaka contends the denial was proper for six reasons:
 
(1) the motion was filed on the wrong island, (2) the motion was
 premature, (3) the Santiagos are estopped from seeking fees under
 the assumpsit statute, (4) the fee request exceeds the statutory
 request, (5) Tanaka's claims are not frivolous, and (6) the fee
 request was excessive.
 
Under HRS § 607-14, an award of attorneys' fees to the 
prevailing party is required when the action is in the nature of assumpsit: "in all actions in the nature of assumpsit . . . there shall be taxed as attorneys' fees, to be paid by the losing party . . . a fee that the court determines to be reasonable[.]" The denial of a request made under 607-14 must have support in the record. See Ranger Ins. Co. v. Hinshaw, 103 Hawai
'i 26, 33, 79 
P.3d 119, 126 (2003). Under HRCP Rule 54(d), a "presumption exists in favor of awarding costs to the prevailing party and that presumption must be overcome by the losing party." Hinshaw, 
103 Hawai
'i at 32, 79 P.3d at 125. "Furthermore, a court must 
adequately explain its reasons for denying or reducing costs unless its reasons are clear from the record." Id. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, the district court provided no explanation for
 
the denying the prevailing party's motion for attorneys' fees and
 
costs. And, as discussed below, the denial is without record
 support. 
Tanaka contends the Santiagos' motion for attorneys' 
fees and costs was improperly filed. The Santiagos' motion for attorneys' fees was filed with a clerk of the appellate courts as an ex officio clerk of the district court. HRS § 606-1(b) provides the "respective clerks of the supreme court, intermediate appellate court, circuit courts, and district courts shall be ex officio clerks of all the courts of records, and as such may issue process returnable in all such courts." Contrary to the language of the statute, Tanaka contends the ex officio designation is for the sole purpose of issuing process returnable in all such courts. In Doe v. Doe, 98 Hawai
'i 144, 44 P.3d 1085 
(2002), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court concluded the family court had 
jurisdiction over a motion where the movant submitted it to a circuit court clerk who accepted and date stamped the motion as received. Doe, 98 Hawai
'i at 151, 44 P.3d at 1092. 
Additionally, Rules of District Courts of Hawai 'i Rule 2.2(6) 
provides for an additional filing fee for ex officio filings. The Santiagos' motion for attorneys' fees and costs was properly filed. 
Tanaka contends the Santiagos' motion for attorneys'
 
fees and costs was prematurely filed. This contention is without
 merit. The district court orally ruled and issued a memorandum
 decision granting summary judgment in favor of the Santiagos
 before the motion for fees was filed. HRS § 607-14 provides:
 "the attorney representing the prevailing party shall submit to
 the court an affidavit stating the amount of time the attorney
 spent on the action and the amount of time the attorney is likely
 to spend to obtain a final written judgment[.]" Emphasis added. 
Tanaka contends that since the Santiagos initially
 
argued she failed to state a claim in assumpsit, they are
 estopped from requesting fees under HRS § 607-14. This
 contention is without merit. HRS § 607-14 applies to "all
 actions in the nature of assumpsit." "The character of the
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
action should be determined from the facts and issues raised in 
the complaint, the nature of the entire grievance, and the relief sought." Leslie v. Estate of Tavares, 93 Hawai
'i 1, 6, 994 P.2d 
1047, 1052 (2000) (citation omitted). Here, the facts and issues raised, nature of the entire grievance, and relief sought relate to agreements between the parties, namely, the Purchase and Sale Instruments. 
(2) The district court did not abuse its discretion
 
when it denied the Santiagos' motion for attorneys' fees and
costs under HRS § 607-14.5.
 
The district court denied the motion for attorneys'
 
fees without determining whether or not Tanaka's claims were
 
frivolous. HRS § 607–14.5 provides that "the court may, as it
 deems just, assess against either party . . . a reasonable sum
 for attorneys' fees . . . upon a specific finding that . . . the
 party's claim or defense was frivolous . . . ." HRS § 607-14.5
 "allows the Court broad latitude to award or not award
 [attorneys'] fees 'as it deems just[.]'" Jones v. Hawaii
 
Residency Program, Inc., CIV. 07-00015 HG-BMK, 2008 WL 355562, 1
 (D. Hawai
'i 2008). A claim is frivolous when it is so manifestly 
and palpably without merit as to indicate bad faith. See 
Morrison–Knudsen Co., Inc. v. Makahuena Corp., 66 Haw. 663, 672 n.5, 675 P.2d 760, 767 n.5 (1983) (denying request for attorneys' fees under § 607–14.5 where appeal was without merit, but was not taken in bad faith). 
The district court denied the Santiagos' motion to
 
dismiss. The record shows that Tanaka's claims invited argument
 and required the district court to look beyond the pleadings to
 determine whether the claims had merit. And notably, 
[t]here are a multitude of situations that arise during
litigation at the trial level that may contribute to the
legal and strategic decisions made by each party; the trial
judge is in the best position to ascertain the motivations
of the parties and the reasonableness of actions undertaken
by counsel and the parties.
 
Nelson v. Univ. of Hawai 'i, 99 Hawai 'i 262, 269, 54 P.3d 433, 440 
(2002). As such, we cannot conclude on this record that Tanaka's 
claims were manifestly and palpably without merit. See generally 
Coll v. McCarthy, 72 Haw. 20, 30-32, 804 P.2d 881, 887-88 (1991) (lower court conclusion that claim was not frivolous overturned 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
in part because there was no need to look beyond the pleadings or
 
invite argument to conclude that the claim was manifestly and
 palpably without merit).
 
II. CONCLUSION
 
Accordingly, the (1) November 13, 2012 "Memorandum";
 
(2) December 21, 2012 "Order Granting Defendant's Motion for
 Summary Judgment on Ruth Tanaka's First Amended Complaint," (3)
 December 21, 2012 "Final Judgment," and (4) December 21, 2012
 "Order Denying Plaintiff Ruth Tanaka's Motion for
 Reconsideration," all entered in the District Court of the Fifth
 Circuit, are affirmed. The December 21, 2012 "Order Denying
 Defendants Louis Robert Santiago and Yong Hwan Santiago's Motion
 for Attorney Fees and Costs," entered in the District Court of
 the Fifth Circuit, is vacated and remanded for a determination of
 reasonable attorneys' fees, consistent with this decision.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, July 16, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Robert Goldberg
for Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee. 
Presiding Judge 
Gary Victor DubinFrederick J. Arensmeyerfor Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants. 
Associate Judge 
14
 