FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--–

 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
vs.
 
JASON CURTIS and MELISSA HALL,
Defendants-Appellants,
and
 
GENEVIEVE WALKER, Defendant-Appellee.
 
CAAP NOS. 12-0000133 and 12-0000134
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CR NO. 11-1-0016)

 
DECEMBER 31, 2015
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.

 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
A FedEx employee opened a parcel he suspected contained 
illegal narcotics and discovered approximately eight pounds of 
marijuana. 
The FedEx employee notified law enforcement, and the 
parcel, which was addressed to a Kaua 'i residence, was eventually 
turned over to the Kaua 'i Police Department (KPD). A KPD officer 
applied for an anticipatory search warrant, which is "a warrant based upon an affidavit showing probable cause that at some future time (but not presently) certain evidence of crime will be FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
located at a specified place." United States v. Grubbs, 547 U.S.
 
90, 94 (2006). Anticipatory warrants generally seek authority to
 
search after the occurrence of a future event, referred to as the
 "triggering condition," which is often the delivery of a package
 containing contraband to the premises to be searched. See id. 
In his affidavit in support of the anticipatory search
 
warrant, a KPD officer explained that the KPD intended to effect
 a controlled delivery of the FedEx parcel to the residence to
 which the parcel was addressed and requested a warrant
 authorizing a search of the residence after the parcel was
 delivered. The search warrant itself, however, which was issued
 by a judge, did not contain the triggering condition and
 authorized the execution of the warrant "forthwith." 
After the controlled delivery was completed and the
 
parcel was taken into the residence, the KPD executed the search
 warrant. During the search, KPD officers observed the defendants
 present in the residence, and the officers found the contents of
 the opened parcel, including the marijuana, in various parts of
 the residence as well as drug paraphernalia.
 
The defendants moved to suppress the evidence obtained
 
as the result of the search, challenging the validity of the
 warrant. The Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (Circuit Court)
1
 
denied the defendants' suppression motion. 
On appeal, Defendants-Appellants Jason Curtis (Curtis)
 
and Melissa Hall (Hall) argue that the Circuit Court erred in
 determining that the search warrant was valid and in denying
 their motion to suppress evidence. We affirm the Circuit Court. 
In Grubbs, the United States Supreme Court held that
 
the Fourth Amendment "does not require that the triggering
 condition for an anticipatory search warrant be set forth in the
 warrant itself[.]" Id. at 99. As explained below, we follow
 
Grubbs and other courts that have come to the same conclusion. 
1The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided over the proceedings
relevant to this appeal.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In this case, (1) the officer's affidavit made clear that the
 
execution of the search warrant was conditioned on the delivery
 of the FedEx package to the residence to be searched and (2) this
 triggering condition was satisfied before the warrant was
 executed. See United States v. Moetamedi, 46 F.3d 225, 229 (2d
 
Cir. 1995). We conclude, under the circumstances of this case,
 that the anticipatory search warrant was valid and that the
 Circuit Court properly denied the defendants' motion to suppress
 evidence.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
A FedEx employee at the Honolulu FedEx sorting facility 
opened a parcel he suspected contained illegal narcotics. The parcel was addressed to "Jennifer ROBERTSON" at a Kaua
'i 
residence address (Subject Premises). After discovering plastic bags in the parcel that appeared to contain marijuana, the FedEx employee notified law enforcement of his discovery. The parcel and its contents were eventually turned over to the KPD. After testing and weighing the suspected marijuana, the KPD determined that the parcel contained approximately eight pounds of marijuana. 
KPD Officer Paris Resinto (Officer Resinto) applied for
 
and obtained a court order authorizing KPD officers to install in
 the parcel and monitor a tracking device that would permit the
 KPD to track the location of the parcel and determine when the
 parcel was opened. In conjunction with obtaining the order for
 the tracking device, Officer Resinto applied for an anticipatory
 search warrant to search the Subject Premises for the parcel and
 its contents, including the tracking device.
 
Officer Resinto's affidavit in support of the
 
anticipatory search warrant explained that the KPD planned to
 effect a controlled delivery of the parcel under police
 surveillance to the Subject Premises to "identify the person(s)
 involved in this illegal drug shipment"; that the KPD would
 install the tracking device in the parcel; and that after the
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
tracking device was installed, Officer Resinto and KPD Sergeant
 
Darren Rose (Sergeant Rose) would maintain custody of the parcel
 until it is delivered to the Subject Premises.
2 The affidavit
 
stated that Officer Resinto "has reasonable grounds to believe
 that the property described herein will be located in the
 [Subject Premises] after the time of delivery of the suspect
 parcel and request that a search warrant issue commanding that a
 search be made of said residence for said property[.]" The
 affidavit also requested the issuance of a search warrant to
 search the Subject Premises "after the time of delivery of the
 subject parcel[.]"
 
Based on Officer Resinto's affidavit, a District Court
 
Judge issued a search warrant authorizing KPD officers to search
 the Subject Premises for the parcel and its contents. The search
 warrant, titled "ANTICIPATORY SEARCH WARRANT," did not set forth
 the triggering condition for the execution of warrant, namely,
 the delivery of the parcel to the Subject Premises, that was
 identified in Officer Resinto's affidavit. Rather, the search
 warrant stated:
 
Affidavit(s) having been made before me that the
property described herein may be found at the location
set forth herein and that it falls within the grounds
specified by said affidavit(s). And I am satisfied
 that there is probable cause to believe that the
property described herein is located within the
property to be searched and that the foregoing grounds
for application for issuance of a search warrant
exist:
 
YOU ARE HEREBY COMMANDED forthwith to search
:
 
[The Subject Premises ]
 
(Emphases added.)
 
Within hours after the issuance of the search warrant,
 
the KPD effected a controlled delivery of the parcel to the
 
Subject Premises. Sergeant Rose approached the Subject Premises
 
2The affidavit in support of the anticipatory search warrant
incorporated documents including the application and order for the tracking
device.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and handed the parcel to Curtis, who carried the parcel inside
 
the Subject Premises. Sergeant Rose also saw Hall and co-
defendant Genevieve Walker (Walker). Officer Rose asked Walker
 if she was "Jennifer Robertson," the named addressee of the
 parcel. Walker said yes and signed the FedEx delivery form. 
Sergeant Rose left the Subject Premises and notified other KPD
 officers participating in the investigation that the parcel had
 been delivered.
 
About five minutes after the parcel had been delivered,
 
the tracking device alerted the KPD officers that the parcel had
 been opened. In response, the KPD officers went to the Subject
 Premises and executed the search warrant. In executing the
 warrant, the officers observed Curtis, Hall, and Walker present
 in the Subject Premises, and the officers found the contents of
 the opened parcel, including the marijuana, in various parts of
 the residence. The officers recovered one of the bags of
 marijuana from the parcel in the living room next to Hall and
 Walker. The officers also recovered drug paraphernalia and over
 $1,000 in cash.
 
II.
 
Curtis, Hall, and Walker (collectively, Defendants) 
were charged with second-degree commercial promotion of
 marijuana, unlawful use of drug paraphernalia, and second-degree
 promoting a detrimental drug. Walker filed a "Motion to Quash
 Search Warrant and Suppress Illegally Obtained Evidence and
 Statements" (Suppression Motion), challenging the validity of the
 warrant. Among other things, Walker argued that the search
 warrant was invalid because it did not contain a description of
 the "triggering condition" on its face. Curtis and Hall joined
 in Walker's Suppression Motion.
 
The Circuit Court held a hearing on the Suppression
 
Motion. The Circuit Court denied the Suppression Motion and
 issued "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying
 [the Suppression Motion]" (Suppression Order). In its 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Suppression Order, the Circuit Court made the following pertinent
 
findings of fact:
 
4. On December 1, 2010, a Fed-Ex employee unsealed
and searched a parcel addressed to Defendants' vacation
rental, as the employee suspected that the parcel contained
illegal narcotics. Inside the parcel, the employee found a
large quantity of marijuana. The parcel was left unsealed
and open, and was turned over to the Drug Enforcement
Administration of the federal government ("DEA"). The DEA
 re-packaged the open parcel and shipped it to KPD, which
confirmed that the parcel contained 7.95 pounds of a green
leafy substance that tested positive for the presence of
(THC) marijuana.
 
5. On December 2, 2010, KPD requested and received
an order to install a mobile tracking device that would
allow the parcel to be tracked, and would alert KPD when the
parcel was open.
 
6. KPD also applied for, and received, an
anticipatory search warrant for Defendants' residence, which
authorized a search for the parcel and its contents.
 
7. On its first page, the Anticipatory Search
Warrant recited that "I am satisfied that there is probable
cause to believe that the property described herein is
located within the property to be searched and that the
foregoing grounds for application for issuance of a search
warrant exist."
 
8. Attached to the Anticipatory Search Warrant, was
a Supporting Affidavit that explained in detail the
procedures that KPD planned to execute pursuant to the
search warrant: (1) that a tracking device would be placed
inside the parcel; (2) that KPD would maintain secure and
exclusive possession of the parcel; (3) that KPD would seek
to deliver the parcel to Defendants' residence, and would
also track the parcel; and (4) that KPD would seek to
execute the search warrant after the tracking device
indicated that the parcel had been opened.
 
9. On December 2, 2010, KPD resealed the parcel
with the tracking device inside, and delivered it to
Defendants' residence, where Defendant Walker signed for the
parcel.
 
10. KPD waited until the parcel was inside the
Defendants' residence, and until tracking device indicated
that the box had been opened, and then executed the
Anticipatory Search Warrant finding marijuana outside the
parcel on the floor between Defendants -- next to marijuana
bong.
 
6
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Relying on the United States Supreme Court's decision
 
in Grubbs, the Circuit Court concluded in relevant part as
 
follows:
 
3. The State of Hawai' i has the authority to
provide constitutional protections to citizens above and
beyond that provided by the U.S. Constitution and the U.S.Supreme Court, and has done so when the Hawai' i Supreme
Court has deemed necessary. State v. Kaluna, 55 Haw. 361, 
367-69, 520 P.2d 51, 57-58 (1974). 
4. The Hawai' i Supreme Court has, however, not
expanded on the constitutional protections provided by theU.S. Constitution and U.S. Supreme Court with respect to
anticipatory search warrants.
 
5. In accordance with controlling case law,
anticipatory search warrants need not contain future tense
anticipatory or triggering language where the accompanying
supporting affidavit adequately demonstrates the
anticipatory nature and intent of the warrant itself. U.S.
 
v. Grubbs, 547 U.S. 90, 126 S.Ct. 1494 (2006).
 
. . . .
 
9. Read in totality, the Anticipatory Search
Warrant at issue is in accordance with HRS Section 803-31
 
(as amended effective April 29, 1998), and is not
constitutionally invalidated by present tense language that
appears on page one of the warrant. HRS Section 803-31.
 
U.S. v. Grubbs, 547 U.S. 90, 126 S.Ct. 1494 (2006).
 
Curtis filed a motion to reconsider the Suppression
 
Order, in which Hall and Walker joined. The Circuit Court denied
 
the motion to reconsider. 
On February 6, 2012, Curtis and Hall entered
 
conditional no contest pleas to the amended charge of first-
degree promoting a detrimental drug, reserving the right to
 appeal the Circuit Court's Suppression Order and its order
 denying the motion to reconsider the Suppression Order. Curtis
 and Hall were each sentenced to pay a $5,000 fine and a $105
 crime victim compensation fee. Their respective Judgments were
 entered on February 8, 2012.
3 Curtis and Hall each appeal from
 
the their Judgments, and their appeals were consolidated by this
 court.
 
3The record indicates that pursuant to a plea agreement, the charges
against Walker were dismissed without prejudice, and Walker is not a party to
this appeal.
 
7
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, Curtis and Hall challenge the validity of 
the search warrant, focusing on the warrant's lack of a 
triggering condition. They argue that because the search warrant did not contain a triggering condition, it constituted a general search warrant which violated their rights under the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
4 They further argue 
that the search warrant was invalid under the greater protection provided by Article I, section 7 of the Hawai
'i Constitution.5 
We conclude that the search warrant in this case was a valid anticipatory search warrant and that the Circuit Court properly denied Defendants' suppression motion. 
I.
 
At the outset, we note that as Curtis and Hall argue 
and Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) concedes, the 
Circuit Court applied the wrong standard in reviewing the issuance of the search warrant by the District Court Judge. The Circuit Court concluded that it was "bound to pay great deference" to the issuing judge's probable cause determination. It is clear, however, that Hawai
'i courts apply a de novo 
standard of review to the issuing judge's determination of probable cause. State v. Navas, 81 Hawai
'i 113, 123, 913 P.2d 
39, 49 (1996). 
4The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides:
 
The right of the people to be secure in their persons,
houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and
seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but
upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and
particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons
or things to be seized.
 
5
Article I, section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution provides: 
The right of the people to be secured in their persons,
houses, papers and effects against unreasonable searches, seizures
and invasions of privacy shall not be violated; and no warrants
shall issue but upon probable cause, supported by oath or
affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched
and the persons or things to be seized or the communications
sought to be intercepted.
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In this appeal, the facts found by the Circuit Court
 
are not disputed and the validity of the search warrant turns on
 
questions of law. Thus, the Circuit Court's application of an
 incorrect standard in reviewing probable cause for the warrant
 does not affect our de novo review.
 
II.
 
Curtis' and Hall's challenge to the validity of the
 
search warrant under the Fourth Amendment is foreclosed by the
 United States Supreme Court's decision in Grubbs. In Grubbs, the
 Supreme Court considered an anticipatory search warrant under
 facts very similar to this case. See Grubbs, 547 U.S. at 92-93.
 
Like the warrant in this case, the warrant in Grubbs did not set
 forth the triggering condition, but was "inartfully drafted" and
 written on a "form 'forthwith' search warrant," and the only
 indication that the warrant was an anticipatory search warrant
 was the word "anticipatory" in its title. United States v.
 
Grubbs, 377 F.3d 1072, 1074 (9th Cir. 2004) (Grubbs/9th Cir.)
 (describing the warrant), amended, 389 F.3d 1306 (9th Cir. 2004),
 rev'd by 547 U.S. 90 (2006). Moreover, like the warrant in this
 case, the Grubbs warrant, on its face, referred to probable cause
 to search for contraband in a package (that had yet to be
 delivered to the premises) in the present tense. Grubbs/9th
 
Cir., 377 F.3d at 1073-74. The Grubbs warrant stated: "I [(the
 magistrate judge issuing the warrant)] am satisfied that the
 affidavit(s) and any recorded testimony establish probable cause
 to believe that the person or property so described is now
 concealed on the person or premises above-described and establish
 grounds for the issuance of this warrant." Grubbs/9th Cir., 377
 
F.3d at 1074 (emphasis added).
 
Like the supporting affidavit in this case, the
 
affidavit on which the warrant was based in Grubbs explained that
 the search warrant was sought in connection with law
 enforcement's future delivery of a package containing contraband
 (a videotape of child pornography) to a residence, and that the
 warrant would be executed after the controlled delivery was
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
effected. Grubbs, 547 U.S. at 92. Also, like the affidavit in
 
this case, the affiant for the Grubbs affidavit asserted that he
 
had probable cause to believe that the items for which the
 warrant was sought "will be found at [Grubb's residence]." Id.
 
(brackets in original). 
Under these facts, the Supreme Court reversed the
 
judgment of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth
 Circuit (Ninth Circuit), which had held that the anticipatory
 search warrant was invalid. Id. at 99. The Ninth Circuit had
 
invalidated the anticipatory search warrant because it failed to
 specify the triggering condition, which led the Ninth Circuit to
 conclude that the warrant violated the Fourth Amendment's
 particularity requirement. Id. at 93-94, 97.
 
In rejecting the Ninth Circuit's analysis, the Supreme
 
Court held that the Fourth Amendment "specifies only two matters
 that must be 'particularly describ[ed]' in the warrant: 'the
 place to be searched' and 'the persons or things to be seized.'" 
Id. at 97 (brackets in original). The Court stated, "'Nothing in
 the language of the Constitution or in this Court's decisions
 interpreting that language suggests that, in addition to the
 [requirements set forth in the text], search warrants also must
 include a specification of the precise manner in which they are
 to be executed.'" Id. at 98 (citation omitted; brackets in
 
original). The Court held that "[b]ecause the Fourth Amendment
 does not require that the triggering condition for an
 anticipatory search warrant be set forth in the warrant itself,
 the [Ninth Circuit] erred in invalidating the warrant at issue
 here." Id. at 99.
 
In reaching its decision, the Court rejected two policy
 
arguments asserted by Grubbs. First, the Court rejected the
 argument that setting forth the triggering condition in the
 warrant itself was necessary because the warrant should contain 
preconditions to the valid exercise of executive power "'to
 delineate the limits of the executing officer's power.'" Id. at
 
98. The Court held that the Fourth Amendment does not require
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that "'if there is a precondition to the valid exercise of
 
executive power, that precondition must be particularly
 identified on the face of the warrant.'" Id. (brackets omitted).
 
The Court noted that "[t]he Fourth Amendment does not require
 that the warrant set forth the magistrate's basis for finding
 probable cause, even though probable cause is the quintessential
 'precondition to the valid exercise of executive power.'" Id. 
The Court concluded that the Fourth Amendment similarly does not
 require the warrant to describe a triggering condition. Id. at
 
98.
 
Second, the Court rejected the argument that listing
 
the triggering condition in the warrant was necessary to assure
 the property owner that the search is valid. Id. at 98-99. The
 Court reasoned that neither the Fourth Amendment nor the Federal
 Rules of Criminal Procedure (FRCP) Rule 41 requires the executing
 officer to present a copy of the warrant to the property owner
 before conducting the search. Id. The Court held that the
 
Constitution does not give property owners "license to engage the
 police in debate over the basis for the warrant," but protects
 them by requiring that an impartial judicial officer issue the
 warrant and by providing "a right to suppress evidence improperly
 obtained and a cause of action for damages." Id. at 99. 
III.
 
Other courts, many before the Supreme Court's decision
 
in Grubbs, have held that the failure to set forth the triggering
 condition in an anticipatory search warrant did not render the
 warrant invalid. E.g. Moetamedi, 46 F.3d at 229; United States
 
v. Hugoboom, 112 F.3d 1081, 1087 (10th Cir. 1997); United States
 v. Rey, 923 F.2d 1217, 1221 (6th Cir. 1991); State v. Moran, 791
 So.2d 1065, 1069-71 (Ala. Crim. App. 2001); Alvidres v. Superior
 Court, 90 Cal. Rptr. 682, 684-86 (Cal. Ct. App. 1970). Courts
 have upheld anticipatory search warrants that do not describe the
 triggering condition as long as two conditions are met: (1) the
 officer's affidavit specifically identifies the triggering
 condition for the execution of the warrant; and (2) this
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
triggering condition is satisfied before the warrant is executed. 
See Moetamedi, 46 F.3d at 229; Moran, 791 So.2d at 1069-71;
 Hugoboom, 112 F.3d at 1087. 
In the context of this case, where the anticipatory
 
search warrant is sought to search for items from a controlled
 delivery after the delivery is effected, any risk that an
 anticipatory search warrant would be executed prematurely if the
 warrant fails to identify the triggering condition is exceedingly
 low. As one court cogently explained:
 
It is logical to assume that when officers obtain a
warrant to search for and seize particular property which
they have probable cause to believe will be on the premises
at a specified future time, they would not be disposed to
undermine the success of their efforts by premature
execution of the warrant.
 
Alvidres, 90 Cal. Rptr. at 686.
 
IV.
 
As relevant to this case, the particularity requirement 
of Article I, section 7 of the Hawai 'i Constitution is the same 
as that of the Fourth Amendment. Both only require that the 
warrant particularly describe the place to be searched and the persons or things to be seized; they do not require that search warrants additionally "include a specification of the precise manner in which they are to be executed." See Grubbs, 547 U.S. 
at 98 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Moreover, similar to FRCP Rule 41, Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) 
Rule 41 does not require that a copy of the search warrant be presented to the property owner or others before the warrant is executed. We therefore apply the analysis of the United States Supreme Court in Grubbs and conclude that Article I, section 7 does not require an anticipatory search warrant to contain the triggering condition in order to be valid.
6 
6Although we conclude that including the triggering condition in the
warrant is not constitutionally required, we believe the better practice would
be to include the triggering condition in the warrant and encourage judges
issuing warrants to promote this practice.
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Although the triggering condition need not be stated in
 
the warrant itself, we agree with courts holding that the 
following two conditions must be satisfied for an anticipatory
 search warrant that does not state the triggering condition to be
 valid: (1) the officer's affidavit must specifically identify the
 triggering condition for the execution of the warrant; and (2)
 this triggering condition must be satisfied before the warrant is
 executed. Moetamedi, 46 F.3d at 229; Moran, 791 So.2d at 1069­
71; Hugoboom, 112 F.3d at 1087.
 
Here, the requirements for a valid anticipatory search
 
warrant were met and the surrounding circumstances provide
 additional support for upholding the warrant. It is undisputed
 that the search warrant was sought in connection with the planned
 controlled delivery of a parcel containing marijuana to the
 residence to which the parcel was addressed. The affidavit in
 support of the search warrant specifically identified the
 triggering condition for the execution of the warrant -- the
 delivery of the parcel to the Subject Premises. When Officer
 Resinto applied to the judge for the warrant, it was clear, based
 on the information contained in the affidavit, that the parcel
 had not yet been delivered and was still in the custody of the
 KPD. There was no plausible risk that the warrant would be
 executed before the triggering condition, the controlled delivery
 of the parcel, had been completed. Indeed, the very purpose of
 the investigation was to identify the persons involved in the
 illegal drug shipment by effecting a controlled delivery of the
 parcel to the Subject Premises, and the warrant sought to search
 the Subject Premises for the parcel and its contents. The KPD
 waited until the parcel had been delivered to the Subject
 Premises (and the tracking device indicated the parcel had been
 opened) before executing the warrant. Under these circumstances,
 we conclude that the anticipatory search warrant was valid.
 
V.
 
We note that in 1997, this court in State v. Scott, No. 
18170, slip op. (Hawai
'i App. Apr. 30, 1997) (Scott I) concluded 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that an anticipatory search warrant was constitutionally 
permissible but imposed six conditions for a valid anticipatory search warrant, including that the warrant "authorizes a search only upon the occurrence of the event generating the probable cause." Scott I, slip op. at 1-2, 13-14.
7 However, in State v. 
Scott, 87 Hawai 'i 80, 951 P.2d 1243 (1998) (Scott II), the Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court, without addressing the constitutionality of anticipatory search warrants, held that such warrants were not permitted under the then-existing HRS § 803-31 (1993) and HRPP Rule 41(a) (1995). Scott II, 87 Hawai
'i at 81, 951 P.2d at 1244. 
The supreme count concluded that anticipatory search warrants were not permitted under HRS § 803-31 because the statute defined a search warrant as authorizing the search for articles "supposed to be in the possession of" the person whose premises are to be searched. Id. at 84, 87 Hawai
'i at 1247. The supreme court also 
held that HRPP Rule 41 did not authorize anticipatory search warrants because the rule only authorized a judge to issue a search warrant within the circuit where "'the property sought is located.'" Id. 
Significant to our analysis, the supreme court in Scott
 
II did not address the conditions this court had imposed for a
 valid anticipatory search warrant, but instead ordered that our
 opinion be depublished, which stripped Scott I of its 
precedential value and rendered it non-citable. Id. at 85, 951
 
7The six conditions set forth in Scott I for a valid anticipatory search
warrant were that it: 
(1) is issued by an authorized judge based on probable cause
supported by oath or affirmation; (2) is based on a clear showing,
supported by oath or affirmation, of law enforcement's need to
have the [anticipatory search warrant] issued before the
occurrence of the event that will generate the probable cause; (3)
particularly describes the place to be searched and the things to
be seized; (4) authorizes a search only upon the occurrence of the
event generating the probable cause; (5) authorizes a search only
within the probable life of the probable cause; and (6) is
executed before the probable cause in fact expires.
 
Scott I, slip. op. at 1-2, 13-14. 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
P.2d 80.8 In addition, the federal cases this court relied upon 
in Scott I to impose the requirement that the triggering 
condition be set forth in the warrant have effectively been overruled by the United States Supreme Court's decision in Grubbs.
9 In response to Scott II, the Hawai 'i Legislature 
amended HRS § 803-31 in 1998 to authorize the issuance of anticipatory search warrants. Haw. Sess. Laws Act 65, § 1 at 145. The 1998 amendment added the phrase "or which are
 
anticipated to be in the possession of" to define a search
 warrant as authorizing the search for articles "supposed to be in
 the possession of or which are anticipated to be in the
 possession of" the person whose premises are to be searched. Id.
 
at § 2 at 145 (emphasis added). However, besides authorizing
 anticipatory search warrants, the amended statute did not impose
 any specific conditions for a valid anticipatory search
 warrant.
10 Moreover, the Grubbs decision was issued after both
 
Scott I and the amendment to HRS § 803-31. Scott I is not
 
precedential, and we decline to follow its conclusion that an
 anticipatory search warrant must itself state the triggering
 condition to be valid. 
8
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 35(c)(1) (2010) provides, in
relevant part: "A memorandum opinion or unpublished dispositional order filed
before July 1, 2008 shall not be cited in any other action or proceeding[.]" 
9The state case we cited, Commonwealth v. Callahan, 671 N.E.2d 958
(Mass. App. Ct. (1996), was later overruled by Commonwealth v. Gauthier, 679
N.E.2d 211 (Mass. 1997).
 
10We note that a House Judiciary Committee Report regarding the bill
that was subsequently enacted states that the Committee "agrees with theIntermediate Court of Appeals that anticipatory search warrants shall" complywith the six conditions listed in Scott I for a valid anticipatory searchwarrant. H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1233-98, in 1998 House Journal, at 1552.However, the interpretation of what the constitution requires is the provinceof the courts. See Del Rio v. Crake, 87 Hawai' i 297, 304, 955 P.2d 90, 97
(1998). In addition, the amended statute itself did not incorporate theconditions for a valid anticipatory search warrant listed in Scott I. 
15
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
VI.
 
"The 'primary purpose of both the Fourth Amendment and 
article I, section 7 of the Hawai 'i Constitution is to safeguard 
the privacy and security of individuals against arbitrary 
invasions by government officials.'" State v. McKnight, 131 
Hawai'i 379, 399, 319 P.3d 298, 318 (2013) (citation omitted). 
Although we may construe Article I, section 7 of the Hawai 'i 
Constitution to provide broader protection than the Fourth Amendment, see State v. Lopez, 78 Hawai
'i 433, 445, 896 P.2d 889, 
901 (1995), we see no basis for doing so in this case. 
The vast majority of jurisdictions, including the
 
United State Supreme Court, have held that anticipatory search
 warrants are not per se unconstitutional. Grubbs, 547 U.S. at 95
 
(holding that anticipatory search warrants are not categorically
 unconstitutional under the Fourth Amendment in agreement with
 "every [federal] Court of Appeals to confront the issue"); State
 v. Womack, 967 P.2d 536, 539-40 (Utah Ct. App. 1998) (joining "the overwhelming majority of jurisdictions in recognizing that anticipatory search warrants are not per se unconstitutional" and collecting cases); Scott II, 87 Hawai
'i at 81 n.2, 951 P.2d at 
1244 n.2 (noting "that most jurisdictions that have considered [anticipatory search warrants] have concluded that they are not per se unconstitutional"). We join these jurisdictions in holding that anticipatory search warrants are not per se unconstitutional.
11 
For an anticipatory search warrant to be valid, there
 
must be probable cause to search the premises after the
 triggering condition occurs as well as probable cause to believe
 that the triggering condition will occur. See Grubbs, 547 U.S.
 
at 96-97. We hold, consistent with other courts that have
 considered anticipatory search warrants, that imposing the 
11We note that Curtis and Hall do not contend that anticipatory search
warrants are per se unconstitutional. 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
additional requirements we have adopted -- (1) that the officer's
 
affidavit must specifically identify the triggering condition for
 the execution of the warrant; and (2) that this triggering
 condition must be satisfied before the warrant is executed -- is
 sufficient to safeguard the privacy and security of individuals
 without demanding that the triggering condition be set forth in
 the warrant. 
We conclude that the anticipatory search warrant in 
this case satisfied the requirements of the Fourth Amendment and Article I, section 7 and was a valid anticipatory search warrant. We further conclude that suppression of the evidence obtained pursuant to the anticipatory search warrant would not further the purposes underlying Hawai
'i's exclusionary rule of "(1) judicial 
integrity, (2) the protection of individual privacy, and (3) deterrence of illegal police misconduct." McKnight, 131 Hawai
'i 
at 398, 319 P.3d at 317. 
The anticipatory search warrant in this case was
 
supported by probable cause, particularly described the place to
 be searched and the items to be seized, and was valid. 
Therefore, suppression of the evidence obtained pursuant to the
 warrant was not necessary to preserve judicial integrity or deter
 illegal police misconduct. Suppression of the evidence was also
 not necessary for the protection of individual privacy. The
 supporting affidavit clearly specified the triggering condition
 and the officers waited until the triggering condition had
 occurred before executing the warrant. Requiring the triggering
 condition to be set forth in the warrant would not have changed
 the way the search was conducted in this case. See id. at 398­
99, 319 P.3d at 317-18 (holding that a judge's error in misdating
 a search warrant did not require suppression of the evidence
 seized).
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Judgments
 
entered against Curtis and Hall.
 
On the briefs:
 
Daniel G. Hempey
Gregory S. Meyers
(Hempey & Meyers LLP)
for Defendants-Appellants
 
Tracy Murakami
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Kaua
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
18
 