NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000325
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
ROCKY R. GILDING,
Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I,
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-1852)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley, and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee State of Hawai' i 
(SOH) appeals from the Judgment entered March 9, 2011, in the 
1
Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court) in favor of
Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant Rocky R. Gilding (Gilding). 
Gilding cross-appeals from the same Judgment.
 
On appeal, SOH contends the following:
 (1)
 Circuit court erred when it awarded special damages
 
for Gilding's medical expenses. Finding of Fact (FOF) 36 is in
 error and Conclusion of Law (COL) 6 is wrong.
 
(2) Circuit court erred when it failed to apportion
 
damages between Gilding's alleged injury and his pre-existing
 
condition. FOF 29 is in error and COL 5 is wrong.
 
1
 The Honorable R. Mark Browning presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) Circuit court's finding of sole liability in favor
 
of Gilding was against the weight of the evidence presented at
 
trial. COL 4 is wrong.
 
On cross-appeal, Gilding contends:
 (1) Circuit court erred when it found insufficient
 
evidence to support an award of future medical expenses. FOF 37
 is in error.
 
(2) Circuit court erred when it found that testimony of
 
Robert A. Male, Ph.D., (Dr. Male) was not credible. FOF 42 is in
 
error.
 
(3) Circuit court erred when it found insufficient
 
evidence to support an award for loss of Gilding's past and
 
future earning capacity, and loss of past and future household
 
services. FOF 43 is in error.
 
(4) Circuit court erred when it entered judgment in
 
favor of Gilding in the amount of $300,516. COL 8 is wrong.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On September 15, 2006, while incarcerated at Oahu
 
Community Correctional Center (OCCC), Gilding and eight other
 
inmates were transferred by van to the Federal Detention Center
 
(FDC). The inmates were restrained by waist chains and leg
 
irons, which hindered their movements.
 
On September 10, 2008, Gilding filed a Complaint
 
against SOH, seeking damages for an injury allegedly sustained
 
during the transfer from OCCC to the FDC. In his Complaint,
 
Gilding alleged that as he stepped down from the van onto a
 
wooden stool, the stool slid out from under him, causing him to
 
fall back and hit his neck, left shoulder, and back on the bottom
 
of the van's door well and ground. Gilding asserted that, due to
 
this incident, he sustained permanent and disabling injuries as
 
well as severe emotional and mental distress.
 
Trial was held January 31, February 1, and 
February 2, 2011. Circuit court entered its FOFs, COLs, and
 
Judgment on March 9, 2011. SOH filed its notice of appeal on
 
April 6, 2011. Gilding cross-appealed on April 12, 2011.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Findings of Fact (FOF)/Conclusions of Law (COL)
 
"In this jurisdiction, a trial court's FOFs are subject 
to the clearly erroneous standard of review. An FOF is clearly 
erroneous when, despite evidence to support the finding, the 
appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction 
that a mistake has been committed." Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the 
Employees' Ret. Sys. of the State of Hawai' i, 106 Hawai' i 416, 
430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 (2005) (internal quotation marks, 
citations, and ellipses omitted) (quoting Allstate Ins. Co. v. 
Ponce, 105 Hawai' i 445, 453, 99 P.3d 96, 104 (2004)). "An FOF is 
also clearly erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding. [The Hawai' i Supreme Court has] defined 
"substantial evidence" as credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of 
reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Leslie v. Estate of 
Tavares, 91 Hawai' i 394, 399, 984 P.2d 1220, 1225 (1999) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted) (quoting State 
v. Kotis, 91 Hawai' i 319, 328, 984 P.2d 78, 87 (1999)). 
An appellate court is "not confined to the trial 
court's express findings of fact and may also take into 
consideration the uncontradicted evidence contained in the 
record." Molokoa Village Development Co., Ltd. v. Kauai Elec. 
Co., Ltd., 60 Haw. 582, 593, 593 P.2d 375, 382 (1979). Furthermore, "[f]indings of fact . . . that are not challenged on 
appeal are binding on the appellate court." Okada Trucking Co., 
Ltd. v. Board of Water Supply, 97 Hawai' i 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 
81 (2002). 
A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and is
freely reviewable for its correctness. [The appellate
court] ordinarily reviews COLs under the right/wrong
standard. Thus, a COL that is supported by the trial
court's FOFs and that reflects an application of the correct
rule of law will not be overturned. However, a COL that
presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under
the clearly erroneous standard because the court's
conclusions are dependent upon the facts and circumstances
of each individual case.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Chun, 106 Hawai' i at 430, 106 P.3d at 353 (internal quotation 
marks, citations, and brackets in original omitted) (quoting 
Ponce, 105 Hawai' i at 453, 99 P.3d at 104). 
B.	 Credibility of Witnesses
 
"[T]he credibility of witnesses and the weight to be
 
given their testimony are within the province of the trier of
 
fact and, generally, will not be disturbed on appeal." Tamashiro
 
v. Control Specialist, Inc., 97 Hawai' i 86, 92, 34 P.3d 16, 22 
(2001). 
III. SOH'S APPEAL
 
A.	 Circuit court did not err in ruling that Gilding
was entitled to special damages of $100,516.
 
1.	 Gilding presented substantial evidence to show
that his medical expenses were reasonable and
necessary.
 
SOH contends circuit court erred in FOF 36 when it
 
found "that substantial undisputed evidence was presented at
 
trial showing that the reasonable value of the medical treatment
 
[Gilding] needed as a result of his injuries amounts to
 
$100,516.00 for which the Department of Human Services' medical
 
assistance program has paid a discounted amount of $16,412.88." 
Based on this alleged error, SOH contends that COL 6, which
 
concluded Gilding was "entitled to an award of special damages
 
for his past medical expenses in the amount of $100,516.00" is
 
necessarily wrong.
 
Medical expenses are recoverable as compensatory 
special damages. Dunbar v. Thompson, 79 Hawai' i 306, 315, 901 
P.2d 1285, 1294 (App. 1995). "Special damages compensate claimants for specific out of pocket financial expenses and 
losses[.]" Bynum v. Magno, 106 Hawai' i 81, 96, 101 P.3d 1149, 
1164 (2004) (internal quotation marks, citation, and emphasis omitted). "In an action to recover medical expenses caused by a 
defendant's negligence, a plaintiff must show that the medical 
services obtained were necessary and the charges were reasonable 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
as required for the injuries sustained." Id. at 86-87, 101 P.3d
 
at 1154-1155.
 Medical evidence received into evidence at the bench
 
trial included Gilding's medical records from Straub Clinic and
 
Hospital (Straub) dating back to 1964. The records indicated
 
Gilding was admitted into Straub for cervical surgery on
 
April 9, 2008 and was discharged on April 11, 2008. Those
 
records did not include a record of bills and charges for any of
 
the medical services rendered. Evidence offered for
 
identification included the Independent Medical
 
Examination/Permanent Partial Impairment Rating report (IME),
 
which summarized Gilding's medical reports.
 
Also admitted into evidence were liens from ACS 
Healthcare Solutions (ACS), the agency contracted by the State of 
Hawai'i Department of Human Services (DHS) to administer DHS's 
third-party liability casualty cases. The liens established DHS's right to recover from a third party "a sum of money equal 
to that paid . . . by DHS, for any and all hospital, medical, and 
similar expenses necessitated by said accident or incident."
2 
Included with the August 11, 2009 and December 27, 2010
 
liens were "itemized medical recap" sheets listing the medical
 
services for Gilding paid by DHS. The January 27, 2011 amended
 
2
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 346-37 provides, in pertinent part:
 
§346-37 Recovery of payments and costs of medical
assistance.
 
. . . .
 
(c) If [DHS] has provided medical assistance . . . to a
person who was injured . . . under circumstances creating a tort
or other liability or payment obligation against a third person,
[DHS] shall have a right to recover from the third person an
amount not to exceed the full amount of the costs of medical
 assistance . . . furnished or to be furnished by [DHS].
 
. . . .
 
(o) In third-party liability situations, the medical
assistance program of [DHS] shall be fully reimbursed before the
claimant receives any money from the settlement or award.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
lien (Amended Lien) adjusted the "Total Billed Amount" to
 
$100,516.14 and listed DHS's payments as $16,412.88.
 
Even though the deposition of Mark S. Gerber, MD,
 
(Dr. Gerber) was permitted to be used at trial in lieu of
 
testimony, circuit court had him testify by phone as to whether
 
the bills listed in the liens were related to the September 15,
 
2006 incident. Dr. Gerber testified the amounts listed in the
 
Amended Lien were reasonable and necessary. On cross-
examination, Dr. Gerber admitted he had not seen any of the
 
itemized bills from the other doctors or Straub and had not
 
compared the charges to those of other outside providers or
 
hospitals. He testified that, based on his experience as a
 
neurosurgeon, he had "a pretty good idea" what the charges were
 
for and the amounts seemed "logical" to him.
 
Dr. Gerber specifically testified that he knew the
 
following physicians who were listed on the Amended Lien and that
 
their charges were "reasonable and necessary": James Pearce, MD,
 
Carlos Lam, MD, Virgil Jobe, MD, Robert May, MD, Carolyn Shiraki,
 
MD, and Debra Gadbois, CRNA.
 
Although the Amended Lien did not provide details as to
 
the purpose of each billed service, the previous liens captured
 
that information. For example, even though neither party asked
 
if Dr. Gerber knew Amy Martin, whose charge was listed on the
 
Amended Lien, the earlier August 8, 2009, lien indicated her
 
charge was related to an MRI on Gilding's spine.
 
Alexander Yim (Yim), a supervisor with ACS, testified
 
regarding the liens. Yim explained that when the bills for
 
medical services come in, his staff verifies the amounts paid but
 
does not make any determination about reasonableness.
 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 303(c)(16)
 
establishes that "[a] bill for goods or services that has been
 
paid is presumed to be authentic and to embody fair and
 
reasonable charges for the itemized goods or services." The
 
liens entered into evidence provided an "itemized medical recap"
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sheet listing the providers, a very brief description of the
 
services rendered, and an indication that DHS paid the bills. 
The burden shifted to SOH to show that the bills were not
 
authentic, fair, or reasonable. Because SOH failed to counter
 
Gilding's evidence that the bills were reasonable and necessary,
 
we conclude there was substantial evidence to support circuit
 
court's finding "that the reasonable value of the medical
 
treatment [Gilding] needed as a result of his injuries amounts to
 
$100,516.00."
 
2.	 Gilding was entitled to special damages in the
full amount of $100,516.
 
SOH contends that if Gilding receives special damages
 
in the full amount of his medical expenses, the SOH will have
 
paid twice--once when DHS paid the discounted amount of
 
$16,412.88 to the providers, and then again when it pays Gilding
 
the full amount of his medical expenses, including the amount DHS
 
already paid. SOH also asserts that receiving the full amount
 
results in a windfall to Gilding.
 
Under the collateral source doctrine, Gilding is 
entitled to special damages for the full amount of his medical 
expenses, even though DHS paid the providers at a deeply 
discounted rate. Sam Teague, Ltd. v. Hawai'i Civil Rights Com'n, 
89 Hawai' i 269, 281, 971 P.2d 1104, 1116 (1999) (internal 
quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted) ("Under the 
collateral source rule, a tortfeasor is not entitled to have its 
liability reduced by benefits received by the plaintiff from a 
source wholly independent of and collateral to the tortfeasor.") 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has expressly ruled "that the 
collateral source rule applies to prevent the reduction of a 
plaintiff's award of damages to the discounted amount paid by 
Medicare/Medicaid." Bynum, 106 Hawai' i at 89, 101 P.3d at 1157. 
Here, Gilding was insured under DHS's Medicaid program, known as Med-QUEST. Under the collateral source rule, Gilding is entitled 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to the reasonable value of the medical services as determined by 
standard (and not discounted) rates. Bynum, 106 Hawai' i at 
89-90, 101 P.3d at 1157-58. 
When Gilding enrolled in Med-QUEST, he signed an
 
agreement to reimburse DHS the amount paid on his behalf by the
 medical assistance program from any judgment proceeds. Thus, DHS
 
will be able to recoup its payments through its lien against
 
Gilding. There will be no double payment by DHS nor a windfall
 
to Gilding. 
B.	 Circuit court correctly concluded there was no
basis for an apportionment of damages for
Gilding's injuries.
 
SOH contends circuit court erred in not apportioning 
damages to Gilding's pre-existing condition. SOH argues that 
Hawai'i case law, specifically Montalvo v. Lapez, 77 Hawai' i 282, 
884 P.2d 345 (1994), supports its contention that where there is a pre-existing condition but apportionment cannot be determined, 
the court must apportion equally. 
On the other hand, Gilding contends Montalvo stands for
 
the proposition that where trauma aggravates a pre-existing
 
condition, a defendant whose act of negligence caused the trauma
 
is responsible for the entire damage.
 
As explained by the Hawai' i Supreme Court, a defendant 
is not responsible for a plaintiff's pre-existing condition but 
may be held responsible for aggravating the condition. Montalvo, 
77 Hawai' i at 299 n.16, 884 P.2d at 362 n.16. 
Generally, a defendant is liable in damages to a
plaintiff for all injuries legally caused by the defendant's
negligence. However, it is well settled that a tortfeasor
is liable not only for damages resulting from direct and
unique injuries inflicted on the victim, but also for
damages resulting from the aggravation of the victim's
pre-existing disease, condition, or predisposition to
injury. Such "predisposition to injury" or other special
sensitivity is often involved in the context of the
so-called "thin skull" or "eggshell skull" plaintiff.
 
Montalvo, 77 Hawai' i at 294, 884 P.2d at 357 (internal quotation 
marks, citations, and brackets omitted). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
If the pre-existing condition is "dormant or latent" at 
the time of the accident, then the defendant is liable for all 
the damages caused by the accident. Montalvo, 77 Hawai' i at 300, 
884 P.2d at 363. Only when the pre-existing condition is not dormant or latent are damages apportioned between the pre­
existing condition and the injuries from the accident. Id. 
Under that scenario, if a jury or court is unable to apportion, the damages must be divided evenly between the pre-existing 
condition and the accident. Id. 
In the instant case, Gilding testified he was not
 
exhibiting any neck or back pain prior to the fall from the van.
 
He acknowledged that prior to the accident, he had visited the
 
infirmary, claiming he was in pain from a neck injury three to
 
four months previously. On the stand, he admitted that the claim
 
of injury had been false and was used as a ploy to get an
 
additional pillow. Circuit court found Gilding to be a credible
 
witness.
 
Stephen L. Demeter, MD, (Dr. Demeter) testified that
 
Gilding had a pre-existing condition, specifically
 
"[d]egenerative disease of the cervical spine." Acknowledging
 
the trauma to Gilding's cervical cord as a result of the
 
accident, Dr. Demeter opined in the IME that 
[b]ut for that fall, [Gilding] would not have sustained the
neurological insult. However, without the degenerative
disease of the cervical spine, it is unlikely that the
incident occurring on 9/15/06 would have caused the
neurological compromise. Accordingly, [Gilding's]
condition, result of the fall on 9/15/06, is attributed both
to his pre-existent cervical degenerative changes as well as
to the effects of that fall.
 
At trial, Dr. Demeter testified that "without the
 
alleged trauma, [Gilding] may or may not have had these problems
 
develop with time. Without the pre-existing degenerative disease
 
of the cervical spine, the trauma would've been insufficient to
 
cause his problems." Dr. Demeter concluded that the pre-existing
 
condition, combined with the trauma from the fall, "caused
 
[Gilding] to have his condition."
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Dr. Demeter explained that because there was no
 
scientific basis for making an apportionment, he relied on past
 
court decisions that "said when there is no scientific basis, you
 
just apportion it equally[.]" Therefore, he apportioned damages
 
equally--50% to the pre-existing condition and 50% to the fall
 
from the van.
 
On cross-examination, Dr. Demeter testified that
 
"eggshell plaintiff" was an accurate description of Gilding. He
 
also testified that nothing in the medical records indicated any
 
prior symptoms like those Gilding experienced after the accident. 
According to the testimony of Gilding and Dr. Demeter,
 
any pre-existing degenerative disease of the cervical spine was
 
dormant or latent when Gilding fell as he stepped out of the van. 
Dr. Demeter indicated that but for the fall, Gilding would not
 
have sustained his resulting injury. The "thin skull" or
 
"eggshell plaintiff" doctrine makes SOH liable for damages for
 
the aggravation of Gilding's pre-existing but dormant condition. 
Because SOH is liable for all damages legally caused by Gilding's
 
September 15, 2006 accident, circuit court did not err when it
 
did not apportion damages.
 
C.	 Circuit court's finding of sole liability in favor
of Gilding was not against the weight of the
evidence.
 
SOH contends circuit court erred in finding Gilding to
 
be a credible witness. SOH also argues that the Federal
 
government should have been apportioned a share of any liability
 
because Federal guards assisted in the disembarkment of inmates
 
from the van. SOH also suggests Gilding bore a share of
 
liability for negligently exiting the van.
 
1.	 We decline to disturb circuit court's finding that
Gilding was a credible witness.
 
"[T]he credibility of witnesses and the weight to be
 
given their testimony are within the province of the trier of
 
fact and, generally, will not be disturbed on appeal." Tamashiro
 
v. Control Specialist, Inc., 97 Hawai' i 86, 92, 34 P.3d 16, 22 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(2001). "It is not the function of appellate courts to 
second-guess the trier of fact where there is substantial 
evidence in the record to support its conclusion." Stanford Carr 
Development Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111 Hawai' i 286, 296-297, 
141 P.3d 459, 469-470 (2006) (quoting In re Estate of Herbert, 90 
Hawai'i 443, 454, 979 P.2d 39, 50 (1999)). Because there was 
substantial evidence in the record to support circuit court's determination that Gilding was credible, we do not disturb 
circuit court's finding. 
2.	 Circuit court did not err when it failed to
 
apportion any liability to the Federal government
for Gilding's injury.
 
SOH argues that liability should have been apportioned
 
between SOH and the Federal government because, according to
 
Gilding's testimony, a Federal guard had helped inmates out of
 
the van. SOH misrepresents the testimony. 
Ronald Moreno, another inmate at the time of the
 
incident, testified that a SOH guard, not a Federal guard, was
 
standing near the van as inmates exited. Gilding testified that
 
a SOH guard placed a stool on the ground in front of the door for
 
the inmates to step on as they exited the van. Gilding said a
 
Federal guard stood to the left of the van door and two SOH
 
guards stood to the right. Gilding thought the Federal guard was
 
standing closest to the van door. Gilding claimed he had no
 
recollection of anyone helping him out of the van or helping him
 
up after he fell.
 
In Gilding's motion for leave to name Joanne Unutoa as
 
an additional lay witness, he provided a letter from Federal
 
counsel regarding the procedures and practices when FDC staff
 
members receive SOH prisoners. The letter stated: "[T]he FDC
 
staff member does not assist the [SOH] prisoners while they are
 
exiting the [SOH] vehicle as this task is performed by [SOH]
 
employees who operated and/or occupied the [SOH] vehicle carrying
 
the [SOH] prisoners."
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit court did not err in concluding SOH, not the
 
Federal government, breached its duty of care to Gilding by
 
failing to provide reasonable assistance in disembarking from the
 
van. 
3.	 Circuit court did not err in failing to apportion
any liability to Gilding for alleged negligence as
he stepped out of the van.
 
SOH contends Gilding was negligent as he exited the van
 
by not putting his right foot flat on the stool as he stepped
 
down. SOH argues that if Gilding had "put his foot flat on top
 
of the stool, the stool should not have moved."
 
Gilding testified that as he stepped out of the van, he
 
put his right foot on the step and then brought his left foot
 
down next to his right. He explained that it had to be done that
 
way because of the leg shackles. SOH asked Gilding if he stepped
 
with his "whole foot on the whole top of the stool[,]" to which
 
Gilding replied, "I stepped on the stool, yes."
 
SOH argues on appeal that if Gilding had stepped on the
 
stool in the manner he described, "it is difficult to see how the
 
stool could have moved[.]" Therefore, SOH argues, Gilding's
 
story is not credible and circuit court erred in not attributing
 
some liability to Gilding's alleged negligence.
 
Because circuit court found Gilding to be a credible
 
witness, circuit court did not err in concluding there was no
 
basis to apportion any liability to him.
 
IV. GILDING'S CROSS-APPEAL
 
A.	 Circuit court erred when it found insufficient
 
evidence to support an award of future medical
expenses.
 
Gilding contends circuit court erred in finding "there
 
was insufficient evidence presented at trial to support an award
 
of any future medical expenses." Gilding points out that this
 
finding, FOF 37, directly conflicts with FOF 28, which provides:
 
28. Undisputed evidence presented at trial, including
the testimony of [Gilding's] occupational medicine expert
Dr. Demeter, shows that [Gilding] will require further
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
medical care and medication for his pain and nerve symptoms
for the indefinite future, which [Gilding] testified costs
between $250 to $400 a month, and [Gilding] also requires
the use of a hospital bed at the cost of $166 per month.
 
We review a circuit court's FOFs under the clearly 
erroneous standard. Chun, 106 Hawai' i at 430, 106 P.3d at 353. 
A FOF must be supported by substantial evidence. Id. 
Substantial evidence is "credible evidence which is of sufficient 
quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable 
caution to support a conclusion." Leslie, 91 Hawai' i at 399, 984 
P.2d at 1225. On review, the appellate court may take into consideration the uncontradicted evidence contained in the 
record. Molokoa Village Development Co., Ltd., 60 Haw. at 593, 
593 P.2d at 382. FOF not challenged on appeal are binding on the appellate court. Okada Trucking Co., Ltd., 97 Hawai' i at 458, 40 
P.3d at 81. 
"[T]o permit an award for future medical . . . expenses,"
 
a plaintiff must provide sufficient evidence to show the medical
 expenses are necessary and the charges reasonable. Condron v.
 
Harl, 46 Haw. 66, 76, 374 P.2d 613, 619 (1962). Upon such a
 showing, a plaintiff may recover the reasonable value of future
 
medical services. Kometani v. Heath, 50 Haw. 89, 95, 431 P.2d 
931, 936 (1967).
 
Dr. Demeter testified that Gilding would need further
 
care for "analgesic therapy for his pain, physical therapy, work
 hardening program for his general condition to be able to get back
 
to work." Gilding testified he took medications costing between
 
$250 and $400 per month. Gilding also testified he used a hospital
 
bed. The rental charge of $166.39/month for the bed was reflected
 
in the Amended Lien.
 
The circuit court found Gilding to be a credible witness. 
FOF 28, which was not challenged on appeal, found that undisputed
 
evidence was presented showing that Gilding would need further
 
medical care and medication.
 
Based on the evidence presented and the uncontested
 
findings in FOF 28, we conclude circuit court erred in finding
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
there was insufficient evidence to support an award of future
 
medical expenses. 
B.	 Circuit court did not err when it found that Dr.
 
Male's testimony was not credible. 
Gilding appears to argue that because Dr. Male was 
qualified as an expert and provided uncontroverted testimony 
regarding Gilding's economic losses, circuit court erred in finding 
his testimony not credible. However, this is not the standard by 
which the credibility of a witness is reviewed by an appellate 
court. As previously noted, "the credibility of witnesses and the 
weight to be given their testimony are within the province of the 
trier of fact and, generally, will not be disturbed on appeal." 
Tamashiro v. Control Specialist, Inc., 97 Hawai' i 86, 92, 34 P.3d 
16, 22 (2001). We do not disturb circuit court's finding that Dr. Male was not credible. 
C.	 Circuit court did not err in finding insufficient
evidence to support an award for loss of Gilding's
past and future earning capacity and loss of past
and future household services.
 
Dr. Male testified as an expert witness on behalf of
 
Gilding regarding economic losses incurred by Gilding as a result
 
of his injuries. The circuit court did not find Dr. Male's
 
testimony credible. With no other witnesses testifying as to
 
economic losses, the circuit court did not err in finding
 
insufficient evidence to support an award of past and future
 
earning capacity damages or past and future household services
 
damages.
 
D.	 Circuit court erred in entering judgment in favor of
Gilding for $300,516.
 
Gilding contends COL 8, which awarded Gilding $300,516, 
is wrong. On cross-appeal, Gilding fails to argue this point of 
error and thus, this point is waived, other than as it is raised 
and addressed in Gilding's other points of error. Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). As previously stated, circuit court erred when 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
it found insufficient evidence to support an award for future
 
medical expenses. To this extent, circuit court erred in entering
 
judgment in favor of Gilding for only $300,516. 
V. CONCLUSION
 
We remand this case to the Circuit Court of the First
 
Circuit for further proceedings to determine the amount of special
 
damages for Gilding's future medical expenses. In all other
 
respects, the Judgment entered March 9, 2011, in the Circuit Court
 
of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 29, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Marie Manuele Gavigan
Deputy Attorney Generalfor Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee. 
Chief Judge 
Eric A. Seitz Della A. Belatti Ronald N.W. Kim for Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
15
 