NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NOS. CAAP-20-0000078 AND CAAP-20-0000079 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
CAAP-20-0000078 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
WILLIAM M. GILROY, also known as William of the Family Gilroy,
William Michael Gilroy, Jr., 
William Michael Gilroy, W.M. Gilroy, 
and William Michael Gilroy, Jr., Defendant-Appellee 
AND 
CAAP-20-0000079 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, and PAUL R. MOW,
Real Party-in-Interest-Appellant, v. WILLIAM M. GILROY,
also known as William of the Family Gilroy, William Michael
Gilroy, Jr., William Michael Gilroy, W.M. Gilroy, and
William Michael Gilroy, Jr., Defendant-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 3CPC-18-000893) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
In this consolidated appeal, Plaintiff-Appellant State 
of Hawai# i (
State) and Real Party in Interest-Appellant Deputy 
Attorney General Paul R. Mow (Mow) (collectively Appellants) 
appeal from the "Order Dismissing Charges Pursuant to Hawai# i 
[sic] Revised Statutes § 704-406 and Releasing Defendant From the 
Custody of the Director of Health" filed on January 30, 2020 and the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Imposing Rule 15 [Hawai# i Rules of the Circuit Courts] Sanctions Against 1
1  Mow filed a Notice of Appeal on February 18, 2020 in CAAP-20-0000079
as the Real Party in Interest with respect to the order imposing sanctions. 
This court consolidated the appeals under CAAP-20-0000078.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Mow]" (Sanction Order) filed on May 22, 2019, in the Circuit 
Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).2 
On appeal, Appellants contend that the Circuit Court: 
(1) erred by setting and holding a hearing on a motion to stay 
filed by pro se Defendant-Appellee William M. Gilroy (Gilroy) 
while the proceedings were suspended; (2) erred in finding Mow violated Rules of the Circuit Courts of the State of Hawai# i 
(RCCSH) Rule 15(b);  (3) abused its discretion by sanctioning Mow 
$500; (4) violated Mow's due process rights by increasing the sanction from four hours of community service to $500 after Mow exercised his right to a hearing; and (5) erred in making Findings of Fact (FOFs) 15, 29, 50, 66, and 67. 43
For the reasons set forth below, we vacate the Sanction 
Order and remand for further proceedings. 
I. Background 
On November 21, 2018, Gilroy was charged with 29 counts 
of Unauthorized Practice of Law, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 605-14, 605-15, 605-17, and 702-204. 
On January 17, 2019, Gilroy failed to appear for his 
arraignment and plea and the Circuit Court entered a bench warrant for his arrest.
5   
During a hearing on March 22, 2019, the State argued 
there was more than sufficient reason to doubt Gilroy's fitness to proceed and moved the Circuit Court for an examination 
2  The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided. 
3  On August 20, 2020, the appellate clerk filed a notice of default of
the answering brief, informing Gilroy that the time for filing his answering
brief expired.  Although Gilroy sought relief from default and was given theopportunity to file an answering brief, Gilroy again failed to file a timelyanswering brief and the appellate clerk filed a second notice of default ofthe answering brief. 
4  RCCSH Rule 15(b) provides: 
(b) Effect of failure to appear. An attorney who,
without just cause, fails to appear when his case is beforethe court on a call or motion or on pre trial or trial, orunjustifiably fails to prepare for a presentation to thecourt necessitating a continuance, may be subject to suchdiscipline as the court deems appropriate. 
5  It appears that although Gilroy was physically present for the
arraignment and plea, he refused to state his name for the record.  
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pursuant to HRS § 704-404 (Supp. 2016) to determine whether 
Gilroy was fit to proceed.  The Circuit Court granted the State's request for an examination, set a hearing for May 30, 2019, and entered an "Order Suspending Proceedings, for Examination of [Gilroy] Under HRS Chapter 704 and for Transport" (Order 
Suspending Proceedings). 
On March 28, 2019, Gilroy filed a "Motion to Stay 
Execution of '[Order Suspending Proceedings]' Pending Appeal" 
(Motion to Stay), which contained a handwritten notation that a 
hearing was set for April 18, 2019 at 11:00 a.m.  In this Motion 
to Stay, Gilroy sought, inter alia,
6 to stay the Order Suspending 
Proceedings and his fitness examination pending an appeal to this court.
7 
On April 2, 2019, Gilroy filed seven documents, six of 
which were notices of counterclaim for alleged damages.  These six documents did not indicate a hearing date.  The last document Gilroy filed on April 2, 2019 was a "Notice for 'Telephonic Conference Call'" in which Gilroy appears to cite Hawai# i Rules 
of Civil Procedure (HRCP
) Rule 16.1(c)(1)8 to notify the State of 
his appearance by telephone and demands the Circuit Court allow him to appear by telephone for the April 18, 2019 hearing. 
On April 10, 2019, Gilroy filed three additional 
documents which indicate a hearing on April 18, 2019 at 11:00 a.m. (April 10, 2019 documents).
9 
6  We recognize that Gilroy's submissions are often difficult to discern
and contain a fair amount of extraneous material. 
7  On March 28, 2019, Gilroy had also filed a notice of appeal from the
Order Suspending Proceedings, which created appellate case no. CAAP-19-
0000421.  Subsequently, on September 26, 2019, this court dismissed CAAP-19-0000421 for lack of appellate jurisdiction. 
8  Gilroy mistakenly cites to HRCP Rules although this case involves
criminal charges against Gilroy. 
9  The April 10, 2019 documents are Gilroy's "Affidavit of Notice of 
Fraud by Public Servants at Court of March 22, 2019 A.D. " "Notice of Failure 
of Competency of Deputy [Attorney General] to Provide Postage for Service of
Instruments " and "Counts 1-29 Jury Instructions ". 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Thus, of the eleven documents filed by Gilroy between 
March 28, 2019 and April 10, 2019, five appear to indicate a 
hearing on April 18, 2019. 
During the April 18, 2019 hearing, Gilroy appeared in 
person.  Mow appeared by telephone and stated, "Your Honor, if we're proceeding with the motion today I do believe I need to be present.  My understanding was today was a status.  I was not aware that it was a motion."  The Circuit Court questioned Mow as follows: 
THE COURT:  How would you -- how did you think that this is
a motion to stay -- ah, status when --  
Mr. Gilroy, you filed your motion on March 28, 2019; 
is that correct?  
MR. GILROY:  Yes.  Thank you.  THE COURT:  And then in your motion you have a Notice of
Motion on page 24 of 24?  
MR. GILROY:  Yes.  Thank you.  MR. MOW:  Two things, Your Honor.  First of all, I believe 
proceedings are suspended.  Second -- 
THE COURT:  Wait.  Wait, wait.  MR. MOW:  -- I attempted to call your office --  THE COURT:  Wait.  Hey, wait. 
So how did you think that you could appear by phone
today? What notice or proof -- wait.  What proof do you have
that this was a status hearing and not a motion filed by Mr.Gilroy?  
MR. MOW:  Your Honor, my recollection of the documents that
was filed by Mr. Gilroy -- actually had said somewhere thatit was in reference to a status by phone.  
THE COURT:  Where is that?  Where is that in the motion?  MR. MOW:  I don't have the doc -- I don't have the document 
in front of me, Your Honor.  My apologies.  We're in the process of moving. 
THE COURT:  Oh, so is that an excuse?  MR. MOW:  That's what I -- that's my recollection. It's not
an excuse.  
THE COURT:  I know but you calling in for one hearing that
you don't even have the document in front of you?  
MR. MOW:  No, Your Honor, I do not.  We're in the process of 
a move and --  
THE COURT:  That's not one excuse.  If you calling in for
one hearing and you telling me you don't have the documentin front of me -- in front of you, and you're makingrepresentation that there's a reference to stay.  
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
MR. MOW:  Your Honor, what happened was at the time that we
received the motion, I looked at the -- at whatever it said. And at that time I made a call to your office just toconfirm it.  I also looked with JEFs and I did not see a motion set for hearing on the calendar.  So my understanding was that it was a status.  
THE COURT:  Well you're wrong.  
Gilroy requested sanctions against Mow for failure to 
appear and failure to respond to his Motion to Stay. 
The Circuit Court continued the hearing on Gilroy's 
Motion to Stay  until May 10, 2019 at 9:00 a.m.  Further, at the 
April 18, 2019 hearing, the Circuit Court addressed the 
possibility of sanctions against Mow, stating: 
[THE COURT:]  Mr. Mow, we're also going to have a rule --
Circuit Court Rule 15 hearing if you want as to the Courthaving to continue this matter because, first of all, youdidn't appear in person, you didn't get permission from theCourt to appear by phone, and you acknowledge that you havereceipt of Mr. Gilroy's motion yet you cannot -- you say youdon't have the motion in front you.  As an experiencedattorney I find that hard to believe that you think thatthis is a status hearing, yet you cannot point out in the pleadings where this Court said it was a status.  And even if a party said it's a status, unless you get permission from the Court or it's filed as a status, you cannot justassume that it's a status and then decide that you not goingfly in from Honolulu, and call in on the day of the hearing. 
So we can have a Rule 15 as to why the Court have to
continue this hearing and wasting the Court's time on thecalendar today.  
MR. MOW:  Well, Your Honor, as I stated before, I did make
attempts to call your office – 
THE COURT:  I don't care if you made attempts to call the
office, it's not one excuse.  Cause we only get one clerkand one bailiff and we were in jury trial, okay.  
MR. MOW:  I understand, Your Honor.  You got to understand 
too that --  
THE COURT:  No.  No, you got to understand, if you want a
Rule 15 hearing we can set it for the same day.  
MR. MOW:  I'm just putting on my position for the record,
Your Honor.  The other part is of course --  
THE COURT:  It's a yes or no question.  MR. MOW:  -- the hearing set for today, there is no hearing
set for today per JEFs.  
THE COURT:  Well maybe that's what you want to use for your 
Rule 15.  So we'll set the Rule 15 hearing.  I'm assuming you want a Rule 15 hearing?  
MR. MOW:  I don't wish a Rule 15 hearing, Your Honor.  I'm 
asking just for the Court's consideration basically.  We've attempted to respond to everything that Mr. Gilroy has filed 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in the past.  We have a good record of doing that.  We 
certainly had no intention of not filing a response to it ifwe believed that there was a hearing set for today.  If there was, if it was our mistake and our misunderstandingthat we didn't show up, I apologize for that of course.  But there's never been an attempt by the State to not appear. 
THE COURT:  Page 24 of the motion filed on March 28, 2019,
says Notice of Motion and Certificate of Service.  This document was also electronically filed.  So I find it hard to believe that you even read this whole motion; you wouldhave seen that.  And on page 1 of 24, hearing, handwrittenApril 18, 11 a.m., 2019.  
Right, Mr. Gilroy?  
MR. GILROy [sic]:  That's correct.  Thank you. 
THE COURT:  So you can either volunteer to do four hours of
community service or we can have a Rule 15 hearing.  Up to you.  What you want to do, Mr. Mow?  
MR. MOW:  Your Honor, I prefer to just have a continuance. 
But, you know, I'm totally expecting to do this motion, as Isaid, I put on the record my position, Your Honor.  
THE COURT:  Okay.  So we'll set the Rule 15 hearing because
I don't hear you volunteering to do four hours of communityservice.  So we'll have the Rule 15 hearing.  I already stated the basis.  And we'll hear that at the same time on 9:00 on May 10th, at 2019 [sic].  
(Emphases added). 
Subsequently, during the May 10, 2019 hearing, the 
Circuit Court denied Gilroy's Motion to Stay before proceeding 
with the RCCSH Rule 15 hearing against Mow.  Mow testified he received emails through the Judiciary Electronic Filing System (JEFS) electronic notification when any motions were filed by 
Gilroy.  Sometime during the week of April 1, 2019, Mow reviewed 
Gilroy's Motion to Stay but could not remember the precise day. Mow testified that sometime in the afternoon on April 2, 2019, he saw emails received through the JEFS electronic notification that Gilroy filed additional motions. 
Mow then went into JEFS to download and review the 
motions and saw that Gilroy's Notice for Telephonic Conference Call had a date set for April 18, 2019.  Mow testified he called the Circuit Court to confirm that there "was in fact a hearing that was approved by the Court, and whether because the case was under suspension at that time whether we could do it telephonically."  Mow was unable to reach anyone at the Circuit Court and left a voice mail message stating he received a notice 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
about the April 18 hearing, was confused because the proceedings 
had been suspended pursuant to the Order Suspending Proceedings, and that he was not expecting further motions pending the completion of the examination. 
Mow did not receive a call back and did not make any 
other attempts to contact the Circuit Court for clarification. Mow also testified that on April 2, there was nothing on the events section of JEFS that a hearing was set for April 18. However, on the day of the hearing, Mow saw that there was a notation on JEFS for the April 18 hearing. 
Mow testified he did not intend to delay the 
proceedings and that if he had received confirmation from the Circuit Court that his presence in Kona was required, he would have flown in from Honolulu. 
Mow further testified that in his twenty-two years as 
an attorney, he had never seen a hearing set while proceedings were suspended.  Additionally, because Gilroy did not have an attorney as a pro se defendant, Mow was unable to contact an attorney about the filing and was unable to obtain confirmation of the hearing.  Mow also stated he had issues trusting the hearing date provided by Gilroy because he was pro se and was facing a fitness hearing. 
The Circuit Court then questioned Mow's preparation for 
the hearing as follows: 
Q.  Okay.  And at the hearing on April 18, 2019, you called
on the day of the hearing and on the record when yourepresented to this Court -- and it's all in the minutes.  I going take notice of my own files and records, I'll justgive you an opportunity to respond.  You at that time said you thought it was a status hearing.  And when I asked you,"Where does it say that in the motion," you represented onthe April 18th, 2019, hearing that you didn't have themotion with you.  
A.  That is correct.  Q.  So wouldn't that be another reason we had to continue 
the case, because you didn't even have the motion, even ifyou thought it was a status hearing, to address it?  
A.  Yeah, well specifically to that -- and, Your Honor, at
the time when you had asked me whether I had the motion infront of me, I could not answer affirmatively to that.  The reason is it was in a box, basically.  We were moving ouroffices from 333 Queen Street to 707 Richards.  I literallywas working in an office that didn't have a desk or a phone. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I called this Court on my own cell phone.  I literally at 
that point --  
Q.  Well that was a reason -- another reason the Court had 
to continue the hearing because you didn't even have yourmotion with you.  
A.  Again, I didn't believe that it was going forward as a
hearing.  And if that's a mistaken belief --  
Q.  Anything else you -- I don't know an attorney working 20
years, call the court on one status -- think it's a statushearing and don't even have the motion in front of them.  So when the Court addressed them questions, the response is, "Idon't have my motion with me, I'm moving.  We're in the process of moving."  Is that -- that's not being prepared. Period.  
A.  Again, in these particular circumstances, if proceedings
are suspended and it doesn't fit the two grounds, I do notunderstand how a hearing can proceed.  
Q.  But this is an opportunity at a hearing, as you know,
for parties to raise issues.  Whether or not you agree withthem raising the issues, the fact is that the parties havean opportunity to have the Court address that.  So you'renot the decision-maker in that part as whether or not youthink the hearing should go forward or not.  That's all I hearing from you.  And even when you call in, all you doingis saying, "I don't have the motion."  
A.  Well again, I did point out that the hearing was -- I
mean, the proceedings are suspended.  I never heard -- 
Q.  We're not even -- we not even asking you about the
substance of the motions.  We just talking about theopportunity or vehicle or forum for parties to addressmatters before the Court.  
A.  Well I'm not going to argue on that point. I can see
your point. 
Q.  Well then don't keep bringing it up.  Anything else you 
want to tell me?  
A.  No.  
Mow further clarified that he did not have the motion 
in front of him for the April 18 hearing because he normally 
would go onto JEFS to access the motion if needed.  However, Mow experienced connectivity issues and could not access the motion. 
The Circuit Court concluded, 
[THE COURT:]  Regarding the motion filed by Mr. Gilroy on
March 28, 2019, Mr. Mow admits that he did receive thatmotion or his office received the motion on March 28, 2019. The Court will find under Rule 15 of the Rules of Circuit Court that his calling in for the hearing, not filing anopposition, representing that he believed this was a statushearing, and not having the motion in front of him so thathe could point out to the Court why he thought it was astatus hearing; Court will find was -- which caused thecontinuance to today.  And he was -- that he unjustifiable 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[sic] failed to prepare for presentation to the Court on
April 18th, 2019.
What would you like to say, if anything, before I
sanction you? 
MR. MOW:  Your Honor, no, I don't.  I think I've said 
everything I wanted to say.  Thank you.  
THE COURT:  Court impose a $500 fine.  
You can -- Counsel, you can prepare the order.  
Anything further? 
[Mow's counsel]:  Nothing, Your Honor.    
II. Discussion 
A. The Circuit Court Did Not Err By Having a Hearingon Gilroy's Motion to Stay 
Appellants contend that the Circuit Court erred in 
holding a hearing while the proceedings were suspended.  In 
support of this contention, Appellants argue that in Mow's twenty-two years as an attorney, he never encountered a situation where the court scheduled a hearing on a motion while the proceedings were stayed pursuant to HRS § 704-404(1).  Appellants assert that given Gilroy's status as a pro se defendant and where Gilroy's fitness to proceed was an issue, Mow believed that the hearing could not be held.  Appellants also argue Gilroy's Motion to Stay did not raise issues of bail or issues related to bond under HRS Chapter 804, and thus did not fall within the exceptions provided in HRS § 704-404(1). 
Appellants' arguments are apparently based on their 
interpretation of HRS § 704-404(1) and therefore we review this issue de novo.  State v. Castillon, 144 Hawai# i 406, 411, 443 
P.3d 98, 103 (2019) ("Statutory interpretation is a question of law reviewable de novo."). 
The proceedings were suspended pursuant to HRS § 704-
404(1) which provides: 
Whenever there is reason to doubt the defendant's fitness to 
proceed, the court may immediately suspend all furtherproceedings in the prosecution; provided that for anydefendant not subject to an order of commitment to ahospital for the purpose of the examination, neither theright to bail nor proceedings pursuant to chapter 804 shallbe suspended. If a trial jury has been empanelled, it shallbe discharged or retained at the discretion of the court.The discharge of the trial jury shall not be a bar tofurther prosecution.
(Emphasis added). 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Although Appellants argue that the April 18, 2019 
hearing could not be scheduled after the proceedings were 
suspended pursuant to HRS § 704-404(1), "it is well-settled that courts have inherent equity, supervisory, and administrative powers as well as inherent power to control the litigation process before them."  Enos v. Pac. Transfer & Warehouse, Inc., 79 Hawai# i 452, 457, 903 P.2d 1273, 1278 (1995).  The language in 
HRS § 704-404(1) does not limit the court's authority to control the litigation process.  Additionally, regardless of the merits or demerits of Gilroy's Motion to Stay or the issues raised regarding Gilroy's fitness to proceed, Appellants assert an incorrect reading of HRS § 704-404(1) in which they contend essentially that the Circuit Court is precluded from holding further hearings related to the Order Staying Proceedings itself, such as a motion for reconsideration or, as in this case, a motion to stay the Order Staying Proceedings. 
The Circuit Court did not err by scheduling and holding 
a hearing on April 18, 2019 related to Gilroy's Motion to Stay.
B. The Circuit Court Erred By Proposing a Sanction Without
a Hearing, or in the Alternative, to Set an RCCSH Rule15(b) Hearing 
Appellants argue that Mow did not violate RCCSH Rule 
15(b) and that the Circuit Court abused its discretion by 
imposing a $500 fine on Mow.  The Appellants also challenge the Circuit Court's FOFs 15, 29, 50, 66, and 67, asserting that these findings misstate the evidence.
10 
10  The challenged FOFs state: 
15. At a Status Conference scheduled by the Court and
heard on March 22, 2019, Mr. Mow appeared in person. (Exhibit 2 - Doc 113)[.] 
. . . . 
29. The Court asked him again if he wanted to do fourhours of community service of if he wanted a Rule 15hearing.  It was up to him. Mr. Mow replied he's justexpecting a continuance. 
. . . . 
(continued...) 
10 10(...continued)NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We do not reach those issues because we conclude the 
RCCSH Rule 15(b) hearing before the Circuit Court was tainted by 
the Circuit Court's initial proposition that Mow "voluntarily" undertake community service for his purported misdeeds, or in the alternative, the court would set an RCCSH Rule 15(b) hearing. 
Appellants argue that the Circuit Court violated Mow's 
due process rights by increasing the sanction from four hours of community service to $500 after Mow invoked his due process right to a hearing.  During the April 18, 2019 hearing, the Circuit Court stated: "So you can either volunteer to do four hours of community service or we can have a Rule 15 hearing.  Up to you. What you want to do, Mr. Mow?"  Appellants argue that what the Circuit Court offered was essentially a sentencing inclination. We reject that analogy to a criminal sentence, but rather conclude the Circuit Court undermined Mow's due process rights by suggesting Mow could accept a sanction without a hearing, or in the alternative, have a hearing on the alleged RCCSH Rule 15(b) violation. 
We review questions regarding procedural due process de 
novo, under the right or wrong standard.  State v. Adam, 97 Hawai# i 475, 481, 40 P.3d 877, 883 (2002).  Due process requires 
prior notice and an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time 
50. Mr. Mow represented that he thought it was a "status"
hearing and he didn't have the Motion to Stay in frontof him.  The Court asked Mr. Mow even if he thoughtthe hearing was a "status" hearing, his not having theMotion to Stay in from of him at the April 18, 2019hearing was another reason to have to continue thehearing?  Mr. Mow replied "yes" (Exhibit 2 - doc 153)[.] 
. . . . 
66. Based on Mr. Kory Young's testimony, it appears Mr.Mow received notice of the Demand for Constitutional assistance of Counsel filed on March 4, 2019 at 1:53PM. 
67. Although Claimant's First Amended Motion to Dismissfiled 12 minutes later on March 4, 2019 at 2:05 PM(set for hearing on March 12, 2019), Mr. Mow testifiedthat he did not have notice of the motion. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and in a meaningful manner for counsel charged with a violation 
of RCCSH Rule 15.  Id. at 482, 40 P.3d at 884.  In Dubin, this court held: 
With respect to [RCCSH] Rule 15(b), it expressly provides
that the attorney's failure to appear must be "without justcause." Due process requires prior notice and a hearing sothat an attorney charged with a violation of [RCCSH] Rule15(b) may prepare and have an opportunity to show that hisfailure to appear at the appointed time was not "withoutjust cause." 
In re Dubin, 9 Haw.App. 249, 261, 833 P.2d 85, 92 (1992). 
Although the Circuit Court stated Mow would be "volunteering to do four hours of community service[,]" the court's offer of community service was clearly intended to be a sanction without a hearing for Mow's alleged violation of RCCSH Rule 15. 
This case is analogous to Felton v. Dillard Univ., 
No. 03–30926, 2004 WL 2943283 at *1 (5th Cir. Dec. 21, 2004), in which the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals held that a federal district court had abused its discretion by taking under advisement a motion for sanctions against an attorney, while also directing the attorney to perform 100 hours of community service. Unlike here, the counsel in Felton performed the community service.  Id. However, the Fifth Circuit held that the district 
court's method of meting out the sanction was an inherent abuse of judicial discretion.  Id. The Fifth Circuit Court first noted 
that community service was a sanction.  Id. Further, the court 
explained that, "by ordering [counsel] to devote one hundred hours of her time to community service, while inexplicably denying that any sanction had been imposed, and later dismissing the motion for sanctions precisely because the community service had been completed, the district court did not reasonably exercise its sanction power."  Id. The Fifth Circuit concluded 
that the district court erred by making "the question of whether sanctions should be imposed contingent upon whether those very sanctions [i.e. community service] had been completed."  Id.
This case is not exactly like Felton, but similar 
concerns are at issue.  Here, the Circuit Court undermined Mow's due process rights by proposing that Mow "volunteer" for 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
community service (i.e., agree to a sanction without a hearing) 
or in the alternative have an RCCSH Rule 15(b) hearing.  Like Felton, if Mow had agreed to the community service proposed by the Circuit Court, no further action would have been taken on the alleged RCCSH Rule 15(b) violation.  The Circuit Court was wrong to make the hearing on sanctions contingent on whether Mow accepted an offer of sanctions without a hearing.  As recognized in Dubin, Mow had a due process right to a hearing.  Once Mow declined the Circuit Court's proposal of community service without a hearing, the subsequent hearing before the Circuit Court on the alleged RCCSH Rule 15(b) violation was tainted, especially where the Circuit Court's sanction of $500 is quite different from the previously proposed community service and where there is no explanation by the Circuit Court for the difference. 
III. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Circuit 
Court's Sanction Order against Mow and remand the case for another RCCSH Rule 15(b) hearing before a different judge.
11 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 7, 2021. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge Kevin K. Takata, Paul R. Mow,Deputy Attorneys General,for Plaintiff-Appellant(CAAP-20-0000078)and for Real-Party-in-Interest-Appellant(CAAP-20-0000079) 
11  We note, in any event, that the Honorable Melvin H. Fujino has 
retired. 
13 