NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000662
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STEPHEN P. FORMAN, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS PRISONER NO. 12-1-0012)

(CRIMINAL NO. 09-1-0987)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
The instant appeal arises from the arrest and
 
subsequent conviction of Petitioner-Appellant Stephen P. Forman
 
(Forman) for the offense of unauthorized control of propelled
 
vehicle (UCPV) in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 708-836 (Supp. 2013).1 Forman appeals from the April 10, 2013
 
"Order Denying Motion for Post-Conviction Relief Granting New
 
1
 HRS § 708-836 provides, in relevant part:
 
§708-836 Unauthorized control of propelled vehicle. (1) A
person commits the offense of unauthorized control of a propelled
vehicle if the person intentionally or knowingly exerts
unauthorized control over another's propelled vehicle by operating
the vehicle without the owner's consent . . . .
 
. . . .
 
(3) It is an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this
section that the defendant:
 
(a)	 Received authorization to use the vehicle from an
 
agent of the owner where the agent had actual or
apparent authority to authorize such use[.]
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Trial" (Order Denying Forman's Rule 40 Petition) entered in the
 
2
Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).
 
Forman contends the circuit court erred by not finding

 
that he received ineffective assistance of counsel when his trial
 
counsel (Counsel) chose not to interview a witness, Alfredo
 Bandalan (Bandalan).
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On June 25, 2009, Honolulu Police Department officers
Kenneth Creekmur and Nalei Sooto [(Officer Sooto)] stopped
Forman while he was riding a moped on Ala Wai Boulevard.
The moped's license decal was partially missing or had been
removed, which, according to the officers, was not uncommon
for mopeds that had been stolen.
 
Forman identified himself to the officers and told them that
 
he had just rented the moped but did not have the rental
paperwork on him. Officer Sooto determined that the moped
was registered to Adventure on 2 Wheels [(Adventure)]. . . .
 
State v. Forman, 125 Hawai 'i 417, 420, 263 P.3d 127, 130 (App. 
2011). 
The police officers called Adventure and spoke to
 
Adventure employee, Bandalan. Bandalan told the police officers
 
that the moped was taken without permission. After being
 escorted to the location where Forman had been stopped and was
 being detained, Bandalan identified the moped as property of
 Adventure and Forman as a person he knew by the name of "Brazil,"
 and stated that Forman did not have permission from Adventure to
 take the moped. Bandalan reiterated his statements to police in
 a "Honolulu Police Department Statement Form" (252 Statement).
 
In his 252 Statement, Bandalan stated: "Unknown how Brazil was
 
able to possess keys to moped!! Is usually in the lock box,
 which is not damaged." Officer Sooto arrested Forman for UCPV.
 
On June 30, 2009, Respondent-Appellee State of Hawai
'i 
(State) charged Forman with one count of UCPV for "intentionally 
or knowingly" exerting unauthorized control over a moped "without 
the consent of [Adventure], owner of said vehicle[.]" Forman pled not guilty on July 23, 2009. 
At trial, Kim Voight [(Voight)], the owner/president
of [Adventure], verified that the company was the
registered owner of [the moped] and that the company
referred to it as Moped No. 26.
 
2
 The Honorable Dexter Del Rosario presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
According to Voight, Adventure's procedure for renting
a moped required employees to ask the customer for a
driver's license and verify that the customer is
eighteen. Customers must provide a credit card number
for a deposit in case the moped becomes damaged, but
can pay rental fees by cash or credit card. A company
employee informs the customer of the rental fees and
shows the customer a contract. . . . According to
Voight, no one would be allowed to use a moped without
signing a contract.
 
Voight stated that the contracts are generated every
time the company rents a moped and the records are
kept in the regular course of business. The contracts
 are "locked up" after customers sign them and "dropped
in a safe" once the mopeds are returned. After
 Forman's arrest, Voight attempted to locate an
agreement "for a Moped No. 26 on or about June 25th,
2009," but could not find one. Voight reviewed the
contracts "from that time period," and no contracts
were missing from the sequence.
 
. . . .
 Forman was the sole witness for the defense. He
 
claimed that he was operating the moped under apparent
authorization given to him by Bandalan, a company
employee. According to Forman, on June 21, 2009, he
went to the hostel where Adventure is located and Adam
 Weiss, a friend of Forman's girlfriend, introduced him
to Bandalan. Forman testified that Bandalan rented
 him the moped for $40 a day, and he returned to the
hostel four or five times to pay Bandalan, each time
in cash. Forman also said that Bandalan gave him some
paperwork, which he discarded without reading.
 
Voight verified that in June 2009 Bandalan was an
employee of the company. She said Bandalan worked for
 the company for about two months before she fired him
because "he kept bad paperwork" and was late. Prior
 to terminating Bandalan, Voight warned him "that he
needed to keep his paperwork better" but his
performance "got worse."
 
. . . [O]n the first day of trial, the court was
informed that the State would not call Bandalan to testify; he was not in Hawai' i because he had been 
extradited to Kentucky a month earlier to stand trialon a rape charge. In response to Forman's concernsthat Bandalan's absence might raise a "confrontationclause problem," the parties stipulated that theywould make no reference to what Bandalan said to police. 
On January 15, 2010, a jury found Forman guilty on one
count of UCPV.
 
On February 1, 2010, Forman's [Counsel] filed a motion
to withdraw, based on Forman's belief that Counsel was
providing ineffective assistance. At the hearing on
the motion, Forman said that before trial, he had
located Bandalan and Bandalan agreed to testify on his
behalf, that he told Counsel to subpoena Bandalan, but
that Counsel refused, because "that's against my
strategy." The circuit court asked Counsel for a
 response, to which Counsel replied, "I think he has
arguments to be made. I think they should be made in
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
a formal setting. I don't think this would be the
 
appropriate setting for that." The circuit court
 granted the motion to withdraw as counsel.
 
On March 9, 2010, Forman, represented by
newly-appointed counsel Walter Rodby [(Rodby)], fileda motion for new trial on the grounds that Counselprovided ineffective assistance where he "failed toinvestigate, interview and subpoena a critical defensewitness, [Bandalan], which resulted in the substantialimpairment of a meritorious defense[.]" Forman acknowledged that the motion was made after [Hawai' i 
Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP)] Rule 33's ten-daydeadline but argued the deadline should not be rigidlyapplied out of fairness. The State arguedthat . . . Forman's motion should be denied because it was filed . . . 43 days late. 
At the hearing on the motion for new trial, Forman
introduced:
 
•	 An offer of proof that Adam Weiss "would also
be able to corroborate that Mr. Forman was
 making rental payments on that moped to
Bandalan" and that Weiss never talked to a
 public defender;
 
•	 An audio recording of a conversation between
Rodby and Bandalan in which Bandalan said
that he "rented the moped without
documentation, and in fear of losing his job,
he made false statements to the police" and
that he never talked to an attorney
representing "Brazil";
 
•	 Forman's testimony that he found Bandalan and
that Bandalan agreed to make a statement to
the effect that Forman was not aware that the
 moped was stolen; that he asked Counsel to
talk to Bandalan but Counsel said "oh, it's
against my strategy," and to his knowledge
Counsel never talked to Bandalan;
 
•	 A note from Forman to Counsel, made during
trial, which read, "You need to let the jury
know I requested Mr. Bandalan & Adam to be
subpoenaed but it went against your
strategy."
 
Forman also orally moved to dismiss the charges
because he received ineffective assistance of counsel. 
The circuit court denied the motion for new trial as
 untimely and denied the motion to dismiss.
 
After the hearing, the defense filed a sworn
declaration from Bandalan, in which he asserted that
he rented the moped to Forman, Forman paid Bandalan
but Bandalan used the money for his own benefit, and
that Bandalan did not tell Forman that he was using
the rental fees for his own benefit. He also attested
 that Forman's attorney did not contact him about
appearing in court.
 
The circuit court [denied Forman's motion for a new
trial and] sentenced Forman to imprisonment for five
years, subject to a mandatory minimum of one year and
eight months as a repeat offender.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Forman, 125 Hawai 'i at 420-21, 263 P.3d at 130-31 (footnote and 
brackets in original omitted).
 
On August 17, 2010, Forman appealed the circuit court's
August 11, 2010 "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence." 
On
 
September 8, 2011, this court affirmed Forman's "conviction
 
without prejudice to a subsequent petition brought under HRPP
 Rule 40[.]" Forman, 125 Hawai
'i at 427, 263 P.3d at 137. This 
court explained:
 
 
Forman raises a prima facie claim of ineffective
assistance. Because Forman was the sole witness in
 his defense, the jury might have found his testimony
self-serving and not credible. Bandalan's testimony,
if believed, would have corroborated Forman's
testimony and supported his defense that he had the
apparent authorization to use the moped. Thus, the
failure to obtain Bandalan's testimony impaired this
potentially meritorious defense. Bandalan's
 declaration that Counsel did not talk to him before
 trial, however, is insufficient evidence from which to
conclude that Counsel was not diligent in
investigating Forman's apparent-authorization defense. 
. . . [W]here ineffectiveness of counsel is the basis
for a Rule 40 petition, the defendant must serve
written notice of the hearing on counsel whose
assistance has been challenged as ineffective and the
counsel shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
See HRPP Rule 40(f).
 
Id. (emphases added).
 
On February 15, 2012, Forman, proceeding pro se, filed
 
a petition for post-conviction relief pursuant to HRPP Rule 40
 
(Rule 40 Petition). Forman obtained counsel on July 5, 2012, and
 
filed a second Rule 40 Petition on August 13, 2012. The State
 
filed its answer to Forman's Rule 40 Petitions on August 28,
 2012. The circuit court ordered a hearing on Forman's Rule 40
 Petition with respect to the issue of whether Counsel's failure
 to interview or subpoena Bandalan constituted ineffective
 assistance of counsel.
 
At the January 23, 2013 hearing, Counsel testified that
 
a few months before trial and on other occasions leading up to
 trial, Forman informed him that he wanted Bandalan to testify as
 a witness for the defense. Counsel further testified that Forman
 explained that he believed Bandalan would testify that he lied to
 the police officers and in his 252 Statement and led Forman to
 believe he was authorized to use the moped. Counsel also
 testified that Forman informed him that he could find Bandalan,
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
but that Forman did not give him Bandalan's contact information
 
or assist in finding Bandalan.
 
Counsel testified that he visited Adventure and the
 
hostel located above Adventure where Bandalan allegedly lived
 while working for Adventure, but did not find any information on
 Bandalan's whereabouts. Counsel also testified he pulled up
 Bandalan's criminal record and learned that "[h]e had a theft
 conviction"; that he searched for Bandalan in several criminal
 databases "periodically for the months leading up to trial" and 
that "about 10 days before the trial, . . . through a Google
 search[,]" he "discovered that Bandalan had been extradited to
 Kentucky to answer to charges involving rape [of a juvenile.]"
 
Counsel testified that Forman had told him "three
 
slightly different accounts of how he came into possession [of
 the moped]," and that he suggested to Forman that Forman consider
 refraining from testifying and base his decision whether or not
 to testify on how the trial unfolded. Counsel further testified
 that despite his advice, Forman "was at all times adamant that he
 would testify, and essentially there were no circumstances under
 which he would not testify." Counsel stated he told Forman his
 strategy for trial did not include calling Bandalan as a witness
 because it was not in Forman's best interest. Counsel testified
 that on or about the second day of trial, he filed a motion to
 withdraw because Forman indicated he wanted to retain private
 counsel, but that he withdrew the motion on the fourth day of
 trial because Forman changed his mind.
 
Counsel testified to the following reasons for deciding
 
that it was not in Forman's best interest to use Bandalan as a
 defense witness:
 
(1) If Bandalan did not testify, and Forman did
 
testify, judgment of acquittal might result because the State
 would not be able to disprove Forman's version of events;
 
(2) If Bandalan did testify, the best case scenario was
 
that he would testify that he lied to the police officers, lied
 in his 252 Statement, and lied to and stole from Voight;
 
(3) Because Voight appeared very credible and her
 
anticipated testimony would discredit Bandalan's credibility,
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Counsel could argue that if "Bandalan was sophisticated enough to
 
trick [Voight] then why couldn't he also trick [Forman] into
 thinking that he had properly rented the moped"; and
 
(4) If Bandalan testified, the jury would learn of his
 
criminal history, not find him credible, and might find Forman
 guilty by association with Bandalan.
 
Counsel summed up his opinion when he testified that he
 
did not think Bandalan "was going to be a credible witness at
 all" and that Bandalan's "reliability was zero and his
 unpredictability was extremely high."
 
Forman testified that he repeatedly and consistently
 
expressed his belief to Counsel that his defense depended on
 Bandalan testifying, gave Counsel Bandalan's cell phone number,
 and never agreed to Counsel's strategy of not calling Bandalan as
 a witness.
 
The circuit court filed its Order Denying Forman's Rule
 
40 Petition on April 10, 2013.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
"In assessing claims of ineffective assistance of 
counsel, the applicable standard is whether, viewed as a whole, the assistance provided was within the range of competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases." Dan v. State, 76 
Hawai
'i 423, 427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994) (internal quotation 
marks and brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 348, 615 P.2d 101, 104 (1980)). A defendant who claims ineffective assistance of counsel meets his burden of proving that the assistance provided was not within the range of competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases by establishing: 
1) that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting
counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that

such errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal
 
or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious
defense. To satisfy this second prong, the defendant need
only show a possible impairment of a potentially meritorious
defense, not probable impairment or actual prejudice.
 
Wilton v. State, 116 Hawai 'i 106, 110-11, 170 P.3d 357, 361-62 
(2007) (citations, quotation mark, emphasis and brackets 
omitted). 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
Forman argues that the circuit court erred in denying
 
his Rule 40 Petition because Counsel provided ineffective
 
assistance of counsel by not interviewing Bandalan.
 
A primary requirement is that counsel must conduct careful
factual and legal investigations and inquiries with a view
to developing matters of defense in order that he may make
informed decisions on his client's behalf; both at pretrial
proceedings and at trial. 
. . . [W]hether to call witnesses in a criminal trial is
normally a matter within the judgment of counsel and,
accordingly, will rarely be second-guessed by judicial
hindsight. 
. . . [T]he decision not to conduct a pretrial investigation
of prospective defense witnesses cannot be classified as a
tactical decision or trial strategy.
 
State v. Alpaca, 74 Haw. 54, 70-71, 837 P.2d 1298, 1307 (1992)
 
(citation, internal quotation marks, ellipses, and omitted).
 
As in Alpaca, defense counsel chose not to interview a 
prospective defense witness that had clearly exculpatory evidence which would have exonerated Forman if believed. Alpaca, 74 Haw. 
at 69, 837 P.2d at 1306. Counsel's investigation was rendered inadequate by his decision to not even attempt to interview Bandalan once Bandalan was located. Counsel could have tried to interview Bandalan over the phone, but chose not to. "It is only after an adequate inquiry has been made that counsel can make a reasonable decision to call or not to call particular witnesses for tactical reasons." Id. at 71, 837 P.2d at 1307 (quoting 
State v. Templin, 805 P.2d 182, 188 (Utah 1990)). Under the circumstances of this case, Counsel's decision to not interview Bandalan "cannot be classified as a tactical decision or trial strategy" and thus constitutes deficient performance by counsel. Alpaca, 74 Haw. at 71, 837 P.2d at 1307. In addition, Forman met his burden of showing that there is a possibility that Counsel's failure to interview Bandalan substantially impaired Forman's apparent authority defense. Wilton, 116 Hawai
'i at 111, 170 P.3d 
at 362. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The April 10, 2013 "Order Denying Motion for Post-
Conviction Relief Granting New Trial" entered in the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit is vacated and this case is remanded
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
with instructions for the circuit court to grant Forman's Rule 40
 
Petition.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, January 29, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Jefferson S. Willard 
(Urbanc Willard Park & Kim)for Petitioner-Appellant. 
Chief Judge 
Brian R. Vincent Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Respondent-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
9
 