 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000643 06-OCT-2026 08:04 AM Dkt. 59 SO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000643  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAI‘I  
ALEXA JACOBS, Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
ANDREW CABRAL, Defendant-Appellant, and  
CLIFTON PERREIRA;  JEREMY PALLONE-DE LA TORRE;  
NOLAN WADA, Defendants-Appellees,  
and  
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; and  
DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES  1-10, Defendants  
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND  CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 2CCV-23-0000185)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.) 
Defendant -Appellant Andrew Cabral ( Cabral) appeals 
from the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit's1 (circuit court ) 
July 15, 2024 "Order Denying [Cabral's] Motion to Dismiss 
1 The Honorable Michelle L. Drewyer presided.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Complaint, Filed July 6, 2023" ( Order Denying the Motion to 
Dismiss).2 
On July 6, 2023, Plaintiff -Appellee Alexa Jacobs 
(Jacobs) filed a Complaint against Cabral, and Defendants -
Appellees Clifton Perreira, Jeremy Pallone -De La Torre, and 
Nolan Wada (collectively, Defendants -Appellees ). Jacobs' 
Complaint alleged that, on or about February 4, 2022, she had 
suffered personal injuries as a new Maui Police Department ( MPD) 
recruit. The Complaint set forth claims of failure to render 
aid and intentional infliction of emotional distress against 
Cabral and Defendants -Appellees. 
Pursuant to Rule 28 of the Rules of the Circuit Courts 
of the State of Hawaiʻi(RCCH),3 Jacobs' deadline to serve the 
Complaint was January 6 , 2024. Each of the Defendants -Appellees 
2 This is an interlocutory appeal. On April 15, 2025, this court 
temporarily remanded the case to the circuit court to allow for the entry of 
an appropriate amended order granting leave for an interlocutory appeal. On 
April 23, 2025, the circuit court ente red its "Amended Order Granting 
[Cabral's] Motion for Leave to File Interlocutory Appeal from Order Denying 
[Cabral's] Motion to Dismiss Complaint, Filed July 6, 2023, to Sever the 
Claims, and Stay Proceedings with Respect to [Cabral], Filed July 2 5, 2024." 
3 RCCH Rule 28, which governs dismissal for want of service, 
provides, 
A diligent effort to effect service shall be made in all 
actions. An action or claim may be dismissed sua sponte 
with written notice to the parties if no service is made 
within 6 months after the action or claim has been filed . 
Such dismissal may be set aside and the action or claim 
reinstated by order of the court for good cause shown upon 
motion duly filed no t later than ten (10) days from the 
date of the order of dismissal. 
(Bolded emphasis added .) 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  were timely served with the Complaint by August 8, 2023. 
Cabral, who no longer resided in Hawaiʻi, was not served when 
Defendants -Appellees were served, or by January 6 , 2024. 
On April 15, 2024, Jacobs filed an "Ex Parte Motion 
for First Extension of Time to Serve Complaint" ( Ex Parte 
Motion) pursuant to Hawaiʻi Rules of Civil Procedure ( HRCP)  
Rule  6(b),  seeking additional time in which to serve Cabral. 
The circuit court granted Jacobs' motion that same day, 
extending the deadline to serve Cabral to July 6, 2024. 
Defendants-Appellees filed a motion for reconsideration, which 
the circuit court denied.  4
In April 2024, Jacobs located Cabral in Nixa, Missouri 
and served him with the Complaint via certified mail, return 
receipt requested. Jacobs received a return receipt showing 
that Cabral received service of the Complaint on April 22, 2024. 
On May 9, 2024, Cabral filed his Motion to Dismiss. 
The circuit court heard the motion, and ordered the parties to 
file supplemental memoranda on the matter of whether Jacobs' 
4 HRCP Rule 6(b) states, in relevant part, 
When by these rules or by a notice given thereunder or by 
order of court an act is required or allowed to be done at 
or within a specified time, the court for cause shown may 
at any time in its discretion . . . (2) upon motion made 
after the expiration of the specified period permit the act 
to be done where the failure to act was the result of 
excusable neglect [.] 
(Emphasis added.) 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 delayed service of Cabral was due to "excusable neglect." The 
circuit court heard additional argument on July 11, 2024, and 
entered its Order Denying the Motion to Dismiss on July 15, 
2024. 
Cabral sets forth four points of error on appeal, 
contending that the circuit court erred when it: (1) "granted 
[Jacobs'] ex parte motion for extension of time to serve process 
to [Cabral]"; (2) "found good cause sufficient to extend the 
time to serve [Cabral]"; (3) "tolled the statute of limitations 
with respect to the claims against [Cabral] by granting the ex 
parte motion"; and (4 ) "denied [Cabral's] motion to dismiss." 
Upon careful review of the record, briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration 
to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, 
we consolidate and resolve Cabral's contentions of error as 
follows. 
In Cabral's Motion to Dismiss, he sought dismissal of 
Jacobs' Complaint "due to expiration of the statute of 
limitations set forth in [H awaii Revised Statutes ( HRS)] § 657-7 
[(2016)]." In addressing Cabral's motion, the circuit court 
considered "matters outside the pleading," such as the 
declarations of Jacobs' counsel Peter C. Hsieh ( Hsieh). Under 
such circumstances, 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 If, on a motion asserting [an HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) defense] 
to dismiss for failure of the pleading to state a claim 
upon which relief can be granted, matters outside the 
pleading are presented to and not excluded by the court, 
the motion shall be treated as one for summary judgment and 
disposed of as provided in [HRCP ] Rule 56, and all parties 
shall be given reasonable opportunity to present all 
material made pertinent to such a motion by [HRCP] Rule 56. 
Andrade v. Cnty . of Hawaiʻi, 145 Hawaiʻi 265, 269, 451 P.3d 1, 5 
(App. 2019) (citation omitted). Accordingly, we apply the de 
novo standard of review applicable to an order denying a motion 
for summary judgment under HRCP Rule 56. Id. 
The record is clear that Jacobs did not serve Cabral 
by January 6 , 2024, as required by RCC H Rule 28. Upon 
discovering this missed deadline, Jacobs moved, in April 2024 
and pursuant to HRCP Rule 6(b), for an extension of time in 
which to serve Cabral. Cabral contends on appeal that the 
circuit court erroneously granted the extension, the statut e of 
limitations was not tolled, and that Jacobs' claims were time -
barred because Jacobs served Cabral after the two -year statute 
of limitations had expired. 
We first consider whether the circuit court abused its 
discretion by extending the time in which to serve Cabral. See  
Bank of Hawaiʻi v. Shaw, 83 Hawaiʻ i 50, 56, 924 P.2d 544, 550 
(App. 1996) (reviewing orders disposing of motions for extension 
of time on the ground of excusable neglect, brought pursuant to 
the analogous District Court Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 
6(b)(2), under the abuse of discretion standard).  
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 "Fundamentally, the determination of whether a party 
has shown excusable neglect is at bottom an equitable one, 
taking account of all relevant circumstances surrounding the 
party's omission." Eckard Brandes, Inc. v. Dep't of Lab.  &  
Indus.  Rels., 146 Hawaiʻi 354, 360, 463 P.3d 1011, 1017  (2020)  
(cleaned up). The following circumstances are relevant here. 
In his declaration in support of the Ex Parte Motion, Hsieh  
represented he had informed Deputy Corporation Counsel John J. Gores (Gores)
  on October 3, 2023 that Jacobs had not been able 
to locate and serve Cabral. Gores informed Hsieh that Cabral had retired from the  MPD  and was living on the mainland. Gores 
did not know Cabral's address, but offered to find and provide 
Cabral's address to Hsieh.  5
Hsieh has also declared on the record that his legal 
assistant resigned in November 2023, his office experienced " a 
major disruption," and this had caused Hsieh to miss the January 
2024 deadline to serve Cabral. Hsieh became aware of the missed 
deadline, and contacted Cabral's new counsel, Anna Elento-Sneed 
(Elento-Sneed), on April 4, 2024, to request Cabral's current 
address. Elento -Sneed did not provide Cabral's address, and 
Hsieh endeavored to locate Cabral through his own investigation. 
5 Gores was counsel for Defendants -Appellees and Cabral until 
January 2, 2024, when Anna Elento -Sneed (Elento-Sneed) was substituted as 
counsel. 
6   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
  On April 15, 2024 , Hsieh filed the Ex Parte Motion, obtained 
additional time in which to serve Cabral with process, located 
Cabral in Missouri, and mailed the Complaint and Summons to 
Cabral's residence by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
The return receipt shows that Cabral received serv ice on April 
22, 2024. 
On this record, we conclude that the circuit court did 
not abuse its discretion by finding that Jacobs' failure to 
serve Cabral within six months was due to Hsieh's "excusable 
neglect." 
We next address Cabral's contention that Jacobs' 
claims against Cabral were time -barred because Jacobs served him 
more than two years after her alleged injury occurred. Jacobs 
alleges that her injury occurred on February 4, 2022. Pursuant 
to HRS § 657-7, a tort claim alleging personal injury "shall be 
instituted within two years " of this date. (Emphasis added.) 
Jacobs sought to institute her action through her 
filing of the Complaint on July 6, 2023, which was within the 
two-year deadline for tort claims set forth by HRS § 657-7. See 
HRCP Rule 3 ("A civil action is commenced by filing a complaint 
with the court."). Pursuant to HRS § 657-22 (2016), the filing 
of a complaint "shall not be deemed the commencement of an 
action" if taken "without any intent that [process] should be 
served." The record reflects that Jacobs intended to serve 
7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  Cabral with process when she filed the Complaint; among other 
things, Jacobs' process server represented that he 
unsuccessfully attempted to serve Cabral around the time he 
served Defendants -Appellees. 
The United States District Court for the District of 
Hawaiʻi's analysis in Heiser v. Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Polo 
Beach Club  provides helpful guidance here. 848 F.  Supp. 1482 
(D. Haw. 1993). In Heiser, the district court concluded that 
plaintiffs' claims were not time-barred because,  
First, Plaintiffs have complied with the literal 
requirements of the Hawaii statute of limitations and rules 
of procedure. Plaintiffs filed a complaint with this Court 
within two years after their tort action accrued. This 
complies with [HRS] § 657 -7 and [HRCP Rule] 3. 
Second, [HRS] § 657 -22 does not require a plaintiff to 
actually serve the defendant or to exercise due diligence.   
Instead, the threshold inquiry is a determination of the 
plaintiff's intent at the time "any process was issued."   
The legislature, by limiting the inquiry to the time of 
issuance of process, apparently recognized the possibility 
that the intent of a plaintiff to serve process may change 
after process is issued but  that under some circumstances 
there may still be justification for tolling the statute of 
limitations.  
Id. at 1484-85 (emphasis added). 
The record reflects that Jacobs timely filed the 
Complaint within the two-year statute of limitations, intended 
to promptly serve Cabral with the Complaint and Summons but was 
unable to do so, ultimately moved for and obtained an extension of time in which  to serve Cabral, and served Cabral with the 
Complaint and Summons prior to the new service deadline. 
Jacobs' timely commencement of her claims against Cabral 
8   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
 
 therefore tolled the statute of limitations pursuant to HRS 
§  657-7 and §  657-22, and HRCP  Rule 3. Jacobs' claims are not 
time-barred.  
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Order Denying 
the Motion to Dismiss.  
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, October 6, 2026. 
On the briefs:  
Anna Elento-Sneed,  
for Defendant-Appellant.  
 
Peter C. Hsieh,  
for Plaintiff-Appellee.  /s/ Katherine G. Leonard  
Presiding Judge  
 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen  
Associate Judge  
 /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Associate Judge  
9 