NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-20-0000495 20-SEP-2024 07:54 AM Dkt. 173 SO
 CAAP-20-0000495 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI#I 
U.S. BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, AS TRUSTEE FOR GSR
MORTGAGE LOAN TRUST 2006-3F, MORTGAGE PASS-THROUGH
CERTIFICATES, SERIES 2006-3F, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JEFFERSON HALONA YOUNG; LINDA D. YOUNG; BANK OF AMERICA, N.A.;
DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION-STATE OF HAWAI# I;
PALEHUA COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION, Defendants-Appellees, and
GABI KIM COLLINS, Defendant-Appellant, and
JOHN DOES 1-20; JANE DOES 1-20; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-20;
DOE ENTITIES 1-20; AND DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-20, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 1CC161001282) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Gabi Kim Collins (Collins), self-
represented, appeals from the March 16, 2020 Judgment (Judgment) 
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).  Collins also challenges, inter alia, the Circuit 
Court's March 16, 2020 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and 
Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment Against All Defendants and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure 1
1 The Honorable Jeannette H. Castagnetti presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Foreclosure Decree), which was entered in favor of Plaintiff-
Appellee U.S. Bank National Association, as Trustee for GSR 
Mortgage Loan Trust 2006-3F, Mortgage Pass-Through Certificates, Series 2006-3F (U.S. Bank), on [U.S. Bank's] Motion for Summary 
Judgment Against All Defendants and for Interlocutory Decree of 
Foreclosure, filed on March 15, 2019 (Second MSJ). 
We construe Collins's opening brief as raising the 
following points of error: (1) the Circuit Court erred in granting the Second MSJ because U.S. Bank did not establish that it had standing to foreclosure on the subject note (Note); (2) 
the Circuit Court erred in entering judgment for U.S. Bank 
because U.S. Bank did not establish that it provided a notice of default to the borrowers; (3) the Circuit Court erred in failing to order sanctions against U.S. Bank for violating a court order. 
In her "Statement of Points of Error," Collins makes 
various additional statements and arguments related to, inter alia, the Circuit Court's rulings on [U.S. Bank's] Motion for Summary Judgment Against All Defendants and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure, filed on April 3, 2017 (First MSJ), which 
was denied without prejudice.
2 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Collins's points of error as follows: 
2 In particular, we note that Collins argues on appeal that the
Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of U.S. Bank based
on a statute of limitations error. However, this argument was not raised inopposition to the Second MSJ and therefore is disregarded. 
Hawai #i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure ( HRAP) 28(b). 
2   
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) Collins argues that U.S. Bank lacks standing 
because the declarations attached to the Second MSJ contain 
hearsay statements and cannot be the basis for awarding summary judgment. Collins contends that a bailee letter offered by U.S. Bank (Bailee Letter) was also hearsay, and did not establish that 
U.S. Bank had possession of the Note at the time of filing the 
Complaint.   Collins also argues, inter alia, that the Declaration 
of Karelton Chester (Chester; Chester Declaration) fails to show 
personal knowledge, and as such, fails to properly authenticate 
the Note pursuant to Bank of America, N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo,  139 
Hawai#i 361, 390 P.3d 1248 (2017). 
For the Chester Declaration and Declaration of Gina 
Santellan (Santellan; Santellan Declaration) to properly 
authenticate the Note, Bailee Letter, and other business records, 
each declaration must satisfy Hawai# i Rules of Evidence (HRE) 
Rule 803(b)(6),
3 as interpreted in U.S. Bank N.A. v. Mattos, 140 
Hawai#i 26, 398 P.3d 615 (2017), and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. 
3 HRE Rule 803 states, in relevant part: Rule 803 Hearsay exceptions; availability of declarant
immaterial. 
. . . . 
(b)
 Other exceptions. 
. . . . 
(6) Records of regularly conducted activity. 
A 
memorandum, report, record, or data compilation, in anyform, of acts, events, conditions, opinions, ordiagnoses, made in the course of a regularly conductedactivity, at or near the time of the acts, events,conditions, opinions, or diagnoses, as shown by thetestimony of the custodian or other qualified witness,or by certification that complies with rule 902(11) or astatute permitting certification, unless the sources ofinformation or other circumstances indicate lack of 
trustworthiness. 
3  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Behrendt, 142 Hawai# i 37, 414 P.3d 89 (2018), and subsequest 
Hawai#i
 Supreme Court cases.  HRE Rule 803 (b)(6) is satisfied in 
part because Chester testified that: 
(1) he was an employee of [Nationstar Mortgage LLC d/b/a Mr.
Cooper ( Nationstar )] authorized to sign the declaration on
behalf of U.S. Bank, (2) Nationstar maintains the recordsfor the loan on behalf of U.S. Bank, (3) he was familiarwith the recordkeeping practices of Nationstar, (4) therecords for the loan he reviewed were obtained, kept,maintained and relied upon by Nationstar in the regular
course of its business. 
In addition, the Chester Declaration satisfies the 
requirement that, 
. . . a witness may be qualified to provide the testimony
required by HRE Rule 803(b)(6) even if the witness is notemployed by the business that created the document or lacksdirect, personal knowledge of how the document was created.There is no requirement that the records have been preparedby the entity that has custody of them, as long as they werecreated in the regular course of some entity's business.The witness, however, must have enough familiarity with therecord-keeping system of the business that created therecord to explain how the record was generated in theordinary course of business. 
Behrendt, 142 Hawai# i at 45-46, 414 P.3d at 97-98 (citations and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
The Santellan Declaration confirms possession of the 
original Note at the time the Complaint was filed, in the first 
instance because Santellan testified that: 
(1) she has personal knowledge of the matters set forth in
the declaration, (2) she is familiar with [TMLF Hawaii LLLC(TMLF Hawaii )]'s record keeping practices, and (3) the
records she relied upon are made at or near the time of theoccurrence by a personnel with knowledge, kept in theregular course of TMLF [Hawaii}'s business and created as aregular practice. 
Here, Santellan, as custodian of records of TMLF Hawaii 
- the entity that created the Bailee Letter - appears to satisfy 
HRE (b)(6) in part because she testified that, 
2. The information in this Declaration is taken 
from TMLF Hawaii's business records. I have personal
knowledge of TMLF Hawaii's procedures for creating theserecords. They are: (a) made at or near the time of the 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
occurrence of the matters recorded by persons with personal
knowledge of the information in the business record, orfrom information transmitted by persons with personalknowledge; (b) kept in the course of TMLF Hawaii's regularlyconducted business activities; and (c) created by TMLF Hawaiias a regular practice. 
Santellan further testified that: (1) she has personal 
knowledge of the Bailee Letter, as a record of regularly 
conducted activity (she signed it on behalf of The Mortgage Law Firm PLC (CA-AZ)); and (2) she personally reviewed the Bailee Letter, which shows receipt and possession of the Note, which was kept in physical possession of TMLF Hawaii "since it was received on 01/13/2015" and throughout the duration of this litigation. 
For these reasons, we conclude that U.S. Bank properly 
authenticated the Note and Bailee Letter via the Chester and Santellan Declarations, and established that it possessed the Note at the time of filing the Complaint. 
In addition, a foreclosing party "must demonstrate that 
all conditions precedent to foreclosure under the note and mortgage are satisfied and that all steps required by statute have been strictly complied with" to prove entitlement to foreclose. Reyes-Toledo
, 139 Hawai#i at 367, 390 P.3d at 1254. 
Typically, this requires that the plaintiff "prove the existence of an agreement, the terms of the agreement, a default by the mortgagor under the terms of the agreement, and giving of the cancellation notice." 
Id.A foreclosing plaintiff must also 
prove that the plaintiff is entitled to foreclose on the note and mortgage. Id.
The "burden to prove entitlement to enforce the note 
overlaps with the requirements of standing in foreclosure 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
actions." Id.(citation omitted). Under the doctrine of 
standing, a plaintiff typically must have suffered an 
injury-in-fact to "justify exercise of the court's remedial powers on his or her behalf." Id. at 368, 390 P.3d at 1255 
(citation omitted). For a foreclosing plaintiff, the injury-in-fact is the mortgagor's "failure to satisfy its obligation to pay the debt obligation to the note holder." Id.
Thus, a person seeking to judicially foreclose on a mortgage following a promissory note default must establish that it was the "person entitled to enforce the note" as defined by Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 490:3-301 (2008)
4 at the time the 
foreclosure complaint was filed to satisfy standing and to be entitled to prevail on the merits. Id. at 368-69, 1255-56; see 
also Mattos, 140 Hawai# i at 33, 398 P.3d at 622. 
The court in Mattos held that a witness may be 
qualified to provide the testimony required by HRE Rule 803(b)(6) even if the witness is not employed by the business that created the document or lacks direct, personal knowledge of how the document was created. 140 Hawai# i at 32, 398 P.3d at 621. 
"There is no requirement that the records have been prepared by the entity that has custody of them, as long as they were created in the regular course of some entity's business." Id. (quoting 
4 HRS § 490:3-301 provides: 
§ 490:3-301 Person entitled to enforce instrument . "Person 
entitled to enforce" an instrument means (i) the holder of the instrument,
(ii) a nonholder in possession of the instrument who has the rights of aholder, or (iii) a person not in possession of the instrument who is entitledto enforce the instrument pursuant to section 490:3-309 or 490:3-418(d). A person may be a person entitled to enforce the instrument even though theperson is not the owner of the instrument or is in wrongful possession of theinstrument. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Fitzwater , 122 Hawai#i 354, 366, 227 P.3d 520, 532 
(2010)). The witness, however, must have enough familiarity with 
the record-keeping system of the business that created the record to explain how the record was generated in the ordinary course of business. 
Id. 
Here, the Note was originally created by Countrywide 
Home Loans, Inc. and subsequently transferred to U.S. Bank. Chester declares that he has familiarity with the "record-keeping practices" of U.S. Bank's loan servicer, Nationstar. 
As 
discussed below, the incorporated records doctrine applies to our review of the Chester Declaration. 
The standard changes when records from one business are 
received and incorporated into the receiving business's records. Mattos
, 140 Hawai#i at 32, 398 P.3d at 621. Incorporated records 
may in some circumstances be regarded as "created" by the receiving business; in this case, Nationstar was the receiving business. 
See Behrendt
, 142 Hawai#i at 45, 414 P.3d at 97. 
Incorporated records are admissible under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) when a custodian or qualified witness testifies that the documents were incorporated and kept in the normal course of business, that the incorporating business typically relies upon the accuracy of the contents of the documents, and the circumstances otherwise indicate the trustworthiness of the document. 
Id.
; see also 
Fitzwater
, 122 Hawai#i at 367-68, 227 P.3d at 533-34; 
Mattos
, 140 
Hawai#i at 32, 398 P.3d at 621. 
In 
U.S. Bank Tr., N.A. v. Verhagen, the supreme court 
stated: 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
If each of these three conditions is satisfied, an
incorporated record is admissible even in the absence of
testimony concerning its actual creation. This is because evidence that a business has incorporated and relied on arecord created by another organization speaks directly tothat record's reliability. When accompanied by testimonyabout other circumstances that also indicate the record's trustworthiness, such evidence is an acceptable substitute
for testimony concerning a record's actual creation.  
149 Hawai#i 315, 326, 489 P.3d 419, 430 (2021). 
In Verhagen, the pertinent declarations met the first 
two requirements of the incorporated records doctrine because 
both witnesses had testified that the "records were incorporated into [the subsequent holder's] own and kept and maintained [by the subsequent holder] in the ordinary course of its business" and that the loan servicer "used and relied on the incorporated records in the regular course of its loan servicing business." Id. 
Here, the Chester Declaration states, in part: 
1. I am authorized to sign this Declaration on
behalf of Plaintiff, [U.S. BANK], as an authorized signer of
[Nationstar], which is Plaintiff s servicing agent for thesubject loan ("the loan"). 
. . . . 
4. The information in this Declaration is taken 
from Nationstar's business records. I have personalknowledge of Nationstar's procedures for creating theserecords. They are: (a) made at or near the time of theoccurrence of the matters recorded by persons with personalknowledge of the information in the business record, or frominformation transmitted by persons with personal knowledge;(b) kept in the course of Nationstar's regularly conductedbusiness activities; and (c) created by Nationstar as a
regular practice. 
. . . . 
27. The prior loan servicers for this mortgage loan
were Specialized Loan Servicing, LLC and Bank of America,
N.A. ("Prior Servicers"). 
28. Upon becoming Plaintiff's loan servicer,
Nationstar took custody and control of loan documents andbusiness records of the Prior Servicers and incorporated allsuch records into the business records of Nationstar. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
29. Before the Prior Servicers' records were 
incorporated into Nationstar's own business records, it
conducted an independent check into the Prior Servicers'records and found them in keeping with industry wide loanservicing standards and only integrated them intoNationstar's own business records after finding the PriorServicers' records were made as part of a regularlyconducted activity, met industry standards and determined tobe trustworthy. 
. . . . 
33. In performing its services to the Plaintiff,
Nationstar relies upon the accuracy of the Prior Servicer's
records and those records are now a part of and used for allpurposes in the conduct of Nationstar's regularly conductedactivity of keeping and maintaining its own businessrecords. 
34. I am familiar with the record-keeping system of
the Prior Servicers that created the records and can explainhow the records were generated in the ordinary course ofbusiness. 
Chester does not purport to be a custodian of 
Nationstar's records per se, rather he testifies concerning his 
personal knowledge of Nationstar's records and procedures based on his job responsibilities with Nationstar. The term "other qualified witness" is given a very broad interpretation if the witness demonstrates the requisite familiarity with the record-keeping system of the business in question. Fitzwater, 122 
Hawai#i at 366, 227 P.3d at 532. Here, Chester meticulously 
delineates Nationstar's acquisition process, further stating in part: 
30. Nationstar's acquisition process is handled
by the Obligation Management Group ("OM Group"). The OM 
Group is one of the departments that supports the duediligence process to determine any deal specific items thatwarrant special handling during or post transfer. The due diligence process often requires a review of seller/priorservicer operational functions and possibly loan documents.The OB Group also supports contract review as needed withdirection through the Transaction Management Group("TM Group"). In some instances, during the contract review,it may be necessary to negotiate with the seller/priorservicer and make adjustments to Nationstar's instructionsregarding the transfer of seller/prior servicer records.These processes are reviewed by Nationstar. 
3l. Nationstar has many functions that ensure the
trustworthiness of the records being integrated into 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nationstar. Nationstar's Acquisition group updates LSAMS
with all relevant information regarding the boarding ofprior servicer records. Nationstar initiates a kick-off call with the prior servicer to introduce key participantsfor both organizations and to set the expectations of thetransfer. This includes confirmation that the prior servicerhas received and read Nationstar's transfer instructions. Project milestones are also agreed upon by all parties.The prior servicer and Nationstar initiate the investorapproval requirements and reconcile to confirm the exactloans expected to transfer. A loan level reconciliation is also preformed to the list for notices that would tieto each item. Upon receipt of the prior servicer source data,reconciliation is performed on the initial set of data receivedand remediation is completed and documented as needed. The Acquisition group then completes a field-level data mappingprocess with support and approval from Nationstar and theprior servicer. The mapping process captures all fieldsrequired for servicer including balances and individualamounts as well as all other source data elements. Then,the prior servicer provides location of physical loandocuments and all relative images to support quality controlreview. Reconciliation is performed to identify any missingimages and communicated to the prior servicer to supportremediation. 
32. Finally, Nationstar completes three sets of test
of preliminary and final data within the servicing platformtest region before going live for servicing. During eachtest, the Acquisition group completes reconciliation of dataelements with confirmation from the prior servicer. This includes key data elements for various servicing areas aswell as monetary values. Nationstar also completes validationduring the testing process and supports remediation of logicaldata edit checks as needed. Nationstar also reviews specificdocuments as the source of truth to support validation.Nationstar's Master Audit Group completes a level of documentsto data validation and adjust any data elements as needed.Exceptions are noted and a review is completed to determine ifadditional process improvement or data checks may be implementedfor future transfers. 
Thus, as Chester demonstrates detailed familiarity with 
Nationstar's record-keeping system, the Circuit Court did not err 
in determining that he is a qualified witness with respect to Nationstar's incorporated records, including the Note and Bailee Letter. However, we recognize that the circumstances must otherwise indicate the trustworthiness of the document(s).  
Mattos, 140 
Hawai#i at 31-32, 398 P.3d at 621-22. In Verhagen, 
the supreme court noted that, to establish trustworthiness in the incorporated records doctrine context, a qualified witness must testify as to whether the incorporating entity engaged in "due 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
diligence" processes or vetting procedures. 149 Hawai# i at 326, 
489 P.3d at 430. 
Here, Chester unequivocally describes 
Nationstar's vetting procedures beyond what is specifically 
required under Verhagen
. 
In sum, based on the Declarations and supporting 
documents filed in conjunction with the Second MSJ and the Chester Declaration, U.S. Bank established its standing to foreclose on the subject Note. 
Somewhat relatedly, Collins argues that U.S. Bank 
failed to attach a mortgage servicing or agency agreement to the Second MSJ. However, Collins fails to identify where in the record that argument was raised in the Circuit Court. As the issue was not raised before the Circuit Court, it will be disregarded. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(4). 
(2) Collins argues that the Circuit Court erred in 
entering judgment for U.S. Bank because U.S. Bank did not establish that the required notice of default was provided to the borrowers. However, with the Second MSJ, and as supported by the Chester Declaration, U.S. Bank provided a copy of the notice of default and acceleration that was provided to the borrowers by the loan servicer at the time, Bank of America N.A. In her opposition to the Second MSJ, Collins did not raise any evidentiary objection or argue that there was a genuine issue of material fact related to the notice of default and acceleration. As Collins's argument regarding the notice of default was not raised before the Circuit Court in conjunction with the Second 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
MSJ, it will be disregarded. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(4); see also 
Munoz v. Yuen, 66 Haw. 603, 605–06, 670 P.2d 825, 827 (1983). 
(3) Collins argues that the Circuit Court erred in 
failing to order sanctions against U.S. Bank for violating a 
court order. Collins submits that "monetary sanctions should be levied" for purported failure to comply with a prior discovery order. Upon review, to the extent we are able to discern Collins's argument, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying her various requests for sanctions against U.S. Bank. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's March 16, 2020 
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, September 20, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Acting Chief Judge
Gabi Kim Collins,Defendant-Appellant Pro Se. /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
Andrew J. Lautenbach,Nainoa J. Watson, /s/ Karen T. Nakasone
(Starn O'Toole Marcus & Associate Judge
Fisher).
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
12 