   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000128
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
CAPITAL ONE BANK (USA), N.A., Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MIKE J. STEWART, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. RC10-1-0024)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Mike J. Stewart ("Stewart") appeals
 
from the January 26, 2011 Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion (1)
 
to Deem Plaintiff's Request for Admissions Directed to Defendant
 Admitted; and (2) for Summary Judgment Filed on December 14, 2010
 ("Order Granting Motion") and the February 14, 2011 Judgment
1
 
entered in the District Court of the Fifth Circuit ("District
 Court").
2
 
Plaintiff-Appellee Capital One Bank (USA), N.A.
 
("Capital One") alleged that Stewart failed to repay the balance
 owed on his credit card. On December 14, 2010, Capital One filed
 Plaintiff's Motion (1) to Deem Plaintiff's Request for Admissions
 Directed to Defendant Admitted; and (2) for Summary Judgment
 ("Motion"), arguing that the District Court should deem matters
 
1
 Stewart's notice of appeal does not specifically refer to the
Judgment, but does cite to the February 14, 2011 Notice of Entry of Judgment
or Order, which was filed on the same date as the Judgment. "[A] mistake indesignating the judgment should not result in loss of the appeal as long asthe intention to appeal from a specific judgment can be fairly inferred from
the notice and the appellee is not misled by the mistake." State v. 
Graybeard, 93 Hawai' i 513, 516, 6 P.3d 385, 388 (App. 2000) (ellipsis and
internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting City & Cnty. of Honolulu v. Midkiff, 57 Haw. 273, 275–76, 554 P.2d 233, 235 (1976)). As this legal
standard is satisfied here, we deem Stewart to have appealed from theJudgment. 
2
 The Honorable Frank D. Rothschild presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
contained in Plaintiff's First Request for Admissions and for
 
Answers to Interrogatories Directed to Defendant ("Request for
 Admissions") admitted, because Stewart failed to reply, and,
 whether because of those admissions or even without regard to
 them, that it was entitled to summary judgment. The District
 Court granted the Motion and entered judgment in favor of Capital
 One in the amount of $6,251.86. 
3
On appeal,  Stewart argues that (1) Capital One "failed
to invoke the jurisdiction of the trial court," (2) Capital One
 failed to establish that it had standing, (3) the District Court
 "lost jurisdiction the instant [Stewart] was deprived of due
 process," (4) the District Court "abused its discretion by
 ignoring [Stewart's] evidence," (5) the District Court "erred by
 showing an appearance of prejudice against [Stewart]," and (6)
 Capital One committed fraud upon the court. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Stewart's appeal as follows:
 
(1)
 Stewart generally claims that the District Court
 
lacked jurisdiction without identifying the reason why this is
 the case. Nevertheless, district courts "have jurisdiction in
 all civil actions where the debt, amount, damages, or value of
 the property claimed does not exceed $25,000 . . . ." H
AW. REV.
 
STAT. § 604-5(a) (Supp. 2012). "Attorney's commissions or fees,
 
including those stipulated in any note or contract sued on,
 interest, and costs, shall not be included in computing the
 jurisdictional amount." Id. Capital One claimed that Stewart
 
owed it a debt in the principal amount of $4,409.46, which is
 less than $25,000. Thus, the District Court had jurisdiction.
 
(2) Stewart argues that Capital One failed to establish
 
standing because it failed to show that it advanced him money or
 
3
 Stewart's opening brief failed to include a statement of the
points of error as required by Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule
28(b)(4). Nevertheless, we strive to address the appeals of pro se parties on
the merits where possible. Hawaiian Props., Ltd. v. Tauala, 125 Hawai' i 176,
181 n.6, 254 P.3d 487, 492 n.6 (App. 2011). Here, the "Legal Discussion"
section in Stewart's opening brief presents six enumerated arguments. We treat these arguments as Stewart's points of error. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
that it was harmed. We hold that Stewart's argument is without
 
merit.
 
"The crucial inquiry with regard to standing is whether 
the plaintiff has alleged such a personal stake in the outcome of the controversy as to warrant his or her invocation of the court's jurisdiction and to justify exercise of the court's remedial powers on his or her behalf." Sierra Club v. Hawai' i 
Tourism Auth. ex rel. Bd. of Dirs., 100 Hawai' i 242, 250, 59 P.3d 
877, 885 (2002) (brackets omitted) (quoting Mottl v. Miyahira, 95 Hawai'i 381, 389, 23 P.3d 716, 724 (2001)). 
In deciding whether the plaintiff has the requisite interest
in the outcome of the litigation, we employ a three-part
test: (1) has the plaintiff suffered an actual or threatened
injury as a result of the defendant's conduct; (2) is the
injury fairly traceable to the defendant's actions; and (3)
would a favorable decision likely provide relief for
plaintiff's injury.
 
Id. (ellipsis and footnote omitted) (quoting Mottl, 95 Hawai' i at 
389, 23 P.3d at 724). 
Here, Capital One presented evidence that it "allowed
 
[Stewart] to make purchases on credit and/or to obtain cash
 
advances by using the credit account[,]" pursuant to a credit
 account agreement between Capital One and Stewart; that Capital
 One mailed billing statements to Stewart's P.O. Box in Hanalei
 (the same P.O. Box Stewart listed as his address in his various
 court filings); that Stewart never timely disputed any charges;
 that Stewart made partial payments and never attempted to cancel
 the credit account agreement; that Stewart failed to repay the
 monies loaned or advanced; and that as of October 10, 2009,
 Capital One was owed $4,409.46. This evidence shows that Capital
 One was harmed by Stewart and that a judicial determination in
 its favor would provide it a remedy. Furthermore, this evidence
 was sufficient to support Capital One's motion for summary
 judgment. 
When a motion for summary judgment is made and supported as
provided in this rule, an adverse party may not rest upon
the mere allegations or denials of the adverse party's
pleading, but the party's response, by affidavits or as
otherwise provided in this rule, must set forth specific
facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial. If
 the adverse party does not so respond, summary judgment, if
appropriate, shall be entered against the adverse party.
 
Dist. Ct. R. Civ. P. 56(e). 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In response to the Motion, Stewart presented his
 
affidavit, where he claimed that he had "no recollection" of the
 
debt on the credit account and "no recollection" of using the
 credit card. General denials based on a purported lack of memory
 are insufficient to create a dispute of material fact; instead,
 it was Stewart's responsibility to present specific facts which
 would permit a trier of fact to find that he did not legally owe
 $4,409.46 to Capital One, either in whole or in part.
4 Accord
 
Discover Bank v. Combs, No. 11CA25, 2012 WL 2832550, at *5 (Ohio
 Ct. App. July 9, 2012) (claim that defendant "does not remember
 applying for nor using this card" is a general denial
 insufficient to defeat summary judgment); see also I.V. Servs. of
 Am., Inc. v. Inn Dev. & Mgmt., Inc., 182 F.3d 51, 55 (1st Cir.
 1999) ("mere lack of recollection" is insufficient to defeat
 summary judgment). This, Stewart failed to do.
 
Therefore, the record shows that Captial One had
 
standing to assert a debt-collection action against Stewart.
 
(3) Stewart argues that, at the hearing on the Motion,
 
he "denied [Capital One's] claim, asserted that [Capital One's]
 Discovery Requests were answered by [him], asserted that [his]
 Discovery Requests were ignored[,] and clearly objected to [the
 Motion]." It is the appellant's obligation, however, to provide
 the appellate court with transcripts of lower-court proceedings
 if an argument on appeal requires consideration of such
 proceedings. Thomas-Yukimura v. Yukimura, No. SCWC-29927, 2013
 
WL 3364104, at *8 n.19 (Haw. June 27, 2013). Stewart failed to
 provide this Court with a transcript of the hearing and, thus,
 cannot rely on anything that allegedly did or did not happen at
 this hearing.
 
As the record on appeal stands, Stewart has not shown
 
that he was deprived of due process as a matter of law because
 Stewart has not established that the District Court erroneously
 
4
 In his affidavit, Stewart claimed that he disputed the debt owed
in a letter addressed to Capital One's attorney, dated October 10, 2009.
However, this letter merely made speculative allegations and legal conclusions
that the "putative debt" is "the result of a unilateral contract of adhesion"
and that "the insurance company is the de facto owner of the debt," among
other similar claims and warnings. Stewart did not dispute that he had in
fact used the credit account as alleged.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
granted Capital One summary judgment, as stated above.
 
(4) Stewart argues that the District Court ignored his
 
evidence opposing summary judgment — specifically, evidence
 
relating to the District Court's decision to deem various
 allegedly unanswered requests for admissions admitted. Even if
 the District Court erred in ruling that Stewart had admitted
 certain facts, however, the error was harmless. As explained
 above, Capital One's other evidence that Stewart had incurred an
 unsatisfied debt to Capital One was not overcome by Stewart's
 affidavit. Thus, Stewart has not shown error.
 
(5) Stewart argues that the District Court exhibited
 
prejudice against him. Stewart points to nothing in support of
 his argument other than the District Court's granting of summary
 judgment in favor of Capital One, an action that we conclude was
 correct. Nothing in our independent review of the record
 supports Stewart's contention. Thus, the argument fails.
 
(6) Stewart argues that Capital One committed fraud
 
upon the court. In support, Stewart presents nothing but
 speculation and conclusory arguments. Therefore, we hold that
 the point of error is without merit.
 
Therefore,
 
The January 26, 2011 Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion
 
(1)
 to Deem Plaintiff's Request for Admissions Directed to
 
Defendant Admitted; and (2) for Summary Judgment Filed on
 December 14, 2010, and the February 14, 2011 Judgment are
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 30, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Mike J. Stewart,
Pro Se Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Marvin S.C. Dang andJason M. Oliver,(Law Offices of Marvin S.C.Dang, LLL)for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 