FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
THOMAS NISHIMURA, COLETTE NISHIMURA, individually
and on Behalf of a Class of All Persons
 
Similarly Situated, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
 
GENTRY HOMES, LTD., a Hawai 'i Domestic
 
Profit Corporation, Defendant-Appellant
and
 
SIMPSON MANUFACTURING CO., INC., a Delaware Corporation;
SIMPSON STRONG-TIE COMPANY, INC., a California Corporation;
JOHN and JANE DOES 1-100, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-100; DOE
CORPORATIONS 1-100; DOE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-100;
and DOES ASSOCIATIONS 1-100, Defendants
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000137
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-1522-07)
 
February 28, 2014
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING J., FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
Defendant-Appellant Gentry Homes, Limited (Gentry)
 
appeals from the November 13, 2012 "Order Granting in Part and
 
Denying in Part Gentry Homes, Ltd.'s Motion to Compel Arbitration
 
Filed August 29, 2012" and the February 4, 2013 "Order Denying
 
Gentry Homes' Motion for Reconsideration of the Order Granting in
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Part and Denying in Part Gentry Homes, Ltd.'s Motion to Compel
 
Arbitration [Filed August 29, 2012], Filed on November 13, 2012"
both entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1
 (circuit
 
court).
 
On appeal, Gentry contends the circuit court erred by:
 (1) requiring the parties to meet and confer on the
 
selection of a local arbitration service in contravention of the
 parties written agreement;
 
(2) finding the Professional Warranty Services
 
Corporation (PWC), who was to select the arbitration service
 
under method the parties' agreement, had a potential conflict of
 
interest in serving in that capacity;
 
(3) finding PWC's potential conflict of interest was a
 
sufficient basis to sever and strike portions of the parties'
 
agreement providing a method for selecting an arbitration
 
service;
 
(4) relying upon Rules of the Circuit Courts of the 
State of Hawai
'i (RCCH) Rule 12.2 to order the parties to confer 
on the selection of a local arbitration service; and 
(5) denying Gentry's motion for reconsideration.
I. BACKGROUND
 
On October 12, 2011, Plaintiffs-Appellees Thomas and
 
Colette Nishimura (Nishimuras) filed a First Amended Class Action
 Complaint (Amended Complaint) as individuals and on behalf of a
 
class of others similarly situated, including homeowners, those
 
with common interests in common elements of multi-family
 
buildings, and any association of unit owners of the multi-family
 
homes (collectively, Nishimura Plaintiffs) against "Designer,
 
Developer and Builder Doe Defendants," including Gentry, and
 
"Manufacturer Defendants," including Simpson Manufacturing Co.,
2
Inc. and Simpson Strong-Tie Company, Inc.  (collectively,
Simpson). The Amended Complaint raised breach of contract,
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 
2
 Simpson manufactures and sells a variety of building products,
including hurricane straps.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
product liability, strict liability, negligence, breach of
 
implied warranty, breach of implied warranty of habitability,
 
breach of warranty of merchantability, breach of express
 
warranty, and violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 480-2
 
claims in relation to alleged failures to protect their homes
 
from hurricane-related damages. 
Gentry is a Hawai 'i corporation and the developer and 
seller of homes in Ewa Beach, Hawai 'i. The Nishimuras reside in 
a single-family home developed, designed, and built by Gentry, which is part of a subdivision called Prescott II. Gentry used 
hurricane straps manufactured and sold by Simpson in the 
construction of the Nishimuras' home, which was originally owned 
by Eric and Julie Javier (Javiers). 
On August 29, 2012, Gentry filed a motion to compel
 
arbitration. Attached to their motion was: (1) the Javiers'
 
Deposit Receipt and Sales Agreement dated February 16, 2004
 
(DRSA); (2) the Home Builder's Limited Warranty (Limited
 
Warranty); (3) the Javiers' Limited Warranty Registration form,
 dated April 30, 2004; and (4) a warranty deed by which the
 
Nishimuras purchased the Javiers' home, recorded on March 3,
 
2006. Gentry's Limited Warranty is administered by PWC and
 
specifies that certain administrative services relative to the
 
Limited Warranty are to be contracted with PWC.
 
Section VIII of the Limited Warranty, entitled,
 
"Binding Arbitration Procedure" provides: 
Any disputes between YOU [homeowner and homeowners
association] and US [the builder, Gentry], or parties acting
on OUR [Gentry's] behalf, including PWC, related to or
arising from this LIMITED WARRANTY, the design or
construction of the HOME or the COMMON ELEMENTS or the sale
 of the HOME or transfer of title to the COMMON ELEMENTS will
 be resolved by binding arbitration. Binding arbitration
shall be the sole remedy for resolving any and all disputes
between YOU and US, or OUR representatives.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
The arbitration clause of the Limited Warranty provided
 
in relevant part: "The arbitration shall be conducted by
 
Construction Arbitration Services, Inc. [(CAS)], or such other
 
reputable arbitration service that PWC shall select, at its sole
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
discretion, at the time the request for arbitration is
 
submitted." It also stated that, "[t]his arbitration agreement
 
shall be governed by the United States Arbitration Act (9 U.S.C.
 
§§ 1-16) to the exclusion of any inconsistent state law,
 
regulation or judicial decision."
 
On September 20, 2012, Nishimura Plaintiffs filed their
 
opposition to Gentry's motion to compel arbitration (Opposition). 
Nishimura Plaintiffs attached the following to their motion: (1)
 
a screenshot of the CAS website; (2) a screenshot of PWC's
 
website; (3) a listing of Zurich American Insurance Company's
 
(Zurich Insurance) subsidiary companies, which included Steadfast
 
Insurance Company (Steadfast); (4) Steadfast's Home Builders
 Protective Insurance Policy; and (5) a circuit court January 18,
 
2012 "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 
Defendants/Cross-Claimants Spinnaker Place Development, LLC, Ke
 
Noho Kai Development, LLC, and Fairway's Edge Development, LLC's
 
Motion to Compel Arbitration and Stay Judicial Proceedings of
 
Claims by Plaintiffs Covered by the Home Builder's Limited
 
Warranty, Filed November 17, 2011" (January Arbitration Order)
 
filed in Kai, et al. v. Haseko Homes, Inc., Civ. No. 09-1-2834­
12.
 
The CAS website screenshot indicated that CAS had
 
"permanently exit[ed] from the binding construction arbitration
 
dispute case administration business effective July 1, 2009."
 
The PWC website screenshot included a statement that
 
PWC maintains a "strong relationship with one of the nation's
 
largest insurance companies [Zurich Insurance]," the parent
 
company of Steadfast. Steadfast's Home Builders Protective
 
Policy identified itself as the insurer of developer/builder
 
Haseko Homes, Inc. and Haseko Construction, Inc. (collectively,
Haseko), who are named as defendants in another action pending
 
before the same court, Alvarez v. Haseko Homes, Inc., Civ. No.
 
09-1-2697. In their Opposition, Nishimura Plaintiffs allege, the
 
Alvarez case "involves the very same construction defect claims"
 
at issue here, but in a different housing development. Nishimura
 
Plaintiffs wrote, "just as PWC had a conflict of interest in
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
selecting the arbitrator in the Alvarez matter, PWC also has an
 
issue [of] conflict in this litigation."
 
Nishimura Plaintiffs drew the circuit court's attention
 
to the January Arbitration Order brought under an allegedly
 
identical Limited Warranty in another related construction defect
 
case against Haseko and other defendants, at which the Honorable
 
Gary W.B. Chang presided. See Kai, et al. v. Haseko Homes, Inc.,
 
Civ. No. 09-1-2834-12. In Kai, the circuit court granted the
 motion to compel arbitration, but severed and struck the method
 
of selecting the arbitration service specified in the Home
 
Builder's Limited Warranty as follows:
 
The method by which the arbitration service is to be
selected under the [Home Builder's Limited Warranty] is
severed and stricken on the ground of PWC's conflict ofinterest in this action. The parties to the arbitrationshall agree by December 30, 2011, upon an arbitrationservice that is located in Hawai[' ]i. If the parties are
unable to agree, defense counsel shall notify the [circuitc]ourt in writing, and the [circuit c]ourt shall proceed toselect an arbitration service, which will select a specificarbitrator. 
The January Arbitration Order in Kai is currently on
 
appeal before this court. See CAAP-12-0000302.
 
On September 28, 2012, the circuit court held a hearing
on Gentry's motion to compel arbitration. In response to the
 
circuit court's inquiry into whether there is a particular
 
arbitration service to which both sides would be amenable,
 
Gentry's counsel replied, "No. I think that is something that
 
the parties would have to discuss . . . ."
  
The circuit court proceeded to rule on the issue of
 
PWC's alleged conflict of interest, stating: 
certain issues that ha[ve] been raised and in terms of the
evidentiary, just on the face of it, you know, there is a
potential conflict, or without going through an evidentiary
hearing full-on or reserving it for the arbitration service,
to me, and I agree with Judge Chang['s order in the Kai
case], as a practical and as a pragmatic matter, because you
don't want to potentially reserve that in the future. You
 know, the less you have to reserve in the future as possible
appealable issues the better because if you have to go to
trial, you want to go to trial on as clean as possible
issues as you can.
 
. . . . 
That's just as a practical matter.
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
So granting your motion to compel, but also insert in
your order regarding that the [circuit c]ourt has directed
both parties to meet and confer on the selection of a local
arbitration service, and if the same cannot be agreed upon
by the parties, then the [circuit c]ourt under [RCCH] 12.2
will invoke its authority to then select from the two
[alternative arbitration services.]
 
On November 13, 2012, the circuit court filed its
 
"Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Gentry Homes, Ltd.'s
 
Motion to Compel Arbitration Filed August 29, 2012" (November
 
Arbitration Order). The circuit court ordered the parties to
 
arbitrate Nishimura Plaintiffs' claims as set forth in their
 
Amended Complaint, but denied Gentry's motion insofar as it
 
specified that PWC would select the arbitration service.
 
Accordingly, the method by which the arbitration service is
to be selected under the Home Builders' Limited Warranty is
severed and stricken. Pursuant to [RCCH] Rule 12.2., this
[circuit c]ourt orders that [Nishimura] Plaintiffs and
Gentry shall meet and confer on the selection of a local
arbitration service within forty-five (45) days of entry of
this Order. If [Nishimura] Plaintiffs and Gentry are unable
to agree, the [circuit c]ourt shall select a local
arbitration service for this matter.
 
On November 26, 2012, Gentry filed a motion for 
reconsideration of the November Arbitration Order, pursuant to 
Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rules 7, 59, and 60. 
Nishimura Plaintiffs opposed Gentry's motion for reconsideration, contending the order is not void and no exceptional circumstances 
existed to warrant application of HRCP Rule 60(b). 
On January 22, 2013, the circuit court held a hearing
 
on Gentry's motion for reconsideration. In response to the
 
circuit court's inquiry into whether employing a U.S. mainland-
based arbitrator would be more expensive, Gentry replied that any
 
answer would be speculative and that the parties would bear their
 
own costs. Gentry stated that it did not know which arbitration
 
service PWC would have selected, but it would have been a
 
national, not locally-based arbitration service. Also at the
 
hearing, the circuit court noted Judge Chang's order in the Kai
 
case and stated, "apparently [Judge Chang] did make a finding
 
that PWC has a conflict on interest[;] apparently PWC was the
 
selector under the [Limited Warranty] of the arbitration service. 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Judge Chang] did make a showing of a conflict of interest such
 
as to strike that part."
 
On February 4, 2013, the circuit court filed its "Order
 
Denying Gentry Homes' Motion for Reconsideration of the Order
 
Granting in Part and Denying in Part Gentry Homes, Ltd.'s Motion
 
to Compel Arbitration [Filed August 29, 2012], Filed on November
 
13, 2012."
 
Gentry filed a notice of appeal on March 6, 2013 and 
an amended notice of appeal on March 15, 2013.
II. DISCUSSION
 
Gentry contends: (1) RCCH Rule 12.2 did not authorize
 
the circuit court to strike the arbitration provision that stated
 PWC would select the arbitration service; (2) the circuit court
 
reversibly erred by failing to order the parties to arbitrate
 
pursuant to all terms of the Limited Warranty; (3) the circuit
 
court lacked jurisdiction under the Federal Arbitration Act, 9
 
U.S.C. § 2-16 (West, Westlaw through P.L. 113-52), (FAA), to
 
address Nishimura Plaintiffs' pre-arbitration challenge; (4)
 
Nishimura Plaintiffs have not made a prima facie showing that
 
enforcement of the Limited Warranty would result in bias or
 
impartiality favoring Gentry; and (5) the circuit court erred by
 
denying Gentry's motion for reconsideration.
 
The Limited Warranty authorized PWC to select a
 
"reputable" arbitration service "at its sole discretion[,]" in
 
the event that CAS did not do so. Because CAS was no longer
 
available to conduct the arbitration, enforcement of the Limited
 
Warranty would give PWC control over the selection of a
 
"reputable" arbitration service. The Limited Warranty did not
 
define the term, "reputable arbitration service[.]"
 
The Limited Warranty is governed by the FAA, "to the
 
exclusion of any inconsistent state law, regulation or judicial
 
decision." Under the FAA, written provisions in arbitration
 
agreements "shall be valid, irrevocable, and enforceable, save
 
upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation
 
of any contract." 9 U.S.C. § 2 (emphasis added). "This saving
 
clause [in the FAA] permits agreements to arbitrate to be
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
invalidated by generally applicable contract defenses, such as
 
fraud, duress, or unconscionability[.]" AT&T Mobility LLC v.
 
Concepcion, 131 S. Ct. 1740, 1746 (U.S. 2011) (citations and
 internal quotation marks omitted). The FAA further provides for
 
vacating an arbitration award "where there was evident partiality
 
or corruption in the arbitrators, or either of them[.]" 9 U.S.C.
 
§ 2(a)(2). 
Similar to the 9 U.S.C. § 2 savings clause, the 
Hawai
'i's Uniform Arbitration Act (HUAA), HRS Chapter 658A 
contains a savings clause that concerns the validity of arbitration agreements: 
An agreement contained in a record to submit to arbitration
any existing or subsequent controversy arising between the
parties to the agreement is valid, enforceable, and
irrevocable except upon a ground that exists at law or in
equity for the revocation of a contract.
 
HRS § 658A-6(a) (Supp. 2012).
 
Also similar to FAA, HUAA provides for the application 
of an "evident partiality" standard to determine whether an 
arbitration award should be vacated. HRS § 658A-23(a)(2)(A) 
(Supp. 2012). "Evident partiality" is distinct from "actual 
bias." Kay v. Kaiser Found. Health Plan, Inc., 119 Hawai 'i 219, 
226, 194 P.3d 1181, 1188 (App. 2008). "Evident partiality not only exists when there is actual bias on the part of the 
arbitrator, but also when undisclosed facts show a reasonable 
impression of partiality." Kay, 119 Hawai
'i at 226, 194 P.3d at 
1188 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
FAA and HUAA specify that illegal and inequitable
 
agreements are not valid, enforceable, and/or irrevocable. See 9
 
U.S.C. § 2 and HRS § 658A-6(a). To constitute a valid
 
arbitration agreement, provisions for the method of selecting an
 
arbitrator must not be unconscionable and unconscionable
 
arbitration provisions are severable from the remainder of the
 
contract. See 9 U.S.C. § 2; Rent-A-Ctr., W., Inc. v. Jackson,
 
130 S. Ct. 2772, 2778 (2010). The Ninth Circuit has held,
 "arbitration provisions that are 'unfairly one-sided' are
 
substantively unconscionable[.]" Nagrampa v. MailCoups, Inc.,
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
469 F.3d 1257, 1281 (9th Cir. 2006) (citation omitted).
 
HUAA prohibits "[a]n individual who has a known,
 
direct, and material interest in the outcome of the arbitration
 
proceeding or a known, existing, and substantial relationship
 
with a party" from serving as an arbitrator where the agreement
 
requires a "neutral" arbitrator. HRS §658A-11(b) (Supp. 2012). 
Provisions for a neutral or disinterested arbitrator are a
 
relevant consideration in determining whether an arbitration
 
agreement is valid and enforceable under FAA as well. See 9
 
U.S.C. § 2; Sehulster Tunnels/Pre–Con v. Traylor Brothers,
 Inc./Obayashi Corp., 4 Cal. Rptr. 3d 655, 666 (Cal. Ct. App.
 
2003); Fields v. NCR Corp., 683 F.Supp.2d 980, 990 (S.D. Iowa
 
2010) (holding an arbitration process not "substantively unfair"
 
where it provided for a neutral arbitrator); Morgan v. Sci.
 
Applications Int'l Corp., 612 F.Supp.2d 81, 83 (D.D.C. 2009). A
 
'disinterested' arbitrator is one who lacks a financial or other
 
personal stake in the outcome of the arbitration. Trustmark Ins.
 
Co. v. John Hancock Life Ins. Co. (U.S.A.), 631 F.3d 869, 872
 (7th Cir. 2011) cert. denied, 131 S. Ct. 2465 (2011). 
Upon CAS' exit from the arbitration business, the
 
Limited Warranty authorized PWC to select a reputable arbitration
 
service in its sole discretion. PWC's alleged conflict of
 
interest is based on its business relationships with Gentry and
 
insurers of other home builder/developers engaged in litigation
 
concerning alleged-identical construction defect claims. PWC has
 
a business relationship with Zurich Insurance, parent company of
 
Steadfast. Steadfast is the insurer of builder/developer Haseko,
 
who is defending against claims of hurricane-proofing related
 
construction defects. See Alvarez v. Haseko Homes, Inc., Civ.
 
No. 09-1-2697; Kai v. Haseko Homes, Inc., Civ. No. 09-1-2834-12. 
Nishimura Plaintiffs contend PWC's interests in maintaining
 
arbitration contracts with insurance companies (Zurich Insurance
 
and Steadfast), and those insurance companies' interests in
 
avoiding liability for hurricane-proofing related construction
 
defects, creates a situation in which PWC's interests would lead
 
it to favor Gentry and, presumably, Gentry's insurers.
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Nishimura Plaintiffs also point to the Limited
 
Warranty's identification of PWC as a "part[y] acting on
 
[Gentry's] behalf[,]" as evidence of PWC's partiality. Language
 
in the Limited Warranty indicating that PWC would act "on
 
[Gentry's] behalf[,]" however, does not establish PWC's improper
 
motives or evident partiality. PWC acts in its role, on Gentry's
 
behalf, as Gentry's Warranty Administrator in selecting a
 
reputable arbitration service. The purpose of PWC taking these
 
actions on behalf of Gentry is to put distance between Gentry's
 
interests and the arbitrator, not to select an arbitration
 
service that would resolve arbitration in favor of Gentry. 
Nishimura Plaintiffs cite to Sixth Circuit decisions on
 
pre-arbitration challenges to the arbitration-selection process. 
Walker v. Ryan's Family Steak Houses, Inc., 400 F.3d 370, 385
 
(6th Cir. 2005); and McMullen v. Meijer, Inc., 355 F.3d 485, 493
 
(6th Cir. 2004). In Walker, employee-plaintiffs entered into an
 
arbitration agreement with Employment Dispute Services, Inc.
 
(EDSI) as opposed to the employer-defendant; EDSI itself would
 
have served as the arbitration service for employee-employer
 disputes; EDSI's lack of protocols in selecting adjudicators
 
could permit a biased arbitration panel; and annual fees paid by
 
Walker employer-defendant accounted for over 42% of EDSI's gross
 
income. Walker, 400 F.3d at 374, 375, 386, 387. By contrast,
 
under the Limited Warranty, PWC would not itself serve as an
 arbitrator and was required to select a reputable arbitration
 
service. 
The arbitration clause at issue in McMullen gave the
 
employer-defendant unilateral control over the pool of potential
 
arbitrators, as opposed to the Limited Warranty's provision for
 
PWC, and not Gentry, to select an arbitration service. McMullen,
 
355 F.3d at 492. McMullen concluded the employer-defendant's
 
practice of employing the same panel of five to seven arbitrators
 
demonstrated a risk of bias rendering the arbital forum an
 
ineffective substitute for a judicial forum because the former
 
inherently lacked neutrality. McMullen, 355 F.3d at 494. 
McMullen is inapposite because the arbitration service selected
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by PWC, not PWC or Gentry, would control the pool of potential
 
arbitrators under the Limited Warranty. We decline to conclude
 
that PWC's potential conflict of interest constitutes bias
 
rendering the arbitrator-selection process under the Limited
 
Warranty so "fundamentally unfair" as to be unenforceable.
 
In this case, the circuit court invalidated the
 
arbitration selection provision before PWC even designated the
 
"reputable arbitration service" that would pick the neutral
 
arbitrator and before the neutral arbitrator was selected. The
 
circuit court's actions were premature. Nishimura Plaintiffs are
 
not precluded from challenging the arbitration service designated
 
by PWC or the neutral arbitrator selected by that service for
 
bias upon appropriate proof before the start of the arbitration
 
proceedings. However, the circuit court's action of invalidating
 
the arbitration selection provision and divesting PWC of the
 
opportunity to even designate an arbitration service was
 
improper.
 
In order to avoid enforcement of an allegedly
 
unconscionable arbitration clause, Nishimura Plaintiffs were
 
required to present evidence of actual partiality or bias of the
 
arbitration service designated by PWC or the neutral arbitrator
 
selected. Doctor's Associates, Inc. v. Stuart, 85 F.3d 975, 981
 
(2nd Cir. 1996) (holding that an arbitration agreement was not
 unconscionable where the agreement's plain language put parties
 
on notice of potential arbitration costs and the party seeking to
 
avoid enforcement failed to present credible evidence indicating
 
bias on the part of the arbitrator-selector or its arbitrators,
 
"particularly because [the parties'] claims have not yet gone to
 
arbitration.") (citing 9 U.S.C. § 10(a)). Nishimura Plaintiffs'
 
contentions, based on circumstances of PWC's business
 
relationships, constitutes a "generalized attack" on PWC's
 
impartiality as an arbitration service selector and thus "rest on
 
suspicion of arbitration . . . [that is] far out of step with our
 
current strong endorsement of the federal statutes favoring this
 
method of resolving disputes." Gilmer v. Interstate/Johnson Lane
 
Corp., 500 U.S. 20, 30 (U.S. 1991) (citation, internal quotation
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
marks, and brackets omitted); see also Marsh v. First USA Bank,
 
N.A., 103 F.Supp.2d 909 (N.D. Texas 2000) (rejecting credit card
 
holder's pre-arbitration contention that the arbitration service-
selector and defendant bank would select biased arbitrators to
 
defeat their consumer claims as "merely illusory" concerns).
 
Gentry cites Carboni v. Lake
, 562 F.Supp.2d 585
 
(S.D.N.Y. 2008), which held: 9 U.S.C. § 10 (providing for the
 
vacation of an arbitration award) does not authorize a court to
 
refuse to enforce an arbitration agreement on the basis of one
 
party's perception that the proceedings will favor his or her
 
opponent; and a party attempting to avoid arbitration must show
 
that 9 U.S.C. § 10 and applicable state rules were inadequate to
 
guard against potential bias on the part of the arbitrator. Id. 
Rather than providing for parties to avoid arbitration through
 pre-arbitration challenges, FAA "protects against bias, by
 
providing that courts may overturn arbitration decisions '[w]here
 
there was evident partiality or corruption of the arbitrators.'" 
Gilmer
, 500 U.S. at 30 (citing 9 U.S.C. § 10(b)) (declining "to
 
indulge the presumption that the parties and arbitral body
 conducting a proceeding will be unable or unwilling to retain
 
competent, conscientious and impartial arbitrators."). Because
 
Nishimura Plaintiffs failed to prove that the arbitration
 
selection process would necessarily result in actual partiality
 
or bias, the circuit court should have confined judicial review
 
to the fairness of the completed arbitration award, at which time
 
9 U.S.C. § 10 could provide for vacating the award upon a finding
 
that the arbitrators acted with evident partiality.
 
As with other contracts, courts must enforce
 
arbitration agreements according to their terms. AT&T Mobility
 
LLC, 131 S. Ct. at 1745. "If in the agreement provision be made
 for a method of naming or appointing an arbitrator or arbitrators
 
or an umpire, such method shall be followed[.]" 9 U.S.C. § 5. 
The Limited Warranty provided that PWC should select the parties'
 
arbitration service in the event that CAS could not do so. The
 
circuit court should have required the parties to arbitrate their
 
dispute pursuant to the Limited Warranty. We conclude that the
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circuit court reversibly erred by denying Gentry's August 29,
 
2012 motion to compel arbitration. Because we so conclude, we
 
need not reach Gentry's other points on appeal.
III. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, the November 13, 2012 "Order
 
Granting in Part and Denying in Part Gentry Homes, Ltd.'s Motion
 to Compel Arbitration Filed August 29, 2012" and the February 4,
 
2013 "Order Denying Gentry Homes' Motion for Reconsideration of
 
the Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Gentry Homes,
 
Ltd.'s Motion to Compel Arbitration [Filed August 29, 2012],
 
Filed on November 13, 2012" both entered in the Circuit Court of
 
the First Circuit are vacated, and this case is remanded for
 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Ryan H. Engle
Sarah M. Love
 Summer L. Sylva
(Bays Lung Rose & Holma)
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Melvin Y. Agena
(Law Offices of Melvin Y. Agena)
and
 Glenn K. Sato
 (Law Office of Glenn K. Sato)
and
 Graham B. Lippsmith
(Girardi Keese)
for Plaintiffs-Appellees.
 
13
 