NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0001033 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
PELE DEFENSE FUND, a Hawaii non-profit corporation, et al.,
Plaintiffs-Appellants.
v.
DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES,
DIVISION OF FORESTRY AND WILDLIFE, STATE OF HAWAI #I,
Defendants-Appellees
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0568)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
Plaintiffs-Appellants Pele Defense Fund, a Hawai# i non-
profit corporation, Ralph Palikapu Dedman, Terri L. Napeahi, and
John Joseph Griffiths, Jr., (collectively, PDF ) appeal from the
Amended Final Judgment entered in favor of Defendants-Appellees
Department of Land and Natural Resources, Division of Forestry
and Wildlife, State of Hawai# i (DLNR) on July 24, 2014, in the
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit ( circuit court).1   
On appeal, PDF contends that the circuit court erred
by: (1) applying an incorrect standard in reviewing an
Environmental Assessment ( EA) and Finding of No Significant
Impact (FONSI) by DLNR, and failing to acknowledge that the Ka #û
1  The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Forest Reserve Management Plan (Management Plan) may have
significant effects on the environment making a FONSI
inappropriate; and (2) failing to award attorneys' fees under
Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 607-14.5 (2016) due to DLNR's
allegedly frivolous claim that the Management Plan was exempt
from preparation of an EA.
  For the reasons discussed below, we affirm
.
I.Background
A.EA and FONSI
The Ka#û Forest Reserve (Reserve) consists of 
61,641 acres of state land located on the southeastern side of
the island of Hawai #i.  The Division of Forestry and Wildlife
(DOFAW) is the division within DLNR responsible for protecting,
managing, and monitoring the resources in the Reserve.  As set
out in the EA, the Reserve was established to "protect the forest
on the lower slopes of Mauna Loa, with particular regard for
water supply of the agricultural lands of Ka #û."  The Management
Plan states that the Reserve "is an important area for public use
which includes hunting, recreational opportunities, cultural
uses, personal gathering, and educational programs and
activities."  Moreover, the Reserve contains a variety of endemic
species of birds and plants.  The Reserve also provides a habitat
for several endangered birds, including the Hawai #i Creeper, the
Hawai#i #Âkepa, and the Hawaiian Hawk ( #Io).  The Management Plan
notes that it is "one in a series of site-specific plans to be
prepared by [DOFAW] for individual forest reserves in the State
of Hawai# i."
The Management Plan proposes that the following
management actions be undertaken as part of a fifteen-year
management plan throughout or for selected areas of the Ka# û
Forest Reserve: 
•Fence management areas in an approximately
12,000 acre portion of the Reserve and remove
feral and introduced ungulates from within
fenced management areas for watershed and native
ecosystem health. 
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
•Remove high priority non-native, invasive
plants.
•Implement non-native predator control. 
•Restore #Alalâ to the wild.  
•Continue forest bird surveys to assess changes
in bird population and distribution.
•Survey and inventory rare native plants and
animals (including insects and snails).
•Improve habitat and recover rare and endangered
plants by propagation and re-introduction of
plants into appropriately fenced and protected
habitat. 
•Maintain existing public access roads and
develop new routes to increase access,
particularly across private and state-leased
lands below the Reserve. 
•Continue to facilitate public hunting in the
Reserve by developing new access routes to
increase hunter access.
•Develop trails and recreational amenities. 
•Hire outreach staff and work with partners to
provide outreach and education (e.g. volunteer
service trips, student internships, and school
programs) for the community to enhance public
understanding of the Reserve's unique native
forest. 
•Respond to fires, as needed.
•Monitor forest for insects and disease and
conduct other management as required (control of
damaging insects, slugs, and/or plant disease).
•Consider environmentally and socially
appropriate ways to make the Reserve
economically self-supporting to support
protection and management. 
•Work with adjacent private landowners on
cooperative management to make better use of
limited funding and resources and more
effectively manage interconnected landscapes. 
On May 11, 2012, DLNR sent a Draft Environmental
Assessment (Draft EA ) of the Management Plan to the Office of
Environmental Quality Control ( OEQC).  On May 23, 2012, the Draft
EA was published in the OEQC's The Environmental Notice .  After
the thirty-day public comment period, and in response to the
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
comments, a Final Environmental Assessment ( Final EA) was
prepared.
In the Final EA, DLNR evaluated three alternative sites
(Alternative A, B, and C) for implementation of the Management
Plan.  All three alternatives included the "construction of
12,000 acres of new fenced management units in the upper
elevation central portions of the Reserve in which ungulates will
be removed and the native forest protected."  DLNR ultimately
selected "implementation Alternative B, which involves the upper,
central portion of the Reserve."
On September 28, 2012, the Board of Land and Natural
Resources (BLNR ) approved and accepted the Final EA, with
issuance of a FONSI for the project.  The Final EA included the
following: Final EA; Appendix 1 - Management Plan; Appendix 2 -
Cultural Impact Statement; Appendix 3 - Public Involvement (Part
A: Response to Early Consultation, Part B: Draft EA Release and
Public Meeting Materials, and Part C: Comments to Draft EA and
Responses). 
On October 3, 2012, DLNR sent its Final EA of the
Management Plan to the OEQC for publication in The Environmental
Notice.  DLNR noted that "[d]uring the public comment period,
written comments were received and responses were prepared for
each comment" and after review of the comments and the Final EA,
DLNR "has determined that this project will not have significant
negative effect on the environment."  The Final EA and FONSI were
published on October 23, 2012.
B.Lawsuit
PDF filed a Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive
Relief (Complaint) on November 20, 2012, seeking to compel DLNR
to comply with environmental review procedures outlined in the
Hawai#i Environmental Protection Act (HEPA ), HRS Chapter 343. 
PDF contended that the Management Plan "would have a significant
effect on the environment of, and [plaintiffs'] interests in, the
Ka#u Forest Reserve[,]" and asserted that plaintiffs are entitled
to temporary, preliminary and permanent injunctive relief to
remedy DLNR's alleged violations of HRS Chapter 343.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On December 5, 2013, DLNR filed a motion for summary
judgment contending, inter alia , that the Management Plan was
exempt from the preparation of an EA.  DLNR asserted that despite
the available exemptions, a decision was made to complete an EA
for the Management Plan to "provide a further layer of review and
protection, and to seek public comment regarding the proposed
action."  DLNR also argued it was entitled to summary judgment
because its determination and finding of no significant impact
was supported under the rule of reason and DLNR's judgment that
an environmental impact statement ( EIS) was not required is
entitled to deference.
On March 17, 2014, the circuit court entered its "Order
Granting [DLNR's] Motion for Summary Judgment" and its Final
Judgment.  PDF filed its first notice of appeal on April 5, 2014.
This appeal was docketed as CAAP-14-0000745.  On June 20, 2014,
this court dismissed the appeal for lack of appellate
jurisdiction.  On July 24, 2014, the circuit court entered the
Amended Final Judgment.  On August 1, 2014, PDF filed a notice of
appeal from the Amended Final Judgment. 
II.Standards of Review
A.Summary Judgment
On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is
reviewed de novo.  See State ex rel. Anzai v. City & Cty. of
Honolulu , 99 Hawai #i 508, 514, 57 P.3d 433, 439 (2002);
Bitney v. Honolulu Police Dep't , 96 Hawai #i 243, 250, 30
P.3d 257, 264 (2001).
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law.  A fact is material if
proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties.  The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party.  In other
words, we must view all of the evidence and inferences
drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the
party opposing the motion.
Kahale v. City & Cty. of Honolulu , 104 Hawai #i 341, 344, 90
P.3d 233, 236 (2004) (citation omitted).
Nuuanu Valley Ass'n v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 119 Hawai# i 90,
96, 194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008). 
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B.Constitutional Issues
"[T]his court reviews questions of constitutional law
de novo, under the right/wrong standard."  Haw. Gov't Emps.
Ass'n, AFSCME Local 152, AFL-CIO v. Lingle, 124 Hawai# i 197, 202,
239 P.3d 1, 6 (2010) (quoting Jou v. Dai–Tokyo Royal State Ins.
Co., 116 Hawai #i 159, 164–65, 172 P.3d 471, 476–77 (2007)).  
C.Attorneys' Fees
A trial court's denial of attorneys' fees is reviewed
under the abuse of discretion standard.  Yoneji v. Yoneji, 137
Hawai#i 299, 309, 370 P.3d 704, 714 (App. 2016) (citing Allstate
Ins. Co. v. Pruett, 118 Hawai #i 174, 179, 186 P.3d 609, 614
(2008)). An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has
"clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a
party litigant."  TSA Int'l Ltd. v. Shimizu Corp. , 92 Hawai #i
243, 253, 990 P.2d 713, 723 (1999) (citation omitted). 
III.Discussion
A.Standard for Reviewing the EA and FONSI
As a threshold matter, PDF contends that the circuit
court erred by applying an incorrect standard in reviewing the EA
and FONSI.  Citing to HRS § 343-5(c)(4) (Supp. 2012), the
definitions of an EA and FONSI set out in HRS § 343-2 (2010), and
Hawai#i Administrative Rules ( HAR) § 11-200-12(b) (1996), PDF
contends that "the proper inquiry for determining the need for an
EIS is whether the proposed actions described in the EA are
likely to have a significant effect on the environment."  PDF
asserts that the circuit court failed to apply this standard and
instead improperly evaluated "whether an environmental impact
statement should have been submitted on the basis of procedural
compliance rather than substantive effects."  PDF contests, inter
alia, the following conclusions made by the circuit court:
The court applies a reasonableness standard as
to the sufficiency of an agency's acceptance of an
environmental document such as an EA, and addresses
itself to whether "[the document] has been compiled in
good faith and sets forth sufficient information to
enable the decision-maker to consider fully the
environmental factors involved and to make a reasoned
decision after balancing the risks of harm to the
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
environment against the benefits to be derived from
the proposed action, as well as to make a reasoned
choice between alternatives." Life of the Land v.
Ariyoshi, 59 Haw. 156, 164-165, 577 P.2d 1116, 1121
(1978).  
The court concludes that the EA is sufficient
under the standards set forth by HRS chapter 343 and
HAR chapter 11-200, and further concludes that DLNR's
determination of a FONSI was appropriate under the
circumstances. Given the lack of any procedural
defects in the environmental review document, the
court further concludes as a matter of law that an
environmental impact statement is not required.
(Emphasis added.)2
Price v. Obayashi Hawaii DLNR contends that pursuant to 
Corp., 81 Hawai #i 171, 182, 914 P.2d 1364, 1375 (1996), the
"legal standard for any environmental review (EA or EIS) is
whether, under the arbitrary and capricious standard, the agency
has taken a hard look at environmental factors and reasonably
2  PDF also contests the circuit court's findings of fact ( FOF) 4-6
setting forth the court's summary of PDF's allegations, which PDF asserts is
not fully correct.  Further, PDF contests FOF's 8, 9, and 11, which state:
8.  Having reviewed the FEA, Cultural Impact
Assessment, Management Plan, and Public Comment
components, the court makes the finding that the
breadth, scope, and content of the documents were
sufficient to adequately inform the decision-maker
(i.e., DLNR) whether further environmental review
(e.g., an environmental impact statement) is needed.
9.  The court finds that matters regarding native
Hawaiian rights and hunting access as raised by
Plaintiffs have been sufficiently addressed in the
FEA, in particular, at subparts 3.4 ("Cultural
Resources" - p. 49 et seq.) and 3.5 ("Socioeconomic
Conditions, Recreation and Public Health" - p. 65 et
seq.). Matters regarding reintroduction of the captive
#alalâ population to the wild have also been
adequately addressed in various references throughout
the FEA, Plan, and Public Comment components.
. . . . 
11.  The court further finds that Plaintiffs have not
shown an entitlement to injunctive relief in this
case, and that the final EA sufficiently addressed
matters as required by rule and statute, as to allow
the head of the DLNR to reasonably conclude that the
subject action under consideration will not have a
significant effect on the environment.
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
sets forth sufficient information to enable the decision-maker
[to make] a reasoned decision."
We do not agree with DLNR regarding the applicable
standard in this case.  Rather, as asserted by PDF, HRS § 343-
5(c)(4) provides that an EIS "shall be required if the agency
finds that the proposed action may have a significant effect on
the environment[.]"  (Emphasis added).  In Kepoo v. Kane # , 106
Hawai#i 270, 288-89, 103 P.3d 939, 957-58 (2005), the Hawai# i
Supreme Court concluded that "the term 'may' in HRS § 343-5(c)
should be construed as 'likely' in common parlance.  The proper
inquiry for determining the necessity of an EIS based on the
language of HRS § 343-5(c), then, is whether the proposed action
will 'likely' have a significant effect on the environment."
(footnote omitted)(emphasis added).
After the appellate briefs were filed in this case, the
Hawai#i Supreme Court decided Kilakila # O Haleakala v. Univ. of
Hawai#i, 138 Hawai# i 364, 382 P.3d 176 (2016), which provides
further guidance on the applicable standard for judicial review
of a FONSI, such as in this case.  Like this case, Kilakila #O
Haleakala arose as a declaratory relief action and addressed
whether an EIS was required after an EA had been completed.  Id.
at 372-73, 382 P.3d at 184-185.
In Kilakila O Haleakala # , the supreme court stated that
"[f]or agency determinations under HEPA, 'the appropriate
standard of review depends on the specific question under
consideration.'"  138 Hawai# i at 375-76, 382 P.3d at 187-88
(quoting Sierra Club v. Dept. of Transp. , 115 Hawai #i 299, 315,
167 P.3d 292, 308 (2007)).  The supreme court further stated
that: 
[g]enerally, a court reviews agency determinations
that involve factual questions under a clearly
erroneous standard. [ Sierra Club , 115 Hawai #i at 315,
167 P.3d 292 at (2007)]; see also Del Monte Fresh
Produce (Haw.), Inc. v. Int'l Longshore & Warehouse
Union, 112 Hawai #i 489, 499, 146 P.3d 1066, 1076
(2006) ("[An agency's] conclusion of law that presents
mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under the
clearly erroneous standard because the conclusion is
dependent upon the facts and circumstances of the
particular case.").  However, "[w]hether or not an
agency has followed proper procedures or considered
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the appropriate factors in making its determination is
a question of law, and will be reviewed de novo."
Sierra Club, 115 Hawai #i at 315, 167 P.3d at 308.
Id. at 376, 382 P.3d at 188 (emphasis added).
A finding of fact or a mixed determination of law and
fact made by an agency 
is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks
substantial evidence to support the finding or
determination, or (2) despite substantial evidence to
support the finding or determination, the appellate
court is left with the definite and firm conviction
that a mistake has been made.  Substantial evidence is
credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and
probative value to enable a person of reasonable
caution to support a conclusion.
Del Monte, 112 Hawai #i at 499, 146 P.3d at 1076 (citations and
internal quotation marks omitted).
In Kilakila # O Haleakala , the University of Hawai# i (UH)
conducted an EA regarding a management plan for an observatory
site located on Haleakala, subsequently determined that the
management plan would have no significant environmental impact,
and thus did not prepare an EIS.  138 Hawai# i at 371-72, 382 P.3d
at 183-84.  The supreme court held that UH's negative declaration
(i.e., its determination that there would be no significant
environmental impact) was "not clearly erroneous."  Id.  at 382,
382 P.3d at 194.  Thus, in light of Kilakila O Haleakala # , an
agency's determination that a proposed action will likely have no
significant impact on the environment is an issue that should be
reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard.
In this case, the circuit court did not apply the
correct standard.  The circuit court cited to Life of the Land v.
Ariyoshi, 59 Haw. 156, 577 P.2d 1116 (1978), which provided that: 
the standard of review which should govern a court's
determination whether an EIS contains sufficient
information to satisfy statutory requirements has been
stated: 
'In making such a determination a court is
governed by the 'rule of reason,' under which an EIS
need not be exhaustive to the point of discussing all
possible details bearing on the proposed action but
will be upheld as adequate if it has been compiled in
good faith and sets forth sufficient information to
enable the decision-maker to consider fully the
environmental factors involved and to make a reasoned
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
decision after balancing the risks of harm to the
environment against the benefits to be derived from
the proposed action, as well as to make a reasoned
choice between alternatives.'
Id. at 164-65, 577 P.2d at 1121 (citation omitted). 
In Life of the Land, the supreme court considered
whether an EIS contained sufficient information, not whether an
EIS was necessary following the completion of an EA and issuance
of a FONSI.  59 Haw. at 158, 577 P.2d at 1118.  As discussed
above, the correct standard to be employed by a reviewing court
in the latter circumstance is whether the subject agency clearly
erred in determining whether the proposed action will likely have
a significant impact on the environment.  Thus, the circuit court
applied the incorrect standard of review.  We will consider de
novo whether, under the appropriate standard, summary judgment
for DLNR was proper.
B.The Environmental Review Process in the Instant Case
The general framework for HEPA is discussed in Kilakila
#O Haleakala: "[i]f an action is subject to environmental review
under HRS § 343–5(a) and is not declared exempt, the applicant of
the proposed project or action must develop a draft [EA]."3  138
Hawai#i at 370, 382 P.3d at 182 (citation omitted).  Following
completion of a draft EA, there is a thirty-day period for review
and comment by the public.  Id.  After the review and comment
phase, "the applicant responds to public comments and finalizes
the draft [EA]" and then the "agency proposing or approving the
action reviews the final [EA] to determine whether the proposed
action could have a significant impact on the environment."  Id.
3  An EA is "an informational document prepared by either the agency
proposing an action or a private applicant, which is used to evaluate the
possible environmental effects of a proposed action."  Sierra Club, 115
Hawai#i at 307, 167 P.3d at 300.  "An environmental assessment must include
the following: (1) a detailed description of the proposed action or project;
(2) an evaluation of the direct, indirect, and cumulative impacts; (3) a
discussion of alternatives to the proposed project or action; and (4) a
description of any measures proposed to minimize potential impacts."  Kilakila
#O Haleakala, 138 Hawai #i at 370, 382 P.3d at 182; see also HRS § 343–2.
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(citing HRS § 343–2; HAR § 11–200–2 (1996); Sierra Club, 115
Hawai#i at 308, 167 P.3d at 301).  A "significant impact" is
defined as:
the sum of effects on the quality of the environment,
including actions that irrevocably commit a natural
resource, curtail the range of beneficial uses of the
environment, are contrary to the state's environmental
policies or long-term environmental goals and
guidelines as established by law, or adversely affect
the economic or social welfare, or are otherwise set
forth in section 11–200–12 of this chapter.
HAR § 11–200–2.
In determining whether an action has a significant
impact on the environment, the agency must consider certain
"significance criteria" outlined in HAR § 11-200-12.4  Kilakila 
4  HAR § 11-200-12 provides: 
§11-200-12  Significance criteria .  (a) In considering
the significance of potential environmental effects,
agencies shall consider the sum of effects on the
quality of the environment, and shall evaluate the
overall and cumulative effects of an action.
(b)  In determining whether an action may have a
significant effect on the environment, the agency
shall consider every phase of a proposed action, the
expected consequences, both primary and secondary, and
the cumulative as well as the short-term and long-term
effects of the action.  In most instances, an action
shall be determined to have a significant effect on
the environment if it:
(1) Involves an irrevocable commitment
to loss or destruction of any
natural or cultural resource;
(2) Curtails the range of beneficial
uses of the environment;
(3) Conflicts with the state's long-term
environmental policies or goals and
guidelines as expressed in chapter
344, HRS, and any revisions thereof
and amendments thereto, court
decisions, or executive orders;
(4) Substantially affects the economic
welfare, social welfare, and
cultural practices of the community
or State;
(continued...)
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
#O Haleakala, 138 Hawai# i at 370, 382 P.3d at 182.  Upon
completion of the final environmental assessment, "if the
reviewing agency determines that the proposed action is likely to
cause a significant impact on the environment, an environmental
impact statement must be prepared."  Id. (citing Price, 81
Hawai#i at 180, 914 P.2d at 1373).  However, if the reviewing
agency determines "that the proposed action will not result in a
significant environmental impact, then the agency must issue and
publish a [FONSI] (i.e., a negative declaration)[.]"  Id. at 370-
71, 382 P.3d at 182-83.  A FONSI is "a determination based on an
[EA] that the subject action will not have a significant effect
4(...continued)
 
(5) Substantially affects public health;
 
(6) Involves substantial secondary 
impacts, such as population changes
or effects on public facilities;
(7) Involves a substantial degradation
of environmental quality;
(8) Is individually limited but
cumulatively has considerable effect
upon the environment or involves a
commitment for larger actions;
(9) Substantially affects a rare,
threatened, or endangered species,
or its habitat;
(10) Detrimentally affects air or water
quality or ambient noise levels;
(11) Affects or is likely to suffer
damage by being located in an
environmentally sensitive area such
as a flood plain, tsunami zone,
beach, erosion-prone area,
geologically hazardous land,
estuary, fresh water, or coastal
waters;
(12) Substantially affects scenic vistas
and viewplanes identified in county
or state plans or studies; or,
(13) Requires substantial energy
consumption.
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and, therefore, will not require the preparation of an
environmental impact statement."  HRS § 343–2; see also HAR 
§ 11–200–2.  "Publication of a negative declaration initiates a
thirty-day period during which that determination may be
challenged through litigation."  Kilakila # O Haleakala , 138
Hawai#i at 371, 382 P.3d at 183 (citing HRS § 343-7(b) (1993)).
In this case, on May 23, 2012, the Draft EA was
published and public comment solicited.  On October 3, 2012, DLNR
sent notice to the OEQC, stating it had determined that the
Management Plan would have no significant environmental impact.
The Final EA and FONSI were published on October 23, 2012.
The Management Plan "proposes management actions to
address threats and better protect the area."  As noted above,
the Management Plan proposes a list of management actions,
including among other things, fencing management areas, removing
ungulates, and restoring the #Alalâ to the wild. 
PDF challenges the circuit court's determination that
DLNR's FONSI was appropriate, arguing that reintroduction of the
#Alalâ and removal of ungulates "must be presumed to have
significant effects on the environment, requiring an EIS."  PDF
argues the FONSI determination does not consider the
environmental impacts arising from these two actions.5
5  PDF makes passing reference in its opening brief to other alleged
impacts.  However, PDF does not present substantive argument on the other
alleged impacts and thus we need not address them.  See Hawai #i Rules of
Appellate Procedure ( HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7) (requiring as part of the opening
brief "[t]he argument, containing the contentions of the appellant on the
points presented and the reasons therefor, with citations to the authorities,
statutes and parts of the record relied upon. . . .  Points not argued may be
deemed waived.").  Even if we considered PDF's general assertion that fencing
would significantly impact the environment, the Final EA considered impacts
from fencing. The Final EA states in part:
DOFAW would subdivide the total fenced area into units of
2,000 to 4,000 acres that would be fenced over time, as
funding becomes available.  The final configuration and
number of fenced unit(s) would consider factors such as
water resources, quality of native ecosystems and habitat
for native species, level of damage from ungulates, public
use of area, cooperation with adjacent landowners, terrain,
(continued...)
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1.Reintroduction of the # Alalâ 
PDF contends that reintroducing the # Alalâ into #Io
habitat would impact both birds, which are endangered, and thus,
constitutes a significant effect.  Under HAR § 11-200-12(b)(9),
an action will have a significant effect on the environment if it
"[s]ubstantially affects a rare, threatened, or endangered
species, or its habitat[.]"   
PDF contends that the Final EA is insufficient because
DLNR disregarded the availability of other suitable release sites
for the #Alalâ.  However, DLNR's Final EA considered and
evaluated a total of six release sites, three of which are in the
Reserve.  In a response to a letter submitted during the public
comment period, DLNR noted: 
Reintroduction of captive-reared birds is an active area of
conservation research and often requires multiple attempts
and innovation before success is achieved ( #Alalâ Recovery
Plan).  Previous introductions of #Alalâ have not been
successful; planned future releases will incorporate lessons
learned from these previous attempts.  Between 1993 and
1998, twenty-seven juvenile #Alalâ were released in South
Kona. The South Kona location was chosen to allow for
integration with the remaining wild population, but after
their release twenty-one of the released birds died.  The
remaining six were recaptured and returned to the captive
flock.  Analysis following this attempt showed that habitat
conditions in the release site were not optimal due to the
degraded forest understory, the open forest canopy which
made the #Alalâ vulnerable to predation by #Io and other
mammalian predators as well as disease (toxoplasmosis and
other infections).  Based on this analysis it is believed
that a successful release site will require fencing a
management area and removing ungulates to protect existing
forest and enhance regeneration of understory vegetation;
erecting holding or release aviaries at release sites;
predator control; restoring food plants of the #Alalâ at the
release site; and control of invasive species. 
5(...continued)
logistics, accessibility, and feasibility for effective
feral ungulate removal.  Field surveys would be conducted to
identify locations for the planned fence alignments, and
final fence alignments would be sited to avoid any impact to
botanical, faunal, and archaeological resources.  Fences are
not meant to restrict public access into management units,
and walkovers and gates would be installed in order for
people to access fenced areas.
The Final EA and Management Plan also state that DOFAW staff will
conduct regular fence inspection and maintenance as necessary.
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Additionally, staff will need to maintain a constant
presence for an undetermined length of time to care for,
feed, monitor, and track released birds.  
The Reserve was determined to be a suitable site for the
reintroduction of the #Alalâ because of the existing
condition of the tree canopy and understory vegetation, as
well as the reserve being within the historic range of the
species.  Vegetation at six potential #Alalâ release sites
were assessed and ranked for suitability (Price, J. & J.D.
Jacobi 2007).  Three of the six potential sites were in the
Reserve and each ranked high for suitable release sites.  In
reviewing this vegetation study, the Reserve was determined
to be a high priority release site by the #Alalâ Recovery
Implementation Team. The six potential #Alalâ release sites
that are currently being considered are listed below in
order of overall ranking for suitability.  Alternative sites
offered for release of the #Alalâ in the draft EA included
the southwest, central and northern sites portions of the
Reserve as well as the no action alternative.  Releases may
occur in multiple sites and all the areas listed below are
still considered as potential alternatives for future
releases.
[1] Southwest Ka #û: Southern portion of the Reserve and
portions of the Kahuku section of Hawai #i Volcanoes
National Park. 
[2] Keauhou-K ûlani: Portions of Keauhou Ranch, K îlauea
Forest, and K ûlani.
[3] Central Ka #û: Central portion of the Reserve northeast
of the 1950 lava flow.
[4] Kapâpala: Northern portion of the Reserve and
portions of the Kap âpala Ranch and Kap âpala Forest
Reserve.
[5] Kona Forest Unit: Kona Forest Unit of Hakalau Forest
National Wildlife Refuge and adjacent private lands.  
[6] Kona Hema: Kona Hema Preserve and the Honom âlino
Section of the South Kona Forest Reserve. 
. . . .
 
The Division will continue to consult with [U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service ( USFWS)] on all ongoing management
activities, such as ungulate removal and invasive plant
control that may have a potential impact to the #Alalâ.  The
#Alalâ will not be released into an area until the majority
of animal control activities have been completed, and
management of invasive plants will primarily occur in the
lower elevation portions of the reserve whereas the release
of the #Alalâ is currently proposed for high elevation areas
where fewer invasive plants are present.  The plan does not
propose any specific management actions to protect the
#Alalâ from predators such as the owl or #Io.  The Division
and USFWS are developing a detail release plan, which may
include provisions for training captive birds to avoid
predators prior to release. Additionally, the Reserve has
15NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
been identified as a suitable release site due to the intact
forest canopy, which will help released birds hide from
predators.  The Division will be conducting studies to
determine #Io density and its relationship to the
availability of rodents and game birds as well as vegetation
density.  This action is included in the management plan as
a proposed action related to the release of #Alalâ and has
not yet been implemented.
  
Furthermore, the Final EA reiterates that out of the
six sites examined for the reintroduction of the #Alalâ, the
"southwest and central Ka #û study sites ranked first and second
overall[.]"  The Final EA explained that the "Reserve is a high
priority site to restore [the #Alalâ] to the wild due to the
large size and elevational range and diversity of wet and mesic
forest types, as well as the fact that the area recently
supported #Alalâ."  The Final EA recognizes that "restoration of
a wild population of #Alalâ will require minimizing threats,
including predator control, and protecting significant areas of
forest . . . from ungulates."  DLNR considered and evaluated
alternative release sites for the # Alalâ and found that the
selected site was one of the best suited to restore the #Alalâ to
the wild.
PDF also contends that the reintroduction of the Alalâ
into the habitat of the # Io fails to consider the significant
effect it may have on the #Io.  PDF contends that the "hawk was
overshadowed by the EA's emphasis on the crow release idea--thus
providing another significant impact the EA did not address." 
PDF argues that the Final EA fails to discuss conservation of the
#Io habitat.  However, the Final EA stated that the " #Alalâ
release effort will involve both physical infrastructure such as
release aviaries and intensive research on # Io density, habitat
and behavior and its interaction with # Alalâ."  Further, the
Final EA contains a section regarding the birds in the Reserve
and discusses how the native birds of Ka #û (which includes the
#Io) would "benefit substantially."  In this regard, the Final EA
states:#
16NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Most of the actions proposed as part of the Management Plan
will produce highly beneficial impacts to native species. 
In particular, the protection of fencing, ungulate removal,
weed control and outplanting are critical to the long-term
health and recovery of native ecosystems that provides
habitat for threatened and endangered plants and animals. 
Such actions are recommended parts of U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service Recovery Plans (see sub-appendix D of Appendix 1 for
list).
The native birds of Ka #û will benefit substantially. 
Removal of feral ungulates will allow native understory
plants and trees to regenerate, providing additional areas
for birds to forage for fruit and nectar resources, and
perpetuating the forest.  Removing pigs will reduce the
number of mosquito breeding sites, which reduces the
transmission of avian diseases and the spread of non-native
plants.  The former is critically important as rising
temperatures associated with climate change broaden the 
elevation band over which mosquitoes and the avian malaria
parasite will be able to survive, reducing the overall area
of disease-free native forest bird habitat.
PDF does not present a discernable argument as to how
the Management Plan as it relates to the #Io may have a
significant negative effect.  PDF's only argument appears to be a
conclusory contention that without a further examination of the
#Io habitat, the Management Plan will have a significant impact
on the environment.
In the Final EA, DLNR expressly considered HAR § 11-
200-12(b)(9) and found that "[t]he project protects rare,
threatened and endangered species and their habitat."   Given the
record, it appears there is substantial evidence to support
DLNR's finding of no significant impact related to reintroduction
of the #Alalâ in the Management Plan, such that the FONSI in this
regard is not clearly erroneous; and the record does not indicate
any genuine issue of material fact as to whether DLNR adequately
considered the impacts from the planned reintroduction of the
#Alalâ.  See Kilakila # O Haleakala , 138 Hawai# i at 382-83, 382
P.3d at 194-95 (regarding the applicable standard for review).
17NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2.Removal of Ungulates
i. Significant Effect Issues 
PDF asserts that the removal of ungulates (specifically
pigs) constitutes a significant effect under HAR §§ 11-200-
12(b)(1), (2), and (4).  HAR § 11-200-12(b) provides, in relevant
part: 
In determining whether an action may have a
significant effect on the environment, the agency shall
consider every phase of a proposed action, the expected
consequences, both primary and secondary, and the cumulative
as well as the short-term and long-term effects of the
action.  In most instances, an action shall be determined to
have a significant effect on the environment if it: 
(1) Involves an irrevocable commitment to loss or
destruction of any natural or cultural resource; 
(2) Curtails the range of beneficial uses of the
environment;
. . . . 
(4) Substantially affects the economic welfare, social
welfare, and cultural practices of the community or
State[.]
In 2000, the legislature enacted Act 50 which added
certain requirements for considering impacts on cultural
practices due to proposed actions that are subject to the
environmental review process.  2000 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 50
(hereinafter Act 50 ), § 1 at 93.  The legislature amended the
definition of "significant effect" in HRS § 343-2 to include
actions that "adversely affect . . . cultural practices of the
community and State."  Act 50, § 2 at 93-94. The purpose of the
amendment was to "clarify that the preparation of [EAs] or [EISs]
should identify and address effects on Hawaii's culture, and
traditional and customary rights."  Act 50, § 1 at 93.  The
legislature recognized that 
the past failure to require native Hawaiian cultural impact
assessments has resulted in the loss and destruction of many
important cultural resources and has interfered with the
exercise of native Hawaiian culture.  The legislature
further finds that due consideration of the effects of human
activities on native Hawaiian culture and the exercise
18NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
thereof is necessary to ensure the continued existence,
development, and exercise of native Hawaiian culture.  
Id.
Here, the Final EA includes a section entitled
"Cultural Resources."  It states in relevant part: 
[i]t is noteworthy that the domestic pigs raised by
Hawaiians did not often enter the forest and were not
apparently hunted (Maly and Maly 2004; Burrows et al
2007).  The eminent Hawaiian ethnographer Kep â Maly
conducted an extensive review of over 60,000 Hawaiian
land documents ranging from 1846 to 1910 looking for
references to pua#a,[6] and "nearly every reference was
in the context of them being near-home and as being
cared for (raised), not hunted" (Maly and Maly
2004:200).  Maly also reviewed writings from native
authors such as Malo, #Î#î, and Kamakau and discovered
that the term "hunting" was rarely ever used in
historical records, and that "hunting" referred to
traditional collection of native birds for food or
their feathers (2004).  Burrows et al (2007) stated
that the only reference to hunting of mammals in the
archival resources and traditional knowledge sources
they reviewed was to hunting rats with bows and
arrows.  In the early 1800s hunting was a more common
practice for Native Hawaiians, but they were primarily
hunting bullocks, goats and other introduced grazers.
Additionally, these hunting practices were mainly
carried out at the request of landlords and ranchers.
Keala Pono Archaeological Consulting also prepared a
Cultural Impact Assessment ( CIA) which is attached as Appendix 2
to the Final EA.  The CIA was prepared using "archival research
as well as community consultation with knowledgeable parties
recognized as having a cultural, historical, genealogical, or
managerial connection to the project area in Ka #û."  The CIA
states in the relevant part: 
[w]hile the issue of whether hunting pua#a is a traditional
cultural practice was not specifically brought up in the
consultation process, it should be briefly mentioned here,
as there continues to be differing opinions on whether or
not hunting for pigs is considered a traditional cultural
6  Pua#a is defined as "[p]ig, hog, swine, pork."  Mary Kawena Pukui &
Samuel H. Elbert, Hawaiian Dictionary 344 (rev. ed. 1986) ( "Hawaiian
Dictionary" ).
19NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
practice.  As evident in the mana#o[7] provided by the
community participants of Ka #û, all of them stated that they
rely on hunting for subsistence, and some of them also
believe that the pua#a is an integral component of a
healthy, balanced forest.  Furthermore, it was stated that
hunting has occurred for generations in Ka #û, and the
knowledge of this practice has also been passed on. 
However, some cultural practitioners, scientists and
historians, such as Dr. Charles Burrows, Kepa Maly,
and Charles Isaacs Jr. have researched and presented
materials indicating that pigs were never hunted game
for ancient Hawaiians (2007).  Rather, Hawaiians had
domesticated pigs and never had the need to hunt them. 
Furthermore, Burrows et al. (2007) state that the only
reference to hunting in the archival resources and
from traditional knowledge sources that they reviewed
was to hunting rats with bows and arrows.  While they
admit that the pua#a did play an important role in
Hawaiian history because of its function as a food
source and cultural symbol, they were never utilized
for recreational or subsistence hunting.
  
Despite the uncertainty expressed in the CIA, DLNR
recognized that pig hunting "is considered by many to be a
cultural practice[.]"  According to DLNR, 139 residents in Ka #û
District had hunting licenses in 2010.  The Final EA also notes
that an unknown number of Ka# û residents hunt in the Reserve
without hunting licenses.  DLNR evaluated three alternative sites
for the implementation of the Management Plan, and concluded that
implementation of Alternative B would not have a "substantial
impact on hunting, based on its relatively remote location and
the fact that it takes up only 20% of the Reserve, leaving other
areas open to hunting[.]" (Emphasis omitted).  DLNR provides
"over 600,000 acres of public hunting on the Island of Hawai #i"
and only about "4 percent is currently fenced with hooved animal
populations effectively controlled."  The Final EA "emphasizes
increasing access to lower portions of the Reserve to allow for
public hunting while increasing watershed and native ecosystem
protection in more remote, inaccessible upper portions of the
7  Mana#o is a "[t]hought, idea, belief, opinion[.]"  Hawaiian
Dictionary at 236.    
20NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Reserve through fencing of management units and removal of feral
ungulates."  Moreover, in response to comment on the Management
Plan, DLNR stated that the "[l]ocations for fencing and ungulate
management were chosen in areas where few hunters currently
access due to the remoteness of the site in order to minimize any
significant impact to major hunting areas."  Thus, the Final EA
considers the cultural implications of the Management Plan and
the effect on hunters.  
Regarding PDF's argument that the removal of pigs from
the management area constitutes a significant effect on the
environment under HAR §§ 11-200-12(b)(1), (2), and (4), PDF
provides no clear argument demonstrating how it "[i]nvolves an
irrevocable commitment to loss . . . of any natural or cultural
resource[,]" "[c]urtails the range of beneficial uses of the
environment[,]" or "affects the economic welfare, social welfare,
and cultural practices of the community[.]"  The Final EA
evaluates the factors that must be considered when determining
whether an action has a significant effect on the environment
under HAR § 11-200-12(b), stating in relevant part:
1) Involves an irrevocable commitment to loss or
destruction of any natural or cultural resource.  
Implementation of the Plan would benefit biological
and watershed resources, including natural resources
utilized for cultural practices.  Impacts to pig
hunting, which is considered by many to be a cultural
practice, would occur but be less than significant
because of the proposed locations of management areas.
DOFAW seeks to balance providing public hunting
opportunities in the Reserve with the protection of
native ecosystems and watersheds, and the Plan
includes actions to substantially facilitate public
hunting in the Reserve. 
2) Curtails the range of beneficial uses of the
environment.
No aspect of the Plan would curtail any beneficial use
in the long term, and implementation would sustain
many beneficial habitat and watershed uses that would
otherwise be jeopardized if not lost. 
. . . . 
21NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4) Substantially affects the economic or social
welfare of the community or state.
The proposed action will not substantially affect the
economic or social welfare of the community or State.
It is expected to contribute to the economic and
social well-being of local communities and the State
through long-term improvement in the health of native
forests and watersheds.  Effects to pig hunting will
not be significant, and other subsistence resources
produced in or by the Reserve would be substantially
enhanced.  Healthy native forests offer recreational,
cultural and watershed values that contribute to
social welfare.
(Emphasis added.)
Thus, DLNR considered the factors under HAR § 11-200-
12(b) as they pertain to removal of pigs in the Management Plan
and found no significant impact.
The Final EA also included as Appendix 3, the comments
received and DLNR's responses during the public review and
comment phase.8  DLNR's responses to comments reflect that
Alternative B was chosen for its remote location and minimized
impact on hunting to major hunting areas.  DLNR noted it had
conducted numerous field trips and meetings with local hunters
and chose Alternative B because "few hunters currently access
[the specific portion of the Reserve] due to the remoteness of
the site[.]"  Moreover, 80% of the Reserve will still be
available and open for hunting use.  DLNR determined that any
affect to the hunters will be "mitigated by increasing access to
large portions of the Reserve still available for hunting and by
involving hunters in ungulate removal activities."
Given the record, DLNR's finding that the Management
Plan would not cause a significant impact with regard to the
removal of ungulates was not clearly erroneous, and the record
8 PDF points to a public meeting held on June 2, 2012 where almost 100
Ka#û residents and hunters attended and there was opposition to any fencing or
ungulate control.  The Final EA reflects the criticism of the Management Plan
by members of the public, and also provides DLNR's responses to comments. 
22NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
does not indicate any genuine issues of material fact relating to
whether DLNR adequately considered the environmental impacts from
removing pigs from the management area before issuing the FONSI. 
See Kilakila # O Haleakala , 138 Hawai #i at 382-83, 382 P.3d at 194-
95 (regarding the applicable standard for review).
ii.Traditional Hawaiian Rights Under Article
XII, section 7 
PDF also argues that pig hunting is a constitutionally
protected traditional and customary native Hawaiian right and
thus DLNR's plan to remove pigs from the designated area
constitutes a per se violation of Article XII, section 7 of the
Hawai#i Constitution.  PDF cites no authority for its assertion
of a per se violation.
Article XII, section 7 states: "The State reaffirms and
shall protect all rights, customarily and traditionally exercised
for subsistence, cultural and religious purposes and possessed by
ahupua#a[9] tenants who are descendants of native Hawaiians who
inhabited the Hawaiian Islands prior to 1778, subject to the
right of the State to regulate such rights."
In State v. Hanapi , 89 Hawai #i 177, 970 P.2d 485
(1998), the Hawai #i Supreme Court held:
In order for a defendant to establish that his or her
conduct is constitutionally protected as a native Hawaiian
right, he or she must show, at minimum, the following three
factors.  First, he or she must qualify as a "native
Hawaiian" within the guidelines set out in [ Public Access
Shoreline Hawaii v. Hawai #i Cty. Planning Comm'n , 79 Hawai #i
425, 903 P.2d 1246 (1995) ( PASH)]. . . . PASH stated that
"those persons who are 'descendants of native Hawaiians who
inhabited the islands prior to 1778,' and who assert
otherwise valid customary and traditional Hawaiian rights
are entitled to [constitutional] protection regardless of
their blood quantum ."
Second, once a defendant qualifies as a native
Hawaiian, he or she must then establish that his or her
claimed right is constitutionally protected as a customary
or traditional native Hawaiian practice. . . .
9  Ahupua #a is a "[l]and division usually extending from the uplands to
the sea[.]" Hawaiian Dictionary at 9.
23NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Finally, a defendant claiming his or her conduct is
constitutionally protected must also prove that the exercise
of the right occurred on undeveloped or "less than fully
developed property."
Id. at 185-86, 970 P.2d at 493-94 (citations and footnote
omitted); see also State v. Pratt, 127 Hawai# i 206, 207, 277 P.3d
300, 301 (2012).
Given the record in this case, PDF has not established
that its members or the individual plaintiffs meet the Hanapi
test such that they have a constitutionally protected traditional
and customary native Hawaiian right to hunt pigs in the Ka# û
Forest Reserve.  None of the declarations or evidence submitted
by PDF in this case demonstrate that the three-part Hanapi test
is met by any particular individual.  At most, Ralph Palikapu
Dedman attests generally in his declaration that "Plaintiffs are
exercising customary and traditional cultural and subsistence
rights possessed by ahupua#a tenants who are descendants of
native Hawaiians inhabiting the Hawaiian islands prior to 1778."
However, this statement does not provide any specifics as to any
individual.  "Bare allegations or factually unsupported
conclusions are insufficient to raise a genuine issue of material
fact, and therefore, insufficient to reverse a grant of summary
judgment."  Reed v. City & Cty. of Honolulu , 76 Hawai #i 219, 225,
873 P.2d 98, 104 (1994) (citations omitted); Chuck Jones &
MacLaren v. Williams, 101 Hawai #i 486, 501, 71 P.3d 437, 452
(App. 2003) (holding that "conclusory statements, in and of
themselves and devoid of specific supporting facts, were not
sufficient to raise [a] genuine issue of material fact[.]");
Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 56(e)(a party opposing
summary judgment "must set forth specific facts showing that
there is a genuine issue for trial.").
Moreover, as to the second Hanapi factor, the Hawai# i
Supreme Court expressed that:  "To establish the existence of a
traditional or customary native Hawaiian practice, we hold that
24NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
there must be an adequate foundation in the record connecting the
claimed right to a firmly rooted traditional or customary native
Hawaiian practice."10  Hanapi, 89 Hawai #i at 187, 970 P.2d at 495
(emphasis added and footnote omitted).  Here, the declarations
submitted by PDF do not provide a foundational basis for
assertion of a traditional or customary native Hawaiian practice,
for instance in the form of an asserted specialized knowledge or
kama#aina witness testimony, as it relates to pig hunting in the
Ka#û Forest Reserve.11
Even if PDF had presented evidence to establish a
plaintiff's constitutionally protected right to pig hunting in
the Ka#û Forest Reserve, this would not end the analysis.
The privilege afforded for native Hawaiian practices, as
expressed in our State constitution and statute, is not
absolute.  The language of the provisions protecting
customary native Hawaiian practices display a textual
commitment to preserving the practices while remaining
mindful of competing interests.  For example, the
constitutional language protecting the right to traditional
and customary practices is qualified by the phrase "subject
to the right of the State to regulate such rights."
Pratt, 127 Hawai #i at 213, 277 P.3d at 307 (citation omitted)
(emphasis added).  With regard to the case law addressing native
Hawaiian rights, the Hawai #i Supreme Court noted that "[a] common
10  An adequate foundation in this context may be established by
specialized knowledge showing the claimed right is a traditional or customary
native Hawaiian practice, such as through expert testimony pursuant to Hawai #i
Rules of Evidence Rule 702.  Hanapi, 89 Hawai #i at 187 n.12, 970 P.2d at 495
n.12.  Hawai #i courts "have also accepted kama #aina witness testimony as proof
of ancient Hawaiian tradition, custom, and usage."  Id.; see also State v.
Palama
, No. CAAP-12-0000434, 2015 WL 8566696 (Haw. App. Dec. 11, 2015) (mem.
op.)
11  PDF also points to a Final Judgment and Findings of Fact and
Conclusions of Law ( FOF/COL) entered by the Honorable Riki May Amano in a case
entitled Pele Defense Fund v. The Estate of James Campbell, Civil No. 89-089
(Hilo), Circuit Court of the Third Circuit, which required that native
Hawaiians be permitted to practice customary and traditional rights in Wao
Kele #O Puna Natural Area Reserve and Puna Forest Reserve, in the Puna
District of the Island of Hawai #i, which was owned by Campbell Estate.  Judge
Amano's Final Judgment and FOF/COL were attached to Dedman's declaration. 
However, Judge Amano's ruling concerns land situated in the Puna District, not
the Ka#û Forest Reserve, and 
as reflected in Judge Amano's FOF/COL, the
evidence and findings in that case related specifically to the area of the
Puna district, and thus are not applicable to this case.
25NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
thread tying all these cases together is an attempt to balance
the protections afforded to native Hawaiians in the State, while
also considering countervailing interests."  Id. at 215, 277 P.3d
at 309.
As pertains to environmental review under HEPA, the
State regulates traditional and customary practices, in part, by
requiring in the definition of "significant effect" consideration
as to whether actions would adversely affect "cultural
practices."  HRS § 343-2.  Here, review of the Final EA, Cultural
Impact Assessment, and the public comments and responses
demonstrate that DLNR acknowledged that pig hunting may be a
native Hawaiian practice that needed to be adequately considered
in its Final EA.  DLNR specifically stated that pig hunting "is
considered by many to be a cultural practice[.]"  DLNR stated
that impacts to pig hunting would occur but "be less than
significant because of the proposed locations of management
areas."  Further, the Final EA states that the Management Plan
preserves pig hunting for those who wish to practice it.  The
Final EA lists all of the individuals and organizations from whom
it received comments during the public comment period.  In its
responses, DLNR addressed concerns raised about pig hunting.
Ultimately, Alternative B was selected because hunters do not
hunt as often in that portion of the Reserve.  Under the
Management Plan, public hunting will be encouraged during the
initial phase of removing pigs from fenced units.  Further, the
remaining eighty percent of the Reserve will be available for
hunters.  On this record, DLNR examined the public's concern
regarding native Hawaiian rights pertaining to pig hunting and on
balance determined that some regulation was necessary to preserve
the native ecosystem and watershed.
Given the above, we disagree with PDF's claim that
DLNR's plan to remove pigs from the designated area constitutes a
per se violation of Article XII, section 7.
26NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Although the circuit court applied an incorrect
standard in reviewing DLNR's issuance of the FONSI, we conclude
for the reasons discussed above that the circuit court did not
err in granting summary judgment in favor of DLNR.
C.Attorneys' Fees
One of DLNR's arguments before the circuit court was
that the Management Plan was exempt from preparation of an EA,
but that an EA was done as an extra layer of review and
protection.  In turn, PDF asserted that DLNR's exemption argument
was frivolous and that PDF was thus entitled to attorneys' fees
and costs under HRS § 607-14.5.12  The circuit court disagreed
with PDF and denied its request for attorneys' fees and costs. 
12  HRS § 607-14.5 provides, in relevant part:  
§607-14.5  Attorneys' fees and costs in civil actions.
(a) In any civil action in this State where a party
seeks money damages or injunctive relief, or both,
against another party, and the case is subsequently
decided, the court may, as it deems just, assess
against either party, whether or not the party was a
prevailing party, and enter as part of its order, for
which execution may issue, a reasonable sum for
attorneys' fees and costs, in an amount to be
determined by the court upon a specific finding that
all or a portion of the party's claim or defense was
frivolous as provided in subsection (b).
(b) In determining the award of attorneys' fees
and costs and the amounts to be awarded, the court 
must find in writing that all or a portion of the
claims or defenses made by the party are frivolous and
are not reasonably supported by the facts and the law
in the civil action.  In determining whether claims or
defenses are frivolous, the court may consider whether 
the party alleging that the claims or defenses are
frivolous had submitted to the party asserting the
claims or defenses a request for their withdrawal as
provided in subsection (c). . . . 
(c) A party alleging that claims or defenses are
frivolous may submit to the party asserting the claims
or defenses a request for withdrawal of the frivolous
claims or defenses, in writing, identifying those
claims or defenses and the reasons they are believed
to be frivolous. 
(Emphasis added).
27NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, PDF disputes the following determination by the
circuit court: 
The claim for attorney's fees in Footnote 8 of
Plaintiffs' Memorandum Opposing State of Hawaii's
Motion for Summary Judgment Filed December 5, 2013
("Footnote 8") is denied.  In adjudicating the  Motion
for Summary Judgment , the Court did review the Party's
arguments on the exemption issue.  The Court finds
that the claim is not frivolous as the term is defined
pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes § 607-14.5 and
Hawaii case law. 
A frivolous claim is "a claim so manifestly and
palpably without merit, so as to indicate bad faith on the
pleader's part such that argument to the court was not required." 
Tagupa v. VIPDesk, 135 Hawai# i 468, 479, 353 P.3d 1010, 1021
(2015) (citations, brackets and internal quotation marks
omitted). "A finding of frivolousness is a high bar; it is not
enough that a claim be without merit, there must be a showing of
bad faith."  Id.  (citations omitted).
In its summary judgment motion, DLNR argued that the
Management Plan was exempt from the preparation of an
environmental assessment because the Environmental Council had
approved an applicable exemption.  Pursuant to HAR 11-200-8(d),
DLNR had submitted a list of department-wide exemptions to the
Environmental Council.  DLNR asserted that it had obtained an
exemption on July 13, 2011, identified as Exemption 3 Class 1,
which provided exemption for "[f]ences around or to manage rare,
threatened or endangered plants, covered and open areas for
endangered species, game birds and mammals; . . . and for
watershed and native forest management and restoration."  DLNR
asserted that despite the availability of Exemption 3 Class 1, it
had prepared the EA to "provide a further layer of review and
protection, and to seek public comment regarding the proposed
action."
The circuit court did not rely on the purported
exemption in granting DLNR's summary judgment motion.  However,
28NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the circuit court noted that it had reviewed the party's
arguments on the exemption issue and found that DLNR's claim was
not frivolous under HRS § 607-14.5.  We conclude the circuit
court did not abuse its discretion.  In this case, the parties
disputed a variety of issues, including the applicable standard
for judicial review of DLNR's actions.  Even if not meritorious,
there is no showing that DLNR's exemption argument was made in
bad faith.  Tagupa, 135 Hawai# i at 479, 353 P.3d at 1021.  As
such, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying
PDF's request for attorneys' fees and costs under HRS § 607-14.5.
IV.Conclusion 
Based on the above, the Amended Final Judgment, filed
on July 24, 2014, in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit is
affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 22, 2018.
On the briefs:
James M. Dombroski,
for Plaintiffs-Appellants.  
Presiding Judge
William J. Wynhoff,
Colin J. Lau,
Deputy Attorneys General,
Department of Attorney General,
for Defendants-Appellees.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
29