NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000903
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ALISON JOAN SANCHEZ,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
COUNTY OF KAUA 'I, KAUA 'I POLICE DEPARTMENT, ERIC CASPILLO,
BARRY DeBLAKE, DOE INVESTIGATORS AND OFFICERS, et al,
Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-0265)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Alison Joan Sanchez (Sanchez)
 
1
appeals from the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit's  (circuit
 
court).
 
(1)
 "Final Judgment as to All Claims and Parties"
 
(Final Judgment), entered June 9, 2014;
 
(2) "Order Granting Defendant Barry DeBlake's Motion to
 
Dismiss, or in the Alternative, for Summary Judgment Filed on
 
August 6, 2013," entered November 7, 2013;
 
(3) "Order Granting Defendants County of Kaua 'i and 
Kaua'i Police Department's Joinder to Defendant Eric Caspillo's 
Motion to Dismiss, or in the Alternative, for Summary Judgment 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Filed on August 6, 2013, Filed August 9, 2013," entered November
 
7, 2013; and
 
(4) "Order Granting Defendant Eric Caspillo's Motion to
 
Dismiss, or in the Alternative, for Summary Judgment Filed on
 August 6, 2013," entered November 7, 2013.
I.
 
On appeal, Sanchez contends the circuit court erred 
because, with respect to their claim of qualified immunity, there was a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Defendants-Appellees Kaua
'i Police Department (KPD) Officers Eric Caspillo 
(Officer Caspillo) and Barry DeBlake (Officer DeBlake) (together,
Officers) acted with malice when they arrested her on December 
24, 2008 for disobeying a police officer in violation of Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291C-23 (1993).2 
Defendant-Appellee County of Kaua 'i (County) and KPD 
contend the circuit court did not err because "Sanchez presented no 'clear and convincing proof' that Officers Caspillo and DeBlake had acted with actual malice." 
Officers Caspillo and DeBlake contend the circuit court
 
did not err because Sanchez failed to "satisfy her burden to
 respond to the motion for summary judgment and demonstrate
 specific facts, as opposed to general allegations, that present a
 genuine issue worthy of trial."
 
Sanchez argues that the circuit court erred in granting
 
the Defendants' motions to dismiss or in the alternative for
 
2
 HRS § 291C-23 provides that it is "a petty misdemeanor for any
person to wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction
of any police officer invested by law with authority to direct, control, or
regulate traffic."
 
On January 19, 2010, the County of Kaua' i Office of the 
Prosecuting Attorney dismissed its March 4, 2009 complaint against Sanchezwith prejudice. 
On December 23, 2010, Sanchez filed the complaint in this case
against the County, KPD, Officer Caspillo and Officer DeBlake (collectively,
Defendants), and "Doe" individuals and entities. Sanchez's complaint stated
that Sanchez's action against the Defendants was for "Assault and Battery,
False Arrest/False Imprisonment, Malicious Prosecution, Negligent Hiring,
Training, Supervision, Discipline and Retention, Negligent Investigation,
Civil Conspiracy, and Punitive Damages."
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
summary judgment because there was a genuine issue of material
 
fact as to whether Officers Caspillo and DeBlake exhibited malice
 towards Sanchez. Sanchez argues that "the contemptuous and
 hateful manner in which the arrest took place confirmed [Officers
 DeBlake and Caspillo] were acting with malice." Sanchez contends
 that "[t]he manner in which the [Officers] glared at her clearly
 showed the contempt they had for her" and that "[s]he could not
 understand why they treated her in such a hateful manner."
 Sanchez argues that the Officers' "appearance, mannerism and
 actions in forcefully grabbing [Sanchez's] arms, twisting them
 behind her back and throwing her into a police car, belie their
 bare assertions" that they had no malice. Sanchez argues that
 there are "genuine material facts at issue" because Officers
 Caspillo and DeBlake "acted without justification or excuse in
 committing a wrongful act, (twisting [Sanchez's] arms and
 throwing her into a police car and driving recklessly causing her
 injury to her shoulder) in reckless disregard of the law" and
 "did so with ill will and wickedness of heart as evidenced by
 their countenance when committing the act."
 
The County and KPD argue that the circuit court did not
 
err because rather than present "'clear and convincing proof'
 that Officers Caspillo and DeBlake had acted with actual
 malice[,] . . . [Sanchez] simply argued that the fact that she
 was arrested coupled with what she perceived as a glaring look
 from one of the [Officers] constituted contemptuous and hateful
 treatment." The County and KPD argue "that the burden was on
 Sanchez to overcome the Officers' qualified immunity, and that
 Sanchez had failed as a matter of law to do so." The County and
 KPD argue that
 
Sanchez has presented no evidence that she was arrested
without provocation and has not clearly contradicted the
evidence presented in the declarations of Officers Caspillo
and Deblake . . . that she was warned multiple times that
she was not permitted to enter an active investigation
scene . . . [and] that she would be arrested if she did not
desist. . . . Sanchez has presented no evidence that she was
subject to violent treatment that would "infer" malicious
intent, other than stating that the [Officers] put her arms
behind her back to handcuff her – standard arrest procedure.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Officers Caspillo and DeBlake contend the circuit court
 
did not err because Sanchez failed to "satisfy her burden to
 
respond to the motion for summary judgment and demonstrate
 specific facts, as opposed to general allegations, that present a
 genuine issue worthy of trial." Officers Caspillo and DeBlake
 argue that they have qualified immunity because they satisfied
 their initial burden of production that they were entitled to
 summary judgment as a matter of law and Sanchez presented no
 evidence to establish that either officer acted with malice.
 
II.
 
We review the Defendants' motions to dismiss or in the 
alternative for summary judgment as motions for summary judgment because the circuit court considered matters outside the pleadings. See Wong v. Cayetano, 111 Hawai
'i 462, 476, 143 P.3d 
1, 15 (2006) (holding that a motion to dismiss "is transformed into a . . . motion for summary judgment when the circuit court considers matters outside the pleadings" (citing Au v. Au, 63 Haw. 210, 213, 626 P.2d 173, 176 (1981))); Hawai
'i Rules of Civil 
Procedure Rule 12(b) (providing that if on a motion "to dismiss for failure of the pleading to state a claim upon which relief can be granted, matters outside the pleading are presented to and not excluded by the court, the motion shall be treated as one for summary judgment"). 
[N]on-judicial governmental officials, when acting in the
performance of their public duty, enjoy the protection of
what has been termed a qualified or conditional privilege.
This privilege effectively shields the official from
liability, and not from the imposition of the suit itself,
to the extent that the privilege is not abused and thereby
lost. . . . [I]n order for an action to lie against an
official acting under a claim of privilege, it is essential
that the injured party allege and prove, to the requisite
degree, that the official had been motivated by malice and
not by an otherwise proper purpose.
 
Towse v. State, 64 Haw. 624, 631-32, 647 P.2d 696, 702 (1982)
 
(footnotes and citations omitted).
III.
 
With the exception of defamation cases, the term
 
"malice," when used in the context of this qualified privilege, 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is "defined in its ordinary and usual sense" to mean "'the 
intent, without justification or excuse, to commit a wrongful act,' 'reckless disregard of the law or of a person's legal rights,' and 'ill will; wickedness of heart.'" See Awakuni v. 
Awana, 115 Hawai
'i 126, 141, 165 P.3d 1027, 1042 (2007) (brackets 
omitted) (quoting Black's Law Dictionary 977 (8th ed. 2004)) (holding that the "reasonable person" test for determining malice was adopted by Towse "for use in the defamation context"). "The existence or absence of malice is generally a question for the jury. However, when this issue has been removed from the case by uncontroverted affidavits and depositions, and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, summary judgment will be granted." Runnels v. Okamoto, 56 Haw. 1, 5-6, 525 P.2d 1125, 
1129 (1974) (citations omitted). Moreover, the non-moving party cannot establish the existence of a genuine issue of material fact through "bare allegations . . . that the defendants were motivated by malice . . . ." Id. at 6, 525 P.2d at 1129. 
Here, the parties do not dispute that at approximately
 
11 P.M. on December 24, 2008, Sanchez arrived on the scene of a
 traffic collision investigation involving her son and exited her
 vehicle to inquire about the condition of her son, that Officers
 DeBlake and Caspillo told Sanchez to return to her vehicle, and
 that Sanchez continued to question the Officers about her son.
 
Sanchez's complaint alleged that she was "thrown into a
 
police vehicle, arrested and driven without a seat belt in a
 reckless manner to the [KPD]." Sanchez's complaint further
 alleged that "[a]s a result of the physical manner in which
 [Sanchez] was handled she sustained severe and debilitating
 injuries to her shoulder, arm, wrists, neck, back and body."
 Sanchez declared that "[t]he manner in which the [Officers]
 glared at me clearly showed that they had contempt for me. I
 could not understand why they treated me in such a hateful
 manner." Sanchez argued in her Memorandum in Opposition to the
 Defendants' motions that the Officers' "appearance, mannerism and
 actions in forcefully grabbing [Sanchez's] arms, twisting them
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
behind her back and throwing her into a police car, belie their
 
bare assertions [that they had no malice]."
 
In support of their motions, Officers Caspillo and
 
DeBlake submitted, inter alia, their respective declarations and
 Sanchez's answers to interrogatories. In turn, Sanchez's
 opposition to the motions was supported by her declaration and
 her interrogatory responses. The evidence adduced by the two
 sides conflict in that they provide materially different versions
 of the relevant events. Based on the declarations by Officers
 Caspillo and DeBlake, Sanchez attempted to enter the
 investigation scene, was given repeated warnings by the officers
 to return to her vehicle, was warned she would otherwise be
 arrested, refused to comply with the officers' orders, and after
 the officers' warnings she still attempted to walk past them.
 
Officer Caspillo declared that the arrest of Sanchez 
"was completed without use of force or any injuries being sustained to [Sanchez]." Officer Caspillo declared that "[u]pon being arrested, [Sanchez] was placed in the rear of my patrol vehicle without incident where she remained until I could complete my traffic investigation and transport her to the Lihu
'e 
Police Station for booking." Officer DeBlake declared that he "assisted Officer Caspillo in placing [Sanchez's] hands behind in back to be handcuffed and putting her in Officer Caspillo's patrol vehicle." Both Officers declared that they "wanted to do [their] job and keep the traffic collision scene clear for integrity and safety reasons" and "felt no malice toward Sanchez." 
Sanchez's answers to interrogatories describe the
 
events at the accident scene as follows:
 
When we stopped I got out of the car and walked up to the
officers who were standing by their police cars and asked if
everything was okay and mentioned I was Justis' Mom and
wanted to know what happened and if everyone was okay. One
 
officer then told me to get back in my car and I explained I
was worried and just wanted to know what had happened and if
my son was alright. He (Mr. Caspillo) then said that they
were going to arrest me, took out his handcuffs grabbed my
arm twisted it behind of me. I immediately felt a pop and
pain I yelled "awe" my shoulder. Officer (DeBlake) then
grabbed my other arm and placed it behind me and handcuffed
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
me. He opened the police car door and "flew" me in the
police car and closed the door. They did not read me my
rights or tell me what I was getting arrested for just left
me in the police car with no air, sweating and
crying. . . . When [my boyfriend's] Aunty got out of the car
and came to where we was I was already in the police car,
the officers then told them if they don't get back in their
car they will be next.
 
(Emphasis added.) In her declaration, Sanchez similarly attests
 
that:
 
I went to the scene of the accident to determine the extent
 
of my son's injuries. Upon arrival at the accident site I
got out of my car to ascertain about the condition of my
son. When I asked the police officers this question, I was
immediately grabbed and my arms forcefully twisted behind my
back. I was then arrested, handcuffed, thrown into a police
vehicle, and driven without a seat belt in a reckless manner
to the Kauai Police Department. The manner in which the
 officer's [sic] glared at me clearly showed that they had
contempt for me. I could not understand why they treated me
in such a hateful manner. . . . On December 24, 2008,
Defendants DeBLAKE and Caspillo unlawfully detained me
without a warrant or any other legal process and took me
into custody, against my will, and without probable cause.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
In sum, Officer DeBlake and Officer Caspillo attest
 
that Sanchez was arrested after she refused multiple orders by
 
them to remain clear of the accident investigation site and after
 she was warned she would otherwise be arrested; whereas under
 Sanchez's version of events, she was immediately arrested after
 once being told to return to her car, when she asked about her
 son's condition. The parties also dispute the manner in which
 Sanchez was handled upon arrest. At the least, viewing the
 evidence in a light most favorable to Sanchez as the non-moving
 party, as we must for summary judgment purposes, the conflicting
 evidence demonstrates there are genuine issues of material fact
 as to the existence or absence of malice for purposes of
 qualified immunity.
 
IV.
 
The Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit's 
(1)
 "Final Judgment as to All Claims and Parties,"
 
entered June 9, 2014;
 
7

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) "Order Granting Defendant Barry DeBlake's Motion to
 
Dismiss, or in the Alternative, for Summary Judgment Filed on
 
August 6, 2013," entered November 7, 2013;
 
(3) "Order Granting Defendants County of Kaua 'i and 
Kaua'i Police Department's Joinder to Defendant Eric Caspillo's 
Motion to Dismiss, or in the Alternative, for Summary Judgment Filed on August 6, 2013, Filed August 9, 2013," entered November 7, 2013; and 
(4) "Order Granting Defendant Eric Caspillo's Motion to
 
Dismiss, or in the Alternative, for Summary Judgment Filed on
 August 6, 2013," entered November 7, 2013 are vacated and this
 case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this
 opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, July 28, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
William A. Harrison 
(Harrison & Matsuoka)for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Mauna Kea Trask Office of the County AttorneyCounty of Kaua
'i 
for Defendants-AppelleesEric Caspillo, Barry DeBlake,County of Kaua
'i, and Kaua 'i 
Police Department. Associate Judge 
Stephen F. HallOffice of the County AttorneyCounty of Kaua
'i 
for Defendant-AppelleeBarry DeBlake. Associate Judge 
Adam P. Roversi Office of the County AttorneyCounty of Kaua
'i 
for Defendant-AppelleeCounty of Kaua
'i and Kaua 'i 
Police Department 
8
 