NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000678
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
ARIEL RAPOZA,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
CLINTON SOARES and LAURA SOARES,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10,
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10, AND DOE ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 15-1-0560)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Chan and Wadsworth, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellant Ariel Rapoza (Rapoza), appeals from
the December 27, 2016 Final Judgment in favor of Defendants-
Appellees Clinton Soares and Laura Soares (the Soareses), filed
in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).   The
Final Judgment was entered pursuant to the "Order Granting
Defendants' Motion to Dismiss Complaint With Prejudice, Filed
May 10, 2016" (Order Granting MTD) filed on September 27, 2016.1
On March 27, 2015, Rapoza filed a complaint alleging a
civil action for fraud against the Soareses.  The Soareses
1The Honorable Jeannette H. Castagnetti presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
separately filed answers to the complaint in July 2015.  On
September 4, 2015, the Soareses filed a "Motion for Judgment on
the Pleadings, or in the Alternative, Motion to Dismiss Complaint
with Prejudice" (MJP).  On December 2, 2015, the circuit court
held a hearing on the MJP.  The circuit court orally granted the
MJP without prejudice, citing Rapoza's failure to plead fraud
with particularity, in violation of Hawai#i Rules of Civil
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 9(b),  and granted Rapoza leave to file an
amended complaint within thirty days of the entry of the written
order to cure the deficiencies identified by the court.   On
March 4, 2016, the circuit court entered its written order
granting the MJP.  Rapoza did not file an amended complaint
within thirty days of the written order and the record is devoid
of an attempt by Rapoza to seek an extension of the court-imposed
deadline.32
On May 10, 2016, the Soareses filed a Motion to Dismiss
Complaint with Prejudice (MTD), noting Rapoza's failure to file
an amended complaint within the time specified by the circuit
2HRCP Rule 9(b) (2000) provides: "In all averments of fraud or
mistake, the circumstances constituting fraud or mistake shall be stated with
particularity.  Malice, intent, knowledge, and other condition of mind of a
person may be averred generally."
3In granting Rapoza leave to file an amended complaint to properly
plead her fraud allegation with particularity, the circuit court instructed
Rapoza to
specify[] the identity of the person who made the false
representation, the time of the false representation, the
place of the false representation, the content of the false
representation (what was said and/or written), the method by
which the false representation was communicated, the person or
entity to whom the false representation was communicated, and
the injury resulting from any alleged reliance on the false
representation.  If the Plaintiff shall claim that both
Defendants made false representations, she shall separately
specify what false representation each Defendant made, the
time that each false representation was made, the place of
each false representation, the content of each false
representation (what was said and/or written), the method by
which each false representation was communicated, the person
or entity to whom the false representation was made, and each
Defendants' specific role in the fraud, in order that each
Defendant may be placed on proper notice of how they are being
claimed to have specifically participated in any fraud.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
court.  In an untimely filed  memorandum in opposition to the
MTD, Rapoza conceded that she did not file an amended complaint
within the time period provided by the court.  However, Rapoza
sought leave to file an amended complaint that she attached as an
exhibit to her memorandum in opposition.  Rapoza asserted that
this matter "is one that has caused [her] considerable concern"
because "it involves family members and continuing with the
lawsuit by filing the amended complaint was a difficult decision
for her which she only made after lengthy consideration."  After
a hearing at which the circuit court orally granted the MTD, the
circuit court entered its written Order Granting MTD on
September 27, 2016.4
On appeal, Rapoza argues that the circuit court erred
in dismissing this action with prejudice and failing to consider
the amended complaint attached as an exhibit to Rapoza's
memorandum in opposition to the MTD.  Rapoza argues that the
circuit court should not have dismissed this action with
prejudice because her amended complaint complied with the circuit
court's instruction to plead her fraud claim with particularity.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Rapoza's
appeal as follows and vacate and remand.
The circuit court did not expressly note the authority
pursuant to which it dismissed the action with prejudice.
However, it appears the circuit court relied on HRCP Rule
41(b)(1) in dismissing the action with prejudice upon the
Soareses' motion, based on Rapoza's failure to comply with the
circuit court's instruction to file an amended complaint in its
4Rapoza's memorandum in opposition to the MTD was filed on July 20,
2016, and the hearing on the MTD was held on July 27, 2016.  Rapoza's memorandum
in opposition was untimely under the Rules of the Circuit Courts of the State of
Hawai#i (RCCH) Rule 7(b), which requires a memorandum in opposition to a motion
to be "served and filed not less than 8 days before the date set for the
hearing."
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
previous order granting the MJP.  See HRCP Rule 41(b)(1) (2012)
("For failure of the plaintiff to prosecute or to comply with
these rules or any order of the court, a defendant may move for
dismissal of an action or of any claim against it.").  Indeed, in
their answering brief, the Soareses assert that "[t]he circuit
court did not expressly state a specific rule under which it
dismissed the Complaint with prejudice, but the applicable rule
is HRCP Rule 41(b)(1)."5
"The review of a dismissal under HRCP Rule 41(b) is for
abuse of discretion, and absent deliberate delay, contumacious
conduct or actual prejudice, an order of dismissal cannot be
affirmed."  In re Blaisdell, 125 Hawai# i 44, 48, 252 P.3d 63, 67
(2011) (citations and original brackets omitted).  "[T]he
sanction of dismissal of a complaint with prejudice is one of
last resort where lesser sanctions would not serve the interest
of justice."  Id. at 49, 252 P.3d at 68 (citing Shasteen, Inc. v.
Hilton Hawaiian Village Joint Venture, 79 Hawai# i 103, 107, 899
P.2d 386, 390 (1995)).  "[A]bsent a clear record of delay or
contumacious conduct, 'the careful exercise of judicial
discretion requires that a [trial] court consider less severe
sanctions [than dismissal with prejudice] and explain, where not
obvious, their inadequacy for promoting the interests of
justice.'"  Id. (emphasis in original) (quoting Schilling v.
Walworth Cty. Park & Planning Comm'n, 805 F.2d 272, 275 (7th Cir.
1986)).  "'Contumacious conduct' has been defined by this court
as '[w]illfully stubborn and disobedient conduct.'"  Id. at 50,
252 P.3d at 69 (quoting Shasteen, 79 Hawai# i at 107 n.7, 899 P.2d
at 391 n.7).
Although it is undisputed that Rapoza failed to file an
amended complaint by the deadline imposed by the circuit court,
we do not find anything in the record indicating that Rapoza or
5We further note that, although the circuit court's Order Granting
MTD alternatively ruled that Rapoza's amended complaint continued to suffer the
same infirmity as the original complaint under HRCP Rule 9, the Soareses do not
argue this as a basis to affirm on appeal.  We decline to address this issue.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
her counsel deliberately delayed the prosecution of this case,
nor do we find any conduct on their part rising to the level of
being contumacious.  We recognize that Rapoza and her counsel
were less than diligent in meeting the deadline to file the
amended complaint, and in filing Rapoza's opposition to the MTD
one day late, but we must also recognize the high bar set for a
dismissal with prejudice.  Further, the record is also devoid of
any actual prejudice suffered by the Soareses in this matter.
The circuit court did not make specific findings as to deliberate
delay, contumacious conduct, or prejudice to the Soareses, nor
did it provide express considerations of less severe sanctions.
Under these circumstances, and after weighing the policy of
having cases decided on their merits with that of the court's
power to prevent delays, see Shasteen, 79 Hawai# i at 107, 899
P.2d at 390, we conclude that the circuit court abused its
discretion in dismissing this case with prejudice.  Our ruling is
without prejudice to the circuit court on remand considering less
severe sanctions.
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the December 27, 2016
Final Judgment and the September 27, 2016 Order Granting MTD,
filed in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit.  We remand this
case for further proceedings.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 21, 2020.
On the briefs:
Arnold T. Phillips, II,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
James A. Kawachika,
and John Winnicki,
(Deeley King Pang & Van Etten)
for Defendants-Appellees.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
5