 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000713 09-DEC-2025 07:49 AM Dkt. 99 SO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000713 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
STATE OF HAWAI‘ I, Plaintiff-Appellee, 
v. 
HOKUOKALANI PATOC, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CPC-23-0000238) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Hokuokalani Patoc (Patoc) appeals 
from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's (circuit court) 
"Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" (Judgment) filed on 
September 27, 2024.
1 
On February 22, 2023, the State of Hawaiʻ i (State) 
filed a three-count indictment (Indictment
) against Patoc.2 A 
1 The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong presided. 
2 The Indictment charged Patoc with: (1) attempted murder in the 
first degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 705- 500 (2014) 
and 707- 701(1)(b) (2014); (2) unauthorized control of propelled vehicle in 
the first degree, in violation of HRS § 708- 836 (2014); and (3) resisting an 
 (continued . . .)   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
 
 2(. . . continued) 
 
 
  jury found Patoc guilty of the included offense of assault in 
the first degree in violation of HRS § 707-710 (2014), and 
guilty as charged of unauthorized control of a propelled vehicle 
in the first degree and resisting an order to stop a motor 
vehicle in the second degree. The circuit court sentenced Patoc 
to consecutive ten-year and five-year indeterminate terms of 
imprisonment, and to a one-year term of imprisonment to be 
served concurrently with Patoc's other sentences. 
On appeal, Patoc raises two points of error, 
contending that the circuit court erred when it: (1) "denied 
Patoc's Motion to Dismiss for Violation of Hawai[ʻ ]i Rules of 
Penal Procedure [(HRPP)] Rule 48 and Speedy Trial [(Motion to 
Dismiss)]"; and (2) "sentenced Patoc without a [p]re-sentence 
diagnosis and report as required by [HRS §] 706-601 [(2014)]." 
Upon careful review of the record, briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration 
to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, 
we resolve Patoc's points of error as follows: 
(1) Patoc contends the circuit court erred in denying 
his Motion to Dismiss because, as of the filing of the Motion to Dismiss on December 21, 2023, "more than 180 days had elapsed 
order to stop a motor vehicle in the second degree, in violation of HRS 
§ 710-1027 (2014). 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 since Patoc's arrest."3 Patoc specifically challenges the 
circuit court's exclusion of the period between July 24, 2023, 
and December 25, 2023 from the HRPP Rule 48 calculation. 
We review the circuit court's decision on an HRPP 
Rule 48 motion to dismiss under both the clearly erroneous and 
right/wrong standards. State v. Hernane, 145 
Hawaiʻi 444, 449, 
454 P.3d 385, 390 (2019). 
A [circuit] court's findings of fact ( FOFs) in deciding an 
HRPP [Rule] 48(b) motion to dismiss are subject to the 
clearly erroneous standard of review. An FOF is clearly 
erroneous when, despite evidence to support the finding, the appellate court is left with the definite and firm 
conviction that a mistake has been committed. However, 
whether those facts fall within HRPP [Rule] 48(b)'s 
exclusionary provisions is a question of law, the 
3 Patoc also challenges the following conclusions of law: 
14. The issue here is the 155 day time period between 
July 24, 2023, and December 25, 2023, for the court's 
suspension of this [ proceeding] to determine [Patoc's] 
fitness to proceed. 
15. The court finds it to be poor judicial management of 
resources to have [Patoc] proceed to trial in one case 
while pending fitness determination in another case. If 
that were to be the case [Patoc] can effectively undermine the trial for which he is ready and going to trial by later 
claiming that he was unfit to proceed, allowing him two 
bites of the apple. 
16. To preclude the mismanagement and poor judicial 
efficiency the court finds that the 155 day time period 
July 25, 2023, to December 25, 2023 is excluded for Rule 48 
and speedy trial purposes pursuant to HRPP Rule 48(c)(8), 
that there is in fact good cause for the suspension of 
proceedings. 
17. The court finds that 324 days have elapsed from 
[Patoc's] arrest and bail set to current trial setting of 
January 8, 2024, and that of the 324 days the previous 
findings and conclusions allow the exclusion[] of 226 days. 
18. The court finds no violation of HRPP Rule 48. 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 determination of which is freely reviewable pursuant to the 
right/wrong test.  
Id. (cleaned up). 
HRPP Rule 48(b)(1) provides, in relevant part, that 
"the court shall, on motion of the defendant, dismiss the charge 
. . . if trial is not commenced within [six] months . . . from 
the date of arrest if bail is set." The parties agree that 
February 16, 2023, the date of Patoc's arrest, is the start date 
for HRPP Rule 48 purposes. 
In calculating the time within which trial must 
commence, HRPP Rule 48(c) expressly excludes, inter alia, the following periods: 
(c) Excluded periods. The following periods shall be 
excluded in computing the time for trial commencement: 
(1) periods that delay the commencement of trial and 
are caused by collateral or other proceedings concerning 
the defendant, including but not limited to penal 
irresponsibility examinations and periods during which the 
defendant is incompetent to stand trial, pretrial motions, 
interlocutory appeals and trials of other charges[.] 
(Emphasis added.) 
The record reflects that the circuit court suspended 
the proceedings, from July 24, 2023 through December 25, 2023, 
during the time that Patoc was complying with its order for 
Patoc to undergo a HRS § 704-404 mental health examination. Patoc contends the circuit court erred by excluding this period 
from the HRPP Rule 48 calculation because "[n]either the State 
[n]or Patoc requested a mental health examination . . . [, and 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
 
   
   
  
 t]here was no incident referenced by the State or Patoc in this 
case which necessitated [the court's sua sponte order]." 
HRS § 704-404 (2014) provides that "[w]henever . . . 
there is reason to doubt the defendant's fitness to proceed, 
. . . the court may immediately suspend all further proceedings 
in the prosecution" and order the defendant to undergo an 
examination. "The court's reason may come from [its] own 
observations, known facts, evidence presented, motions, affidavits, or any other reasonable or credible sources." 
State
v. Harter, 134 Hawaiʻ i 308, 331, 340 P.3d 440, 463 (2014) 
(cleaned up). 
In its motion to set a firm trial date and for 
determination of HRPP Rule 48, the State informed the circuit 
court that Patoc had been ordered, in June 2023, to undergo an 
HRS § 704-404 fitness examination in case no. 1CPC-23-0000576.4 
The circuit court took judicial notice of the records and proceedings in case no. 1CPC-23-0000576, and sua sponte ordered 
a fitness and penal responsibility determination for Patoc. 
In light of the above-described proceedings in 1CPC-
23-0000576 the circuit court appropriately exercised its 
4 Patoc was charged in case no. 1CPC- 23-0000576 with an unrelated 
criminal offense. Pursuant to Hawaii Rules of Evidence Rule 201, this court 
takes judicial notice of the records and proceedings in circuit court case no. 1CPC- 23-0000576. Patoc's defense counsel in 1CPC- 23-0000576 moved for an 
HRS § 704- 404 examination on June 26, 2023, and the court in 1CPC- 23-0000576 
granted the motion on June 27, 2023. 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 discretion to sua sponte suspend the underlying proceedings, 
from July 24, 2023 to December 25, 2023, for the purpose of 
determining Patoc's fitness to proceed. See id. at 330, 340 
P.3d at 462 ("[W]hen a trial court finds that there is . . . reason to believe that the defendant's mental or physical state 
will become an issue in the case, the court is required to 
suspend the proceedings and order an examination.") (emphasis 
added) (cleaned up). We conclude that the circuit court did not err in excluding this period from the HRPP Rule 48 calculation. 
See HRPP Rule 48(c)(1) (authorizing the exclusion of "periods 
that delay the commencement of trial and are caused by 
collateral or other proceedings concerning the defendant, 
including but not limited to penal irresponsibility examinations 
and periods during which the defendant is incompetent to stand 
trial" when computing the time for trial commencement). The 
circuit court therefore did not err in denying Patoc's Motion to 
Dismiss. 
(2) Patoc contends the circuit court erred when it 
sentenced Patoc without preparing a pre-sentence report and when the circuit court did not conduct a colloquy with Patoc to 
determine whether Patoc "intentionally, knowingly[,] and 
voluntarily waived his right to the preparation of a pre-
sentence report." We review sentencing decisions for abuse of 
discretion. State v. Hussein
, 122 Hawaiʻi 495, 503, 229 P.3d 
6   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
    
  
 313, 321 (2010). "[T]o constitute an abuse it must appear that 
the court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded 
rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial 
detriment of a party litigant." Id. (citation omitted). 
HRS § 706-601(1) (2014) states that "the court shall 
order a pre-sentence correctional diagnosis of the defendant 
. . . where: . . . [t]he defendant has been convicted of a 
felony." (Emphasis added.) Patoc was convicted of two felony offenses: assault in the first degree and unauthorized control 
of a propelled vehicle in the first degree. See HRS §§ 707-
710(2) (2014), 708-836(5) (2014).
5 
HRS § 706-601(3) (Supp. 2016) states, however, that 
the pre-sentence report requirement can be waived if certain circumstances are met. 
With the consent of the court, the requirement of a pre-
sentence diagnosis may be waived by agreement of both the 
defendant and the prosecuting attorney; provided that in 
felony cases, the prosecuting attorney shall inform, or make reasonable efforts to inform, the victim or the 
victim's surviving immediate family members of their rights 
to be present at the sentencing hearing and to provide 
information relating to the impact of the crime, including 
any requested restitution. 
(Emphasis added.) 
"A waiver is the knowing, intelligent, and voluntary 
relinquishment of a known right." 
State v. Friedman, 93 Hawaiʻ i 
5 Resisting an order to stop a motor vehicle in the second degree 
is a misdemeanor. HRS § 710- 1027(2) (2014). 
7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 63, 68, 996 P.2d 268, 273 (2000) (citation omitted). We look at 
"the totality of [the] facts and circumstances" of this case to 
determine whether Patoc waived his right to a pre-sentence 
report. Id. (citations omitted). 
The record reflects that the circuit court ordered the 
preparation of a pre-sentence report. The court-ordered report 
could not be completed, however, because Patoc refused, multiple 
times, to be interviewed by the probation officer.6 At the 
May 3, 2024 sentencing hearing, the circuit court explained the 
purpose of a pre-sentence report to Patoc, and Patoc stated 
several times that he did not want a pre-sentence report 
prepared. The circuit court granted defense counsel's request 
for a continuance of the sentencing hearing over the State's 
objection. 
At the June 21, 2024 continued sentencing hearing, 
defense counsel informed the circuit court that Patoc had 
"questions as to how the [pre-sentence] report was not done," and "that [Patoc] recognize[d] that he has a right to do it." 
The circuit court engaged in the following colloquy with Patoc: 
THE COURT: Do you understand what this pre- sentence 
report i[s]? 
[PATOC]: It is [sic] basically brings up my 
history and stuff like that about me, right? 
6 In an April 2, 2024 letter to the circuit court, the probation 
officer stated that Patoc "failed to avail himself for presentence 
investigation." The probation officer made three attempts to meet with Patoc 
to complete the interview, but Patoc declined each time. 
8   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 THE COURT: It does. 
[PATOC
]: Right. 
THE COURT: And it's not just your history, right? 
It is a fairly comprehensive report. It talks about your 
family background, your parents, whether or not you 
yourself have any children, your significant relationships. 
It also talks about your work history. It is fairly 
detailed about that. It talks about any criminal history 
that you might have. And if there is any juvenile records. And I don't know if there is or not. But if there is any 
juvenile records, they try to find that as well. 
Then they will inquire about your physical condition, 
whether or not you have any physical disabilities or 
injuries of significance, like surgeries. And they even 
look into whether or not there is any mental health issues 
and mental health treatment. So is [sic] a fairly 
comprehensive report. And it also allows for people to 
write in on your behalf. They are called letters of reference or letters of support. They normally get sent 
into the probation office. And all of that is put together 
in the report. 
There was a 704 examination that was sought in your 
case, right? 
[PATOC]: Correct. 
THE COURT: At one point. If any of those reports by 
those examiners were completed, that would also get 
attached to the report as well. So pretty -- like I said -
-pretty extensive report. You follow me so far? 
[PATOC]: Yeah. 
THE COURT: I normally recommend defendants to 
participate and have that report done. Because, number 1, 
if they are sentenced to probation it assists the probation 
officer in supervision. If a defendant is sentenced to prison, then the parole board really wants to see that 
report to determine what kind of minimum is going to be set 
for that particular person. And it generally helps a 
defendant in both of those circumstances. Follow me so 
far? 
[PATOC]: Yes. 
THE COURT: Do you have any questions about that so 
far? 
[PATOC]: So far, no. 
THE COURT: Okay. And the Court, as [defense 
counsel] indicated, needs to order it unless you really say you don't want it and [the prosecutor] says he doesn't 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 really want it as well. If both sides waive the report, 
then we can proceed to sentencing without. But if one side 
wants it and one side doesn't, I still got to order it. Do 
you have any questions about that? 
[PATOC]:  No.  
The circuit court then asked Patoc whether he wanted 
the pre-sentence report done. Patoc stated, "I was hoping that 
[the pre-sentence report] was already done to be honest with 
you." Patoc expressed reluctance to continue the sentencing 
hearing to allow time for preparation of a pre-sentence report, given that, "to postpone again, for something [he] feel[s] 
should have already been done . . . [was] not sitting well with 
[him]." When informed that the continued hearing would be on 
September 27, 2024, Patoc said, "I would definitely want that 
report, but at the same time, I just want to move on already 
with this whole process." Given Patoc's apparent uncertainty as 
to whether the pre-sentence report was worth a continuance, the circuit court continued sentencing so that Patoc could discuss 
the matter with his defense counsel. 
At the September 27, 2024 continued sentencing 
hearing, the circuit court noted on the record Patoc's continued 
refusal to participate in the pre-sentencing report process, and 
engaged in the following colloquy with Patoc: 
THE COURT:  Well, here is your choice. And we are 
back to square 1 again, Mr. Patoc.  
[PATOC]:  Right.  
THE COURT:  If you want to participate in the 
investigation with the probation officer to create a 
10   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 complete pre- sentence report, I will give you the time to 
do so. You have indicated that you didn't want to do that 
in the past. 
[PATOC]: Right. 
THE COURT: And if you don't, I will respect those 
wishes as well, and we can proceed to sentencing today. 
[PATOC]:  Yeah, I definitely would like to proceed 
today.  
  THE COURT:  Today?  
 [PATOC]:  Yeah.  
 
THE COURT:  So, again, you understand that whatever 
records we have now, if you were sentenced to prison, that is what the [Paroling] Authority is going to have. They 
don't have the benefit of the pre- sentence report.  
Normally they want to see that. We talked about  this 
before, right?  
[PATOC]
: Right. Right. 
THE COURT: So I want to make sure that if we proceed 
with sentencing you understand there is no [pre- sentence 
report] for the [Paroling] Authority. They normally rely 
on the [pre- sentence report] whenever they submit and make 
recommendations for minimum terms. 
And, again -- and I don't know for sure, your lawyer 
can confirm this. But it is my general belief that when 
detainees go before the [Paroling] Authority, it is more 
beneficial for them to have a [pre- sentence report] than 
not. 
When asked if he wanted to proceed with sentencing, 
Patoc stated, "I definitely would like to continue to proceed in 
the sentencing." Patoc twice more represented during the circuit court's colloquy that he would like to proceed with 
sentencing.  
We conclude, on this record, that the circuit court 
did not err in determining that the parties had waived the 
required pre-sentence report pursuant to HRS § 706-601(3). 
11   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  Patoc intelligently, knowingly, and voluntarily waived his right 
to a pre-sentence report. 
The prosecutor also represented on 
the record of the June 21, 2024 continued sentencing hearing that the "State is ready to proceed," and "the State believes 
that the [c]ourt and counsel have all that they need with 
respect to documents." The circuit court therefore did not 
abuse its discretion in imposing a sentence without a pre-
sentence report. 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, December 9, 2025. 
On the briefs: 
Keith S. Shigetomi, 
for Defendant-Appellant. 
 
Stephen K. Tsushima, Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, City and County of Honolulu, 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Katherine G. Leonard Presiding Judge 
 /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge 
 /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry Associate Judge  
12 