NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000790

IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
BRIAN M. WESTERDAHL, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
TANYA M. BOUSHLEY, Respondent-Appellee

APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT

(FC-P NO. 13-1-107K)

SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Brian M. Westerdahl (Westerdahl)

appeals pro se from the Family Court of the Third Circuit's

(Family Court's) March 28, 2014 Decision and Order After

Evidentiary Hearing on (1) Respondent's Motion to Dismiss Action

in Home State as Being in the Best [Interest] of the Child Filed

October 29, 2013 (2) Petitioner's Motion and Affidavit for

Temporary Relief Filed September 11, 2013 and (3) Petitioner's

Motion to Strike Respondent's Motion to Dismiss Action in Home

State as Being in the Best Interest of the Child Filed October

1
29, 2013 (Decision and Order).  The Decision and Order 
concluded, 
inter alia, that Hawai 'i was an inconvenient forum to 
try the child custody action initiated by Westerdahl and that jurisdiction in Wisconsin was proper. Westerdahl urges this court to vacate the Decision and Order. 
1

The Honorable Aley K. Auna, Jr. presided.

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the brief

submitted by Westerdahl, and having given due consideration to

the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve

Westerdahl's appeal as follows:

"A family court's decision to decline jurisdiction is

reviewed for abuse of discretion." NB v. GA , 133 Hawai 'i 436, 
444, 329 P.3d 341, 349 (App. 2014) (citing Fisher v. Fisher, 111

Hawai
'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006)). 
HRS ยง 583A-207 (2006) states, in relevant part:

(a) A court of this State which has jurisdiction under
this chapter to make a child-custody determination may
decline to exercise its jurisdiction at any time if it
determines that it is an inconvenient forum under the

circumstances and that a court of another state is a more

appropriate forum. The issue of inconvenient forum may be
raised upon the motion of a party, the court's own motion,
or request of another court.

(b) Before determining whether it is an inconvenient
forum, a court of this State shall consider whether it is
appropriate for a court of another state to exercise
jurisdiction. For this purpose, the court shall allow the
parties to submit information and shall consider all
relevant factors, including:

(1) Whether domestic violence has occurred and is 
likely to continue in the future and which state
could best protect the parties and the child;
(2) The length of time the child has resided outside
this State;
(3) The distance between the court in this State and 
the court in the state that would assume 
 jurisdiction;
(4) The relative financial circumstances of the 
parties;
(5) Any agreement of the parties as to which state
should assume jurisdiction;
(6) The nature and location of the evidence required
to resolve the pending litigation, including
testimony of the child;
(7) The ability of the court of each state to decide
the issue expeditiously and the procedures
necessary to present the evidence;
(8) The familiarity of the court of each state with
the facts and issues in the pending litigation;
and

(9) The physical and psychological health of the
parties.

The Family Court's Decision and Order addressed each of

the nine statutory factors listed above and made the following

findings:

a.		Whether domestic violence has occurred and is likely
to continue in the future and which State can best

protect the parties and the child. The Court

2

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
concludes that domestic violence has occurred. The

Court does not conclude that it is likely that
domestic violence is likely to continue. The Court

does conclude that both Hawaii and Wisconsin can

protect the parties. However, the Court does conclude
that Wisconsin would be a good place for the
enforcement of the protection orders because of the
great distance between Wisconsin and Hawaii and
Respondent's representation that she now resides in
Wisconsin and has no intention to return to Hawaii.

b.		The length of time the child has resided outside this
state. The fact that the child has now been out of

the State of Hawaii for four months is not a factor to

consider. Respondent left Hawaii because of domestic
violence. The child has resided in the State of

Hawaii for the majority of the child's life although
the child is still of tender years. If the child was

much older this factor would be relevant but because

the child is of tender years the Court finds this is
not an important factor for determining whether Hawaii
is an inconvenient forum.

c.		The distance between the court in this State and the

court in the state that would assume jurisdiction. 
 The court concludes that the distance between Hawaii

and Wisconsin is a relevant factor and concludes there

will be a large distance between the non-custodial
parent and the child.
d.		The relative financial circumstances of the parties. 
 The Court finds that Petitioner is employed full time
and has been employed in that position for a while.
The Court finds that Respondent earns basically
minimum wage but does receive assistance from family.
The Court finds that this is an important factor for
consideration, namely the ability of one party to
travel from or to Wisconsin to have significant
contact with the minor child. The Court finds that

Petitioner has a better financial circumstance to

ensure contact with the minor child. 
 
e.		Any agreement of the parties as to which state should
assume jurisdiction. This is not a relevant factor

for determination as the court finds that the parties
have no such agreement.
f.		The nature and location of the evidence required to
resolve the pending litigation, including testimony of
the child. The court finds that the child is too

young for testimony. The court finds that many of the
witnesses and evidence may be located in Hawaii
because the parties have resided in Hawaii prior to
and after the birth of the child although Respondent
now lives in Wisconsin. The court notes that

Wisconsin courts appoint a guardian ad litem in
paternity cases and finds that the guardian ad litem
may find it difficult but not insurmountable to gather
evidence. The Court concludes, however, that either
the Hawaii court or the Wisconsin court would have the

ability to adequately deal with the evidence in
resolving the custody, visitation and child support
issues. 
 
g. 	 The ability of the court of each state to decide the
issue expeditiously and the procedures necessary to
present the evidence. The court finds that both

Hawaii and Wisconsin courts have the ability to decide
the issue expeditiously and the procedures necessary
to present the evidence.

3

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
h.		The familiarity of the court of each state with the
facts and issues in the pending litigation. The court

finds that the Honorable Gregory B. Gill, Jr. would
not have a problem becoming familiar with all facts
and issues in the pending litigation having been
already been involved in these jurisdictional
proceedings which address these facts and issues to a
degree. The court therefore finds that both Hawaii

and Wisconsin courts have familiarity with the facts
and issues in the pending litigation.
i.		The physical and psychological health of the parties. 
 The court finds there is no evidence to indicate that

Petitioner suffers from any physical or psychological
health issues. The court finds there is no evidence

to indicate that Respondent suffers from any
significant physical or psychological health issues
although she has admitted to an anxiety condition.

(Emphases added).

The alleged facts on which Westerdahl bases his

arguments are the following: "The minor child was born and lived

all his life in Hawaii, the Petitioner has lived in Hawaii for 25

years and the majority of all witness[es] live in the State of

Hawaii." However, the Family Court incorporated these facts into

its findings, stating that "[t]he child has resided in the State

of Hawaii for the majority of the child's life[,]" and "many of

the witnesses and evidence may be located in Hawaii because the

parties have resided in Hawaii prior to and after the birth of

the child although Respondent now lives in Wisconsin." 
 Accordingly, these facts were considered by the Family Court in

reaching its conclusions and do not undermine the other findings

upon which the Family Court's decision is based. 
 
In addition, we are unable to review whether the 
Family Court's findings were otherwise clearly erroneous as the record is devoid of a transcript of the January 9, 2014 evidentiary hearing.
2 It is Westerdahl's duty to provide a 
record sufficient to review his points of error. Hawai 'i Rules 
of Appellate Procedure Rule 11(a). Here, the record is "insufficient to show that the alleged error[s] occurred." State 
v. Hoang, 93 Hawai
'i 333, 336, 3 P.3d 499, 502 (2000). As 
2

The minutes entered by the Family Court clerk(s) reveal that the
hearing was electronically recorded and that Boushley and Westerdahl
testified. The minutes do not indicate what was said during their
testimonies. 
 
4

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Westerdahl failed to demonstrate that the Family Court's findings

were clearly erroneous, and no abuse of discretion is apparent on

the face of the Decision and Order, we do not find that the

Family Court abused its discretion in relying on its findings to

decline jurisdiction. See Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber
 
Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26 (1992) (An abuse of

discretion occurs if the trial court has "clearly exceeded the

bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or

practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.") 
 
For these reasons, we affirm the Family Court's March

28, 2014 Decision and Order.

DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, July 8, 2015. 
On the brief: 
Brian M. Westerdahl 
Petitioner-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
5

