NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
NOS. CAAP-22-0000034 AND CAAP-22-0000035 
  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAI‘I 
 
 
CAAP-22-0000034 
IN THE INTEREST OF JM 
(FC-S NO. 17-00020) 
 
AND 
 
CAAP-22-0000035 
IN THE INTEREST OF AM 
(FC-S NO. 17-00023) 
  
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Wadsworth, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Chan, JJ.)
 
  In these consolidated appeals, Respondent-Appellant 
(Mother
) appeals from two orders terminating parental rights 
entered by the Family Court of the Fifth Circuit,  which together 
terminated Mother's parental rights as to JM and AM (Children).    21
                                                           
1  The Honorable Edmund D. Acoba presided. 
2  Mother is the natural and legal mother of Children.  Children's 
father (Father) did not appeal the TPR Orders. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
2 
   Specifically, Mother appeals from:  (1) the January 3, 2022 
order terminating parental rights as to JM, entered in FC-S 
No. 17-00020, which created the appeal in CAAP-22-0000034; and 
(2) the January 3, 2022 order terminating parental rights as to AM, entered in FC-S No. 17-00023, which created the appeal in 
CAAP-22-0000035 (collectively, 
TPR Orders).  On January 3, 2022, 
the family court entered the same findings of fact and conclusions of law (FOF/COL) in each proceeding. 
  On appeal, Mother first challenges FOF 6 under the 
"Historical Background-Procedural History" section (Historical), 
FOF 22 under the "Concurrent Planning-Order to Show Cause 
Hearing" section (Concurrent Planning), and FOF 9, 20, and 21 of 
the "Termination of Parental Rights Hearing" section (TPR) of 
the FOF/COL.  (Formatting altered.)  Mother then contends that 
the family court abused its discretion by finding that 
Petitioner-Appellee Department of Human Services (DHS) made 
reasonable efforts to reunify Mother with Children, Mother was 
unable to provide Children with a safe family home with the 
assistance of a service plan, and the proposed permanent plan 
was in Children's best interests.    Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and arguments advanced, we resolve Mother's 
points of error as discussed below, and affirm. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
3 
  I. Background 
  On August 8 and September 29, 2017, DHS filed 
petitions for temporary foster custody of Children based on 
Mother's inability to provide Children with adequate food, clothing, supervision, psychological,  physical, or medical care.   
JM was two years old and AM was one month old when they entered foster custody on October 5, 2017. 3
   To regain custody of Children, Mother agreed to complete substance abuse treatment, parenting education, and 
individual counseling.  Mother greatly progressed on the 
services, and DHS reunified Mother and Children under family 
supervision on December 24, 2018. 
  
On August 8, 2019, DHS again removed Children from 
Mother due to unsanitary living conditions, lack of 
participation in services, failure to provide Children adequate 
food and water, concerns of drug use, incidents of domestic 
violence between Mother and her boyfriend (Boyfriend), including 
one in which Boyfriend struck JM, and failure to supervise 
Children, including an incident of Children wandering away from 
Mother's home without her knowledge.  DHS placed Children with paternal grandmother.  On August 21, 2019, the family court re-
awarded foster custody of Children to DHS. 
                                                           
3  DHS' petition regarding AM notes "Mother has not provided her child 
with . . . psychological . . . care."  However, DHS' petition regarding JM 
does not note a failure to provide psychological care. 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
4 
   On February 6, 2020, DHS filed, among other things, an 
initial permanent plan (Permanent Plan 1), which contemplated 
termination of parental rights and permanent placement of 
Children with paternal grandmother.  On March 6, 2020, the family court set the matters for a termination of parental 
rights hearing, but granted Mother multiple continuances. 
  During this time, DHS provided Mother with parenting 
education and individual counseling services.  DHS also organized supervised visitation between Mother and Children, and 
filed periodic safe family home reports, which, among other 
things, documented an allegation of sexual abuse by Boyfriend 
against JM. 
  On July 15, 2021, DHS filed an updated permanent plan 
reflecting Children's removal from paternal grandmother's home, 
placement with resource caregivers (RCGs), and anticipated 
permanent placement of Children with RCGs (Permanent Plan 2).   
Additionally, DHS filed an updated service plan for Mother, 
which listed individual counseling as the sole remaining service 
for Mother to complete, but noted that Mother was discharged 
from counseling on June 3, 2021.   On July 15, August 26, October 7, and November 7, 
2021, the family court held a single termination of parental rights trial for both proceedings.  DHS case manager Lisa Cook 
(Cook) testified, in relevant part, that Mother completed 
services, however based on her observations, Mother remained NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
5 
   unable to redirect Children's behavior away from dangerous 
activities such as running away and hitting
, and opined that 
Mother could not supervise and protect Children without the 
intervention of other parties.  Cook also testified that Mother had been in and out of services for about four years, but was 
unable to demonstrate that she could implement skills taught at 
services. 
  Mother's therapist, Orie Lutwin (Lutwin) testified in 
relevant part, that Mother completed counseling, reported no 
domestic violence by Boyfriend, and mentioned an allegation of 
sexual abuse by Boyfriend against JM, however they did not cover 
the topic of sexual abuse during therapy.  With respect to 
domestic violence, Lutwin testified that they covered the topic of "power and control dynamic in a relationship." 
  Parent educator Shenella Asuncion (Asuncion) testified 
in relevant part, that she taught Mother parenting classes, 
which Mother completed, and did one-on-one parenting support 
with Mother.  Asuncion also testified that Mother told her 
domestic violence was not an issue, and based on her 
interactions with Mother, Asuncion was under the impression that Mother was not in a romantic relationship.  Asuncion stated she 
did not address protecting Children from sexual abuse with 
Mother. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
6 
     Mother testified in relevant part, that there was no 
domestic violence in her relationship with Boyfriend, she did 
not discuss domestic violence with Lutwin because she felt it 
was a "done issue," and she did not bring up domestic violence incidents with Asuncion.  Mother did not testify regarding 
allegations of sexual abuse by Boyfriend against JM. 
  After considering the evidence and arguments 
presented, the family court terminated Mother's and Father's 
parental rights. 
II. Standards of Review 
  "Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion 
in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion."  In re 
Doe, 95 Hawai‘ i 183, 189, 20 P.3d 616, 622 (2001) (internal 
quotation marks omitted) (quoting In re Doe, 84 Hawai‘ i 41, 46, 
928 P.2d 883, 888 (1996)). 
  We review the family court's FOF for clear error.  In 
re Doe, 95 Hawai‘ i at 190, 20 P.3d at 623.   
A FOF "is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks 
substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) despite 
substantial evidence in support of the finding, the 
appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and 
firm conviction that a mistake has been made." . . .  "'Substantial evidence' is credible evidence which is of 
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person 
of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
7 
 (continued . . .) 
 Id. (citations and ellipsis omitted).  Unchallenged findings of 
fact are binding on appeal.  In re Doe, 99 Hawai‘ i 522, 538, 57 
P.3d 447, 463 (2002). 
III.  Discussion 
  (1)  In her first point of error, Mother claims that 
Historical FOF 6, Concurrent Planning FOF 22, and TPR FOF 9, 20, 
and 21 are clearly erroneous.  We address each in turn. 
  Mother argues that Historical FOF 6 is clearly 
erroneous because "[t]o the extent an issue exists as to whether 
Mother is able to adequately supervise her Children and protect them from dangerous situations, it exists because Mother was not 
afforded an opportunity by the DHS to resolve it."  Historical 
FOF 6 states: 
 6.  The Court finds that the issue is whether mother is 
able to adequately supervise her children and to 
recognize and protect them from dangerous situations, including future harm or threat of harm. 
 
  As a threshold matter, Mother's argument fails to 
demonstrate that Historical FOF 6 is clearly erroneous because 
she purports to explain the reason for the factual finding, 
rather than demonstrate it is in error.   In any event, Historical FOF 6 is supported by 
Historical FOF 7-9 and TPR FOF 13,  which corroborate DHS' 
4
                                                           
4  Historical FOF 7- 9 state: 
7. The Court finds the GAL in her report filed July 14, 
2021 noted concerns about mother's ability to supervise 
the children. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
8 
  concerns about Mother's ability to supervise and protect 
Children.  Additionally, the record reflects that DHS raised 
inadequate supervision and protection of Children as initial 
safety concerns, re-emergence of these safety concerns caused DHS to remove Children again on August 8, 2019, and these safety 
concerns remained unresolved throughout the remaining 
proceedings.  Thus, substantial evidence supports Historical FOF 
6, and we are not left with a definite and firm conviction that 
a mistake has been made. 
  Mother argues that Concurrent Planning FOF 22 is 
clearly erroneous because Mother made significant progress on her service plan prior to March 29, 2018.  Concurrent Planning 
FOF 22 states: 
22. At the review hearing on March 29, 2018, Parents had 
made little progress and the matter was scheduled for Order to Show Cause Hearing on June 7, 2018, to 
determine whether the matter should be set for 
termination of parental rights.  (Order Continuing 
Foster Custody of [JM] filed on April 12, 2018).
 
 
                                                           
  
(. . . continued) 
 
8. The Court further finds that the DHS warned mother to not allow [Boyfriend] to have access to the children because of [JM]'s allegation [Boyfriend] sexually abused 
her. 
  
9. The Court finds that despite DHS' warnings to mother, 
mother added [Boyfriend] to her residential lease as a co-tenant. 
 
TPR FOF 13 states:  "On August 26, 2021, Ms. Cook testified that she spoke to 
[Mother] about [Boyfriend] sexually abusing [JM], and the very next day, [Boyfriend] was added as a co- tenant to Mother's residential lease." 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
9 
   The record reflects that, on March 29, 2018, the 
family court recognized Mother made some progress on the service 
plan, but declined to find that she made sufficient progress on 
the service plan given Children's young age, and scheduled an order to show cause hearing.  Thus, the record contains 
substantial evidence to support the "little progress" finding in 
Concurrent Planning FOF 22, and we are not left with a definite 
and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. 
  Mother argues TPR FOF 9 is clearly erroneous because 
DHS did not provide Mother the opportunity to "show that she had achieved the ability to react quickly to the needs of her 
Children."  TPR FOF 9 states: 
 9. Despite individual counseling being ordered in the 
Family Service Plan, [Mother] never achieved the 
ability to react quickly to the needs of her children, 
and therefore visits continue to be supervised four 
years later because Mother's ability to supervise the 
children is an ongoing safety issue. 
 
  Mother, however, fails to demonstrate that TPR FOF 9 
is clearly erroneous.  At best, Mother purports to explain the 
reason for the factual finding, rather than demonstrate it is in 
error.  In any event, substantial evidence supports TPR FOF 9, 
and we are not left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made.  Therefore, TPR FOF 9 is not clearly 
erroneous. 
  Mother argues that TPR FOF 20 is clearly erroneous 
because some visitation observation notes show that Children 
listen to her directions.  Additionally, Mother argues that the NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
10 
 quoted language in TPR FOF 20 does not show that she is unable 
to manage Children.  TPR FOF 20 states: 
20. After three years of supervised visitation, parent 
education, hands on coaching during the visits, and 
individual counseling, the children continue to run 
away from Mother, and do not follow her instructions, 
"When [JM] was on the playground [JM] jumped from the top of the slide down to the ground while mom stood 
watching the girls play.  Then [JM] climbed once again 
to the top of the slide and the worker told [JM] to 
get down because it's dangerous.  [JM] listened to the 
worker." 
 
  Mother correctly asserts that some visitation notes 
reflect Children listening to Mother's instructions.   
Additionally, Mother correctly asserts that the quoted language 
in TPR FOF 20 does not support a finding that Children do not 
follow Mother's instructions.  This being said, the record confirms that Children running away from Mother remained a 
recurring safety issue.  Even if TPR FOF 20 is clearly erroneous 
in part, the error is harmless because it does not undermine the 
reason upon which the family court terminated Mother's parental 
rights, namely Mother's inability to adequately supervise and 
protect Children, which is supported by the record.  See 
discussion of Historical FOF 6 supra at 7-8.  As such, to the 
extent TPR FOF 20 is erroneous, it does not provide a ground to vacate the TPR Orders.  Hawai‘ i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 61 
("No . . . error or defect in any . . . order or in anything 
done or omitted by the court . . . is ground for . . . vacating, 
modifying, or otherwise disturbing a judgment or order, unless NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
11 
 refusal to take such action appears to the court inconsistent 
with substantial justice "). 
  Mother argues TPR FOF 21 is clearly erroneous because she completed individual counseling.  TPR FOF 21 states: 
21. Individual Counseling was ordered for Mother in the 
Order Continuing Foster Custody, dated July 15, 2021, it is the remaining and outstanding Service Plan item 
for Mother. 
 
  The record reflects that Lutwin discharged Mother from 
counseling on June 3, 2021.  Additionally, Cook testified that Mother completed services.  As such, the record lacks 
substantial evidence to support TPR FOF 21 and it is thus 
clearly erroneous.  This error, however, is harmless because the 
family court recognized that Mother substantially complied with 
the service plan, but nonetheless concluded based on the court's 
findings that Mother was unable to provide Children with a safe 
family home.  As such, TPR FOF 21 does not provide a ground to vacate the TPR Orders.  HFCR Rule 61. 
  (2)  In her second point of error, Mother claims the 
family court abused its discretion by finding that "DHS made 
reasonable efforts to finalize the initial permanency plan, 
which was reunification."  Mother identifies the July 20, 2021 
orders continuing DHS foster custody over Children (Foster 
Custody Orders) as the source of this point of error, and cites 
to HFCR Rule 46 as the basis for her ability to appeal the NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
12 
  Foster Custody Orders.   Mother argues that, after DHS re-assumed 
foster custody of Children, DHS failed to offer her domestic 
violence and sexual abuse services, and failed to provide her 
opportunities to apply skills learned from services, therefore DHS failed to provide reasonable reunification efforts.  5
  As an initial matter, HFCR Rule 46 is inapplicable because Mother had the opportunity to object to the family 
court's "reasonable efforts" findings at the July 15, 2021 
hearing or by appealing from the Foster Custody Orders, but 
failed to do so.  In re Doe, 77 Hawai‘ i 109, 114-15, 883 P.2d 30, 
35-36 (1994) (allowing immediate appeal of family court 
decisions that impact custody over a child); Rules Expediting 
Child Protective Appeals Rule 3 (setting forth a fifteen-day 
deadline to appeal appealable orders, or allowing appeal within 
thirty-days with a showing of good cause as per appellate 
rules). 
  In any event, the record in this case reflects that 
DHS provided Mother reasonable opportunities to reunify with 
                                                           
5  HFCR Rule 46 provides: 
Formal exceptions to rulings or orders of court are 
unnecessary; but for all purposes for which an exception 
has heretofore been necessary it is sufficient that a 
party, at the time the ruling or order of the court is made or sought, makes known to the court the action that the 
party desires the court to take or the party's objection to 
the action of the court and grounds therefor; and, if a 
party has no opportunity to object to a ruling or order at 
the time it is made, the absence of an objection does not thereafter prejudice the party. 
(Emphasis added.) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
13 
    
 Children.  The record also indicates Mother was unable to 
demonstrate that she could apply what she learned from the 
services provided and declined to discuss domestic violence with 
Lutwin and Asuncion.  Based on this record, we cannot say that the Family Court abused its discretion. 
  (3)  In her third point of error, Mother claims the 
family court abused its discretion by finding that Mother was 
unable to provide Children a safe family home.  Mother 
identifies Historical FOF 1 and 2  and the TPR Orders as the 
basis for this point of error.  Mother argues Historical FOF 1 and 2 are clearly erroneous because DHS failed to provide her 
the opportunity to demonstrate her ability to provide a safe 
family home. 6
  Mother purports to explain the reason for the factual 
findings, rather than demonstrate they are in error.  The record reflects that DHS provided Mother with reasonable opportunities 
                                                           
6  Historical FOF 1 and 2 state: 
1. Having considered the testimony presented, the records 
and files herein, and the written closing arguments 
submitted by Mr. Goo, Mrs. Meyers, and Mr. Morimoto this 
Court finds by clear and convincing evidence that 
mother, .  . . , and father, . . . , are not willing and 
able to provide a safe family home for their two 
children, . . . , even with the assistance of a service 
plan. 
 2. This Court further finds by clear and convincing 
evidence that it is not reasonably foreseeable that the 
parents will become willing and able to provide the 
children with a safe home, even with the assistance of a 
service plan within a reasonable period of time.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
14 
   to reunify with Children.  Therefore, we cannot say that the 
court abused its discretion in regards to this point. 
 
 (4)  Finally, in her fourth point of error, Mother 
claims the family court abused its discretion by finding that 
Permanent Plan 2 was in Children's best interests.  Mother 
argues that Permanent Plan 2 falsely states that DHS "continued 
to provide a service plan and referrals as needed[,]" and the 
safety issues DHS identified in 2017 remained unresolved.  
Additionally, Mother alleges DHS failed to consider placing 
Children with her parents. 
  Here, evidence of services, safety issues, and 
placement with maternal grandparents were before the family 
court.  In 2017, JM was two years old and AM was one month old when they entered foster custody.  Due to Mother's progression 
with services, DHS reunified Mother and Children under family 
supervision in 2018.  But, in 2019, DHS removed Children because 
of unsanitary living conditions, failure to provide Children 
adequate food and water, failure to supervise Children 
(including an incident of Children wandering away from Mother's 
home without her knowledge), incidents of domestic violence between Mother and Boyfriend (including one in which Boyfriend 
struck JM), concerns of drug use, and lack of participation in 
services. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
15 
 The January 9, 2020 safe family home report stated 
among other things: 
[Mother] is believed to be sober.  She completed one urine 
test just after the children were removed in August.  The 
UA was negative for all substances.  The DHS concerns were that [Mother's] behaviors regarding the children may have 
been related to her having relapsed but it appears this is not the case.  Her inability to follow through with 
scheduling medical appointments, cleaning the house to the 
point where it was at least sanitary, and her relationship 
with a violent partner were decisions she made while sober. 
The children were often unsupervised in the neighborhood while [Mother] was sober.
 
 
The report also noted Boyfriend transported Mother to and from 
supervised visits with Children and remained in his car during 
the visits, Mother's visits were often shorter than the time 
allowed, Mother was late for visits with Children, and JM 
reported being sexually abused by Boyfriend.  DHS warned Mother 
not to allow Boyfriend to have access to JM due to allegations 
of sexual abuse, but Mother added Boyfriend to her residential 
lease as a co-tenant. 
Moreover, when JM was residing with maternal 
grandparents pursuant to a safety plan, Mother violated the safety plan by resuming care of JM.  And after AM was born, 
police officers "stated they did not feel the Maternal 
Grandparent's home would be a suitable environment for an 
infant[,]" as police "frequently responded to incidents at this 
home." 
Based on the record in this case, we cannot say the 
family court was clearly erroneous in concluding that the "proposed permanent plan of termination of parental rights and NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
16 
 the goal for children [to be] placed for adoption is in the best 
interest of the children." 
IV.  Conclusion 
   For the reasons discussed above, we affirm the family court's (1) January 3, 2022 order terminating parental rights as 
to JM, entered in FC-S No. 17-00020, and (2) January 3, 2022 
order terminating parental rights as to AM, entered in FC-S 
No. 17-00023.   DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai‘ i, March 31, 2023 
 
On the briefs: 
 Casey M. Hutnick, 
for Mother-Appellant. 
 Russell K. Goo, Patrick A. Pascual, 
Regina Anne M. Shimada, and
Julio C. Herrera, Deputy Attorneys General, for Petitioner-Appellee.  /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth Presiding Judge 
 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge  /s/ Derrick H.M. Chan 
Associate Judge 
 