NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000081
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JASON K. UCHIMA, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
HONOLULU DIVISION
(CASE NO. 1DTA-16-01965)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Jason K. Uchima (Uchima) appeals
from the January 24, 2017 Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or
Order and Plea/Judgment1 and the February 23, 2017 Notice of
Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment2 entered by the
District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (District
Court).  Uchima was convicted of Operating a Vehicle Under the
Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII) in violation of Hawaii Revised
Statutes (HRS) ยง 291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2017).3
1The Honorable James H. Ashford presided.
2The Honorable Linda K. Luke presided.
3HRS ยง 291E-61(a)(1) states:
ยง291E-61  Operating a vehicle under the influence of
an intoxicant.   (a)  A person commits the offense of
operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if
the person operates or assumes actual physical control of a
vehicle:
     (1) While under the influence of alcohol in an
amount sufficient to impair the person's normal
mental faculties or ability to care for the
person and guard against casualty[.]NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Uchima contends (1) the District Court erred
by denying his July 13, 2016 Motion to Suppress because he was
not advised of his Miranda rights and did not waive his Miranda
rights while in custody and being interrogated during a traffic
stop, and (2) there was insufficient evidence to convict him.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Uchima's points of error as follows, and affirm.
(1)  Relying on State v. Tsujimura , 140 Hawai #i 299,
311, 400 P.3d 500, 512 (2017), Uchima contends the District Court
erred by denying his motion to suppress both Officer Richard
Townsend's (Officer Townsend) observations of his performance on
the standardized field sobriety tests and his responses to
"medical rule-out questions" because he was not read the warnings
required by Miranda v. Arizona , 384 U.S. 436 (1966), and he was
"seized at the moment that Officer Townsend detained him for the
investigative stop and, 'his right to remain silent was invoked,
and this right continued during his detention.'"  However,
Tsujimura  does not hold that Miranda warnings must be
administered at the initiation of a traffic stop.  Rather, the
issue in Tsujimura  was whether pre-arrest silence  could be used
as substantive evidence against the defendant.  Tsujimura, 140
Hawai#i at 314, 400 P.3d at 515.  
Miranda warnings are required before custodial
interrogation.  However, 
[P]ersons temporarily detained for brief questioning by
police officers who lack probable cause to make an arrest or
bring an accusation need not be warned about incrimination
and their right to counsel, until such time as the point of
arrest or accusation has been reached or the questioning has
ceased to be brief and casual and [has] become sustained and
coercive.
State v. Ah Loo , 94 Hawai #i 207, 210, 10 P.3d 728, 731 (2000)
(citations omitted).  A person who has been stopped for a
suspected traffic violation, without more, is not in custody.  Ah
Loo, 94 Hawai# i at 211, 10 P.3d at 732 ("an individual may very
well be "seized," within the meaning of article I, section 7 of
the Hawai #i Constitution (inasmuch as, 'given the totality of the
circumstances, a reasonable person would have believed that he or
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
she was not free to leave,') and yet not be 'in custody,' such
that Miranda warnings are required as a precondition to any
questioning." (citation omitted)).  See also, State v. Wyatt , 67
Haw. 293, 300-01, 687 P.2d 544, 550 (1984) (during traffic stop,
police officer was not required to issue Miranda warnings prior
to asking motorist if she had been drinking); State v. Kuba, 68
Haw. 184, 184, 706 P.2d 1305, 1306 (1985) (during traffic stop,
investigative questioning regarding suspicion of alcohol or drug
impairment did not require Miranda warnings).  
Uchima argues that the information Officer Townsend had
at the time he "requested that Uchima get out of his car"
constituted probable cause that Uchima had committed the offense
of OVUII, Uchima was the focus of the investigation and was not
free to leave, and the medical rule-out questions were beyond the
brief questions to confirm or dispel Officer Townsend's
suspicions.  However, Uchima points to no facts that would
distinguish this case from other OVUII investigatory stop cases
in which it was concluded Miranda warnings were not required.  As
Ah Loo makes clear, a defendant is not in custody for purposes of
Miranda merely because he or she had been pulled over pursuant to
a valid traffic stop.  State v. Kaleohano, 99 Hawai# i 370, 376,
56 P.3d 138, 144 (2002). 
Admission of Uchima's performance on the standardized
field sobriety tests does not violate his right against self-
incrimination.  The right against self-incrimination is not
necessarily implicated whenever a person suspected of criminal
activity is compelled in some way to cooperate in developing
evidence which may be used against him.  State v. Wyatt, 67 Haw.
293, 302, 687 P.2d 544, 551 (1984).  In Wyatt, the court stated
that observations of a defendant's performance on field sobriety
tests was an exhibition of physical characteristics of
coordination.  Id. at 303, 687 P.2d at 551.  Thus, the Wyatt
court held that since performance on field sobriety tests was not
communication nor testimony, the trial court did not err by
refusing to suppress the field sobriety test observations.  Id.
at 301-03, 687 P.2d at 550-51.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Uchima's right to remain silent was not violated with
respect to answers he provided to the "medical rule-out"
questions.  Uchima's counsel first examined Officer Townsend
regarding these questions and Uchima's specific answers to those
questions.  Officer Townsend testified that after Uchima
indicated that he would participate in the standardized field
sobriety tests, he asked Uchima whether he had any physical
defects or speech impediments, was taking any medication, was
under the care of a doctor, dentist, or eye doctor, had an
artificial or glass eye, or was epileptic or diabetic.  Uchima
responded in the negative to each question.  Again, Tsujimura,
concerned the admissibility of Tsujimura's silence, not his
statements to the police.  Tsujimura , 140 Hawai #i at 313, 400
P.3d at 514 (observing it is a "well-established tenet that a
person being questioned by a law enforcement officer during an
investigatory stop 'is not obliged to respond.'" quoting Berkemer
v. McCarty, 468 U.S. 420, 439 (1984)).4  
It was not a violation of Uchima's Miranda rights to
admit Officer Townsend's observations of Uchima's driving,
Uchima's answers to medical rule-out questions, and his
performance on the field sobriety tests at trial.
(2)  Uchima claims that without the erroneously
admitted observations of Uchima's performance on the standardized
field sobriety tests, there was no substantial evidence to
support his conviction.  As stated above, the District Court did
not err by refusing to suppress observation of Uchima's actions
and responses to Officer Townsend's questions.  When the evidence
adduced in the trial court is considered in the strongest light
for the prosecution, there was substantial evidence to support
Uchima's conviction.  State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai #i 149, 157-58,
166 P.3d 322, 330-31 (2007).
4In any event, it was Uchima that introduced his answers to the
"medical rule-out" questions at trial.  On direct examination and on redirect
examination of Officer Townsend, the issue of the "medical rule-out" questions
was not raised by the State.  Therefore, to the extent it was error to admit
this evidence, the error was committed by Uchima.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Officer Townsend first observed Uchima traveling in a
black Acura on Beretania Street at Punchbowl Street which is a
public way, street, road, or highway in the County of Honolulu,
State of Hawai #i.
Officer Townsend noticed Uchima had an odor of alcohol,
slurred speech, and red and watery eyes.  When Uchima exited his
vehicle, he was unsteady on his feet and had to use his vehicle
to keep his balance.  During the walk-and-turn test, Uchima did
not count out loud, during the first nine steps he missed every
heel-to-toe step, stepped off the line on every step, and raised
his hands, all of which were contrary to the instructions. 
Uchima also swayed while he walked.  On the nine steps back, he
missed every heel-to-toe step, stepped off the line, raised his
arms, did not count, and took ten steps back, all of which were
contrary to the instructions.  It appeared that Uchima was taking
normal steps instead of putting one foot in front of the other.
During the one-leg stand test, Uchima was instructed to
lift one leg off the ground, point the toe straight out, look
down, keep his hands to the side, and count until he was told to
stop, approximately 30 seconds.  During the first 10 seconds,
Uchima raised his arms and swayed in all directions.  During the
next 10 seconds, Uchima had his arms raised, was swaying, had
difficulty balancing, and put his foot down once.  During the
last 10 seconds, Uchima still had his arms raised and was
swaying, and hopped on his planted foot once.  Uchima was not
able to perform the one-leg stand test as instructed.  
Therefore, there was sufficient evidence that Uchima was under
the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair a
person's normal mental faculties or ability to care for the
person and guard against casualty when he operated or assumed
actual physical control of his vehicle on a public way, street,
road, or highway in the County of Honolulu, State of Hawai# i.
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of
Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, entered on
January 24, 2017  and Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Plea/Judgment, entered on February 23, 2017 in the District Court
of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division, are affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawaii, February 15, 2018. #
On the briefs:
Alen M. Kaneshiro,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
6