NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000456
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MICHELE LINCOLN, Plaintiff/Appellant-Appellant,
v.
 
LAND USE COMMISSION, STATE OF HAWAI 'I; WEST MAUI LAND
COMPANY, INC., a domestic profit corporation;
KAHOMA RESIDENTIAL LLC, a domestic limited liability
Company; OFFICE OF PLANNING, STATE OF HAWAI 'I; MAUI
PLANNING DEPARTMENT, COUNTY OF MAUI; WILLIAM SPENCE,
Director of Planning of the County of Maui;
and ROUTH BOLOMET, Defendants/Appellees-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0528)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff/Appellant-Appellant Michele Lincoln (Lincoln)
 
appeals from the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and
 
Decision and Order Affirming the Agricultural Land Use District
 Boundaries into the Urban Land Use District Dated April 5, 2013"
 (FOF/COL/Order), entered on December 5, 2013, and the "Final
 
Judgment," entered on January 27, 2014, in the Circuit Court of
 
1
the Second Circuit  (circuit court).
 
This is a secondary appeal from the circuit court's 
review of the April 5, 2013 "Findings Of Fact, Conclusions Of 
Law, And Decision And Order" (April 2013 FOF/COL) of 
Defendant/Appellee-Appellee Land Use Commission, State of Hawai 'i 
(LUC), that granted the "Petition for Land Use District Boundary 
1
 The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Amendment" (Petition) of Defendants/Appellees-Appellees West Maui 
Land Company, Inc. (WMLC), a Hawai 'i corporation, and Kahoma 
Residential LLC (Kahoma), a Hawai 'i limited liability company, 
(together, Petitioners). 
On appeal, Lincoln contends the circuit court erred in:
 
(1) affirming the LUC's grant of Petitioners' Motion
 
for Reconsideration;
 
(2) finding that the Petitioners' project was exempted
 
from compliance with the West Maui Community Plan under Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 201H-38 (Supp. 2014);
 
(3) affirming the LUC's decision to limit the issues
 
that Lincoln could address during the hearing;
 
(4) affirming the LUC's determination that Petitioners'
 
unaudited financial statements satisfied Hawaii Administrative
 Rules (HAR) § 15-15-50(c)(8) (2008);
 
(5) substituting its judgment on the evidence in its
 
FOF/COL/Order; and
 
(6) not holding that the LUC failed to address allodial
 
title claims to the underlying property.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude
 Lincoln's appeal is without merit.
I. Motion for Reconsideration
 
Lincoln contends the LUC erred in granting Petitioners'
 
Motion for Reconsideration and issuing its April 2013 FOF/COL
 
without "expressly determin[ing] which, if any, of its challenged
 findings were clearly erroneous" and without "giv[ing] the
 reasons for its determination . . . ." Lincoln also contends the
 LUC's "original findings must stand because they may not simply
 be impliedly deemed to be clearly erroneous simply as a result of
 the fact that the LUC replaced them with findings stating the
 opposite." Lincoln's opening brief fails to provide any legal
 support for her contentions.
 
HAR § 15-15-84 (2013) permits a party to submit a
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
motion for reconsideration of an LUC decision.2 HAR § 15-15­
84(b) provides that "[t]he motion for reconsideration shall state
 
specifically the grounds on which the movant considers the
 decision or order unreasonable, unlawful, or erroneous." 
On January 23, 2013, pursuant to HAR § 15-15-84(b) the
 
Petitioners filed a "Motion to Reconsider Decision and Order
 Adopted January 14, 2013" (Motion for Reconsideration) of the
 
LUC's original January 14, 2013 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of
 
Law, and Decision and Order" (January 2013 FOF/COL). The Motion
 
for Reconsideration alleged (1) that the LUC's findings could not
 
rely upon the written testimony of Michael Lee (Lee) because
 
Lee's testimony was not admitted into evidence; (2) that the
 
LUC's finding that it could not determine the cultural practices
 of the proposed reclassification was inconsistent with the
 evidence presented during the hearing; (3) that the LUC
 erroneously concluded that Petitioners' unaudited financial
 statements were insufficient; (4) that the LUC erroneously
 concluded that the Petition Area includes lands with open area
 recreation facilities when the area is vacant and fallow; and (5)
 that the LUC should reconsider its determination because the Maui
 County adopted a new Maui Island Plan and new rules governing
 water quality of storm runoff after the evidentiary record had
 closed.
3 The LUC granted Petitioners' Motion for Reconsideration
 
with the understanding that, by granting the motion, the LUC was
 
2
 HAR §15-15-84 provides:
 
§15-15-84 Reconsideration of decision. (a) A motion
for reconsideration shall be filed with the commission
 
within seven calendar days after issuance of the
commission's written decision and order. The motion for
 reconsideration shall clearly specify that the motion is for
reconsideration.
 
(b) The motion for reconsideration shall state
specifically the grounds on which the movant considers the
decision or order unreasonable, unlawful, or erroneous.
 
(c) In no event will the commission consider any
motion for reconsideration on any petition after the period
within which the commission is required to act on the
petition.
 
3
 The LUC deemed the evidentiary portion of the proceeding complete
on October 5, 2012. The Petitioners' Motion for Reconsideration alleged that
the Maui County adopted new rules governing water quality of storm water
runoff on November 28, 2012 and the Maui Island Plan on December 28, 2012.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not approving Petitioners' Petition. Instead, LUC's grant of
 
Petitioners' Motion for Reconsideration merely indicated an
 intent to receive new evidence and reconsider its January 2013
 FOF/COL conclusions at a later time. Thus, the LUC's grounds for
 granting Petitioners' Motion for Reconsideration and issuing its
 findings in its April 2013 FOF/COL were within the bounds of the
 LUC's discretion. See HAR § 15-15-84. The circuit court did not
 
err in affirming the LUC's grant of Petitioners' Motion for
 Reconsideration and affirming the LUC's April 2013 FOF/COL.
II. 	HRS § 201H-38 Exemption
 
Lincoln challenges "the LUC's conclusion that it had
 
authority to grant the boundary amendment based upon [FOF] 387 in
 
[the April 2013 FOF/COL]," which provides:
 
387. 	The County of Maui has undergone a review and update
of its land use plans, the current result of which is
that the [Petitioners' Kahoma's Residential
Subdivision Affordable Housing Project (Project)] is
included in the adopted Maui Island Plan as an urban
use."
 
Lincoln provides no support for her contention that the LUC's 
reliance on FOF 387 was erroneous. Insofar as Lincoln does not present a discernible argument challenging FOF 387, we deem Lincoln's challenge to this finding waived. See Hawai
'i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may 
be deemed waived."); see also Kaho 'ohanohano v. Dep't of Human 
Servs, State of Hawaii, 117 Hawai 'i 262, 297 n.37, 178 P.3d 538, 
573 n.37 (2008) ("This court will disregard a particular 
contention if the appellant makes no discernible argument in support of that position." (citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets, omitted)). 
Instead of providing an argument for how the LUC's
 
reliance on FOF 387 was erroneous, the arguments in Lincoln's
 opening brief appear to challenge the LUC's determination that
 Petitioners were exempt from several regulations, pursuant to HRS
 § 201H-38.
4 Without providing any relevant factual or legal 
4
 HRS § 201H-38 provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 201H-38 Housing development; exemption from
statutes, ordinances, charter provisions, and rules  (a) The
[Hawaii Housing Finance and Development Corporation
 
(continued...)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
support, Lincoln argues that Petitioners "waived [the Chapter
 
201H exemptions] . . . after they filed the Petition."
 
Under HRS § 201H-38, certain housing projects may be
 
4(...continued)
(
corporation)] may develop on behalf of the State or with an
eligible developer, or may assist under a government
assistance program in the development of, housing projects
that shall be exempt from all statutes, ordinances, charter
provisions, and rules of any government agency relating to
planning, zoning, construction standards for subdivisions,
development and improvement of land, and the construction of
dwelling units thereon; provided that:
 
(1)	 The corporation finds the housing project is
consistent with the purpose and intent of this
chapter, and meets minimum requirements of
health and safety;
 
(2)	 The development of the proposed housing project
does not contravene any safety standards,
tariffs, or rates and fees approved by the
public utilities commission for public utilities
or of the various boards of water supply
authorized under chapter 54;
 
(3)	 The legislative body of the county in which the
housing project is to be situated shall have
approved the project with or without modifications[.] 
We note that Lincoln failed to raise her HRS § 201H-38 exemption
argument in her appeal from the LUC to the circuit court. HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)
mandates opening briefs to contain, inter alia:
 
Rule 28. Briefs.
 
. . . .
 
(b) Opening brief. . . . 
(4) A concise statement of the points of error set
forth in separately numbered paragraphs. Each point shall
state: (i) the alleged error committed by the court or
agency; (ii) where in the record the alleged error occurred;
and (iii) where in the record the alleged error was objected
to or the manner in which the alleged error was brought to
the attention of the court or agency.
 
. . . .
 
(D) . . . .
 Points not presented in accordance with this section
will be disregarded, except that the appellate court, at
its option, may notice a plain error not presented.
 
(Emphasis added.) See Mauna Kea Power Co. v. Bd. of Land & Natural Res. 
(Bd.), 76 Hawai' i 259, 262 n.2, 874 P.2d 1084, 1087 n.2 (1994) (appellant
waived issue that was not raised before circuit court in appeal from agencydecision); see also State v. Moses, 102 Hawai' i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 947
(2003) ("As a general rule, if a party does not raise an argument at trial,that argument will be deemed to have been waived on appeal; this rule appliesin both criminal and civil cases."). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exempt from the requirement that zoning or community plan
 
designations must be changed to conform to the proposed use. The
 LUC found that the Petitioners' proposed Project was an
 affordable housing project. In addition, the LUC's FOFs 384 and
 386 found:
 
384. 	On December 2, 2011, the Maui County Council approved
a HRS Section 201H-38 application submitted by
Petitioner allowing an exemption from the Maui County
Code to enable project implementation without the
filing and processing of a community plan amendment
application.
 
. . . .
 
386. 	
The Maui County Council exempted the Project [sic]
obtaining a change in zoning. 
Lincoln did not challenge the LUC's FOFs 384 and 386 in her 
appeal to the circuit court. Given that the circuit court's FOF 43 is consistent with the LUC's unchallenged FOFs 384 and 386, the circuit court's finding was not erroneous. 
See Okada 
Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawai 'i 450, 459, 40 P.3d 
73, 82 (2002) ("[U]nchallenged factual findings are deemed to be
 binding on appeal[.]").
III. Intervention Limitation

 
Lincoln contends the LUC erred in limiting the issues
 
that Lincoln was permitted to address during the Petition
 hearing. The record indicates that Lincoln filed a Petition to
 Intervene pursuant to HAR § 15-15-52 (2008), listing three areas
 of concern as the basis of her intervention. When the LUC was
 considering Lincoln's Petition to Intervene, Lincoln further
 requested that, "if her intervention is granted, the issue of
 traffic (commitment of state funds and resources) be added to the
 three issues for which Petition did not oppose intervention." On
 June 22, 2012, the LUC granted Lincoln's Petition to Intervene
 and limited the scope of her intervention to the following
 issues:
 
(1) the impact of the proposed reclassification on the
preservation or maintenance of important natural systems or
habitats; (2) the impact of the proposed reclassification on
the maintenance of other natural resources relevant to
 Hawaii's economy including, but not limited to, agricultural
resources; (3) the impact of the proposed reclassification
on the provision for housing opportunities for all income
groups, particularly the low, low-moderate, and gap groups;
 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and (4) traffic (commitment of state funds and resources).
 
The scope of the LUC's limitation was consistent with Lincoln's
 
four areas of concern and Lincoln did not object to the LUC's
 imposed limitations.
 
The only legal argument Lincoln provides in support of
 
her appeal is that the circuit court should have declared that
 she did not waive her objection to the LUC's limitation because
 she proceeded during the LUC proceedings pro se.
5 But see HRAP
 
Rule 28(b)(4) (appellant's concise statement of the points of
 error shall state "where in the record the alleged error was
 objected to or the manner in which the alleged error was brought
 to the attention of the court or agency.").
 
Even if we were to consider Lincoln's challenges to the
 
LUC's intervention limitation, Lincoln's opening brief provides
 no legal or factual support for her argument that the LUC erred
 in limiting the scope of her intervention. HAR § 15-15-63(b)
 (2008) provides that "[a]ny oral or documentary evidence may be
 received, but the [LUC] shall as a matter of policy provide for
 the exclusion of irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious
 evidence . . . ." See also HAR § 15-15-65 (2008) ("To avoid
 
unnecessary cumulative evidence, the presiding officer may limit
 the number of witnesses or the time for testimony upon a
 particular issue."). The LUC clearly had the authority to
 exclude any questioning that it deemed irrelevant, immaterial, or
 unduly repetitious. Lincoln does not indicate where in the
 record any of her concerns were not addressed or where the LUC
 erred in limiting her participation in the hearing. See Int'l
 
Bhd. of Elec. Workers, Local 1357 v. Hawaiian Tel. Co.
, 68 Haw.
 
316, 332, 713 P.2d 943, 956 (1986) ("[A]ppellate court is not
 required to sift through a voluminous record for documentation of
 a party's contentions."). Given that the scope of the LUC's
 limitation was consistent with Lincoln's grounds for
 intervention, that Lincoln failed to object to the limitation
 
5
 While Lincoln proceeded before the LUC pro se, she is represented
by counsel in this appeal.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
during the LUC proceedings, and that Lincoln's opening brief
 
fails to provide any factual support for her argument on appeal,
 we have no basis upon which to rule that the scope of the LUC's
 limitation was erroneous.
 
IV. 	Financial Reports
 
Lincoln challenges the LUC's FOFs 393 and 394, which
 
provide:
 
393. 	Petitioner will obtain funding for improvements by
bank or private financing. 
394. 	Petitioner has the financial capability to undertake
the Project.
 
Lincoln contends the LUC erred in finding that Petitioners
 
provided sufficient financial statements because, as a matter of
 law, Petitioners were required to provide audited financial
 reports.
 
HAR § 15-15-50(c)(8), the rule in effect at the time of
 
the LUC proceedings, provided that a petition for boundary
 amendment shall include "[a] statement describing the financial
 condition together with a current balance sheet and income
 statement, and a clear description of the manner in which the
 petitioner proposes to finance the proposed use or development." 
HAR § 15-15-50(c)(8) does not specify whether the financial
 statements need be audited in order to comply with the rule. The
 LUC promulgated HAR § 15-15-50's requirements pursuant to
 statutory authority granted under HRS §§ 205-1, 205-4, and 205-7. 
None of the authorizing statutes indicate a requirement that
 financial statements for the proposed use or development of land
 be audited. 
As a general rule,
 
where an administrative agency is charged with the
responsibility of carrying out the mandate of a statute
which contains words of broad and indefinite meaning, courts
accord persuasive weight to administrative construction and
follow the same, unless the construction is palpably
erroneous.
 
Haole v. State, 111 Hawai 'i 144, 150, 140 P.3d 377, 383 (2006)
 
(brackets omitted) (quoting Morgan v. Planning Dep't, Cnty. of
 
Kaua'i, 104 Hawai 'i 173, 180, 86 P.3d 982, 989 (2004)). 
In other words,
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[w]here an agency is statutorily responsible for carrying
out the mandate of a statute which contains broad or ambiguous language, that agency's interpretation andapplication of the statute is generally accorded judicialdeference on appellate review. Vail v. Employees' RetirementSystem, 75 Haw. 42, 59, 856 P.2d 1227, 1237 (1993). However,an interpretation by an agency of a statute it administersis not entitled to deference if the interpretation isplainly erroneous and inconsistent with both the letter andintent of the statutory mandate. Kahana Sunset Owners v.County of Maui, 86 Hawai' i 66, 72, 947 P.2d 378, 384 (1997). 
Haole, 111 Hawai 'i at 150, 140 P.3d at 383 (quoting TIG Ins. Co. 
v. Kauhane, 101 Hawai 'i 311, 321, 67 P.3d 810, 820 (App. 2003)). 
Lincoln provides no argument for why the LUC's
 
interpretation of HAR § 15-15-50(c)(8) was erroneous. Instead,
 
Lincoln merely contends that "[t]he rules do not tie the LUC's
 hands or require it to accept an unaudited financial statement at
 face value." Indeed the rules do not require the LUC to accept
 unaudited financial statements, but it also does not preclude the
 LUC from finding unaudited financial statements sufficient. 
Therefore, the circuit court did not err in affirming the LUC's
 finding that unaudited financial statements satisfied HAR § 15­15-50(c)(8)'s requirements.
V. Circuit Court's Findings of Fact
 
Lincoln contends the circuit court erred "when it
 
substituted its judgment on the evidence in finding that the LUC
 
did not breach its constitutional and statutory duties." Lincoln
 alleges the circuit court erred by "evaluating evidence which the
 LUC had not even identified as the basis for the findings it
 reversed" and "speculat[ing] about which evidence the LUC may
 have found persuasive or more persuasive . . . ." It is unclear
 which of the circuit court's factual findings Lincoln challenges
 on appeal. Lincoln's point of error section contends the circuit
 court erred when it cited to the testimony of Agronomist Paul
 Singleton, Ph.D (Dr. Singleton) and Cultural Practitioner Michael
 
Dega (Dega) to the exclusion of other evidence to the contrary. 
It appears that Lincoln may be challenging the circuit court's
 
COLs 86 and 105, the only two findings that cite to the
 challenged testimonies. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
COL 86 provides:
 
86. The [LUC], after lengthy testimony by [Dr.
Singleton], determined that removal of the land from
agricultural use would not substantially impair actual or
potential agricultural production and that the removal of
the land from agricultural use was reasonably necessary for
urban growth.
 
COL 105 provides:
 
105. The [LUC] based this finding on the testimony of
[Dega], the report submitted in connection with the
Environmental Assessment, and supplemental archaeological
work performed during the hearing on the Petition.
 
Without providing citations to the record, Lincoln
 
contends Dr. Singleton's testimony was "contradicted by farmers"
 
during the hearing and that Dega's testimony was "vigorously
 opposed by other practitioners." Lincoln argues that the circuit
 court's reliance upon the challenged testimonies was therefore
 erroneous. Because Lincoln fails to provide any citations to
 where evidence of opposing testimonies can be found in the
 record, we have no basis upon which to rule that the circuit
 court's findings were erroneous.
VI. Allodial Title
 
Lincoln contends the LUC erred when it granted
 
Petitioners' Petition without first addressing allodial title
 
claims to the underlying property that intervenor Routh Bolomet
 (Bolomet) raised during the LUC proceedings. Lincoln's opening
 
brief only argues that Bolomet raised allodial title claims
 
before the LUC, but fails to indicate if or when Lincoln also
 raised such a claim.
6 Therefore, the circuit court did not err
 
in declining to address Lincoln's allodial title claims.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Circuit Court of the
 
Second Circuit's "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and
 Decision and Order Affirming the Agricultural Land Use District
 Boundaries into the Urban Land Use District Dated April 5, 2013,"
 
6
 The record indicates that Bolomet did not appeal the LUC's grant
of Petitioners' Petition. Furthermore, the record does not indicate that
Lincoln was claiming that she had a right of ownership over the underlying
property, but rather that she was asserting ownership rights on behalf of
Bolomet.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
entered on December 5, 2013, and "Final Judgment," entered on
 
January 27, 2014, are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 10, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Rafael G. Del Castillo
 
(Jouxson-Meyers & DelCastillo)
for Plaintiff/Appellant-
Appellant Michele Lincoln.
 Presiding Judge
Associate JudgeAssociate Judge Patricia Ohara 
Diane Erickson Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Defendant/Appellee-Appellee Land Use Commission,State of Hawai
'i. 
James W. Geiger

(Mancini, Welch & Geiger)
for Defendants/Appellees-
Appellees West Maui Land
Company, Inc., and Kahoma
Residential LLC.
 
11
 