NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000538 
  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
 
 
ONE KALAKAUA SENIOR LIVING ASSOCIATION, 
a Hawaii non-profit corporation, Plaintiff-Appellee, v. 
ALICE CLAY, Defendant-Appellant, and 
HAWAI‘I STATE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, Defendant-Appellee, and 
DOES 1-10, Defendants. 
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 1CC16-1-000229) 
  
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By:  Leonard, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.)
 
  Defendant-Appellant Alice Clay (Clay) appeals from the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit's:  (1) December 19, 2016 
order granting Plaintiff-Appellee One Kalakaua Senior Living 
Association's (Association) motion for partial summary judgment 
as to Count I; (2) December 19, 2016 order denying Clay's motion 
for leave to file a counterclaim; (3) June 28, 2017 order granting Association's motion for partial summary judgment as to NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
2 
 Count III; and (4) June 28, 2017 final judgment, which was 
amended on November 15, 2017.   Based on the discussion below, we 
affirm in part and vacate in part.  1
I. BACKGROUND 
Clay has been a resident and owner at One Kalakaua 
Senior Living Condominium Project (One Kalakaua
) since 1997.  
The background in this case spans over two decades and involves a long-standing dispute between Clay and Association over One Kalakaua's operation as an assisted living facility.  Because 
they are central to this appeal, we begin with One Kalakaua's 
governing documents.   
A. One Kalakaua's Governing Documents 
1. Declaration 
In 1995, One Kalakaua's Declaration (Declaration) was 
recorded with the Bureau of Conveyances, describing the project as "a single monolithic building consisting of 14 floors" and 
the "entire second floor is a skilled nursing facility consisting of beds, patient lounge, recreation and dining area, 
physical therapy room, beauty shop, nurses station and 
administrative area, lobby and waiting area."  (Declaration, 
 
1  The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided over the December 19, 2016 
orders, and the Honorable Keith K. Hiraoka presided over the June 28, 2017 
order and final judgment, and the November 15, 2017 amended final judgment.  
 
We note that Clay' s opening brief does not comply with the Hawai‘ i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (
HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4).  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
3 
 Article 5.0, 5.1(d)).  The third to fourteenth floors have 
apartments, elevators, a lobby, corridors, mechanical and 
electrical rooms, and a trash chute.  (Declaration, Article 
5.1(e)). 
The common elements of One Kalakaua include the 
"skilled nursing facility, patient lounge, recreation and dining 
area, physical therapy room, beauty shop, nurses station and 
administrative area [that] are located on the second floor."  (Declaration, Article 6.4(b)).  "Each apartment shall have 
appurtenant thereto the following undivided interest in all the 
common elements of the Project for determination of the common 
profits, expenses, voting and for all other purposes."  
(Declaration, Article 7.0). 
The Declaration vested the administration of One 
Kalakaua in Association.  (Declaration, Article 11.0).  "The 
purpose of this Association is to provide a means for the 
governance of the Project as a senior living facility, providing such services and amenities as the Association may from time to 
time deem appropriate in furtherance of such purpose."  
(Declaration, Article 11.1(b)). 
"The One Kalakaua Club is that part of the Association
which provides services and amenities through the facilities to 
the owners and occupants of the apartments in the Project."  
(Declaration, Article 11.5).  Available to the owner as part of  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
4 
 the common expense are meals, the wellness program, arts and 
crafts program, recreational program, and other social programs. 
(Declaration, Article 11.5(a)).  Available to the owner through 
One Kalakaua Club upon request and purchase are the beauty 
salon, the skilled nursing facility, and "[o]ther services or 
uses that are offered."  (Declaration, Article 11.5(b)) 
(emphasis added).  
The Declaration also requires that 
[a]ll apartment owners . . . shall be bound by and comply 
strictly with the provisions of this Declaration, the By Laws of the Association and all agreements, decisions, and 
determinations of the Association duly and lawfully made or 
amended from time to time, and failure to comply with any 
of same shall be grounds for an action to recover sums due, 
for damages or injunctive relief, or both[.] 
 
(Declaration, Article 14.0). 
The Declaration defines "Act" as "the provisions of 
Chapter 514A, Hawaii Revised Statutes [(HRS)], as the same may 
be amended from time to time."2  (Declaration, Article 1.0(a)).  
The Declaration provides for "Compliance with Laws" and that 
"[i]n the event of conflict the Act shall prevail over the 
Hawaii Nonprofit Corporation Act and an owner shall not excuse 
 
2  In 2017, the legislature repealed HRS chapter 514A and made clear 
that HRS " chapter 514B applies to all condominiums in the State, provided 
that such application shall not invalidate existing provisions of a 
condominiums governing documents, if to do so would invalidate a developer's 
reserved rights[.]"   2017 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 181, §§ 1, 2 at 629; S.B. 292, 
S.D. 1, 29th Leg., Reg. Sess. (2017), available at 
https://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/session2017/bills/SB292_SD1_.pdf; S.B. 292, 
H.D. 1, 29th Leg., Reg. Sess. (2017), available at https://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/session2017/bills/SB292_HD1_.pdf; S.B. 292, 
C.D. 1, 29th Leg., Reg. Sess. (2017), available at https://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/session2017/bills/SB292_CD1_.pdf. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
5 
 an owner from observing any law and any regulation of any 
governmental body."  (Declaration, Article 20.3).  "Any dispute 
involving an apartment owner, the Association, the Board, or the
Managing Agent shall be submitted to arbitration as required by 
the Act."  (Declaration, Article 21.0) (emphasis added).  
2. By Laws 
Also in 1995, One Kalakaua's "By Laws" (By Laws) were 
recorded with the Bureau of Conveyances.  The By Laws explain 
that the "mere acquisition or rental of any apartment or the 
mere act of occupancy of any apartment will signify that these 
By Laws are accepted, ratified, and will be complied with."  (By 
Laws, Introduction/Preamble). 
The By Laws provide that, "in the use of" One 
Kalakaua, "[e]very apartment owner and occupant shall at all 
times keep his apartment in a strictly clean and sanitary 
condition and observe and perform all laws, ordinances, rules 
and regulations now or hereafter made by any governmental authority or the Association for the period during which the 
same are applicable to the use of" One Kalakaua.  (By Laws, 
Article V, Section 3(A)(6)).  Also "in the use of" One Kalakaua, 
"[n]o unlawful use shall be made of the Project or any part 
thereof, and all valid laws, orders, rules and regulations of 
all governmental agencies having jurisdiction thereof NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
6 
 (collectively "Legal Requirements") shall be strictly complied 
with."  (By Laws, Article V, Section 3(A)(11)). 
Apartment owners "need not comply with any Legal 
Requirement so long as it shall be so contesting the validity or 
applicability thereof, provided that noncompliance shall not 
create a dangerous condition or constitute a crime or an offense 
punishable by fine or imprisonment," and also "that no part of 
the Project shall be subject to being condemned or vacated by reason of noncompliance . . . ."  (By Laws, Article V, 
Section 3(A)(11)(ii)). 
"All costs and expenses, including reasonable 
attorney's fees, incurred by or on behalf of the Association for 
. . . [e]nforcing any provision of the Declaration, By Laws, 
House Rules, and the Condominium Property Act . . . against an 
owner . . . shall be promptly paid on demand to the Association 
by such person . . . ."  (By Laws, Article V, Sections 5(C), 
5(C)(3), and 5(C)(4)). 
"Each apartment owner . . . shall comply strictly with 
the By Laws and with the administrative rules and regulations adopted . . . .  Failure to comply with any of the same shall be 
ground for an action to recover sums due, for damages or 
injunctive relief, or both . . . ."  (By Laws, Article V, 
Section 9). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
7 
 The By Laws "are subordinate and subject to all 
provisions of the Declaration and any amendments thereto and the 
Condominium Property Act ([HRS] chapter 514A, . . . as amended) 
which shall control in case of any conflict."  (By Laws, 
Article VI, Section 3).  "At the request of any party, any 
dispute . . . involving . . . the Association . . . relating to 
the interpretation, application or enforcement of [HRS chapter 
514A], Declaration, By Laws, House (Building) Rules . . . shall be subject to arbitration and disposition as provided under 
Part VII, Arbitration, under said Chapter 514A."3  (By Laws, 
Article VI, Section 8) (emphasis added). 
The By Laws also give the Board power to adopt, amend 
or repeal House Rules.  (By Laws, Article V, Section 4).   
3. House Rules 
The House Rules, approved August 2015 and effective 
October 2015, declare that One Kalakaua "is a fee-simple condominium multipurpose senior living community that exists to support the current and enhance the future lifestyle needs of 
our residents."  (House Rules, Section 1 - Introduction, 
Mission/Vision/Values – Our Community).  "The amenities 
(programs and services) offered by our community are geared to 
 
3  The By Laws make mediation available in assessment disputes and court 
actions by an owner " against an Association . . . to enforce any provision of 
the Declaration, By Laws, House Rules, or [HRS chapter 514A] . . . ."  (By 
Laws, Article V, Sections 1(D)(5), 1(E) and 5(D)). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
8 
 meet the needs of seniors who are independent as well as those 
who benefit from supervised assistance of others."  (House 
Rules, Section 1 - Introduction, Mission/Vision/Values – Our 
Community).  One Kalakaua's mission is to "strive to be a leader 
in senior living by providing a gracious, friendly, and secure 
residential community that offers residents and their family's 
[sic] peace of mind through wellness and assisted living 
programs that support the continuum of care and 'aging in place'."  (House Rules, Section 1 - Introduction, 
Mission/Vision/Values – Our Mission). 
The House Rules also acknowledge that One Kalakaua's 
"operation requires special policies and services in compliance 
with the State of [Hawai‘ i], Department of Health [(DOH)], 
Assisted Living Regulations . . . ."  (House Rules, Section 1 - 
Introduction, Acknowledgement).  The House Rules then disclose 
that "One Kalakaua has adopted polices and services in 
compliance with the State of [
Hawaii ‘], [DOH], Assisted Living 
Regulations, Hawaii Administrative Rules [(HAR)], Title 11, 
Chapter 90."  (House Rules, Section 5 – Senior Living, Senior 
Living Disclosures). 
The House Rules provide that "[a] 2-step TB clearance 
is required before move-in" and an "[a]nnual TB clearance is 
required from the [DOH], and must be obtained with written documentation given to the facility, for Independent Contracted NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
9 
   Caregivers."  (House Rules, Section 2 - Administration, 
Registration, Section 5 – Senior Living, Resident Arranged 
Health Services).  The club dues include the "State required TB 
clearance for all new move-ins and annually thereafter."  (House 
Rules, Section 6 – Services, Services Included in Monthly Fees – 
Club Dues).  "Mandatory tuberculin skin testing is also offered 
annually" and included in the monthly fees for the Independent 
Living-Wellness Program.  (House Rules, Section 5 – Senior Living, Continuum of Care – Independent Living-Wellness 
Program).  
"Owners and occupants as well as their guests shall 
observe and adhere to the House Rules, Declaration, and Bylaws."  
(House Rules, Section 2 – Administration, Violations).  The 
minimum fine is $50, and the maximum fine is $350.  (House 
Rules, Section 2 – Administration, Violations).  Also, "[t]he 
Board may impose charges or penalties for violations of the 
Declaration, Bylaws, or House Rules" including "[e]njoin, abate or remedy by appropriate legal proceedings, either at law or in 
equity, the continuance of any breach, and all costs thereof, 
including attorney's fees, shall be borne by the defaulting 
apartment owner."  (House Rules, Section 2 – Administration, 
Violations). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
10 
 B. Clay and Assisted Living 
Clay acquired Unit 1503 in 1997, and Unit 1204 in 
2004.  Clay resided in Unit 1503 until 2012, when she 
transferred Unit 1503 to another person and then resided in 
Unit 1204. 
According to Clay, from 1997 to 2000, Association 
hired Life Care Services to provide assisted living at One 
Kalakaua.  Clay "was President of One Kalakaua at the time the assisted living services ceased being provided by an independent 
contractor at the end of calendar year 2000 and voted in favor 
of the termination of that independent contractor."  Clay 
averred that, in 2001, "One Kalakaua began to provide assistance 
in living services in a manner which raised licensing and 
insurance issues . . . ." 
Also in 2001, HAR § 11-164's Exhibit A was amended.  
HAR § 11-164 Exhibit A (Amended 2001, Repealed 2018).  Applying 
to programs licensed under Title 11 chapters 85-105, Exhibit A provided that "[a]ll residents, employees, contract workers, and 
volunteers working more than 10 hours per week are required to have an Entry TB Evaluation (as described in #2 below) within 1 
year prior to starting work and Annual Tuberculosis Re-
evaluations" except for buildings with no patient care, patients 
of acute inpatient facilities, and infants under twelve months 
old.  (Emphases added.)   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
11 
 In 2002, One Kalakaua established itself as an 
assisted living facility as reflected in the 2015 license below: 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
See Exhibit "V" of Association's Motion for Partial Summary 
Judgment as to Count I.  The license identifies the 166 units within One Kalakaua. 
C. The 2002 Litigation 
Clay filed a second amended complaint alleging the 
following:  (1) "Count I Violation of Duty of Prudent Business Practices and Breach of Fiduciary Duties[,]" and (2) "Count II 
Violation of Declaration/Ultra Vires[.]"  (Formatting altered.)  
As to Count I, Clay argued that Association breached its 
fiduciary duties for the following reasons:   
(a) improperly operating One Kalakaua as an Assisted Living 
Facility first without proper licensing and proper 
insurance, and then without first obtaining an amendment to 
the Declaration;  
  
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
12 
 (b) directly providing the assisted living services through 
Association employees, and thereby incurring ever 
increasing expenses including for wages and insurance, 
instead of hiring a proper vendor;  
 
(c) using common area funds and club dues to subsidize what 
should be "pay as you go" services;  
 
(d) reducing or eliminating services provided as part of 
the club dues in order to use the funds for the assisted 
living services;  
(e) failing to fund the building reserve;  
 
(f) failing to provide timely audits; and  
 (g) promulgating improper House Rules[.]  
 
(Formatting altered and emphasis added.) 
Clay sought, inter alia, declaratory relief for 
Association's "violation of the Declaration and/or By-Laws and 
acting ultra vires" in "breach of their fiduciary duties, by 
obtaining a license to act as an Assisted Living Facility, and 
operating [Association] as an Assisted Living Facility, without 
first presenting the issue to the homeowners and obtaining the 
necessary votes to amend the Declaration and By-Laws[.]" 
In 2004, the Honorable Elizabeth E. Hifo concluded: 
(1) "The Declaration did not need to be amended to obtain an assisted living license and the Board did not breach its 
fiduciary duty by obtaining the assisted living facility 
license[,]" and (2) "The doctrine of judicial estoppel bars 
Plaintiffs from claiming that the Declaration was violated or 
needed to be amended or that the Board breached its fiduciary duty by obtaining the assisted living facility license." NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
13 
 Judge Hifo found that, in the Declaration, "'other 
services offered' at One Kalakaua by the One Kalakaua Club are 
'based on the owner and/or occupant, requesting and/or 
purchasing the same.'"  Judge Hifo also found that Clay "admits 
that all 'other services offered' include assisted living 
services and that One Kalakaua charges for all 'other services 
offered.'" 
On December 8, 2004, Judge Hifo entered a judgment in 
favor of Association and against Clay. D. The 2016 Litigation 
 1. Pre-complaint 
In 2011, DOH's Tuberculosis Control Branch answered 
questions from the Hawaii Long Term Care Association (2011 Q&A).  
One of the scenarios posed by the Hawaii Long Term Care 
Association closely resembled the situation at One Kalakaua: 
Facility is a condominium that has been also licensed as 
an [assisted living facility].  Residents privately own 
and purchase their units and do not necessarily receive 
[assisted living facility] services or oversight.  
[Assisted living facility] services are an ala- carte 
feature that they must purchase separately and the 
majority of the residents and independent [sic] receive 
no [assisted living facility] services.  Because residents own their unit, management has no enforcement 
mechanism.  Are independent residents and their visitors required to have TB clearance?  Is there an opportunity 
to address this for units that are privately owned? 
 
(Formatting altered.)  The Tuberculosis Control Branch responded 
that 
[a]ll residents of a facility licensed under Title 11, 
Chapters 85- 105 by the [DOH] (Office of Health Care NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
14 
 Assurance) are required to comply with TB clearance 
requirements.  The independence of a resident and 
utilization of services is not used to determine if TB 
clearance is required.  If the entire condominium is 
licensed by the Office of Health Care Assurance, all 
residents of the facility would be required to have TB clearance.  TB clearance is not required for visitors. 
 
In 2012, 2013, and 2014, Clay complied with the TB 
screening requirement. 
In October 2015, Clay refused the TB reevaluation.   
This refusal continued for several months, and Association 
imposed a $50 fine in a third notice of non-compliance, a $100 
fine in a fourth notice, a $200 fine in a fifth notice, a $350 
fine in a sixth notice, and another $350 fine in the seventh, 
and final, notice.4 
 
4  The non- compliance notices were as follows: 
 
Second Notice:  Dated November 5, 2015 with a compliance due 
date of November 20, 2015. 
 
Third Notice:  Dated November 23, 2015 with a $50.00 fine, 
a new compliance due date of December 4, 
2015, and a warning of being assessed a 
$100.00 fine. 
 
Fourth Notice:  Dated December 7, 2015 with $100.00 fine, a 
new compliance due date of December 18, 
2015, and a warning of being assessed a $200.00 fine. 
 
Fifth Notice:  Dated De cember 21, 2015 with a $200.00 fine, 
a new compliance due date of January 8, 
2016, and a warning of being assessed a $350.00 fine.   
 
Sixth Notice:  Dated January 11, 2016 with a $350.00 fine, 
a new compliance due date of January 27, 
2016, and a warning of being assessed a $350.00 fine.  
 
Seventh Notice:  Dated January 28, 2016 with a $350.00 fine.  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
15 
 On the day before the final notice, Clay filed a 
special proceeding in circuit court seeking to compel mediation 
with Association under HRS § 514B-161(a), which was assigned to 
the Honorable Gary W.B. Chang.  Clay clarified that the only 
issue was the $50 fine she paid and would like to get back.  On 
February 19, 2016, Judge Chang ruled that "the Court is unable 
to find sufficient legal authority authorizing [it] to issue an 
order compelling mediation[,]" and denied the petition without prejudice. 
 2. Association's Complaint 
On February 4, 2016, Association filed a verified 
complaint (Complaint) alleging three counts. 
In Count I, Association requested a declaration that:  (1) "state law requires that all One Kalakaua 
residents undergo annual TB skin testing as set forth in HAR Title 11, Chapter 164;"  
(2) "Clay's refusal since October 2015 to undergo the 
annual TB skin test (or secure a letter from her physician demonstrating her medical inability to 
take the TB skin test, undergo a chest X-ray to 
clear her of TB infection, and respond to annual 
Health Department TB-focused questionnaires 
thereafter) is a violation of HAR Title 11, NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
16 
   Chapter 164, and also of [Association's] House 
Rules; and"  
(3) Association "is entitled to levy fines (and all 
other penalties allowable under the House Rules) 
against Ms. Clay for her refusal to undergo the 
annual TB skin test (or the previously stated 
alternative)." 
(Formatting altered.) 
In Count II, Association requested that the circuit 
court "enjoin Ms. Clay from residing in the One Kalakaua 
condominium community unless and until Ms. Clay demonstrates 
that she has undergone either the annual TB skin test or the 
previously stated alternative."  The parties later stipulated to 
dismiss this count as Clay submitted documents showing she was 
screened for TB in May 2016 (seven months after her previous TB 
screening expired). 
In Count III, Association requested attorneys' fees 
and costs related to Clay's refusal to take the TB skin test, under HRS §§ 514B-157 (2006), 607-9 (1993), and 607-14.5 
(Supp. 2015). 
One Kalakaua attached to its Complaint as Exhibit C 
the 2011 Q&A. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
17 
  3. Clay's Answer 
On February 26, 2016, Clay filed a five-page answer to 
the Complaint proffering nineteen defenses including that she 
"relies as an affirmative defense upon the . . . breach of [One 
Kalakaua's] governing documents."  Clay filed no counterclaim 
with her answer. 
4. Clay's Motion for Mediation 
Ten days after filing her answer, Clay moved to compel 
mediation, which the circuit court granted but explained that it 
was not a stay of the case and the case would proceed in normal 
course.  Association later represented that the "parties have 
engaged in court-ordered mediation" and "there was no settlement 
on the substantive issues in the case[.]" 
5. Motion for Summary Judgment on Count I (Declaratory 
Relief) 
 
In June 2016, Association moved for summary judgment 
on Count I (declaratory relief), arguing that undisputed facts 
demonstrated that Clay refused to take a TB test from 
October 22, 2015 to May 19, 2016, which violated One Kalakaua's 
By Laws and House Rules.  Association also asserted that it was 
entitled to levy fines against Clay for refusing to comply with the TB testing requirements. 
In her response to Association's motion for summary 
judgment, Clay argued that:  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
18 
 (1) [Association] has no authority to enforce state law 
against Ms. Clay;  
 
(2) [Association] must amend its By- Laws and/or Declaration 
in order to enforce the DOH regulations against Ms. Clay 
and the entire One Kalakaua Project;   
(3) The Board owes a fiduciary duty to Ms. Clay and all of 
the residents of One Kalakaua pursuant to its operating an 
[assisted living facility] within One Kalakaua;  
 (4) Ms. Clay's doctor's note satisfied the DOH guidelines 
and demonstrates the ambiguity within their regulations and the Board's interpretation of the same;  
 (5) Ms. Clay was penalized by the Board in violation of 
House Rules and the DOH regulations;  
 
(6) Ms. Clay's defenses to the Motion and Complaint are not 
barred by the doctrine of res judicata; and   (7) Ms. Clay respectfully requests a continuance under 
[Hawai‘i
 Rules of Civil Procedure ( HRCP)] Rule 56(f). 
 
(Formatting altered.) 
In its December 19, 2016 Order, the circuit court 
granted summary judgment "because there are no disputed issues 
of material fact and [Association] has demonstrated entitlement 
to judgment as a matter of law . . . ."  The circuit court found 
that it was undisputed that Clay refused the TB screening in 
October 2015.  The circuit court further found that this refusal 
"violated applicable state health department laws and the One 
Kalakaua rules." 
The circuit court stated that it 
rejects Ms. Clay's arguments in opposition to the Motion 
that [Association] cannot enforce state laws on grounds 
that only the State of [Hawaii ‘] can do so.  As a regulated 
entity under the state health law provisions that are cited 
in the
 moving papers, [Association] is bound to follow 
those state law provisions. 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
19 
 The circuit court clarified that "while it is being 
characterized by Ms. Clay as enforcement of state law, 
[Association] is trying to enforce its own rules and comply with 
state law, which it is required to do as a licensed" assisted 
living facility. 
Finally, the circuit court stated that it "rejects 
Ms. Clay's arguments that One Kalakaua is improperly operating 
as an [assisted living facility] in breach of its fiduciary duties."  To that, the circuit court concluded that "[t]hese 
arguments were fully litigated and decided upon in the 2002 
complaint, resulting in the 2004 judgment before Judge Hifo, and 
are accordingly barred by principles of res judicata." 
6. Motion for Leave to File Counterclaim 
Also in June 2016, Clay moved for leave to file a 
counterclaim, arguing that (1) she did "not unduly [delay] in bringing the instant motion; (2) the amendment to the pleadings 
will not prejudice [One Kalakaua]; (3) [she] will be damaged should she not be allowed to file her Counterclaim; and (4) the 
motion is made in good faith and not for undue purposes."  Clay 
explained that she "did not initially file a counterclaim as she 
was hopeful the matters would be resolved in mediation." 
Clay attached her proposed counterclaim, which alleged 
eight counts.  All counts were based on the propriety of One 
Kalakaua operating as an assisted living facility.  In NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
20 
 particular, Counts 6 through 8 were in pertinent part, as 
follows: 
COUNT VI[5] 
BREACH OF FIDUCIARY DUTY 
  
. . . . 
 
39.
  The Board breached its duties to Ms. Clay and 
the members of [One Kalakaua] when it unilaterally converted One Kalakaua to an [assisted living facility], 
and held the owners financially responsible for the 
maintenance of the [assisted living facility] while 
requiring the owners and residents to adhere to the regulations of the [DOH], as interpreted by [One Kalakaua]. 
 39.  The Board further violated its duties to 
Ms. Clay individually when [sic] fined Ms. Clay in excess 
of $1,000.00 and ultimately sued her in an attempt to force her to comply with the Board's new rules or otherwise be 
able to prevent her from entering her home until the Board 
deemed she was in compliance.  Then, after suing Ms. Clay, 
the Board and [One Kalakaua] Executive Director spoke out 
against Ms. Clay at meetings, blaming her for wasting [One 
Kalakaua] funds on the lawsuit and publishing such 
statements in [One Kalakaua] literature and meeting 
minutes. 
 . . . .  
COUNT VII
[6] 
NEGLIGENT INFLICTION OF EMOTIONAL DISTRESS 
 
 . . . . 
 
 43.
  [One Kalakaua] breached this duty by, in 
violation of the governing documents and state law, 
unilaterally converting her fee simple property to an 
[assisted living facility], holding her financially responsible for the operation of the [assisted living 
facility] while forcing her to adhere to the rules and 
regulations of the [DOH]. 
 
  . . . .  
 
44.
  The Board further inflicted distress upon 
Ms. Clay when it fined Ms. Clay in excess of $1,000.00 and 
ultimately sued her in an attempt to force her to comply with the Board's new rules or otherwise be able to prevent her from entering her home until the Board deemed she was 
 
5  Count 6 included two paragraphs numbered 39.   
 
 6  Count 7 included two paragraphs numbered 44. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
21 
 in compliance.  Then, after suing Ms. Clay, the Board and 
[One Kalakaua] Executive Director spoke out against 
Ms. Clay at meetings, blaming her for wasting [One 
Kalakaua] funds on the lawsuit and publishing such statements in [One Kalakaua] literature and meeting 
minutes.   
 
. . . . 
 
COUNT VIII
 
BREACH OF DUTY OF GOOD FAITH AND FAIR DEALING 
 
. . . .  
49.  [One Kalakaua] and the Board violated its duties 
under HRS §§ [sic] 514B
-9-10 [sic] when it began to operate 
an [assisted living facility] in One Kalakaua, charging the 
owners and residents of the property regardless of 
individual usage, while holding both subject to the rules 
and regulations it determined were applicable, ultimately 
suing Ms. Clay and attempting to receive Court authority to prevent her from entering the property until the Board 
determined she was in compliance with the Board's rules. 
 
  During the November 30, 2016 hearing on Clay's motion, 
Clay's attorney explained that "once it became clear to us that 
mediation, reaching an amicable resolution to this dispute was 
not possible through mediation. . . [t]hat's when Ms. Clay 
accepted the cost of litigation, and that this would be 
litigated, which is why we then filed a motion for leave to file 
the counterclaim." 
Clay's attorney further explained, "they have changed 
from being awarded [sic] license to now operating this full-scale [assisted living facility], which is the crux of 
Ms. Clay's counterclaim, it's the operation of it."  In 
discussing the source of her counterclaim, Clay's attorney 
clarified, "[t]he source of Ms. Clay's counterclaim is the 2011 
internal memo between the [DOH] that the board seems to rely NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
22 
 upon to say they can now enforce the [DOH] regulations against 
Ms. Clay." 
The circuit court asked, "where in the counterclaim do 
you talk about the 2011 memo, and the alleged wrongdoing that 
stems from the memo[,]" and Clay's attorney did not provide a 
responsive answer.  Clay's attorney then stated to the circuit 
court, "if you're at all considering denying this, you could 
deny it without prejudice, and we could submit a new counterclaim with the evidence we've received since then, could 
more substantially justify Ms. Clay's counterclaims." 
The circuit court inquired, "So, at the time you filed 
the motion for leave to file the counterclaim, you didn't have 
this 2011 letter?"  Clay's attorney responded, "I believe this 
was filed before the MSJ, Your Honor, and that letter came as 
part of the MSJ."  But, Association's attorney clarified that he 
provided Clay with a copy of the proposed complaint and the 2011 
Q&A: 
I sent a copy of the proposed complaint that we were 
going to file, including the exhibits to Mr. Revere, and 
said, [t]his is what we're going to file, let us know if 
Ms. Clay changes her position, and the 2011 letter from the 
DOH was referenced in the complaint, and I believe it was attached as Exhibit C. 
 So that information was provided to Mrs. Clay's 
counsel before the lawsuit was ever filed. 
 
The record also reflects that the 2011 Q&A was attached as 
Exhibit C to the filed Complaint. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
23 
 In its December 19, 2016 order, the circuit court 
denied Clay's motion for leave to file a counterclaim as 
follows: 
"The claims set forth in the proposed Counterclaim are 
barred both by the statute of limitations and by the doctrine of res judicata.  The Court rejects Clay's 
argument that the continuing tort doctrine applies.  
Accordingly, the Motion For Leave to File Counterclaim is denied based upon futility of amendment." 7. Motion for Summary Judgment on Count III (Fees and 
Costs) 
 
In February 2017, Association moved for partial 
summary judgment on Count III for attorneys' fees and costs, 
relying on HRS §§ 514B-157 and 607-9.  Association asserted 
that, up until January 31, 2017, it incurred $98,311.82 in fees 
and costs. 
In opposition, Clay argued that she requested to 
mediate, she is a dissenter, Association was not a prevailing 
party in Count II, and equity requires that the court deny Association's motion. 
Association later requested an additional $17,773.55
in attorneys' fees and costs for matters litigated from 
January 2017 to May 2017.  On June 28, 2017, the circuit court 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
24 
 granted Association's motion for partial summary judgment
pursuant to HRS § 514B-157.7 
 
In its amended final judgment, the circuit court 
entered judgment in favor of Association and against Clay in 
Counts I and III, and dismissed Count II without prejudice.  The 
circuit court awarded Association $109,401.53 in attorneys' 
fees, $6,693.84 in costs, and post-judgment interest.  Clay 
filed a timely notice of appeal. 
II. DISCUSSION 
On appeal, Clay contends that the circuit court erred 
by (1) granting Association's motion for summary judgment and 
denying her motion for leave to file a counterclaim based on res 
judicata and (2) awarding attorney's fees and costs. 
A. Summary Judgment and Counterclaim 
 
In her first two points of error, Clay challenges the 
circuit court's res judicata reasoning in granting Association's 
motion for summary judgment on Count I and denying her motion for leave to file a counterclaim.  Based on the discussion 
below, we hold that the circuit court did not err in granting 
Association's motion for summary judgment and did not abuse its 
 
7  The circuit court awarded $17,783.55 in attorney's fees and costs to 
Association, while Association had requested $17,773.55 in attorney's fees 
and costs. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
25 
 discretion in denying Clay's motion for leave to file a 
counterclaim.      
1. Res Judicata  
 
"In the past, the term 'res judicata' was used to 
describe both claim preclusion (res judicata) and issue 
preclusion (collateral estoppel)."  PennyMac Corp. v. Godinez, 
148 Hawai‘ i 323, 328 n.5, 474 P.3d 264, 269 n.5 (2020) (citation 
omitted).  But, the appellate courts have since clarified that these are "separate doctrines that involve distinct questions of 
law."  Id. (citation omitted). 
Here, the doctrine of issue preclusion applies.  See 
State v. Taniguchi, 72 Haw. 235, 239, 815 P.2d 24, 26 (1991) 
(explaining that the appellate courts "have consistently held 
that where the decision below is correct it must be affirmed 
. . . even though the lower tribunal gave the wrong reason for 
its action") (citation omitted).    
Issue preclusion "may preclude the relitigation of a 
fact or issue that was previously determined in a prior action 
on a different claim or cause of action between the same parties 
or their privies."  Dannenberg v. State, 139 Hawai‘ i 39, 59-60, 
383 P.3d 1177, 1197-98 (2016) (formatting altered).  The test 
for issue preclusion requires establishing the following four 
elements: NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
26 
 (1) the issue decided in the prior adjudication is 
identical to the one presented in the action in 
question;  
 (2) there is a final judgment on the merits;  
 
(3) the issue decided in the prior adjudication was 
essential to the final judgment; and  
 (4) the party against whom [issue preclusion] is asserted 
was a party or in privity with a party to the prior adjudication. 
 
Bremer v. Weeks, l04 Hawai‘ i 43, 54, 85 P.3d 150, 161 (2004) 
(citation omitted, brackets in the original, and formatting 
altered).  
2. One Kalakaua's Operation as an Assisted Living 
Facility 
 
Following a trial in the 2002 case, Judge Hifo ruled 
that the "Declaration did not need to be amended to obtain an 
assisted living license and the Board did not breach its 
fiduciary duty by obtaining the assisted living facility 
license[.]"  Judge Hifo found, among other things, that Clay 
failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that by 
operating as an assisted living facility "Defendants acted 
without authority, or against the interests of One Kalakaua" or 
that "Defendants have violated the Declaration or Bylaws or 
their fiduciary duty in any other manner."  Judge Hifo concluded that Association "complied with and [has] not violated the 
Declaration or the Bylaws of One Kalakaua or any other governing 
document" and "have not breached any duty to" Clay.  Judge Hifo 
then entered judgment in favor of Association and against Clay. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
27 
 In this case, the circuit court stated that it 
"rejects Ms. Clay's arguments that One Kalakaua is improperly 
operating as an [assisted living facility] in breach of its 
fiduciary duties."  To that, the circuit court concluded that 
"[t]hese arguments were fully litigated and decided upon in the 
2002 complaint, resulting in the 2004 judgment before Judge 
Hifo, and are accordingly barred by principles of res judicata."  
This is the conclusion that Clay challenges, and this conclusion applies only to Clay's argument that One Kalakaua is improperly 
operating as an assisted living facility in breach of its 
fiduciary duties.   
The circuit court appears to have used the term "res 
judicata" in a general overarching manner, but the four 
requirements of issue preclusion were nonetheless met.  Judge 
Hifo determined that Association did not violate the Declaration 
or By Laws, or breach its fiduciary duty, by operating as an 
assisted living facility, Judge Hifo entered a final judgment in favor of Association and against Clay, the issues litigated were 
essential to the final judgment, and the parties were the same.  
Bremer, 104 
Hawai‘i at 54, 85 P.3d at 161.   
Thus, Clay was precluded from asserting violation of 
the Declaration and By Laws or breach of fiduciary duties 
regarding One Kalakaua's operation as an assisted living 
facility in this case.  See Dannenberg, 139 Hawai‘ i at 59-60, 383 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
28 
 P.3d at 1197-98.  And the circuit court's conclusion that Clay 
was barred from asserting that Association breached its 
fiduciary duty by operating as an assisted living facility was 
not wrong.  
3. The Circuit Court Did Not Err in Granting       
Summary Judgment  
 
More to the point, the circuit court decided on the 
motion for summary judgment based primarily on Association's 
governing documents and the relevant regulations, and not solely 
on res judicata. 
This court reviews the granting of summary judgment de 
novo.  Nuuanu Valley Ass'n v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 119 
Hawai‘i 90, 96, 194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008).  Viewing the evidence 
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, "summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, depositions, answers 
to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the 
affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a 
judgment as a matter of law."  Id. (citation omitted). 
In its motion for summary judgment as to Count I, 
Association argued that "HRS § 321-482(a) vests the Health 
Department with authority over assisted living facilities," HRS 
§ 321-482(c) requires assisted living facilities to comply with 
DOH administrative rules, HAR § 11-90-3(g) requires assisted NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
29 
 living facilities to be licensed every two years, HAR § 11-90-
3(j) suspends such license for failing to comply, HAR § 11-90-
9(a)(1) requires the facility to maintain records including TB 
clearance, and HAR § 11-164-10 requires TB examination for all 
residents.  Association also explained that the 2011 Q&A made 
clear that "[a]ll residents of a facility licensed under 
Title 11, Chapters 85-105 by [DOH] are required to comply with 
TB clearance requirements" and "[t]he independence of a resident and utilization of services is not used to determine if TB 
clearance is required." 
Association's exhibits included the Declaration, 
By Laws, House Rules, DOH license, 2011 Q&A, and a July 2014 
notice reminding residents of the TB requirements.  Association 
also attached correspondence regarding Clay's refusal to comply 
with TB screening. 
With the pleadings before it, the circuit court first 
found that "applicable state law, including HAR Title 11, Chapter 164, and other provisions set forth in [Association's 
Motion for Partial Summary Judgment], are applicable and compel 
[Association] to require all One Kalakaua residents to undergo 
an annual tuberculosis test."  Clay does not challenge this 
finding in her opening brief. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
30 
 The circuit court next found that it was undisputed 
that Clay refused the TB screening in October 2015, which Clay 
also does not challenge. 
Finally, the circuit court found that this refusal 
violated DOH "laws" and One Kalakaua rules.  Clay does not 
challenge this finding either.  See State v. Barros, 98 Hawai‘ i 
337, 343 n.4, 48 P.3d 584, 590 n.4 (2002) (noting that "[i]f a 
finding is not properly attacked, it is binding; and any 
conclusion which follows from it and is a correct statement of 
law is valid") (citation omitted).  
The circuit court then granted summary judgment 
"because there are no disputed issues of material fact and [Association] has demonstrated entitlement to judgment as a 
matter of law . . . ." 
a. State Law An assisted living facility is "a combination of 
housing, health care services, and personalized supportive services designed to respond to individual needs, to promote 
choice, responsibility, independence, privacy, dignity, and 
individuality."  HRS § 321-15.1 (2010).  DOH "shall have general charge, oversight, and care of the health and lives of the 
people of the State, and shall pursue as a goal, the achievement 
of health equity" and "may adopt rules that it deems necessary 
for the public health and safety" for various situations NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
31 
 including an assisted living facility.  HRS § 321-1(a) 
(Supp. 2015); § 321-11(10) (2010). 
"Any person, agency, or organization engaged in 
providing, coordinating, or monitoring comprehensive services to 
. . . assisted living facilities, shall meet the standards of 
conditions, management, and competence set by the department, 
and hold a license in good standing issued for this purpose by 
the department."  HRS § 321-482(a) (Supp. 2015).  Complying with the rules adopted is a condition for obtaining a license, and 
DOH "may suspend or revoke a license if the department deems 
that the agency is unwilling or unable to comply with the rules 
adopted . . . ."  HRS § 321-482(c) and (f) (Supp. 2015).  DOH 
rules "have the force and effect of law."  HRS § 321-10 (2010).  
HAR Title 11 Chapter 90 (adopted 1999) governs 
assisted living facilities, establishing "minimum standards and 
requirements for licensure to protect the health, welfare, and 
safety of residents in such facilities."  HAR § 11-90-1.  "Assisted living facilities shall serve the purpose of providing 
a combination of housing, meal services, health care services, 
and personalized supportive services designated to respond to 
individual needs."  HAR § 11-90-1.  An assisted living facility 
applies the principles of "(1) Aging in place; (2) Negotiated 
plan of care; and (3) Managed risk."  HAR § 11-90-1. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
32 
 All assisted living facilities "shall meet all 
requirements for licensure under state law."  HAR § 11-90-3(a).  
HAR § 11-90-9(a) requires that the assisted living facility 
"shall establish policies and procedures to maintain a system of 
records and reports which shall include . . . [a c]opy of a 
current physician or primary care provider's report of 
resident's physical examination which includes tuberculosis 
clearance and verification that the resident is free from other infectious or contagious diseases." 
The purpose of HRS Chapter 164 was "to establish 
minimum requirements for the control of [TB] in the State."  HAR 
§ 11-164-1 (Adopted 1981, Repealed 2018). 
Requirements for examination for [TB] of employees, 
patients and other individuals working or residing in 
healthcare facilities regulated by [DOH] shall be provided 
in Exhibit A, "Tuberculosis Examination For A ll Health 
Care, Domiciliary Care, Day Care, and Residential 
Facilities and Programs Licensed under Title 11, Chapters 
85-105, by the [DOH], August, 2001." 
 
HAR § 11-164-10, Exhibit A (Amended 2001, Repealed 2018).   
Exhibit A provided that "[a]ll residents, employees, 
contract workers, and volunteers working more than 10 hours per 
week are required to have an Entry TB Evaluation . . . within 1 
year prior to starting work and Annual Tuberculosis Re-
evaluations . . . ."  "Any person who violates any provision of 
this chapter shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
33 
 not more than one year or both."  HAR § 11-164-11 (Adopted 1981, 
Repealed 2018). 
b. Analysis Again, in Count I, Association requested three 
declarations from the circuit court.  First, Association requested declaratory relief that "state law requires that all 
One Kalakaua residents undergo annual TB skin testing as set 
forth in HAR Title 11, Chapter 164[.]"  HAR § 11-164-10 provided that individuals residing in healthcare facilities are regulated 
by Exhibit A.  Exhibit A governed programs licensed under 
Title 11 chapters 85-105 and provided that "[a]ll residents 
. . . are required to have . . . Annual Tuberculosis Re-
evaluations[.]"   
Assisted living facilities are regulated by HAR 
Title 11 Chapter 90, and Association established that One 
Kalakaua is an assisted living facility licensed by DOH.  Thus, 
Association established there was no genuine issue that HAR Title 11 Chapter 164 requires One Kalakaua residents to screen 
for TB annually.         
Association next requested a declaration that "Clay's 
refusal since October 2015 to undergo the annual TB skin test 
. . . is a violation of HAR Title 11, Chapter 164, and also of 
[Association's] House Rules."  Association provided 
correspondence establishing that Clay refused to screen for TB, NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
34 
 which Clay does not refute.  As discussed above, HAR § 11-164-10 
and Exhibit A require residents of licensed assisted living 
facilities to screen for TB annually.  Association submitted its 
DOH license as an assisted living facility.  In addition, One 
Kalakaua's House Rules require residents to screen for TB 
annually.  (House Rules, Section 2 - Administration, 
Registration, Section 6 – Services, Services Included in Monthly 
Fees – Club Dues).  Thus, Association established that there was no genuine issue that Clay's refusal to screen for TB violated 
HAR Title 11, Chapter 164 and One Kalakaua's House Rules.    
Finally, Association requested a declaration that it 
"is entitled to levy fines (and all other penalties allowable 
under the House Rules) against Ms. Clay for her refusal to 
undergo the annual TB skin test (or the previously stated 
alternative)."  One Kalakaua's House Rules allow fines for 
violation of House Rules, and House Rules provide that annual TB 
screening is required.  (House Rules, Section 2 - Administration, Registration, Section 2 – Administration, 
Violations, Section 6 - Services, Services Included in Monthly 
Fees - Club Dues).  Thus, Association established that there was 
no genuine issue that it may levy fines for Clay's refusal to 
screen for TB under One Kalakaua's House Rules.  
Here, One Kalakaua established that it was entitled to 
a declaratory relief on Count I because, even when viewing the NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
35 
 filings and evidence it presented in the light most favorable to 
Clay, no genuine issue existed as to One Kalakaua's three 
requests for declaratory relief in Count I of its complaint.   
In defending the motion, Clay did not dispute that she 
refused to screen for TB, and did not "set forth specific facts 
showing that there is a genuine issue for trial" as to the 
declaratory relief requested.  Dairy Rd. Partners v. Island Ins. 
Co., 92 Hawai‘ i 398, 412, 992 P.2d 93, 107 (2000).  Instead, Clay 
argued that Association attempted to enforce State law and failed to amend the By Laws and House Rules and breached its 
fiduciary duty with respect to operating as an assisted living facility, the latter of which was litigated and resolved in the 
2002 litigation as discussed above. 
Thus, the circuit court did not err in granting 
Association's motion for summary judgment on Count I.   
4. The Circuit Court Did Not Abuse Its Discretion in 
Denying Clay's Motion For Leave to File a Counterclaim    
Clay also contends that the circuit court "committed 
reversible error where it . . . denied [her] Motion for Leave to 
File a Counterclaim as moot due to res judicata where Ms. Clay 
was challenging facts that had occurred after the initial 
lawsuit and court order."  Clay argues that the "allegations in 
the previous complaint then, and the Court's findings therein, 
pertain to [Association] obtaining
 the assisted living license, NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
36 
 and its actions prior to obtaining said license."  Clay asserts 
that these "allegations and court findings are categorically 
different than the allegation in [her] proposed Counterclaim, as 
well as [Association's] complaint seeking injunctive relief to 
require [her] to adhere to the regulations of [DOH]." 
The circuit court denied Clay's motion for leave to 
file her counterclaim finding that the "claims set forth in the 
proposed Counterclaim are barred both by the statute of limitations and by the doctrine of res judicata."  The Court 
then stated that it "rejects Clay's argument that the continuing 
tort doctrine applies" and denied her motion for leave to file 
the counterclaim "based upon futility of amendment." 
Clay challenges the circuit court's ruling only to the 
extent that it applied res judicata. 
In her motion for leave to file a counterclaim, Clay 
argued that Association "wrongfully has acted as if it amended 
the Declaration and Bylaws when it began operating a full-service [assisted living facility] from within One Kalakaua 
. . . ."  In all counts except Count V, Clay alleged in some 
form that the Association violated its declaration, bylaws, or 
fiduciary duty by operating as an assisted living facility.  
Count V alleged unjust enrichment in operating as an assisted 
living facility. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
37 
  As discussed above, the circuit court met the four 
requirements of issue preclusion and the issue of Association 
operating as an assisted living facility was precluded.  Clay 
contends on appeal that her claims included allegations of 
events that occurred in late 2011 and after, but these 
allegations were thoroughly interwoven with her allegations 
Association was violating its governing documents and fiduciary 
duty by operating as an assisted living facility, and Clay never explained below (nor does she on appeal) what claims she was 
asserting based on these allegations separate and apart from her 
precluded claims.  Indeed, at the hearing of her motion for 
leave to file the counterclaim, she conceded that "the crux" of 
her claim was "the operation of" One Kalakaua as an assisted 
living facility, i.e., the very issue that is precluded. 
To the extent Counts 6, 7, and 8 of Clay's proposed 
Counterclaim included allegations challenging Association's 
post-2011 enforcement of DOH regulations regarding TB testing against Clay, we have affirmed the circuit court's grant of 
summary judgment on Count I of Association's Complaint, i.e., a 
grant of declaratory judgment that, among other things:  
(1) Clay's refusal to comply with TB clearance requirements 
violated HAR Title 11, Chapter 164 and One Kalakaua's House 
Rules; and (2) Association was entitled to levy fines and other 
penalties allowable under its House Rules against Clay for her NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
38 
 refusal to comply with TB clearance requirements.  See, e.g., By 
Laws, Article IV, Section (1)(p); Article V, Section 9 and House 
Rules; Section 2 – Administration, Violations (authorizing both 
fines and an action for injunctive relief, such as seeking an 
order enjoining residence at One Kalakaua for failure to comply 
with the Bylaws). 
Given the context in which Clay sought to file her 
proposed Counterclaim,8 she never explained below (nor does she 
explain on appeal) what claims she was asserting or could assert 
based on Association's post-2011 enforcement of DOH regulations 
regarding TB testing that were separate and apart from her 
precluded claims.9 
Under these circumstances, the circuit court did not 
abuse its discretion in denying Clay's motion to file a 
counterclaim.  See HRCP Rule 13(f); Marks v. Marks, 51 Haw. 548, 
 
8  Clay's motion for leave to file the counterclaim and Association's 
motion for summary judgment on Count I were both filed in June 2016 and were 
both heard and decided during the same November 30, 2016 hearing.  The orders 
denying Clay' s motion and granting Association's motion were both entered on 
December 19, 2016. 
 
9  During the November 30, 2016 hearing on Clay' s motion, her counsel 
asserted that "the source of Ms. Clay's counterclaim is the 2011 internal memo between [DOH] that the board seems to rely upon to say they can now 
enforce the [DOH] regulations against [her]."  But, when the circuit court 
asked where in the counterclaim Clay raised the 2011 Q&A, Clay's counsel's 
answer was nonresponsive.  See supra at 21-22. 
 
In fact, Clay's proposed counterclaim did not mention the 2011 Q&A, 
despite the fact that it was attached as an exhibit to Association's 
February 4, 2016 Complaint, and was thus available to Clay when she filed her 
February 26, 2016 answer, as well as when she later moved for leave to file 
the counterclaim. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
39 
 560, 563, 465 P.2d 996, 1002, 1004 (1970); Bailey v. 
Duvauchelle, 143 Hawai‘ i 234, 426 P.3d 458, No. CAAP-16-0000072,
2018 WL 4627593 at *4 (App. Sept. 27, 2018) (SDO) (explaining 
that the "denial of an HRCP Rule 13(f) motion is reviewed for 
abuse of discretion"); Bank of Hawaii v. Mostoufi, 138 Hawai
‘i 
141, 377 P.3d 1059, No. CAAP-14-0001073, 2016 WL 3615334 at *2 
(App. June 30, 2016) (SDO) (same).  
Moreover, in her opening brief, Clay did not challenge 
the circuit court's independent basis for denying her motion for leave to file the counterclaim – that her proposed claims were 
barred by the applicable statutes of limitations.  Instead, 
after Association's answering brief pointed out this deficiency 
(and the related waiver of Clay's argument), Clay made a statute 
of limitations argument in her reply brief.  There, she claimed 
she had not waived her statute of limitations argument and could 
raise the issue for the first time in her reply brief because 
she had made a statute of limitations argument in the circuit 
court, in her reply memorandum in support of her motion for 
leave to file the counterclaim and at the hearing of her motion. 
Clay's position, which deprived Association of an 
opportunity to answer her argument challenging an independent 
basis for the circuit court's ruling, patently violates HRAP 
Rule 28(b)(4) and (7).  See Hawaii Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, Inc., NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
40 
   114 Hawai‘ i 438, 472 n.17, 164 P.3d 696, 730 n.17 (2007) 
("[Appellant's] aforementioned point of error is deemed waived 
for failure to present any argument in its opening brief in the 
first instance and presenting such arguments in its reply brief to which no answer could be made");  Galliard v. Rawsthorne, 150 
Hawai‘i
 169, 178, 498 P.3d 700, 709 (2021) (same).  Thus, this 
untimely challenge is deemed waived.  HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) and 
(7); Galliard, 150 Hawai‘ i at 178, 498 P.3d at 709; Hawaii 
Ventures, 114 Hawai‘ i at 472 n.17, 164 P.3d at 730 n.17; In re 
Hawaiian Flour Mills, Inc., 76 Hawaii ‘ 1, 14 n.5, 868 P.2d 419, 
432 n.5 (1994) (explaining that arguments raised for the first 
time in the reply brief are deemed waived). 
Under these circumstances, we cannot conclude that the 
circuit court exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules 
or principles of law and, thus, we cannot conclude that the 
circuit court abused its discretion in denying Clay's motion for leave to file her counterclaim.     
B. Attorneys' Fees, Costs, And Fines 
Clay's remaining points of error challenge the circuit 
court's award of attorneys' fees and costs, as well as fines 
imposed by the Association. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
41 
 (continued . . .)  1. Attorney's Fees and Costs 
In Count III of its Complaint, Association sought an 
award of attorney's fees and costs.  Association moved for 
summary judgment on Count III, and Clay objected.  Relying on 
HRS § 514B-161(a) (Supp. 2016), Clay argued that she "should not 
be required to pay [Association's] excessive attorneys' fees 
under HRS § 514B-157 as she requested mediation of this dispute 
on multiple occasions, both before and after [Association] chose to sue [her], and did mediate in good faith once the Court 
compelled [Association] to participate in said mediation."  
Association countered that it was not required to mediate 
because its complaint fell under an HRS § 514B-161(b) exception. 
The circuit court granted Association's motion for 
summary judgment ordering Clay to pay $92,006.25 in attorney's 
fees and $6,305.27 in costs for legal services rendered from 
November 2015 to January 2017, plus an additional $17,783.55 for 
legal services rendered since January 2017.  The circuit court relied on HRS § 514B-157,
10 and made no determination regarding 
 
10  HRS § 514B- 157(a) provides: 
(a)  All costs and expenses, including reasonable 
attorneys' fees, incurred by or on behalf of the 
association for: 
(1) Collecting any delinquent assessments against any 
owner's unit; 
(2) Foreclosing any lien thereon; or NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
42 
 Clay's HRS § 514B-161(a) argument or Association's HRS § 514B-
161(b) counterargument. 
On appeal, Clay again relies on HRS § 514B-161(a) and 
argues that the circuit court "committed reversible error where 
it awarded attorneys' fees where [she] demanded mediation on 
numerous occasion [sic], which [Association] refused and 
opposed, without ever finding on the record whether [she] did 
request and have a right to mediation and how such finding impacted the award of fees[.]"  Clay also relies on Ass'n of 
Apartment Owners of Discovery Bay v. Mitchell, 134 Hawai‘ i 251, 
339 P.3d 1052 (2014). 
HRS § 514B-161(a) requires participation in mediation 
under certain circumstances, and the circuit court may consider a party's refusal to mediate in awarding fees and costs: 
If an apartment owner or the board of directors requests 
mediation of a dispute involving the interpretation or 
enforcement of the association of apartment 
owners' declaration, bylaws, or house rules, the other 
party in the dispute shall be required to participate in 
mediation.  Each party shall be wholly responsible for its
own costs of participating in mediation, unless both  
 
(. . . continued) 
(3) Enforcing any provision of the declaration, bylaws, 
hous
e rules, and this chapter, or the rules of the 
real estate commission; 
against an owner, occupant, tenant, employee of an owner, or any other person who may in any manner use the property, 
shall be promptly paid on demand to the association by such 
person or persons; provided that if the claims upon which 
the association takes any action are not substantiated, all 
costs and expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees, 
incurred by any such person or persons as a result of the 
action of the association, shall be promptly paid on demand 
to such person or persons by the association. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
43 
 parties agree that one party shall pay all or a specified 
portion of the mediation costs.  If a party refuses to 
participate in the mediation of a particular dispute, a court may take this refusal into consideration when 
awarding expenses, costs, and attorneys' fees. 
 
HRS § 514B-161(a) (emphases added).     
Mediation, however, is not mandatory under HRS § 514B-
161(b) where the health and safety of unit owners are at issue: 
"Nothing in subsection (a) shall be interpreted 
to mandate the mediation of any dispute involving . . . [a]ctions seeking equitable relief 
involving threatened property damage or the 
health or safety of association members or any 
other person[.]"   
 
HRS § 514B-161(b)(1) (Supp. 2016) (emphases added). 
In Mitchell, the association was awarded attorney's 
fees and costs pursuant to HRS § 514B-157, over Mitchell's 
objections, which included that the association refused to 
mediate the dispute pursuant to HRS § 514B-161(a).  134 Hawai‘ i 
at 252-53, 339 P.3d at 1053-54.  On appeal and certiorari
, 
Mitchell challenged the award of fees and costs, arguing that 
the association's refusal to participate in mediation precluded 
it from receiving an award of fees and costs under HRS § 514B-
161(a).  134 Hawai‘ i at 254-55, 339 P.3d at 1055-56.  
The Hawai‘ i Supreme Court explained that although the 
court has discretion under HRS § 514B-161(a) to consider the 
refusal to mediate in awarding fees and costs, it "cannot assume NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
44 
 that the circuit court in this case exercised such discretion 
simply by virtue of having reduced the [association's] fee 
award, because the hearing transcript is silent on the matter."  
134 Hawai‘ i at 254-55, 339 P.3d at 1055-56.  The supreme court 
noted that Mitchell expressly raised HRS § 514B-161(a), and 
"[g]iven the legislature's intent to encourage mediation of 
condominium disputes, the circuit court should have addressed 
whether HRS § 514B-161(a) applied."  134 Hawai
‘i at 255, 339 P.3d 
at 1056.   
The supreme court then directed the circuit court on 
remand to "determine whether the [association] refused to 
participate in mediation, and if so, the circuit court should 
consider, on the record, such refusal in determining whether to 
award attorney's fees and costs."  Id. 
As in Mitchell, we cannot assume that the circuit 
court considered the application of HRS §§ 514B-161(a) and (b) because the circuit court made no ruling on the matter despite 
it being expressly raised by both parties.  The circuit court, 
thus, erred in granting summary judgment on Count III and abused 
its discretion in awarding attorney's fees and costs.   
On remand, the circuit court should determine, on the 
record, whether HRS § 514B-161(a) or (b) controls in this case.  
And should the circuit court determine that HRS § 514B-161(a) controls, the circuit court should then place on the record NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
45 
 whether a refusal to mediate, if any, was taken into 
consideration when awarding fees and costs.   
Finally, in light of our decision to vacate the 
circuit court's award of fees and costs and remand this case for 
further proceedings, we need not address Clay's alternative 
arguments based on public policy and HAR § 11-90-10(b)(3). 
 2. Association Fines 
       In conjunction with her challenge of attorney's fees and costs, Clay argues that the imposition of fines was "well 
over the maximum by the House Rules, but the Board did not give 
[her] notice or an opportunity for a hearing, and actively 
opposed [her] requests for mediation."  As discussed above, the 
imposition of a fine was authorized.  However, the basis for the 
circuit court's approval of fines in excess of the $350.00 
maximum is unclear.  Therefore, on remand, the circuit court is 
directed to determine the propriety of the fines in the amount 
of $1,050.00.  
III. CONCLUSION 
  Based on the foregoing, we affirm the circuit court's (1) December 19, 2016 order granting Association's motion for 
partial summary judgment as to Count I and (2) December 19, 2016 
order denying Clay's motion for leave to file a counterclaim.  
We vacate the circuit court's (1) June 28, 2017 order granting 
Association's motion for partial summary judgment as to NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
46 
 Count III and (2) November 15, 2017 amended final judgment, and 
remand this case to the circuit court for further proceedings 
consistent with this Memorandum Opinion. 
  DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai‘ i, May 26, 2023. 
 
On the briefs: 
 Terrance M. Revere, Andrew D. Chianese, 
for Defendant-Appellant. /s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
Presiding Judge  /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
Associate Judge 
 /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge 
  Peter W. Olson, 
John P. Duchemin, 
(Cades Schutte), for Plaintiff-Appellee. 