NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000600 
(Consolidated with No. CAAP-19-0000602) 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
CAAP-19-0000600 
IN THE INTEREST OF KKA, BORN ON 00/00/0000 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-S No. 19-00026) 
and 
CAAP-19-0000602 
IN THE MATTER OF THE ADOPTION OF A FEMALE CHILD,
BORN ON 00/00/0000 BY KA AND LA, HUSBAND AND WIFE 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-A No. 05-1-0502) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Petitioner-Appellant State of Hawai
#i Department of 
Human Services (DHS) appeals from orders entered by the Family 
Court of the First Circuit1 in two cases concerning the same 
adopted minor child. In CAAP-19-0000600, DHS appeals from the 
"Orders [sic] Concerning Child Protective Act" entered in FC-S No. 19-00026 (the Child Protective Act Case) on August 13, 2019. 
In CAAP-19-0000602, DHS appeals from the "Orders [sic] Setting 
Aside and Rescinding the Adoption Decree Filed on January 13, 2006[,]" entered in FC-A No. 05-1-0502 (the Adoption Case) on 
1 The Honorable Bode A. Uale entered the orders on appeal. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
August 13, 2019. We consolidated the appeals on September 4, 
2019. 
For the reasons explained below we vacate both orders, 
without prejudice to further proceedings in the Child Protective Act Case. 
BACKGROUND 
KKA (Child) was born in 2003. The parental rights of 
Child's natural mother and father were terminated by order of the family court on February 8, 2005. 
KA (Adoptive Father) and LA (Adoptive Mother) filed the 
Adoption Case, seeking to adopt Child. The family court entered "Findings and Decision of the Court Granting Petition for Adoption" and an "Adoption Decree".  KA and LA became Child's 
adoptive parents effective December 20, 2005. Child was two 
years old at the time. 
Adoptive Father died in 2018, when Child was 15 years 
old. At some point after Adoptive Father's death, Adoptive Mother and Child moved to Virginia with Adoptive Mother's fiancé. Adoptive Mother's fiancé works for the federal department of defense. The following findings of fact by the family court are unchallenged:
2 
3. [Child] stated to adoptive mother that she did
not want to be with her and that she wanted to return to her 
biological mother 
. . . . 
7. While in Virginia, [Child] got into drugs and
she was placed in an Alternative Learning Center ("ALC").Adoptive mother was concerned about [Child] being exposed tobad influences while at the ALC. 
8. In addition, [Child] used marijuana. 
9. [Child]'s marijuana use could jeopardize
adoptive mother's fiancé's job [with the federal departmentof defense]. 
10. 
Adoptive mother sent [Child] to Hawai #i under 
Power of Attorney ("POA")to live with [Child's] adultsister[.] 
2 The family court entered identical findings of fact and
conclusions of law in the Adoption Case and in the Child Protective Act Case. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
11. In September 2018, [Child] ran away from her
sister's home to stay with her biological mother. 
12. During this time, [Child]'s biological mother
became homeless, and [Child] lived with her on the beach. 
13. This runaway behavior was the same type of
behavior [Child] engaged in in Virginia — running away,
interference and defiance. 
14. Adoptive mother resided in Virginia while
[Child] resided in Hawai #i, and there was no legal caretaker
for [Child] in Hawai #i, despite the POA. 
15. Adoptive mother tried to get [Child] to return
to Virgina [sic], but [Child] continued to run away from heradult sister. 
16. [Child] was then arrested and placed into the
Kapolei Detention Center pending her return to her adoptivemother in Virginia. 
17. [Child] expressed to adoptive mother that she
did not want to live with adoptive mother. 
18. [Child] expressed to adoptive mother that she
did not want to live in Virginia. 
19. [Child] expressed to adoptive mother that she
did not want to live with adoptive mother's eldest daughter,who currently resides in Las Vegas, Nevada, which was theoriginal plan. 
. . . . 
22. In January 22, 2019, DHS assumed placement
responsibility for [Child] based on [alleged] physicalneglect by adoptive mother. 
On that date, [Child] was
placed in an emergency shelter to last through to [sic]May 10, 2019. 
. . . . 
24. While placed at the emergency shelter, she ran
away for a period of four weeks. 
She eventually returned. 
25. On June 28, 2019, she again ran away from her
placement at the shelter. 
26. [Child] wishes to remain in Hawai #i with her 
birth mother or adult sister. 
. . . . 
28. On March 23, 2019, Foster Custody of the [Child]
was awarded to the DHS. 
. . . . 
30. On July 15, 2019, a review hearing was held by
the Honorable Bode A. Uale. . . . 
31. At that hearing, and after colloquy, the Court
found that [Child]'s adoptive mother . . . "knowingly, 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
willingly, and voluntarily waived her right to counsel and
proceeded pro se at today's hearing." . . . 
32. The Court further found, after colloquy, that
"[Adoptive Mother] knowingly, willingly, and voluntarilyconsented and agreed [sic] to rescind and set aside theadoption of [Child]" and "the adoptive mother . . . hasknowingly, voluntarily, and willingly consented to rescindthe adoption of [Child] and the adoption is set aside." 
On July 15, 2019, in the Child Protective Act Case, the 
family court entered an order setting aside the Adoption Decree 
and discharging Adoptive Mother as a party. DHS moved for reconsideration. The motion was heard on August 13, 2019. The family court denied reconsideration and entered the orders in the Child Protective Act Case and the Adoption Case from which DHS appeals. 
STANDARD OF REVIEW 
[T]he family court possesses wide discretion in making its
decisions and those decision[s] will not be set aside unlessthere is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus, we will notdisturb the family court's decisions on appeal unless thefamily court disregarded rules or principles of law orpractice to the substantial detriment of a party litigantand its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of reason. 
Fisher v. Fisher , 111 Hawai# i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(citation omitted). 
The family court's findings of fact are reviewed under 
the "clearly erroneous" standard. Fisher
, 111 Hawai# i at 46, 137 
P.3d at 360. A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when the 
record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding, or despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, we are nonetheless left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. 
Id. "Substantial evidence" is credible 
evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion. Id. "It is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass 
upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." Id.
 (citation omitted). 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The family court's conclusions of law are ordinarily 
reviewed de novo, under the right/wrong standard, "and are freely 
reviewable for their correctness." Fisher, 111 Hawai# i at 46, 
137 P.3d at 360. However, when a conclusion of law presents mixed questions of fact and law, we review it under the "clearly erroneous" standard because the court's conclusions are dependent on the facts and circumstances of each individual case. Estate of Klink ex rel. Klink v. State, 113 Hawai# i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 
504, 523 (2007). A conclusion of law that is supported by the trial court's findings of fact and reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be overturned. Id. 
DISCUSSION 
DHS contends the family court erred by: (1) setting 
aside Child's adoption by Adoptive Mother for reasons not authorized under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 578-12; and 
(2) relying upon "the best interests of the child" to set aside 
the Adoption Decree.
3 
1. The family court erred by setting aside
the Adoption Decree in the Adoption Case. 
HRS § 578-12 (2018) provides, in relevant part: 
At any time within one year  from the date of entry of any
decree of adoption, the court may, for good cause, set asideor modify the decree and, in connection therewith, may makeappropriate orders, concerning the custody of the minorchild and the disposition and handling of the record ofadoption by the department of health. The setting aside ormodification of any decree of adoption shall not affect anyproperty rights which have become vested between the date ofthe entry of the decree or the effective date of the decreeand the effective date of any order setting aside ormodifying the decree of adoption. 
No decree of adoption shall be subject to attack in
any collateral proceeding , and, after the expiration of one 
3 DHS's statement of points also challenges the family court's
finding of fact no. 34(a) and conclusions of law nos. 1-5, but the openingbrief presents no discernable arguments on those issues and we deem the pointswaived. 
Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure, Rule 28(b)(7); 
see In re
Guardianship of Carlsmith
, 113 Hawai #i 236, 246, 151 P.3d 717, 727 (2007)
(noting that an appellate court "may disregard a particular contention if theappellant makes no discernible argument in support of that position") (cleanedup) (citations omitted). 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
year from the date of its entry, no decree of adoption shall
be subject to direct attack upon any ground other than fraudrendering the decree void as of the time of its entry . 
(Emphasis added.) 
DHS argues that the family court erred in 2019 when it 
set aside the 2006 Adoption Decree. We agree for three reasons. 
First, the Child Protective Act Case was a proceeding collateral to the Adoption Case. HRS § 578-12 prohibits a collateral attack on a decree of adoption; the family court lacked authority to order the Adoption Decree set aside as part of the Child Protective Act Case. 
Second, we have held that HRS § 578-12 is a one-year 
statute of limitations prohibiting a direct attack on an adoption decree except for fraud which renders the decree void ab initio. In re Adoption of Male Minor Child, 1 Haw. App. 364, 370, 619 P.2d 1092, 1097 (1980). In the Adoption Case, the family court set aside the Adoption Decree 13 years after the decree was entered, on grounds other than fraud; the family court erred when it set aside the Adoption Decree in the Adoption Case. 
Third, HRS Chapter 578 was enacted based largely upon 
recommendations contained in U.S. Children's Bureau, Pub. No. 331-1949, Essentials of Adoption Law and Procedure (1949), https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=mdp.39015018389950&view=1u p&seq=1. In re Adoption of Male Minor Child, 1 Haw. App. at 369, 
619 P.2d at 1096. The federal publication states: 
Adoption establishes a permanent relationship. With 
the provision of adequate social study and supervision
before the decree is granted, there should be no need forannulment. 
The adoptive parent has recourse to the remedies that
are available to a natural parent: [they] may formallyrelinquish the child; consent to the child's adoption; . . .or disown [the child] when [their] will is made. The 
adopting parents' rights may be terminated when necessary bythe court in accordance with the provisions existing for theprotection of children . 
Essentials of Adoption Law and Procedure at 22-23 (emphasis 
added). As discussed in the next section, HRS § 571-61(a) contemplates relinquishment of parental rights for an adopted 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
child. It was error for the family court to set aside the
Adoption Decree.  
2. The family court erred when it
terminated Adoptive Mother's parentalrights in the Child Protective Act Case. 
DHS filed the Child Protective Act Case in the family
court under HRS §§ 571-11 (2018) and 587A-5 (2018). Those 
statutes provide, in relevant part:  
[§ 571-11] Jurisdiction; children.  Except as
otherwise provided in this chapter, the [family] court shall
have exclusive original jurisdiction in proceedings: 
. . . . 
(9) For the protection of any child under chapter587A[.] 
[§ 587A-5] Jurisdiction . Pursuant to section 
571-11(9), the [family] court shall have exclusive originaljurisdiction: 
(1) In a child protective proceeding concerning anychild who is or was found within the State at the time specified facts and circumstancesoccurred, are discovered, or are reported to[DHS] . . . [that] constitute the basis for thecourt's finding that the child's physical orpsychological health or welfare is subject toimminent harm, has been harmed, or is subject tothreatened harm by the acts or omissions of thechild's family[.] 
The family court found, and DHS does not contest, that 
Child told Adoptive Mother she did not want to be with Adoptive 
Mother in Virginia, and wanted to return to her biological mother. Adoptive Mother sent Child with a power of attorney to live with Child's adoptive sister in 
Hawai# i. Child ran away 
from her adoptive sister's home to stay with her biological mother. Child's biological mother was homeless; they lived on the beach. Adoptive Mother tried to get Child to return to Virginia, but Child continued to run away from her adoptive sister. Child was arrested and placed into the Kapolei Detention Center. Child ran away from the detention center, and a warrant for her arrest was issued. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
During a review hearing conducted on July 15, 2019, the 
family court had the following colloquy with Adoptive Mother, who 
attended the hearing in person and agreed to relinquish her parental rights: 
THE COURT: Okay. Well, you still live in Virginia
then, right? 
[ADOPTIVE MOTHER]: I do live in Virginia. 
THE COURT: Okay. The problem is is that she's here
and you're not here. So when there's no legal caretaker,
then the State has to step in and try to provide her withshelter. I know you sent her with a power of attorney, isthat right? 
[ADOPTIVE MOTHER]: 
Yes. 
THE COURT: Okay. So that -- that doesn't really work
for everything because of her age and all of the things thatshe needs. It's really up to you. If you -- if you -- ifyou want to fight for her and -- are you planning on takingher back with you to Virginia? What is your plan? 
[ADOPTIVE MOTHER]: Well, originally, before all of
this started, I was trying to get her to come back to
Virginia. But she kept running away so it was just
impossible for me to get her back. And then when she gotinto more trouble and was placed in the detention home, Icouldn't take her back. And so while she was on the run,you know, she would text me sometimes and tell me that she'sokay. So I had told her, you know, turn yourself in,[Child], because it's not right for you to be out there,it's not safe. 
THE COURT: 
Yeah. 
[ADOPTIVE MOTHER]: Turn yourself in and tell them,
you guys, what you want because I can't do it for you nomore. If I could do it for you, I would do it for you but-- but I can't -- I can't make you do what is right. I can't make the decisions for you. I can, but it doesn'tmean that you're going to do it, which is where I'm at rightnow. And so she did. She listened to me. That night, she
turned herself in. She knows she was going to detention
home, which she went. 
And, you know -- and then I got the report and I --
well, I got the court paperwork after I got the phone callfrom here. When you guys did the first proceeding and whenI read the paperwork, it said that I'm being charged forneglect. I guess I'm being charged for neglect basing onthe fact that I couldn't get my child back to Virginia in mycustody, is because she kept running away. But, you know,it was then that she said she doesn't want to live with me. She doesn't want to live with me. She doesn't want to live in Virginia. She doesn't want to live with my daughter whowas part -- the reason I -- my daughter came into the
picture was because she was part of the adoption plan in the
beginning. She -- my daughter currently now resides in 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nevada, in Las Vegas, and she said she doesn't want to live
with my daughter, she doesn't want to live in Las Vegas. 
She wants to live with her mother, her birth mother,
or her oldest sister[.] And so, you know, if that's whatshe wants, then that's what I'm going to advocate for. I know it's not the best place for her, but forcing her tolive with me even though I want to bring her back with me,it's not going to help solve whatever is going on in hermind. 
For me, I think what I would want for her, I want her
to be with me because I know I'm the best person to providecare for her. But being the best caretaker doesn't meanthat I'm the best person for her. And she had alreadystated that she doesn't want to be with me. So at this point, I do believe that forcing her to come back with me toVirginia is not going to be in her best interest. And she had said if she can't live with her mom or live with her sister, she would want to age out of the system 'cause shewas comfortable being where she was. Apparently, that's notso anymore because she's gone again, you know, and --
THE COURT: Well, let me just say that I -- I don't --
I don't believe you've been neglectful. I think you'vetried your best to help her. You know, when they turn 16,17, kind of hard to force anybody to do anything, and that'show I see her because we've had her in our custody and triedto help her. She ran. It's kind of hard to tell any16-year-old what to do. 
[ADOPTIVE MOTHER]: 
Yeah. 
THE COURT: Yeah? And so is there a warrant out for 
her arrest on the J side or not? 
. . . . 
[DEPUTY A.G.]: 
There is. 
. . . . 
THE COURT: Okay. It's really up to you, ma'am. What 
I can do is I -- like I said, I don't believe you've been
neglectful. You've been a unfortunate mother to a 16-year-old who's basically going to do what she going todo. If you want, I can -- if you want me to -- because Idon't believe that I'm -- forcing her to go back to you isgoing to help, 'cause even if we -- we force her to go back,
she's not going to -- she going board the plane, what you
going to do? You not going do -- you not going be able toforce her to get on the plane. And even if she gets on theplane, once she's in Virginia, if she runs again, then sheruns, you know. 
If you'd like me to, I can rescind the adoption, and
then we can work with her within the system. You can goback to Virginia. And I know this is not the optimum thingbecause I know you love her and care for her, but I don'tthink that we're -- I mean even -- you're not -- how longare you here for? 
[ADOPTIVE MOTHER]: 
I -- I have to go back to work on
the 28th. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: See, so even that time, we -- we not sure
if we can get her back. 
. . . . 
. . . Because she's on the run. The police are
probably going to -- we -- we cannot do anything until they
come back for a hearing. 
. . . . 
. . . And, you know, in four days, you got to go back.
So my offer to you -- and I -- I make no judgment on you,
ma'am, because I think you've tried your best. I mean, youeven had your daughter try to take care of her. But [Child]going do what [Child] wants to do --
[ADOPTIVE MOTHER]: 
Yes. 
THE COURT: -- you know. She -- she's got a mind of
her own, and unfortunately, she's not making some goodchoices. So if you'd like me to, I can set aside theadoption, she can be back in DHS custody, and then we cantry to reunify her with her mom folks if that's what shewants. But we got to get her back. So if -- if she -- if we can get her back, we can try to do that. So it's up toyou. I don't want to make you go through a trial because a
trial, I mean, what -- what will that accomplish? Nothing
really, because we can't really force her to do anything.As a judge, even me, I cannot force her to go anywhere or do
--  
[ADOPTIVE MOTHER]: 
Yeah. 
THE COURT: -- anything. So when I talk to kids, I
tell them you got to do this and if you don't do it, there'sconsequences. You know what I mean? You got to go here,stay there. But if they -- if they go there and they runaway, I mean, you know, the next thing is just try to do thenext step to try to help them. 
So, [Adoptive Mother], it's up to you. If you want me
to go ahead and set aside the adoption today, that way, you
can go on living your life. Hopefully, she still have some
connection to you. You can talk to her and help her as youcan. But at least you will not be responsible for her.She's back in the system. We don't know where she is. We'll try to get her back, and we'll do our best to do that,and then we can try, once we get her back, to try to see ifwe can reunify her with her mother folks or with the oldestsister. But we got to get ahold of them and see what theirstatus is and what their situation is even before we do that. 
So what -- what would you like me to do? 
[ADOPTIVE MOTHER]: I -- I would like to move forward 
with your suggestion to rescind it, not because I don't loveher but because I do love her and I don't think that I'm the best person for her right now. It's not me. She needed me when she was baby. But now that she's so old and she's making her own choices and sadly it's not the right choices,you know. I've been praying -- I pray for all my kids. I pray that they all never have to go through this, and I get 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Child] going through this, you know. But I would like to 
rescind it so that she can get the proper care that she needfor -- to become a -- a contributing citizen to thecommunity. 
THE COURT: Okay. And like I said, I make no judgment
on you. I believe that you've tried your best. You even went to the extent of sending her to your daughter to try tohelp her. [Child] is -- she's almost an adult. She's goingto have to make better choices for herself. And I'm hopingshe does. But in the meantime, I'm going to go ahead and dowhat I said because you agree. I'm not doing it unless youagree so if you --
[ADOPTIVE MOTHER]: 
I -- I agree. 
THE COURT: If you agree, I'm going to set aside the
adoption, and I'm going to award foster custody to [DHS],and then we'll go from there. Hopefully we can get her backand try to help her the best that we can. I don't -- I don't believe you neglected her. I think you tried yourbest to help her. But at that age, she just have to makebetter choices in her life. And hopefully we can help herbecause it is not a safe world out there. 
. . . . 
. . . But in the meantime, I think the best course of
action is we try to help her from within -- within DHS and
try to assist her on the juvenile calendar, 'cause she got ahearing, too, and do our best to get her back in from thecold and try to help her to straighten up a little bit andmake some better choices for herself. 
[ADOPTIVE MOTHER]: 
Thank -- thank you --
THE COURT: Okay --
[ADOPTIVE MOTHER]: -- you know. 
THE COURT: -- so based on my conversation with
adoptive mother, I'm going to set aside the adoption, award
foster custody to the [DHS]. 
During the August 13, 2019 hearing on DHS's motion for 
reconsideration, the family court explained: 
Okay. Well, so we have a situation here where we have achild that was basically out of control of an adoptivemother. Adoption was performed here via DHS. And so she sent her daughter to be with an older daughter. . . . Andthen that daughter was not able to control her. . . . 
. . . . 
Anyway, with regard to adoptive mother, . . . she did
come in and tell me how it had stressed her and that the 
daughter would not stay with her where -- where she's at. I believe -- is she in Virginia? 
. . . . 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . In Virginia. And the daughter was on the run.
So we have the girl back. The [adoptive] mother lives in
Virginia. It would do nothing. It would be no -- do no good for this child to try to force her on an airplane to goback to her mother -- her adoptive mother where she does notwant to be. She is here. Mother lives in Virginia.[Child] will not go back. Sounds like a CPS case to me. 
. . . [DHS's] motion [for reconsideration] is denied.
I believe it is in the best interest of this child that myorder is maintained. I do believe that this child can be helped, but I think we need to help her from our vantagepoint rather than sending her back to her [adoptive] motherwho cannot control her and most likely will find her backhere in Hawaii in no time if I were -- if -- even I were able to get her to go back to Virginia. Therefore, based onall of those factors and the fact -- in fact, I'm going toappoint a -- an attorney for the girl. 
. . . . 
Okay, I'm going to appoint an attorney for the girl to
advocate for her rights, and then we'll go from there. 
Based on the substantial evidence in the record, it 
appears that the family court suggested and accepted Adoptive 
Mother's relinquishment of parental rights to (in the words of the court) "try to see if we can reunify [Child] with her [biological] mother folks or with the oldest sister." However, HRS § 571-61 provides, in relevant part: 
(a) Relinquishment. The parents or either parent or the
surviving parent who desire to relinquish parental rights to
any natural or adopted child and thus make the childavailable for adoption or readoption, may petition thefamily court of the circuit in which they or he or sheresides, or of the circuit in which the child resides, orwas born, for the entry of a judgment of termination ofparental rights. The petition shall be verified and shallbe substantially in such form as may be prescribed by thejudge or senior judge of the family court. 
To relinquish her parental rights, Adoptive Mother was required 
to file a verified petition with the family court. Adoptive Mother stated her desire to relinquish her parental rights during the July 15, 2019 hearing in the Child Protective Act Case, but the record does not reflect that Adoptive Mother was sworn to tell the truth before her colloquy with the family court. The family court exceeded its authority when it accepted Adoptive 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mother's apparent relinquishment of parental rights without 
following the procedure prescribed by HRS § 571-61(a).4 
CONCLUSION 
Based upon the foregoing, the "Orders [sic] Setting 
Aside and Rescinding the Adoption Decree Filed on January 13, 2006[,]" entered in FC-A No. 05-1-0502 on August 13, 2019, is vacated. The "Orders [sic] Concerning Child Protective Act" entered in FC-S No. 19-00026 on August 13, 2019, is vacated, without prejudice to further proceedings in the family court consistent with HRS § 571-61. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 30, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate JudgeNara E. Sitachitta, for Petitioner-AppellantState of 
Hawai# i 
Department of Human Services. 
Crystal K. Glendon, for Respondent-Appellee Court Appointed SpecialAdvocates Program. 
4 HRS § 571-61(b) (2018) authorizes the family court to
involuntarily terminate the parental rights of any legal parent on the groundsset forth in the statute. The family court made no findings in the ChildProtective Act Case that would support involuntary termination of AdoptiveMother's parental rights. 
13 