 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000328 25-MAR-2025 07:53 AM Dkt. 109 SO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000328  
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
RICHARD DENNIS STRINI, Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
DEBRA ANN SANCHEZ STRINI, Defendant-Appellant  
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO.  2DV171000015)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION  ORDER  
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.)  
Defendant -Appellant Debra Ann Sanchez Strini (Wife) 
appeals from the Decree Granting Divorce ( Divorce Decree ), filed 
on April 18, 2022, by the Family Court of the Second Circuit 
(family court ).1 This matter arises out of a Complaint for 
Divorce filed by Richard Dennis Strini ( Husband). 
On appeal, Wife raises five points of error , 
contending that the family court erred by : (1) "failing to 
require the parties to submit property division charts in 
1 The Honorable James R. Rouse presided over the case.   
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
advance of trial and/or in failing to attach its own property 
division chart to its [Divorce] Decree and/or Findings of Fact 
[(FOFs)] and Conclusions of Law [( COLs)]"; (2) failing to 
include a "discussion of why [Wife] was not entitled to alimony 
based upon the Court's analysis of the factors set out in 
[Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS)] §[]580-47(a)" in its FOF s and 
COLs; (3) "failing to file [FOF s] and [COL s] that support the 
provisions of the Divorce Decree"; (4) "ordering a property 
division that was not just and equitable"; and (5) "finding that 
[Wife] had committed marital waste without reference to when the 
alleged waste was committed and without [FOF s] to suppor t the 
finding." 
Upon careful review of the record , briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities , and having given due consideration 
to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties , 
we resolve Wife's points of error as follows : 
(1) Wife contends , as her first, third, and fourth 
points of error , that the family court 's division of property 
was not "just and equitable ," and that this court cannot 
evaluate whether the division is just and equitable, because the 
family court failed to "require the parties to submit property 
division charts in advance of trial ," "attach its own property 
2   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
division chart to its [Divorce] Decree and/or [FOFs]  and 
[COLs],"  and file  sufficient FOFs and COLs.   2 
Division of marital property resulting from a divorce 
is  governed by HRS § 580-47 (2018), which states in relevant 
part:  
Upon granting a divorce, . . . the court may make any 
further orders as shall appear just and equitable . . . 
finally dividing and distributing the estate of the 
parties, real, personal, or mixed, whether community, 
joint, or separate [.] . . . In making these further orders, 
the court shall take into consideration: the respective 
merits of the parties, the relative abilities of the 
parties, the condition in which each party will be left by 
the divorce, the burdens imposed upon either party for the 
benefit of the children of the parties, the concealment of 
or failure to disclose income or an asset, or violation of 
a restraining order [,] . . . and all other circumstances of 
the case. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The  family court has wide discretion when dividing 
marital partnership property based on what is "just and 
equitable" in  the case before it. Gordon v. Gordon, 135 Hawaiʻi 
340,  348–49,  350 P.3d 1008, 1016–17  (2015)  (citation omitted). 
The family court  will assess and weigh all "valid and relevant 
considerations to exercise its equitable discretion in distributing marital property." Booth v. Booth, 90 Hawai ʻi 413, 
417, 978 P.2d 851, 855 (1999)  (citation omitted).   However, 
2   We address in section (1) Wife's contention that the family court 
failed to make sufficient FOFs  and/or COLs  that support its division of 
property. We address, in sections (2) and (3)  infra,  the issue of whether 
the family court failed to make sufficient FOFs and/or COLs  with respect to 
spousal support and marital waste.  
3   
  
  
 
  
   
   
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[i]t is axiomatic that a family court cannot sat isfactorily 
fulfill its responsibility under general partnership principles 
to determine each party's contributions and equitably divide 
marital property without first assessing the net market value s 
of the parties' respective properties at various time frames." 
Gordon, 135 Hawai‛i at 351, 350 P.3d at 1019 (citation omitted) . 
We review the family court's division of property for 
abuse of discretion. Brutsch v. Brutsch , 139 Hawaiʻi 373, 381, 
390 P.3d 1260, 1268 (2017) . 
Here, Wife did not file an Income and Expense 
Statement, nor did she file an Asset and Debt Statement. At 
trial, Wife did not provide a n inventory list or a valuation of 
the art business inventory. The family court found Wife's 
testimony not credible and lacking in sincerity. 
Husband submitted an Income and Expense Statement, and 
an Asset and Debt Statement. Husband also provided itemized 
records of Strini Art Glass's inventory, including the value of 
individual art pieces. Based on Husband's testimony, which the 
family court found to be credible, the family court made a 
finding that the total value of the Strini Art Glass inventory 
amounted to $1,190,016 , and the total value of the art glass 
inventory located at the Maui Craft Guild's shop amounted to 
$103,535 . 
4   
   
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
    
   
   
 
 
 
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Neither Wife nor Husband submitted a property division 
chart. 
On this record, we conclude that the family court 
appropriately exercised its discretion in relying upon the 
statements and credible testimonial evidence presented by 
Husband in making a finding as to the total valu e of Wife and 
Husband's art glass inventory. However, because the family 
court failed to attach a property division chart or make 
sufficient FOFs regarding the itemized valuation of the 
property , 3 we are unable to determine whether the family court 's 
division of property was just and equitable . See Gordon, 135 
Hawaiʻi at 351, 350 P.3d at 1019 ("Given the numerous omissions 
of property categorizations and net market values in this case, 
the record is deficient to enable meaningful appellate review of 
the family court's distribution of the marital estate."). 
Although the family court concluded that "[t]he 
property in this case was and is Marital Partnership Property," 
and that "there is no just and equitable reason to deviate from 
the partnership model,"4 it is unclear whether Wife and/or 
3   "[A] chart or equivalent itemization of the information 
required by the five- category partnership model is a valuable and 
important tool for the family court to properly divide property and 
afford transparency to the parties and reviewing court." Gordon, 135 
Hawaiʻi at 351, 350 P.3d at 1019  (citation omitted) .    
4 "It is well established that a family court is guided in 
divorce proceedings by partnership principles in governing division and 
distribution of marital partnership property." Id. (citation omitted) . 
(continued . . .) 
5   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Husband was credited in any way for premarital contributions.5 
Moreover, t he family court did not make any FOFs regarding the 
itemized value of much of the marital property that was being 
divided between Wife and Husband . It is unclear, for example: 
what portion of the art glass inventory constitutes the " eighty 
pieces" awarded to Wife, and the itemized value of th ose pieces; 
the value of the "tools, supplies, and equipment" awarded solely 
to Husband ; and the value of the Strini Art Glass business and 
website awarded solely to Husband . 
We therefore vacate the property division part of the 
family court's Divorce Decree, and instruct the family court on 
4(. . .continued) 
Pursuant to partnership principles, the family court must categorize 
property as follows:  
Category 1 includes the net market value of property 
separately owned by a spouse on the date of marriage; 
Category 2 includes the increase in the net market value of 
Category 1 property during the marriage; 
Category 3 includes the net market value of property 
separately acquired by gift or inheritance during the 
marriage; 
Category 4 includes the increase in the net market value of 
Category 3 property during the marriage; and 
Category 5 includes the net market value of the remaining 
marital estate at the conclusion of the evidentiary part of 
the trial. 
Id. at 349, 350 P.3d at 1017 ( cleaned up ). 
5  Although it appears that Wife and Husband agreed that the 
property at issue in this case would be categorized as "marital partnership 
property," Wife and Husband both testified that they brought separate 
property into the marriage. 
6   
  
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
remand to make an itemized valuation of the Strinis' property , 
either through a property division chart or by making additional 
FOFs, such that this court may discern the basis for the family 
court's determination that the ordered property division was 
"just and equitable ." 
(2) Wife contends, as her second point of error,  that 
the family court erred by concluding that  Wife was not entitled 
to alimony  without making FOFs  and COLs  that applied the factors 
set forth in HRS § 580-47(a). In its FOFs and COLs, the  family 
court, referencing the property division, concluded that "[Wife] 
does not meet the criteria for an award of spousal support since 
she was awarded half of the net proceeds from the sale of the 
[marital r]esidence in addition to half of the inventory from 
[Strini Art Glass] which she can sell to earn a living."  
In light of our decision to vacate the family court's  
property division award, we also vacate the spousal support part 
of the Divorce Decree  for the family court's consideration on 
remand.   See  id.  at  355, 350 P.3d at  1023 ("[B]ecause the 
court's division of property likely had an impact in determining [the wife's] entitlement to alimony, the ICA should have also 
vacated the family court's alimony award.")  (citation omitted).  
(3) Wife contends, as her fifth point of error,  that 
the family court erred because it did not provide sufficient 
FOFs  to support its determination  that Wife had committed 
7   
  
   
 
 
   
     
   
  
    
  
 
  
    
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
marital waste prior to trial , and by finding that Wife's conduct 
after trial also constituted marital waste. 
"A reduction of the dollar value of the marital estate 
chargeable to a divorcing party occurs when, during the time of 
the divorce , a party's action or inaction . . . reduc[es] . . . 
the dollar value of the marital estate" under circumstances that 
suggest that the party "should be charged with having received 
the dollar value of the reduction. " Higashi v. Higashi , 106 
Hawaiʻi 228, 241, 103 P.3d 388, 401 (App. 2004) (emphasis added) . 
The family court's finding that Wife "accumulat[ ed] 
approximately $ 561,243.61  in debt prior to the start of trial , 
and an additional $30,824.00 after the conclusion of the trial ," 
does not establish whether that "marital waste " occurred during 
the time of the divorce . (Emphasis added.) 
That being said , it appears that the family court's 
finding of Wife's marital waste was not used to reduce the 
marital estate in Husband's favor , and that any error regarding 
Wife's marital waste therefore amounted to harmless error . 
Nevertheless , in light of our rulings in sections (1) and (2), 
supra, the family court may, on remand, consider any marital 
waste committed by Wife during the time of the divorce in 
conjunction with its consideration of property division and 
spousal support. 
8   
   
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the property 
division, spousal support, and marital waste sections of the 
Divorce Decree , and remand for further proceedings consistent 
with this summary disposition order . 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, March 25 , 2025. 
On the briefs:  /s/ Katherine  G. Leonard  
 Acting Chief  Judge  
Francis T. O'Brien,   
for Defendant-Appellant.  /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth  
 Associate Judge  
Peter Van Name Esser,   
for Plaintiff-Appellee.  /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Associate Judge  
9 