NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000246
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
In the Matter of the Application of
PASHA HAWAII TRANSPORT LINES LLC
 
for Issuance of a Certificate of Public
 
Convenience and Necessity and Approval of
its Local Tariff No. 1 for Service Between and
 
Among the Ports of Honolulu, Kahului, Hilo and Nawiliwili
 
APPEAL FROM THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
(DOCKET NO. 2009-0059)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Intervenor-Appellant Young Brothers, Limited (Young
Brothers) and Cross-Appellant Division of Consumer Advocacy 
(Consumer Advocate) appeal from the September 20, 2010 Interim 
Decision and Order (Interim Decision) of Appellee State of 
Hawai'i Public Utilities Commission (PUC). In the Interim 
Decision, the PUC granted Applicant-Appellee Pasha Hawaii 
Transport Lines LLC's (Pasha's) request for a Certificate of 
Public Convenience and Necessity (Certificate) to operate as an 
intrastate water carrier in Hawai' i, until December 31, 2013. 
The appellants challenge the Interim Decision on various grounds. 
In addition, Young Brothers challenges the PUC's denial of its request for certain discovery from Pasha. We affirm.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On March 13, 2009, Pasha applied to the PUC for a 
Certificate to provide intrastate "water transportation services 
for heavy commercial and military truck/trailer equipment, tracked vehicles, buses, automotive/recreational vehicles, and other general cargoes, excluding passengers and livestock," on a motor-driven vessel called the M/V Jean Anne. Pasha sought to provide service between and among ports in Honolulu, Kahului, and Hilo, as well as Nawiliwili Harbor on Kaua' i, and Barbers Point, 
O'ahu, upon inducement. At that time, Pasha had been 
transporting vehicles and large pieces of cargo for Hawai' i 
customers between Hawai' i and the U.S. mainland. 
The Consumer Advocate became an ex officio party to
 
this case. Pursuant to a stipulation entered into between Pasha
 
and the Consumer Advocate, the PUC issued a protective order
 
regarding all confidential information identified in the course
 of the proceedings and in connection with the application. The
 Consumer Advocate made recommendations to the PUC regarding
 Pasha's application for a Certificate in an Initial Statement of
 Position (Initial SOP) and a Supplemental Statement of Position
 
(Supplemental SOP). In its Supplemental SOP, the Consumer
 
Advocate stated that although Pasha was "fit, willing, and able
 
to properly perform" its proposed services, the PUC should deny
 Pasha's application on the basis that Pasha had "not met its
 burden of proof in regards to the related public interest and
 public convenience and necessity issues." The Consumer Advocate
 argued that, based on the information that had been submitted, it
 was unclear whether the proposed service would adversely affect
 certain customer classes. The Consumer Advocate recommended that
 the PUC offer Pasha an opportunity to file a more fully supported
 application in a subsequent filing.
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On April 27, 2009, Young Brothers, a regulated water
 
1
carrier operating throughout Hawai' i,  filed a motion to
intervene in the proceedings. The PUC granted the motion on May 
28, 2009. 
On September 20, 2010, the PUC filed the Interim
 
Decision, concluding, 
inter alia, that:
 
(1) in accordance with the requirements of Hawaii
 
2
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 271G-10(c),  Pasha is "fit, willing, and
able to properly perform the proposed service, and is able to
 conform to HRS Chapter 271G and the requirements and rules of the
 commission"; and
 
(2) in accordance with the requirements of HRS § 271G­
10(c) and Hawaii Administrative Rules (
HAR) Rule 6-61-81, Pasha's
 
proposed service "is or will be required by the present or future
 public convenience and necessity." 
On October 4, 2010, Young Brothers filed, inter alia, a
 
motion for reconsideration of the Interim Order and a motion to
 stay the Interim Order. On December 1, 2010, the PUC denied the
 motion for reconsideration and dismissed the motion to stay as
 moot.  The PUC found that Young Brothers had previously raised 
1/
 At the time the Interim Decision was filed, Young Brothers offered
"twelve round-trip sailings from Honolulu each week, with four sailings weekly
to Hawai' i (two each to Hilo and Kawaihae), three weekly sailings to Maui, two
weekly sailings to Kaua' i, two weekly sailings to Moloka' i, and one weekly
sailing to Lana' i."
2/
 HRS § 271G-10(c) (2007) provides:
 
(c) A certificate shall be issued to any qualified
applicant therefor, authorizing the whole or any part of the
operations covered by the application if it is found that
the applicant is fit, willing, and able properly to perform
the service proposed and to conform to this chapter and the
requirements, rules, and regulations of the commission
thereunder, and that the proposed service, to the extent to
be authorized by the certificate, is or will be required by
the present or future public convenience and necessity;
otherwise the application shall be denied.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the arguments made in the motion for reconsideration and had not
 
presented any new evidence that would justify reconsideration. 
Young Brothers filed a notice of appeal on December 29,
 
2010. On January 21, 2011, Young Brothers herein filed an
 emergency motion to stay the Interim Decision. On March 14,
 2011, this court entered an order denying Young Brothers's motion
 to stay.
 II.	 POINTS OF ERROR ON APPEAL
 
Young Brothers raises the following points of error:
 (1) The PUC exceeded its statutory authority under the
 
Hawaii Water Carrier Act (HRS Chapter 271G), specifically HRS
 §§ 271G-10 and 271G-12, by granting Pasha authority to operate
 until December 31, 2013 as an intra-state water carrier;
 
(2) The PUC failed to require Pasha to meet its burden
 
of proof, and Pasha failed to meet its burden, to demonstrate
 that its proposed intra-state water carrier service is or will be
 required by the present or future public convenience and
 necessity pursuant to HRS § 271G-10, and the PUC improperly
 shifted the burden of proof to Young Brothers and the Consumer
 Advocate to show harm from Pasha's service;
 
(3) The Interim Decision erroneously replaced
 
legislative policy and the statutory standard under HRS § 271G-10
 with the PUC's own erroneous findings, standards, and policies;
 
(4) The PUC, in failing to apply the requirements of
 
HRS § 271G-10, ignored the public interest, and misapplied and
 violated HRS § 271G-2;
 
(5) The Interim Decision was based upon out-of-context
 
information from Young Brothers's 2008 rate case and, therefore,
 the PUC erroneously interpreted Pasha's impact on Young Brothers;
 and
 
(6) The PUC abused its discretion in denying Young
 
Brothers's Motion to Compel. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Consumer Advocate also contends that the PUC erred 
in its determination that Pasha met its burden of proof.
 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
The standards applicable to the review of the PUC's
 
rulings are well-defined:
 
The applicable standard of review is established by
HRS § 91-14(g) (1993), which provides:
 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may
affirm the decision of the agency or remand the case
with instructions for further proceedings; or it may
reverse or modify the decision and order if the
substantial rights of the petitioners may have been
prejudiced because the administrative findings,
conclusions, decisions, or orders are:
 
(1) In violation of constitutional or
 
statutory provisions; or
 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or 
(4) Affected by other error of law; or 
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or
 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized
by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise
of discretion.
 
[U]nder HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law are
reviewable under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions
regarding procedural defects are reviewable under subsection
(3); findings of fact is reviewable under subsection (5);
and an agency's exercise of its discretion under subsection
(6). . . .
 
Accordingly, a reviewing court will reverse an
agency's findings of fact if it concludes that such a
finding is clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record. HRS § 91-14(g)(5). On the other hand, the
agency's conclusions of law are freely reviewable.
. . . .
 
...In order to preserve the function of the
administrative agencies in discharging their
delegated duties and the function of this court
in reviewing agency determinations, a
presumption of validity is accorded to decisions
of administrative bodies acting within their
sphere of expertise and one seeking to upset the
order bears the heavy burden of making a
convincing showing that it is invalid because it
is unjust and unreasonable in its consequences.
An agency's findings, if supported by reliable,
probative and substantial evidence, will be
upheld.
 
5
 Application of Charley's Tour & Transp., Inc., 55 Haw. 463, 466,
 
522 P.2d 1272, 1275 (1974) (citation omitted). The PUC's
 
determination that services are required by present and future
 public convenience and necessity is also reviewed for an abuse of
 discretion. In re Robert's Tours & Transp., Inc., 104 Hawai' i 
98, 108, 85 P.3d 623, 633 (2004).
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
.  .  .  .
 
Additionally, courts decline to consider
the weight of the evidence to ascertain whether
it weighs in favor of the administrative
findings, or to review the agency's findings of
fact by passing upon the credibility of
witnesses or conflicts in testimony, especially
the findings of an expert agency dealing with a
specialized field. 
In re Gray Line Hawai' i, Ltd., 93 Hawai' i 45, 52-53, 995 P.2d 776, 
783-84 (2000) (quotations marks and citations omitted). 
In summary, when reviewing a determination of an
administrative agency, we first decide whether the legislature
granted the agency discretion to make the determination being
reviewed. If the legislature has granted the agency discretion
over a particular matter, then we review the agency's action
pursuant to the deferential abuse of discretion standard (bearing
in mind the legislature determines the boundaries of that
discretion). If the legislature has not granted the agency
discretion over a particular matter, then the agency's conclusions
are subject to de novo review. 
Paul's Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Befitel, 104 Hawai' i 412, 419-20, 91 
P.3d 494, 501-02 (2004).
 
An appellate court's review of the PUC's decision to
 
grant an application for a Certificate is limited to a
 
determination of
 
whether the [PUC] has observed the requirements of the law
in the conduct of their proceedings and additionally,
whether the conclusions as to public convenience and
necessity have a rational basis in the facts found, which
must be supported by substantial evidence on the record
considered as a whole.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
A. Applicable Law
 Since 1974, HRS Chapter 271G, the Hawai' i Water Carrier 
Act (HWCA), has governed intrastate water carrier services in
 
Hawai'i. Since its enactment, HRS § 271G-2 (2007) has provided: 
§ 271G-2 Declaration of policy.  The legislature of
this State recognizes and declares that the transportation
of persons and of property, for commercial purposes, by
water within the State or between points within the State,
constitutes a business affected with the public interest.
It is intended by this chapter to provide for fair and
impartial regulation of such transportation, so administered
as to recognize and preserve the inherent advantages of such
transportation, in the interest of preserving for the public
the full benefit and use of the waterways consistent with
the public safety and the needs of commerce: to promote
safe, adequate, economical, and efficient service among
carriers, to encourage the establishment and maintenance of
reasonable rates and charges for transportation and related
accessorial service, without unjust discrimination, undue
preference or advantage, or unfair or destructive
competitive practices, all to the end of developing,
coordinating, and preserving a sound transportation system
by water. This chapter shall be administered and enforced
with a view to carrying out the above declaration of policy.
 
 
HRS § 271G-3 (2007) provides that the HWCA shall be
 
administered by the PUC. HRS § 271G-10 governs when the PUC
 
shall issue a Certificate to an applicant seeking to operate as a
 water carrier within the State. More specifically, at the time
 of Pasha's application, and at the time of the PUC's Interim
 Decision, HRS § 271G-10(c) (2007) provided as follows:
 
(c) A certificate shall be issued to any qualified
applicant therefor, authorizing the whole or any part of the
operations covered by the application if it is found that
the applicant is fit, willing, and able properly to perform
the service proposed and to conform to this chapter and the
requirements, rules, and regulations of the commission
thereunder, and that the proposed service, to the extent to
be authorized by the certificate, is or will be required by
the present or future public convenience and necessity;
otherwise the application shall be denied.
 
During the pendency of this appeal, the 2011 Hawai' i 
Legislature passed Senate Bill 98, legislation relating to water
 
carriers that, while self-described as clarifying the legislative
 intent underlying the existing requirements for issuing a
 Certificate, substantially and substantively amended the
 procedures and requirements for the issuance of a Certificate to
 a water carrier applicant.  Act 213 was signed into law with a
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
specified effective date of July 1, 2011. In addition to
 
establishing new notice and public hearing requirements prior to
 the issuance of a certificate, Act 213 barred interim orders for
 Certificates, such as the one at issue herein, and establishes
 new criteria for a water carrier Certificate. S.B. 98, S.D. 2,
 H.D. 1, C.D. 1, 26th Leg., Reg. Sess. (2011). The amended
 statute now provides, in relevant part:
 
(e) The commission shall not make a finding of public
convenience and necessity or issue an authorization, whether
interim, permanent, or otherwise, to operate as a water
carrier without the following specific findings supported by
evidence in the record:
 
(1) 	Existing water carrier services are inadequate
to presently service the public or meet
demonstrated and quantifiable future demands for
service;
 
(2) 	The proposed service is designed for and
necessary to meet demonstrated and quantifiable
unmet public needs for present water carrier
service or demonstrated and quantifiable future
demands for service;
 
(3) 	The proposed service will provide demonstrated
and quantifiable benefits to the general public,
business community, and the economy of all
islands that are entitled to notice under
 section 271G-23.5, including demonstrated and
quantifiable benefits with respect to
reliability, affordability, and security of the
service line;
 
(4)	 The specific, identified benefits of the
proposed service outweigh its detrimental impact
to the public's interest in maintaining
services, including:
 
(A) 	Economies of scale and scope of current
water carriers;
(B)	 Future capital costs of existing water
carriers;
(C)	 Ability of existing water carriers to make
necessary capital and resource
investments;
(D) 	The financial health, stability, and
revenue stream of existing water carriers;
and
 
8
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(E)	 The likelihood that existing levels of
service will be maintained after the
 enactment of the proposed service; and
 
(5)	 If the commission's finding of public
convenience and necessity differs from the
recommendation of the consumer advocate,
specific findings to address each ground for
objection articulated by the consumer advocate.
 
The commission shall not make a finding of public
convenience and necessity nor issue a certificate if the
evidence in the record indicates that the issuance of the
 certificate would diminish an existing water carrier's
ability to realize its allowed rate of return or if the
certificate would allow an applicant to serve only
high-margin or high-profit ports or lines of service that
are currently served by an existing carrier.
 
HRS § 271G-10(e) (Supp. 2012); see also HRS § 271G-10(g) (newly
 
prohibiting interim approval of a Certificate except in response
 to a state-declared emergency).
 
Given the scope of the changes to the HWCA, we must 
determine which version of the statute governs this appeal. HRS § 1-3 (1955) provides that "[n]o law has any retrospective operation, unless otherwise expressed or obviously intended." Id.; see also Wong v. Takeuchi, 88 Hawai' i 46, 51, 961 P.2d 611, 
616 (1998) (citing State of Hawai' i Org. of Police Officers v. 
Soc'y of Prof'l Journalists, 83 Hawai' i 378, 389, 927 P.2d 386, 
397 (1996)). Where an amendment does not provide for retroactive application, retroactive construction generally is not applied "if such a construction will impair existing rights, create new obligations or impose additional duties with respect to past transactions." Clark v. Cassidy, 64 Haw. 74, 77 n.6, 636 P.2d 
1344, 1346 n.6 (1981) cf. Gov't Emp. Ins. Co. v. Hyman, 90 Hawai'i 1, 5, 975 P.2d 211, 215 (1999) ("a statute providing 
remedies or procedures that do not affect existing rights, but merely alter the means of enforcing or giving effect to such rights, may apply to pending claims–-even those arising before the effective date of the statute") (citing Clark, 64 Haw. at 77, 636 P.2d at 1347) (internal citations omitted). 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We reject Young Brothers's argument that the 
Legislature's description of Act 213 as a clarification of the 
pre-existing requirements for the issuance of a Certificate is determinative of whether the Legislature intended retroactive application of its new requirements. See, e.g., State v. Jordan, 
72 Haw. 597, 600, 825 P.2d 1065, 1067 (1992) (noting that the use of the "clarification" normally would seem to indicate an intent that statute was intended to be applied retroactively, but declining to apply the statute retroactively because no express statement of retroactivity, later effective date, and substantive effect on retroactive application). Here, Act 213 is expressly made effective as of July 11, 2013 and not retroactively. It is obvious that the Legislature intended that interim Certificates not be granted in the future, for example, but not that the Legislature intended the PUC to rescind existing interim Certificates. It is also apparent that the Legislature intended to make it more difficult for new water carriers to enter the market, adding stringent new statutory requirements and burdens that did not exist in HRS § 271G at the time that Pasha's Certificate was issued, but not that it was intended that these new criteria be applied to previously-issued Certificates. On balance, we cannot say that the Legislature either expressly or obviously intended that Act 213 have retroactive application. See also Wong v. Takeuchi, 88 Hawai' i 46, 50-51, 961 P.2d 611, 
615-16 (1998) (rejecting retroactive application of a statute because it would impose an additional burden on a party as a result of a past transaction and the statute did not "expressly or obviously manifest an intent to be applied retroactively"). Indeed, the substantive rights of the litigants in this appeal are altered by the amendments, not merely "collateral matters of the enforcement and administration of these rights," as must be found in order to retroactively apply the amended statute in the absence of express legislative intent for retroactive construction. See Gov't Employees Ins. Co., 90 Hawai' i at 7, 975 
P.2d at 217. Accordingly, this appeal is governed by HRS § 271G­
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
10 (2007) and not the statute as amended.3
 
B. The Interim Decision
 
Young Brothers challenges the Interim Decision on
 
various grounds. The Consumer Advocate, as well as Young
 Brothers, argues that Pasha did not meet its burden of proof.
 
Young Brothers first argues that the PUC exceeded its
 
statutory authority when it granted Pasha the right to operate as
 an intra-state water carrier until December 31, 2013. We
 disagree. HRS § 271G-10(c) expressly grants the PUC the mandate
 to authorize "the whole or any part of the operations covered by
 the application" and states that "the proposed service, to the
 extent to be authorized by the certificate, is or will be
 required by the present or future public convenience and
 necessity[.]" Id. (emphasis added). There is nothing in the
 statute that explicitly or implicitly prohibits the PUC from
 allowing water carrier operations on an interim basis. Other
 sections of HRS Chapter 271G similarly grant the PUC broad duties
 and powers to regulate, direct inquiries, investigate, require
 accounts, records, and reports, and/or suspend, change, limit,
 terminate, or revoke a Certificate. See, e.g., HRS §§ 271G-7,
 
271G-8, 271G-15, 271G-18. The PUC's power under HRS § 271G-12 to
 grant "temporary authority" for water carrier services, in order
 to direct "an immediate and urgent need" does not expressly or
 implicitly limit the PUC's authority under HRS § 271G-10(c) and
 does not apply to situations where a formal Certificate
 application proceeding has already been initiated. See generally
 
Application of Kauai Elec. Div. of Citizens Utilities Co., 60
 Haw. 166, 180, 590 P.2d 524, 535 (1978) (holding that the PUC's
 "authority to grant interim rate increases conditioned on a
 refund provision is necessarily implied from the express
 authority to regulate rates and supervise public utilities
 operating within the State, and is to be implied from the express
 authority granted the Commission under HRS § 269-16").
 
3/
 Therefore, unless otherwise specifically noted, all further
references to HRS Chapter 271G refer to statute in effect at the time of the
Interim Decision.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In addition, Young Brothers and the Consumer Advocate
 
argue that the PUC erred in issuing the Interim Decision because
 
Pasha failed to provide sufficient evidence to meet its burden of
 proof on the element of public necessity, as required by HRS
 § 271G-10. HRS Chapter 271G does not define "public convenience
 and necessity." However, the Hawai' i Supreme Court has 
explained:
 
While it is well settled that the [PUC] should
consider the public interest in maintaining the health and
stability of existing carriers and the adequacy of existing
services, these are but two of the elements to be considered
in determining public convenience and necessity.
 
The burden is on the applicant to show that the
proposed operation not only will be of beneficial value to
the community, but also is a necessity. Generally, the
applicant may meet this burden by demonstrating either a
lack of adequate existing facilities to presently serve the
public, or insufficient facilities to meet anticipated
future demands for service. The [PUC] may authorize the
certificate even though other existing carriers might be
fit, willing, and able to furnish successfully the proposed
service.
 
Charley's Tour, 55 Haw. at 469, 522 P.2d at 1277 (citations
 
omitted) .
 
In the Interim Decision, the PUC found:
 
Pasha's proposed intrastate operations would foster
competition in the intrastate shipping industry, provide
consumers with a choice of intrastate water carriers, and
minimize any potential harm or inconvenience to the public
if existing services were disrupted. Without a second
 intrastate water carrier of property, consumers will
continue to be at the mercy of a single water carrier of
property. [Young Brothers] will also have little incentive
to improve services and increase efficiency in its
operations. Thus, from the commission's perspective there
appears to be a "public need" for a second carrier.
 
The PUC stated that it considered the entire record in
 
determining that Pasha's services were required by the present
 
and future public convenience and necessity. The PUC cited
 representations made by the Consumer Advocate as well as Pasha
 regarding the services Pasha would provide, including services
 "not currently available," to support the PUC's conclusions that
 Pasha's proposed intrastate operations met this statutory
 requirement. 
  
The appellants challenge various findings by the PUC,
 
including: "that entry of a second water carrier may be of
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
'beneficial value' to the community, and that competition may
 
pressure existing firms to lower prices or improve quality"; 
that Pasha could serve as a back-up in an emergency; that
 continued reliance on only one intrastate water carrier of
 property places the State in an untenable position; and that
 Pasha will provide customers with "roll-on/roll-off service" and
 offer capacity not currently available. They also dispute the
 following:
 
The commission recognizes that the entry of a second
water carrier of property may be of beneficial value to the
community. Competition among firms, or the potential of
such competition, can benefit the public by creating
pressure for the existing firms to minimize their costs and
lower their prices, improve the quality of their existing
products, develop new technology, and increase service
offerings. 
See In re Robert's Tours & Transp., Inc.,  104
 
Hawai'i 98, 109, 85 P.3d 623, 634 (Sup. Ct. 2004) (affirming
the PUC's decision to grant a motor carrier Certificate
where "it would encourage competition and constrain
otherwise monopolistic operations."). 
Based on the record before us, it appears that the PUC
 
had substantial evidence on which to base its findings. In
 
Pasha's application for a Certificate, Pasha stated:
 
It has already been demonstrated that the entry of the M/V
Jean Anne into the interstate transportation of cargoes by
water between the mainland and Hawaii created competition
which has benefitted the trade. [Pasha] believes that its
proposed inter-island water transportation service will
bring competition into that market which will cause similar
economic and service benefits [sic] this inter-island water
carrier service.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Pasha attached to its application numerous letters from
 
business people, members of the military, and public figures in
 
support of its assertion that its entry into the shipping trade
 would benefit the public by fostering competition. 
  
In the Interim Decision, the PUC found:
 
[A]llowing Pasha to operate would provide the State with an
alternative option in the event [Young Brothers's] service
is disrupted or an emergency situation that requires the
availability of a second water carrier of property should
occur. As noted by the Consumer Advocate, the options for
shipping cargo inter-island are basically limited to the
airline industry, [Young Brothers], and freight forwarders
(which in turn rely on the airlines and [Young Brothers]).
For customers shipping certain types of cargo, however,
[Young Brothers's] barge service is the only option that is
currently available. 
Young Brothers contends that, to the contrary, the
 
record demonstrates that (1) it serves as its own back-up, with
 
numerous tugs and barges, (2) Pasha only proposes to sail twice a
 month, one-way, among Honolulu, Kahului, and Hilo, in contrast to
 Young Brothers's numerous sailings among all islands several
 times each week, and (3) Pasha is unable to carry refrigerated
 cargo and livestock, which would likely be the bulk of products
 that need to be shipped in an emergency. Nevertheless, we will
 not reweigh the evidence presented to the PUC, and we conclude
 that the PUC's conclusions have a rational basis in the facts
 found, which are supported by substantial evidence in the record. 
In the Interim Decision, the PUC found that "[g]iven
 
the critical importance of the inter-island shipping industry in
 the movement of produce, livestock, and consumer goods within the
 State, the commission believes that the continued reliance on
 only one intrastate water carrier of property places the State in
 an untenable position." 
Young Brothers disagrees with the PUC's
 
determination. We cannot conclude, however, that the PUC abused
 its discretion in its consideration of public policy concerns, as
 well as the evidence before it, in its determination that Pasha's
 services were required, at least on an interim basis, by present
 and future public convenience and necessity.
 
In the Interim Decision, the PUC found:
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In this case, Pasha's proposed service will provide
customers with RO/RO [roll-on/roll-off] water transportation
service. In addition, Pasha claims that the "M/V Jean Anne
will offer capacity not currently available by providing a
vessel with adjustable, fully enclosed cargo decks, a stern
ramp capable of receiving loads up to 100 metric tons, and
increased capacity for oversize cargos." While Pasha's
 sailing schedule may be less frequent, its proposed service
would benefit shippers who need to transport oversized
cargos, such as heavy construction equipment, tracked
vehicles, buses, and automotive/recreational vehicles, in a
fully enclosed cargo space.
 
Young Brothers argues that the finding that Pasha will
 
offer roll-on/roll-off service and offer capacity currently not
 
available is incorrect and not evidence of a need for Pasha's
 services or capacity, because Young Brothers has already invested
 in, and currently owns, a covered roll-on/roll-off vessel and
 other barges capable of carrying oversized cargoes. However, the
 PUC did not find that roll-on/roll-off service was currently
 unavailable; rather, it found that Pasha would offer that
 service. The PUC's finding that Pasha would offer capacity
 currently not available is clearly supported in the record.
 
Young Brothers argues that the PUC erroneously
 
concluded that Pasha's services satisfy the public convenience
 and necessity requirement because they may foster competition. 
However, the PUC's conclusion has a rational basis in the facts
 found and appears to be supported by substantial evidence, based
 on the record before us. The PUC relied on, inter alia, the
 Consumer Advocate's observation that "Pasha's proposed service
 offers the public a choice of intrastate water carrier service
 and encourages competition among carriers. This, in turn, could
 result in higher quality customer service, improved service
 offerings, and possibly more jobs." The PUC also relied on the
 important benefit of having an alternative option in the event
 that Young Brothers's service was disrupted or an emergency
 situation required the availability of a second carrier.
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In addition, contrary to Young Brothers's argument, 
there appears to be no evidence that, by approving Pasha's
 
application for a Certificate to the extent authorized therein,
 the PUC has decided to deregulate the water carrier industry. 
Nor is there evidence that, as a result of the Interim Decision,
 the PUC will fail to regulate the operations of both Young
 Brothers and Pasha, in accordance with HRS Chapter 271G. 
Clearly, future regulation and any new application(s) for a
 Certificate will be governed by the 2011 revisions to the HWCA.
 
We also reject Young Brothers's argument that the PUC
 
erroneously concluded that Pasha was "fit . . . to perform the
 service proposed" pursuant to HRS § 271G-10(c) because Pasha
 failed to carry its burden of proof with respect to the fitness
 requirement. The record includes, inter alia, the Consumer
 Advocate's statement that Pasha was "fit, willing, and able to
 perform its proposed service" because Pasha "currently provides
 very similar interstate water carrier service to the same ports
 as its proposed intrastate service, and appears to have
 sufficient financial resources to sustain its operations for the
 near future." 
We also reject the arguments made by Young Brothers and
 
the Consumer Advocate that the PUC improperly shifted the burden
 of proof from Pasha to them regarding harm to Young Brothers
 resulting from the issuance of a Certificate to Pasha. Pasha, as
 the applicant for a Certificate, bears the burden of establishing
 that the "proposed operation not only will be of beneficial value
 to the community, but also is a necessity." Charley's Tour, 55
 
Haw. at 469, 522 P.2d at 1277. However, if alleged, competing
 carriers shall be "permitted to testify on the adverse effect to
 their operations of the proposed services." Id. at 469, 522 P.2d
 
at 1277., 
[i]t is a general doctrine of evidence that where the facts
with regard to an issue lie peculiarly in the knowledge of
one party and where it would be particularly onerous to
force the other party to bear the proof of the negative, the
burden of proving the issue lies with the knowledgeable
party. 
Trans-Am. Van Serv., Inc. v. U.S., 421 F. Supp. 308, 331 (N.D.
 
16
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Tex. 1976) (citing McCormick on Evidence, § 337 (2d ed. 1972)).
 
Because Young Brothers is proffering the argument that Pasha's
 operation would be harmful to its business, and is in the best
 position to present credible evidence on this point, Young
 Brothers bears the burden of bringing forth evidence to support
 its argument. By requiring Young Brothers to support its
 assertion of harm as a result of Pasha's services, the PUC did
 not erroneously shift the ultimate burden of proving the elements
 required for the Certificate approval under HRS § 271G-10 from
 Pasha to Young Brothers.
 
We also reject Young Brothers's contention that the PUC
 
misinterpreted information and opinions submitted by Young
 Brothers in a prior rate-setting case. The PUC considered and
 weighed the evidence and arguments made by Young Brothers on this
 point and retained the authority to revoke Pasha's Certificate
 during the interim period of operation approved in the
 Certificate. We cannot conclude that the PUC clearly erred in
 its weighing of this evidence or abused its discretion in its
 method of addressing Young Brothers's concerns.
 
Finally, as we have concluded that the PUC did not
 
clearly err in its factual findings, and did not abuse the
 discretion granted to it under HRS chapters 269 and 271G, we
 reject the argument that the PUC erroneously replaced existing
 legislative policy and statutory standards with its own standards
 for entry into the regulated water carrier market. 
C. Young Brothers's Motion to Compel
 As acknowledged by Young Brothers, the PUC's decision 
to deny Young Brothers's motion to compel is reviewed for an abuse of discretion. "While PUC decisions are not presumptively valid, . . . an agency's discretionary determinations are entitled to deference, and an appellant has a high burden to surmount that deference." In re Molokai Pub. Utilities, Inc., 
127 Hawai' i 234, 236, 277 P.3d 328, 330 (App. 2012) (citations 
and brackets omitted). 
On December 4, 2009, Young Brothers filed a motion to
 
compel Pasha to provide responses to certain information requests
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
previously issued by Young Brothers to Pasha. Young Brothers had
 
previously posed three separate sets of information requests to
 Pasha on September 4, 2009, September 25, 2009, and on September
 30, 2009. Pasha responded to each of them. However, in
 accordance with a protective order issued by the PUC, Pasha did
 not answer certain questions that fell under the classification
 of the confidential, protected information. As explained by PUC
 in the protective order, any information in good faith believed
 to "contain trade secrets or other confidential research,
 development, commercial, financial, vendor, or bid information,
 including but not limited to cost support studies" shall be kept
 confidential from "non-qualified person[s]." Because Young
 Brothers was found not to be a qualified person, Young Brothers
 was not privy to this information. Specifically, the PUC stated
 that Young Brothers was permitted to intervene for the sole
 purpose of providing "evidence regarding the state of the inter­island shipping market to assist the commission in developing a
 sound record in this proceeding." In the PUC's Order Granting
 the Intervention, the PUC "cautioned [Young Brothers] that its
 involvement as an intervenor in this docket [is] limited to the
 issues raised in this docket."
 
Young Brothers argued that the information it sought
 
should not be designated as confidential and that, even if the
 information was found to be confidential, it should nevertheless
 be disclosed to Young Brothers under a protective order, because
 Young Brothers has a substantial need for the information in
 order to assist the PUC in examining the state of the inter­island shipping market and the potential impacts of Pasha's
 proposed service overall.
 
In its Order Denying Young Brothers's Motion to Compel,
 
the PUC explained that the information requested by Young
 Brothers is "not directly relevant to the specific issues with
 which Young Brothers, as intervenor, is concerned." Young
 Brothers attempted to request types of cargo handling equipment
 and labor force that Pasha proposes to use to load and unload its
 cargo, as well as the frequency and volume of cargo loaded and
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unloaded at Grays Harbor and whether such service has ever 
affected Pasha's inter-state service between San Diego and Hawai'i. The PUC found, however, that the information requested 
was not relevant to Young Brothers's role as an intervenor in determining the state of the inter-island shipping market. Finally, the PUC found that Young Brothers was fully capable of assisting the PUC without the requested information, as shown by Young Brothers's submission of its SOP and supplemental discovery responses addressing the issue of potential impacts. 
The reasons set forth by the PUC in denying Young
 
Brothers's Motion to Compel appear to be just and reasonable, and
 not arbitrary or capricious. Young Brothers's position as
 intervenor was specifically limited to assisting the PUC in
 developing information regarding the inter-island shipping
 market, which rested largely on evidence related to Young
 Brothers's own intrastate operations. Furthermore, as the PUC
 noted, there are important policy considerations for precluding a
 party from gaining access to its competitor's confidential
 business information by taking advantage of its position as an
 intervenor in the case before the PUC. Therefore, the PUC did
 not abuse its discretion in denying Young Brothers's Motion to
 Compel.
 
19
                                                     NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
V.	 CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the PUC's September 20, 2010 Interim
 
Decision is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 10, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Craig I. Nakanishi
Tracy G. ChinenErin H. Yoda (RUSH MOORE LLP)for Appellant/Cross-AppelleeYOUNG BROTHERS, LIMITED Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge 
Jon S. Itomura 
Lane H. Tsuchiyamafor Cross-AppellantDIVISION OF CONSUMER ADVOCACY DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND CONSUMER AFFAIRS Associate Judge 
Bonita Y.M. Changfor Appellee/Cross-AppelleeSTATE OF HAWAI' I, PUBLIC
UTILITIES COMMISSION 
Clifford K. HigaBruce Nakamura Anthony F. Suetsugu(KOBAYASHI SUGITA & GODA)for Appellee/Cross-AppelleePASHA HAWAII TRANSPORT LINES LLC 
20
 