NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000202
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
PATRICK KEKOA PALMER, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
HENRIANN PUUALOHA PALMER, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 03-1-0051K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
This appeal arises out of a motion for post-decree
 
relief for the enforcement of a December 8, 2010 order enforcing
 
the payment of post-high school education expenses, which
 resulted from the divorce of Plaintiff-Appellant Patrick Kekoa
 Palmer (Father) and Defendant-Appellee Henriann Puualoha Palmer
 
(Mother). Father appeals from the January 4, 2013 "Order Re:
 
Defendant Henriann Puualohba [sic] Palmer's Motion for Post-
Decree Relief," entered in the Family Court of the Third Circuit
1
 
(family court). 
On appeal, Father contends the family court abused its
 
discretion when it ordered him to pay both child support, which
 includes the cost of food and shelter, and the room and board
 portion of Child 2's education expenses.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
1
 The Honorable Aley K. Auna, Jr. presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude Father's
 
appeal is without merit. 
On April 10, 2012, the family court entered the "Order
 
After Hearing on March 7, 2012" (April 10, 2012 Order), which
 
states that "[o]n or before the first day of each calendar month
 
[Father] shall pay child support in the amount of $493.33
 directly to [Child 2] . . . ." At this time Child 2 was
 attending college full time. The April 10, 2012 Order did not
 specify that child support payments were for or in lieu of post-
high school education expenses.
 
On December 8, 2010, the family court entered the order
 
Re: Defendant's Motion and Affidavit for Post-Decree Relief Filed
 August 16, 2010" (December 8, 2010 Order), which states that
 
"Father shall pay half of all post-High School education
 
expenses[,]" and does not state that the post-high school
 education expenses is a substitute for child support as suggested
 by Father. Education expenses were "defined to include tuition,
 room and board, books and fees."
 
Father contends the family court erred in requiring him
 
to continue to pay child support because the family court's
 orders "did not require that the child support continue after the
 child reached the age of majority or graduation from high school,
 [and therefore] . . . child support terminated when the child
 graduated from high school."
 
With regard to child support enforcement, an
 
"administrative order shall remain in effect until superseded by
 a subsequent court or administrative order." Hawaii Revised
 Statutes 576E-12(c) (2006 Repl.). An "Administrative Findings
 and Order" dated June 23, 2010 (June 23, 2010 Administrative
 
Order) and issued by the Office of Child Support Hearings of the
 
Department of the Attorney General states, 
Responsible Parent shall pay child support . . . . Support
shall remain in effect until the subject child is/are age 18,
or age 23 provided said child is in high school, or enrolled
as a full-time student or has been accepted into and plans to
attend as a full-time student for the next semester to an
 accredited educational or vocational institution.
 
Additionally, the April 10, 2012 Order, which allowed
 
Father to pay child support directly to the adult child states
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that "[a]ny and all prior orders of the court and the [Child
 
Support Enforcement Agency] not amended or modified herein shall
 remain in full force and effect." This would include the
 December 8, 2010 Order stating that Father shall pay half of
 Child 2's post-high school education expenses, "including
 tuition, room and board, books and fees."
 
Contrary to Father's contention, the June 23, 2010
 
Administrative Order provided for child support past the age of
 majority or graduation from high school, if the child was or
 intended to become a full-time student at an accredited
 educational or vocational institution. This was in addition to
 the education expenses which father was also ordered to pay.
 
The family court did not abuse its discretion when it
 
granted Mother's post-decree motion to enforce its December 8,
 2010 Order concerning Child 2's education expenses. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the January 4, 2013 "Order
 
Re: Defendant Henriann Puualohba [sic] Palmer's Motion for Post-
Decree Relief," entered by the Family Court of the Third Circuit
 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 20, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Gerald W. Scatena 
for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Joanna Sokolow (Legal Aid Society of Hawai
'i)
for Defendant-Appellee. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge

 
3
 