NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-16-0000667 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I  
ALEXANDER & BALDWIN, LLC, a Hawaii limited liability company,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
NELSON ARMITAGE; WAYNE ARMITAGE; FREDERICK TORRES-PESTANA
aka RIKI TORRES-PESTANA; KINGDOM OF HAWAI# I, also known as
REINSTATED LAWFUL HAWAIIAN GOVERNMENT, also known as
LAWFUL HAWAIIAN GOVERNMENT, also known as REINSTATED HAWAIIAN
GOVERNMENT, also known as REINSTATED HAWAIIAN NATION, also known
as REINSTATED HAWAIIAN KINGDOM, an unincorporated association;
Defendants-Appellants,
and 
ROBERT ARMITAGE aka BOBBY ARMITAGE; JAMES AKAHI also known as
AKAHI NUI aka MAJESTY AKAHI NUI aka JAMES AKAHI NUI aka ROYAL 
MAJESTY AKAHI NUI, Executor/Trustee of the Kingdom of Hawaii
Nation Ministry Trust; KINGDOM OF HAWAI# I NATION MINISTRY TRUST,
also known as KINGDOM OF HAWAII, an unincorporated association,
Defendants-Appellees,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-20, JANE DOES 1-20,
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-20, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-20,
DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-20, and DOE ENTITIES 1-20,
Defendants 
A
PPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-1065) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Chan and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
In this appeal arising out of an alleged trespass to
land, Defendant-Appellant Nelson Armitage appeals from the 
Amended Final Judgment entered in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Alexander & Baldwin, LLC, a Hawai# i Limited Liability Company 
(A&B) on September 16, 2016, in the Circuit Court of the Second 
Circuit (circuit court).1 
On appeal, Nelson Armitage raises the following points 
of error: (1) Judge Loo erred when she failed to "certify 
familiarity" with the underlying action in accordance with 
Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 63 (2000) and held a 
hearing despite having a conflict of interest in the matter; (2) Judge Loo abused her discretion when she granted A&B's request 
for an injunction after recusing herself; (3) Judge Loo erred in 
issuing a favorable ruling for A&B despite having a conflict of 
interest in the matter; (4) Judge Cardoza erred when he failed to 
"certify familiarity" with the underlying action in accordance 
with HRCP Rule 63 prior to accepting the case; (5) Judge Cardoza 
abused his discretion when he prevented Nelson Armitage from 
challenging the validity of A&B's evidence regarding ownership of 
the contested parcel; and (6) Judge Cardoza erred in granting 
A&B's motion for summary judgment because A&B failed to meet its 
burden of proof regarding ownership. 
As a preliminary matter, we note that the notice of 
appeal purports to assert an appeal on behalf of Defendants-
Appellants Nelson Armitage; Wayne Armitage; Frederick Torres-
Pestana aka Riki Torres-Pestana; and Kingdom of Hawai# i, also 
known as Reinstated Lawful Hawaiian Government, also known as Lawful Hawaiian Government, also known as Reinstated Hawaiian 
Government, also known as Reinstated Hawaiian Nation, also known 
as Reinstated Hawaiian Kingdom, an unincorporated association 
(Reinstated Hawaiian Nation). Wayne Armitage and Frederick 
Torres-Pestana signed the notice of appeal on their own behalf as 
pro se
 defendants. Nelson Armitage signed the notice of appeal 
1 This case was initially presided over by the Honorable Peter T.
Cahill (Judge Cahill) who recused himself on June 10, 2014. The Honorable 
Rhonda I.L. Loo (Judge Loo) then presided over this case until her recusal onSeptember 2, 2014. The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza (Judge Cardoza) presidedfor the remainder of the case, including the Amended Final Judgment. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
both on his own behalf as a defendant pro se and also as "Foreign 
Minister." Non-Party/Appellant Henry Noa signed the notice of 
appeal as "Prime Minister" purportedly representing Reinstated 
Hawaiian Nation. Neither Nelson Armitage nor Henry Noa is 
licensed to practice law in the State of Hawai# i. Under HRS ยง 
605-2 (2016) and ยง 605-14 (2016), persons who are not licensed to practice law in Hawai
#i "are not permitted to act as 'attorneys' 
and represent other natural persons in their causes." Oahu 
Plumbing & Sheet Metal, Ltd. v. Kona Constr., Inc.
, 60 Haw. 372, 
377, 590 P.2d 570, 573 (1979) (emphasis in original). "By the same token, non-attorney agents are not allowed to represent 
corporations in litigation, for a wholly unintended exception to 
the rules against unauthorized practice of law would otherwise 
result." Id. at 377, 590 P.2d at 574. The same rules apply to 
unincorporated entities, such as Reinstated Hawaiian Nation. See 
Free Church of Tonga-Kona v. Ekalesia Ho# ole Pope O Kekaha, No. 
CAAP-19-0000005, 2019 WL 2285359, at *2 (Haw. App. May 28, 2019) (SDO). Therefore, neither Nelson Armitage nor Henry Noa was 
entitled to assert an appeal on behalf of Reinstated Hawaiian 
Nation. Accordingly, the notice of appeal is not valid with 
respect to Reinstated Hawaiian Nation, and Reinstated Hawaiian 
Nation is not a party to this appeal. 
Moreover, the amended opening brief, like the initial 
opening brief, was purportedly filed on behalf of Reinstated 
Hawaiian Nation, Nelson Armitage, Wayne Armitage, Robert 
Armitage, and Frederick Torres-Pestana. However, the amended 
opening brief was only signed by Henry Noa, purportedly 
representing Reinstated Hawaiian Nation, and Nelson Armitage, on 
his own behalf and also as "Minister of Foreign Affairs" 
purportedly representing Reinstated Hawaiian Nation. Neither 
Wayne Armitage, nor Robert Armitage, nor Fredrick Torres-Pestana 
signed the brief. Henry Noa is not a party in this case. 
Furthermore, as stated above, neither Henry Noa nor Nelson 
Armitage is authorized to represent any other person or entity in 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
this appeal. Thus, Nelson Armitage (Armitage) is the only 
appellant. 
(1) Armitage's first contention on appeal is that: (A) 
Judge Loo committed reversible error when she failed to "certify 
familiarity" with the underlying action in accordance with HRCP 
Rule 63 before granting A&B's August 27, 2014, Ex Parte Motion 
for a Temporary Restraining Order (Motion for TRO) and taking any 
other actions in the case, and (B) Judge Loo had a conflict of 
interest at the time she granted the temporary restraining order. 
(A) Armitage first contends that Judge Loo was required
to formally and explicitly "certify familiarity" with the case, 
per HRCP Rule 63, before taking any action in the case.  
HRCP Rule 63 covers situations where a judge takes over
a case for a prior judge during a trial or hearing, providing 
specifically that:  
If a trial or hearing has been commenced and the judge is
unable to proceed, any other judge may proceed with it uponcertifying familiarity with the record and determining thatthe proceedings in the case may be completed withoutprejudice to the parties. In a hearing or trial without ajury, the successor judge shall at the request of a partyrecall any witness whose testimony is material and disputedand who is available to testify again without undue burden.The successor judge may also recall any other witness. 
HRCP Rule 63 was amended in 1999 to more closely track the 
language of Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (FRCP) Rule 63 
(2007). While no Hawai# i cases have addressed the modern version 
of the rule, the Hawai
#i Supreme Court has held that where an 
HRCP Rule was "patterned . . . after an equivalent rule within 
the FRCP, interpretations of the rule by the federal courts are 
deemed to be highly persuasive." Kawamata Farms, Inc. v. United 
Agri Prods., 86 Hawai# i 214, 251-52, 948 P.2d 1055, 1092-93 
(1997) (internal quotations marks omitted). 
In Canseco v. U.S., 97 F.3d 1224, 1227 (9th Cir. 1996), 
the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit held 
that a successor judge was required to certify familiarity with 
the record before deciding a motion for new trial following a 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 judgment entered by the previous judge after a bench trial. The 
Ninth Circuit explained: 
To certify her familiarity with the record, the successor
district judge will have to read and consider all relevantportions of the record. If, by reviewing the record, thejudge determines there is sufficient evidence to support thefindings actually made, or to support other necessaryfindings, and such evidence does not depend upon thetestimony of a witness whose credibility is in question, shemay conclude that the findings are supported by theevidence, or make the necessary findings, and deny themotion for a new trial, insofar as the motion challenges thesufficiency of the evidence. In the event the sufficiencyof the evidence depends upon the credibility of a witnesswhose credibility is in question, and that credibilitycannot be determined from the record, the successor judgewill have to recall the witness, if the witness is availablewithout undue burden, and make her own credibilitydetermination. 
Id. (footnote omitted). The Ninth Circuit also noted that, in 
contrast, "[t]o certify familiarity with the record as a 
prerequisite to ruling on a new trial motion which challenges the 
district court's interpretation and application of the law, the 
successor judge's review of the record would likely be less 
extensive." Id. at 1227 n.2. Thus, a successor judge need only 
certify his or her familiarity with the portions of the record that are relevant to the issue before him or her. Further, a 
successor judge's certification need not be express; evidence 
demonstrating that the successor judge became familiar with the 
relevant portions of the record is sufficient. Mergentime Corp. 
v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 166 F.3d 1257, 1265 (D.C. Cir. 1999). 
In the present case, Judge Loo's order granting A&B's 
Motion for TRO, while not expressly citing HRCP Rule 63, stated 
that Judge Loo "considered the entire record on file in the 
above-entitled matter." Accordingly, and in consonance with the 
persuasive federal authority cited above, Judge Loo was not 
required to explicitly certify familiarity with the case before 
ruling on A&B's Motion for TRO. Regardless, the record reflects 
that Judge Loo did in fact consider all relevant portions of the 
record. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(B) Armitage contends that Judge Loo committed 
reversible error in granting the Motion for TRO despite her 
conflict of interest. Judge Loo entered the Temporary 
Restraining Order on August 27, 2014. Judge Loo informed the 
parties of her conflict of interest at a status conference held 
on August 29, 2014. Thereafter, on September 2, 2014, Judge Loo 
entered an order disqualifying herself from further presiding in 
the case, due to her ownership of A&B stock, pursuant to HRS ยง 
601-7. We note that disqualification due to a fully-disclosed 
pecuniary interest may be waived by parties, but there was no 
waiver in this case. See HRS ยง 601-7(a) (2016). More 
importantly, however, Judge Cardoza conducted new, full 
evidentiary hearings on, inter alia, the issue of injunctive 
relief, making clear that it was A&B's burden to prove that the 
previously-issued form of temporary injunctive relief should 
remain in place, as well as A&B's burden to prove that it was 
entitled to further injunctive relief. See Fujimoto v. Au, 95 
Hawai# i 116, 164, 19 P.3d 699, 747 (2001) ("[D]ue process is 
flexible and calls for such procedural protections as the 
particular situation demands. 
The basic elements of procedural 
due process of law require notice and an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner." (internal 
citations omitted) (quoting Bank of Hawai# i v. Kunimoto, 91 
Hawai# i 372, 388, 984 P.2d 1198, 1214 (1999))). Accordingly, we 
conclude that Judge Loo's temporary restraining order, which by 
its own terms expired no later than ten (10) days after its 
entry, did not adversely affect Armitage's substantial rights and 
did not constitute reversible error. 
(2) Armitage contends that Judge Loo abused her 
discretion when she granted A&B's request for an injunction after 
recusing herself due to a conflict of interest. 
Judge Loo held 
no hearing and made no ruling after she disqualified herself from presiding in this case. Thus, Armitage's contention is without 
merit. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) Armitage contends that Judge Loo erred in entering 
a ruling favorable to A&B despite her pecuniary interest in A&B. 
As discussed above, we conclude that Judge Loo's pre-
disqualification rulings did not adversely affect Armitage's 
substantial rights and did not constitute reversible error. 
(4) Armitage contends that Judge Cardoza committed 
reversible error when he failed to "certify familiarity" with the 
underlying action in accordance with HRCP Rule 63 before 
accepting the assignment. This contention is also without merit. 
The case was assigned to Judge Cardoza on September 2, 
2014. At the first hearing before Judge Cardoza, which was held 
on September 5, 2014, the judge made clear that he would not 
consider any prior testimony and that A&B had the burden to 
present testimony to him -- even if it had been previously 
presented to another judge -- that demonstrated A&B's entitlement 
to relief. Judge Cardoza subsequently conducted numerous 
hearings to allow both sides to newly present their witnesses and 
arguments. Thus, Judge Cardoza did not render a decision or 
enter judgment based on testimony presented to a predecessor 
judge. Accordingly, we conclude that Judge Cardoza did not 
violate HRCP Rule 63. 
(5) Armitage contends that the circuit court abused its 
discretion when it refused to allow Armitage to challenge the 
validity of A&B's evidence regarding the ownership of Royal 
Patent Grant 165. Armitage appears to contend that, during the 
September 5, 2014 morning evidentiary hearing, the circuit court 
erred in refusing to allow Armitage to testify about the 
existence of Royal Patent Grant 165 while Armitage was cross-
examining A&B's witness and in refusing to grant Armitage's 
corresponding oral motion to dismiss the case (brought during the 
same cross-examination). 
Preliminary injunctions generally require an 
evidentiary hearing (and the evidence presented becomes part of 
any future trial record) and the evidence presented in that 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hearing is distinct from any arguments the parties make about how 
the court should view or interpret those facts. See HRCP Rule 
65(a).2 Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 611 (2016) vests 
discretion in the trial court to control the conduct of the 
proceedings before it, including "the mode and order of 
interrogating witnesses and presenting evidence." This is 
consonant with the court's "inherent equity, supervisory, and 
administrative powers as well as inherent power to control the 
litigation process before them." Doe v. Doe, 98 Hawai# i 144, 
154-55, 44 P.3d 1085, 1095-96 (2002) (quoting Richardson v. Sport Shinko (Waikiki Corp.), 76 Hawai# i 494, 507, 880 P.2d 169, 182 
(1994)). 
At the September 5, 2014 hearing, throughout Armitage's 
cross-examination of A&B's first witness, including during the discussion of Royal Patent Grant 165, the circuit court 
repeatedly reminded Armitage to limit himself to asking questions 
instead of making arguments. Armitage argued that he could not 
ask questions without providing the court with additional context 
and rested. 
On September 19, 2014, when it was Armitage's turn to 
present evidence, Armitage requested additional time to prepare. 
The hearing was continued to September 22, 2014, when Armitage 
2 HRCP Rule 65(a) provides:
 (a) Preliminary injunction. 
(1) NOTICE. No preliminary injunction shall be issued
without notice to the adverse party. 
(2) CONSOLIDATION OF HEARING WITH TRIAL ON MERITS.
Before or after the commencement of the hearing of anapplication for a preliminary injunction, the courtmay order the trial of the action on the merits to beadvanced and consolidated with the hearing of theapplication. Even when this consolidation is notordered, any evidence received upon an application fora preliminary injunction which would be admissibleupon the trial on the merits becomes part of therecord on the trial and need not be repeated upon thetrial. This subdivision (a) (2) shall be so construedand applied as to save to the parties any rights theymay have to trial by jury. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
again requested additional time to prepare, and the circuit court 
granted a four-week extension. When the hearing reconvened on 
October 27, 2014, the circuit court again informed Armitage that 
it was time to present evidence and that there would be time to 
present arguments. Armitage did not call any witnesses or 
introduce any exhibits and rested the case. The circuit court 
then heard oral closing arguments from both parties and accepted 
written versions of closing arguments from both parties. 
On this record, we conclude that the circuit court did 
not refuse to allow Armitage to challenge the validity of A&B's 
evidence regarding the ownership of Royal Patent Grant 165. 
(6) Armitage contends that the circuit court committed 
reversible error when it granted A&B's motion for summary 
judgment because A&B failed to meet its burden of proof regarding 
ownership of the contested properties. Specifically, Armitage 
appears to contend that A&B attempted to purposefully deceive the 
court when it submitted a copy of a document entitled "Royal 
Patent No. 165" as proof that its chain of title began with 
"Royal Patent Grant No. 165" and thus committed fraud upon the 
court. Armitage argues that A&B did not establish title 
sufficiently to merit summary judgment because A&B did not enter 
into evidence a copy of a "Royal Patent Grant No. 165," on which 
its claim is purportedly based. Armitage also claims his own 
right to "Royal Patent No. 165" is superior to that of A&B. 
We review 
the circuit court's grant or denial of summary judgment  de 
novo . Accordingly, on appeal, an order of summary judgment
is reviewed under the same standard applied by the circuit
courts. Summary judgment is proper where the moving partydemonstrates that there are no genuine issues of materialfact and it is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.In other words, summary judgment is appropriate if thepleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, andadmissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any,show that there is no genuine issue of material fact and themoving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. 
Kawashima v. State, 140 Hawai# i 139, 148, 398 P.3d 728, 737 
(2017) (block quote format altered) (internal quotation marks, 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
brackets, and citations omitted). In reviewing a circuit court's 
grant or denial of a motion for summary judgment, the appellate 
court "must view all of the evidence and the inferences drawn 
therefrom in the light most favorable to the party opposing the 
motion." Crichfield v. Grand Wailea Co., 93 Hawai# i 477, 483, 6 
P.3d 349, 355 (2000) (internal quotation marks, brackets, and citation omitted). 
"Where the title is the issue in an action of trespass 
it becomes similar to the action of ejectment, and the burden is 
upon the plaintiff to prove his title." Mew Kung Tung v. Wong Ka 
Mau, 8 Haw. 557, 559 (Haw. Prov. Gov. 1893). Thus, to be entitled to summary judgment, A&B was required to affirmatively 
show that there was no genuine issue of material fact as to A&B's 
title to the land. 
To establish legally cognizable private title to land in the
great majority of cases, one must show that he or apredecessor-in-interest acquired a Land Commission Award, aRoyal Patent, a Kamehameha Deed, a Grant, a Royal PatentGrant, or other government grant for the land in question.Thurston v. Bishop, 7 Haw. 421 (1888); In re Title of PaPelekane, 21 Haw. 175 (1912). Such award or grant can bedemonstrated by either the document itself or through theapplication of the "presumption of a lost grant." In re 
Title of Kioloku, 25 Haw. 357 (1920); United States v.Fullard-Leo, 331 U.S. 256, 67 S.Ct. 1287, 91 L.Ed. 1474(1947). 
State v. Zimring, 58 Haw. 106, 114, 566 P.2d 725, 731 (1977). 
Throughout these proceedings, A&B described its claim 
of ownership as based on "Royal Patent Grant No. 165." In that 
regard, A&B submitted title reports and visual aids tracing the 
history of "Royal Patent Grant No. 165" and adduced expert 
witness testimony on the history of "Royal Patent Grant No. 165." 
However, none of the documents A&B submitted into evidence 
expressly refer to a document entitled "Royal Patent Grant No. 
165." Rather, A&B appears to reference a document entitled 
"Royal Patent No. 165," which was submitted by A&B as Exhibit P-
41. 
Armitage appears to challenge A&B's submission of the 
document entitled "Royal Patent No. 165" as evidence of the 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
purported "Royal Patent Grant No. 165." We thus examine the 
distinction between a "Royal Patent" and a "Royal Patent Grant" 
in the context of the history of Hawaii's land system. 
Under the traditional ancient Hawaiian land system, 
islands were divided into tracts called ahupua# a, some of which 
were further divided into subdivisions called # ili
. Territory v. 
Bishop Trust Co., 41 Haw. 358, 361-62 (Haw. Terr. 1956). The 
#ili
 were administered by konohiki, the agent to the superior 
chief holding the ahupua
#a. Jon J. Chinen, The Great Mahele: 
Hawaii's Land Division of 1848 4 (1958). 
Responding to pressure exerted by foreign residents who
sought fee title to land, and goaded by the recognition thatthe traditional system could not long endure, KingKamehameha III undertook a reformation of the traditional system of land tenure by instituting a regime of privatetitle in the 1840's. In adopting a system under whichindividuals could hold title to land, the public domain,which theretofore had been all-encompassing, necessarily wasdiminished. 
State v. Zimring, 58 Haw. 106, 111, 566 P.2d 725, 729 (1977). 
In 1845, the Board of Commissioners to Quiet Land Title 
(Land Commission) was established "to investigate and settle all 
land claims of private individuals, whether native or foreign." 
Omerod v. Heirs of Kaheananui, 116 Hawai# i 239, 247, 172 P.3d 
983, 991 (2007) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Makila Land Co., LLC v. Kapu, 114 Hawai# i 56, 58, 156 P.3d 482, 
484 (App. 2006)). The Land Commission was given the power to issue Land Commission Awards upon confirmation of a claim. 
Zimring
, 58 Haw. at 111, 566 P.2d at 730. "Except for the 
government's right of commutation, a Land Commission Award gave complete title to the lands confirmed." 
Chinen, supra, at 13. 
The Minister of Interior was authorized to issue "Royal Patents" upon the issuance of a Land Commission Award and payment of 
commutation by the awardee to the government. Zimring, 58 Haw. 
at 111, 566 P.2d at 730. A "Royal Patent" issued upon a Land Commission Award was essentially a quitclaim of the government's 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interest in the land and did not confer or confirm title. Mist
v. Kawelo, 11 Haw. 587, 589 (Haw. Terr. 1898).  
"In 1847, the King together with the Privy Council 
determined that a land mahele, or division was necessary for the 
prosperity of the Kingdom." Zimring, 58 Haw. at 112, 566 P.2d at 
730. The Great Mahele began in 1848. Id. During the Great 
Mahele, the King entered into reciprocal quitclaim agreements 
with chiefs and konohiki to settle their interests in the lands. 
Id. The agreements did not convey title and chiefs and konohiki 
were still required to present claims to the Land Commission for formal Land Commission Awards and to obtain a Royal Patent by the 
Minister of Interior. Id.; Chinen, supra, at 21. 
After the Mahele agreements were completed, King 
Kamehameha III further divided the remaining lands between the 
King and the Government. Zimring, 58 Haw. at 112, 566 P.2d at 
730. The King designated a portion for himself and his heirs, 
which became known as "Crown Lands." Id. at 113, 566 P.2d at 
730. The other portion was given "to the chiefs and people," 
which became known as "Government Lands." Chinen, supra, at 26. 
Following the division of the lands into Crown, Government,
and Konohiki Lands, from time to time portions of theGovernment Lands were sold as a means of obtaining revenueto meet the increasing costs of the Government. Purchasers of these lands were issued documents called "Grants" or "Royal Patent Grants." These differed from the RoyalPatents issued upon Land Commission Awards. It was not necessary for the recipients of the Royal Patent Grants toobtain an award for their land from the Land Commission. 
Id. at 27, 29. 
In this case, Exhibit P-41 provides: 
Kamehameha III, By the grace of God, King of the HawaiianIslands, by this his Royal Patent, makes known unto all men,that he has for himself and his successors in office, thisday granted and given, absolutely, in Fee Simple unto M.Kekuanaoa [as guardian of Victoria Kamamalu], his faithfuland loyally disposed subject for the consideration of OneDollar, paid into the Royal Exchequer, all that certainpiece of Land, situated at Haiku, in the Island of Maui. . . Containing 567 Acres, more or less: excepting andreserving to the Hawaiian Government, all mineral ormetallic Mines of every description.
To have and to hold the above granted Land in Fee
Simple, unto the said M. Kekuanaoa, his Hawaiian Heirs and 
12           
          
             
           
              
               
               
            
        
             
            
        NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Assigns forever, subject to the taxes to be from time to
time imposed by the Legislative Council equally, upon alllanded Property held in Fee Simple. 
(Emphases added.) By its terms, the document is a "Grant" or 
"Royal Patent Grant" obtained through purchase of government 
lands. Exhibit P-41 contains no reference to the Land Commission 
nor any confirmation or award by the Land Commission. Despite 
its title, the document is not a "Royal Patent" issued upon Land 
Commission Awards.3 Armitage's challenge to A&B's reliance on 
Exhibit P-41 as evidence of "Royal Patent Grant No. 165" is therefore without merit. 
Furthermore, A&B additionally submitted various deeds 
and conveyances establishing an unbroken chain of title. On this 
record, we conclude that A&B established prima facie evidence 
that it holds title to the subject property originating from 
"Royal Patent Grant No. 165," and Armitage presented no evidence 
to the contrary. 
Armitage also contends that his own right to "Royal 
Patent Grant No. 165" is superior to that of A&B and sufficient 
to defeat the motion for summary judgment. Specifically, 
Armitage contends that the heirs of the original patentee have 
superior title to A&B.
4 
Armitage states that a Royal Patent Grant issued, as 
here, to the patentee and their "Heirs and Assigns forever, . . . 
in Fee Simple" is a tenancy-in-common and thus its alienability 
is limited to the granting of life estates--ownership reverting 
3 In his book, The Great Mahele: Hawaii's Land Division of 1848 ,
Chinen discusses both the issuance of "Royal Patents" upon Land Commission
Awards, Chinen, supra , at 8-24, as well as the issuance of "Royal Patent Grants"
for the sale of government lands, clarifying the difference between the twodocuments, id. at 27-29. In doing so, Chinen included a photocopy image of an 
example of each document. Id. at 22, 28. Notably, the example of the "Royal
Patent Grant" is entitled "Royal Patent" at the top of the document. Id. at 28. 
Furthermore, the language contained in the example of the "Royal Patent Grant" isidentical to the language in Exhibit P-41. Id. 
4 We note that Armitage does not argue that he is an heir to the
original patentee. Rather, he argues that the subject property is land thatbelongs to Native Hawaiians and the Kingdom of 
Hawai #i. 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to the heirs of the original patentee at the end of the life 
estate. Thus, Armitage contends, the initial deeds granted by 
the original patentee only conveyed a life estate, and ownership 
of the contested parcels returned to the heirs of the original 
patentee, instead of the chain of title continuing to A&B. 
This contention is without merit. Armitage, relying on 
Wailuku Sugar Co. v. Parke, 4 Haw. 89, 92 (Haw. Kingdom 1877),5 
is correct that a party with a life estate interest in a property may only transfer up to a life estate interest in that property 
to another party, and the transferor may not transfer a fee 
simple interest in the property to another party because the 
transferor does not own a fee simple interest in the property. 
However, as held by the Supreme Court of the Kingdom of Hawai# i, 
"[i]t was clearly the intention of the King and Government in the use of the word 'heirs' in royal patents to give an estate in fee 
simple to the patentee, and it was introduced to define the 
character of the estate in the patentee." Thurston v. Allen, 8 
Haw. 392, 402 (Haw. Kingdom 1892); see generally Omerod, 116 Hawai# i at 246-48, 172 P.3d at 990-92. Thurston distinguished 
this meaning of the language in a Royal Patent from similar language in a will where there was a manifestly different 
intention: constructing the phrase "to A and his heirs" to mean 
granting of only a life estate to A, and upon A's death, a fee 
simple estate in A's heirs, if that were the testator's intention 
in forming the will. See Thurston, 8 Haw. at 399-402. Thus, 
Royal Patent Grant No. 165, under both Hawaiian Kingdom Law and modern jurisprudence, through the language "Heirs and Assigns 
5 To the extent that Armitage's argument relies on Hawaiian Kingdom
Law and an assertion that the circuit court does not have jurisdiction in this
matter, "[t]his court has repeatedly held that claims involving theapplicability of the Kingdom of 
Hawai #i laws are without merit." State ex 
rel. Dep't. of Hawaiian Home Lands v. Kawa #auhau
, No. CAAP-12-0000364, 2012 WL
5971176, at *1 (Haw. App. Nov. 29, 2012) (SDO). "The sovereignty of the Stateand its lawful jurisdiction over the inhabitants of the State is a matter oflaw that is well-established." State v. Kaluau, No. 30460, 2011 WL 3805761,
at *1 (Haw. App. Aug. 29, 2011) (SDO) (citing State v. Fergerstrom
, 106
Hawai #i 43, 55, 101 P.3d 652, 664 (App. 2004)). 
14           
           
           
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
forever, . . . in Fee Simple," created an alienable, fee simple 
estate in the patentee, M. Kekuanaoa, as guardian of Victoria 
Kamamalu. 
Armitage does not raise a genuine issue of material 
fact and the circuit court properly granted summary judgment in 
favor of A&B.6 
Based on the foregoing, the September 16, 2016 Amended 
Final Judgment filed in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit 
is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 12, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
Nelson Armitage,
Defendant-Appellant,Pro Se. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Deborah K. Wright,
Keith D. Kirschbraun,and Douglas R. Wright,(Wright & Kirschbraun),for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
6 We note that Armitage does not challenge on appeal the circuit
court's determination that A&B was entitled to summary judgment because A&B had
demonstrated superior title via adverse possession. We therefore do not reach the issue. 
15 