NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000031
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
BOMBEN-GLEN BALLESTEROS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(Ewa Division)

(CASE NO. 1DTA-15-01301)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Bomben-Glen Ballesteros (Ballesteros) by
 
complaint with operating a vehicle under the influence of an
 intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
1
 ยง 291E-61(a)(1) (2007) (Count 1);  refusal to submit to a
 
breath, blood, or urine test, in violation of HRS ยง 291E-68
 (Supp. 2015) (Count 2); and driving without a license, in
 violation of HRS ยง 286-102 (2007 & Supp. 2014) (Count 3). The
 
1
 HRS ยง 291E-61(a)(1) provides:
 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle
under the influence of an intoxicant if the person operates or
assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
 
(1)	 While under the influence of alcohol in an amount
 sufficient to impair the person's normal mental
faculties or ability to care for the person and guard
against casualty[.]
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State subsequently declined to prosecute Ballesteros on Count 2,
 
which was dismissed, Ballesteros pleaded no contest to Count 3,
 and the case proceeded to trial on Count 1. After a bench trial,
 
2
the District Court of the First Circuit (District Court)  found
Ballesteros guilty as charged of OVUII. The District Court
 
entered its Judgment on December 28, 2015.
 
On appeal, Ballesteros contends that there was

 
insufficient evidence to support his OVUII conviction. We
 
disagree.
 
I.
 
We conclude that when viewed in the light most
 
favorable to the State, there was sufficient evidence to support
 Ballesteros' OVUII conviction. See State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 
248-49, 831 P.2d 924, 931 (1992) (stating the standard of review
 for a sufficiency of the evidence claim). Honolulu Police
 Department Officer Noel Araki (Officer Araki) testified that at
 about 1:40 a.m., he saw Ballesteros driving a van heading
 westbound on Moanalua Freeway. According to Officer Araki,
 Ballesteros was having a difficult time keeping the van within
 its lane, was weaving, went on the right shoulder of the freeway
 where it appeared that he was going to hit the concrete side of
 the overpass, and continued weaving after he passed the overpass. 
Officer Araki testified: 
[I]nitially [Ballesteros] was weaving. And the weaving is
in itself kind of bad, because he was coming outside of his
lane, and then he was driving into the shoulder. And then
 when he came up toward the overpass area, you know, when I
thought he was going to hit it, then he kind of swerved away
from the -- the overpass area or the -- the wall and then
cut back across into the right lane and then one lane over
and then started weaving again, and then he started to weave
into the shoulder again . . . .
 
At that point, Officer Araki signaled Ballesteros to
 
pull over by turning on his flashing lights and chirping his
 
siren. In response, Ballesteros pulled over and came to what
 Officer Araki described as "a very abrupt stop." Upon
 
2The Honorable Alvin K. Nishimura presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
approaching Ballesteros, Officer Araki smelled alcohol coming
 
from Ballesteros' van and noticed that his eyes were red. 
Ballesteros agreed to perform field sobriety tests. When
 Ballesteros exited the van, he kept leaning on the van or other
 objects for balance. During the horizontal gaze nystagmus test,
 Ballesteros swayed with the movement of the stimulus. During
 Officer Araki's instructions on the walk-and-turn test,
 Ballesteros lost his balance and broke his stance three times and
 tried to start early twice. Ballesteros' heal-to-toe was wrong
 and his turn was incorrect. Ballesteros swayed throughout the
 one-leg stand test and he raised his arms instead of keeping them
 at his sides as he was instructed. 
We conclude that Officer Araki's testimony provided
 
substantial evidence to support the District Court's finding that
 Ballesteros was guilty as charged of OUVII.
 
II.
 
In support of his contention that the evidence was
 
insufficient, Ballesteros refers to his own testimony that: (1) 
he swerved on the freeway because he was distracted by his cell
 phone lighting up to notify him of an incoming message; and (2)
 his poor performance on the field sobriety tests was attributable
 to pain from a gout condition. However, the District Court found
 that Ballesteros' testimony was not credible. The District Court
 found Ballesteros' contention that he swerved because his cell
 phone light went off to be "highly incredible[,]" stating: "You
 know, you just don't swerve like that because your cell phone
 goes off. And if -- and if you do, there's got to be something
 else wrong with you." The District Court also did not believe
 Ballesteros' claim that he was experiencing extreme pain from his
 gout, noting that Ballesteros had gone to work that day, went to
 visit his mentor after work, and was driving his vehicle.
 
"It is the province of the [trier of fact], not the 
appellate courts, to determine the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence." State v. Smith, 106 Hawai
'i 365, 
372, 105 P.3d 242, 249 (App. 2004). Ballesteros' testimony, 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
which the District Court found was not credible, does not
 
demonstrate that the evidence was insufficient to support his
 OVUII conviction. 
III.

 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm Ballesteros' OVUII
 
conviction and the District Court's Judgment.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, September 30, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Antoinette V.M. Lilley 
Deputy Public Defender
Office of the Public Defender
 for Defendant-Appellant
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Brandon H. Ito

 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
4
 