NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000703 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
ANWAR HOSSAIN, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 14-1-0902)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) appeals 
from the "Order Granting Defendant's Motion to Dismiss For
 
Violation of Speedy Trial and/or Rule 48" (Order Granting Motion
to Dismiss), filed on August 26, 2015, in the Circuit Court of
 
the First Circuit (circuit court).1
 
The State concedes that the circuit court was correct
 
in determining that there was a violation of Hawai 'i Rules of 
2
Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 48(b)  and dismissal of this case was
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided, except as otherwise noted.
 
2
 HRPP Rule 48(b) provides in pertinent part:
 
Except in the case of traffic offenses that are not
punishable by imprisonment, the court shall, on motion of
the defendant, dismiss the charge, with or without prejudice
in its discretion, if trial is not commenced within 6
months:
 
(1) from the date of arrest if bail is set or from the
filing of the charge, whichever is sooner, on any offense
(continued...)
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
proper. However, the State contends that the circuit court
 
abused its discretion when it dismissed the case with prejudice
 rather than without prejudice.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced, the issues raised, as well as the
 relevant legal authorities, we resolve the State's appeal as
 follows, and vacate and remand.
 
I. Background
 
On June 4, 2014, the State filed a Complaint against
 
Defendant-Appellee Anwar Hossain (Hossain), charging Hossain with
 
Count 1: Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree, in
 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-716(1)(e)
 
(2014); and Count 2: Assault in the Third Degree, in violation of
 
HRS § 707-712(1)(a) (2014).
 
At a hearing on June 12, 2014, Hossain requested a
 
Bengali or Bangladeshi interpreter, and the circuit court orally
 granted the request.
3
 
Following Hossain's request for an interpreter, trial
 
calls/hearings were held on August 5, 2014, September 30, 2014,
 November 25, 2014, and January 20, 2015, during which the record
 reflects that no interpreter had been located but the parties
 agreed to proceed with the respective hearings. Also during
 these proceedings, either Hossain requested or the parties
 stipulated to a continuance of the trial date –- for a variety of
 reasons apparently unrelated to a lack of an interpreter -- and
 the circuit court granted the continuances.
 
Subsequently, at trial calls/hearings on March 17,
 
2015, May 12, 2015, and July 7, 2015, the record reflects that
 Hossain and the State were ready to proceed to trial, but an
 interpreter had not been located. As a result, the circuit court
 continued the case on each date.
 
2(...continued)
based on the same conduct or arising from the same criminal

episode for which the arrest or charge was made[.]
(Emphasis added.)
3
 The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided at this hearing.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On July 27, 2015, Hossain filed a "Motion to Dismiss
 
for Violation of Speedy Trial and/or Rule 48" (Motion to
 
Dismiss). In the Memorandum in Support of Motion, Hossain
 
argued, inter alia, that his rights under HRPP Rule 48 were
 
violated because he waited longer than six months for a trial. 
On August 19, 2015, the circuit court held a hearing
 
regarding Hossain's Motion to Dismiss. The circuit court stated
 that it was dismissing the case because there was an undisputed
 HRPP Rule 48 violation. The State requested that the circuit
 court dismiss the case without prejudice. The circuit court
 considered the following and dismissed the case with prejudice:
 
Okay. The Estencion factors. This is a Class C felony,
lowest level of felony. Still a felony, but it's a Class C
felony. The reasons for the delay, as far as I'm concerned,
were totally on the State because the State has not been
able to get Mr. Hossain a proper interpreter. And it's the
State's responsibility to do so, and the State has not been
able to do so.
 
So looking at the third factor, it's my finding
that both the administration of justice and the policy of
considerations behind the rule itself, all of it and
equities and everything else compel me in my view to dismiss
this case with prejudice, so I'm doing so. 
On August 26, 2015, the circuit court filed the Order
 
Granting Motion to Dismiss. 
On September 25, 2015, the State timely appealed from
 
the Order Granting Motion to Dismiss.

II. Dismissal with or without prejudice
 
The State contends the circuit court abused its

 
discretion when it dismissed the Complaint with prejudice rather
 
than without prejudice.
 
In State v. Estencion, 63 Haw. 264, 625 P.2d 1040 
(1981), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court provided three factors for the 
trial court to consider when determining whether to dismiss a case with or without prejudice. Citing the Federal Speedy Trial Act, the supreme court stated: 
To eliminate confusion and to help the trial court in the
exercise of its discretion here, we think the following
language is appropriate:
 
In determining whether to dismiss the case
with or without prejudice, the court shall
consider, among others, each of the
following factors: the seriousness of the
offense; the facts and the circumstances
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the case which led to the dismissal;
and the impact of a reprosecution on the
administration of this chapter and on the
administration of justice.
 
s 3162(a)(1) of the Federal Speedy Trial Act, 18 U.S.C.A.
(1969), Supp.1980.
 
We adopt the language of the Federal Speedy Trial Act as a
requirement to [HRPP] Rule 48(b).
 
Estencion, 63 Haw. at 269, 625 P.2d at 1044.
 
Further, in State v. Hern , 133 Hawaii 59, 323 P.3d 1241
 
(App. 2013), this court noted that "the trial court must 'clearly
 
articulate [the] effect' of the Estencion factors and any other
 factor it considered in rendering its decision." Id. at 60-61,
 323 P.3d at 1242-43 (citation omitted).
 
We need not automatically remand every case in which the
trial court's findings are deficient, if the record is
otherwise sufficient for this court to determinate whether
 the trial court abused its discretion. However, we will
remand the case for the trial court to make the appropriate
findings where: (1) the record affirmatively shows that the
trial court failed to consider the Estencion factors; (2)
the record is inadequate to permit meaningful review of the
trial court's exercise of discretion; or (3) the trial
court's findings are deficient and an inordinate burden
would be placed on this court to conduct a searching review
of the record necessary to determine whether the trial court
abused is discretion.
 
Id. at 61, 323 P.3d at 1243 (emphasis added).
 
In this case, the circuit court articulated its 
consideration of the first Estencion factor, "the seriousness of 
the offense," when it stated that "[t]his is a Class C felony, lowest level of felony. Still a felony, but it's a Class C felony." In this regard, it appears the circuit court was addressing the more serious of the two charges, Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree, which is a class C felony offense. See State v. Kim, 109 Hawai
'i 59, 62-64, 122 P.3d 1157, 
1160-62 (App. 2005) (stating the circuit court reasonably considered the first Estencion factor when the circuit court provided in its order: "[t]he offense charged is possession of drug paraphernalia, which is a class 'C' felony. This is a serious offense, although not as serious as other class 'C' offenses[.]"). We note that the circuit court did not address that there also was a second charge, Assault in the Third Degree, 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
which is a misdemeanor offense or, under certain circumstances, a
 
petty misdemeanor. Although the charged assault offense carries
 a lower possible punishment than the felony offense, it would be
 appropriate that the circuit court consider that Hossain is also
 charged with the assault offense.
 
The second Estencion factor provides that the court
 
must consider "the facts and circumstances of the case which led
 to the dismissal[.]" 63 Haw. at 269, 625 P.2d at 1044. In this
 regard, the circuit court stated that "[t]he reasons for the
 delay, as far as I'm concerned, were totally on the State because
 the State has not been able to get Mr. Hossain a proper
 interpreter. And it's the State's responsibility to do so, and
 the State has not been able to do so." Thus, the circuit court
 attributed the delay of Hossain's trial to the State for not
 locating an interpreter for Hossain.
 
In the context of determining whether the trial court 
abused its discretion when it denied a defendant an interpreter, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court stated, "[i]t is general law that where 
a defendant cannot understand and speak English, the judge is required to appoint an interpreter to aid a defendant." State v. 
Faafiti, 54 Haw. 637, 638, 513 P.2d 697, 699 (1973) (emphasis added); Cun-Lara v. State, 126 Hawai
'i 541, 554, 273 P.3d 1227, 
1240 (App. 2012) (quoting Faafiti); c.f. State v. Casipe, 5 Haw. App. 210, 213, 686 P.2d 28, 32 (1984) ("The record indicates that the trial court properly appointed an interpreter to translate the proceedings into Defendant's dialect."). 
HRPP Rule 28(b) provides that "[t]he court may appoint 
an interpreter of its own selection." (Emphasis added.) Under the Hawai
'i Rules For Certification of Spoken and Sign Language 
Interpreters Rule 1.3 (2007), "[a] person who is Limited English Proficient (LEP), deaf, or hard-of-hearing shall, throughout a legal proceeding, have the right to the assistance of an interpreter appointed by the court as provided by court rule." (Emphasis added.)
4 
4
 We further note the Hawai' i State Judiciary Language Access Plan for
Persons with Limited English Proficiency (Language Access Plan). The version 
(continued...) 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In light of the above, the circuit court, and not the
 
State, was obligated to provide Hossain with an interpreter. 
Thus, the circuit court incorrectly attributed the delay of
 Hossain's trial to the State.
 
Finally, under the third Estencion  factor, the court
 
must consider the impact of a reprosecution on the administration
 of HRPP Rule 48 and on the administration of justice. 63 Haw. at
 269, 625 P.2d at 1043; Kim, 109 Hawai
'i at 62, 122 P.3d at 1160. 
4(...continued)
of the plan in effect when the circuit court ruled was adopted as of October
3, 2013, and provides in pertinent part:
 
Once it has been determined that an individual requires

language services to meaningfully participate in a legal
proceeding, Judiciary policy requires the provision of the
most qualified reasonably available interpreter to provide
such services. Authorized Judiciary staff is trained to
contact and obtain the most qualified interpreter in a given
language reasonably available for a particular assignment,
by using the Court Interpreter Registry (“Registry”).
 
The Registry is a statewide list of interpreters eligible to
interpret in the state courts. Interpreters are listed by
Language, Circuit, and Tier/Category. Within each
Tier/Category, interpreters are listed in reverse
alphabetical order by last name. Judiciary staff should
contact interpreters in the required language within the
specific circuit, beginning with interpreters in the highest
available tier, then the next highest tier(s), and so on
from Tier 6/Certified Master Interpreters through Tier
1/Registered Interpreters.
 
Hawai'i State Judiciary Language Access Plan for Persons with Limited English
Proficiency, FY 2013-2014 at 9 (footnote omitted). The 2013 Language AccessPlan further states: 
[i]n the event that no resources for in-person
interpretation can be secured . . . the court may suspend
the case until an interpreter is available or consider using
- for limited purposes - the telephonic interpreting service
provided by the Judiciary's contracted vendor, CTS
LanguageLink. . . . Finally, if a telephonic interpreter is
not available, Judiciary staff should contact the Office on
Equality and Access to the Courts (OEAC) as early as
possible prior to the scheduled court date, for assistance
in securing the resources necessary to meet the language
needs of the individual with LEP for an in-court proceeding. 
Id. at 10. As stated in the 2013 Language Access Plan, a telephone
interpreter should not be used, inter alia, in proceedings longer than thirty
minutes and during trials. Id. at 11. Thus, a telephone interpreter may not
have been appropriate for Hossain's trial, especially considering that Hossain
and a potential defense witness needed an interpreter. However, a telephone
interpreter may have been appropriate at the several hearings in which
continuances were requested and no interpreter was provided.
 
The subsequent version of the Language Access Plan for FY 2015-2016 is
available online at http://www.courts.state.hi.us/docs/services/LEP.pdf.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, the circuit court stated, "[s]o looking at the third
 
factor, it's my finding that both the administration of justice
 and the policy of considerations behind the rule itself, all of
 it and equities and everything else compel me in my view to
 dismiss this case with prejudice, so I'm doing so."
 "The third factor not only allows courts to review the 
seriousness of the criminal charges and the reason for the delayed indictment but also provides authority for considering such aggravating and mitigating factors as the length of the delay and the prejudice to the defendant." Kim, 109 Hawai
'i at 
64, 122 P.3d at 1162 (quoting United States v. Williams, 314 F.3d 552, 559-60 (11th Cir. 2002). Here, the circuit court referenced certain language in the third Estencion factor, but did not articulate any particulars in this case that it was considering related to the administration of HRPP Rule 48 or the administration of justice. 
Overall, it appears that the circuit court gave the
 
most weight to the second Estencion factor in deciding to dismiss
 the case with prejudice, attributing the trial delays to the
 State for not providing an interpreter. However, as discussed
 above, it is the responsibility of the court and not the State to
 provide necessary interpreters. Therefore, we believe the
 circuit court erred in its consideration of the second Estencion
 factor. Moreover, although the record contains general
 references by the circuit court about seeking to locate an
 interpreter and indicating that efforts were certainly made, it
 is unclear as to: the particular efforts that were made; and
 whether any judiciary policies or plans were considered and
 utilized in seeking an interpreter (see footnote 4). In this
 regard, we recognize the difficult challenge a court may face
 where it appears that an appropriate interpreter is not
 available. However, in deciding whether to dismiss a case with
 or without prejudice under HRPP Rule 48(b) based in part on the
 lack of an interpreter, we believe it is important for the trial
 court to specify in the record the efforts made to locate an
 interpreter so that there can be meaningful review of the trial
 court's exercise of discretion.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Based on the above, we conclude that it is appropriate 
to remand this case to the circuit court for further 
consideration of the Estencion factors in light of this Summary Disposition Order, and to "'clearly articulate [the] effect' of the Estencion factors and any other factor it consider[s] in rendering its decision." Hern, 133 Hawai
'i at 60-61, 323 P.3d 
1242-43 (citation omitted). 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order
 
Granting Defendant's Motion to Dismiss For Violation of Speedy
 Trial and/or Rule 48," filed on August 26, 2015, in the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit, is vacated. The case is remanded for
 further proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition
 Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 28, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Stephen K. Tsushima,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Andrew T Park,for Defendant-Appellee.
 Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8
 