 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000562 19-JUN-2026 07:56 AM Dkt. 120 OP 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
#I 
---oOo---
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KADEN K. KANAE, Defendant-Appellant 
NO. CAAP-24-0000562 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CPC-18-0001569) 
June 19, 2026 
LEONARD, PRESIDING JUDGE, HIRAOKA AND MCCULLEN, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY HIRAOKA, J. 
This criminal appeal concerns a trial court's 
determination that there was manifest necessity to declare a 
hung-jury mistrial, and its denial of the defendant's motion to dismiss the indictment based on double jeopardy and State v. Moriwake
, 65 Haw. 47, 647 P.2d 705 (1982). 
Kaden K. K
anae was tried for murder in the second 
degree and related offenses in connection with the September 29, 2018 early-morning shooting of Thomas McCandless, Jr. at  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Monuments, a landmark in Hale# iwa.  A jury was empaneled on 
February 16, 2024. Evidence was presented over seven days. The 
jury began deliberating at 12:28 p.m. on March 4, 2024. 
By the end of the next day, the jury had sent four 
communications. 
The fourth stated they were deadlocked. The 
trial court responded: "Will additional time to deliberate assist you in reaching a unanimous verdict?" 
The jury answered: 
"No, more time will not aid the 
process." 
After conferring with the deputy prosecuting attorney 
and defense counsel, with Kanae present, the court declared a mistrial based on manifest necessity. 
On June 29, 2024, Kanae moved to dismiss the indictment 
based on double jeopardy. The trial court entered findings of fact, conclusions of law, and an order denying the motion.
1 
Kanae appeals. 
We have jurisdiction under the collateral order 
exception to the final-judgment rule. State v. Minn, 79 Hawai# i 
461, 464, 903 P.2d 1282, 1285 (1995). We hold: (1) the trial court acted within its broad discretion when it decided that manifest necessity justified a discharge of the jury and no less severe options were available under the circumstances of this case; and (2) the trial court acted within its discretion when it denied Kanae's motion to dismiss the indictment. 
We affirm the 
order denying Kanae's motion to dismiss. 
1 The Honorable Shanlyn A.S. Park presided. 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. POINTS OF ERROR 
Kanae states fifteen points of error and makes three 
arguments: (1) there was no "manifest necessity" to declare a 
hung-jury mistrial; (2) he did not consent to a mistrial declaration; and (3) the trial court abused its discretion by failing to dismiss the indictment under Moriwake. He challenges several of the trial court's findings of fact and conclusions of law, some of which are actually mixed findings and conclusions. 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
Trial judges have "broad discretion" to decide "whether 
or not 'manifest necessity' justifies a discharge of the jury." Moriwake, 65 Haw. at 52, 647 P.2d at 710. This is because not discharging a jury that is unable to reach a unanimous verdict creates "a significant risk that a verdict may result from pressures inherent in the situation rather than the considered judgment of all the jurors." Id. at 52–53, 647 P.2d at 710. In 
other words, a compromise verdict. See State v. Fajardo, 67 Haw. 
593, 699 P.2d 20 (1985) (defendant charged with murder was convicted of included offense of manslaughter shortly after deadlocked jury was given an Allen instruction). 
A trial court's application of Moriwake to a motion to 
dismiss an indictment is also reviewed for abuse of discretion. State v. Deedy, 141 Hawai# i 208, 214, 407 P.3d 164, 170 (2017). 
Findings of fact are reviewed under the clearly 
erroneous standard. Cowan v. Exclusive Resorts PBL1, LLC, 156 
Hawai#i 268, 272, 574 P.3d 288, 292 (2025). Conclusions of law 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
are reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard. Id. A 
determination presenting mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard because it implicates the facts and circumstances of the case. Id.
III. DISCUSSION 
A. The trial court acted within its 
discretion when it declared a hung-jurymistrial. 
"A mistrial from a hung jury is a safeguard built into 
the American system of jurisprudence." Fajardo, 67 Haw. at 600, 
699 P.2d at 24. "A conscientious minority [of jurors] is the 
backbone of our American way of life. No individual, group or institution, however altruistic its intentions, can set aside the sincere convictions of a minority to conform to that of the majority for the expedience of rendering a unanimous decision." Id. at 601, 699 P.2d at 25. Thus, a mistrial is properly declared where there is manifest necessity. State v. Wilmer
, 97 
Hawai#i 238, 242–43, 35 P.3d 755, 759–60 (2001). "Manifest 
necessity" exists when "it becomes no longer possible to conduct the trial or to reach a fair result based upon the evidence." 
Id.
 at 244, 35 P.3d at 761. 
Here, the first three jury communications came at 
9:45 a.m. on the second day of deliberations. The first asked: 
Can we have a copy of the ballistics report.
By: Curtis KuboDoes the bullet found at marker #5 match the revolver? 
The court responded at 10:18 a.m.: 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
You have received all of the evidence you may consider to
decide the case. The court will not provide a copy ofCurtis Kubo's report. 
The second communication asked: 
Can we have Shayden McCandless' testimony? 
The third asked: 
Can we have a replay of Dr. Happy's testimony?Did Dr. Happy state that the angle that McCandless was shot,was from a reclined, laying down, position? 
The court responded to the second and third 
communications, again at 10:18 a.m.: 
Please refer to your individual and collective memory as toShayden McCandless and Dr. Happy's testimony. The transcripts of their testimony are not available and thetestimony cannot be played back. 
Kanae does not contest the propriety of the court's 
responses to the first three communications. 
The fourth communication came at 3:55 p.m.: 
What happens if the vote cannot be unanimous? hung jury 
The court responded at 4:08 p.m.: 
Will additional time to deliberate assist you in reaching aunanimous verdict? 
The jury responded: 
No, more time will not aid the process. 
The court conferred with counsel, with Kanae present: 
Based upon [the jury's last response], the court's
inclination is to declare a mistrial at this time as this 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
jury is unable to reach a unanimous verdict despite
one-and-a-half days of deliberation. 
Mr. Bell, the State's position? 
MR. BELL: Well, I'll just ask the court to
explicit[ly] say manifest necessity exists for the
pronouncement of a mistrial. 
THE COURT: Yes. 
Mr. Merrill? MR. MERRILL: Mr. Kanae agrees with the court's
position. 
THE COURT: All right. All right. Based upon that, the court does find that
the standard of manifest necessity has been met as this jury
has deliberated for one-and-a-half days and has sent fourcommunications. Based upon that, the court will declare amistrial at this time.
 The jury was brought into the courtroom. The 
foreperson confirmed they could not reach a unanimous decision 
even if given more time. The court thanked the jury and excused them. 
There was conflicting evidence about who shot Thomas, 
and what weapon had been used. The jury communications, considered in light of the evidence presented, could explain why the jury was deadlocked. 
The Perpetrator 
Thomas's son, Shayden — who was thirteen when his 
father was shot and nineteen when he testified at trial — was the 
only witness who saw Thomas being shot. He wasn't able to identify Kanae in a field show-up, but he identified Kanae at trial. He testified he was in the back seat of his family's van when his father stopped it at Monuments. Kanae was there. Thomas got out and confronted Kanae. Thomas shoved Kanae in the 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
chest. Kanae "threw a left hook to my dad's right jaw." Two 
other people he didn't know also started to punch Thomas. One of them punched the back of Thomas's head, which made him stumble to the ground. He ended up on his back. 
Shayden got out of the van. He saw tattoo marks along 
Kanae's neck and "some markings right along the eye bag" on the right side of Kanae's face. His father was still on the ground. He saw Kanae pull a black gun out of his waistband. Kanae "extended his arm and then angled it down towards my father." "Then he proceeded to pull the trigger." Shayden heard the gunshot. "Since I didn't see any shells fly out, I assumed that it was a revolver." Kanae and the other two men got into a silver Acura and drove toward Hale# iwa town.  Shayden called 911, 
and then his mom. 
The first police officer to arrive at the scene found 
Thomas lying on his back. 
Kanae didn't testify, but offered a recorded interview 
between two Honolulu Police Department (HPD) investigators and 
Alexander Kinney. A video of the hour-and-forty-minute interview was admitted without objection and played for the jury. Kinney 
has several tattoos on his face, including his son's name, Julian, above his right eyebrow, the number 13 under his right eye, and the number 85 under his left eye. 
Kinney described being at Monuments with Kanae. A van 
pulled up fast. A guy jumped out and approached Kanae. They started fighting. Kinney jumped in. The guy got beat up and was on the ground. "[H]e got up on all fours." Then he got up fast 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and grabbed Kinney. Kinney had a black revolver with a black 
rubber grip. He took the gun from his belt. He pulled away from the guy and the gun fired. The guy was "at the same level" as Kinney. Kinney fired once, and the guy "falls down," "just drops slowly." Kanae was standing in the middle of the road, "not close." Kinney threw the gun away "somewhere far." Kanae ran to Kinney's silver Acura and Kinney drove toward Hale# iwa. No one 
else was in the car. 
Christopher Happy, M.D. performed Thomas's autopsy. 
Thomas had a single gunshot wound in his mid-chest. The size of the entry wound was consistent with a .38 caliber bullet shot at close range, "which is usually up to 6 to 10 inches." The exit wound was on the back of the upper right shoulder. The jury was shown photographs of Thomas's body with rods showing the bullet's trajectory. It went from front to back, with an eight-inch upward climb. Dr. Happy opined that was consistent with Thomas lying on his back when he was shot; if Thomas and the person who shot him were both standing facing each other, the wound track would be level unless the shooter was holding the gun low and at an angle that "is quite acute." 
Dr. Happy also testified he found abrasions on Thomas's 
knee and left forearm that were consistent with someone scraping their knee and elbow while trying to stand up from an asphalt road. He also found sand on the front and back of Thomas's shirt, consistent with Thomas being on his belly and on his back at some point in time. 
8  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Weapon 
Shayden testified the gun he saw was black. Kinney 
said the gun he used was a black revolver with a black rubber 
grip, and he threw it "somewhere far." 
Justin Raymond was the shop foreman at 4 Wheel Parts. 
Shane Naho# oikaika-Ramirez and someone named Kaden also worked at 
4 Wheel Parts. Raymond's description of Kaden — "tall, skinny, had some tats on him, short hair" — matched Kanae's appearance. In the mid-morning on September 29, 2018 (Thomas was shot in the early morning that day), Shane gave Raymond a gun. Raymond called HPD officer Desi Miner, whom he had known for over ten 
years, that afternoon. Asked why he called Officer Miner, he 
replied: "Because we were going to turn it in." 
The jury heard a recording of a February 27, 2020 phone 
call between Kanae and a woman, made while Kanae was in custody. A male voice is heard saying: "Tell her to text Keoni to talk to Shane to testifying against -- to -- to not testify against me. Okay. Thank you." 
Officer Miner testified that Raymond is his long-time 
friend. Raymond called him at about 4:20 p.m. on September 29, 2018. He met Raymond later that evening. Raymond gave him a sock with a gun and ammunition inside. The gun was a silver revolver with a brown wooden handle. Officer Miner turned the items over to the lead homicide detective on Thomas's case. 
Curtis Kubo was a criminalist with HPD. He examined 
the items in the sock Raymond gave to Officer Miner. The gun was 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a Taurus .38 caliber revolver with a silver finish and checkered 
wooden grip. He also examined State's Exhibit 191, a spent bullet that had been found behind the driver's side rear tire of Thomas's van and marked with evidence marker #5. Kubo determined the bullet had been fired from the Taurus revolver. 
Manifest Necessity 
A trial court's decision to declare a mistrial when it 
considers the jury deadlocked is "accorded great deference by a 
reviewing court." Arizona v. Washington, 434 U.S. 497, 510, 98 S. Ct. 824, 832, 54 L. Ed. 2d 717 (1978). "[T]he rationale for this deference in the 'hung' jury situation is that the trial court is in the best position to assess all the factors which must be considered in making a necessarily discretionary determination whether the jury will be able to reach a just verdict if it continues to deliberate." Id. at 510 n.28, 98 S. Ct. at 832 n.28, 54 L. Ed. 2d 717 n.28. 
Here, the trial court saw "firsthand and independently 
appraised the evidence and the credibility of the witnesses; and . . . closely observed the jury and the manner in which the jury deliberated." Deedy, 141 
Hawai#i at 231 n.20, 407 P.3d at 187 
n.20. About the jury communications, the court stated: 
Here, it was evident that the jury wanted to
reevaluate the testimony of Shayden McCandless and possibly
compare it to the ballistic report as well as Dr. Happy'stestimony. From the Court's recollection of the testimony,the testimony of Shayden McCandless appears to be consistentwith the testimony of Dr. Happy, rather than with AlexanderKinney. And if the jury were to believe this testimony,then the (indiscernible) could be convicted as charged. 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Under these circumstances, it was appropriate for the 
trial court to ask whether additional time to deliberate would 
assist the jury in reaching a unanimous verdict. See State v. 
Matavale, 115 Hawai# i 149, 156, 171-72, 166 P.3d 322, 329, 344-45 
(2007) (Acoba, J., concurring) (endorsing "Would more time assist you in reaching a unanimous verdict?" as an appropriate response to the jury communication, "We are in a deadlock decision. What next?"). 
Kanae argues that upon receiving the jury's negative 
response, the trial court should have considered "less severe options" before declaring a mistrial, citing Minn and 
State v. 
Quitog, 85 
Hawai#i 128, 938 P.2d 559 (1997). 
In Minn, the deadlocked jury communicated that "further 
deliberations would not be of assistance without a transcript of Wheeler's testimony." 79 Hawai# i at 463, 903 P.2d at 1284. The 
option discussed in Minn was granting the jury's request for the transcript. Here, Kanae did not object to the trial court's responses declining the jury's requests for Kubo's ballistics report and Shayden's and Dr. Happy's testimony. 
The other option discussed in Minn was reinstructing 
the jury, which had apparently not been given a copy of the jury instructions. Id. at 466-67, 903 P.2d at 1287-88. Here, the 
jury had its own copy of the jury instructions. Kanae did not ask the court to repeat any of the instructions to the jury. 
In Quitog, the defendant was charged with attempted 
murder in the second degree. The jury was instructed on the 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
included offenses of attempted manslaughter, three degrees of 
assault, and reckless endangering. On the first day of deliberations the jury asked: 
How does the law interpret the explanation of Assault in the
First Degree regarding bodily injury? Does the 'cause' of bodily injury apply to the intent of the assailant or to theoutcome of the injury? 
85 Hawai#i at 133–34, 938 P.2d at 564–65 (italics omitted). 
The trial court responded, "Please refer to the jury 
instructions." Id.
 at 134, 938 P.2d at 565. 
On the third day of deliberations, the jury asked for 
"further explanation, definition and/or example regarding 
reckless in order to distinguish between Assault 1 and Assault 2. The jury is hung without further information or understanding." Id. (italics omitted). 
The court replied, "No further definition of Reckless 
can be provided. If the Court gives the jury additional time to deliberate, can the jury reach a unanimous verdict?" Id. 
(footnote omitted). 
The jury responded, "No. . . . The jury is hung." Id.
The court declared a mistrial, finding there was 
manifest necessity. Id. at 135, 938 P.2d at 566. 
The court denied Quitog's motion to dismiss the 
indictment, and allowed an interlocutory appeal. On the issue of manifest necessity, the supreme court stated: 
[A] trial court's declaration of a mistrial is not supported
by manifest necessity if less severe options were availablethat would have protected both the defendant's rights andthe public's interest. 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . For example, the trial court could have responded more
substantively to the jury's [first] communication . . . byclarifying the fact that, in accordance with itsinstructions, . . . the states of mind requisite to thecommission of assault in the first degree applied both tothe defendant's conduct and to its result, i.e., "seriousbodily injury." Additionally, and inasmuch as the jury hadeffectively exhibited its inability to reach a unanimousguilty verdict . . . the trial court could have instructedthe jury to continue its deliberations regarding includedoffenses. On the record before us, however, we cannot saythat the trial court's declaration of a mistrial based on manifest necessity constituted an abuse of discretion, andwe therefore hold that it did not. 
Id. at 143, 938 P.2d at 574 (cleaned up). 
Here, Kanae did not ask the trial court to consider any 
other option when it informed him of its inclination to declare a 
mistrial. Nevertheless, the court did consider another option. It concluded: 
7. The Hawai #i Supreme Court has expressly disapproved
the giving of an Allen charge in criminal cases.
State v. Fajardo, 67 Haw. 593, 600-01, 699 P.2d 20,24-25 (1985). 
8. Here, given the posture of the case and the nature ofthe jury's communications, the court only had twooptions on March 5, 2024: (1) force the jury tocontinue its deliberations notwithstanding the factthat it unequivocally said that additional time wouldnot help or (2) declare a mistrial. There were no other less severe options available. See Minn, 79Hawai #i at 465, 903 P.2d at 1286 ("Even though a 'hung
jury' constitutes a 'classic example' of manifestnecessity, a trial court must first consider lesssevere options available and balance the accused'srights against the public interest"). 
9. Pursuing option (1) would be tantamount to the courtgiving an Allen charge, which, under Fajardo, isforbidden. Thus, declaring a mistrial (option 2) wasthe only course of action available to the court. 
The term "Allen charge" comes from Allen v. United 
States, 164 U.S. 492, 17 S. Ct. 154, 41 L. Ed. 528 (1896). 
There, the Supreme Court approved instructing a deadlocked jury 
that, if much the larger number were for conviction, a
dissenting juror should consider whether his doubt was a 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasonable one which made no impression upon the minds of so
many men, equally honest, equally intelligent with himself.If, upon the other hand, the majority was for acquittal, theminority ought to ask themselves whether they might notreasonably doubt the correctness of a judgment which was notconcurred in by the majority. 
Fajardo, 67 Haw. at 596–97, 699 P.2d at 22 (quoting Allen, 164 
U.S. at 501). 
In Fajardo, a deadlocked jury was instructed that if it 
couldn't "reach a verdict, this case must be tried again." 67 Haw. at 594, 699 P.2d at 21 (italics omitted). Each juror in the minority was instructed to "reconsider his views in the light of the opinion of" the majority, and jurors in the majority were instructed to "give equal consideration to the views of the minority." Id. at 595, 699 P.2d at 21 (italics omitted). One 
hour later, the jury reached what appeared to be a compromise verdict of guilty on an included offense. On appeal, the supreme court held it was error to give the Allen-like instruction. It hypothesized: "Had the trial court simply repeated an instruction given earlier to the jury on how to go about its deliberations,
[2] 
2 The instruction read: A verdict must represent the considered judgment of each
juror, and in order to return a verdict, it is necessarythat each juror agree thereto. In other words your verdictmust be unanimous. 
Each of you must decide the case for yourself, but it is
yourduty [sic] to consult with one another and to deliberatewith a view to reaching an agreement, if you can do sowithout violence to individual judgment. In the course of your deliberations, do not hesitate to reexamine your ownviews and change your opinion if convinced it is erroneous.But do not surrender your h onest [sic] conviction as to theweight or effect of evidence for the mere purpose ofreturning a verdict. 
Fajardo, 67 Haw. at 601 n.2, 699 P.2d at 25 n.2. 
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
we feel that no prejudicial effect would have befallen 
Appellant." Id. at 601, 699 P.2d at 25. 
Later, in Matavale, a jury deliberated for five hours 
over two days before communicating: "We are in a deadlock decision. What next?" 115 Hawai# i at 156, 166 P.3d at 329. The 
trial court instructed the jury: "Continue your deliberations. See page 16 of the instructions." Id.The instruction on 
page 16 was materially identical to the one endorsed in the Fajardo dictum. Id.Two hours later, the jury found the 
defendant guilty of Abuse of Family or Household Members. The defendant appealed. We affirmed based on Fajardo. State v. 
Matavale, No. 27476, 2006 WL 2361921 (Haw. App. Aug. 15, 2006) (SDO). The supreme court granted certiorari. A plurality reversed the conviction, holding the evidence was insufficient to disprove the defense of parental discipline. 115 Hawai# i at 
168–69, 166 P.3d at 341–42. It held the Allen issue was moot. 
One justice concurred in the result and expressed the 
view that the trial court's instruction was incorrect, endorsing the State's argument that instructing the jury to continue deliberating after it reported being deadlocked was just like the Allen "'dynamite instruction' said to blast a verdict out of a jury" rejected by Fajardo. Id. at 171-72, 166 P.3d at 344-45 
(Acoba, J., concurring). 
Two justices dissented, criticizing the plurality for 
usurping the jury's fact-finding function. Id. at 172, 166 P.3d 
at 345 (Nakayama, J., dissenting). The dissent also noted the 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
instruction given was "virtually identical to the instruction 
recommended in Fajardo" and was not an improper Allen-like instruction. Id. at 180, 166 P.3d at 353. 
Here, Kanae did not ask that the jury be instructed to 
continue deliberating or to be told: "You are excused for today. Return tomorrow at 9:00 a.m." as it was in State v. Gonsalves, 108 Hawai# i 289, 291, 119 P.3d 597, 599 (2005), overruled on 
other grounds by, State v. Auld, 136 Hawai# i 244, 361 P.3d 471 
(2015). 
"Manifest necessity" exists when "it becomes no longer 
possible to . . . reach a fair result based upon the evidence." Wilmer, 97 Hawai# i at 244, 35 P.3d at 761. On the record in this 
case, we hold that upon receiving the jury's negative response when asked if additional time to deliberate would assist them to reach a unanimous verdict, the trial court acted within its broad discretion when it decided that manifest necessity justified a discharge of the jury and no less severe options were available. "[A] mistrial ordered sua sponte because of a true inability of the jury to agree upon a verdict represents the 'classic example' of manifest necessity." Moriwake, 65 Haw. at 52, 647 P.2d at 
710. 
B. We need not decide whether Kanae 
consented to the trial court's declaration of a mistrial. 
Kanae challenges conclusion of law (COL) no. 11: 
11. Defendant impliedly consented to the court declarationof a mistrial. On March 5, 2024, defense counselrepresented Defendant and his double jeopardyinterests. The court stated its intention to declare 
16  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a mistrial. Defense counsel did not object; instead,
he agreed with the court. Defendant "did not offer an alternative course to declaration of a mistrial. Instead, when asked for his position, [Defendant]expressly agreed with [the court's] plan." Deguair,
136 Hawai #i at 93, 358 P.3d at 65. Thus, the only
plausible interpretation of defense counsel'sposition — i.e., that he agreed with the court — isthat Defendant impliedly consented to the mistrial. 
Kanae's motion to dismiss argued — through new defense 
counsel — that "all [former] defense counsel said was he agreed 
that IF the Court was going to declare a 'hung jury mistrial,' the Court would have to hold that such a declaration was based on 'manifest necessity' basically because Defendant was not moving for a mistrial based on a hung jury." Former defense counsel (Merrill) did not submit a declaration, affidavit, or other statement attesting to his intent when he said "Mr. Kanae agrees with the court's position." 
We need not decide whether Kanae impliedly consented to 
a mistrial because we hold that the trial court acted within its discretion when it decided that manifest necessity existed to declare a mistrial. See Wilmer, 97 Hawai# i at 242–43, 35 P.3d at 
759–60 ("A mistrial is properly declared and retrial is not barred by the defendant's right against double jeopardy where the defendant consented to the mistrial 
or there was manifest 
necessity for the mistrial." (emphasis added)). 
C. The trial court acted within its 
discretion when it denied Kanae's motion to dismiss the indictment. 
Kanae contends that even if manifest necessity for the 
mistrial existed, the trial court should have dismissed his 
indictment based on Moriwake. 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Moriwake, the defendant was tried twice for 
manslaughter, on essentially the same evidence, with both cases 
ending in hung-jury mistrials. After the second mistrial, Moriwake moved to dismiss the indictment. The trial court granted the motion. The State appealed. The appeal presented two issues: (1) was further prosecution barred by double jeopardy; and (2) did the trial court have discretion to dismiss the indictment and, if so, was it properly exercised? 65 Haw. at 50, 647 P.2d at 709. 
On the first issue, the supreme court thought "it clear 
from the record that the reasons for which mistrials were declared in both prosecutions constituted 'classic examples' of 'manifest necessity[.]'" Id. at 54, 647 P.2d at 711. The court 
thus held that the constitutional proscription against double jeopardy "did not mandate dismissal of Moriwake's indictment." Id.; see also State v. Gouveia, 139 Hawaii # 70, 81, 384 P.3d 846, 
857 (2016) ("In light of our ruling that the circuit court was within its discretion in concluding that manifest necessity existed, retrial . . . is not barred by double jeopardy."); State v. Deguair, 136 Hawai# i 71, 91, 358 P.3d 43, 63 (2015); Wilmer, 
97 Hawai# i at 242–43, 35 P.3d at 759–60; cf. State v. Mayo, 62 
Haw. 108, 111, 612 P.2d 107, 110 (1980) ("Where a mistrial is declared . . . and there is an absence of manifest necessity for the mistrial, a retrial will be barred by double jeopardy."); State v. Lam, 75 Haw. 195, 201, 857 P.2d 585, 589 (1993), overruled on other grounds by, Wilmer. 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On the second issue, the supreme court held that "trial 
courts have the power to dismiss sua sponte an indictment with 
prejudice and over the objection of the prosecuting attorney." Moriwake, 65 Haw. at 55, 647 P.2d at 711. It listed six factors for trial courts to consider when "balancing the interest of the state against fundamental fairness to a defendant with the added ingredient of the orderly functioning of the court system." Id. 
at 56, 647 P.2d at 712-13. It ultimately held: 
In this case, two full, nearly identical trials on a
serious charge were held, following which two separate
juries were unable to reach a verdict despite sound judicialefforts to encourage a "considered judgment." There was no indication that a third trial would proceed in a manner anydifferent than did the previous two. Considering this andother evidence in the record, we do not perceive the trialcourt to have abused its discretion in dismissing theindictment of Moriwake. 
Id. at 57, 647 P.2d at 713. 
Thus, Moriwake stands for two distinct propositions: 
(A) double jeopardy does not prohibit a retrial when a hung-jury 
mistrial is declared based on manifest necessity; and (B) even though a dismissal is not required under double jeopardy, a trial court has discretion to dismiss an indictment, over the State's objection, after considering (1) the severity of the offense charged; (2) the number of prior mistrials and the circumstances of the jury deliberation therein, so far as is known; (3) the character of prior trials in terms of length, complexity and similarity of evidence presented; (4) the likelihood of any substantial difference in a subsequent trial, if allowed; (5) the trial court's own evaluation of relative case strength; and 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(6) the professional conduct and diligence of respective counsel, 
particularly that of the prosecuting attorney. Id. at 56, 647 P.2d at 712–13. 
And: 
Nothing in Moriwake indicates that all factors must be
given equal weight or that certain factors must be given
more weight than others. In reviewing the propriety of atrial court's exercise of its discretion to dismiss an indictment, this court accords deference to the conclusionof the trial court. We will not vacate a trial court's Moriwake ruling unless the party challenging the ruling canmake a strong showing that the court abused its discretionby clearly exceeding the bounds of reason or disregardingrules or principles of law or practice. 
Deedy, 141 Hawai# i at 224, 407 P.3d at 180 (cleaned up). 
Here, the trial court concluded that each of the six 
Moriwake factors "weighs in favor of retrial." Kanae argues only 
about factors two and four. 
Factor 2 
Kanae challenges COL no. 15: 
15. Factor 2 (the number of prior mistrials and the
circumstances of jury deliberation therein, so far isknown): There has been only one prior mistrial. The first jury deliberated for one-and-a-half days. This factor weighs in favor of retrial. 
COL no. 15 was a mixed finding of fact and conclusion 
of law. 
Kanae argues, "if it is really believable that the jury 
could legitimately be hung after only a day and a half of 
deliberations, it is very likely that the State has no case, and not very likely that another trial will produce a different 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
result." One could ask, "if the State really had no case, why 
didn't the jury unanimously acquit?" 
Kanae's argument assumes the evidence presented in a 
retrial will be the same. But, as discussed below in connection with Factor 4, the assumption may be flawed. 
The trial court's mixed finding and conclusion that 
Factor 2 weighed against dismissal was not clearly erroneous (there had only been one mistrial), applied the correct law (Moriwake), and was within its discretion under the circumstances of this case. See State v. Hinton, 120 Hawai# i 265, 278-79, 204 
P.3d 484, 497-98 (2009) (stating that "second factor weighed in favor of a retrial" where "the jury had trouble following the evidence" and because "the case against Hinton was not a particularly complex case, there was a basis for concluding that another jury would be able to reach a verdict" (cleaned up)). 
Factor 4 
Kanae challenges COL no. 17: 
17. Factor 4 (the likelihood of any substantial difference
in a subsequent trial, if allowed): While much of the State's evidence will be the same, if a retrial isallowed, the State's presentation and evidence willnot be identical. For example, the State will refineits presentation to address [Kanae]'smisidentification defense. Additionally, if the courtreconsiders its earlier ruling precluding evidence ofa May 15, 2018 shooting, the evidentiary landscapewill change in the State's favor. Finally, in theevent of a retrial, [Kanae] will have to establishKinney's unavailability before his out-of-courtstatement is admitted as a statement against penalinterest. This factor weighs in favor o[f] retrial. 
21 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The trial court was referring to its order granting 
Kanae's motion in limine no. 7 to preclude the State from 
offering evidence that Kanae shot Thomas in the leg at Monuments on May 15, 2018 (four months before Thomas was killed), and its order allowing Kanae to introduce Kinney's recorded interview under Hawaii Rules of Evidence Rule 804(a)(5) after Kanae showed he was unable to procure Kinney's presence at trial by process or other reasonable means. 
On the motion in limine, there was no dispute that 
Thomas had been shot in the thigh and groin, at Monuments, on May 15, 2018. Thomas identified Kanae to HPD as the shooter. During the evidentiary hearing, Kanae called two witnesses who testified that Kanae was not the shooter. The trial court ruled that "events of May 15, 2018, would confuse the jury and result in a trial within a trial." 
Kanae argues the ruling would be the law of the case in 
any retrial. "Unless cogent reasons support the second court's action, any modification of a prior ruling of another court of equal and concurrent jurisdiction will be deemed an abuse of discretion." Gurrobat v. HTH Corp.
, 135 Hawai#i 128, 139, 346 
P.3d 197, 208 (2015) (cleaned up). 
Here, the trial court vacated its own order during the 
post-trial hearing on the State's motion for reconsideration based on new evidence (from a federal wiretap) that Kanae admitted shooting Thomas on May 15, 2018. 
The court specifically 
stated it was "not going to tie the hands of the trial judge that 
22 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
will be" presiding over the retrial.3 The court also noted that 
Shayden's trial testimony about how he knew Kanae had been 
limited, but if evidence of the May 15, 2018 shooting was admitted, Shayden would be allowed to testify that he "talked to his father about that incident and knew who Kaden Kanae was from that incident." 
As to the order admitting Kinney's recorded interview, 
Kanae argues "there is no reason to believe that Kinney will not be as unavailable in the second trial as he was in the first so his confession will undoubtedly be admitted in a subsequent trial." Kanae will still have to make reasonable attempts to serve Kinney with a trial subpoena to establish his unavailability. If he does not, or if he is able to serve Kinney with a trial subpoena, he may not be able to play the video of Kinney's HPD interview to the next jury. And, as the trial court noted, if Kinney is served, his decision to testify or not testify "may change the landscape of this case." 
The trial court acted within its discretion when it 
determined that Factor 4 "weighs in favor o[f] retrial." Kanae presents no argument against the court's findings and conclusions that the other four Moriwake factors weighed against a dismissal. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
The August 21, 2024 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of 
Law, and Order Denying Defendant's Motion to Dismiss Case for 
3 The judge who presided over Kanae's trial was leaving the Hawai #i 
State Judiciary to become a United States district judge for the District of
Hawai #i. 
23 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 Double Jeopardy Violation is affirmed. Kanae's May 21, 2026 
Request for Retention of Oral Argument is denied. This case is 
remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings. 
On the briefs: 
Samuel P. King, Jr.,
for Defendant-AppellantKaden K. Kanae. 
Steven S. Alm,
Prosecuting Attorney,Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-AppelleeState of Hawai# i. /s/ Katherine G. LeonardPresiding Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate Judge 
24
 