NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000631
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
DANIEL PAUL LEAF, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION

 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-12-01280)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Daniel P. Leaf (Leaf) appeals from
 
the Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment filed on June 13,
 
2012 in the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu
 Division (district court).
1 The district court dismissed,
 
without prejudice, the State's complaint against Leaf for
 Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII),
 in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 291E-61(a)(1) and
 (a)(3) (Supp. 2014).
2
 
1

 The Honorable Paula Devens presided, unless otherwise noted.
 
2
 HRS ยง 291E-61(a) provides in relevant part:
 
ยง291E-61 Operating a vehicle under the influence of an
intoxicant. (a) A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the person
operates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
 
(1)	 While under the influence of alcohol in an
 amount sufficient to impair the person's normal
mental faculties or ability to care for the
person and guard against casualty; [or]
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Leaf argues that the district court erred in
 
dismissing the case without prejudice, where a different district
 
court judge had previously ruled that the case would be dismissed
 with prejudice if the State was not ready to proceed at the next
 hearing on Leaf's motions to suppress evidence. In the
 alternative, Leaf argues that the district court erred by failing
 to issue adequate findings of fact to support its dismissal
 without prejudice.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Leaf's points of error as follows and remand with
 directions to dismiss the case with prejudice.
 
On March 5, 2012, the State filed a Complaint for OVUII
 
against Leaf.3 On April 9, 2012, Leaf filed motions to suppress
 
the breath test results and any illegally obtained evidence, as
 well as a motion in limine seeking to exclude any and all
 evidence pertaining to the breath test. 
2(...continued)
. . . . 
(3)
	 With .08 or more grams of alcohol per two
hundred ten liters of breath[.]
3
 The Complaint stated that:
 
On or about the 18th day of February, 2012, in the City and
County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, [Leaf] did operate or
assume actual physical control of a vehicle upon a public
way, street, road, or highway while under the influence of
alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair his normal mental
faculties or ability to care for himself and guard against
casualty; and/or did operate or assume actual physical
control of a vehicle upon a public way, street, road, or
highway with .08 or more grams of alcohol per two hundred
ten liters of breath, thereby committing the offense of
Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant, in
violation of Section 291E-61(a)(1) and/or (a)(3) of the
[HRS]. [Leaf] is subject to sentencing as a first offender
in accordance with Section 291E-61(b)(1) of the [HRS].
 
On May 4, 2012 and May 21, 2012, the State filed motions to amend the
Complaint to include the mens rea requirement "intentionally, knowingly or
recklessly" so as to comport with State v. Nesmith, 127 Hawai' i 48, 276 P.3d
617 (2012).
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The motions were scheduled to be heard on May 4, 2012,
 
but the State was not ready to proceed on the motions at that
 
time.4 At the State's request, Judge Lono J. Lee continued the
 
hearing on the motions but expressly noted for the record that
 the case would be dismissed with prejudice if the State was not
 ready at the next hearing date. Judge Lee directed the court
 
5
clerk to include that instruction in the court minutes.  The
motions were reset to be heard on June 13, 2012, the trial date. 
On June 13, 2012, Judge Paula Devens presided. 
The
 
State was again not ready to proceed and orally requested a
 continuance.
6 The defense objected to a continuance and
 
requested that the case be dismissed with prejudice. Defense
 counsel referenced the minutes from the May 4, 2012 hearing and
 argued that "Judge Lee specifically told [the State] that if they
 weren't ready today, this case would be dismissed with prejudice. 
We'd ask you to uphold what Judge Lee had told them before as a
 sanction for not being ready to address this motion to suppress
 repeatedly." Judge Devens could not find anything in the minutes
 to indicate that the case should be dismissed with prejudice
 because the relevant part of the May 4, 2012 minutes read only
 that a continuance had been granted and that the "case will be
 dismissed at next hrg if State not ready to proceed." Judge
 Devens stated that "to the extent there is indication that the
 case will be dismissed if the State is not ready to proceed, the
 court will bind itself to that." But, Judge Devens issued the
 dismissal without prejudice, to which defense counsel objected,
 and which is the subject of this appeal.
 
4
 The Honorable Lono J. Lee presided.
 
5
 The record does not indicate the basis for the first continuance and
 
neither party challenges the propriety of the first continuance or Judge Lee's
ruling that the case would be dismissed with prejudice if the State was not
ready at the next hearing.
6
 The State requested the second continuance due to the illness of the
police officer who was to testify.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"A judge should generally be hesitant to modify, vacate 
or overrule a prior interlocutory order of another judge who sits 
in the same court." Wong v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 66 Haw. 
389, 395, 665 P.2d 157, 162 (1983). "Unless cogent reasons support the second court's action, any modification of a prior ruling of another court of equal and concurrent jurisdiction will be deemed an abuse of discretion." Id. at 396, 665 P.2d at 162 
(emphasis omitted); see State v. Mabuti, 72 Haw. 106, 114, 807 P.2d 1264, 1269 (1991) (concluding that a change in the factual underpinning of a particular ruling may constitute a "cogent reason"); see also State v. Oughterson, 99 Hawai
'i 244, 256, 54 
P.3d 415, 427 (2002) (holding that because neither the factual nor legal bases of the prior judge's denial of a motion to dismiss had changed in the interim, a subsequent judge abused his discretion in granting a motion to reconsider the prior order). 
Having reviewed the record, we agree with the State's
 
concession in its answering brief that the district court should
 have granted Leaf's motion for dismissal with prejudice,
 consistent with the holdings in Mabuti and Oughterson. Indeed,
 if the minutes available to Judge Devens had reflected Judge
 Lee's prior ruling about dismissing with prejudice, it appears
 she likely would have dismissed with prejudice.
 
The transcript from the May 4, 2012 prior hearing,
 
contained in the record on appeal, reflects Judge Lee's ruling
 that the dismissal would be with prejudice if the State was not
 ready at the next hearing. The State does not assert any cogent
 reason to modify Judge Lee's ruling. Based on the record in this
 case and the State's concession, we conclude that the district
 court should have granted Leaf's motion for dismissal with
 prejudice. Accordingly, we need not address Leaf's additional
 arguments.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment and
 
Notice of Entry of Judgment filed on June 13, 2012 in the
 
District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division is vacated
 and the case is remanded to the district court with instructions
 to dismiss the case with prejudice.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, July 28, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Richard Holcomb 
(Holcomb Law, LLLC)for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity & County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5

 