NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000196
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ARTHUR GALVAN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 1PC-15-1-1910)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Arthur Galvan (Galvan) appeals from 
the March 7, 2017 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence Notice of 
Entry (Judgment), which was entered against him and in favor of 
Plaintiff-Appellee the State of Hawai' i (State), in the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 
After a jury trial, Galvan was convicted of Arson in 
the First Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 
1
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
708-8251(1)(b) (2014),2 and sentenced to a twenty-year term of
 
incarceration.
 
Galvan raises one point of error, contending that the
 
prosecutor committed misconduct during rebuttal by appealing to
 
the jury's emotions, thereby diverting the jury from deciding the
 case on the evidence alone. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Galvan's
 point of error as follows: 
Galvan challenges the following comments made by the
 
prosecutor during rebuttal. 
You know, in this case, justice requires a guilty
verdict because the defendant did harm to Maria [Nemoto].
He did harm to Ray [Dong]. And he did harm to the Wahiawa
 community. And it will not be just to say, eh, you know,
maybe some itty-bitty doubt from a made-up story. Fire
 patterns do not lie. 
And so a just verdict would be guilty as charged.
Thank you.
 
Galvan contends that the prosecutor's argument that
 
Galvan did harm to Maria Nemoto (Nemoto), Ray Dong (Dong), and
 
the Wahiawâ community carried significant weight and improperly
 
appealed to the jury's emotions. Galvan argues that Nemoto and
 
2
 HRS § 708-8251(1)(b) provides:
 
§ 708-8251 Arson in the first degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of arson in the first degree if the
person intentionally or knowingly sets fire to or causes to
be burned property and:
. . . . 
(b)	 Knowingly or recklessly damages the property of
another, without the other's consent, in an
amount exceeding $20,000.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dong were sympathetic figures because Nemoto was advanced in age
 
and Dong had worked hard to build up his business, and that the 
statement that he did harm to the Wahiawâ community was improper
 because there was no evidence that the entire Wahiawâ community
 
was harmed.
 
During closing arguments, a prosecutor is 
permitted to draw reasonable inferences from the evidence
and wide latitude is allowed in discussing the evidence. It
 is also within the bounds of legitimate argument for
prosecutors to state, discuss, and comment on the evidence
as well as to draw all reasonable inferences from the
 evidence. In other words, closing argument affords the
prosecution (as well as the defense) the opportunity to
persuade the jury that its theory of the case is valid,
based upon the evidence adduced and all reasonable
inferences that can be drawn therefrom. 
State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai' i 405, 412–13, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238–39 
(1999) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
However, prosecutors "should not use arguments
 
calculated to inflame the passions or prejudices of the jury." 
Id. at 413, 984 P.2d at 1239. 
In State v. Schnabel, No. 29390, 2010 WL 4546655 at *3 
(Haw. App. Nov. 12, 2010) (mem. op.), vacated in part on other grounds, 127 Hawai' i 432, 279 P.3d 1237 (2012), the prosecutor 
displayed a PowerPoint slide during closing arguments that read: "Is there a substantial and unjustifiable risk of death from one punch? . . . Ask [the decedent] if it's substantial and unjustified. He's dead!" This court held, and the Hawai' i 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Supreme Court affirmed,3 that the comment "did not reach the
 
level of improper conduct." Id. at *3-4. 
Like the statement "[h]e's dead!" in Schnabel, here the
 
prosecutor's comments could be seen as inflammatory; yet they do
 
not rise to the level of improper conduct. In fact, they were
 much less inflammatory than the PowerPoint slide shown in
 Schnabel. Upon review of the entire record, and considering
 remarks in context of all of the arguments made, we conclude that
 the prosecutor's comments were not improper. 
In addition, the prosecutor's statement that Galvan
 
harmed Nemoto, Dong and the Wahiawâ community were within the
 wide latitude afforded to the State in closing argument, as they
 were reasonable inferences drawn from the evidence. Nemoto
 testified that she suffered property damage of around
 $400,000.00. Dong testified that his business suffered property
 damage of about $1,000,000.00. Although arguably somewhat
 hyperbolic, because Galvan apparently harmed two neighborhood
 businesses, it was also a reasonable inference that Galvan had
 caused harm to the Wahiawâ community. 
Galvan further argues that it was improper for the
 
prosecutor to argue that a "just verdict would be guilty as
 
3
 The supreme court stated:
 We find no error in the other points raised by Petitioner
and affirm the ICA's opinion insofar as it held that . . .
the DPA did not engage in prosecutorial misconduct in
displaying a power point slide during closing arguments
which stated, "Is there a substantial and unjustifiable risk
of death from one punch? ... Ask [Reuther] if it's
substantial and unjustified. He's dead!"
 
State v. Schnabel, 127 Hawai 'i 432, 436, n.2, 279 P.3d 1237, 1241, n.2 (2012)
. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
charged." However, viewed in context, this comment appears to
 
simply have been a concluding remark, urging a guilty verdict
 after having discussed a wide array of evidence, which included,
 inter alia, the fire pattern, Galvan's admission to Terrykay
 Sandobal that "I burnt it down because I needed to, it needed to
 be burnt down," rebuttals of Galvan's testimony, and the damages
 caused by the fire. Therefore, we reject Galvan's argument that
 the prosecutor was urging the jury to reach a guilty verdict
 based on issues other than the evidence.
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's March 7, 2017
 
Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 15, 2018. 
On the briefs: Emmanuel G. Guerrero,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 