NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0005555
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
SIXTO MANUEL, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(SPECIAL PROCEEDING PRISONER NO. 13-1-0018)
(CRIMINAL NO. 00-1-2103)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Sixto Manuel (Manuel) appeals from
 
the "Order Dismissing and Denying Petitioner Sixto Manuel's
 
Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release

 
Petitioner from Custody (Filed June 12, 2013)," entered October
 
1
24, 2013 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit
 
court).
 
On appeal, Manuel contends the circuit court erred in
denying his Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 
Petition for Post-Conviction Relief (Petition) because Manuel's
 
previous appellate attorney provided ineffective assistance of
 
counsel during Manuel's prior direct appeal to this court.2
  
 
1
 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.
 
2
 Because Manuel did not have a realistic opportunity to raise the
claim of ineffective appellate counsel until the current action, we deem that
his claim of ineffective assistance of appellate counsel was not waived and isproperly before us for consideration. See De La Garza v. State, 129 Hawai' i 
429, 442-43, 302 P.3d 697, 710-11 (2013) ("This court has held that a claim ofineffective assistance of counsel is not considered 'waived' for the purposesof a HRPP Rule 40 petition if there was 'no realistic opportunity' for thepetitioner to raise the claim in the proceedings specified by the rule."). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Manuel contends that his appellate attorney was ineffective
 
because he (1) failed to properly raise a claim challenging the
 circuit court's unanimity jury instruction and (2) failed to
 properly raise a claim challenging the sufficiency of evidence
 adduced to support Manuel's four count conviction for sexual
 assault in the third degree.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we concluded
 Manuel's appeal is without merit.
A. Unanimity Jury Instruction
 
In Manuel's Petition, he contends that his appellate
 
counsel was ineffective for failing to properly challenge the

 
circuit court's unanimity instruction during Manuel's trial.3
 
Manuel contends the circuit court's unanimity instruction was
 "insufficient to ensure that the jury unanimously agreed that
 [he] committed the same specific conduct for each of the
 individual counts that he was convicted."
 
When jury instructions or the omission thereof are at
issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when
read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
misleading. Erroneous instructions are presumptively
harmful and are a ground for reversal unless it
affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the
error was not prejudicial.
 
State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai 'i 327, 334, 141 P.3d 974, 981 (2006) 
(citations omitted). "[O]nce instructional error is 
demonstrated, [the appellate court] will vacate, without regard to whether timely objection was made, if there is a reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the defendant's conviction." Id. at 337, 141 P.3d at 984. 
Respondent-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) charged 
Manuel with four counts of sexual assault in the third degree in 
3
 On appeal, Manuel also contends that the circuit court erred when
it did not provide the jury with specific verdict forms to eliminate the
confusion regarding the particular acts for each count. Manuel presents thisclaim for the first time on appeal. Insofar as Manuel did not raise this claim in his Petition, this claim is deemed waived. See Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-732(1)(b) (2013
 
4
Supp.) for touching the penises and buttocks of Minor #1 and
Minor #2 (Counts 1, 2, 4, and 5). Because the prosecution in
 
Manuel's trial did not elect a specific act to establish Manuel's
 charge of sexual assault in the third degree, the circuit court
 was required to give the jury an instruction that all twelve
 jurors must unanimously agree to the same criminal act so to
 support each count of Manuel's conviction. 
See State v. Arceo,
  
84 Hawai 'i 1, 32-33, 928 P.2d 843, 874-75 (1996) In Arceo, the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court determined that a unanimity instruction was 
required when the prosecution alleged that defendant engaged in
 multiple acts of "sexual conduct" that would give rise to a
 conviction of sexual assault in the third degree.
 
[W]hen separate and distinct culpable acts are subsumed
within a single count charging a sexual assault–any one of
which would support a conviction thereunder–and the
defendant is ultimately convicted by a jury of the charged
offense, the defendant's constitutional right to a unanimous
verdict is violated unless one or both of the following
occurs: (1) at or before the close of its case-in-chief, the
prosecution is required to elect the specific act upon which
it is relying to establish the "conduct" element of the
charged offense; or (2) the trial court gives the jury a
specific unanimity instruction, i.e., an instruction that
advises the jury that all twelve of its members must agree
that the same underlying criminal act has been proved beyond
a reasonable doubt. 
Arceo, 84 Hawai 'i at 32-33, 928 P.2d at 874-75. 
During Manuel's trial, the circuit court gave the
following unanimity instruction to the jury:
 

 
The defendant is charged with four counts of Sexual Assault
in the Third Degree. In order to return a verdict of guilty
as to each of those four counts, it is first necessary that
the jury unanimously agree that the same specific act has
been proven as to each count by the Prosecution beyond a
reasonable doubt.
 
4
 HRS §707-732 provides in relevant part:
 
§707-732 Sexual assault in the third degree. (1)
A person commits the offense of sexual assault in the
third degree if:
 
. . . .
 
(b)	 The person knowingly subjects to sexual
contact another person who is less than
fourteen years old or causes such person
to have sexual contact with the person[.]
 
3
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The court's unanimity instruction was consistent with the 
requirements set forth in Arceo and is nearly identical to the generic unanimity instruction recommended in the Hawai
'i Standard 
Jury Instructions.5 
"We presume that the jury followed the court's 
instructions." State v. Carvalho, 106 Hawai 'i 13, 19, 100 P.3d 
607, 613 (App. 2004) (citing State v. Klinge, 92 Hawai 'i 577, 
592, 994 P.2d 509, 524 (2000)). During closing arguments in Manuel's trial, the prosecutor's statements were not misleading or inconsistent with the law. The prosecutor stated, "all that the State needs to prove for you to find [Manuel] guilty of these Sexual Assault in the Third Degree charges is that the crime happened somewhere between the time frame charged. Just one act within the time frame charged." The prosecutor further stated that the "defense counsel started arguing you have to find a particular time. Well, you don't have to come up with a particular date that the crimes happened, just as long they happened within the time frame that has been charged." 
Manuel contends that the prosecutor's statements during
 
closing arguments "misled the jury into believing that there was
 no need to find a particular act for each of the four specific
 counts." However, the prosecutor's statements did not exceed the
 permissible bounds of closing arguments and was not inconsistent
 with the law.
6 The supreme court in Arceo specifically
 
determined that the precise time and date is not regarded as
 material for a conviction of sexual assault in the third degree. 
5
 The generic unanimity instruction reads:
 
8.02 UNANIMITY INSTRUCTION – GENERIC

 
The law allows the introduction of evidence for the
 
purpose of showing that there is more than one [act]
[omission][item] upon which proof of an element of an
offense may be based. In order for the prosecution to prove
an element, all twelve jurors must unanimously agree that
[the same act][the same omission][possession of the same
item] has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
Hawai'i Standard Jury Instructions--Criminal, Instr. 8.02. 
6
 Notably, during Manuel's first direct appeal to this court, we held
that the prosecutor's remarks during closing arguments did not constitute
prosecutorial misconduct.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
See Arceo, 84 Hawai 'i at 13, 928 P.2d at 855. Instead, the jury 
need only determine that a specific act occurred in a "particular 
time span." Id. Therefore, the prosecutor's statement that the 
jury does not "have to come up with a particular date that the crimes happened, just as long they happened within the time frame that has been charged" was correct and, therefore, not misleading or erroneous. 
The timing of the circuit court's instructions also did
 
not cause the court's instructions to be insufficient or
 misleading. The circuit court was required to give the jury
 instructions before closing arguments began. See HRPP Rule
 
30(f). HRPP Rule 30(f) states that, "[e]xcept upon good cause
 articulated by the court, the court shall instruct the jury
 before the arguments are begun and shall provide to each juror,
 including alternates, a copy of the jury instructions to follow
 along as instructions are read." (Emphasis added.) The circuit
 court was also not required to give additional instructions to
 the jury after closing arguments, especially given that the
 prosecutor's statements were not erroneous. See HRPP Rule 30(f)
 
("The court may, as it deems necessary or appropriate, give
 additional instructions after arguments are concluded and before
 the jury retires." (emphasis added)).
B. Sufficiency of Evidence
 
Manuel contends that his appellate counsel provided
 
ineffective assistance "for failing to brief and waiving
 [Manuel's] argument that there was insufficient evidence upon
 which to convict [him]." Manuel contends that there was
 insufficient evidence to convict him of sexual assault in the
 third degree because there was "conflicting descriptions" as to
 when, where, and how Manuel had sexual contact with Minor #1 and
 Minor #2. Manuel argues that "[g]iven such varied, amorphous,
 and conflicting evidence it was impossible for the jury to have
 unanimously agreed that [Manuel] committed the specific conduct
 charged for a particular count."
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has held that 
evidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in 
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellatecourt passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence tosupport a conviction; [and that] the same standard applies 
5
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
whether the case was before a judge or jury. The test on
 
appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a
reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence
to support the conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
State v. Kalaola, 124 Hawai 'i 43, 49, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010) 
(brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Richie, 88 Hawai 'i 19, 33, 
960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998)). "'Substantial evidence' as to every 
material element of the offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Richie, 
88 Hawai
'i at 33, 960 P.2d at 1441 (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted). 
Under HRS § 707-732(1)(b), a defendant is guilty of 
sexual assault in the third degree when "[t]he person knowingly subjects to sexual contact another person who is less than fourteen years old or causes such a person to have sexual contact with the person." There are four material elements of an offense of sexual assault in the third degree. Arceo, 84 Hawai
'i at 15, 
928 P.2d at 857. The four material elements are (1) that the defendant subjected a minor to sexual contact; (2) that the defendant was aware that he was doing so; (3) that the defendant was aware the minor was not married to him; and (4) that the minor was less than fourteen years old at the time of sexual contact. See Id. It is undisputed that Minor #1 and Minor #2 
were under fourteen years-old when Manuel allegedly made sexual contact with them and that Manuel was not married to the Minors. Therefore, the only issues on appeal are whether there was sufficient evidence adduced at trial to show Manuel made sexual contact with Minor #1 and Minor #2 and that he was aware that he had done so. 
In Arceo, the supreme court clarified what evidence was
 
required to prove that defendant had sexual contact so to support
 a conviction of sexual assault in the third degree. The supreme
 court recognized that 
[i]n general, the precise time and date of the commission of
an offense is not regarded as a material element.Accordingly, [Hawai' i] has long recognized that, in cases
involving sexual abuse of minors, it is sufficient, in theindictment, to allege that the offense occurred over aparticular time span. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. at 13, 928 P.2d at 855. (citations, internal quotation marks
 
and brackets omitted). As further clarification, the supreme
 court adopted the following paradigm, as articulated in People v.
 Jones, 792 P.2d 643, 655-56 (Cal. 1990).
 
Does the victim's failure to specify precise date, time,
place or circumstance render generic testimony insufficient?
Clearly not. As many of the cases make clear, the particular
details surrounding a child molestation charge are not
elements of the offense and are unnecessary to sustain a
conviction.
 
The victim, of course, must describe the kind of act or acts
 
committed with sufficient specificity, both to assure that
unlawful conduct indeed has occurred and to differentiate
 
between the various types of proscribed conduct (e.g. lewd
conduct, intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy). Moreover,
the victim must describe the number of acts committed with
 
sufficient certainty to support each of the counts alleged
"in the information or indictment (e.g., "twice a month" or
"every time we went camping"). Finally, the victim must be
able to describe the general time period in which these acts
 
occurred (e.g., "the summer before my fourth grade," or
"during each Sunday morning after he came to live with us")
to assure the acts were committed within the applicable
limitation period. Additional details regarding the time,
place or circumstance of the various assaults may assist in
assessing the credibility or substantiality of the victim's
testimony, but are not essential to sustain a conviction. 
Id.
 
1.	 Sufficiency of evidence as to Manuel's conviction for Sexual
Assault in the Third Degree of Minor #1
 
The jury found Manuel guilty of two counts of sexual
 
assault in the third degree for placing his hand on Minor #1's
 
penis and on his buttocks between July 20, 1998 and March 22,
 2000. Manuel contends that there was insufficient evidence to
 support the jury's conviction because (1) Minor #1 "could not
 provide sufficient specificity to support a particular act[;]"
 (2) Minor #1's "testimony varied widely as to the number of acts
 committed so there was no certainty to support each count[;]" and
 (3) Minor #1's "testimony regarding the general time period was
 highly inconsistent and also undermined by the physical
 impossibility of Manuel committing the alleged offenses during
 the time frame testified to by [Minor #1]."
 
During trial, Minor #1 testified that Manuel touched
 
his "penis and my butt" with "[h]is bare hands." Minor #1
 testified that Manuel began touching him after Manuel started
 working at the apartment where Minor #1 lived, approximately
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
thirteen days after Minor #1 turned six years old. Minor #1
 
testified that when Manuel would touch him, Manuel would "grab[]
 it or squeeze[] it." He testified that Manuel touched him
 "[s]ometimes by the shack, sometimes by the manager's
 office . . . [b]y the laundromat." During trial, Minor #1's
 testimony as to how many times Manuel touched him varied, but
 Minor #1 ultimately concluded that Manuel touched him "[l]ike 50
 or more" times between August 1998 and January 3, 1999. Minor
 #1's testimony also included a description of one particular
 incident that he had with Manuel. Minor #1 testified:
 
I was walking, um, and I slept over my friend's house and
then my auntie asked if I can walk the dog, and I said,
okay. And then I walked the dog by the manager's office.
So I walked over there and then [Manuel] just came up to me
and he touched me in my penis.
 
Minor #1 later clarified that, on that day, Manuel touch him
 
"[o]n top" of his clothing with "[h]is bare hand" and that he
 "[t]ried to run . . . [b]ack to the house" after the incident
 occurred.
 
The inconsistencies in and accuracy of Minor #1's 
testimony go to his credibility as a witness. "[I]t is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence[.]" State v. Buch, 83 Hawai
'i 308, 321, 926 P.2d 599, 
612 (1996) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Instead, credibility determinations are strictly within the province of the trier of fact. See State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai
'i 
131, 139, 913 P.2d 57, 65 (1996). We decline to overturn the jury's credibility determination of Minor #1. Viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution, Minor #1's testimony was sufficient to support the jury's two count conviction of Manuel as to the sexual assault in the third degree of Minor #1.
2.	 Sufficiency of evidence as to Manuel's conviction for Sexual
Assault in the Third Degree of Minor #2
 
There was also substantial evidence to support the
 
jury's conviction of Manuel as to Minor #2. The jury found
 
Manuel guilty of another two counts of sexual assault in the
 third degree for placing his hand on Minor #2's penis and
 buttocks between November 4, 1997 to March 22, 2000. Manuel
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argues that Minor #2's testimony did not support Manuel's
 
conviction because Minor #2 could not "describe the kind of act
 or acts committed with sufficient specificity[,]" "testified
 inconsistently as to the number of acts that occurred[,]" and
 "couldn't really describe the general time period in which these
 acts occurred with any specificity."
 
Minor #2 testified that Manuel worked at his apartment
 
complex and that he would pass tools to Manuel while Manuel was
 working. Minor #2 also testified that he was about seven years
 
7
old when Manuel first touched his penis and buttocks.  Minor #2
 
also testified that Manuel touched his penis and buttocks on

 
"three to four different days." Minor #2 testified he was
 touched one day at the laundromat and two to three different days
 at the shack by the apartment complex. He testified that one day
 at the shack, Manuel touched him on his buttocks while Minor #2
 was standing and on another day Manuel touched his penis. Minor
 #2 testified that Manuel would touch him with his hand in a
 swiping motion, "[l]ike if you were changing a baby's diaper and
 your had to wipe the butt because they made doo-doo or
 something[.]"
 
Any inconsistencies in Minor #2's testimony go to the 
weight of his credibility as a witness. See Buch
, 83 Hawai 'i at 
321, 926 P.2d at 612. We decline to overturn the jury's credibility determinations as to Minor #2's testimony and, therefore, hold that there was sufficient evidence presented during trial to support Manuel's two convictions of sexual assault in the third degree of Minor #2. 
The arguments underlying Manuel's ineffective
 
assistance of counsel claim are meritless. The circuit court did
 not err in concluding that Manuel did not allege a colorable
 claim so to warrant an evidentiary hearing on his Petition.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order Dismissing and
 
Denying Petitioner Sixto Manuel's Petition to Vacate, Set Aside,
 or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner from Custody (Filed
 
7
 Minor #2 was born on November 4, 1991.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
June 12, 2013)," entered October 24, 2013 in the Circuit Court of
 
the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, December 31, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Cynthia A. Kagiwada
for Petitioner-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 James M. Anderson

 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Respondent-Appellee.
 
10

 