FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAI#I 
–––O0O––– 
SC, Petitioner, v.
JC, Respondent-Appellant
and 
TG and AG, Intervenors-Appellees 
NO. CAAP-20-0000618 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(
UCCJEA NO. 20-1-6004) 
APRIL 14, 2022 
GINOZA, C.J., AND WADSWORTH AND McCULLEN, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY WADSWORTH, J. 
Self-represented Respondent-Appellant JC (Father) 
appeals from the "Order Re: [Father's] Motion & Declaration for 
Post-Decree Relief Filed 2/25/20" (
Order Denying Relief), entered 
on September 18, 2020, in the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).
1/ Father's February 25, 2020 Motion and 
Declaration for Post-Decree Relief (Post-Decree Motion) sought 
modification of a Colorado court's order granting self-
represented Intervenors-Appellees TG and AG's (Maternal 
Grandparents) motion for visitation of their grandchildren, who 
1/ The Honorable Elizabeth Paek-Harris presided. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
are the two minor children (
Children) of Father and Petitioner SC 
(Mother).2/ Following an August 28, 2020 evidentiary hearing, 
the Family Court denied Father's Post-Decree Motion. 
On appeal, Father contends that the Order Denying 
Relief: (1) infringed upon Father's fundamental parental rights, 
as protected by the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution; (2) failed to uphold "the special weight standard" imposed by Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571-46.3(2), quoted infra; and (3) violated HRS § 578-16, 
quoted infra. Father also challenges Findings of Fact (FOFs) 
135, 140 through 143, 145, 146, and 149 of the Family Court's 
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (FOFs/COLs), entered on 
January 29, 2021. 
In Doe v. Doe, 116 Hawai# i 323, 172 P.3d 1067 (2007), 
the Hawai
#i Supreme Court declared the state's grandparent 
visitation statute, HRS § 571-46.3, quoted infra, facially 
unconstitutional, because it did not include the "harm to the child" standard required by the right to privacy under article I, section 6 of the Hawai# i Constitution. Id. at 336, 172 P.3d at 
1080. The court ruled that "proper recognition of parental autonomy in child-rearing decisions requires that the party petitioning for visitation demonstrate that the child will suffer significant harm in the absence of visitation before the family court may consider what degree of visitation is in the child's best interests." Id.
 at 335–36, 172 P.3d at 1079–80. 
We hold that Doe's harm-to-the-child standard applies 
in the circumstances of this case, where Father, as a custodial parent whose fitness has not been challenged, seeks to modify a visitation order entered in favor of non-parent third parties, i.e., Maternal Grandparents. We further hold that Maternal Grandparents have satisfied the harm-to-the-child standard in the unique circumstances of this case, where the Family Court entered extensive findings of fact that the Children would suffer significant harm if the visitation order were modified as requested. The Family Court also correctly concluded that the 
2/ Mother is now deceased, Father has remarried, and Father's wife
(Adoptive Mother ) has adopted the Children. 
2  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
weight of the evidence on Maternal Grandparents' side was 
sufficient to overcome the rebuttable presumption in favor of Father's request to modify visitation. See Troxel v. Granville
, 
530 U.S. 57, 68-70 (2000) (plurality opinion). 
Father's remaining arguments, to the extent not waived, 
are without merit. Accordingly, we affirm the Order Denying Relief. 
I. Background 
The following FOFs by the Family Court, among others,
are unchallenged on appeal and are thus binding on the parties  
and this court, see State v. Rodrigues, 145 Hawai# i 487, 494, 454 
P.3d 428, 435 (2019): 
1. Father and [Mother] were married but separated
in 2011. 
2. Father and Mother divorced pursuant to the
Decree of Dissolution of Marriage entered in the District
Court El Paso County, Colorado [(the Colorado Court )] on
January 14, 2016 ("Decree"). 
3. The parties have two (2) minor children . . .
(collectively "the children"). 
4. The Colorado Court entered the following
findings as set forth in the Decree: 
. . . . 
Mother will enjoy sole decision making, primaryresidential responsibilities, or, in other words, solecustody for [the children]. 
She may determine the
terms of parenting time between the children of themarriage and their father. 
5. Subsequently, Mother tragically died in a
traffic accident [in October] 2017. 
. . . . 
7. On March 6, 2018, Maternal Grandparents filed a
Motion for Grandparent Visitation in Colorado ("3/6/18
Motion for Grandparent Visitation"). 
. . . . 
10. On October 3, 2018, the Colorado Court entered
its Order Re Motion for Grandparent Visitation ("10/3/18Visitation Order"). 
11. The Colorado Court entered the following
findings in the 10/3/18 Visitation Order: 
. . . . 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
c. The Colorado Court must begin with the
presumption that the parent's determination of
grandparent visitation is in the best interest of thechildren. That presumption is rebuttable with factsand evidence which establish by clear and convincingevidence that (a) the parent is unfit or (b) theparent's determination of parenting time is not in thebest interest of the children. 
d. There have been no allegations of
unfitness of Father. . . . 
. . . . 
f. Following the parents' separation [in
2011], Mother was the primary parent and exercised themajority of the parenting time. 
g. Mother was awarded sole decision-making
responsibility for the children, with parenting timefor Father as determined by Mother . . . . 
. . . . 
j. Father's parenting time was limited before
Mother's death [in October 2017]. 
k. Maternal Grandparents had been very
involved in the children's lives since between 2013 and 2017, and had the children two (2) to three (3)days per week during the school year and five (5)times per week during the summer. 
1. Father was living in Ohio or Hawaii during
this period and had limited contact with the children. 
. . . . 
r. This is an unusual situation. 
s. Mother is deceased, and the children are
presently with Father, who had limited contact withthem prior to Mother's death. 
t. Maternal Grandparents have played a very
important role in the children's lives and provide anessential link to the maternal side of the family. 
u. The children are still grieving. 
Father 
has placed the children in therapy and they areimproving. However, it doesn't follow that MaternalGrandparents' contact with the children should belimited. 
v. Maternal Grandparents need to be an active
presence in the children's lives. They have alwaysbeen in the children's lives and they are a link tothe maternal side of the family. Contact with Maternal Grandparents is necessary for the emotionalhealth of the children and to aid in the grievingprocess. 
. . . . 
x. Father is providing stability for the
children and Maternal Grandparents are an essentialpart of their emotional health. 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
y. The Colorado Court finds that Maternal 
Grandparents have met their burden by clear and
convincing evidence in that Father's determination ofgrandparent visitation is not in the children's bestinterests and that their request for grandparentvisitation is in the children's best interests. 
. . . . 
(Footnotes omitted.) 
The Family Court concluded that the Colorado Court, in 
entering the 10/3/18 Visitation Order, had considered and applied 
the United States Supreme Court's decision in Troxel, 530 U.S. 57, as well as the relevant statutes and case law in Colorado, "when it entered findings that the children would suffer significant harm in the absence of visitation with Maternal Grandparents before it considered what degree of visitation was in the children's best interests." The Colorado Court granted Maternal Grandparents the following grandparent visitation schedule, subject to certain conditions and contingencies: one week in the spring from March 17 to March 23 each year; one week for Christmas from December 30 to January 5 each year; and two weeks in the summer from July 1 to July 14 each year. Father was to "deliver and receive the minor children from Maternal Grandparents at the departure and arrival gates at the airport in Hawaii." Maternal Grandparents were granted visitation "in Hawaii unless Maternal Grandmother or Maternal Grandfather are able to travel with the minor children to and from Colorado." 
There is no evidence in the record that the 10/3/18 
Visitation Order was ever appealed in Colorado. The Family Court concluded that the 10/3/18 Visitation Order was a valid and enforceable order. 
On February 25, 2020, Father registered the 10/3/18 
Visitation Order and other documents from the Colorado Court, in the Family Court, pursuant to HRS § 583A-305. On the same day, Father filed the Post-Decree Motion seeking to modify the 10/3/18 Visitation Order by restricting Maternal Grandparents' visitation with the Children to "where the [C]hildren reside[,]" i.e., Hawai#i. Father asserted in the Post-Decree Motion that the 
change in visitation was appropriate because: 
(a) "[t]he 
[C]hildren have resided in the [S]tate of Hawaii for over 2 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
years"; and (b) "[d]uring [the Children's] last visit with 
[Maternal Grandparents, Maternal Grandparents] failed to return the children in a timely manner pursuant to the court order creating a lot of panic and confusion for the [C]hildren." Father also requested that telephone visits between Maternal Grandparents and the Children "be scheduled around the [C]hildren[']s activities because it's become difficult for the [C]hildren to comply during the court ordered hours and the [C]hildren do not want to stay on the phone for a whole hour." Further, Father contended that Hawai# i
 should have jurisdiction 
in this matter because: (a) the Children have resided in Hawai# i 
for over two years; (b) "[b]oth parents and all information regarding [the Children's] care and well being exist here in Hawaii"; and (c) Colorado is an inconvenient forum. 
On April 28, 2020, the Colorado Court communicated with 
the Family Court pursuant to HRS § 583A-110, as reflected in the Family Court's "Record of Communication Between Courts," filed on May 6, 2020. 
The Colorado Court stated that it believed that 
Hawai#i has home state jurisdiction under the Uniform Child-
Custody Jurisdiction and Enforcement Act (UCCJEA), and that 
Colorado no longer has continuing, exclusive jurisdiction, as no 
party resides in Colorado. The Colorado Court informed the Family Court that it was relinquishing jurisdiction to 
Hawai#i. 
The Family Court stated that jurisdiction would be in Hawai# i 
under the UCCJEA, but that the presiding judge would further address the matter at the hearing. 
On May 21, 2020, the Family Court held the first 
hearing on Father's Post-Decree Motion. At the hearing, the court found and ordered, among other things, that Hawai# i 
 has 
jurisdiction under the UCCJEA, and the hearing would be continued to July 8, 2020, to allow the parties to mediate prior to proceeding with the Post-Decree Motion.
3/ Mediation was 
unsuccessful and, at a July 8, 2020 hearing, the Family Court 
3/ FOF 25 states that "Colorado no longer had continuing, exclusive
jurisdiction as none of the parties resided in the State of Colorado, Colorado
relinquished jurisdiction, Father asserted Hawaii had jurisdiction as he andthe [C]hildren resided in Hawaii, and Maternal Grandparents did not contestHawaii jurisdiction." 
6  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ordered that the hearing be continued to August 28, 2020, for an 
extended evidentiary hearing. 
The parties agreed to modify 
Maternal Grandparents' telephone/video visits to: (a) telephone visits every other Sunday starting July 12, 2020, from 3-4 p.m., and (b) video visits every other Sunday starting July 19, 2020, from 3-4 p.m. 
On August 28, 2020, the Family Court held the extended 
evidentiary hearing on Father's Post-Decree Motion. 
Father, 
Adoptive Mother, and a Hawai# i-licensed therapist testified on 
behalf of Father. 
Two of Maternal Grandparents' Colorado family 
members, as well as maternal grandmother TG, testified for Maternal Grandparents. Multiple exhibits were received into evidence. 
On September 18, 2020, the Family Court entered the 
Order Denying Relief, and on January 29, 2021, the Family Court filed the FOFs/COLs. 
The FOFs stated in part: 
40. Father's request does not constitute such a
change in circumstances that modification of the valid and
enforceable 10/3/18 Visitation Order is in the bestinterests of the children. 
41. At the time of the entry of the valid and
enforceable 10/3/18 Visitation Order, the children werealready residing in Hawaii. 
42. The fact that the children lived in Hawaii 
longer than they had at the time of the valid andenforceable 10/3/18 Visitation Order is not a change incircumstances such that modification of the valid and enforceable 10/3/18 Visitation Order is in the children'sbest interests. 
43. As for Father's second basis for requesting
modification of the valid and enforceable 10/3/18 VisitationOrder in which he claims that during Maternal Grandparents'last visit with the children in July 2019 they "failed toreturn the children in a timely manner pursuant to the courtorder creating a lot of panic and confusion for thechildren" - this also does not constitute a change incircumstances such that modifying their visits to beexercised only in Hawaii or their residential area withMaternal Grandparents would be in the children's bestinterest. 
. . . . 
53. There was good cause for the delay in Maternal
Grandparents' untimely return of the children to Father inHawaii in July 2019. 
54. During Maternal Grandparents' visit with the
children in July 2019 in Colorado, Maternal Grandmothernotified Father on July 13, 2019 that she may need to delay 
7  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
her flight with the children to return to Hawaii on July 14,
2019 due to an unexpected medical emergency where she wasadmitted into the hospital with an acute diverticuli flareup. 
55. In the same email on July 13, 2019, Maternal
Grandmother also notified Father that (a) the children werefine and at home with Maternal Grandfather, (b) she tried toswitch the flights so Maternal Grandfather could travel withthe children back to Hawaii instead of herself, but theairlines would not allow her to transfer her ticket to Maternal Grandfather, and (c) she should be released thatday but would need to wait a few days to be on oralantibiotics before flying. 
. . . . 
58. Father unreasonably demanded that Maternal
Grandmother return the children as originally plannedwithout any justifiable reason. 
. . . . 
62. Maternal Grandmother returned the children to 
Father in Hawaii on July 18, 2019. 
. . . . 
64. There was an unexpected, unintentional and
unforeseen change in circumstances that caused a slight four(4)
 day delay in Maternal Grandparents' timely return of the
children to Father in July 2019. 
65. Maternal Grandparents made their best effort to
return the children to Father as soon as practicallypossible. 
66. Notwithstanding, Father filed a complaint for
custodial interference with the Honolulu Police Department("HPD") against Maternal Grandparents on July 14, 2019 thatwas unwarranted and unnecessary. 
. . . . 
68. Father also contacted the local sheriff's 
department in Colorado to enforce the valid and enforceable10/3/18 Visitation Order, and requested the sheriffs inColorado to check on the children at Maternal Grandparents'home, even though he received detailed notice from MaternalGrandparents regarding the delay in the return of thechildren to Father in Hawaii and that the children were safe. 
69. There was no reason for Father to believe that 
the children were not safe. 
70. The only plausible reason for Father to have
responded in the unreasonable manner that he did was tocreate an unfair advantage for him to seek modification ofthe valid and enforceable 10/3/18 Visitation Order, which hehad repeatedly been attempting to do unsuccessfully sincethe Colorado Court entered it. 
71. Father's actions subjected the children to
unnecessary harm and conflict by involving the sheriff'sdepartment in Colorado. 
8  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . 
114. Father is married to [Adoptive Mother]. 
115. [Adoptive Mother] legally adopted the children
on May 23, 2018. 
. . . . 
125. The Court did not find Father and [Adoptive
Mother's] testimony credible. 
126. Maternal Grandparents are elderly and for them
to travel will become more difficult for them as they
continue to age. 
127. The children are getting older and for them to
travel will become easier for them in the future. 
128. The valid and enforceable 10/3/18 Visitation
Order states that when the children are older and Father believes they can travel with an airline escort, they willno longer need to travel with Maternal Grandparents. 
129. Maternal Grandparents and Mother's family are
the only ties and connection the children have to theirMother, now deceased, who was also once their primarycaretaker. 
130. Maternal Grandparents had substantial and
emotional ties to the children throughout their life withMother until Father assumed custody after Mother passed awaythree (3) years ago. 
131. Maternal Grandparents' relationship with the
children goes beyond having a mere positive influence onthem. 
132. The children will suffer significant harm in the
absence of visitation with Maternal Grandparents inColorado. 
133. Colorado was the children's home where they
lived with Mother and were raised for most of their life before they moved to Hawaii a few years ago. 
134. Most of the children's extended family on
Mother's side, including one (1) of their half-siblingsreside in Colorado. 
135. The children's other half-sibling lives in
Texas, but visits Colorado. 
Maternal Grandparents do not
have authority to travel to Hawaii with the children'shalf-sibling who lives in Texas. 
. . . . 
138. Serious harm would result to the children given
Father's motivation to limit and restrict Maternal Grandparents' visits with the children to Hawaii only. 
139. The level of harm is of the magnitude that
justifies overruling Father's proposed request to modify thevalid and enforceable 10/3/18 Visitation Order restrictingthe location of the visits to Hawaii. 
9  
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
140. Father and [Adoptive Mother] are using the
children as pawns based on their own personal conflict and
resentment towards Mother's family in which the childrenshould not suffer as a result. 
141. Father and [Adoptive Mother] are not acting out
of the best interests of the children, but instead, seek toadvance their own personal agenda by using the childrenagainst Maternal Grandparents and attempting to restricttheir visits to Hawaii only. 
142. Father and [Adoptive Mother] are attempting to
diminish the relationship between the children and MaternalGrandparents as opposed to supporting and maintaining arelationship between them. 
143. There was a history of domestic violence in the
relationship between Mother, the children and Father inwhich Father was the perpetrator. 
. . . . 
146. Father's history of domestic violence against
Mother and [younger daughter] has caused some of the tensionand conflict between Father and Maternal Grandparents. 
147. The conflict escalated when [Adoptive Mother]
legally adopted the children, and injected herself in themiddle of communications between the children and Maternal Grandparents. 
148. Due to the growing conflict between Father,
[Adoptive Mother] and Maternal Grandparents, Father isattempting to sever the children's ties with MaternalGrandparents and Mother's family. 
149. Father is not acting in the best interests of
the children in attempting to sever this criticalrelationship . . . . 
150. Given the strong and close relationship and bond
between Maternal Grandparents and the children, and Father'smotivation to sever ties between the children and Maternal Grandparents due to the personal conflict between him,[Adoptive Mother] and Maternal Grandparents, the overallweight of the evidence on Maternal Grandparents' side issufficient to overcome any rebuttable presumption in favorof Father's request to modify visitation. 
151. There is clear and convincing evidence that
Maternal Grandparents are acting in the best interests ofthe children. 
152. There is clear and convening evidence that
modifying the valid and enforceable 10/3/18 Visitation Orderto limit Maternal Grandparents' visitation would be harmfulto the children. 
153. It is in the best interests of the children to 
enforce the provisions of the valid and enforceable 10/3/18Visitation Order. 
(Footnotes omitted.) 
10  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
II. Discussion 
A.
 Father's Parental Rights 
Father contends that the Family Court infringed upon 
his fundamental parental rights, as protected by the due process 
clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, "simply because [the Family Court] believes a 'better' decision could be made." In this regard, Father argues that FOFs 145 and 146 are not supported by substantial evidence. 
FOFs 143 through 146, as well as FOF 154a, concern 
Father's history of domestic violence. The Family Court found the following: 
143. There was a history of domestic violence in the
relationship between Mother, the children and Father in
which Father was the perpetrator. 
144. The children's grief counselor, Ms. Bagford,
states in her letter dated February 22, 2018 that she workedwith [younger daughter] weekly since August 2017 on "feelingidentification and regulation, psychoeducation arounddomestic violence and safety as well as work around griefand loss." 
145. Further, in the parties' divorce case filed
earlier in FC-D No. 13-1-6897, prior to the parties filingfor divorce in Colorado, the Hawaii Family Court entered thefollowing findings in paragraph 1 of its "Order DenyingPlaintiff's Motion for Pre-Decree Relief Filed May 28, 2013and Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendant's Motionfor Pre-Decree Relief Filed July 12, 2013" [( August 30, 2013
Order)]: 
Viewed from the standpoint of the best interests ofthe children, the Court finds that an award of solephysical custody of the minor children to MOTHER is inthe children's best interests. The Court awards each of the parties joint legal custody of the minorchildren. The children have resided with MOTHER in Colorado since December, 2012; the Court finds thatMOTHER has been the primary caregiver for the childrenover the majority of their lives. FATHER has failed 
to rebut the Court's finding that he engaged indomestic violence against MOTHER in January, 2013  and 
therefore, an award of legal and physical custody toMOTHER is appropriate (emphasis added). 
146. Father's history of domestic violence against
Mother and [younger daughter] has caused some of the tension
and conflict between Father and Maternal Grandparents. 
. . . . 
154. In addition to all of the factors already noted
herein, the Court enters the following additional factorsconsidered in applying the best interests of the childrenstandard enumerated in HRS §571-46(b): 
11  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a. As noted herein, there is a history of
domestic violence by Father and against Mother, where
one of the children, [younger daughter] was alsoinvolved, which also included emotional abuse. 
(Footnotes omitted.) 
Findings of fact are reviewed under the clearly 
erroneous standard and will not be overruled unless: 
(1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support thefinding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in support ofthe finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left with adefinite and firm conviction that a mistake had been made. 'Substantial evidence' is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person ofreasonable caution to support a conclusion. 
LC v. MG, 143 Hawai# i 302, 310, 430 P.3d 400, 408 (2018) (quoting 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai# i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006)). 
We first note that Father does not challenge FOFs 143 
144, and 154a, which are thus binding on this court. Rodrigues, 
145 Hawai# i at 494, 454 P.3d at 435. Regarding FOFs 145 and 146, 
Father asserts generally that "no substantial evidence . . . 
verifies the claims of abuse; all accusations are unfounded and clearly erroneous." 
In FOF 145, the Family Court quotes from the August 30, 
2013 Order entered by the Family Court in the parties' separate divorce proceeding, which was initiated in Hawai# i in 2013 before 
the filing of the divorce proceeding in Colorado.
4/ The 
August 30, 2013 Order was entered into evidence as Maternal Grandparents' Exhibit 23 at the August 28, 2020 evidentiary hearing. At that time, Father asserted that Exhibit 23 was "irrelevant" and also stated, "I don't disagree that it's a court order, but it wasn't due to domestic violence that it was filed . . . ." There is no indication in the record, however, that Father ever challenged the Family Court's domestic violence finding by appealing from a final order in the Hawai# i divorce 
proceeding. Nor does Father contend that FOF 145 misquotes the August 30, 2013 Order. 
We thus conclude there is substantial 
evidence to support FOF 145, and we are not left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. 
4/ It appears that the Hawai #i divorce proceeding was dismissed in
2014. 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
FOF 146 appears to be based on FOFs 143 through 145, 
which concern Father's history of domestic violence, and FOFs 118 
through 121, and 154bb and 154ii, which concern the conflict between Father and Adoptive Mother on one side, and Maternal Grandparents and Mother's family on the other. 
Father has not 
challenged any of these FOFs supporting FOF 146, except for FOF 145, which we have concluded is not clearly erroneous. Based on our review of the record, we conclude there is substantial evidence to support FOF 146, and we are not left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. 
Father also argues more generally that he has not been 
found to be an "unfit" parent, and the Order Denying Relief infringes on his fundamental parental right to make child-rearing decisions. 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court recently reiterated: 
[A] parent's right to the "care, custody and control" of his
or her child is a fundamental liberty interest protected bythe United States Constitution. Troxel v. Granville, 530
U.S. 57, 65, 120 S. Ct. 2054, 147 L. Ed. 2d 49 (2000)("[T]he interest of parents in the care, custody, andcontrol of their children is perhaps the oldest of thefundamental liberty interests recognized by this Court.").This court has also recognized that independent of theUnited States Constitution "parents have a substantiveliberty interest in the care, custody, and control of theirchildren protected by the due process clause of article 1,section 5 of the Hawai #i Constitution. . . ." In re Doe, 99
Hawai #i 522, 533, 57 P.3d 447, 458 (2002). 
DJ v. CJ, 147 Hawai# i 2, 17, 464 P.3d 790, 805 (2020) (quoting AC 
v. AC, 134 Hawai# i 221, 233, 339 P.3d 719, 731 (2014)); see AA v. 
BB, 139 Hawai# i 102, 109, 384 P.3d 878, 885 (2016). 
In Troxel, the United States Supreme Court affirmed the 
Washington Supreme Court's judgment that a Washington visitation 
statute violated the United States Constitution. The plurality opinion found that the Washington statute was "breathtakingly broad" because its language effectively permitted "any third party seeking visitation to subject any decision by a parent concerning visitation of the parent's children to state-court review." 530 U.S. at 67. The plurality also emphasized the importance of the presumption "that fit parents act in the best interest of their children[,]" and reasoned that the trial court's visitation order contravened that presumption in part 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
because it accorded no "special weight" to the parent's 
determination of her children's best interests. Id.
 at 68-69. 
The plurality further observed that the trial court's findings demonstrated "nothing more that a simple disagreement between [the trial court] and [the parent] concerning her children's best interests." Id. at 72. However, neither the plurality opinion 
nor the other five opinions in Troxel defined the scope of the parental right with respect to visitation decisions. See AA, 139 
Hawai#i at 109, 384 P.3d at 885 (construing Troxel). 
In Doe, the Hawai# i Supreme Court considered the 
constitutionality of HRS § 571-46.3,
5/ which allowed for a 
grandparent to petition for reasonable visitation of their grandchild, and allowed the court to grant the petition so long as Hawai# i was the child's home state and reasonable visitation 
was in the child's best interests. 116 Hawai
#i at 325, 172 P.3d 
at 1069. Applying strict scrutiny, the supreme court concluded that "proper recognition of parental autonomy in child-rearing decisions requires that the party petitioning for visitation demonstrate that the child will suffer significant harm in the absence of visitation before the family court may consider what degree of visitation is in the child's best interests." Id. at 
335–36, 172 P.3d at 1079–80. The court held that HRS § 571-46.3 
5/ HRS § 571-46.3 (2018) states: 
Grandparents' visitation rights; petition; notice;
order. A grandparent or the grandparents of a minor child
may file a petition with the court for an order of
reasonable visitation rights. The court may awardreasonable visitation rights provided that the followingcriteria are met: 
(1) This State is the home state of the child at the time of the commencement of the proceeding; and 
(2) Reasonable visitation rights are in the bestinterests of the child. 
No hearing for an order of reasonable visitation rightsunder this section shall be had unless each of the livingparents and the child's custodians shall have had duenotice, actual or constructive, of the allegations of thepetition and of the time and place of the hearing thereof. 
An order made pursuant to this section shall be
enforceable by the court, and the court may issue otherorders to carry out these enforcement powers if in the bestinterests of the child. 
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was facially unconstitutional because it did not include the 
"harm to the child" standard required by the right to privacy under article I, section 6 of the Hawai# i Constitution. Id. at 
336, 172 P.3d at 1080. 
"Thus, a parent's fundamental right to 
direct the upbringing of his or her child was implicated 'where a nonparent third party petitione[d] for visitation,' and the State could not interfere with the parent's decision absent a finding that the parent's decision to deny access to the child would result in harm to the child." AA, 139 Hawai# i at 111, 384 P.3d 
at 887 (construing Doe). 
We hold that Doe's harm-to-the-child standard applies 
in these circumstances, where Father, as a custodial parent whose fitness has not been challenged, seeks to modify a visitation order entered in favor of non-parent third parties, i.e., Maternal Grandparents. We further hold that Maternal Grandparents have satisfied the harm-to-the-child standard in the unique circumstances of this case, where the Family Court entered extensive findings of fact that the Children would suffer significant harm if the 10/3/18 Visitation Order were modified as requested. The Family Court also concluded, in compliance with the Troxel plurality, that the weight of the evidence on Maternal Grandparents' side was sufficient to overcome the rebuttable presumption in favor of Father's request to modify visitation. The relevant FOFs include the following, none of which Father challenges on appeal: 
129. Maternal Grandparents and Mother's family are
the only ties and connection the children have to their
Mother, now deceased, who was also once their primarycaretaker. 
130. Maternal Grandparents had substantial and
emotional ties to the children throughout their life withMother until Father assumed custody after Mother passed awaythree (3) years ago. 
131. Maternal Grandparents' relationship with the
children goes beyond having a mere positive influence onthem. 
132. The children will suffer significant harm in the
absence of visitation with Maternal Grandparents inColorado. 
133. Colorado was the children's home where they
lived with Mother and were raised for most of their life before they moved to Hawaii a few years ago. 
15  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
134. Most of the children's extended family on
Mother's side, including one (1) of their half-siblings
reside in Colorado. 
. . . . 
138. Serious harm would result to the children given
Father's motivation to limit and restrict Maternal Grandparents' visits with the children to Hawaii only
. 
(Emphasis added.) 
These FOFs are binding on this court and support the 
Family Court's mixed conclusions of fact and law in FOFs 139 and 
150 that, respectively: (1) "[t]he level of harm is of the magnitude that justifies overruling Father's proposed request to modify the valid and enforceable 10/3/18 Visitation Order restricting the location of the visits to Hawaii"; and (2) "the overall weight of the evidence on Maternal Grandparents' side is sufficient to overcome any rebuttable presumption in favor of Father's request to modify visitation." Cf. Troxel, 530 U.S. at 
72 (observing that the trial court's "slender findings" demonstrated "nothing more than a simple disagreement between [the trial court] and [the parent] concerning her children's best interests"). 
After determining that the Children would suffer 
significant harm if the 10/3/18 Visitation Order were modified as requested, the Family Court then considered and applied the factors enumerated in HRS § 571-46(b)
6/ for determining the best 
6/ HRS § 571-46(b) (2018) states: 
(b) In determining what constitutes the best interest
of the child under this section, the court shall consider,
but not be limited to, the following: 
(1) Any history of sexual or physical abuse of achild by a parent; 
(2) Any history of neglect or emotional abuse of achild by a parent; 
(3) The overall quality of the parent-childrelationship; 
(4) The history of caregiving or parenting by eachparent prior and subsequent to a marital orother type of separation; 
(5) Each parent's cooperation in developing andimplementing a plan to meet the child's ongoingneeds, interests, and schedule; provided that
(continued...) 
16 6/(...continued) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interest of the child. See Doe, 116 Hawai# i at 335–36, 172 P.3d 
at 1079–80. 
Father does not dispute any of the Family Court's 
extensive findings on this subject, which support the court's 
conclusions in FOFs 153 and 156 that, respectively, "[i]t is in 
this factor shall not be considered in any case
where the court has determined that familyviolence has been committed by a parent; 
(6) The physical health needs of the child; 
(7) The emotional needs of the child; (8) The safety needs of the child; (9) The educational needs of the child; (10) The child's need for relationships with
siblings; 
(11) Each parent's actions demonstrating that theyallow the child to maintain family connectionsthrough family events and activities; providedthat this factor shall not be considered in anycase where the court has determined that familyviolence has been committed by a parent; 
(12) Each parent's actions demonstrating that theyseparate the child's needs from the parent'sneeds; 
(13) Any evidence of past or current drug or alcoholabuse by a parent; 
(14) The mental health of each parent; 
(15) The areas and levels of conflict present withinthe family; and 
(16) A parent's prior willful misuse of theprotection from abuse process under chapter 586to gain a tactical advantage in any proceedinginvolving the custody determination of a minor.Such willful misuse may be considered only if itis established by clear and convincing evidence,and if it is further found by clear andconvincing evidence that in the particularfamily circumstance the willful misuse tends toshow that, in the future, the parent who engagedin the willful misuse will not be able to cooperate successfully with the other parent intheir shared responsibilities for the child.The court shall articulate findings of factwhenever relying upon this factor as part of itsdetermination of the best interests of the child. For the purposes of this section, whentaken alone, the voluntary dismissal of apetition for protection from abuse shall not betreated as prima facie evidence that a willfulmisuse of the protection from abuse process hasoccurred. 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the best interests of the children to enforce the provisions of 
the valid and enforceable 10/3/18 Visitation Order[,]" and "[t]he best interests of the children do not justify modification." 
The 
Family Court also made clear in COLs 6 and 7 that it relied on HRS § 571-46(a)(6) and (7)
7/ and HRS § 571-46(b) in making its 
visitation decision.8/ See Waldecker v. O'Scanlon, 137 Hawai# i 
460, 375 P.3d 239 (2016) (cited by the Family Court in COL 11). 
Accordingly, Father's argument that his parental rights 
were violated is without merit. 
B. Grandparent Visitation Statute 
Father contends that the Family Court erred "by failing 
to uphold the special weight standard specified in Paragraph 2 of 
[HRS §] 571-46.3." 
As discussed above, HRS § 571-46.3, the grandparent 
visitation statute, was declared facially unconstitutional in Doe. See 116 Hawai# i at 336, 172 P.3d at 1080. Even if HRS 
§ 571-46.3 had not been held unconstitutional, the statute would not have applied to Father's Motion for Post-Decree Relief, which sought modification of the Colorado Court's 10/3/18 Visitation 
7/ HRS § 571-46(a)(6) and (7) (2018) states, in relevant part: 
(a) In actions . . . where there is at issue a 
dispute as to the custody of a minor child, the court,
during the pendency of the action, . . . or any time duringthe minority of the child, may make an order for the custodyof the minor child as may seem necessary or proper. In awarding the custody, the court shall be guided by thefollowing standards, considerations, and procedures: 
. . . . 
(6) Any custody award shall be subject tomodification or change whenever the bestinterests of the child require or justify themodification or change and, whereverpracticable, the same person who made theoriginal order shall hear the motion or petitionfor modification of the prior award; 
(7) Reasonable visitation rights shall be awarded toparents, grandparents, siblings, and any personinterested in the welfare of the child in the discretion of the court, unless it is shown thatrights of visitation are detrimental to the bestinterests of the child[.] 
8/ Father does not challenge the validity of these provisions. 
18  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Order, entered pursuant to Colorado law. The Family Court did 
not err in not applying HRS § 571-46.3 to the Motion for Post-Decree Relief. Moreover, we ruled in Section A, supra, that the Family Court correctly concluded that the weight of the evidence on Maternal Grandparents' side was sufficient to overcome the rebuttable presumption in favor of Father's request to modify visitation. 
Father also argues that FOFs 135, 140 through 142, and 
149 (see supra) are "outside the scope of evidence." FOF 135 states in part that one of the Children's half-siblings lives in Texas. Maternal Grandmother testified that one of the Children's half-siblings lives with Grandparents in Colorado and the other half-sibling lives with his father in Colorado.
9/ The record 
lacks substantial evidence to support the finding that one of Children's half-siblings lives in Texas, and that finding is thus clearly erroneous. However, this minor error was harmless in these circumstances and does not warrant relief. See, e.g., 
Dupree v. Hiraga, 121 Hawai# i 297, 320 n. 28, 219 P.3d 1084, 1107 
n.28 (2009) (ruling that a clearly erroneous finding of fact was harmless); DL v. CL, No. CAAP-18-0000211, 2019 WL 968052 at *6 
(Haw. App. Feb. 28, 2019) (SDO) (holding in a custody proceeding that "[m]inor errors in a court's findings that are harmless do not warrant relief"). 
FOFs 140 through 142 and 149 reflect the Family Court's 
findings regarding Father and Adoptive Wife's motivations in seeking to modify the 10/3/18 Visitation Order. These FOFs appear to be based on numerous other unchallenged findings, e.g., FOFs 49-75 and 116-24, which describe instances of conflict between Father and Adoptive Wife on one side, and Maternal Grandparents and Mother's family on the other. See In re Doe, 
107 Hawai# i 12, 19, 108 P.3d 966, 973 (2005) (explaining that 
appellate courts give due deference to the right of the trier of fact to draw reasonable inferences from the evidence adduced). 
9/ In the same testimony, Maternal Grandmother stated that two weeks
earlier, the "El Paso County Courts" had awarded Grandparents additional
visitation with the latter child. In context, it appears that MaternalGrandmother was referring to El Paso County, Colorado rather than El PasoCounty, Texas. 
19  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Family Court also "did not find Father and [Adoptive 
Mother's] testimony credible," a determination that we will not
 
disturb on appeal. See Fisher, 111 Hawai# i at 46, 137 P.3d at 
360. Based on our review of the record, we conclude there was credible evidence of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support FOFs 140 through142 and 149, and we are not left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made.  
C. Effect of Adoption 
Father argues that as a result of the adoption of the 
Children by Adoptive Mother, under HRS § 578-16,
10/ Maternal 
10/ HRS § 578-16 (2018) provides in part: 
Effect of adoption.  (a) A legally adopted individual
shall be considered to be a natural child of the whole blood 
of the adopting parent or parents as provided in the UniformProbate Code, relating to the descent of property. 
(b) The former legal parent or parents of an adopted
individual and any other former legal kindred shall not beconsidered to be related to the individual as provided inthe Uniform Probate Code except as provided in this section. 
(c) An adopted individual and the individual's
adopting parent or parents shall sustain towards each otherthe legal relationship of parents and child and shall haveall the rights and be subject to all the duties of thatrelationship . . . . 
(d) Except as provided in subsection (e), all legal
duties and rights between the individual and theindividual's former legal parent or parents shall cease fromthe time of the adoption; provided that if the individual isadopted by a person married to a legal parent of theindividual, the full reciprocal rights and duties whichtheretofore existed between the legal parent and theindividual, and the rights of inheritance as between theindividual and the legal parent and the legal relatives ofthe parent, as provided in chapter 560, shall continue,notwithstanding the adoption, subject only to the rightsacquired by and the duties imposed upon the adoptive parentsby reason of the adoption. 
(e) Notwithstanding subsections (b) and (d), if an
individual is adopted before that individual attains the ageof majority and: 
(1) The individual is adopted by a spouse of anatural parent of the individual; or 
(2) The individual is adopted by a natural
grandparent, aunt, uncle, or sibling of the
(continued...) 
20 10/(...continued)  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Grandparents "no longer have any legal rights and duties" as to 
the Children. 
Father did not raise this argument in the Family Court. 
"As a general rule, if a party does not raise an argument at trial, that argument will be deemed to have been waived on appeal; this rule applies in both criminal and civil cases." County of Hawaii v. C & J Coupe Family Ltd., 119 Hawai# i 352, 
373, 198 P.3d 615, 636 (2008) (quoting State v. Moses
, 102 
Hawai#i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003)); see Hawai# i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4)(iii). Accordingly, Father's argument is deemed waived. 
III.  Conclusion 
For the reasons discussed above, we affirm the "Order 
Re: [Father's] Motion and Declaration for Post-Decree Relief Filed 2/25/20," entered on September 18, 2020, in the Family Court of the First Circuit. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate Judge JC,Self-representedRespondent-Appellant 
TG and AG,
Self-represented Intervenors-Appellees 
individual or the spouse of a naturalgrandparent, aunt, uncle, or sibling; 
then for the purposes of interpretation or construction of adisposition in any will, trust, or other lifetimeinstrument, whether executed before or after the order ofadoption, and for purposes of determining heirs at law, therights of the adopted individual and the individual'sdescendants with respect to the individual's natural familyshall not be affected by the adoption, and they shall beincluded in any determination of heirs or members of anyclass, unless specifically excluded by name or class. 
. . . . 
21 