NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-20-0000759 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JASON F. TENGAN, Defendant-Appellant. 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
WAILUKU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 2DTA-20-00442) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Leonard, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Jason F. Tengan (Tengan) appeals 
from the District Court of the Second Circuit, Wailuku Division's 
(district court) December 9, 2020 Judgment and Notice of Entry of 
Judgment.1 
On appeal, Tengan contends the district court erred by 
denying his Motion to Suppress because there was no reasonable 
suspicion to stop his vehicle. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Tengan's point of error as follows, and affirm. 
1  The Honorable Douglas J. Sameshima presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State charged Tengan with (1) Operating a Vehicle 
Under the Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1), and/or 291E-61(a)(3) (Supp. 2019),
2 (2) Inattention to Driving, in violation 
of HRS § 291-12 (Supp. 2019),3 and (3) Accidents Involving Damage 
to Vehicle or Property, in violation of HRS § 291C-13 (Supp. 
2019).4  After entering into a conditional guilty plea and 
reserving his right to appeal, Tengan was convicted of OVUII and Operating Generally, in violation of Maui Traffic Code (MTC) 
§ 10.52.010.
5 
2  HRS § 291E-61 provides, in pertinent part, as follows: 
(a)  A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the person
operates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle: 
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an 
amount sufficient to impair the person's normalmental faculties or ability to care for theperson and guard against casualty;  
. . . . 
(3) With .08 or more grams of alcohol per two
hundred ten liters of breath[.] 
3  HRS § 291-12, Inattention to Driving, provides as follows: 
Whoever operates any vehicle negligently as to cause a
collision with, or injury or damage to, as the case may be,any person, vehicle or other property shall be fined notmore than $500 or imprisoned not more than thirty days, orboth, and may be subject to a surcharge of up to $100, whichshall be deposited into the trauma system special fund. 
4  HRS § 291C-13, Accidents Involving Damage to Vehicle or Property,
provides as follows: 
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resultingonly in damage to a vehicle or other property that is drivenor attended by any person shall immediately stop suchvehicle at the scene of the accident or as close thereto as possible, but shall forthwith return to, and in every eventshall remain at, the scene of the accident until the driverhas fulfilled the requirements of section 291C-14.  Everystop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than isnecessary. 
5  As part of the Maui County Code, MTC § 10.52.010, Operation
Generally, provides that "[e]very operator of a motor vehicle shall exercise
(continued...) 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Tengan claims there was no reasonable suspicion to stop 
his vehicle because Maui Police Department Officer Caleb 
Guariello (Officer Guariello) "did not receive information from 
[the complaining witness] that Tengan violated any offense, 
criminal or otherwise.  Similarly, prior to pulling Tengan's vehicle over, the officer did not observe Tengan commit any violations."  Tengan, thus, argues that "Officer Guariello did not have objective specific and articulable facts to support the stop." 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court "has held that a stop of a 
vehicle for an investigatory purpose constitutes a seizure withinthe meaning of the constitutional protection against unreasonablesearches and seizures."  State v. Heapy, 113 Hawai# i 283, 290, 
151 P.3d 764, 771 (2007) (citation, internal quotation marks, andbrackets omitted).  A "narrowly defined exception to the warrant requirement is that a police officer may stop an automobile and detain its occupants if that officer has a reasonable suspicion that the person stopped was engaged in criminal conduct."  Id. (citation, internal quotation marks, emphasis, and ellipsis omitted).   
 
But, "the police officer must be able to point to 
specific and articulable facts which, taken together with rational inferences from those facts, reasonably warrant that intrusion."  Id. at 291, 151 P.3d at 772 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).  "The totality of the circumstances 
5(...continued)
due care in the operation of such vehicle upon any highway in order to avoid
colliding with any vehicle, pedestrian, other object, or embankment on or offthe roadway." 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
measured by an objective standard, must indicate that criminal 
activity is afoot."  Id. at 292, 151 P.3d at 773 (citation and emphasis omitted). 
Reasonable suspicion does not require an officer to 
prove every element of a crime was committed.  United States v. Blessinger, 752 F. App'x 765, 770 (11th Cir. 2018) ("[R]easonablesuspicion does not require proof that every element of the offense has been met."); State v. Sisson, 417 P.3d 268, No. 117,198, 2018 WL 2072802 at *3 (Kan. Ct. App. May 4, 2018) (MO) (explaining that the state does not need to prove every element of the crime, only show officer reasonably believed the crime had been or was being committed based on totality of circumstances); Texas Dep't of Pub. Safety v. Axt, 292 S.W.3d 736, 739 (Tex. Ct. App. 2009) ("The state is not required to showan offense was actually committed or to prove every element of a specific offense" for reasonable suspicion). 
 
 
Here, Officer Guariello testified he heard over the 
radio there was a motor vehicle accident at Jack in the Box at 
700 Lower Main and proceeded to that location.  The complaining witness waived him down and informed him that the car that hit her left the scene going up Lower Main towards Waena.  She also provided a description of the car, a white sedan like a Crown Victoria with the license plate "LET 480." 
Officer Guariello left the scene, and located a white 
car around the intersection of Lower Main and Waena.  After confirming that the license plate matched, Officer Guariello stopped the car and identified Tengan as the driver. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
With information from the complaining witness, Officer 
Guariello had specific and articulable facts that constituted 
reasonable suspicion to stop Tengan.  Officer Guariello knew a motor vehicle accident was reported, he knew the description and license plate number of the car that left the scene of the accident, and he knew the direction in which the responsible car drove.  Officer Guariello located a car matching the description and license plate number in the location described by the complaining witness.  Under these circumstances, Officer Guariello had specific and articulable facts that, taken together with rational inferences from those facts, reasonably warranted stopping Tengan. 
Officer Guariello need not have been told there was 
actual damage, or seen the damage himself under the circumstances of this case.  Notably, Inattentive Driving and Operation Generally do not require damage to a vehicle.  Nonetheless, the information Officer Guariello obtained from the complaining witness was specific enough to warrant a traffic stop.  Thus, the district court did not err by denying the Motion to Suppress. 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the district court's 
December 9, 2020 Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 24, 2022. 
On the briefs: Taryn R. Tomasa,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Mark R. Simonds,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Maui,for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Katherine G. LeonardPresiding Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate Judge 
5 