NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-23-0000689 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
IN RE TRUST AGREEMENT OF KARL KRIEG, Settlor, 
(CASE NO. 3CTR-21-0000005) 
___________________ 
IN THE MATTER OF MARGUERITE KRIEG REVOCABLE 
TRUST AGREEMENT, DATED DECEMBER 28, 1993 
(CASE NO. 3CTR-22-0000004) 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Guidry, JJ.) 
Respondent-Appellant Alexander Krieg (Alexander) 
appeals from the: (1) July 11, 2023 "Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting Petitioner[-Appellee] Eric Karl Krieg's [(
Eric)] Motion for Summary Judgment on 
Petition for Instructions and Relief for Breach of Trust, Filed February 9, 2022 [Dkt. 24] and Order Denying the Motion for 
Summary Judgment of [Alexander], as the Successor Trustee of the 
Karl Krieg [(Karl)] Revocable Trust Agreement [(Karl's Trust)] Electronically Filed
Intermediate Court of Appeals
CAAP-23-0000689
28-MAY-2026
07:53 AM
Dkt. 88 SONOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
2 Dated December 28, 1993, as Amended Filed April 21, 2023 [Dkt. 
140]" (Summary Judgment Order); (2) October 19, 2023 "Order 
Granting [Eric's] Request for Attorneys' Fees and Costs Against 
[Karl's Trust]" (Attorneys' Fees Order); (3) October 19, 2023 
"Final Judgment on Order Granting [Eric's] Motion for Summary 
Judgment on Petition for Instructions and Relief for Breach of 
Trust, Filed February 9, 2022"; and (4) July 26, 2024 "Amended 
Final Judgment as to All Claims and All Parties" (Final Judgment), entered by the Circuit Court of the Third 
Circuit1 
(probate court). 
In December 1993, Karl and his wife, Marguerite Krieg 
(Marguerite), separately executed revocable trust agreements: Karl's Trust, and the "Marguerite Krieg Revocable Trust 
Agreement dated December 28, 1993" (
Marguerite's Trust).  At the 
time of their execution, Karl's Trust and Marguerite's Trust were "A-B Trusts" that included mirror trust provisions. 
In July 1999, Karl and Marguerite each conveyed to 
their respective Trusts an undivided one-half fee simple interest, as tenants in common, in their Kailua-Kona residence 
(Real Property).  The conveyance was executed by the "Apartment 
Deed to Trustees" (Apartment Deed) that was filed with the State 
of Hawaiʻ i Bureau of Conveyances. 
 
1  The Honorable Robert D.S. Kim presided over this matter.  The 
Honorable Kimberly B.M. Tsuchiya entered the July 26, 2024 Final Judgment on 
temporary remand.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
3 Karl became successor trustee of Marguerite's Trust 
upon her passing in June 2017.  Pursuant to the terms of 
Marguerite's Trust: Marguerite's Trust became irrevocable upon 
Marguerite's passing; as successor trustee, Karl was to hold and 
administer the residuary trust estate as the "Family Trust"; and 
Karl was entitled to all net income of the trust for his 
lifetime.  The principal of Marguerite's Trust could only be 
utilized as the trustee determined to be "necessary" for Karl's "support, maintenance, and health."
 
Upon becoming successor trustee, Karl proceeded to 
transfer the principal of Marguerite's Trust -- i.e., 
Marguerite's one-half interest in the Real Property and 
Marguerite's Merrill Lynch account -- as well as items of 
Marguerite's personal property, into Karl's Trust (July 2017 
Transfers).  Karl then amended Karl's Trust to provide for the 
distribution of the assets to Alexander, with "no bequest or 
devise" for Eric. 
Karl passed in April 2021.  Upon Karl's passing, 
Alexander became the successor trustee of Karl's Trust, and the successor in interest of Karl's estate.  It appears undisputed 
that Eric learned for the first time of the July 2017 Transfers, 
and the subsequent amendments to Karl's Trust, in May 2021.  In NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
4 February 2022, Eric filed a "Petition for Instructions and 
Relief for Breach of Trust."2   
In April 2023, Alexander and Eric filed cross-motions 
for summary judgment.  Alexander alleged that "[t]he presumption 
in favor of the regularity and good faith of [Karl's] action 
continues and is confirmed by the record," and that "Eric . . . 
acquiesced in his father [Karl's] action, waived and 
relinquished his claims as a contingent, remainder beneficiary of [Marguerite's] trust estate."  
Eric alleged, inter alia, that 
Karl had breached his fiduciary duties as successor trustee of Marguerite's Trust, and requested that the probate court 
"rescind[] and revoke[]" the July 2017 Transfers.   
The probate court ordered the following: 
1. [Eric's] Motion for Summary Judgment filed April 
27, 2023, is GRANTED.  The [probate court] finds and 
concludes that there is no genuine issue of material fact, 
and that movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.  
In granting the motion the court enters the following orders, consistent with this ruling. 
 
2. The "Successor Trustee's Deed" executed on July 
22, 2017, recorded in the Bureau [of Conveyances] as Doc 
No(s) A- 64700453, is hereby voided and all right, title and 
interest, together with the reversions, remainders, rents, 
issues and profits thereof, from the date of this order, in 
the undivided FIFTY PERCENT (50%) interest in the [ Real 
Property], previously held by Marguerite's Trust, is hereby determined to be vested in [Eric] and [Alexander], 
 
2  In February 2022, Eric also filed a petition to be appointed 
successor trustee of Marguerite's T rust in related case no. 3CTR-22- 0000004.  
Case no. 3CTR- 22-0000004 was consolidated with the underlying case no. 3CTR-
21-0000005 for purposes of an evidentiary hearing only.  The evidentiary 
hearing, which was calendared for September 26, 2022, was continued, and the probate court subsequently resolved the underlying matter on the parties' 
cross-motions for summary judgment without an evidentiary hearing.  No final 
judgment has been entered in 3CTR-22- 0000004, and that matter remains pending 
before the probate court.
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
5 individually, as a fee simple undivided one half (1/2) 
interest each, as tenants in common, pursuant to the terms 
of [Marguerite's Trust]. 
 
3. That [Eric's] reasonable attorneys' fees and costs 
for having to bring this action or in connection with this 
proceeding and as related to the entry of this order shall 
be paid from Karl's Trust.  Counsel for [Eric] shall file 
the appropriate application with supporting documents to 
obtain such relief. 
 
4. The Motion for Summary Judgment of [Alexander], as 
the Successor Trustee of [Karl's Trust], filed April 21, 2023 [Dkt. 140], is hereby DENIED. 
 
(Emphasis added.) 
The probate court entered final judgment, and 
Alexander appealed.  Alexander contends that the probate court 
erred in granting summary judgment in Eric's favor, and in 
determining that Eric is entitled to half of Marguerite's fifty 
percent interest in the Real Property.3  Upon careful review of 
the record, briefs, and relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Alexander's contentions of 
error as follows. 
 
3  Alexander's opening brief sets forth various "assignments of 
error," contending that the probate court erred: (1) by "fail[ing] to make 
findings and conclusions"; (2) by disregarding the "existence of genuine 
issues of material fact"; (3) with regard to various "mixed findings and 
conclusions"; (4) with regard to various "conclusions of law"; (5) by 
entering judgment against Alexander, and awarding attorneys' fees and costs 
to Eric; and (6) in denying Alexander's motion for summary judgment.   
(Formatting and capitalization altered.)  These assignments of error are not 
compliant with Hawaiʻ i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28.  We consolidate 
and reorder Alexander's contentions herein.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
6 We review the probate court's Summary Judgment Order 
de novo, applying the same standard applied by the probate 
court: 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the 
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.  A fact is material if proof of that fact would have the 
effect of establishing or refuting one o f the essential 
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the 
parties.  The evidence must be viewed in the light most 
favorable to the non- moving party.  In other words, we must 
view all of the evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom 
in the light most favorable to the party opposing the 
motion. 
 
Hilo Bay Marina, LLC v. State, 156 Hawaiʻ i 478, 486, 575 P.3d 
568, 576 (2025) (citation omitted).   
Alexander argues on appeal that the probate court 
erred by failing to: "address the effect of the increased estate 
and inheritance tax individual exemption" in interpreting the 
directives of Marguerite's Trust; consider the "effect of the 
1999 amendment that added the 'sole judgment and discretion' 
provision" to Marguerite's Trust; "make findings pertaining to [Eric's] disclaimer" of his interest in Marguerite's Trust 
assets; and "make findings pertaining to [Karl's] personal 
financial resources."  
At issue in the underlying proceeding was whether Karl 
breached his fiduciary duty as successor trustee to Marguerite's 
Trust by making the July 2017 Transfers.  In order to establish 
a breach of fiduciary duty, Eric needed to show, NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
7 (1) a fiduciary relationship existed; (2) [Karl] breached 
[his] fiduciary duty to [Eric, as beneficiary of 
Marguerite's Trust]; and (3) the breach was the proximate 
cause of [Eric's] injury.  
Yamaguchi v. Title Guar. Escrow Serv., Inc., No. SCWC-21-
0000097, 2026 WL 789054, at *13 (Haw. Mar. 20, 2026) (citations 
omitted).  Karl, as trustee, benefits from the presumption of 
regularity and good faith, such that "the person questioning the 
trustee's action" bears "the burden of overcoming the 
presumption, but which requires the trustee ultimately to 
justify his action if sufficient evidence is produced to 
overcome the presumption."  Tr. Created Under the Will of Damon, 
140 Hawaiʻ i 56, 62, 398 P.3d 645, 651 (2017) (citations omitted).   
Marguerite's Trust plainly provides that "[t]he 
trustee shall . . . pay to . . . [Karl] such amount or amounts of principal of the trust as the trustee may determine to be necessary to provide for [Karl's] support, maintenance, and 
health."  (Emphasis added.)  "A fundamental rule . . . is that 
the intention of the settlor as expressed in a trust instrument 
shall prevail unless inconsistent with some positive rule of 
law."  In re Est. of Damon, 109 Hawaiʻ i 502, 511, 128 P.3d 815, 
824 (2006) (citation omitted).  The probate court correctly 
declined to consider extrinsic evidence -- i.e., the "increased 
estate and inheritance tax individual exemption" -- because the 
language of Marguerite's Trust was clear and unambiguous.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
8 The probate court also correctly determined that 
Marguerite's conveyance of her 50% interest in the Real Property 
into Marguerite's Trust did not constitute an amendment to 
Marguerite's Trust.  By its plain terms, Marguerite's Trust 
could only "be amended by the settlor by a written instrument 
signed and duly acknowledged by both the settlor and the 
trustee."  The Apartment Deed by which Marguerite conveyed her 
interest in the Real Property to Marguerite's Trust did not "duly acknowledge" an "amendment" to Marguerite's Trust. 
Moreover, the probate court correctly determined that 
Eric did not disclaim his interests in Marguerite's Trust assets 
pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 526-5 (2018).  
Alexander produced evidence that Eric made the following 
statements with regard to inheritance: "[w]hen my parents pass, 
it all goes to my daughters any way- I don't want anything"; 
"I'm tired of all this fighting and back stabbing. . . . It's 
all yours"; and "Dad give it all to [Alexander] or whom ever you want to, It's all yours."  These statements do not meet the 
requirements of HRS § 526-5(c) (2018), which provides that, 
"[t]o be effective, a disclaimer [of any interest in or power 
over property] must be in a writing or other record, declare the 
disclaimer, describe the interest or power disclaimed, be signed 
by the person making the disclaimer, and be delivered or filed 
in the manner provided in section 526-12."   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
9 The probate court did err, however, in determining, at 
the summary judgment stage, that there is no "clear and 
convincing evidence" in the record to establish that the July 
2017 Transfers were "in fact necessary for Karl's support, 
maintenance, and health."  See Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawaiʻ i 43, 
64, 85 P.3d 150, 171 (2004) (holding that "the circuit court 
applied the incorrect [clear and convincing evidence] standard" 
because, "[i]n determining whether summary judgment was 
appropriate[,] . . . the circuit court was required to view the 
evidence in the light most favorable to . . . the non-moving 
party." (citation omitted)).   
Marguerite's Trust states, in relevant part, 
1-8.1.  INCOME AND PRINCIPAL DISTRIBUTIONS: Commencing with 
[Marguerite's] death, all net income of [Marguerite's 
Trust] shall be paid to (or used and applied for the 
benefit and account of) [Karl], in convenient installments 
at least quarterly, for the lifetime of [Karl].  [Karl, as 
successor trustee] shall also pay to (or use and apply for 
the benefit and account of) [Karl, as Marguerite's spouse] such amount or amounts of principal of [Marguerite's Trust] 
as [Karl] may determine to be necessary to provide for 
[Karl's] support, maintenance, and health.  Prior to making 
any principal distributions, [Karl] shall have discretion 
to take into consideration all other funds available to said spouse for such purposes. . . . 
 
(Emphasis added.) 
The record reflects that Alexander introduced some 
evidence, including the "Successor Trustee's Deed" and 
"Successor Trustee's Assignment of Trust Assets," to support his 
contention that the principal of Marguerite's Trust was NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
10 necessary for Karl's "support, maintenance, and health."  The 
Successor Trustee's Deed instructs that, 
The Successor Trustee of [Marguerite's Trust] has 
determined that it is necessary for the support, 
maintenance and health of [Karl], the surviving spouse of [Marguerite], that the principal of the trust be paid and 
delivered to said [Karl], specifically the [R]eal 
[P]roperty[.] 
 
(Emphasis added.)  And the Successor Trustee's Assignment of 
Trust Assets instructs that, inter alia,  
The Successor Trustee of [Marguerite's Trust] has 
determined that it is necessary for the support, 
maintenance and health of [Karl], the surviving spouse of 
[Marguerite], that the principal of the trust be paid and 
delivered to said [Karl], specifically any monies, funds 
and interests in bank accounts, investment accounts, mutual funds, stocks and other financial holdings standing in the 
name of [Marguerite], as the Trustee of [Marguerite's 
Trust]. 
 
(Emphasis added.) 
Although the record does not reflect that the 
transferred principal was actually used by Karl for his support, 
maintenance, or health, or why a transfer was necessary because 
Karl, as successor trustee, was authorized to invade principal 
without first transferring it out of Marguerite's Trust, we 
conclude that Alexander's evidence raised a genuine issue of 
material fact as to whether Karl's conveyance of the assets was necessary for Karl's "support, maintenance, and health," and 
therefore within Karl's discretion as successor trustee.  See 
Omerod v. Heirs of Kaheananui, 116 Hawaiʻ i 239, 254-55, 172 P.3d 
983, 998-99 (2007) (On summary judgment, "we must view all of 
the evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
11 most favorable to the party opposing the motion." (citations 
omitted)).  We therefore conclude that the probate court erred 
in granting summary judgment in Eric's favor.   
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm in part, and 
vacate in part, the Summary Judgment Order, and we vacate the 
Attorneys' Fees Order and Final Judgment.  We remand for further 
proceedings consistent with this summary disposition order.  On 
remand, we instruct the probate court to conduct an evidentiary hearing to (1) resolve the genuine issue of material fact 
discussed above, and (2) to make appropriate findings of fact 
and conclusions of law as to whether Karl's transfer of the 
principal of Marguerite's Trust to Karl's Trust was necessary 
for Karl's "support, maintenance, and health."   
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻ i
, May 28, 202 6. 
On the briefs:  
 Michael J. Matsukawa,  
for Respondent-Appellant. 
 Michael S. Zola,  for Petitioner-Appellee. 
 
 /s/ Katherine G. Leonard Presiding Judge  
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
Associate Judge 
 
 /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
Associate Judge
 
 