  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000741 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MARK BECKER, Defendant-Appellant 
A
PPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2CPC-17-0000286) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Mark Vincent Becker (Becker) 
appeals from the Judgment Conviction and Sentence, Notice of 
Entry (
Judgment) entered on August 1, 2018, in the Circuit Court 
of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).1 
On April 25, 2017, Becker was charged by complaint with 
one count of Attempted Murder in the Second Degree (Attempted 
Murder) in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
1 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§§ 705-500(2) (2014)2 and 707-701.5 (2014).3 Following a jury 
trial, Becker was convicted of the lesser-included offense of 
Attempted Assault in the First Degree (Attempted Assault First) 
in violation of HRS §§ 705-500(2) and 707-710 (2014),4 and he was 
sentenced to a term of ten years imprisonment. 
Becker raises six points of error on appeal, contending 
that: (1) the Circuit Court deprived Becker of his 
constitutional right to self-representation; (2) the Circuit Court improperly gave the jury an instruction on Attempted Assault First as an included offense; (3) the Circuit Court erred by failing to provide a written instruction on the included 
2 The statute provides, in relevant part: 
§ 705-500 Criminal attempt. . . . 
(2) When causing a particular result is an element of
the crime, a person is guilty of an attempt to commit the
crime if, acting with the state of mind required toestablish liability with respect to the attendantcircumstances specified in the definition of the crime, theperson intentionally engages in conduct which is asubstantial step in a course of conduct intended or known tocause such a result. 
3 At the time Becker was charged, HRS § 707-701.5 provided: 
§ 707-701.5 Murder in the second degree.  (1) Except
as provided in section 707-701, a person commits the offenseof murder in the second degree if the person intentionallyor knowingly causes the death of another person.
(2) Murder in the second degree is a felony for which
the defendant shall be sentenced to imprisonment as providedin section 706-656. 
4 HRS § 707-710 provides: 
§ 707-710 Assault in the first degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of assault in the first degree if theperson intentionally or knowingly causes serious bodilyinjury to another person. 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
offense of Assault in the Third Degree (Assault Third);  (4) the 
Circuit Court erred by failing to instruct the jury on the 
included offense of Reckless Endangering in the Second Degree 
(Reckless Endangering Second);  (5) Becker was deprived of his 
right to effective assistance of counsel at trial; and (6) there
was insufficient evidence to convict Becker of Attempted AssaultFirst. 65
  
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Becker's points of error as follows: 
(1) Becker contends that the Circuit Court denied him 
his right to self-representation, citing Faretta v. California, 422 U.S. 806, 834 (1975) (holding that a defendant must be free 
5 HRS § 707-712 (2014) provides: 
§ 707-712 Assault in the third degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of assault in the third degree if the
person:
(a) Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly causesbodily injury to another person; or
(b) Negligently causes bodily injury to anotherperson with a dangerous instrument.
(2) Assault in the third degree is a misdemeanor
unless committed in a fight or scuffle entered into bymutual consent, in which case it is a petty misdemeanor. 
6 HRS § 707-714 (2014) provides, in relevant parts: 
§ 707-714 Reckless endangering in the second degree.
(1) A person commits the offense of reckless endangering inthe second degree if the person:
(a) Engages in conduct that recklessly placesanother person in danger of death or seriousbodily injury; or
. . . . 
(2) Reckless endangering in the second degree is a
misdemeanor. 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to decide to conduct his own defense), as well as various cases 
requiring a voluntary, knowing, and intelligent waiver of the right to counsel. He submits that, on March 5, 2018, he "specifically asked the court if he could proceed to trial without an attorney." That is not, however, a completely accurate characterization of the record. 
At the March 5, 2018 hearing, defense counsel Richard 
Gronna (Gronna) orally moved to withdraw as counsel, at Becker's 
request. After the Circuit Court granted Gronna's motion, the 
court said it would take off the motions in limine that were set to be argued that day, as well as the trial that was scheduled to 
start the next day, and the court would set up a hearing for the next week and would try to find another attorney for Becker at that time. Becker then asked the court questions on various issues, ending with: 
[Becker]: Well, can I ask a question? Like is the 
trial going to be -- could I just defend myself and have a
nonjury trial? Do I have to have a jury? Can I refuse a jury trial? 
THE COURT: You want to -- okay. So you want to waive
your --
[Becker]: How does that work? 
THE COURT: -- right to an attorney and you want to
waive your right to a jury? 
[Becker]: Yeah. THE COURT: You want both? [Becker]: The jury is not a good thing for me here in
Hawaii. 
THE COURT: So you're asking to waive your right to a
jury and you're -- so you want an attorney but you don't
want a jury trial? Is that what you're saying? 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Becker]: I think that a jury trial in my -- being
the person that I am and here in Hawaii, it's not a jury of
my peers. It's people who don't like me from --
THE COURT: Okay. 
[Becker]: -- all (inaudible). THE COURT: 
But you want --
[Becker]: So --THE COURT: 
-- an attorney, right? 
[Becker]: -- I think -- you know, I'd trust myself
with you as a person. 
THE COURT: But you want an -- you want an attorney to
represent you, correct? 
[Becker]: 
Can I just have an attorney to help me --
THE COURT: Well --[Becker]: -- and start the trial? Can we go to trial
immediately? If I don't (inaudible) the jury --
THE COURT: Okay. . . . There's two things you're
asking me. 
[Becker]: Right. THE COURT: One, you're saying you want an attorney. [Becker]: 
Right. 
THE COURT: And secondly, you're saying you want --
you don't want a jury to hear your case. Is that what -- is 
that what I'm hearing from you? 
[Becker]: I believe so, yeah. 
THE COURT: Okay. Okay. 
. . . . 
THE COURT: So first -- first things first. [Becker]: Okay. THE COURT: If you don't -- if you want an attorney, I
have to continue that so we can find you an attorney.
That's the first thing. 
Okay? And that's going to take
some time because we've gone through a few -- quite a fewattorneys. Now it's time to look for someone else. Okay?So that's part of it. That's why we're continuing it tonext week Wednesday.
Secondly, yes, there's an option for you to waive jury
trial and just have a trial before myself, just a judge.Yes, that is an option. But I suggest that you -- maybe youshould talk it over with your new attorney first, and if 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that's the way you folks want to go, if that's the way you
want to go, that is a very real possibility to do ajury-waived trial, meaning there will be no jury to hearyour case. It will just be the attorneys, myself, and youand the witnesses. 
[Becker]: And what if I don't even want an attorney
at all? 
THE COURT: Then I will -- if you don't want an
attorney -- I want you to think about this because it's avery serious charge. It's currently an attempted murder inthe second degree, so you're looking at life with apossibility of parole. 
Correct? So it's a very serious
offense. 
So why don't you think about it, and when we come back
next week, we'll have an attorney for you. If you tell me
next week that you want to represent yourself, I'm going toask you a lot of questions just to make sure that it's trulywhat you want to do.  But you should think about that very
hard because if you get convicted of attempted murder in the
second degree, you're looking at life imprisonment without-- with the possibility of parole. 
[Becker engages in various unrelated inquiries, with
responses by the Court and attorneys. Then:] 
[Becker]: Can I ask another question? 
 What about the 
fact of the six-month speedy trial thing? Can I just have 
someone show me the waivers that I've signed and the way it checks out on the calendar. 
THE COURT: You know, you can raise all these issues, 
Mr. Becker, but can you raise them with your new attorney, first of all? Or if you don't want an attorney, we'll go 
through the colloquy next week and you can possibly represent yourself. It's up to you. 
But it's probably easier and it would make more sense 
to have an attorney, because, again, you need to understand you're looking at attempted murder in the second degree, which carries it -- with it a life possibility -- with the possibility of parole sentence. So it's a very, very – 
[Becker]: Most of those --
THE COURT: 
-- serious charge. 
[Becker]: Yeah. Right. And the --
THE COURT: Okay. So we'll see you next week
Wednesday. 
Okay?
Thank you. 
[No further response from Becker. Court was adjourned.] 
(Emphasis added). 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Accordingly, Becker did not unequivocally say that he 
wanted to represent himself. His inquiry to the Circuit Court 
was more in the nature of: what if I want to represent myself? Under no circumstances would Becker's inquiries be considered a valid waiver of his right to an attorney. The Circuit Court's response was to try to clarify what Becker was asking, and then to suggest that Becker think it over and talk to new counsel about it. The court twice informed Becker that when they came back the next week, after Becker had an opportunity to speak with new counsel, if Becker did not want to be represented by counsel, the court would then colloquy him to make sure that was truly what he wanted to do. Throughout the exchange, the court made it clear that it was Becker's decision whether to be represented by counsel or be self-represented. 
At the March 14, 2018 hearing, newly-appointed trial 
counsel Gerald Johnson (Johnson) appeared and said he would need 
six weeks to prepare for trial. Becker indicated that he wanted 
to "go to trial as fast as possible." However, he also indicated that he wanted to meet with Johnson and "talk about everything." Becker was clearly unhappy with any further delay and wanted a "speedy trial." At one point, Becker said he did not need any help, but then again agreed to consult with counsel. 
[Becker]: If it's going to go this route, another six
-- two months sitting in jail, I do not need this help, just
so you know. I want to see the Rule 44 waivers and I want them written down on paper, the dates I signed them, whenthe went to --
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: You talk with Mr. Johnson when you get a
chance. 
[Becker]: Fine. 
Becker then refused to waive his speedy trial rights, 
but never asserted that he wanted to waive his right to counsel 
and proceed pro se. The Circuit Court never denied a request for Becker to proceed without counsel. At no point in subsequent proceedings did Becker state that he wanted to exercise his right to represent himself at trial. 
Becker points to no case law supporting his argument 
that his constitutional right to self-representation was violated under these circumstances, and we find none. Therefore, based on the record in this case, we conclude that Becker's point of error is without merit. 
(2) Becker argues there was no rational basis to 
support the jury instruction on Attempted Assault First as an included offense of Attempted Murder, citing HRS § 701-109(5) (Supp. 2019). The statute provides, in relevant part: 
§ 701-109 Method of prosecution when conduct
establishes an element of more than one offense. . . . 
. . . . 
(4) A defendant may be convicted of an offense
included in an offense charged in the felony complaint,
indictment, or information. 
An offense is so included when: 
(a) It is established by proof of the same or lessthan all the facts required to establish thecommission of the offense charged; or
(b) It consists of an attempt to commit the offensecharged or to commit an offense otherwiseincluded therein; or
(c) It differs from the offense charged only in therespect that a less serious injury or risk ofinjury to the same person, property, or publicinterest or a different state of mind indicatinglesser degree of culpability suffices toestablish its commission. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(5) The court is not obligated to charge the jury
with respect to an included offense unless there is a rational
basis in the evidence for a verdict acquitting the defendantof the offense charged and convicting the defendant of theincluded offense. 
"[J]ury instructions on lesser-included offenses must 
be given where there is a rational basis in the evidence for a 
verdict acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and convicting the defendant of the included offense." State v. Austin, 143 Hawai# i 18, 38, 422 P.3d 18, 38 (2018) (citing State 
v. Flores, 131 
Hawai#i 43, 51, 314 P.3d 120, 128 (2013)). 
Here, the instructions to the jury included: 
Instruction No. 17 
In the Complaint, the Defendant, MARK BECKER, is
charged with the offense of Attempted Murder in the Second
Degree.
A person commits the offense of Attempted Murder in
the Second Degree if he intentionally engages in conductwhich, under the circumstances as he believes them to be, isa substantial step in a course of conduct intended or knownto cause the death of another person.
There are two material elements of the offense of 
Attempted Murder in the Second Degree, each of which theprosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
These two elements are: 1. That on or about April 2, 2017, in the Countyof Maui, State of Hawaii, the Defendant, MARKBECKER, intentionally engaged in conduct; and
2. That the conduct, under the circumstances asDefendant believed them to be, was a substantialstep in a course of conduct intended or known tobe practically certain by the Defendant to causethe death of Carlos Loria. 
Conduct shall not be considered a substantial step
unless it is strongly corroborative of the Defendant'sintent to commit Murder in the Second Degree, which is,intentionally or knowingly causing the death of anotherperson. 
. . . 
Instruction No. 19 
If and only if you find the Defendant not guilty of
Attempted Murder in the Second Degree, or you are unable toreach a unanimous verdict as to Attempted Murder in theSecond Degree, then you must consider whether the Defendantis guilty or not guilty of the included offense of AttemptedAssault in the First Degree.
A person commits the offense of Attempted Assault in
the First Degree if he intentionally engages in conduct 
9  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
which, under the circumstances as he believes them to be, is
a substantial step in a course of conduct intended or knownto cause serious bodily injury to another person.
There are two material elements of the offense of 
Attempted Assault in the First Degree, each of which theprosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
These two elements are: 1. That on or about April 2, 2017, in the County ofMaui, State of Hawaii, the Defendantintentionally engaged in conduct; and
2. That the conduct, under the circumstances asDefendant believed them to be, was a substantialstep in a course of conduct intended or known tobe practically certain by the Defendant to causeserious bodily injury to Carlos Loria. 
Conduct shall not be considered a substantial step
unless it is strongly corroborative of the Defendant'sintent to commit Attempted Assault in the First Degree,which is intentionally causing serious bodily injury toanother person. 
(Emphasis added). 
The difference between these two instructions was 
whether Becker's conduct could have been intended or known to be
practically certain to cause "the death of Carlos Loria" versus 
"serious bodily injury to Carlos Loria" (Loria).  
Becker argues that there was no rational basis for the 
jury to find there was an attempted assault because Becker never 
denied hitting Loria's bicycle with his van; rather, Becker argues that it was not intentional. Becker further argues in this case, there was "no attempt" because it was a completed act, 
i.e., a completed act of Assault. However, based on the evidence, discussed below, there was a rational basis for the 
jury to find that Becker intended or knew that hitting Loria's bicycle with his van was practically certain to cause serious bodily injury to (but not the death of) Loria, but a jury could determine that Loria's injuries did not meet the definition of 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
serious bodily injury. See HRS § 707-700 (2014) (defining 
serious bodily injury as "bodily injury which creates a 
substantial risk of death or which causes serious, permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ"). 
In his reply brief, Becker also points to the testimony 
of Dr. Gabrielle O'Sullivan (Dr. O'Sullivan) to argue that 
Loria's resultant injuries were not serious enough to create "a 
substantial risk of death or which causes serious, permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ" as "serious bodily injury" is defined by statute. 
Other evidence at trial -- including surveillance 
footage and witness testimony -- showed: Becker's van striking Loria's bicycle causing Loria to launch through the air off of the bicycle; the bicycle being broken by being run over by the van after Loria was thrown from it; Loria's testimony of the van passing "right by my head" when it passed where Loria had landed; and testimony by Dr. O'Sullivan that Loria's injuries could have been life-threatening. 
While the evidence arguably showed that Loria did not 
ultimately suffer a "serious bodily injury," under the facts here, with the van striking the bicycle that Loria was riding, the jury could rationally conclude that the act was intended by Becker and could have been practically certain to cause serious 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
bodily injury to Loria. Thus, there was a rational basis here 
for the jury to acquit Becker of Attempted Murder and convict Becker of Attempted Assault First. See Flores, 131 Hawai# i at 
53, 314 P.3d at 130. We conclude the Circuit Court did not err by including the Attempted Assault First instruction. 
(3) 
Becker argues that the Circuit Court plainly erred 
in not providing the jury with a w
ritten copy of Instruction No. 
21, which was read to the jury, along with the other jury instructions. Instruction No. 21 instructed the jury on the lesser included offense of Assault Third.
 7
The record on appeal contains a document entitled Jury 
Instructions Read to the Jury/Given to the Jury Nos. 1-32. It appears that, prior to the court's oral reading of the instructions, defense counsel was provided a "clean copy" of the written instructions that were to be read to the jury.
8 Prior to 
reading the instructions, the Circuit Court said, "Ladies and gentlemen, it is now my duty to instruct you on the law applicable to this case. You have in front of you packets of the jury instructions. So you're free to read along with me." Thus, at this point, it appears that the court, all members of the 
7 At trial, Becker made a blanket objection to instructing the jury
on any lesser included offenses. Instruction No. 21 was given to the jury
over Becker's objection. 
8 At the beginning of the proceeding, Defense counsel said to the
court, "And, Your Honor, I apologize. I didn't print out the clean copy ofthe new instructions." The court responded, "So the clerk will give you aclean copy once we settle the instructions." At no point did counsel indicatethat he had not been given the clean copy as directed by the court. 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
jury, and prosecution and defense counsel had the written 
instructions in front of them, and everybody was invited to follow along as the court read them. 
The transcript of the proceedings reflects that, after 
reading Instruction No. 20, the court read Instruction No. 21 to the jury, as follows: 
If and only if, one, you find the defendant not guilty 
of Attempted Murder in the Second Degree or you are unable 
to reach a unanimous verdict as to Attempted Murder in the Second  Degree and, two, you find the defendant not guilty of 
offense of Attempted Assault in the First Degree or you are unable to reach a unanimous verdict as to Attempted Assault in the First Degree and, three, you find the defendant not guilty of Assault in the First Degree or you are unable to reach a unanimous verdict as to Assault in the Second Degree, then you must consider whether the defendant is guilty or not guilty of the included offense of Assault in the Third Degree. 
A person commits the offense of Assault in the Third 
Degree if he intentionally, knowingly or recklessly causes bodily injury to another person. 
There are two material elements of the offense of 
Assault in the Third Degree, each of which the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt. 
These two elements are: One, that on or about April 2nd, 2017, in the County 
of Maui, State of Hawaii, the defendant caused bodily injuryto Carlos Loria; and two, that the defendant did so intentionally, knowingly or recklessly.  
The Circuit Court then proceeded to read Instruction 
No. 22, and the rest of the instructions. When finished, the 
court asked counsel to approach the bench and, outside the hearing of the jury, the court asked, "Any objections to the reading?" Both attorneys responded, "No objection." Nor does the record reflect any one else in the courtroom -- such as court personnel or the jury members who were encouraged to read along with the judge -- noting a missing page in the written packet of jury instructions. Two jury communications were put on the 
13  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
record, neither of which raised any question about Instruction 
No. 21. Later that same day, the jury indicated that it reached a unanimous verdict finding Becker "Guilty of the included offense of Attempted Assault in the First Degree." 
Nevertheless, the document that was filed in the 
Circuit Court record on May 16, 2018, nine days later, which is entitled the Jury Instructions Read to the Jury/Given to the Jury Nos. 1-32, is missing the page containing Jury Instruction No. 21.
9 We note that the title of the document indicates that it 
includes the instructions read to the jury, which is plainly 
inconsistent with the transcript of the court's reading of the 
instructions, including Instruction No. 21. 
An appellate court "will apply the plain error standard 
of review to correct errors [that] seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings, to serve the ends of justice, and to prevent the denial of fundamental rights." State v. Kikuta, 125 Hawai# i 78, 95, 253 P.3d 639, 656 
(2011) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Notwithstanding that there appears to be a page missing 
in the document filed by the Circuit Court on May 16, 2018, nothing presented to this court or in the record on appeal clearly indicates that the packet of instructions provided to the jury was missing Instruction No. 21, as opposed to indicating that a clerical error occurred in conjunction with the filing of 
14 9 There was one numbered instruction on each page.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that document. Moreover, considering the instructions as a whole 
and all of the circumstances here, including but not limited to the judge's oral charge just hours before the jury's verdict, which indisputably contained Instruction No. 21, we conclude that Becker has not shown that there was a reasonable possibility that error with respect to the Jury Instruction addressing Assault Third contributed to his conviction. 
(4) Becker argues that the Circuit Court plainly erred 
in failing to sua sponte instruct the jury on the included 
offense of Reckless Endangering Second. 
As set forth above, "jury instructions on 
lesser-included offenses must be given where there is a rational basis in the evidence for a verdict acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and convicting the defendant of the included offense." Flores, 131 Hawai# i at 51, 314 P.3d at 128. A person 
commits the misdemeanor offense of Reckless Endangering Second if he or she "[e]ngages in conduct that recklessly places another person in danger of death or serious bodily injury." 
HRS § 707-
714(1)(a). Hawai#i courts have recognized Reckless Endangering 
Second to be a lesser-included offense of, 
inter alia, attempted 
murder. See State v. Rumbawa, 94 Hawai# i 513, 516-21, 17 P.3d 
862, 865-70 (App. 2001) (citing State v. Feliciano
, 62 Haw. 637, 
618 P.2d 306 (1980)). 
Here, Becker testified, inter alia, that he was only 
trying to capture Loria, after a prior altercation with Loria 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
followed by Loria allegedly smashing Becker's windshield with a 
rock. Becker said, at one point, he was just trying to knock Loria off the bicycle. He also testified that his visibility was limited and the "accident" happened when he was focused on trying to avoid hitting a fire hydrant. Accordingly, Becker argues that, based on his testimony, a jury could have found that he acted recklessly and his recklessness placed Loria in danger of death or serious bodily injury. 
Based on our review of all of the evidence, we conclude 
that there was a rational basis in the evidence for a verdict 
acquitting Becker of, inter alia, Attempted Murder, and instead convicting him of Reckless Endangering Second. 
The State argues that any such error is harmless beyond 
a reasonable doubt under State v. Magbulos, 141 Hawai# i 483, 413 
P.3d 387 (App. 2018), because the jury convicted Becker of the 
higher-included offense of Attempted Assault First, despite being 
instructed on, 
inter alia, Assault Third, which like Reckless 
Endangering Second is a misdemeanor-level offense. In Magbulos
, 
this court discussed the supreme court's jurisprudence concerning 
whether failure to instruct on a lesser-included offense can be harmless error. Id. at 498-99, 413 P.3d at 402-03 (citations 
omitted). 
Here, the jury was instructed on Attempted Murder, 
Attempted Assault First, Assault Second, and Assault Third, and was found guilty of Attempted Assault First, which is two levels 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
higher than Reckless Endangering Second. The jury was not left 
with an "all or nothing" choice between the guilty verdict it rendered and a complete acquittal. See id. As this court held 
in Magbulos, "absent unusual circumstances, the failure to instruct on a lesser included offense two levels below the offense for which the defendant is found guilty will ordinarily be harmless." Id. at 499, 413 P.3d at 403. Here, akin to 
Magbulos, it strains credulity to believe that the jury who found Becker guilty of Attempted Assault First, despite being instructed on the lesser-included offenses of Assault Second, and Assault Third, might reasonably have found him guilty of Reckless Endangering Second if they had been instructed on it. We therefore conclude that there is no reasonable possibility that the Circuit Court's failure to instruct on Reckless Endangering Second affected the outcome in this case. 
(5) Becker argues that he was deprived of his right to 
effective assistance of counsel at trial on multiple grounds. 
First, Becker argues that competent trial counsel would 
have objected to, and/or moved to redact, the "lengthy" portion of the audio recording of a voluntary statement in which Maui Police Department Detective Dennis Lee questioned Becker regarding Becker's attempts to obtain surveillance video from 
Ohana Drapery & Upholstery (Ohana Drapery), including whether 
Becker had offered to buy such footage from Ohana Drapery. 
Becker argues that this evidence was essentially prior bad act 
17  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence under Hawai# i Rules of Evidence Rule 404, and that it 
undermined his credibility because it could have appeared as 
though he was afraid that such video could contain incriminating 
evidence that he sought to hide or destroy. 
However, Becker's theory of the case was consistent 
with his recorded statement that Loria was the aggressor that 
Becker only acted in response to; Johnson argued as much in his closing: "[a]nd one thing that is good is that you will have Mr. Becker's statement to the police." Likewise, Becker's attempt to obtain evidence from Ohana Drapery –- which was located at the site of the initial altercation with Loria -- was consistent with Becker's story that he was looking for evidence to support his account of fearing Loria as an aggressor. Becker testified that he was not offering to buy the evidence, but that he was trying to indicate his seriousness by "pull[ing] out a $100 bill in my pocket" as a means of showing that he wasn't "a homeless guy" wasting the business owner's time. 
Thus, it appears that trial counsel's non-objection to 
the portion of the recorded police interview discussing an alleged attempt to obtain video evidence from Ohana Drapery had an obvious tactical basis and a valid strategic rationale. State 
v. Richie, 88 Hawai# i 19, 39-40, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247-48 (1998) 
("matters presumably within the judgment of counsel, like t
rial 
strategy, will rarely be second-guessed by judicial hindsight." 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted)). We conclude 
18 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the lack of objection to this evidence did not fall below 
the range of competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases. State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai# i 504, 513-14, 78 P.3d 317, 326-27 
(2003). 
Relatedly, Becker argues that trial counsel was 
ineffective when he withdrew Becker's Motion in Limine because 
that motion would have led to the redaction of the Ohana Drapery 
questions and answers. The State notes that Johnson's withdrawal of the motion was at Becker's specific request when Johnson wanted to proceed with it, which Becker replies shows that Johnson performed incompetently because he should not have acceded to Becker's request on withdrawing the motion. However, 
as previously discussed, withdrawal of the Motion in Limine was consistent with Becker's strategy of demonstrating that Becker 
was looking for evidence to bolster his claim that Loria was the aggressor and wrongdoer, and Becker was just trying to capture him, presumably to bring him to justice, when the van-bicycle incident occurred. Accordingly, we reject Becker's argument that he was denied effective assistance of counsel when Johnson 
withdrew the Motion in Limine previously filed by Gronna. 
Becker also argues that trial counsel "proved 
ineffective in getting Loria to admit" to a second confrontation 
with Becker. Counsel tried to impeach Loria with a police report, but Loria claimed that the report was not a correct 
19 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
summary of what he told the police. Becker contends that 
competent counsel would have then subpoenaed the police officer who took Loria's statement. However, as the State argues, whether there was one confrontation or two had little or no bearing on the charged conduct and Becker's state of mind. We cannot conclude that counsel's failure to further impeach Loria constituted ineffective assistance of counsel. 
Finally, Becker argues that counsel's failure to 
request a jury instruction on Reckless Endangering Second and failure to object to the lack of a written jury instruction on Assault Third were further instances of ineffective assistance of counsel. However, as we have rejected Becker's argument that any such instructional error constituted reversible error, we conclude that any such error did not result in a withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. 
Accordingly, we conclude that Becker's contentions that 
he was provided ineffective assistance of trial counsel are without merit. 
(6) Becker argues that there was not sufficient 
evidence to convict him of Attempted Assault First, pointing to his own testimony as credible and Loria's testimony as not credible, as well as his earlier argument that there was no evidence of an attempt offense because there was a completed act when Becker struck Loria's bicycle. Becker's argument is without 
20 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
merit. As discussed in conjunction with our disposition of 
Becker's argument that the Circuit Court erred in instructing the jury on Attempted Assault First, and viewing the evidence adduced at trial in the light most favorable to the prosecution, there was evidence of sufficient quality and probative value to enable the jury to find that Becker intentionally engaged in conduct that constituted a substantial step in a course of conduct that Becker intended or knew to be practically certain to cause serious bodily injury to Loria. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's August 1, 2018 
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 30, 2021. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge 
21 Dwight C.H. Lum, for Defendant-Appellant. 
Gerald K. Enriques, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Maui, for Plaintiff-Appellee. 