 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000660 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ALEXANDER MIRANDA, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CR. NO. 16-1-0315) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Alexander Miranda (Miranda) appeals 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence; Notice of 
Entry entered on July 12, 2017 (Judgment), by the Circuit Court 
of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 Miranda also challenges 
the Circuit Court's June 16, 2017 Findings of Fact, Conclusions 
of Law, and Order Denying Motion to Set Aside the Verdict and Enter a Judgment of Acquittal and/or Grant Defendant a New Trial (Order Denying Motion for New Trial). Miranda's conviction 
arises out of an altercation Miranda and his friends, one of whom 
was Steven Rodriguez (Rodriguez), had with two other individuals 
during a night out drinking in Waikiki. Following a trial by 
1 The Honorable Sherri L. Iha presided.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
jury, Miranda was convicted of one count of Assault in the Second 
Degree (Assault Second), a violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes 
(HRS) § 707-711(1)(a) and/or HRS § 707-711(1)(b)(2014).2 
I. BACKGROUND 
On March 2, 2016, Miranda was charged by Felony 
Information with one count of Assault Second, averring that on or 
about March 27, 2015, Miranda intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly caused substantial bodily injury to David Metts (Metts), a violation of HRS § 707-711(1)(a) and/or HRS § 707-
711(1)(b). 
A. Pretrial Matters 
1. Motion to Dismiss 
On August 26, 2016, Miranda filed a Motion to Dismiss 
for Violation of Due Process and Pre-Indictment Delay (Motion to 
Dismiss), arguing that the case must be dismissed as a result of undue delay in the State of Hawaii's (State's) filing of the Felony Information, which allegedly resulted in the loss of a 
surveillance video that was crucial to Miranda's defense. Miranda alleged that the surveillance video would have shown that Metts was the first aggressor in the encounter, that Miranda did not cause substantial bodily injury to Metts, and/or that Miranda acted reasonably in self-defense and/or defense of others. 
2 HRS § 707-711 states, in relevant part: 
§ 707-711 Assault in the second degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of assault in the second degree if:
(a) The person intentionally or knowingly causes
substantial bodily injury to another;
(b) The person recklessly causes serious orsubstantial bodily injury to another[.] 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 Miranda's counsel's attached declaration averred that 
on March 28, 2015, Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Detective 
Michael Burger (Det. Burger) was assigned to investigate the incident. It averred that following the detective's review of 
investigation reports, his interview of Metts and two other witnesses, Metts's friend Casey Smith (Smith) and Miranda's 
friend Victor Vargas (Vargas), photographic lineups shown to Metts and Smith of the alleged assailants, and the interrogation 
of Miranda and Rodriguez, Det. Burger released Miranda and Rodriguez from police custody. The Felony Information was filed on March 2, 2016, almost a year from the date of the offense. 
A hearing was conducted on the Motion to Dismiss on 
September 21, 2016. HPD Officer Arthur Gazelle (Officer Gazelle) 
testified that he responded to an incident on March 27, 2015, 
that occurred in front of an ABC Store in Waikiki. He testified that he was able to view surveillance footage from the ABC Store that captured the sidewalk in front of the store from 11:30 p.m. to 11:34 p.m. Officer Gazelle testified that the video showed two groups of men, some of whom got into an argument.  It 
appeared to the officer that Miranda was engaged in an argument 
with another person, when Metts eventually stepped between them. He said that he did not see Metts or Smith attempt to strike Miranda in any way and that he saw Miranda punch Metts. Officer Gazelle recalled that he observed from that video that about a minute after the first encounter, Miranda and Rodriguez had started to walk away, but Miranda came back and punched Metts one 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 more time. At no point did Officer Gazelle observe Smith or 
Metts engage in fighting. 
Officer Gazelle testified that after viewing the video, 
he asked the ABC Store Assistant Manager, Trisha Vespie (Vespie), 
for a copy of the surveillance footage. Vespie informed Officer 
Gazelle that only the supervisor of their loss prevention program could download the footage, so he left an HPD form with Vespie requesting the video. Vespie said she would forward the form to the supervisor. On cross-examination, Officer Gazelle testified that he did not have a copy of the form he left with Vespie. 
The State submitted an offer of proof with respect to 
the testimony that would have been offered by Det. Burger regarding his efforts to obtain the surveillance video from the ABC Store. Det. Burger would have testified that he spoke with Vespie, who told him to contact the loss prevention supervisor Newell Hirata (Hirata). Det. Burger called Hirata three or four 
times in early to mid-April of 2015, who did not respond. Det. Burger issued an administrative subpoena for the video, after 
which time he was told by Hirata that the video had been destroyed due to the company's thirty-day retention policy. 
Miranda's counsel represented at the hearing that 
Hirata would claim that he was never contacted by Det. Burger and he could not find a request for the video. The Circuit Court offered to continue the hearing so that Miranda could issue a subpoena to Hirata to present this evidence. Miranda's counsel chose not to continue the hearing and asked to proceed to 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argument based on the evidence presented at the hearing because 
the delay would be too long. 
The Circuit Court denied the Motion to Dismiss, 
stating: 
The Court has considered the evidence presented and notes
that the applicable law in -- such as State v. Carvalhoestablishes that in a due process -- allegation of dueprocess violation, the burden is on the movant to showactual prejudice. And they must establish that by proofthat is definite and not speculative in nature to establishactual prejudice. The Court finds that based on the testimony presented, the exhibits, the defendant has not metits burden, so motion is denied. 
2. Motions in Limine 
On April 7, 2017, the State filed a motion in limine 
seeking, inter alia, an order permitting Officer Gazelle to 
testify as to the contents of the ABC Store's surveillance video. On April 9, 2017, Miranda filed a motion in limine seeking, inter alia, an order precluding Officer Gazelle from testifying regarding the contents of the video. 
A hearing was held on April 10, 2017. The Circuit 
Court ruled that "the officer will not be allowed to testify to the contents of the video," apparently because there were eyewitnesses to the events that would be testifying at trial. Later in the hearing, Miranda's counsel indicated that Miranda intended to submit into evidence a photograph taken by Officer Gazelle of the surveillance video, which showed Rodriguez, and for which Officer Gazelle had noted that it was a picture of Rodriguez just before he punched Metts's face. The State argued that using the photograph as evidence of what was portrayed in the video would open the door to testimony from Officer Gazelle regarding what he observed in the video. The Circuit Court 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
agreed and advised Miranda's counsel that if the defense used the 
photo as evidence of what the officer saw in the video or did based on the video, that he would be opening the door for Officer Gazelle's testimony regarding the contents of the video. 
B. Trial 1. The State's Case 
Samuel Wight (Wight) testified that on the night of 
March 27, 2015, he was walking down the street in Waikiki to meet up with some friends. Wight was walking in the area of the ABC Store on Kalâkaua Avenue when he heard shouting. Wight turned around and saw a group of three individuals yelling at and confronting two individuals. Wight did not know them. 
Wight saw 
Metts standing with his hands out and palms facing forward. Wight observed Miranda punch Metts with an uppercut and heard a loud cracking sound. Metts started spitting blood. Wight stepped between the two to prevent Metts from getting punched again. Wight did not see anyone else punch Metts. 
Wight spoke to the police officers who responded to the 
scene. Approximately ten minutes after law enforcement arrived, an officer showed Wight a lineup, and Wight identified Miranda as the man who punched the victim. Wight stated he was one-hundred percent positive regarding his identification. 
Wight never saw 
Metts push anyone, put his hands up in a fighting stance, nor touch Miranda or anyone else. 
Metts testified that in 2015 he was a United States 
Marine stationed on O# ahu. He and his friend Smith were in 
Waikiki on the night of March 27, 2015, having drinks and waiting 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for friends. Metts testified he had consumed about three drinks 
and he was not drunk. Smith's arm was injured and in a sling. Metts and Smith were walking down the sidewalk and a group of three males, none of whom were known to Metts, were walking toward them. As they were crossing paths, Metts turned his shoulder to let them pass by and he was struck on the shoulder by Miranda, which Metts thought was intentional. It appeared that Smith had been bumped as well. Metts turned to look at the men, and they had also turned around and began talking about Metts's and Smiths's haircuts, being in the military, and someone called them haoles. Metts testified that he said, "No. Stop. Let's just keep walking. It's Friday night. Let's just enjoy our night. There's no need to do this." He saw Smith and another member of the group of three close together and it looked as if things might get physical. As Smith's arm was in a sling, Metts diverted his attention and turned to him and saw his sling get ripped off, and at that time Metts was punched in the jaw. Metts was confused at first and felt there was something wrong with his mouth. He looked up to re-orient himself and thought he was struck again but he was not positive. 
Metts testified that someone broke up the incident and 
called the police. The three males left, and Metts believed Smith followed them. Metts testified that at no point during the confrontation did he touch Miranda or any of his friends. Metts identified Miranda and one of his friends in a field lineup prior to leaving for the hospital. Metts testified that he still feels pain, has depression, anxiety, and headaches from his injury. He 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  
 was bedridden for a year with his jaw wired shut for ten weeks. 
He also suffers from temporal mandibular joint syndrome. 
On cross-examination, defense counsel asked Metts 
whether he recalled giving a statement to law enforcement that he had shoved someone during the incident. Metts did not recall giving that statement and testified he was on pain medication at the time. At trial, he only specifically remembered getting hit once, but in a statement made on the day in question he stated he was hit twice. In his statement to police, Metts stated two of the three men punched him. Metts testified that he intended to 
indicate during the field lineup that the two men he identified, 
Miranda and Rodriguez, were involved in the fight, but that Miranda is the person who hit him. 
An audio recording of Metts was played to refresh 
Metts's recollection of his interview with Det. Burger at the hospital the night of the incident. In the interview, Metts 
stated that there were three individuals in the group that 
confronted him, and he got punched twice by the same man. He stated that he was able to identify two of the men, but he could not remember which one had punched him. 
On cross-examination, Miranda's counsel attempted to 
elicit testimony with respect to Metts's knowledge of the Marine Corps's Code of Conduct as follows: 
Q. Did the Marine Corps have a code of conduct?
A. Yeah. Q. What is that code of conduct?A. It's very lengthy.Q. So, I mean, in terms of how you presentyourself, I guess, to the public.A. There's a full book of it. Q. Just give me a little bit of it. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 [STATE]: Objection, Your Honor.
Relevance. THE COURT: Sustained. [DEFENSE COUNSEL]:Q. What's the policy -- what's the code ofconduct on alcohol? A. I don't know it verbatim. Q. Just tell me what your recollection is of it.A. Don't get overly drunk and make a fool ofyourself.Q. Okay. What are the consequences if youviolate that code of conduct? [STATE]: Objection. Relevance.THE COURT: Sustained. 
At the bench, the defense argued that questions 
regarding the Code of Conduct were relevant to bias and motive. 
The Circuit Court found that there was no evidence Metts was overly drunk or acting out. The State also pointed out that Metts was no longer in the Marines and so bias, interest, and motive would be gone. The court did not permit further pursuit of this line of questioning. Defense counsel attempted one more question: 
Q. What is the Marine code of conduct in terms
of fighting?[STATE]: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained. 
None of Metts's answers were stricken from the record. 
Dr. Jerry Beckham (Dr. Beckham) testified that he is an 
emergency medicine physician at Tripler Army Medical Center and was certified as an expert witness with a specialty in emergency medicine. Dr. Beckham treated Metts when he arrived in the emergency department at around 2:00 a.m. on March 28, 2015. Metts told Dr. Beckham that he was hit in the face twice and was complaining of jaw and nose pain. Metts had suffered a fractured jaw in two places. Metts's injuries were consistent with being punched in the mouth. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HPD Officer Riley Saunders (Officer Saunders) testified 
that he was on duty the night of March 27, 2015, and responded to 
an assault in front of an ABC Store. When he arrived at the scene, Officer Gazelle was already present. Officer Gazelle told him an assault had occurred and that male suspects had run from the scene. Officer Saunders drove down Kalâ kaua and observed 
three males running westbound a block away from the incident. Officer Saunders stopped the men, including Miranda and Rodriguez. The officer put the three men and a male bystander in a field lineup. Metts and Wight were shown the same field lineup. According to Officer Saunders, both Wight and Metts identified Miranda and Rodriguez as men who had hit Metts. 
Miranda told Officer Saunders, after Metts identified 
him, "Officer, to be honest, I did it. I hit the kid." Officer Saunders took Rodriguez to the police station for booking. Rodriguez said he was not injured, but the officer saw him wince when the handcuffs were taken off his right hand, which appeared to be puffy. The officer took photos of Rodriguez's hand. 
Officer Gazelle testified he was on duty the night of 
March 27, 2015, and was flagged down regarding an assault in front of the ABC Store on Kalâkaua Avenue. He saw Metts walking toward him on the sidewalk, bleeding and holding his face. He appeared to be dazed and disoriented. Officer Gazelle also testified that two field lineups were conducted separately for Wight and Metts to make identifications. Metts identified Miranda and Rodriguez as his assailants, but did not identify which one hit him in the jaw. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 Officer Gazelle testified that he viewed surveillance 
footage from the ABC Store and spoke with Vespie to get a copy of 
the video. The officer testified that he was not able to get a copy because Vespie was unable to download videos directly from her camera and said that the request would have to go through the ABC Store security department. Officer Gazelle left her an HPD form requesting a copy of the surveillance video, and Vespie said she would forward the request to the security department and arrange for pickup when it was finished. Officer Gazelle did not have a copy of the HPD request form he gave to Vespie. 
Miranda's counsel asked Officer Gazelle whether he took 
a video or photo of the surveillance with his cell phone. Officer Gazelle testified he took a photo. 
Det. Burger testified that he is an HPD detective.  He 
was assigned the night of the assault to investigate the incident, and he interviewed Metts at the hospital. Det. Burger believed that Metts was coherent and that the medications he had been given for pain would not affect his interview. Det. Burger contacted the ABC Store directly and they forwarded him to their security officer Hirata, who, the detective was told, was the only person able to provide a copy of the surveillance video. Det. Burger left three phone messages over two weeks for Hirata, but he did not get a response. Det. Burger then obtained an administrative subpoena and sent it to the ABC Store. Hirata received the subpoena and then notified the detective that the footage was saved for only thirty days and had been written over. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Det. Burger was not sure whether he or the prosecutor's office 
retained a copy of the administrative subpoena. 
Det. Burger testified that he prepared two photographic 
lineups containing six photographs, one with Miranda and one with Rodriguez included. Neither Metts nor Smith were able to identify the assailants from the photographic lineups. The detective testified that during the investigation he learned that Rodriguez may have assaulted Metts. 
2. The Defense's Case 
Miranda testified that he and his friends Rodriguez and 
Vargas came into Waikiki the night of March 27, 2015, at around 8:00 or 8:30 p.m. They arrived at the zoo parking lot and drank a few beers before taking a walk. Miranda testified that he had about six beers between arriving in Waikiki and approximately 10:00 p.m.  Miranda testified that one of his friends was teasing 
him and pointing to the location where Miranda's ex-girlfriend 
lived, and they started laughing. They then heard someone say, "What the fuck? What the fuck did you just say to me? I'll fuck you up." They turned around and saw Metts and Smith staring and yelling. He testified that Rodriguez and Metts approached each other, and Metts shoved and grabbed Rodriguez. Miranda said that Metts came toward him, yelling, and that he defended himself by punching Metts once. Miranda claimed he then began to walk away, realized his friends were not following him, and then went back and grabbed Rodriguez, who was in a scuffle with Metts, and then proceeded to walk away. Miranda testified that Smith followed them and continued to yell, and eventually they were stopped by 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
police. Miranda said he told an officer that he hit Metts in 
self-defense, but that he was not aware at that time whether anyone else had also hit Metts. Miranda testified that he was not aware that Rodriguez had also hit Metts. 
Miranda's counsel sought to admit the photograph taken 
by Officer Gazelle of the surveillance video. At the bench, the court again cautioned that if the defense admitted the photograph, the State would be allowed to recall Officer Gazelle to testify regarding what he saw in the surveillance video. Miranda's counsel admitted the photograph into evidence, and Miranda testified the photo depicted Rodriguez and Metts. 
3. The State's Rebuttal 
Officer Gazelle testified that he watched the ABC Store 
surveillance footage that captured approximately 11:30 p.m. to 11:34 p.m. the night of the incident. He testified that he took a photo to get a timestamp of the approximate time of the event. The officer observed what appeared to be Miranda and Rodriguez calling out Metts and Smith, and Metts and Smith had their hands up, signaling that they did not want any trouble. Miranda approached Metts, and Rodriguez approached Smith. Officer Gazelle saw that Miranda threw a punch at Metts, and Rodriguez threw a punch at Smith. Metts and Smith were trying to walk away to avoid the situation. Miranda, Vargas, and Rodriguez then walked away and were out of the video frame for about thirty seconds, and then the officer saw Miranda run back into the frame and punch Metts one last time. Officer Gazelle clarified that Rodriguez and Miranda also engaged with Metts and Smith, 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
respectively, and the photo portrayed that moment. The officer 
on cross-examination affirmed that Metts received at least two punches, and Smith received one. He did not remember seeing Rodriguez throw a punch at Metts. 
C. Jury Instructions, Verdict, New Trial Motion & Sentence As relevant to this appeal, the Circuit Court 
instructed the jury regarding accomplice liability as follows: 
A defendant charged with committing an offense may be
guilty because he is an accomplice of another person in the
commission of the offense. The prosecution must proveaccomplice liability beyond a reasonable doubt.
A person is an accomplice of another in the commission
of an offense if, with the intent to promote or facilitatethe commission of the offense, he aids or agrees or attemptsto aid the other person in the planning or commission of theoffense. 
Mere presence at the scene of an offense or knowledge
that an offense is being committed, without more, does notmake a person an accomplice to the offense. However, if aperson plans or participates in the commission of an offensewith the intent to promote or facilitate the offense, he isan accomplice to the commission of the offense. 
The jury found Miranda guilty of Assault Second. 
Miranda filed a Motion to Set Aside the Verdict and Enter a 
Judgment of Acquittal and/or Grant Defendant a New Trial (Motion 
for New Trial), based on the following grounds: 
1. The evidence adduced at trial did not support finding
that the Defendant caused substantial bodily injury tothe complaining witness.
2. The evidence adduced at trial did not disproveDefendant's facts or prove facts negating Defendant'sself-protection justification defense.
3. The failure to preserve the surveillance video by thepolice resulted in actual prejudice to the Defendantat trial because there was a dispute between Defendantand Officer Gazelle as to: (i) identity of theprincipal; 
(ii) identity of the first aggressor and/or
(ii)[sic] number of punches thrown by Defendant.
4. Any additional grounds revealed through furtherinvestigation of this matter. 
The Motion for New Trial was heard on May 17, 2017, at 
which time Miranda asserted that an additional basis for a new 
trial had arisen after trial in that Hirata disclosed he never 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
received an administrative subpoena for the surveillance video. 
The court orally denied the motion. On June 16, 2017, the Circuit Court filed its Order Denying Motion for New Trial. 
On June 24, 2017, Miranda filed Defendant's Statement 
of Objections to [Order Denying Motion for New Trial] (Statement 
of Objections) and, on July 2, 2017, filed an Addendum to the Statement of Objections (Addendum), which had attached thereto a declaration from Hirata. 
On July 12, 2017, the Circuit Court entered its 
Judgment and sentenced Miranda to a term of four years of 
probation. Miranda timely appealed. II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Miranda raises six points of error on appeal, 
contending that the Circuit Court erred when it: (1) denied his 
Motion to Dismiss, because the loss of the surveillance video during the one-year delay before charges were filed against Miranda deprived him of his right to a fair trial; (2) precluded the defense from cross-examining Metts on the Marine Corps's Code of Conduct on alcohol and fighting, because, it deprived him of the opportunity to fully cross-examine Metts; 
(3) allowed Officer 
Gazelle to testify about the contents of the ABC Store surveillance video, as the defense did not open the door to the officer's testimony by introducing the photograph taken by Officer Gazelle of the video; (4) instructed the jury on accomplice liability as there was no evidence that Miranda aided and abetted Rodriguez in causing substantial bodily injury to Metts; (5) insufficiently instructed the jury on accomplice 
15 III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
liability by failing to define the term "intent to promote or 
facilitate;" and (6) denied his Motion for New Trial as there was insufficient evidence to convict him and the interests of justice required a new trial based on newly discovered evidence. 
With respect to a motion to dismiss based on pre-
indictment delay, the supreme court has held: 
Both the clearly erroneous and right/wrong tests must
be employed in reviewing the circuit court's denial of a
motion to dismiss for preindictment delay. A trial court's [findings of fact] are reviewed under the clearly erroneousstandard. A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when (1)the record lacks substantial evidence to support thefinding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in support ofthe finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left with adefinite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. 
A trial court's conclusions of law are reviewed under 
the right/wrong standard. A [conclusion of law] is notbinding upon an appellate court and is freely reviewable forits correctness. [The appellate] court examine[s] the factsand answer[s] the question without being required to giveany weight to the trial court's answer to it. 
State v. Keliiheleua, 105 Hawai# i 174, 178-79, 95 P.3d 605, 609-
10 (2004) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
As a general rule, the appellate court reviews 
evidentiary rulings for abuse of discretion. Kealoha v. County 
of Haw., 74 Haw. 308, 319, 844 P.2d 670, 676 (1993). However, when there can only be one correct answer to the admissibility question, or when reviewing questions of relevance under 
Hawai# i 
Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rules 401 and 402, the appellate court 
applies the right/wrong standard of review. State v. White, 92 
Hawai# i 192, 204-05, 990 P.2d 90, 102-03 (1999). "The trial 
court's determination that the proffered evidence is probative of bias, interest or motive is reviewed under the right/wrong 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
standard." State v. Balisbisana, 83 Hawai# i 109, 114, 924 P.2d 
1215, 1220 (1996) (citation omitted). 
Violation of the constitutional right to confront 
adverse witnesses is subject to the harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt standard. In applying the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard the court is required to examine the record and determine whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of might have contributed to the conviction. State v. Acacio, 140 Hawai# i 92, 98, 398 P.3d 681, 687 (2017) 
(citation omitted). 
When jury instructions are at issue on appeal, the 
standard of review is whether, when read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading. State v. Metcalfe, 129 Hawai# i
 206, 222, 297 P.3d 1062, 1078 (2013) (citation omitted). 
"Erroneous instructions are presumptively harmful and are a ground for reversal unless it affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial." Id. (citation omitted); see also State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai
#i 327, 
337, 141 P.3d 974, 984 (2006) ("once instructional error is demonstrated, we will vacate, without regard to whether timely objection was made, if there is a reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the defendant's conviction"). 
When reviewing a post-verdict motion for judgment of
acquittal, we employ the same standard that a trial court
applies to such a motion, namely, whether, upon the evidenceviewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution and infull recognition of the province of the trier of fact, theevidence is sufficient to support a prima facie case so thata reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond areasonable doubt. Sufficient evidence to support a primafacie case requires substantial evidence as to every 
17 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
material element of the offense charged. Substantial 
evidence as to every material element of the offense chargedis credible evidence which is of sufficient quality andprobative value to enable a person of reasonable caution tosupport a conclusion. Under such a review, we give fullplay to the right of the fact finder to determinecredibility, weigh the evidence, and draw justifiableinferences of fact. 
State v. Foster, 128 Hawai# i 18, 25, 282 P.3d 560, 567 (2012) 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
[T]he granting or denial of a motion for new trial is
within the sound discretion of the trial court and will not be disturbed absent a clear abuse of discretion. It is well-established that an abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has clearly exceed[ed] the bounds of reason ordisregards rules or principles of law or practice to thesubstantial detriment of a party litigant. 
State v. Hicks, 113 Hawai# i 60, 69, 148 P.3d 493, 502 (2006) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). "Furthermore, 
at a hearing on a motion for new trial, the trial court acts as the trier of fact." Id. at 69-70, 148 P.3d at 502-03 (citation omitted). 
In this jurisdiction, a trial court's FOFs are subject to
the clearly erroneous standard of review. An FOF is clearlyerroneous when, despite evidence to support the finding, theappellate court is left with the definite and firmconviction that a mistake has been committed. And where there is substantial evidence, which is credible evidence ofsufficient quantity and probative value to justify areasonable person in reaching conclusions that support theFOFs, the FOFs cannot be set aside. Moreover, an appellatecourt will not pass upon issues dependent upon credibilityof witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is theprovince of the trial judge. 
Id. at 70, 148 P.3d at 503 (citation omitted). "A trial court's 
conclusions of law, however, are reviewed de novo, under the right/wrong standard of review." Id. (citation omitted). IV. DISCUSSION A. Pre-Indictment Delay/Due Process Claim Miranda argues the Circuit Court erred when it denied 
his Motion to Dismiss because the loss of the surveillance video 
18 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 during the one-year delay before charges were filed against 
Miranda deprived him of his right to a fair trial. 
While the applicable statue of limitations is the 
"primary guarantee" against the State's assertion of stale criminal trials, a preindictment delay that causes substantial prejudice to a defendant can offend due process. See Keliiheleua, 105 
Hawai# i at 179, 95 P.3d at 610. Therefore, the 
Hawai# i
 Supreme Court has determined that "[w]hen a defendant 
alleges a violation of due process based on preindictment delay, the court must employ a balancing test, considering actual substantial prejudice to the defendant against the reasons asserted for the delay." Id. (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
At the hearing on the Motion to Dismiss, Officer 
Gazelle testified regarding his efforts to obtain the surveillance video the night of the incident, his unability to obtain a copy, and the referral to the ABC Store's security department.  Det. Burger took over the investigation later that 
night. The State made an offer of proof at the hearing, and Det. 
Burger testified at trial, that he called Hirata, the ABC Store's loss prevention supervisor, three times in early April of 2015 to obtain a copy of the video, and he eventually obtained an administrative subpoena at the end of April or early May due to the lack of response. 
Det. Burger was unable to obtain a copy of 
the video because the ABC Store no longer had the footage by the time Hirata responded to Det. Burger. 
19 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Miranda's counsel stated at the hearing that he had 
contacted Hirata, who would testify that he never heard from the 
detective and never received the subpoena. The Circuit Court offered to continue the hearing to allow Miranda to subpoena Hirata so the evidence could be presented to support those assertions. Miranda's counsel declined the offer. 
The State argues that the loss of the video cannot be 
prejudicial to Miranda because his argument is speculative, as Officer Gazelle testified as to the contents of the surveillance video. We disagree. There was conflicting testimony regarding the cause and course of the fight, and both the State and Miranda accept that the video captured video footage of the incident. In State v. Dunphy, the supreme court found prejudice to the defendant where taped telephone conversations between the defendant and law enforcement were lost, which compelled the jury to decide whether the defendant was entrapped by law enforcement in those conversations based only on the credibility of witnesses at trial. 71 Haw. 537, 542-43, 797 P.2d 1312, 1315 (1990). As in Dunphy, if the surveillance video had corroborated Miranda's version of events, it may have helped to convince the jury he was acting in self-defense or defense of others, and the destruction thereof would have been prejudicial. Id. at 543, 797 P.3d at 
1315 ("Here, it is clear that if the tapes had corroborated appellant's version of the telephone conversations, they would have gone a long way toward convincing the jury that he had established his defense of entrapment, and so the delay which 
20 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
caused the destruction of the tapes must be deemed to have been 
prejudicial."). 
However, the evidence at the hearing, and at trial, did 
not establish that the preindictment delay caused actual substantial prejudice to Miranda. The preindictment delay must cause prejudice to the defendant to create a due process violation. 
See United States v. Marion, 404 U.S. 307, 324 (1971) 
("the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment would require dismissal of the indictment if it were shown at trial that the pre-indictment delay in this case caused substantial prejudice to appellees' rights to a fair trial"); Keliiheleua, 105 Hawai# i at 
179, 95 P.3d at 610 ("events occurring prior to [the formal criminal charge]" may "cause substantial prejudice to such rights") (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
There is no indication in the evidence at the hearing 
or at trial that any delay in investigating the case or lack of diligence by law enforcement (or any other act or non-act attributable to the State) resulted in the loss of the surveillance video. The testimony heard by the Circuit Court was that law enforcement was diligent in its efforts to obtain the video, but law enforcement was unable to do so before the video was lost. Det. Burger testified that he tried to contact Hirata multiple times at the beginning of April 2015 and sent the administrative subpoena at the end of April or beginning of May of 2015. 
Det. Burger heard back from Hirata shortly after he 
received the subpoena and learned the video no longer existed. It appears, in fact, that the delay in bringing the charge 
21 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
against Miranda was a result of the State's attempts to obtain 
the video before making a prosecutorial decision. The court gave Miranda the opportunity to delay the hearing to obtain Hirata as a witness, but he declined. Miranda did not call Hirata as a witness at trial. Accordingly, Miranda did not establish that the preindictment delay caused the loss of the video. Therefore, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in denying the Motion to Dismiss. 
B. Cross-Examination Regarding the Code of Conduct Miranda argues the Circuit Court erred when it 
precluded the defense from cross-examining Metts on the United States Marine Corps's Code of Conduct on alcohol and fighting in that it deprived him of the opportunity to fully cross-examine Metts. The exchange is set forth above. 
As noted earlier, the defense argued that questions 
regarding the Code of Conduct were relevant to bias and motive, but the Circuit Court found that there was no evidence Metts was overly drunk or acting out. The State also pointed out that Metts was no longer in the Marines at the time of trial and, therefore, bias, interest, and motive related to his status in the Marine Corps would be gone. 
"An accused's right to demonstrate the bias or motive 
of prosecution witnesses is protected by the sixth amendment to the United States Constitution, which guarantees an accused, inter alia, the right 'to be confronted with the witnesses against him [or her].'" Acacio, 140 
Hawai# i at 98-99, 398 P.3d 
at 687-88 (quoting Balisbisana, 83 Hawai# i
 at 115, 924 P.2d at 
22 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1221). "Indeed, the main and essential purpose of confrontation 
is to secure for the opponent the opportunity of cross-examination[,] . . . [and] the exposure of a witness' motivation in testifying is a proper and important function of the constitutionally protected right of cross examination." Id. at 99, 398 P.3d at 688 (quoting Balisbisana, 83 Hawai# i at 115, 
924 P.2d at 1221) (emphasis omitted). HRE Rule 609.1(a) (2016)
 
provides that the credibility of a witness may be attacked by evidence of bias, interest, or motive. "[B]ias, interest, or motive is always relevant under HRE Rule 609.1." Acacio, 140 3
Hawai# i at 99, 398 P.3d at 688 (citation and emphasis omitted). 
The supreme court has established a procedure to 
determine whether a defendant has been afforded his right to demonstrate bias or motive on the part of a complaining witness. Id. The first step is to determine "whether the jury had 
sufficient information from which to make an informed appraisal of [the complaining witness's] motives and bias[.]" Id. 
(citation omitted). Only after the court determines this threshold level of inquiry under the confrontation clause is satisfied, then the second step is triggered, the balancing test to determine whether the probative value of the evidence is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. Id.
3 HRE Rule 609.1 states: 
Rule 609.1 Evidence of bias, interest, or motive.
(a) General rule. The credibility of a witness may be
attacked by evidence of bias, interest, or motive.
(b) Extrinsic evidence of bias, interest, or motive.
Extrinsic evidence of a witness' bias, interest, or motiveis not admissible unless, on cross-examination, the matteris brought to the attention of the witness and the witnessis afforded an opportunity to explain or deny the matter. 
23 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, we conclude that the jury had sufficient 
information from which to make an informed appraisal of Metts's 
alleged motives and bias. It was not disputed that an incident occurred between Metts and Miranda and that Miranda punched Metts at least once. Metts claimed Miranda instigated the fight. Miranda claimed that Metts was responsible and he acted only in self-defense and/or defense of others. The jury knew from the evidence that (1) Metts was a Marine at the time of the incident, (2) the Marine Corps has a Code of Conduct, (3)
 the Code of 
Conduct has an alcohol policy that provides Marines should not become overly intoxicated. None of this evidence was stricken from the record. The specific code provisions of the Code of Conduct, and Metts's knowledge of those provisions at the time of trial, would not have provided substantially different information than that already in evidence. In addition, at the time of trial, Metts was no longer in the military, so any motive or bias he may have had at the time of the incident with respect to his fear for his military career, was no longer at issue. 
We note that this is not a case in which the 
complaining witness's motive or bias is non-apparent. Cf. State v. Marcos, 106 Hawai# i 116, 120-23, 102 P.3d 360, 364-67 (2004) 
(right of confrontation violated where defendant was precluded from questioning complaining witness regarding pending family court cases concerning custody of their child and possible motive to fabricate charges); Acacio, 140 Hawai# i at 100-01, 398 P.3d at 
689-90 (right of confrontation violated where defendant was precluded from questioning complaining witness whether she knew 
24 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defendant's immigration status and risk of deportation as it 
raised question of whether she accused defendant of offenses to have him deported and removed from her life); Balisbisana, 83 Hawai# i at 114, 924 P.2d at 1220 (right of confrontation violated 
where defendant was precluded from questioning regarding complaining witness's previous conviction for harassing defendant and motive for bringing false charges against him). Rather, whatever motive or interest Metts would have had to deflect responsibility for the fight would have been readily apparent to the jury. 
For these reasons, we conclude that the jury had 
sufficient information from which to make an informed appraisal of Metts's motives and bias. 
The second question is whether the Circuit Court erred 
in concluding that the probative value of the evidence was substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. Acacio, 140 Hawai
#i at 99, 398 P.3d at 688; HRE Rule 403. First, 
the probative information of the contents of the Marine Corps's Code of Conduct was minimal. The jury was informed that the code contained a prohibition on excessive alcohol consumption. There was no evidence at trial that Metts was intoxicated at the time of the incident and at the time of trial Metts was no longer subject to the Code of Conduct. 
Furthermore, as explained above, 
whatever motive or bias Metts may have had at the time of the incident was not hidden and would have been apparent to the jury. Any probative value specific to the Marine Corps's Code of Conduct provisions would have been minimal. On the other hand, 
25 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the danger of unfair prejudice would have been substantial. 
Metts testified that he did not know the exact language of the Code of Conduct. Further attempts to introduce evidence of specific provisions of the Code of Conduct could have confused the issues and misled the jury. 
"A trial court's balancing of the probative value of 
relevant evidence against the prejudicial effect of such evidence under HRE Rule 403 is reviewed for an abuse of discretion." State v. Pasene, 144 Hawai# i 339, 362, 439 P.3d 864, 887 (2019) 
(citation omitted). We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in excluding further inquiry or evidence into the Marine Corps's Code of Conduct at trial. 
C. Testimony Regarding the Contents of the Video Miranda argues the Circuit Court erred when it allowed 
Officer Gazelle to testify about the contents of the ABC Store surveillance video, because the defense did not open the door to the officer's testimony by introducing the photograph at trial.   
Miranda does not cite any authority countering the Circuit Court's conclusion that Miranda opened the door to the testimony by introducing the photograph. Rather, he argues that due process ensures that he has a right to be accorded a meaningful opportunity to present a complete defense, citing State v. DeLeon, 131 
Hawai# i 463, 486, 319 P.3d 382, 405 (2014).  Miranda 
does not explain how the ruling allowing testimony from Officer 4
4 The DeLeon case is inapposite, as in that case the Supreme Court
held that the preclusion of expert testimony from trial regarding the probable
effects of cocaine at the time of a shooting prevented the defendant frompresenting a complete defense. 131 Hawai #i at 486, 319 P.3d at 405. 
26 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Gazelle deprived him of a meaningful opportunity to present a 
complete defense and we cannot conclude that this argument has merit. 
It appears that Miranda's argument is in fact based on 
HRE Rule 1002 and HRE Rule 1004(1), in that he argues that the testimony regarding the contents of the video violated the best evidence rule and did not satisfy any applicable exception thereto. HRE Rule 1002  provides the general rule that in order 
to prove the content of, inter alia
, a recording, the original is 
required except as provided under the rules. HRE Rule 1004  sets 
forth a number of exceptions to the general rule, one of which provides that an original or duplicate recording is not required, and other evidence of the contents of the recording is admissible, if "[a]ll originals are lost or have been destroyed, 65
5 HRE Rule 1002 states: 
Rule 1002 Requirement of original.  To prove the
content of a writing, recording, or photograph, the original
writing, recording, or photograph is required, except asotherwise provided in these rules or by statute. 
6 HRE Rule 1004 states: 
Rule 1004 Admissibility of other evidence of contents.
The original or a duplicate is not required, and otherevidence of the contents of a writing, recording, orphotograph is admissible if:
(1) Originals lost or destroyed. All originals arelost or have been destroyed, unless the proponent lostor destroyed them in bad faith; or(2) Original not obtainable. No original can beobtained by available judicial process or procedure;or (3) Original in possession of opponent. At a time whenan original was under the control of the party againstwhom offered, the party was put on notice, by thepleadings or otherwise, that the content would be asubject of proof at the hearing, and the party doesnot produce the original at the hearing; or(4) Collateral matters. The writing, recording,or photograph is not closely related to acontrolling issue. 
27 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 unless the proponent lost or destroyed them in bad faith[.]" 
HRE Rule 1004(1). The supreme court has explained that "HRE Rule 1004(1) is 'particularly suited' to electronic evidence '[g]iven the myriad ways that electronic records may be deleted, lost as a result of system malfunctions, purged as a result of routine electronic records management software (such as the automatic deletion of e-mail after a set time period) or otherwise unavailable[.]'" State v. Espiritu, 117 Hawai# i 127, 134, 176 
P.3d 885, 892 (2008) (citation omitted). 
Miranda argues that the exception in HRE Rule 1004(1) 
does not apply because there has been a showing of bad faith by the State in its efforts to secure the video. Miranda cites the Addendum. However, the Circuit Court made its evidentiary ruling well before a declaration was submitted by Miranda. Hirata's declaration was submitted after Miranda moved for a new trial, following the jury's verdict. The Circuit Court gave Miranda the opportunity to subpoena Hirata in order to present his testimony, which Miranda declined. There was no evidence presented at trial that the failure by law enforcement to obtain a copy of the video was in bad faith. Officer Gazelle and Det. Burger both testified to their good faith efforts to obtain a copy of the surveillance video. They were unsuccessful, and the video was erased by the ABC Store. Therefore, the recording was unavailable at trial. 
Miranda does not identify, and the court does not see, any 
evidence at trial to support a claim of bad faith, and bad faith cannot be reasonably inferred under the facts of this case. See 
Espiritu, 117 Hawai# i at 135, 176 P.3d at 893. 
28 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  Miranda's counsel was warned that if he sought to admit 
the still photograph of the video, Officer Gazelle would be 
allowed to testify regarding the video's contents to provide context for the photograph. Miranda's counsel chose to admit the photograph. The evidence at trial supported the decision to admit Officer Gazelle's testimony as the video recording was lost and Miranda did not establish bad faith by the State. We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in allowing Officer Gazelle to testify regarding the contents of the video. 
D. Accomplice Liability - Sufficiency of the Evidence Miranda argues the Circuit Court erred when it gave a 
jury instruction on accomplice liability, as there was no evidence that Miranda aided and abetted Rodriguez in causing substantial bodily injury to Metts. 
HRS § 702-222 provides, as relevant here, that 
[a] person is an accomplice of another person in the
commission of an offense if: 
(1) With the intention of promoting or facilitatingthe commission of the offense, the person:(a) Solicits the other person to commit it;
(b) Aids or agrees or attempts to aid theother person in planning or committingit[.] 
Officer Gazelle testified that he observed on the 
surveillance video Miranda first hitting Metts in the face. He 
recalled that Metts received at least two punches, but he did not recall if one of those punches came from Rodriguez. He did see 
that Rodriguez at some point engaged with Metts. According to 
Miranda, he first punched Metts in self-defense and later saw Rodriguez and Metts "in a scuffle." Officer Saunders observed 
Rodriguez after the incident while transporting him to booking 
29 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and noticed that his right hand appeared to cause him pain and 
was puffy. It is undisputed that Metts was punched in the face and suffered substantial injury therefrom. The evidence at trial supports a conclusion that Miranda and/or a combination of Miranda and Rodriguez caused Metts's injuries. There was no testimony that anyone else other than Miranda or Rodriguez physically touched Metts during the incident. There was sufficient evidence from which a jury could have inferred that Miranda aided Rodriguez in the commission of Assault Second. 
Regarding the requisite intent, the evidence must 
support a finding that Miranda had as his conscious objective the bringing about of conduct that the law has declared to be criminal. See State v. Basham, 132 
Hawai# i 97, 109, 319 P.3d 
1105, 1117 (2014). Miranda argues there was no evidence that he "said anything to indicate that he intended to aid Rodriguez in assaulting Metts." 
It is unnecessary for Miranda to have vocally 
or in any specific manner expressed an intent to aid Rodriguez in assaulting Metts. This court has stated: 
[S]ince intent can rarely be proved by direct evidence,
proof by circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferencesarising from circumstances surrounding the act is sufficientto establish the requisite intent. Thus, the mind of analleged offender may be read from his acts, conduct andinferences fairly drawn from all circumstances. 
State v. White, 10 Haw. App. 263, 265, 865 P.2d 944, 945 (1994) 
(citations omitted). 
The evidence supported a finding that Miranda had as 
his conscious objective the bringing about of the assault on Metts. Metts testified that he believed Miranda intentionally struck his shoulder while passing him on the sidewalk. Metts 
30 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testified that he tried to diffuse the situation, but Miranda 
continued to escalate the situation and eventually threw the first punch. Officer Gazelle testified that he saw the surveillance video and it appeared to him that Miranda and Rodriguez were calling out Metts and Smith. Officer Gazelle testified that Miranda also engaged with Smith, and Rodriguez with Metts. We conclude that the jury could have reasonably inferred from the evidence presented that Miranda solicited Rodriguez or acted to aid Rodriguez with the conscious objective to assault Metts. Miranda's fourth point of error has no merit. 
E. The Accomplice Liability InstructionMiranda argues the Circuit Court's jury instruction on
accomplice liability was insufficient, erroneous, and misleading.
The Circuit Court's instruction to the jury regarding accomplice 
liability is set forth above.  
Miranda argues that the failure to define the concept 
of "intent to promote or facilitate" was an error that mislead 
the jury, citing Basham, 132 Hawai'i 97, 319 P.3d 1105. In 
Basham, although the jury instructions on accomplice liability 
were correct, the defendant argued that the prosecutor misstated 
the law on accomplice liability during closing arguments. Id. at 
108-09, 319 P.3d at 1116-17. The prosecutor during closing 
arguments gave his own interpretation of the meanings of 
"promote" and "facilitate" in the accomplice liability 
instruction. The prosecutor argued that "promote" "simply means 
for our purposes to encourage, the desire to bring about," which 
was objected to by the defense and overruled by the court. Id. 
31 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 108, 319 P.3d at 1116. The prosecutor also informed the jury 
that "facilitate" means "to bring about," and the prosecutor stated that the root of the word is "facile," which he defined as "easy or to make easy or to bring about." Id. at 108-09, 319 P.3d at 1116-17.
The supreme court concluded that the prosecutor in 
Basham had misstated the law. First, the court recognized that "promote" and "facilitate" were not defined by statute. Id. at 
109, 319 P.3d at 1117. The court noted that Hawaii's accomplice liability statute was derived from the nearly identical Model Penal Code (MPC) provision, which also did not define the term. 
Id. However, the court recognized that the commentary to the 
relevant MPC section explains that "an accomplice, in having the 
purpose of promoting or facilitating the commission of the offense, is required to 'have as his [or her] conscious objective the bringing about of conduct that the Code has declared to be criminal.'" Id. (quoting MPC § 2.06 cmt. (1962)). Accordingly, 
the court found that the prosecutor's own definitions "reduced the culpability necessary to satisfy the statutory definition of an accomplice." Id.
In this case, the jury was properly instructed with 
respect to the required findings for accomplice liability. Unlike in Basham, the State did not redefine any terms in closing argument. The State made no specific argument regarding the intent required. 
32 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Shortly after Basham was decided, the supreme court 
considered a substantially identical instruction as given in this 
case, which stated as follows: 
A defendant charged with committing an offense may be
guilty because he is an accomplice of another person in the
commission of the offense. The prosecution must proveaccomplice liability beyond a reasonable doubt.
A person is an accomplice of another in the commission
of an offense if: 
1. With the intent to promote or facilitate the commission
of the offense he a. solicits the other person to commit it; orb. aids or agrees or attempts to aid the other person in theplanning or commission of the offense. 
Mere presence at the scene . . . of an offense or
knowledge that an offense is being committed, withoutmore, does not make a person an accomplice to theoffense. However, if a person plans or participatesin the commission of an offense with the intent to promote or facilitate the offense, he is an accompliceto the commission of the offense. 
A person is not guilty of an offense unless the State
proves beyond a reasonable doubt that the person actedwith the required states of mind, as theseinstructions specify, with respect to each element ofthe offense. The instruction for the offense chargedspecifies the states of mind required to be proved. 
State v. Walton, 133 Hawai# i 66, 89-90, 324 P.3d 876, 899-900 
(2014). Of note, no definition of "intent to promote or 
facilitate" was provided to the jury. 
The defendant argued that
a specific intent instruction should have been included in the instruction. Id. at 90, 324 P.3d at 900. The supreme court disagreed, holding that the "instruction accurately states the law under HRS § 702–222. No further instruction, therefore, wasrequired[.]" Id. The same is true here, as the instruction provided to Miranda's jury was substantively identical to the  
 
33 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
language approved by the supreme court in Walton.  We conclude 
that Miranda's fifth point of error has no merit. 7
F. Motion for New Trial 
Miranda argues the Circuit Court erred when it denied 
his Motion for New Trial. Miranda has two main arguments. First, Miranda argues that there was insufficient evidence to sustain his conviction. Second, Miranda argues that a new trial was required in the interest of justice based on newly discovered evidence. We will address each in turn. 
With respect to the sufficiency of the evidence to 
support a conviction, we must view the evidence at trial in the strongest light for the prosecution. 
State v. Pomroy, 132 
Hawai# i
 85, 94, 319 P.3d 1093, 1102 (2014). 
The test on appeal is whether substantial evidence
supports the trier of fact's conclusion. Substantial 
evidence as to every material element of the offense chargedis credible evidence which is of sufficient quality andprobative value to enable a person of reasonable caution tosupport a conclusion. 
Id. at 94-95, 319 P.3d at 1102-03 (citations and internal 
quotation marks omitted). "The question of credibility and the weight to be given the evidence is for the trier of fact to determine and is not disturbed on appeal." Id. at 95, 319 P.3d 
at 1103 (citation omitted). 
7 We note that after Basham was decided and after Miranda's trial,
the Hawai #i Pattern Jury Instructions - Criminal ( HAWJIC ) were amended by
order on May 5, 2017 to include the definition of "intent to promote or
facilitate" as "to have the conscious objective of bringing about thecommission of (charged offense)." See HAWJIC Amendments,
https://www.courts.state.hi.us/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/05052017_Order_Crim_Jury_Instruct.pdf (last visited September 13, 2019). Regardless, HAWJIC hadnot been amended at the time of trial, the HAWJIC are not law, and courts arenot bound by the standard instruction. See Metcalfe, 129 Hawai #i at 231 n.19,
297 P.3d at 1087 n.19. 
34 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 Miranda argues that there was a lack of "credible 
evidence" that Miranda caused substantial bodily injury to Metts 
as a principal or accomplice. He identifies what he believes are inconsistencies in the evidence presented at trial. However, Metts testified that he was walking with Smith in Waikiki when they were confronted by three individuals. Metts testified that Miranda initiated the confrontation, and Metts tried to diffuse the situation but was punched by Miranda. Wight, a disinterested 
bystander, testified that he saw Miranda punch Metts in the face 
and heard a loud cracking sound. Wight saw no one else punch Metts. Wight testified that Metts did not push anyone, was not in a fighting stance, and never touched anyone in Miranda's group. Officer Gazelle, who watched the surveillance video that captured the scene, testified that he saw Miranda and Rodriguez call out Metts and Smith, and it appeared to him that Miranda and Rodriguez were instigating the encounter and that Smith and Metts were signaling that they did not want any trouble. He saw Miranda throw a punch at Metts, saw Miranda walk out of the video frame and then thirty seconds later returned and punched Metts one final time. Dr. Beckham testified that Metts suffered a jaw fracture in two places and his injuries were consistent with getting punched in the face. We conclude that there was sufficient evidence at trial to support Miranda's conviction for Assault Second. 
Finally, Miranda argues the Circuit Court erred in 
denying his request for a new trial in the interest of justice 
35 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
under Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 33  based on 
newly discovered evidence. However, the Hirata declaration does 
not constitute newly discovered evidence. 8
A motion for new trial based on newly discovered
evidence will only be granted if (1) the evidence has been
discovered after trial; (2) such evidence could not havebeen discovered before or at trial through the exercise ofdue diligence; 
(3) the evidence is material to the issues
and not cumulative or offered solely for purposes ofimpeachment; and (4) the evidence is of such a nature aswould probably change the result of a later trial. 
State v. Mabuti, 72 Haw. 106, 112-13, 807 P.2d 1264, 1268 (1991) 
(quoting State v. McNulty, 60 Haw. 259, 259, 588 P.2d 438, 440 (1978)). "In determining whether evidence is, in truth, newly discovered and whether sufficient diligence was used to learn of such evidence, the composite knowledge of both the accused and his counsel will be considered." McNulty, 60 Haw. at 268, 588 P.2d at 445, overruled on other grounds by State v. Eberly, 107 Hawai# i 239, 249, 112 P.3d 725, 735 (2005); see also 3 Wright & 
Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure: Criminal § 584 at 454-55, (4
th Ed. 2011). Thus, "evidence known to defendant's counsel 
before or at trial does not constitute newly discovered evidence justifying [a] new trial." McNulty, 60 Haw. at 268, 588 P.2d at 445 (citations omitted). 
8 HRPP Rule 33 states: 
Rule 33. NEW TRIAL. 
The court on motion of a defendant may grant a new
trial to the defendant if required in the interest of
justice. If trial was by the court without a jury, thecourt on motion of a defendant for a new trial may vacatethe judgment if entered, take additional testimony anddirect the entry of a new judgment. A motion for a new trial shall be made within 10 days after verdict or findingof guilty or within such further time as the court may fixduring the 10-day period. The finding of guilty may beentered in writing or orally on the record. 
36 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Miranda argued that Hirata's averment that he never 
received an administrative subpoena was new evidence. Hirata's 
declaration stated that Hirata (1) did not recall and did not have in his records the receipt of phone messages from Det. Burger regarding the surveillance video, 
(2) did not recall or 
have any record that reflects the receipt of an administrative subpoena, and (3) the ABC Store does not have a set thirty-day retention policy before the system rewrites over a surveillance video. Even considering the Addendum and Hirata's declaration, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in concluding that Miranda did not present "new evidence." During the pre-trial hearing on Miranda's Motion to Dismiss, the issue of HPD's efforts to obtain the surveillance video was at the center. The State submitted an offer of proof regarding Det. Burger's efforts to obtain the surveillance video from Hirata. Miranda offered that Hirata would claim that he was never contacted by Det. Burger and he could not find a request for the video. Miranda declined to continue the hearing so that Hirata could testify. The evidence contained in the Hirata declaration could have been, and in fact was, known to Miranda and counsel prior to trial. Whatever additional facts were contained in the Hirata declaration could have been discovered by the exercise of due diligence. Therefore, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying the motion. 
37 V. CONCLUSION NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For the reasons set forth above, the Circuit Court's 
July 12, 2017 Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 11, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
Dwight C.H. Lum,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Chad Kumagai,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
38 