NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001091
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
IN THE INTEREST OF R.K.; K.K.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 14-00041)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, and Leonard, J.;
and Reifurth, J., dissenting)
 
Mother-Appellant appeals from the August 14, 2014 Order
 
After Trial and the August 22, 2014 Orders Concerning Child
 
Protective Act (Orders Concerning CPA) entered in the Family
 
1
Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).  Mother contends that 
the Family Court abused its discretion in awarding temporary foster custody of her minor children, RK and KK, (Children) to 
the Hawai
'i Department of Human Services (Department or DHS) and 
challenges various rulings in the Order After Trial and the 
September 11, 2014 Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (FOFs/COLs). 
1
 The Honorable Bode A. Uale presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In her points of error on appeal, Mother contests the
 
Family Court's rulings that were numbered 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 10
 
in the Order After Trial (these rulings were also included as
 FOFs 59 a, d, f, g, h, and j in the FOFs/COLs), as well as FOFs
 77, 86, 117, 118, 120, and 121 in the FOFs/COLs.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Mother's points of error as follows:
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 587A-26 (Supp. 2015)
 
provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 587A-26 Temporary foster custody hearing.
. . . .
 (c) After reviewing the petition and any reports
submitted by the department and considering all information
pertaining to the safe family home factors, the court shall
order:
 
(1)	 That the child be immediately released from the
department's temporary foster custody, placed in
temporary family supervision, and returned to
the child's family home with the assistance of
services, upon finding that the child's family
is able to provide a safe family home with
services; or
 
(2) 	That the child continue in the department's
temporary foster custody, upon finding that
there is reasonable cause to believe that
 continued placement in foster care is necessary
to protect the child from imminent harm;
provided that in making this determination, the
court shall consider whether:
 
(A) 	The department made reasonable efforts to
prevent or eliminate the need for removing
the child from the child's family home
before the child was placed in foster
care;
 
(B) 	The alleged or potential perpetrator of
imminent harm, harm, or threatened harm
should be removed from the family home
rather than continuing the child's
placement in foster care. The child's
family shall have the burden of
establishing that it is in the child's
best interests to remove the child, rather
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
than the alleged or potential perpetrator,
from the family home; and
 
(C) 	Every reasonable effort has
been or is being made to place
siblings or
psychologically-bonded
children together, unless such
placement is not in the
children's best interests.
 
The following standards apply to this court's review of
 
the Family Court's rulings in this case:
 
The family court's FOFs are reviewed on appeal under
the clearly erroneous standard. A FOF is clearly erroneous
when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support
the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in support
of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left with
a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. 
Substantial evidence is credible evidence which is of
 sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of
reasonable caution to support a conclusion.
 
On the other hand, the family court's COLs are
reviewed on appeal de novo, under the right/wrong standard.
COLs, consequently, are not binding upon an appellate court
and are freely reviewable for their correctness.
 
However, the family court's determinations pursuant to
2
 HRS § 587-73(a) with respect to (1) whether a child's
parent is willing and able to provide a safe family home for

the child and (2) whether it is reasonably foreseeable that
a child's parent will become willing and able to provide a
safe family home within a reasonable period of time present
mixed questions of law and fact; thus, inasmuch as the
family court's determinations in this regard are dependant
upon the facts and circumstances of each case, they are
reviewed on appeal under the clearly erroneous standard.
Likewise, the family court's determination of what is or is
not in a child's best interests is reviewed on appeal for
clear error. 
Moreover, the family court is given much leeway in its
examination of the reports concerning a child's care,

custody, and welfare, and its conclusions in this regard, if
supported by the record and not clearly erroneous, must
stand on appeal.
 
In re Doe, 95 Hawai 'i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001) 
(citations, quotation marks, ellipses, and brackets omitted).
 
2
 HRS § 587-73 (entitled Permanent plan hearing) was replaced in
2010 by § 587A-33 (Supp. 2011) (entitled Termination of parental rights
hearing). The statutes are substantially similar in all relevant respects.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has applied this deferential 
standard to its review of the award of temporary foster custody,
 
stating:
 
[T]he family court possesses wide discretion in making its
decisions and those decisions will not be set aside unless
 there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Under the abuse of
 discretion standard of review, the family court's decision
will not be disturbed unless the family court disregarded
rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial
detriment of a party litigant, and its decision clearly
exceeded the bounds of reason.
 
In Interest of Doe , 84 Hawai 'i 41, 46, 928 P.2d 883, 888 (1996) 
(citations, quotation marks, and brackets omitted).
 
As the Family Court concluded in part in its FOFs/COLs:

 
5. The purpose of the Child Protective Act, HRS
Chapter 587A, is to make paramount the safety and health ofthe children who have been harmed, and to provide childrenwith prompt and ample protection from the harms, as statedin the Child Protective Act, supra, with an opportunity fortimely reconciliation with their families, if they canprovide safe family homes, with timely and appropriateservices or permanent plans to ensure the safety of thechild. HRS § 587A-2. The Hawai' i Legislature made it clear
that child safety is paramount. Id. 
6. The Child Protective Act, supra, shall be liberally
construed to serve the best interests of the child and the
 purposes of the Child Protective Act, supra. Id.
 
7. The Court may look to the past and present
conditions of the home and natural parents so as to gaininsights into the quality of care the Children mayreasonably be expected to receive in the future. In re Doe, 
95 Hawai' i 183, 191, 20 P.3d 616, 624 (2001). Woodruff v. 
Keale, 64 Haw. 85, 99, 637 P.2d 760, 769 (1981). 
On January 9, 2014, Mother's three-year-old child, RK,
 
suffered a life-threatening and life-altering brain injury, which
 
is described in the Family Court's unchallenged FOFs as follows:
 
66. [RK] suffered a subdural hemorrhage with severe
brain swelling, which is a serious, life-threatening injury.
 
67. When [RK] underwent a craniotomy to remove a part
of his skull in order to relieve the pressure on his
swelling brain, the surgeon directly observed the source of
the bleeding in his brain to be a lacerated or torn vein.
 
68. Blood tests have ruled out a bleeding disorder as
the cause of [RK's] brain injury.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
69. A vascular malformation has been ruled out as a
 
cause of [RK's] brain injury as no vascular malformations
were observed by a CT scan of his brain in May 2013 or by
direct observation of the surgeon during [RK's] craniotomy.
 
70. A metabolic disorder has been ruled out as a cause
 
of [RK's] brain injury as [RK's] development has been
normal.
 
71. At the time of his injury, [RK] was taking
amoxicillin and tylenol to treat an ear infection. Both the
 ear infection itself and the medication he was taking were
not related to [RK's] brain injury at all.
 
72. There is no medical condition that explains
[RK's] brain injury.
 
73. [RK's] brain injury was caused by blunt force
trauma to his head. This trauma occurred within a matter of
 a few hours prior to [RK] having seizures and losing
consciousness. Following such a trauma, the bleeding in
[RK's] brain would have caused deterioration in his
functioning over time, including a worsening headache and a
declining level of consciousness.
 
74. It is unlikely that [RK's] injury was caused by
the hitting of his head on the stair rail on January 8, 2014
because of the described mild force with which [RK's] head
struck the rail and more importantly, because of the
described period of about 16 hours of normal, active,
playful behaviors between the stair rail event and [RK]
losing consciousness.
 
75. [RK's] vomiting on January 8, 2014 and January 9,
2014 is not necessarily medically associated with his brain
injury. If the vomiting had been in combination with pain
and abnormal behavior, then it would have been associated
with his brain injury.
 
76. It is unlikely that [RK] had an existing injury
that was exacerbated by hitting his head on the stair rail
on January 8, 2014 and resulted in his subdural brain
hemorrhage. If there was an old injury, it would have
healed quickly and would not have been aggravated by a minor
injury that occurred months later.
 
. . . .
 
78. [RK] has a severe residual brain injury, is
unlikely to regain consciousness, and requires excessive and
life long full time care. He currently receives hospice and
urgent care services for twelve hours per day.
 
79. [RK] has extreme special needs due to his brain
injury. He is vulnerable to child maltreatment due to his
 medical condition and complete dependence on adult
caretakers to meet his needs.
 
. . . .
 
83. At the time of [RK's] brain injury, Mother was the
primary caregiver for the Children.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
84. At the time of [RK's] brain injury, the people who
had access to [RK] outside of Mother's supervision were
[Boyfriend] and [Boyfriend's] parents.
 
85. Mother is unable to identify the cause of [RK's]
brain injury. Mother does not believe it is possible that
someone may have caused [RK] brain injury.
 
. . . .
 
87. Mother has not been ruled out as the perpetrator
of [RK's] brain injury.
 
As found by the Family Court, RK remains in a coma,
 
receives hospice and urgent care services for twelve hours per
 
day, and is expected to eventually die as a result of his injury.
 
At the time of RK's injury, RK and his twenty-month-old
 
sibling, KK, were living with Mother and Mother's Boyfriend
 (Boyfriend) in the home of Boyfriend's parents, along with
 
Boyfriend's parents and Boyfriend's three siblings. Boyfriend is
 
not the Father of RK or KK. Although represented by counsel, the
 Father of RK and KK did not participate in the trial and, through
 counsel, notified this court that he did not wish to participate
 in this appeal.
 
In the days prior to RK's injury, he was sick and
 
taking medicine for an ear infection. In the evening before RK's
 injury, the following reportedly occurred:
 
On the way down the stairs, [RK] walked into the
wooden stair rail, hitting the left side of his head on the
rail. Both Mother and [Boyfriend] describe the impact of
[RK's] head on the stair rail as mild. [RK] grabbed the
right side of his head and wobbled but did not fall down or
lose consciousness. He did not cry or complain of pain.
 
RK vomited during and after dinner that evening, but
 
Mother attributed it to his illness. The next morning, January
 
9, 2014, RK was active and playful before breakfast, vomited
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
after eating, but then continued to run around and play, and
 
behaved consistently with his behavior over the previous few
 days. Mother was home alone with RK and KK. The unchallenged
 FOFs describe what reportedly happened next as follows:
 
22. [RK] went to [Boyfriend's] upstairs bedroom where
he watched television and took his usual morning nap at
about 10:30 to 11:00 a.m.
 
23. [Boyfriend's] mother and sister came home and went
upstairs. Shortly thereafter, at about 12:00 to 12:30 p.m.,
Mother and [KK] went outside to hang laundry. [RK] remained
upstairs.
 
24. A couple of minutes later, [Boyfriend] came home.
Upon his arrival, he heard [RK] crying and went upstairs.
[Boyfriend's] mother was standing outside the door to his
bedroom, asking [RK] if he was alright. [RK] was on the
ground in [Boyfriend's] bedroom, where he normally naps.
 
25. [Boyfriend] saw [RK's] eyes roll back and his body
stiffen up. [Boyfriend] hit [RK's] leg to try to get his
attention and sat him up on the bed before letting him go to
turn on the fan. [RK] lay back and stiffened up again.
Both of his arms were stiff his eyes were rolling back, and
he appeared to be having a seizure.
 
26. [Boyfriend] tried to revive [RK] by slapping him
on the face, but he didn't wake up.
 
27. [Boyfriend] alerted Mother to [RK's] condition and
they called 911 for help.
 
28. Emergency Medical Services arrived at the home at
about 12:30 p.m. [RK] was unresponsive and was transported
by ambulance to the Queens Medical Center. While in the
 emergency room, a CAT scan was done and then [RK] was taken
into surgery to remove part of his skull in order to relieve
some of the pressure from his swelling brain. He was later
 transferred to the Kapiolani Medical Center for Women and
Children [(KMC)].
 
When asked questions at trial regarding why her
 
children were in foster care, Mother testified that "we didn't
 
intentionally do anything to them." She further testified that
 she had no idea what may have caused his injury and expressly
 denied causing the injury. Boyfriend also testified that he did
 not cause and had no idea what might have caused RK's injury and,
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
like Mother, he does not believe that someone may have caused the
 
harm to RK.
 
Gina French, M.D. (Dr. French) was found by the Family
 
Court to be qualified as an expert in the fields of pediatrics
 and child abuse and to be a credible witness. Dr. French's
 opinions as expressed in two reports, as well as her trial
 testimony, were made to a reasonable medical certainty. Although
 Mother challenges key findings based on the medical testimony
 given by Dr. French – including that RK's injury was not caused
 by the hitting of his head on the stairway railing the evening of
 January 8, 2014 that RK's vomiting was not significant to the
 cause of his injury, that the severe injury that happened to RK
 happened within hours of him beginning to have seizures and
 lapsing into a coma — she does not challenge Dr. French's
 qualifications. No other medical testimony was offered at trial.
 
Dr. French testified, inter alia, that RK's injury,
 
which included a large tear in a major vein coming off of his
 brain, was "most likely caused by some blunt trauma, something
 hitting his head" and that it likely happened close in time to
 when he collapsed, rather than 16 hours earlier. She explained
 that, with such a devastating injury, although there were a few
 cases where someone was lucid for a period of time and not
 comatose, those children "were clearly severely in pain and
 injured and not right." Based on RK's surgeon's direct
 observation of RK's bleeding and a prior CT scan, the possibility 
of abnormal vessels or brain size was eliminated. Dr. French
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testified that she looked hard to identify any possible medical
 
condition that could explain RK's injury and found none.
 Based on the medical evidence, she opined that RK likely received
 a hard blow to his head within a short period of time before his
 collapse. Based upon the entire record, as well as Dr. French's
 testimony and reports, we conclude that the Family Court did not
 err finding her testimony to be trustworthy, credible, and made
 to a reasonable medical certainty.
 
Mother challenges the Family Court's initial ruling
 
that "given the evidence adduced at Trial and the proximity of
 [Mother] and [Boyfriend] to the child when his severe brain
 injury occurred, the Court identifies both of them as
 perpetrators of harm to [RK]" and the court's later finding that
 "Mother and [Boyfriend] have not provided an adequate explanation
 for [RK's] brain injury. There is no identified perpetrator of
 [RK's] brain injury." However, the former finding was made in
 the context of the Family Court's ruling that RK was harmed due
 to acts and/or omissions of his family, specifically Mother and
 Boyfriend, who had no adequate explanation for what the court
 determined to be a severe brain injury caused by a blunt force
 hit to his head. The latter finding highlighted that Mother and
 Boyfriend had not provided an adequate explanation for RK's
 grievous injury and no one identified who inflicted the blunt
 force injury. Although the specific wording of the Family
 Court's findings could have been clearer, reading the entirety of
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the court's decision and the record of this case, we cannot
 
conclude that the Family Court's FOFs were clearly erroneous. 
Thus, RK was severely injured by someone while in
 
Mother and/or Boyfriend's care. Neither Mother or Boyfriend
 could be ruled out as the perpetrator of the harm. After
 interviews and investigation, a Multidisciplinary Team, including
 Dr. French, held a conference over the course of two days and
 concluded, inter alia, that Mother and Boyfriend were inadequate
 caretakers for RK and KK, and recommended that the Children be
 removed from the family home. RK now has extreme special needs
 due to his medical condition. Given the blunt force injury
 suffered by RK, KK's vulnerability due to his young age and
 complete dependence on adult caretakers, the Family Court found
 that it was not in the best interest of the Children to be
 returned to the care of Mother and Boyfriend. We conclude that
 the Family Court did not clearly err in its FOFs and did not
 abuse its discretion in granting DHS's motion petition for
 temporary foster custody in this case.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, the Family Court's August 14, 2014 Order
 
After Trial and August 22, 2014 Orders Concerning CPA are
 
affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 16, 2016 
On the briefs: 
Herbert Y. Hamada,
for Mother-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Mary Anne Magnier,Erin K.S. Torres,Deputy Attorneys General,for Petitioner-Appellee. Associate Judge 
11
 