FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
COUNTY OF KAUA 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
HANALEI RIVER HOLDINGS LIMITED, a Cook Islands corporation;
MICHAEL GUARD SHEEHAN; PATRICIA WILCOX SHEEHAN, as
Trustee of that certain unrecorded Revocable Trust 
Agreement of Patricia Wilcox Sheehan, dated December
21, 1994; PATRICIA WILCOX SHEEHAN; GAYLORD H. WILCOX;
DANIEL H. CASE; GROVE FARM COMPANY, INC., a Hawaii
corporation; HUGH W. KLEBAHN; DONN A. CARSWELL; PAMELA
W. DOHRMAN; ROBERT D. MULLINS; WILLIAM D. PRATT;
RANDOLPH G. MOORE; and the Heirs and/or Assigns of JOHN
B. BROSSEAU, also known as JOHN BROSSEAU, JOHN B.
BRASSEAU and J.B. BRASSEAU; JOHN DOES 1-200; DOE
PARTNERSHIPS 1-25; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-25; DOE ENTITIES
1-25; AND DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-25, Defendants-Appellants
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000828 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-0098)

 
March 31, 2016
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, LEONARD and GINOZA, JJ.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
OPINION OF THE COURT BY GINOZA, J.
 
This case involves Plaintiff-Appellee County of 
Kaua'i's (County) exercise of eminent domain to take private land 
in which the Defendants-Appellants Hanalei River Holdings, Ltd., 
(HRH) and Michael Sheehan (Sheehan) (collectively, the Sheehan Defendants) owned an interest. The Sheehan Defendants appeal from a "Final Judgment As To All Claims and All Parties" (Judgment) entered April 25, 2014, in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (circuit court).
1 
On appeal, the Sheehan Defendants contend the circuit
 
court erred by (1) granting the County's motion to withdraw a
 portion of estimated just compensation that had been deposited
 with the circuit court; (2) granting the County's motion for
 summary judgment on the issue of severance damages; and (3)
 adopting the County's calculation for blight of summons damages.
 
For the reasons stated below, we vacate the circuit
 
court's award for blight of summons damages and remand on that
 issue. In all other respects, we affirm.
I. Background
 
On May 31, 2011, the County filed a Complaint against
 
Sheehan asserting its exercise of eminent domain to take private
 land for a public use, specifically to expand a public park
 located in Hanalei commonly known as Black Pot Beach Park. The
 private land at issue consists of three parcels, referred to in
 this case as Parcel 33 (TMK No. (4) 5-5-01-033), Parcel 34 (TMK
 No. (4) 5-5-01-034), and Parcel 49 (TMK No. (4) 5-5-01-049)
 (collectively referred to as the Subject Properties). 
Subsequently, the County filed a First Amended Complaint adding
 defendants, including HRH and Patricia Wilcox Sheehan,
 individually and as Trustee of that certain unrecorded Revocable
 Trust Agreement of Patricia Wilcox Sheehan, dated December 21,
 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided, except as noted.
 
2
     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1994 (Patricia Sheehan).2
 
On April 30, 2012, the County filed an ex parte motion 
for an order putting it in possession of the Subject Properties. 
In an attached affidavit, Wallace G. Rezentes, Jr., Director of Finance of the County of Kaua
'i, stated that the County had 
deposited with the chief clerk of the circuit court the amount of estimated just compensation for the taking of the real property, $5.89 million, as required under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 101-29 and -30 (2012). 
On May 4, 2012, the circuit court entered the requested
 
ex parte order of possession in favor of the County.
3
 
On June 29, 2012, Patricia Sheehan filed an answer to
 
the First Amended Complaint and asserted that she, both
 individually and as trustee, "is the owner of the fee simple
 interests, easements, rights of way or the express contingent
 remainder man [sic], to all or portions of the real property
 [Parcels 33, 34, and 49.]" Further, Patricia Sheehan requested
 that the circuit court decide the respective interests of all
 named defendants and that the court "determine and award the just
 compensation, including but not limited to blight of summons, to
 which Patricia W. Sheehan is entitled by virtue of the taking,
 and severance damages to the remaining property." 
On August 16, 2012, HRH filed an answer in which it
 
admitted it has right, title, and interest in the subject
 parcels. HRH also filed a "Motion to Vacate Ex Parte Order
 Putting Plaintiff in Possession" in which it argued, inter alia,
 that the appraisal used as a basis for the estimate of just
 
2
 Patricia Sheehan takes no part in this appeal. In its First Amended 
Complaint, the County also added the following defendants who it asserted may
have an interest in the Subject Properties: Gaylord H. Wilcox; Daniel H. Case;Grove Farm Company, Inc., a Hawai' i corporation; Hugh W. Klebahn; Donn A.
Carswell; Pamela W. Dohrman; Robert D. Mullins; William D. Pratt; Randolph G.Moore; the Heirs and/or Assigns of John B. Brosseau, also known as JohnBrosseau, John B. Brasseau and J.B. Brasseau; and various Does. None of these parties take part in this appeal.
3
 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano entered this order.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
compensation was seven months stale on the date of summons (the
 
valuation date pursuant to HRS § 101-24 (2012)), thus "[i]t was
 stale as a matter of law and did not in good faith represent the
 reasonable fair market value of the property." At the hearing on
 the motion, HRH argued that the primary defect in the appraisal
 was that it did not value purported improvements made to the
 lots. On September 13, 2012, the court entered an order denying
 HRH's motion to vacate the order of possession. 
On September 25, 2012, Sheehan filed an answer and
 
admitted that "some of the identified individuals and/or entities
 have right, title and interest in the subject parcels[.]" 
On March 11, 2013, the Sheehan Defendants filed an
 
application for payment of the estimated compensation, requesting
 that the clerk of the court remit the entire deposit of estimated
 compensation ($5.89 million), minus the required taxes, penalties
 and interest, pursuant to HRS § 101-31 (2012). On March 19,
 2013, Patricia Sheehan filed a statement of no position regarding
 the Sheehan Defendants' application for payment of estimated
 compensation. However, Patricia requested that her attorneys
 have an opportunity to review any order entered in relation to
 the application.
 
On April 2, 2013, the County filed an opposition to the
 
disbursement of the estimated compensation asserting, inter alia,
 that it was unresolved how the Sheehan Defendants would apportion
 the payment between the Subject Properties given that Sheehan
 owned Parcel 49, HRH owned Parcels 33 and 34, and the interests
 of Patricia Sheehan remained to be adjudicated. The County also
 noted that title to the Subject Properties was clouded as to
 exactly what interest each of the three defendants had in the
 properties because the tax map of the Subject Properties
 reflected a subdivision that was never completed. The County
 also contended that, in the event the jury awarded compensation
 in a manner different than the allocation made by the defendants,
 it "would have no reliable means of recouping any excess payment"
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
because, for example, if HRH, a Cook Islands corporation, 
withdrew the estimated just compensation and it was later determined HRH was not entitled to that amount, the County would be forced to seek reimbursement from a foreign corporation with potentially no other assets in Hawai
'i. 
On the same day, April 2, 2013, the County also filed a
 
motion to withdraw $1.03 million of the estimated just
 compensation on deposit with the court, contending it was
 entitled to adjust its estimate based on an updated appraisal of
 the Subject Properties that valued the properties at $4.86
 million. The County asserted that its initial deposit was based
 on an appraisal conducted in anticipation of condemnation
 litigation, but, once the Complaint was filed, it obtained an
 updated appraisal by the same appraiser based on the applicable
 valuation date, May 31, 2011, the date of summons. 
On April 5, 2013, Patricia Sheehan filed a waiver and
 
release of all proceeds payable by the County in the proceedings
 and expressed her consent to disbursement of the proceeds to the
 Sheehan Defendants. 
On the same day, April 5, 2013, the Sheehan Defendants
 
filed a reply in support of their application for payment of the
 estimated compensation in which they asserted that none of the
 County's objections prevented payment. The Sheehan Defendants
 asserted inter alia that (1) Patricia Sheehan's interests were
 now resolved; (2) the appraisal valued each parcel separately, so
 the money could be easily apportioned; and (3) whether HRH is a
 foreign corporation is irrelevant as the governing statutes do
 not differentiate between a local and a foreign owner.
 
On April 10, 2013, the County and Sheehan executed an
 
Agreement Regarding Withdrawal of Deposit, which allowed the
 Sheehan Defendants partial payment of the deposit, in the amount
 of $4.86 million less unpaid property taxes (a total of
 $4,538,018.10), apportioned as follows: Parcel 33 ­$1,627,295.03; Parcel 34 - $2,294,407.11; and Parcel 49 ­
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
$616,315.96.4 Further, as part of the agreement, Sheehan agreed
 
to indemnify the County if HRH failed to repay any money that
 
exceeded the jury verdict on Parcels 33 and 34. The parties
 filed a stipulation on April 10, 2013 and an amended stipulation
 on April 18, 2013, providing for partial payment of the deposit
 to the Sheehan Defendants in the amounts set forth in the
 agreement.
 
On April 22, 2013, the Sheehan Defendants filed an
 
opposition to the County's motion to withdraw $1.03 million of
 the estimated just compensation, generally challenging the
 existence of any authority permitting the County to revise its
 estimated compensation, especially after it seized the property
 and the Sheehan Defendants had applied for the release of the
 funds. 
On May 13, 2013, the circuit court granted the County's
 
motion to withdraw $1.03 million of the deposit. 
On August 13, 2013, the County filed a motion for
 
partial summary judgment on the issue of severance damages for an
 area of land referred to in the Sheehan Defendants' appraisal as
 "Area 51." The parties agree that "Area 51" is not owned by the
 Sheehan Defendants. Instead, it appears to be part of a lot
 owned by Patricia Sheehan, Lot 127, which abuts Parcel 34, and is
 an area over which Sheehan had an easement to operate a boat
 baseyard, to the extent the baseyard was permitted by the County. 
On October 3, 2013, the circuit court filed an order
 
granting the County's motion for partial summary judgment, ruling
 that the Sheehan Defendants were not entitled to severance
 damages. The circuit court concluded inter alia that there were
 no genuine issues of material fact and that the Sheehan
 Defendants could not satisfy the unities test under City & County
 of Honolulu v. Bonded Investment Co., Ltd., 54 Haw. 523, 525, 511
 
4
 The agreement also provided that, in the event the circuit court
denied the County's pending motion to withdraw $1.03 million from the deposit
and allowed further payment to the Sheehan Defendants, said payment would be
allocated between the parcels according to the ratios used in the agreement.
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
P.2d 163, 165 (1973) [hereafter Bonded Inv. II]. Specifically,
 
the court concluded that there was no unity of title because HRH
 owned Parcels 33 and 34, Sheehan owned Parcel 49, and Patricia
 Sheehan owned "Area 51." Moreover, the court concluded there was
 no physical unity because "Area 51" did not abut the only
 property owned by Sheehan, Parcel 49. Alternatively, the circuit
 court also determined that an easement is not title to land, and
 that the Sheehan Defendants were estopped from claiming severance
 damages because they had failed to disclose the claim in any
 pleading or during discovery.
 
On November 8, 2013, after a jury trial, the jury
 
returned a Special Verdict Form, finding that the total fair
 market value of the three parcels on May 31, 2011, was $5.8
 million, broken down as follows: Parcel 33 (owned by HRH) - $2.03
 million; Parcel 34 (owned by HRH) - $3.016 million; and Parcel 49
 (owned by Sheehan) - $754,000. 
On November 18, 2013, the County filed a motion
 
regarding blight of summons damages (an amount paid to a land
 owner as a result of the government's delay in paying full just
 compensation for the condemned property on the date of summons). 
The County contended that the Sheehan Defendants were entitled to
 blight of summons damages (5% per annum interest) during two
 periods: (1) from May 31, 2011 (the date of summons) until May 4,
 2012 (the date the County asserted it made its initial deposit)
5
 
on the full $5.8 million jury verdict; and (2) from April 29,
 2013 (erroneously stated as the date the court granted the
 
6
County's motion to withdraw a portion of the deposit)  until the
5 It appears from the record that the County may have made its deposit
of $5.89 million to the court on April 30, 2012. However, none of the parties
challenge the May 4, 2012 date as the date of deposit and we will thus treat
that date as the date of deposit for purposes of this appeal. 
6
 The circuit court entered its order allowing the County to withdraw a
portion of the deposit on May 13, 2013, not April 29, 2013. Nonetheless, as
discussed in section III.C. below, April 10, 2013 (the date the parties
executed the Agreement Regarding Withdrawal of Deposit) is the triggering date
for the second period for blight of summons damages under the facts of this
case and the issues raised on appeal.
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
date the County paid the Sheehan Defendants in full, on the
 
$940,000 difference between the $4.86 million already received by
 the Sheehan Defendants and the $5.8 million jury verdict.
7
 
On January 16, 2014, the circuit court granted the
 
County's motion regarding blight of summons damages and adopted
 the County's calculation of damages. On January 24, 2014, the
 Sheehan Defendants filed a motion for reconsideration of the
 blight of summons order. The circuit court thereafter denied the
 motion for reconsideration. 
On April 25, 2014, the circuit court entered the
 
Judgment and a Final Order of Condemnation. The Sheehan
 Defendants timely appealed.
II. Standards of Review

 
A. Withdrawal of a Portion of the
 Estimated Just Compensation
 
We consider applicable Hawai 'i statutes in determining 
whether the circuit court was authorized to allow the County to
 withdraw part of the estimated just compensation deposited with
 the court.
 
Statutory interpretation is reviewed de novo by [an
appellate] court. "When construing a statute, our foremost
obligation is to ascertain and give effect to the intention
of the legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from
the language contained in the statute itself." Taylor-Rice
v. State, 105 Hawai'i 104, 108, 94 P.3d 695, 663 (2004)(citations omitted). Moreover, "it is a cardinal rule ofstatutory interpretation that, where the terms of a statuteare plain, unambiguous and explicit, we are not at libertyto look beyond that language for a different meaning.Instead, our sole duty is to give effect to the statute'splain and obvious meaning." T-Mobile USA, Inc. v. Cty. ofHawai'i Planning Comm'n., 106 Hawai' i 343, 352-53, 104 P.3d
930, 939-40 (2005) (citation omitted). 
Bhakta v. County of Maui, 109 Hawai 'i 198, 208, 124 P.3d 943, 953 
(2005) (some citations and brackets omitted). "[E]minent domain
 
7
 The Sheehan Defendants' position on calculating blight of summons
damages changed during the course of the proceedings before the circuit court.
Ultimately, they argued that the County should pay: 5% interest per annum on
the entire jury verdict between May 31, 2011 (date of summons), and April 10,
2013 (the date the parties executed the Agreement Regarding Withdrawal of
Deposit); and 5% interest per annum on the $940,000 from April 10, 2013, until
the County paid in full.
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statutes are to be construed liberally in favor of the 
landowner." County of Hawai 'i v. C & J Coupe Family Ltd. P'ship, 
119 Hawai 'i 352, 366, 198 P.3d 615, 629 (2008). 
Given our conclusion, infra, that the circuit court had
 
the authority to allow the County to withdraw a part of the
 deposit, we review the circuit court's exercise of that authority
 for abuse of discretion. See United States v. 1,997.66 Acres of
 
Land, More or Less, in Polk County, Iowa, 137 F.2d 8, 13-14 (8th
 Cir. 1943).
 
B. Summary Judgment on Severance Damages
 
We review the circuit court's grant or denial of
summary judgment de novo. The standard for granting a
motion for summary judgment is settled:
 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material if
 proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party. In other
 words, we must view all of the evidence and the
inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable
to the party opposing the motion.
 
Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111 Hawai 'i 286, 
295, 141 P.3d 459, 468 (2006) (citations and brackets omitted).
C. Blight of Summons Damages
 
An award of blight of summons damages is reviewed under 
the abuse of discretion standard. Hous. Fin. & Dev. Corp. v. 
Ferguson, 91 Hawai 'i 81, 92, 979 P.2d 1107, 1118 (1999).
III. Discussion
 
A. 	County's Withdrawal of a Portion
of the Estimated Just Compensation
 
The Sheehan Defendants contend that the circuit court
 
erred by granting the County's motion to withdraw a portion of
 
the estimated just compensation that had been deposited with the
 court, specifically $1.03 million of the $5.89 million that the
 County had deposited with the clerk of the circuit court. 
9
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The Sheehan Defendants contend that the circuit court's
 
actions should be reviewed under the abuse of discretion
 
standard, and that there is no legal authority that permits the
 County to withdraw a portion of the estimated just compensation
 that was deposited pursuant to HRS § 101-29 after the County has
 taken possession of the land and the condemnee has petitioned the
 court for release of the funds pursuant to HRS § 101-31. The
 Sheehan Defendants argue that the County should be estopped from
 reducing the amount of estimated just compensation in this case
 because the Sheehan Defendants relied on the estimate in
 petitioning the court for release and, in doing so, waived all
 defenses to the condemnation action besides an assertion of
 greater compensation or damages.
8
 
The County responds that its decision to withdraw a
 
portion of the estimated just compensation cannot be reviewed by
 a court because the County has the right to adjust its estimate.
 The County further asserts that the Sheehan Defendants were not
 harmed by the reduction of the estimated just compensation
 because the County was required to cover the difference between
 the amount initially paid to the Sheehan Defendants and the jury
 verdict, plus the statutory 5% interest per annum on the
 difference, thus the Sheehan Defendants have received just
 compensation.
 
We disagree with the County's contention that its
 
decision to withdraw a portion of the estimated just compensation
 on deposit with the court is not subject to judicial review. The
 County moved for withdrawal under HRS §§ 101-29 and 101-31. 
Thus, there is a question of statutory interpretation whether the
 
8
 The Sheehan Defendants also assert that they were further deprived of
the use of the withdrawn $1.03 million for four months and potentially could
have garnered more than a 5% per annum return on the funds. We note that before the circuit court, the Sheehan Defendants only challenged the authorityof the County to withdraw a portion of the estimate, and did not argue thatthey could earn more of a return. Arguments not raised below are waived.County of Hawaii v. UNIDEV, LLC, 129 Hawai' i 378, 387, 301 P.3d 588, 597
(2013) ("It is axiomatic that where a party fails to raise an argument beforethe courts below, that argument may be deemed waived for purposes ofappeal."). 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circuit court, with whom the money was deposited, was authorized
 
to permit the withdrawal. 
To evaluate this issue, we must consider pertinent
 
sections of HRS Chapter 101. HRS § 101-29 provides in pertinent
 part:
 
§101-29 Possession pending action; alternative
procedure.  Where the plaintiff is the State or any county,
the following alternative procedure may be followed. At any
time after the commencement of an action pursuant to this
part, the State or any county may file a motion for an order
of possession invoking this section and supported by an
affidavit alleging, or by oral evidence prima facie 
showing:
 
. . . .
 
(3)
	 The sum of money estimated by the State or
county to be just compensation or damages for
the taking of the real property.
 
Upon such motion and upon payment of such estimated
sum of money to the clerk of the court for the use of the
persons entitled thereto
, the court shall issue an order ex
parte putting the State or county in possession of the real
property sought to be condemned . . . . The order placing
the State or county in possession shall become effective
upon the expiration of ten days after service thereof;
provided that for good cause shown within the ten days, the
court may vacate or modify the order or postpone the
effective date thereof for an additional period of time.
 
(Emphasis added.) In turn, HRS § 101-30 provides in pertinent
 
part:
 
§101-30 Order of possession.  No order of possession
shall issue unless the plaintiff has paid to the clerk of
the court issuing the order, for the use of the persons
entitled thereto, the amount of the estimated compensation
or damages stated in the motion for the issuance of the
order and, in the case of a plaintiff other than the State
or a county, has so paid such additional amount, or
furnished such additional security, as may be required by
the court.
 
(Emphasis added.) HRS § 101-31 provides in pertinent part: 
§101-31 Payment of estimated compensation; effect
thereof.  Upon the application of the parties entitled
thereto the court may order that the amount of the estimated
compensation or damages stated in the motion and paid to the
clerk of the court, or any part thereof, be paid forthwith
for or on account of the just compensation to be awarded in
the proceedings. . . . A payment to any party as aforesaid
shall be held to constitute an abandonment by the party of
all defenses interposed by the party, excepting the party's
claim for greater compensation or damages. If the
 compensation or damages finally awarded in respect of the
land or any parcel thereof exceeds the amount of the money
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
so received by any person entitled, the court shall enter
judgment for the amount of the deficiency. The unexpended
moneys and any additional security so deposited with the
clerk of the court shall be available for, or for
enforcement of, the payment of any final judgment awarded by
the court.
 
(Emphasis added.) We also note that HRS § 101-24 provides in
 
pertinent part that "[f]or the purpose of assessing compensation
 and damages, the right thereto shall be deemed to have accrued at
 the date of summons, and, except as provided in section 46-6, its
 actual value at that date shall be the measure of valuation of
 all property to be condemned[.]" (Emphasis added.) 
The plain language of HRS § 101-31 authorizes the
 
circuit court to order the amount of estimated compensation "or
 any part thereof" to be paid forthwith upon application of the
 party entitled to the compensation. Thus, there is clear
 statutory authority that the court is not required to order
 payment of the entire amount deposited. The issue here is
 whether the circuit court could permit the County to withdraw a
 portion of the deposit. The circuit court granted the County's
 motion to withdraw based on HRS § 101-29, City & County of
 Honolulu v. Bonded Investment Co., Ltd., 54 Haw. 385, 507 P.2d
 1084 (1973) [hereafter Bonded Inv. I], and federal case law. 
The plain language of HRS §§ 101-29 through -31 does
 
not expressly authorize withdrawal of a portion of estimated just
 compensation deposited in support of a motion for possession. 
HRS § 101-29 provides that the State or any county may file a
 motion for possession of private property supported by evidence
 showing the amount of estimated just compensation or damages for
 the taking of the property. It is only upon payment to the court
 of "such estimated sum of money[,]" or "the amount of the
 estimated compensation or damages stated in the motion for the
 issuance of the order[,]" for the use of the persons entitled
 thereto, that the circuit court can issue the order of
 possession. HRS §§ 101-29, -30. Further, HRS § 101-31
 authorizes the court to disburse "the amount of the estimated
 
12
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
compensation or damages stated in the motion and paid to the
 
clerk of the court, or any part thereof," upon application by the
 parties entitled to the money. These provisions do not authorize
 the court to allow withdrawal of a portion of estimated just
 compensation.
 
However, while not cited by the circuit court as a
 
basis for granting the County's motion to withdraw a portion of
 the deposit, HRS § 101-19 (2012) provides the court in an eminent
 domain action with broad authority to permit amendments to the
 proceeding.
 
§101-19 Amendments of complaints, citations.  In all
 
proceedings under this part the court shall have power at
any stage of the proceeding to allow amendments in form or
substance in any complaint, citation, summons, process,
answer, motion, order, verdict, judgment, or other
proceeding, including amendment in the description of the
lands sought to be condemned, whenever the amendment will
not impair the substantial rights of any party in interest.
 
(Emphasis added.) Thus, relevant to this case, HRS § 101-19
 
authorized the circuit court to allow amendments "in form or
 
9
substance" of processes, motions, or other proceedings,  as long
as "the amendment will not impair the substantial rights of any

 
party in interest."
 
In addition to the express statutory authorization in 
HRS § 101-19, the analysis in 
Bonded Inv. I also provides some 
guidance. In Bonded Inv. I, the jury verdict in an eminent domain case was less than the estimated just compensation that had been deposited and paid to the property owner, and the trial court allowed the property owner to retain the excess amount that had been paid, in disregard of the jury verdict. 54 Haw. at 387­88, 507 P.2d at 1087. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that the 
City and County of Honolulu was entitled to restitution of the total excess deposit, plus 5% per annum, from the date of withdrawal of the excess deposit. Id. at 395, 507 P.2d at 1091. 
9
 "[T]he estimate [of just compensation] is not part of the pleadings.
It is part of a separate procedure under HRS [§] 101-29 for immediate
possession of the condemned property." Bonded Inv. I, 54 Haw. at 395, 507
 
P.2d at 1091. 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The court noted that "an 'estimate of just compensation and
 
damages' is just that - an estimate. It was not intended in any
 manner to be dispositive, final or binding as a settlement on the
 amount due." 
Id. at 394, 507 P.2d at 1091. 
In reaching its decision, the Bonded Inv. I court cited
 
favorably to federal case law and construction of the Federal
 Declaration of Taking Act, 40 U.S.C. § 3114 (2012), which, the
 court noted, had a similar purpose to HRS Chapter 101. 54 Haw.
 at 393-94, 507 P.2d at 1090. Following that example, we look to
 1,997.66 Acres of Land, in which the Eighth Circuit Court of
 Appeals held that 
there is nothing in the Declaration of Taking Act,
inconsistent with an exercise of the implied, inherent
authority of the district court to allow the United States
to amend the declaration of taking filed in a condemnation
proceeding, for the purpose of reducing (or increasing) an
erroneous estimate of just compensation for the land taken,
and to permit the Government to withdraw the excess of the
cash deposited over the revised estimate. This construction
merely seeks, by reasonable and sound implication, to give
practical effect to the fundamental purposes and policies of
the Act, on a point on which the Act itself is silent, in a
manner that does no violence to the basic or substantive
 rights that are involved in the proceeding.
 
10
135 F.2d at 13 (footnote omitted);  see also, Bishop v. United
10 In a footnote, the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals discussed a
District of Columbia statute containing language substantially similar to HRS
§ 101-19, and noted that the statute was a codification of inherent judicial
power:
 
In a corresponding declaration of taking statute applicable

to the District of Columbia, Act of March 1, 1929, c. 416,
45 Stat. 1415, 40 U.S.C.A. § 361 et seq., there is a
provision, 45 Stat. 1421, 40 U.S.C.A. § 383, that 'In all
proceedings under this chapter the court shall have power at
any stage of the proceeding to allow amendments in form or
substance in any petition, citation, summons, process,
answer, declaration of taking, order, verdict, or other
proceeding, including amendment in the description of the
lands sought to be condemned, whenever such amendment will
not impair the substantial rights of any party in interest.'
This is, of course, a mere legislative declaration of
existent, inherent judicial power, but the inclusion of a
declaration of taking in its terms in [sic] confirmatory
that Congress did not intend that the mere filing of a
declaration of taking in a condemnation proceeding should
result in the creation of such a fixed or unvariable status
 with respect to the estimate and deposit that there could be
no correction of an error which had occurred in them.
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
States, 288 F.2d 525, 529 (5th Cir. 1961) (citing 1,997.66 Acres
 
of Land) (noting that the government may reduce the deposit
 before it has been withdrawn by the property owner). The Eighth
 Circuit noted that "[t]he two principal purposes of Congress, in
 making provision in the Declaration of Taking Act for the
 estimating of just compensation and the depositing of the amount
 thereof in court, undoubtedly were to minimize the interest
 burden of the Government in a condemnation proceeding, and to
 alleviate the temporary hardship to the landowner and the
 occupant from the immediate taking and deprivation of
 possession." 137 F.2d at 11. However, the court also stated
 that permitting the landowner to acquire the excessive initial
 estimate "would not tend to serve the general aim and policy of
 the [Federal Declaration of Taking Act]" and would "leave open
 the possibility of a waste of public funds[.]" Id. at 12. The
 
Eighth Circuit also held that the court could refuse to permit
 the government to revise its estimate and withdraw a portion of
 the deposit if the deposit was already paid out to the landowner,
 or if the government was not acting in good faith. Id. at 14.
 
Based on HRS § 101-19 and persuasive federal case law,
 
we hold that the court in an eminent domain proceeding may permit
 a governmental entity to withdraw a portion of the estimated just
 compensation deposit that has not been dispersed to the landowner
 when the governmental entity, acting in good faith, seeks to
 adjust the estimate to accurately reflect the value of the
 property on the date of summons and the adjustment will not
 impair the substantial rights of any party in interest. Given
 this standard, we review the circuit court's decision to allow
 the withdrawal of $1.03 million in this case for abuse of
 discretion. See 1,997.66 Acres of Land, 137 F.2d at 13-14
 
(applying an abuse of discretion standard in reviewing the trial
 court's refusal to allow a governmental entity to revise its
 compensation estimate and to withdraw the deposit excess).
 
1,997.66 Acres of Land, 137 F.2d at 13 n.1 (emphasis added).
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In this case, the estimated just compensation had not
 
been dispersed to the Sheehan Defendants at the time the County
 
moved to revise its estimate and withdraw a portion of the
 deposit. Also, the County appears to have acted in good faith. 
Pursuant to HRS § 101-24, the County was required to pay the
 "actual value" of the Subject Properties on the date of summons
 "[f]or the purpose of assessing compensation and damages[.]" It
 appears from the record that the County sought to adjust its
 estimate and withdraw a portion of the deposited just
 compensation based on an updated appraisal that reflected the
 value of the Subject Properties at the date of summons (May 31,
 2011). The initial estimate of $5.89 million was based on an
 appraisal of the value of the Subject Properties seven months
 before the date of summons, and therefore did not reflect the
 date upon which the Sheehan Defendants' right to compensation
 accrued. HRS § 101-24. In fact, HRH had previously requested
 that the circuit court vacate the order of possession inter alia
 on the grounds that the $5.89 million figure was seven months
 stale and did not accurately reflect the value of the Subject
 Property on the date of summons.
 
The County's withdrawal of a portion of the estimated
 
just compensation did not impair the substantial rights of the
 Sheehan Defendants. First, under HRS § 101-31, the circuit court
 is authorized to disperse only a part of the estimated just
 compensation "stated in the motion and paid to the clerk of the
 court[.]" Second, it is only once payment of "the amount of the
 estimated compensation or damages stated in the motion and paid
 to the clerk of the court, or any part thereof" is made to the
 entitled party that the party abandons all defenses except claims
 for greater compensation or damages. HRS § 101-31. The Sheehan
 Defendants accepted payment of the reduced amount of estimated
 just compensation ($4.86 million) pursuant to agreement after the
 County had moved to withdraw a portion of the deposit. 
Therefore, the Sheehan Defendants did not rely on the original
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
deposit in accepting payment. Third, although the property owner 
in an eminent domain proceeding is entitled to just compensation for the taking of private property for public use, the Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court has noted that "to award [the condemnee] more than [the] value [of the property] would be unjust to the public." Bonded Inv. I, 54 Haw. at 394, 507 P.2d at 1091 (quoting Garrow v. United States, 131 F.2d 724, 726 (5th Cir. 1942)). So long as
 the Sheehan Defendants receive proper blight of summons damages,
 the calculation of which is based in part on the estimated amount
 they initially received, they will have received just
 compensation. In short, the Sheehan Defendants will receive full
 market value of the property as determined by a jury, plus
 appropriate interest. An award of additional sums at this stage
 in the proceedings would be inappropriate.
11
 
The supreme court has noted that "[w]here the circuit 
court's decision is correct, its conclusion will not be disturbed on the ground that it gave the wrong reason for its ruling. An appellate court may affirm a judgment of the lower court on any ground in the record that supports affirmance." Poe v. Hawai'i 
Labor Relations Bd., 87 Hawai
'i 191, 197, 953 P.2d 569, 575 
(1998)(citation and quotation marks omitted). Under HRS §§ 101­19 and 101-31, the circuit court had authority to disperse only part of the estimated just compensation to the Sheehan Defendants and to grant the County's motion to withdraw a portion of the estimated just compensation that had been deposited with the court. Further, given the circumstances of this case, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in allowing the County to withdraw $1.03 million of the amount deposited with the court. 
11 We note that the Sheehan Defendants do not request any form of
relief from the circuit court's order permitting the County to withdraw a
portion of the deposit, besides a request for us to vacate that order.
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B. Severance Damages
 
The Sheehan Defendants contend that Sheehan12 is
 
entitled to "severance damages" because the taking of the Subject
 
Properties damaged the value of Sheehan's interest in the
 purportedly adjacent "Area 51." They assert that the circuit
 court erred in granting the County's motion for partial summary
 judgment on the issue of severance damages because there is a
 genuine issue of material fact whether Sheehan is entitled to
 such damages and he was not estopped from asserting a claim. The
 County moved for summary judgment on the severance issue after
 receiving a Summary Appraisal Report from the Sheehan Defendants
 that in part estimated damages to "Area 51" caused by the taking
 of the Subject Properties. 
HRS § 101-23 (2012) sets out the statutory right to
 
severance damages, stating in pertinent part:
 
If the property sought to be condemned constitutes only a
portion of a larger tract, the damages which will accrue to
the portion not sought to be condemned by reason of its
severance from the portion sought to be condemned, and the
construction of the improvements in the manner proposed by
the plaintiff shall also be assessed, and also how much the
portion not sought to be condemned will be specifically
benefited, if at all, by the construction of the improvement
proposed by the plaintiff. If the benefit shall be equal to
the amount of compensation assessed for the property taken,
and for damages by reason of its severance from another
portion of the same tract, then the owner shall be allowed
no compensation, but if the benefits shall be less than the
amount so assessed as damages or compensation, then the
former shall be deducted from the latter and the remainder
 shall be the amount awarded as compensation or damages.
 
"[T]he test generally used by courts to determine whether a
 
parcel to be acquired by eminent domain proceeding is a part of a
 larger tract of land to entitle owners to severance damages is
 that there must be
 unity of title, physical unity and unity of
 
use of the parcel taken and parcel left." Bonded Inv. II, 54
 Haw. at 525, 511 P.2d at 165 (emphasis added). 
The parties do not dispute that Sheehan has a purported

 
12 The Sheehan Defendants only assert that Sheehan is entitled to
severance damages, not HRH. 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
easement on "Area 51" to operate a boat baseyard (to the extent 
permitted by the County) and that "Area 51" is part of Lot 127, owned by Patricia Sheehan. In support of its motion for partial summary judgment, the County submitted the Sheehan Defendants' answers to interrogatories in which they acknowledge the ownership of the respective Parcels; that is, that Sheehan owns Parcel 49 and HRH owns Parcels 33 and 34. Thus, it is undisputed that, of the three parcels taken by the County, only Parcel 49 was owned by Sheehan. In support of its motion for partial summary judgment, the County also submitted, inter alia, maps from the Sheehan Defendants' appraisal, showing the relative location of the Subject Properties and "Area 51," which reveal that Parcel 49 does not abut "Area 51." Thus, the only condemned parcel owned by Sheehan, Parcel 49, is not adjacent to "Area 51," because Parcels 33 and 34, both owned by HRH, lie in between. Sheehan therefore cannot satisfy the physical unity requirement.
13 Based on this evidence, the burden shifted to the 
Sheehan Defendants to demonstrate a genuine issue of material fact. See Stanford Carr Dev., 111 Hawai
'i at 295-96, 141 P.3d at 
468-69 (explaining the burdens on moving and non-moving parties on summary judgment). 
In an attempt to raise a genuine issue of material 
fact, the Sheehan Defendants only submitted Sheehan's 
unsigned 
declaration14 which states that (1) Sheehan's boatyard is 
situated on Parcels 33, 34, 49, 50, and "Area 51"; (2) his easement over "Area 51" remains in full force and effect as Patricia Sheehan had not cancelled it; and (3) he considered all of the lots part of the larger boatyard. Sheehan's unsigned declaration does not constitute admissible evidence under Rule 56(e) of the Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) because it 
13
 We make no comment on whether an easement constitutes title for
 
purposes of the unities test. 
14 Sheehan did not file a signed version of the declaration until
approximately five months after the circuit court issued its order granting
the County's motion for partial summary judgment. 
19
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
violates Rule 7(g) of the Rules of the Circuit Courts setting
 
forth the requirements for when a declaration may be submitted in
 lieu of an affidavit. In any event, even if Sheehan's
 declaration were considered, it does not raise a genuine issue of
 material fact whether he could satisfy the unities test.
 
Finally, we reject Sheehan's argument that under Bonded 
Inv. II there is no requirement that all of the pertinent lots abut one another. This is a clear misreading of Bonded Inv. II as the Hawai
'i Supreme Court expressly noted that of the three 
parcels at issue in that case (which all satisfied the unity of title requirement), two were contiguous, and one of the two contiguous parcels adjoined the third, thus all three could comprise one tract of land. 54 Haw. at 524, 527, 511 P.2d at 164, 166. 
There is no genuine issue of material fact that Sheehan
 
cannot satisfy the unities test for severance damages for "Area
 51." We need not reach any other basis relied upon by the
 circuit court in granting summary judgment on severance damages.
C. Blight of Summons Damages (Conditional Deposit)
 
The Sheehan Defendants contend that the circuit court
 
abused its discretion by granting the County's motion regarding
 blight of summons damages and adopting the County's proposed
 method of calculation. Specifically, the Sheehan Defendants
 contend that the County's deposit of estimated just compensation
 was conditional and therefore did not stop interest from accruing
 on the amount that would be owed, until monies were paid to the
 Sheehan Defendants.
 
"'[B]light of summons damages' [is] a term which in
 
general means the indemnification due a condemnee for the damages
 resulting from the government's delay in paying the full cash
 equivalent of the property taken on the date of summons." City &
 
County of Honolulu v. Market Place, Ltd., 55 Haw. 226, 235, 517
 P.2d 7, 15 (1973). Blight of summons damages are essentially a
 rate of "interest" to provide the condemnee with full just
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
compensation. County of Hawaii v. C & J Coupe Family Ltd.
 
P'ship, 124 Hawai 'i 281, 290 n.11, 242 P.3d 1136, 1145 n.11 
(2010).
 
In a case like this, where the County has obtained an
 
order of possession for the property during the course of the
 
condemnation proceedings, HRS § 101-33 (2012) provides the
 relevant statutory authority regarding blight of summons damages. HRS § 101-33 states, in pertinent part:
 
§101-33 Allowance of interest, etc. If an order is
 
made letting the plaintiff into possession as provided for
in sections 101-28, 101-29, and 101-32, the final judgment
shall include, as part of the just compensation and damages
awarded, interest at the rate provided in section 101-25
from the date of the order until paid by the plaintiff;
provided that except in the case of an appeal by the
plaintiff as provided in section 101-32, interest shall not
be allowed upon any sum paid by the plaintiff to the clerk
of the court from the date of the payment.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Based on our reading of HRS § 101-33 and relevant 
Hawai'i case law, in a case like this, there are generally two 
periods relevant for blight of summons damages when the estimated 
deposit is less than the eventual final award. First, for the period between the date of summons and the date of an unconditional deposit of estimated just compensation, the party entitled to compensation is entitled to interest at 5% per annum on the amount of the final award of just compensation. Market 
Place, 55 Haw. at 235-37, 517 P.2d at 15-17; Bonded Inv. I, 54 Haw. at 396-97, 507 P.2d at 1092.
15 Second, from the date of an 
unconditional deposit of estimated just compensation until final 
15 Although Market Place and Bonded Inv. I refer to the first period as
 
between the date of summons and the date of order of possession, Market Place 
establishes, consistent with HRS § 101-33, that:
 
[T]here is no obligation on the part of the condemnor to pay
interest to the extent that it makes an unconditional
 deposit of estimated just compensation with the clerk of the
court. The City and County made such a deposit on May 28,
1970, and that is the date on which the trial court should
have stopped the running of interest on the deposited sum as
non-statutory blight of summons damages.
 
55 Haw. at 237, 517 P.2d at 16-17 (emphasis added).
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
payment, interest accrues at 5% per annum on the "amount by which
 
the final award of just compensation exceeds the deposit of
 estimated just compensation upon which the order of possession
 was based." Market Place, 55 Haw. at 235, 517 P.2d at 15. 
However, it is only if the deposit of estimated just compensation
 is "truly unconditional" that it will "stop the running of
 interest as blight of summons damages on [the] amount of the
 deposit." Id. at 239, 517 P.2d at 17.
 
In this case, the circuit court ordered the County to
 
pay blight of summons damages for two periods: first, from May
 31, 2011 (date of summons) until May 4, 2012 (date of deposit for
 estimated compensation), 5% per annum on the jury's final award
 of $5.8 million; second, from April 29, 2013 (purported date of
 the order permitting the County to withdraw a portion of the
 deposit) until the date the County paid in full, 5% per annum on
 the $940,000 difference between the amount initially paid to the
 Sheehan Defendants ($4.86 million) and the jury award ($5.8
 million). The circuit court ordered no interest be paid on any
 amount during the period of May 4, 2012, through April 29, 2013,
 presumably because during this time, the deposit exceeded the
 eventual jury verdict.
 
The only issue related to the blight of summons damages
 
that has been raised in this appeal is whether the County's
 deposit of estimated just compensation was conditional, such that
 the deposit did not stop interest from accruing.
16 The Sheehan
 
Defendants contend that the circuit court erred in ruling that
 the County's deposit was unconditional, because the County
 opposed the Sheehan Defendants' request to release the $5.89
 million on deposit with the court. The Sheehan Defendants thus
 contend that blight of summons damages (5% per annum interest)
 should run: on the entire jury award from May 11, 2011 (date of
 
16 The Sheehan Defendants do not raise any argument that the blight of
summons calculation should have been affected by the County's request or
ultimate withdrawal of $1.03 million from the $5.89 million deposited with the
circuit court. Thus, we need not address any issues related thereto.
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
summons) to April 10, 2013 (the date of the Agreement Regarding
 
Withdrawal of Deposit), despite the County's deposit of estimated
 just compensation almost a year earlier on May 4, 2012; and
 thereafter, continue to run on the $940,000 difference between
 the jury award and the $4.86 million initially paid, from April
 10, 2013 until paid in full.
 
Thus, there are two issues that we must address: (1)
 
whether the circuit court abused its discretion in ruling that
 the County's deposit of $5.89 million in estimated just
 compensation was unconditional; and (2) if the County's deposit
 was conditional, what effect that has on the calculation for
 blight of summons damages.
 
Regarding the first question whether the deposit was
 
conditional, unlike in Market Place, there were no express
 conditions placed on the County's deposit of estimated just
 compensation at the time of deposit. Rather, the Sheehan
 Defendants contend that the deposit of $5.89 million became
 conditional because, when they applied for disbursement of the
 deposit in March 2013, the County opposed disbursement and only
 agreed to release of the money after Sheehan agreed to indemnify
 the County for any amount paid to HRH that exceeded the jury
 verdict. The County was concerned that because HRH was a Cook
 Islands entity, it would be difficult to obtain repayment from
 HRH if the ultimate jury award was less than the estimated
 deposit for the lots owned by HRH. The County thus wanted to
 ensure that it would receive repayment from HRH if the estimated
 deposit paid to HRH exceeded the jury verdict.
 
The Sheehan Defendants contend Market Place is on point 
and demonstrates that the County's deposit was conditional. In Market Place, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that one of the City 
and County of Honolulu's deposits of estimated just compensation was conditional and therefore did not stop interest from accruing. The City, after originally depositing an unconditional amount of estimated just compensation and after a jury verdict 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was entered that was greater than the original deposit, deposited
 
additional money in order to bring the amount deposited in line
 with the jury verdict. 55 Haw. at 229-30, 517 P.2d at 12. As
 part of its additional deposit, however, the City sought to
 attach certain conditions on the distribution of the money,
 namely that it would consent to distribution "provided that such
 order contain such protective measures to insure the return of
 any monies not lawfully due the distributees together with such
 additional interest, damages or charges for wrongful withdrawal
 of funds to which distributees may not be entitled." Id. at 238,
 
517 P.2d at 17. As a result of the City's condition on
 distribution, there was a delay in release of the funds to the
 condemnees. Id. at 238-39, 517 P.2d at 17. 
The supreme court held that by placing such
 
restrictions on the disbursement of the additional deposit, the
 City's deposit was not unconditional, and interest could continue
 to accrue on the difference between the original unconditional
 deposit and the jury verdict. Id. at 240-41, 517 P.2d at 18-19. 
The supreme court noted that
 
an initial deposit of estimated just compensation entitling
the condemnor to an order of possession must be ‘for the use
of the persons entitled thereto’ under HRS [§] 101-30. As
 this language suggests, only if such a payment is truly
unconditional will it stop the running of interest as blight
of summons damages on [t]he amount of the deposit.
 
Id. at 239, 517 P.2d at 17 (emphasis added). The supreme court
 
thus held that subsequent deposits must likewise "be
 unconditionally for the use of the persons entitled thereto, cf.
 HRS [§] 101-30, in order to escape interest charges under HRS [§]
 101-33." Id. at 241, 517 P.2d at 19.
 In this case, however, the County's opposition to
 
releasing the estimated just compensation to the Sheehan
 Defendants was not solely based on implementation of "protective
 measures" meant to ensure repayment of excess funds to HRH. 
Importantly, one of the bases asserted by the County for opposing
 release of the money was that title to the Subject Properties was
 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
not clear, and indeed, the record establishes that title to the
 
Subject Properties was still in dispute when the Sheehan
 Defendants filed their application for payment of the deposited
 funds. Pursuant to HRS § 101-31, only "the parties entitled
 thereto" may be paid the "amount of the estimated compensation or
 damages stated in the motion and paid to the clerk of the court,
 or any part thereof[.]" See also Market Place, 55 Haw. at 241,
 
517 P.2d at 19, ("[W]e hold that such money 'paid by the
 plaintiff to the clerk of the court' must be unconditionally for
 the use of the persons entitled thereto[.]" (Emphasis added.)).
 
In Bonded Inv. I, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court quoted the 
following from United States v. Miller, 317 U.S. 369 (1943), as instructive in interpreting HRS Chapter 101 because the Federal Declaration of Taking Act has a similar purpose: 
The purpose of the statute is twofold. First, to give the
Government immediate possession of the property and to
relieve it of the burden of interest accruing on the sum
deposited from the date of taking to the date of judgment in
the eminent domain proceeding. Secondly, to give the former
owner, 
if his title is clear , immediate cash compensation to
the extent of the Government's estimate of the value of the
 property.
 
Bonded Inv. I, 54 Haw. at 393-94, 507 P.2d at 1090 (emphasis
 
added)(block format omitted)(quoting Miller, 317 U.S. at 381-82). 
Therefore, a party must be entitled to the just compensation in
 order to receive payment of the estimated amount deposited with
 the court. Requiring a party to demonstrate entitlement to the
 money does not constitute placing a condition upon the deposit.
 
In this case, the County objected on April 2, 2013 to
 
the Sheehan Defendants' application for payment of the deposit. 
At that time, it was unclear if Patricia Sheehan held a
 compensable interest in the Subject Properties.
17 In her answer
 
17 By the time the Sheehan Defendants filed the application for payment
of the deposit of estimated just compensation (March 11, 2013), all other
defendants besides the Sheehan Defendants and Patricia Sheehan had either
 disclaimed any interest in the Subject Properties, stipulated to dismiss all
claims, or had default entered against them.
 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to the First Amended Complaint, Patricia Sheehan had asserted
 
that she "is the owner of the fee simple interests, easements,
 rights of way or the express contingent remainder man [sic], to
 all or portions of the real property" and requested that the
 circuit court decide the respective interests of all named
 defendants and that the court "determine and award the just
 compensation, including but not limited to blight of summons, to
 which Patricia W. Sheehan is entitled by virtue of the taking,
 and severance damages to the remaining property." Without
 resolution of these issues, it was not clear which party was
 entitled to the just compensation.
 
It was not until April 5, 2013, that Patricia Sheehan
 
waived her interest in the proceeds paid by the County on the
 Subject Properties. It was only at that date that it became
 clear that the Sheehan Defendants were the parties entitled to
 just compensation. Therefore, until April 5, 2013, any delay in
 the availability of deposited funds was not due to conditions
 placed by the County upon payment of the money.
 
However, the County did not drop its opposition to the
 
payment of the estimated just compensation on April 5, 2013. 
Rather, the County consented to the release of the money five (5)
 days later, on April 10, 2013, only after the County and Sheehan
 reached the Agreement Regarding Withdrawal of Deposit, in which
 Sheehan inter alia agreed to indemnify the County for any amount
 paid to HRH that exceeded the jury verdict. The County's
 requirement of an assurance that it could recover any excess
 payment made to HRH further delayed payment to the Sheehan
 Defendants, and this constituted a condition placed upon the
 deposit of estimated just compensation.
 
The supreme court noted in Market Place that "[i]f a
 
condemnor were free to withhold arbitrarily its consent to a
 distribution of an additional deposit of estimated just
 compensation, it is evident that the right to interest under HRS
 [§] 101-33 could be circumvented in substantial measure." 55
 
26
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Haw. at 239, 517 P.2d at 18. This statement is equally
 
applicable in this case to the initial deposit of estimated just
 compensation where the County, on the eve of distribution,
 required conditions be satisfied to merit the County's
 acquiescence to the payment. The County's position would, in
 effect, allow it to circumvent HRS §§ 101-29, 101-30, 101-31 and
 101-33, by first depositing estimated just compensation to stop
 the running of interest on that amount, but then also
 conditioning access to that money by the "persons entitled
 thereto" on the acceptance of "protective measures." In
 addressing persons or parties entitled to just compensation, HRS
 §§ 101-29 through 101-31 do not distinguish between local and
 foreign owners, or owners whose financial situation may be
 conducive to difficult recovery of an overpayment. The County
 chose to pursue immediate possession, and such action requires
 the deposit of estimated just compensation that the "person
 entitled thereto" has the right to withdraw and use at once, if
 title is clear. Market Place, 55 Haw. at 239, 517 P.2d at 17;
 
Bonded Inv. I, 54 Haw. at 393-94, 507 P.2d at 1090.
 
As of April 5, 2013, it was clear that the Sheehan
 
Defendants were entitled to the estimated just compensation on
 deposit with the circuit court. Before that date, the question
 whether the deposit was conditional does not affect the
 calculation of blight of summons damages. However, the County's
 insistence that it receive protection against overpayment to HRH
 further delayed payment to the Sheehan Defendants for five days. 
Based on Market Place, blight of summons damages to the Sheehan
 Defendants should include, for the five days between April 5,
 2013 (the date the record establishes the Sheehan Defendants as
 the parties entitled to just compensation) and April 10, 2013
 (the date the parties agreed to initial payment of funds), 5%
 interest per annum on the entire $5.8 million jury verdict.
 
Moreover, from April 10, 2013, until the date the
 
County paid in full, blight of summons damages should have
 
27
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
included 5% interest per annum on $940,000 (the difference
 
between the $5.8 million jury verdict and the $4.86 million
 initially paid). The circuit court incorrectly started this
 second period on April 29, 2013 (and not April 10, 2013). Thus,
 the Sheehan Defendants are also entitled to further blight of
 summons damages of 5% interest per annum on $940,000 for the
 period between April 10, 2013 and April 29, 2013.
IV. Conclusion
 
Based on the above, the "Final Judgment As To All
 
Claims and All Parties" entered on April 25, 2014, in the Circuit
 Court of the Fifth Circuit is affirmed, except with regard to the
 award of blight of summons damages. The award for blight of
 summons damages is vacated, and this matter is remanded to the
 circuit court to recalculate blight of summons damages consistent
 with this opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Richard E. Wilson,
for Defendants-Appellants.
 
Mauna Kea Trask,
(Office of the County Attorney)
Rosemary T. Fazio,
James K. Mee,
(Ashford & Wriston)
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
28
 