NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0006008
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
IKAIKA AHINA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 12-1-0083(4))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Ikaika Ahina (Ahina) appeals from
 
the "Order Revoking Probation and Resentencing Defendant,"
 
entered on December 5, 2013, by the Family Court of the Second
 Circuit (Family Court).
1
 
On March 28, 2012, pursuant to a plea agreement, Ahina
 
pleaded no contest to one count of Violation of an Order for
 Protection, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 586­11 (2006 and Supp. 2015). Ahina was sentenced to probation for
 one year and two days of incarceration.
 
On December 5, 2013, after a hearing, the Family Court
 
issued a written order revoking Ahina's probation and resentenced
 him to, inter alia, probation for one year with 60 days of
 incarceration as a special condition for failing to report to a
 probation officer as directed.
 
On appeal, Ahina claims the Family Court abused its
 
discretion when it revoked his probation because there was
 insufficient evidence to demonstrate that he inexcusably failed
 
1
 The Honorable Richard T. Bissen, Jr. presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to comply with a substantial requirement of probation.
 
Specifically, Ahina argues that the Family Court erred by finding
 that he intentionally failed to comply with the requirement that
 he report to his Probation Officer as ordered. Ahina also argues
 that his actions were not meant to circumvent the court's
 probation order when the goals of sentencing are considered.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Ahina's point of error as follows and affirm.
 
The court shall revoke probation if the defendant has
inexcusably failed to comply with a substantial requirement
imposed as a condition of the order or has been convicted of
a felony. The court may revoke the suspension of sentence
or probation if the defendant has been convicted of another
crime other than a felony.
 
HRS § 706-625(3) (2014).
 
The term "inexcusably" in HRS § 706-625(3) means a
 
wilful and deliberate attempt to circumvent the order of the
 
court. State v. Villiarimo,  132 Hawai 'i 209, 222, 320 P.3d 874, 
887 (2014).
 
This standard requires both an intentional act on the part
of the defendant ("willful"), and a deliberate attempt by
him or her to circumvent the probation order, taking into
consideration the significance of the defendant's action
with respect to the court’s order and goals of probation
("to circumvent the order of the court"').
 
Id. (footnote omitted). Contrary to Ahina's claim, there was
 
sufficient evidence that he acted intentionally and deliberately
 attempted to circumvent the probation order by violating the
 substantial condition of his probation that he "must report to a
 probation officer as directed by the court or the probation
 officer."
 
The facts are not in dispute. After learning from a
 
Criminal Justice Information Systems inquiry that Ahina had been
 arrested for intoxication on August 14, 2012 and for theft and
 promoting a detrimental drug on August 28, 2012, Ahina met with
 his Probation Officer on September 7, 2012 when they discussed
 the arrests and more frequent meetings. Probation Officer then
 gave Ahina an appointment slip for September 26. During a
 conversation with his Probation Officer, Ahina's tone indicated
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that he questioned why he needed to report to her. Ahina failed
 
to report on September 26. His Probation Officer called him
 again and they agreed to another meeting. However, Ahina again
 failed to show up to that appointment. After his Probation
 Officer sent Ahina a letter, he called his Probation Officer, who
 agreed to a third meeting. The date and time was set based upon
 Ahina's availability because he was not working on the date of
 the appointment. However, Ahina again failed to report, failed
 to call his Probation Officer to inform her that he would not
 appear, and no other arrangement to report was made thereafter.
 
"Given the difficulty of proving the requisite state of 
mind by direct evidence[,] . . . 'proof by circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences arising from circumstances surrounding the defendant's conduct is sufficient.'" State v. 
Stocker, 90 Hawai
'i 85, 92, 976 P.2d 399, 406 (1999) (citation 
and brackets omitted). "Thus, the mind of an alleged offender may be read from his acts, conduct and inferences fairly drawn from all the circumstances." Id. (quoting State v. Sadino, 64 
Haw. 427, 430, 642 P.2d 534, 536-37 (1982)). Ahina failed to comply with the requirement that he report to his Probation Officer as directed by his Probation Officer three times with the last scheduled report date specifically scheduled to accommodate Ahina's work schedule, yet he still failed to report. No reasons for the failures to report were offered. Given Ahina's conduct and the inferences fairly drawn from all of the circumstances, there was sufficient evidence that Ahina acted intentionally and deliberately attempted to circumvent the probation order by violating a substantial condition of his probation. 
The rehabilitative and protective factors set out by 
the legislature in HRS § 706-606 (2014) are relevant in considering whether a defendant's violation of probation is inexcusable. Villiarimo, 132 Hawai
'i at 221, 320 P.3d at 886. 
HRS § 707-606 states: 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§706-606 Factors to be considered in imposing a
sentence.  The court, in determining the particular sentence
to be imposed, shall consider:
 
(1)	 The nature and circumstances of the offense and
 
the history and characteristics of the
defendant;
 
(2)	 The need for the sentence imposed:
 
(a)	 To reflect the seriousness of the offense,
to promote respect for law, and to provide
just punishment for the offense;
 
(b)	 To afford adequate deterrence to criminal
conduct;
 
(c)	 To protect the public from further crimes
of the defendant; and
 
(d)	 To provide the defendant with needed
educational or vocational training,
medical care, or other correctional
treatment in the most effective manner;
 
(3)	
 The kinds of sentences available; and
 
(4)	
 The need to avoid unwarranted sentence
 disparities among defendants with similar
records who have been found guilty of similar
conduct.
 
Prior to September 2012, Ahina had only minimal
 
reporting requirements. However, after Ahina's Probation Officer
 
discovered that he had been arrested for multiple offenses in
 August 2012 and failed to report these arrests to her, she
 attempted in increase the number of interviews with him. This
 action by Ahina's Probation Officer was consistent with three of
 the protective factors set out in HRS § 706-606(2)(b), (c), and
 (d) and therefore a prudent step in promoting the purposes of
 probation. When Ahina failed to report and meet with his
 Probation Officer from late September to October 2012, Ahina's
 Probation Officer could not determine what Ahina's circumstances
 were and whether those circumstances placed the public at risk
 for further crimes from Ahina, whether he was likely to engage in
 criminal conduct, or whether treatment for intoxication issues
 was necessary. Ahina's repeated failure to report circumvented
 the probation order, undermined the purposes of his sentence, and
 negatively impacted on the goals of probation.
 
4

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Based on the evidence and taking the protective and
 
rehabilitative purposes of probation into account, there was
 
substantial evidence supporting the Family Court's finding that
 Ahina inexcusably failed to report to his probation officer as
 directed.
 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the December 5, 2013 "Order
 
Revoking Probation and Resentencing Defendant," entered by the
 Family Court of the Second Circuit, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 31, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Ben C. Summit,

for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Peter A. Hanano,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
5
 