NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000993
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
BRIAN L. GROELSMA and INGRID K. GROELSMA, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v. CITY & COUNTY OF HONOLULU, Defendant-Appellee,

and DOES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0213)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION

 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Brian L. Groelsma and Ingrid K.
 
Groelsma (the Groelsmas) appeal from the Final Judgment
 
(Judgment) entered against them and in favor of Defendant-
Appellee City & County of Honolulu (City), on June 23, 2014, in
 
1
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).  The
 Groelsmas' suit against the City alleged that the City's
 
negligent failure to adequately maintain, operate, repair, and

 
inspect its storm sewers caused a landslide, which damaged the
 Groelsmas' property. The Groelmas do not directly challenge the
 jury verdict in favor of the City on the issue of the City's
 negligence. Rather, the Groelmas argue that the Judgment must be
 
1
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
vacated, and the case remanded for further proceedings, on the
 
grounds that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in granting
 a motion in limine to exclude a March 17, 2012 videotaped scoping
 of a drainline running from Ahuwale Place to Ahuwale Street (2012
 
Videoscoping), still photographs from the 2012 Videoscoping, and
 certain other exhibits that were not produced in discovery prior
 
to the discovery cutoff date. For the reasons set forth below,
 we affirm.
 I. FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
 
In their February 2, 2007 Complaint, the Groelsmas
 
alleged that, on or about February 3, 2005, a landslide began in
 the proximity of their property, causing damage to buildings,
 landscaping, walls, trees, and concrete work on the Groelsmas'
 property. The Groelsmas alleged that the landslide was a
 "proximate result" of the City's failure to, inter alia, maintain
 its storm sewers, drain lines, and other catchment facilities,
 which caused water to infiltrate the subsurface soils near their
 property. The Groelsmas sought compensation for damages,
 including the cost of emergency repairs to their house, the cost
 of devices to mitigate the effects of the landslide, and a
 diminishment in property value due to the proximity of the
 landslide. The City filed an Answer to the Complaint on February
 26, 2007. Both parties demanded a jury trial. 
The Groelsmas and the City filed Pre-trial Statements
 
on December 3, 2007, and January 28, 2008, respectively. On
 December 21, 2009, a trial setting status conference was held,
 and trial was set for November 22, 2010. However, on July 26,
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2010, the Groelsmas moved to continue trial and discovery
 
deadlines. In the Groelmas' counsel's declaration in support of
 the motion to continue trial, counsel averred that, before
 
2
"certain developments,"  the Groelsmas "were essentially ready
for trial, having accumulated the documents necessary to prove
 that the City's installations were substantial factors that
 brought about the landslide and having a highly qualified expert
 who was confident that the City's theories regarding the cause
 were easily controverted." The City took no position, but asked
 for additional time to complete discovery, if the motion was 
granted. The court granted the Groelsmas' motion, held a further
 trial setting conference, and set a new trial date of June 13,
 2011. 
On April 25, 2011, the Groelsmas moved to add a
 
critical witness, Paul C. Weidig, P.E. (Weidig), in lieu of their
 
previously identified expert; the City opposed the motion, noting
 
the Groelsmas' failure (twice) to timely file their Final Naming
 of Witnesses and the Groelsmas' alleged lack of good faith
 related to alleged changes in theory of liability, as well as
 their failure to timely inform the City that their prior expert
 lost his professional license. The Groelsmas' request was
 granted. 
On May 26, 2011, the court again continued the trial
 
date due to a family emergency of the Groelsmas' counsel. Months
 later, a new trial date was set for April 9, 2012. 
2
 The developments included a "lengthy notice of records
depositions" by the City, that a settlement had not been reached, and Mrs.
Groelsma's pregnancy.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On November 14, 2011, the Groelsmas filed a First
 
Amended Pre-Trial Statement which listed Weidig as an expert
 
witness in the area of "causes of landslides." On March 5,
 
2012, the court issued a pre-trial conference order, which
 
ordered, inter alia, the parties to "Meet & Confer re: exhibits
 (exhibits not exchanged at conference shall not be admitted into
 evidence, absent reasonable grounds)" on March 27, 2012 (Pre-
Trial Order).
 
On March 19, 2012, the Groelsmas provided the City a
 
copy of the 2012 Videoscoping. On March 20, 2012, the Groelsmas
 
filed a "First Substitution of Witnesses," purported to
 substitute a new lay witness, the videographer for the 2012
 Videoscoping. At the March 27, 2012 meeting to exchange
 exhibits, the Groelsmas submitted the 2012 Videoscoping as a
 proposed exhibit, as well as several other exhibits representing
 evidence allegedly not previously disclosed. Altogether, it
 appears that this new evidence included: 
1. A March 17, 2012, videotaped scoping of the drainline
running from Ahuwale Place to Ahuwale Street, (Exhibit 2);
 
2. Still photographs taken from the aforementioned March 17,
2012 videotaping of a storm drain line, (Exhibits 3-12;
23-27);
 
3. Documentary evidence regarding the performance of the
aforementioned videotaping, (Exhibits 13-14; 28-29);
 
4. Another video of a storm drain inlet at Ahuwale Place
 
during the recent heavy rains of March 2012 (Exhibit 31);
 
5. Still photographs from the video of a storm drain inlet
at Ahuwale Place during the recent heavy rains of March
2012, (Exhibits 32-34);
 
6. Still photographs of purported testing of pipe joints and
a manhole purportedly performed by Plaintiff Brian L.
Groelsma, (Exhibits 30; 35-47); and
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
7. Still photographs of purported tests which are
represented to demonstrate subsidence of a portion of
Ahuwale Street, (Exhibits 48-49).
 
On March 23, 2012, the City moved to strike the
 
3
Groelsmas' First Substitution of Witnesses,  and on April 2,
2012, the City filed a motion in limine to exclude, as untimely, the above-referenced evidence from admission into evidence at trial and to preclude the Groelsmas from mentioning the evidence at trial (Motion to Exclude). The City sought to exclude forty 
exhibits of "videographic, photographic, documentary, and 
'testing' evidence," which had been disclosed to the City for the first time on March 19, 2012, arguing that this new evidence was not produced in discovery, and was thus in violation of the discovery cutoff. The City cited Hawai
'i Rules of the Circuit 
Courts (HRCC) Rule 12(r) as establishing the discovery cutoff in 
this case on February 9, 2012, sixty days before trial. In their 
supporting memorandum, the City also noted that the Groelsmas' expert, Weidig, had already produced several reports based on the existing evidence, and the "final report," dated November 11, 2011, identified the "leakage through defects such as cracks and joint separations in the drain line crossing Ahuwale Street." The City thus argued that the Groelsmas continue to change their theory of liability, and that the City had been prepared for trial based on the theory stated in November 11, 2011 final report. 
3
 On April 5, 2012, the Groelsmas filed a position statement saying
that the new witness was unnecessary and that Brian Groelsma was testifying as
to the 2012 Videoscoping.
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In their opposition to the City's Motion to Exclude,
 
the Groelsmas did not dispute that the exhibits were not
 
exchanged until March 19, 2012, but argued that HRCC Rule 12(r)
 does not control, as it "deals with discovery and not with trial
 evidence." They argued that, because the Pre-Trial Order set the
 date to meet and confer regarding exhibits at March 27, 2012, the
 exhibits were timely exchanged. The Groelsmas further argued
 that the City tried to trick them into not gathering the evidence
 in time by "repeatedly represent[ing] that it would perform the
 videoscoping that resulted in the new evidence" and then later
 "reveal[ing] that it would not really perform the videoscoping." 
In their opposition, the Groelsmas did not respond to the City's
 argument that their theory of liability had changed. At the
 April 9, 2012 hearing on the Motion to Exclude, the Groelsmas
 noted that the same drain pipe had been video recorded on March
 20, 2005, but they argued that the 2012 Videoscoping was
 essential to show that the gaps in the drain pipe were still
 there.
 
At the hearing, the Circuit Court noted that the new
 
exhibits were not disclosed to the City before Weidig's
 deposition and were disclosed after the February discovery
 cutoff. The court granted the Motion to Exclude, finding that
 the Groelsmas' introduction of the videoscoping and thirty-nine
 other exhibits was untimely and "the unfortunate consequence of
 too much procrastination in completing discovery." The court
 stated that "plaintiffs are responsible to develop their own
 evidence and cannot delegate that duty to opposing counsel." 
6
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The court additionally found that the new evidence was
 
"cumulative," as "Mr. Groelsma already filmed the pipe in
 question[.]"
4
 
On April 18, 2012, a jury entered a Special Verdict in
 
favor of the City. On May 25, 2012, the court filed a Judgment
 Pursuant to Special Verdict. An (amended) Final Judgment was
 
entered on June 23, 2014.  On July 23, 2014, the Groelsmas filed
 a notice of appeal. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
The Groelsmas raise a single point of error, contending
 
that the Circuit Court abused its discretion by excluding the
 2012 Videoscoping and the thirty-nine other exhibits produced for
 the first time on March 19 and 27, 2012.
 III. APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
"[A] court's imposition of a discovery abuse sanction 
is reviewable on appeal for abuse of discretion. A court abuses its discretion whenever it exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party." In re Guardianship of 
Carlsmith, 113 Hawai
'i 211, 223, 151 P.3d 692, 704 (2006) 
(citation, internal quotation marks, and ellipsis omitted). 
In applying the abuse of discretion standard of review
to the admissibility of relevant evidence under HRE Rule 403
[(i.e., cumulative evidence)], this court has acknowledged
that the determination of the admissibility of relevant
evidence under HRE 403 is eminently suited to the trial
court's exercise of its discretion because it requires a
cost-benefit calculus and a delicate balance between
 probative value and prejudicial effect.
 
4
 It is undisputed that Brian Groelsma documented the condition of
the drain pipe on March 20, 2005 with his own video. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Udac v. Takata Corp., 121 Hawai 'i 143, 150, 214 P.3d 1133, 1140 
(App. 2009) (quoting State v. McCrory, 104 Hawai 'i 203, 207, 87 
P.3d 275, 279 (2004)). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
The Groelsmas submitted several interrelated arguments
 
in support of the point of error raised on appeal, including: 
that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in imposing
 sanctions for the violation of the discovery cutoff because the
 exhibits were not generated until after the discovery cutoff and
 that the Groelsmas then disclosed to the City; exclusionary
 sanctions should not have been imposed because it was the City's
 fault, not the Groelsmas' fault, that the Groelsmas did not
 possess the "needed evidence" sooner; the Groelsmas had good
 cause for their late production of the subject exhibits; there
 was no prejudice to the City; and the Groelsmas should not have
 been sanctioned because they exchanged the exhibits by the
 deadline set forth in the March 5, 2012 Pre-Trial Order.
 
HRCC Rule 12 governs pre-trial deadlines. HRCC Rule
 
12(r) (2007) states: "Discovery shall be cut off 60 days before
 the assigned trial date." HRCC Rule 12(t) states: "Failure of a
 party or his attorney to comply with any section of this rule is
 deemed an undue interference with orderly procedures and unless
 good cause is shown, the court may, in its discretion, impose
 sanctions." "As a general rule, 'good cause' means a substantial
 reason; one that affords a legal excuse." State v. Estencion, 63
 
Haw. 264, 267, 625 P.2d 1040, 1042 (1981).
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"The imposition of a sanction is generally within the 
discretion of the trial court." Weinberg v. Dickson-Weinberg, 
123 Hawai 'i 68, 71, 229 P.3d 1133, 1136 (2010) (citation 
omitted). "[T]rial courts have broad powers to control the 
litigation process before them, including the presentation of evidence." Id. at 75, 229 P.3d at 1140. "The courts also have 
inherent power to curb abuses and promote a fair process which extends to the preclusion of evidence." Id. (citation omitted). 
"[T]he trial court has a broad spectrum of sanctions to impose, although the sanction chosen must be commensurate with the offense." Id. (citation and emphasis omitted). 
The Groelsmas argue that the exclusion of the subject
 
exhibits was "tantamount to an order dismissing the case." We
 recognize that the supreme court has held that "the more
 draconian sanctions of dismissing a claim or precluding the
 evidence necessary to support a claim are normally reserved for
 persistent and deliberate violations that actually cause some
 prejudice, either to a party or to the court." Id. at 76, 229
 
P.3d at 1141 (citation omitted). Indeed, "the imposition of a
 sanction [such as] precluding [a party] from submitting any
 evidence not previously disclosed [] requires 'an analysis of the
 relevant facts and circumstances that resulted in the exercise of
 discretion.'" Id.; see also W.H. Shipman, Ltd. v. Hawaiian
 Holiday Macadamia Nut Co., 8 Haw. App. 354, 362, 802 P.2d 1203
 1207 (1990). However, the Groelsmas' claim that the exclusion of
 these exhibits was the equivalent of dismissal of claims is
 without merit. Even assuming that the other exhibits and
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testimony presented by the Groelsmas was less compelling without
 
the new evidence, they nevertheless proceeded to trial with
 evidence in support of their claims.
 
In any case, the Shipman factors support the Circuit
 
Court's exercise of its discretion here. This case arose out of
 a February 2005 landslide and suit was filed in February of 2007. 
In addition, trial dates had been previously set for November of
 2010 and June of 2011, before the third setting in April of 2012. 
The first delay was unopposed and was expressly for the purpose
 of facilitating the Groelsmas' presentation of a "critical" new
 expert witness in support of their claims. It appears that each
 time the trial date was continued the pre-trial deadlines,
 including the discovery deadlines, were also continued, giving
 all parties ample opportunity to marshal their evidence, secure
 expert review and opinions concerning the evidence, and prepare
 for trial. Notwithstanding the Groelsmas' claims that they
 needed an updated videoscoping and that they had anticipated that
 the City would do it, there is no adequate explanation as to why
 they did not diligently pursue the matter until after the
 discovery cutoff. In fact, the Groelsmas took the position that
 their eleventh hour production was timely, that the discovery
 cutoff did not apply because there was a later date set to
 exchange exhibits – essentially, that they were not required to
 comply with the discovery cutoff. In their opposition
 memorandum, the Groelsmas argued that
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[HRCC Rule 12] deals with discovery and not with trial
evidence. The provision that is actually controlling is the
provision in the [Pre-Trial Order], which states that
'exhibits not exchanged at conference shall not be admitted
into evidence, absent reasonable grounds.' This provision
is explicit and Plaintiffs took this provision 'to the
bank.' That provision governs this motion and that is all
there is to it.
 
While the Circuit Court did not find that this position
was taken in bad faith, it pointed out, inter alia:
 
 
I'm excluding [the late evidence] because it's
untimely. There's a discovery cutoff and you need to
prepare your trial up to the discovery cutoff. You didn't
 supplement, which is your obligation under the rule. You
 waited and waited. . . . You had to have developed all of
this by February before the cutoff and then disclosed that
in time for the defense to do some discovery if they wished
to do so.
 
Thusly, the Circuit Court noted the prejudice to the
 
City, which was that the City was precluded from doing discovery
 
based on the new evidence and, presumably, to discover and
 counter any new expert opinions that might be offered based on
 the new videos and photographs. In addition, the record shows
 that the Groelsmas were able to present a videoscoping and
 photographs taken by Brian Groelsma in 2005.  The Groelsmas were
 
able to present the testimony of their expert, Weidig, a
 
professional engineer with a degree in geology, who testified
 before the jury that he had "investigated many hundreds" of
 water-based landslides caused by "storm drains, sewers, and in
 some cases[,] leaky ditches." Weidig testified that he had
 reviewed the 2005 videoscoping of the drain pipe, as well as
 photographs and rainfall records. He testified that he believed
 there was "a connection" between what he perceived to be a
 "deficiency of the storm drain line" and "what appears to be the
 settlement" in the landslide area. Granted, an updated,
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
professionally-made, video may have bolstered the Groelsmas'
 
case, especially with respect to their claim that repairs were
 still necessary. However, the exclusion of this late evidence
 was not tantamount to the dismissal of their claims, as they now
 appear to argue. The case proceeded to a trial on the merits,
 with all of the evidence relied on by the Groelsmas' expert in
 his final report being presented to the jury. While lesser
 sanctions might have been formulated, exclusion of the videos and
 photos created after the discovery cut-off, which had been
 previously extended and fell more than five years after the
 Complaint was filed, was not an abuse of discretion. See, e.g.,
 
United States v. Sims, 776 F.3d 583, 584, 586 (8th Cir. 2015)
 (district court did not abuse its discretion in excluding DNA
 evidence as a sanction for government's failure to disclose
 expert's report because (1) the district court concluded that the
 government had acted in a reckless disregard of the discovery
 deadline by failing to check on the DNA results with the lab, and
 (2) defendant was prejudiced by the late disclosure); Washburn v.
 Lavoie, 437 F.3d 84, 93-94 (D.C. Cir. 2006) (district court did
 not abuse its discretion in disallowing further discovery where
 the discovery deadline had been set ten months after the
 complaint, and almost two years from the date of the subject
 allegations, and thus, there had already been ample opportunity
 prior to complete discovery); Wilson v. Bradlees of New England,
 Inc., 250 F.3d 10, 20-21 (1st Cir. 2001) (the duty of a party to
 seasonably supplement its disclosures under Rule 26(e) "carries
 with it the implicit authority of the district court to exclude
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
such materials when not timely produced"); Burgess v. Salmon
 
River Canal Co., Ltd., 903 P.2d 730, 739 (Idaho 1995) (holding
 that the trial court did not err in excluding opinion testimony
 based on data gathered after the discovery cut-off).
 
Finally, we have carefully considered the Groelsmas'
 
argument that it was the City's fault that they produced the 2012
 Videoscoping and related exhibits well after the discovery
 cutoff. Essentially, the Groelsmas submit that they relied on
 the City's representation that it would conduct a videoscoping
 and they point to their counsel's declaration to that effect. 
However, the only specific reference by the Groelsmas' counsel
 was to communications between the parties' lawyers well after the
 discovery cutoff. In a March 8, 2012 email from the City's
 counsel, Richard Lewallen (Lewallen), to the Groelsmas' attorney,
 
Lewallen wrote: "I got your voice message. We have not had a
 
closed circuit television scoping of the storm drainage line
 running from the corner of Ahuwale Place to the manhole
 [adjacent] to your clients' home on Ahuwale Street." The same
 day, the Groelsmas' attorney responded: "Is it expected that
 this will be done or not? If it will, when?" On March 13, 2012,
 the Groelsmas' counsel again inquired: "What has come of the
 effort you mentioned to have the City run a video camera through
 the 15" or 18" pipe that crosses Ahuwale Street? Is it assured
 that this video will be accomplished; if so, when? Thank you for
 your prompt response." The same day, Lewallen responded:
 
Regar[d]ing performing CCTV on that drain line, and as we
told you we would at our meeting, we consulted with our
experts on whether scoping of the line was necessary. They
said no. As such, the City will not CCTV that storm drain
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
line. However, should your client wish to have access to
scope the line, please let me know and I will initiate the
requisite approvals.
 
As noted above, there is no adequate explanation in the
 
record as to why the Groelsmas did not pursue this evidence
 
earlier. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not
 
abuse its discretion when it granted the City's Motion to
 Exclude.
 V.	 CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's June 23, 2014
 
Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaii, February 28, 2017.
 
On the briefs: 
Charles S. Lotsof,
for Plaintiffs-Appellants. Chief Judge 
Matthew S.K. Pyun, Jr.,John R. Moran,Nicolette Winter,Deputies Corporation Counsel,for Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
14
 