 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000670
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
ALLEN M. OZAKI, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
DENISE N. SAUNDERS and WINDWARD WHEELS, LLC,
Defendants-Appellants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-2349-11 KTN)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Denise Saunders (
Saunders) and
 
Windward Wheels, LLC (Wheels) (collectively, Appellants) appeal
 
from the November 5, 2015 Final Judgment (Judgment) filed in the
 Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1
 
At the conclusion of a bench trial, the Circuit Court
 
found Saunders and Wheels jointly and severally liable to
 
Plaintiff-Appellee Allen M. Ozaki (Ozaki) for Unfair or Deceptive
 
Acts or Practices (UDAP) pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
1
 The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(HRS) §§ 437-12 (Supp. 2013),2  286-52 (2007),3 480-2 (2008),4
 480­
13(b) (2008),5 and 480-13.5 (2008).
6
2
 HRS § 437-12 provides: 
§ 437-12 Legal ownership certificates. (a) Possession
of or right to possess legal ownership certificate. No
 
dealer shall sell or advertise for sale a new motor vehicle
 unless the dealer has in the dealer's possession the actual
legal ownership certificate or a certificate of origin or
its equivalent issued to the dealer by the manufacturer or
distributor for the subject motor vehicle. No dealer shall
 sell or advertise for sale a used motor vehicle unless the
 dealer has in the dealer's possession evidence that all
liens on the subject motor vehicle have been satisfied and
the actual legal ownership certificate or proof of the right
to possess the legal ownership certificate for the subject
motor vehicle.
 
(b) Delivery of legal ownership certificate. The
legal ownership certificate shall be delivered within the
time period specified in section 286-52(b).
 
3 HRS § 286-52 provides in relevant part: 
§ 286-52 Procedure when title of vehicle transferred;
delivery of certificate mandatory. (a) Upon a transfer of
the title or interest of a legal owner in or to a vehicle
registered under this part, the person whose title or
interest is to be transferred and the transferee shall write
 their signatures with pen and ink upon the certificate of
ownership issued for the vehicle, together with the address
of the transferee in the appropriate space provided upon the
certificate.
 
(b) Within thirty calendar days thereafter, the
transferee shall forward the certificate of ownership so
endorsed to the director of finance who shall file the same;
provided that if the recorded lien holder does not have an
office in the State, the applicable period shall be sixty
days. 
4 HRS § 480-2 provides in relevant part: 
§ 480-2 Unfair competition, practices, declared
unlawful. (a) Unfair methods of competition and unfair or
deceptive acts or practices in the conduct of any trade or
commerce are unlawful.
 
. . . .
 (d) No person other than a consumer, the attorney
general or the director of the office of consumer protection
may bring an action based upon unfair or deceptive acts or
practices declared unlawful by this section.
 
5
 HRS § 480-13(b) provides in relevant part: 
§ 480-13 Suits by persons injured; amount of recovery,
injunctions.... (b) Any consumer who is injured by any
unfair or deceptive act or practice forbidden or declared
unlawful by section 480-2:
 
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Saunders and Wheels contend that the Circuit
 
Court erred when it found: (1) that John Siracusa (Siracusa)
 
acted as an agent of Appellants; (2) that Ozaki was a "consumer"
 
as defined in HRS § 480-1 (2008); and (3) that Ozaki was entitled
 to relief as an "elder" under HRS § 480-13.5. Saunders and
 Wheels also argue that the Circuit Court erred when it awarded
 attorneys' fees to Ozaki.
7 Notably, Saunders and Wheels do not
 
challenge on appeal the finding that Saunders received cash
 payment in full for the subject Volkswagen GTI from Ozaki's son,
 Chad Y. Ozaki (Chad). 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Appellants' contentions as follows:
 
5	 (...continued)
(1)	 May sue for damages sustained by the consumer, and,
. . . where the plaintiff is an elder, the plaintiff,
in the alternative, may be awarded a sum not less than
$5,000 or threefold any damages sustained by the
plaintiff, whichever sum is the greater, and
reasonable attorney's fees together with the costs of
suit. In determining whether to adopt the $5,000
alternative amount in an award to an elder, the court
shall consider the factors set forth in section
 480-13.5[.]
 
6	 HRS § 480-13.5 provides, in part:
 
§ 480-13.5 Additional civil penalties for consumer
frauds committed against elders. (a) If a person commits a
violation under section 480-2 which is directed toward,
targets, or injures an elder, a court, in addition to any
other civil penalty, may impose a civil penalty not to
exceed $10,000 for each violation.
 
. . . . 
(c) As used in this chapter, "elder" means a
consumer who is sixty-two years of age or older.
 
7
 The issue of attorneys' fees was not identified as a point of
error, but was part of Appellants' request for relief. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) Saunders and Wheels contend that Siracusa was not
 
their agent when he solicited Ozaki and Chad for the purchase of
 
the Volkswagen. 
An agency relationship may be created through actual or
apparent authority. Actual authority exists only if there
has been a manifestation by the principal to the agent that
the agent may act on his account and consent by the agent so
to act[,] and may be created by express agreement or implied
from the conduct of the parties or surrounding
circumstances. 
Cho Mark Oriental Food, Ltd. v. K & K Int'l, 73 Haw. 509, 515,
 
836 P.2d 1057, 1061–62 (1992) (citations and internal quotation
 marks omitted).
 
Where implied actual authority is asserted, the focus is on
the agent's understanding of his authority inasmuch as the
relevant inquiry is whether the agent reasonably believes,
because of the conduct of the principal (including
acquiescence) communicated directly or indirectly to him,
that the principal desired him so to act.
 
State v. Hoshijo ex rel. White, 102 Hawai 'i 307, 322, 76 P.3d 
550, 565 (2003) (quoting Cho, 73 Haw. at 515–16, 836 P.2d at
 
1061–62) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
Apparent authority arises when the principal does something
or permits the agent to do something which reasonably leads
another to believe that the agent had the authority he was
purported to have. The critical focus is not on the
 principal and agent's intention to enter into an agency
relationship, but on whether a third party relies on the
principal's conduct based on a reasonable belief in the
existence of such a relationship.
 
Cho, 73 Haw. at 516–17, 836 P.2d at 1062 (internal quotation
 
marks, emphasis, and citations omitted).
 
Here, Saunders testified that she and Siracusa
 
maintained a business relationship in which their mutual
 understanding was that Siracusa was to refer business to
 Saunders. Siracusa apparently had access to the keys to the
 vehicles at the Wheels dealership, as he took Ozaki for a test
 drive of the subject vehicle off the Wheels lot. Siracusa
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
testified that Saunders paid Siracusa $600 for "bringing [Ozaki]
 
down." Further, Saunders testified that when trying to collect
 payment, she contacted Siracusa, not Ozaki or Chad because "he
 always wanted to be respected, to keep it separate, like as far
 as like if he refers a customer, he didn't really want me to talk
 to them." When the form Retail Purchase Agreement for the
 Volkswagen was completed (in part), Siracusa testified that he
 filled in part of the top section of the form. Saunders then
 asked Ozaki if the information was correct, and the form was
 signed by Ozaki and Saunders. According to Siracusa, he then
 informed Ozaki, with Saunders present in the Wheels office, that
 they did not have the title, but they would deliver it to him in
 a couple of weeks. We conclude that, based on all of the
 evidence in the record, including the foregoing, substantial
 evidence supports the Circuit Court's finding that Siracusa acted
 as the Appellants' agent in connection with this transaction. 
(2) Appellants argue that Ozaki was not a "consumer," as
 
defined in HRS § 480-1, because the car was not purchased with
 his money and because Chad was the primary driver of the car. 
This argument is without merit.
 
A UDAP claim may be brought only by "a consumer, the
 
attorney general or the director of the office of consumer
 protection." HRS § 480-2(d). "Consumer" means 
a natural person who, primarily for personal, family, or
household purposes, purchases, attempts to purchase, or is
solicited to purchase goods or services or who commits
money, property, or services in a personal investment. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 480-1. The definition of "Purchase" under chapter 480
 
includes "contract to buy." HRS § 480-1 (internal quotation
 marks omitted). 
Ozaki was solicited to purchase goods for personal,
 
family or household purposes when he was solicited to buy the
 Volkswagen. Indeed, he purchased (or at least attempted to
 purchase) the Volkswagen, within the plain meaning of HRS § 480­1, when he and Saunders entered into the agreement for him to buy
 the car. Appellants cite no authority for the proposition that
 the purchase had to be with Ozaki's money or that it had to be
 intended for his own personal use, and we find none. On the
 contrary, HRS § 480-1 specifically references goods intended for
 family or household uses. Accordingly, the Circuit Court did not
 clearly err when it found that Ozaki qualified as a "consumer,"
 as that term is defined in HRS § 480-1.
 
(3) Saunders and Wheels admit that Ozaki is an elder,
 
within the meaning of HRS § 480-13.5(c), but argue that they
 should not be subject to additional civil penalties under HRS
 § 480-13.5 because Chad was the "actual consumer/purchaser," not
 Ozaki. There is substantial evidence in the record to support
 the Circuit Court's findings and conclusions that Defendants
 "commit[ted] a violation under section 480-2 which is directed
 toward, targets, or injures an elder," potentially implicating an
 additional civil penalty not to exceed $10,000, pursuant to HRS
 § 480-13.5(a). 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
However, HRS § 480-13.5(b) provides:
 
(b) In determining the amount, if any, of civil
penalty under subsection (a), the court shall consider  the
 
following:
(1) 	 Whether the person's conduct was in wilful
disregard of the rights of the elder;
(2) 	 Whether the person knew or should have known
that the person's conduct was directed toward or
targeted an elder;
(3) 	 Whether the elder was more vulnerable to the
 
person's conduct than other consumers because of
age, poor health, infirmity, impaired
understanding, restricted mobility, or
disability;
(4) 	 The extent of injury, loss, or damages suffered
by the elder; and
 
(5) Any other factors the court deems appropriate.
 
(Emphasis added.)  
Here, the Circuit Court addressed only the first two
 
factors, in Findings of Fact 30 and 31. 
Ozaki's arguments
 
pertain to the third, fourth, and possibly the fifth part of the
 
section (b) requirements. Concerning HRS § 480-13.5(b)(3), there
 is no finding for example, that Ozaki was "more vulnerable" than
 other consumers, or that the wrongful post-transaction
 repossession that constituted the fraudulent conduct was related
 to Ozaki's status as an elder. With regard to the HRS § 480­13.5(b)(4) factor of extent of "injury, loss, or damages," there
 is no finding as to the injury, loss, or damages suffered by
 Ozaki. Ozaki was awarded "treble damages" in the amount of
 $17,100 for theft (i.e. the repossession) of the vehicle,
8 as
 
well as an additional $5,000 for an "additional" HRS § 480-2
 violation of "selling the subject vehicle to [Ozaki] in violation
 of HRS § 437-12(a) "by operation of HRS §§ 480-13(b)(1) and ­(d)," as well as the maximum "elder consumer" penalty of $10,000
 pursuant to HRS § 480-13.5. As to HRS § 480-13.5(b)(5), there
 
8
 On appeal, Appellants do not challenge the treble damages.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
are no findings concerning whether there were "other factors"
 
supporting the penalty. Upon review of the record, there is no
 readily discernible rationale for the imposition of the maximum
 civil penalty of $10,000 under HRS § 480-13.5 and the $5,000
 awarded under HRS § 480-13(b)(1) due to Ozaki being an elder, and
 no explanation is provided by the Circuit Court regarding the
 last three factors under HRS § 480-13.5(b).
9 Thus, we conclude
 
that we must vacate this portion of the damages award and remand
 for further consideration by the Circuit Court.
 
Finally, although Saunders and Wheels seek relief from
 
the Circuit Court's allowance of attorney's fees, they provided
 no grounds for that request, other than to contend that the
 recovery of fees flows from Ozaki's elder status. This argument
 is without merit.
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's November 5, 2015
 
Judgment is affirmed in part and vacated in part. This case is
 remanded to the Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent
 with this Summary Disposition Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 3, 2017. 
On the briefs: Anthony T. Fujii,
for Defendants-Appellants. 
Charles S. Lotsof,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
9
 HRS § 480-13(b)(1) also provides that "[i]n determining whether to
adopt the $5,000 alternative amount in an award to an elder, the court shall
consider the factors set forth in section 480-13.5[.]"
 
8
 