  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000045 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF  HAWAI#I 
MORTEZA KHALEGHI and KAREN KHALEGHI, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v. 
INDYMAC VENTURE, LLC; ONEWEST BANK, FSB, Defendants-Appellees,
and 
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-20; and DOE ENTITIES 1-20, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 2CC151000071) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and McCullen, JJ.) 
The parties to this appeal are before us for the third 
time. 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Morteza Khaleghi and Karen Khaleghi 
(collectively, the Khaleghis) and Defendant-Appellee Indymac 
Venture, LLC were parties to a mortgage foreclosure lawsuit. 
That lawsuit was terminated on the merits; Indymac foreclosed the Khaleghis' mortgage, sold the mortgaged property, and obtained a deficiency judgment against the Khaleghis. The Khaleghis appealed. We affirmed. The Khaleghis did not petition the supreme court for review. The Khaleghis satisfied the deficiency judgment. 
The Khaleghis then filed the action below. They 
claimed that Indymac committed unfair and deceptive acts or practices (UDAP) in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 480–2 while prosecuting the foreclosure action, and was NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unjustly enriched by the deficiency judgment. Indymac moved to 
dismiss. The circuit court granted the motion. The Khaleghis appealed. We vacated the dismissal on procedural grounds and remanded for further proceedings. 
On remand Indymac moved for judgment on the pleadings 
or for summary judgment. The circuit court granted the motion based on res judicata (claim preclusion). A Final Judgment was 
entered on January 11, 2017.
1 The Khaleghis appealed. For the 
reasons explained below, we affirm the Final Judgment. 
BACKGROUND 
The Foreclosure Action 
The Khaleghis are California residents. In 2007 they 
signed a $5.3 million promissory note to build a second home on 
Maui (the Property). The note was secured by a mortgage on the 
Property. The note and mortgage were assigned to Indymac. 
The Khaleghis failed to make payments due on the note. 
Indymac filed a mortgage foreclosure action in July 2009 
(Foreclosure Action).  The Khaleghis were served with the 
complaint. They did not answer the complaint. Their defaults 
were entered. 
Indymac moved for summary judgment and a decree of 
foreclosure in October 2010. In November or December 2010 (while Indymac's motion for summary judgment was pending) the Khaleghis received a third-party offer to purchase the Property for $3.4 million, contingent upon Indymac's consent. The offer was made using Hawaii Association of Realtors forms, and contained several other contingencies. The Khaleghis accepted the offer on December 3, 2010, but Indymac did not consent.
2 The third-party 
sale never closed. 
1 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided. 
2 The record does not reflect whether any of the other contingencies
had, or could have, been satisfied. 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Indymac's motion for summary judgment was granted. A 
foreclosure commissioner was appointed. The commissioner was 
authorized to take possession of the Property and sell it at public auction. Findings of fact, conclusions of law, an order granting Indymac's motion for summary judgment, and a judgment of foreclosure (Foreclosure Judgment), were entered on February 16, 
2011.
3 
The Khaleghis moved for relief from the Foreclosure 
Judgment under Rule 60(b)(4) of the Hawai# i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP
)4 "insofar as said Judgment purports to allow for 
entry of a deficiency judgment against the Khaleghis." They 
argued: (1) the circuit court lacked personal jurisdiction over them because HRS § 634-23 gave the circuit court in rem jurisdiction over the Property only; (2) they were not properly served with the foreclosure complaint; (3) their due process rights were violated by the way Indymac obtained a deficiency judgment against them; and (4) their note and mortgage were governed by California law, which does not permit deficiency judgments. Their motion was denied. They filed a notice of appeal. That appeal was docketed as CAAP-11-0000560. 
Meanwhile, on June 3, 2011, a foreclosure auction was 
conducted. The commissioner reported that Indymac had submitted the high bid, for $909,246. The Khaleghis then moved to set aside their defaults. They argued (among other things) that they had a meritorious defense because Indymac's $909,246 bid was unreasonably low based on the $3.4 million third-party offer (to which Indymac did not consent). 
3 The Honorable Shackley F. Raffetto presided over the Foreclosure 
Action. 
4 HRCP Rule 60 provides, in relevant part: 
(b) Mistakes; inadvertence; excusable neglect; newly
discovered evidence; fraud, etc.  On motion and upon such
terms as are just, the court may relieve a party or a
party's legal representative from a final judgment, order,or proceeding for the following reasons: . . . (4) thejudgment is void[.] 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Indymac moved to confirm the foreclosure sale. The 
Khaleghis opposed the motion, again contending they had accepted 
the $3.4 million offer for the Property but could not close the transaction because Indymac did not consent. The Khaleghis argued that Indymac's $909,246 bid was unconscionably low because the fair market value of the Property was $3.4 million (based upon the third-party offer). They did not, however, argue that the amount of any deficiency judgment should be the difference between the amount they owed Indymac and the fair market value of the Property, rather than the amount of the high bid at the foreclosure auction.
5 The Khaleghis also filed a motion to stay 
the foreclosure proceedings pending a proposed mediation. 
On September 21, 2011, the circuit court conducted a 
combined hearing on Indymac's motion to confirm the foreclosure sale, the Khaleghis' motion to set aside their defaults, and the Khaleghis' motion to stay. Four bidders appeared at the hearing. The record does not reflect whether the person who had made the $3.4 million offer was one of the bidders. Bidding was reopened. The highest bid was for $2.788 million. The circuit court orally confirmed the foreclosure sale for $2.788 million and denied the Khaleghis' motions to set aside their defaults and to stay proceedings. 
Orders denying the Khaleghis' motions to set aside 
their defaults and to stay the foreclosure proceedings were entered on October 7, 2011. A judgment confirming the foreclosure sale was entered on October 18, 2011 (Judgment
Confirming Sale). On November 17, 2011, the Khaleghis filed a 
5 Had that argument been made and accepted, the ruling would have
prospective effect only, and would not have reduced the amount of the
deficiency judgment against the Khaleghis. See HawaiiUSA Fed. Credit Union v. 
Monalim, 147 Hawai #i 33, 45, 48-49, 54 & n.32, 464 P.3d 821, 833, 836-37, 842
& n.32 (2020) (adopting "majority rule" that mortgagor has "the right toinsist that the greater of the fair market value of the real estate or theforeclosure sale price be used in calculating the deficiency[ judgment,]" but"only to foreclosure cases in which a deficiency judgment is first enteredafter the date of this opinion."). 
In Monalim
 the supreme court declined to
allow the Monalims to apply the newly adopted rule because a deficiencyjudgment against the Monalims had already been entered by the circuit court.Id. at 54 n.32, 464 P.3d at 842 n.32. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
notice of appeal from the Judgment Confirming Sale. That appeal 
was docketed as CAAP-11-0000843. It did not address the order denying the Khaleghis' motion to set aside their defaults. 
A deficiency judgment against the Khaleghis was entered 
on December 8, 2011. An amended deficiency judgment for $2.5 million was entered on January 23, 2012 (Deficiency
Judgment). The Khaleghis did not appeal from the Deficiency 
Judgment. 
We consolidated the Khaleghis' appeals. The Khaleghis' 
consolidated opening brief raised two points of error: (1) the 
Khaleghis were not properly served with Indymac's foreclosure complaint; and (2) Indymac was entitled to a judgment against the Property only, and had no right to a deficiency judgment against the Khaleghis individually. 
On their second point of error, the Khaleghis argued 
that HRS §§ 634-23 and 634-24 gave the circuit court in rem jurisdiction over the Property only. They did not argue (as they did in their motion for relief from the Foreclosure Judgment) that their note and mortgage were governed by California law, which did not allow deficiency judgments. They did not argue (as they did in their motion to set aside their defaults and in their opposition to Indymac's motion to confirm the foreclosure sale) that the high bid in the foreclosure auction was not reasonable because they had received a bona fide offer to purchase the Property for $3.4 million. They also did not argue that the amount of the Deficiency Judgment should have been the difference between the amount they owed Indymac and the $3.4 million alleged fair market value of the Property, rather than the $2.788 million high bid at the re-opened foreclosure auction. See note 5. 
We held: (1) the Khaleghis were properly served with 
Indymac's foreclosure complaint; and (2) the Khaleghis were personally liable for the Deficiency Judgment. Indymac Venture, 
LLC v. Khaleghi, Nos. CAAP-11-0000560, CAAP-11-0000843, 2014 WL 3708116, at *2-3 (Haw. App. July 25, 2014) (SDO) (Khaleghi I). 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Khaleghis did not petition the Hawai# i Supreme Court for 
certiorari. 
On January 9, 2015, the Khaleghis paid $3.3 million to 
Indymac to satisfy the Deficiency Judgment. That terminated the 
Foreclosure Action. 
The Action Below 
On February 13, 2015, the Khaleghis (through new 
counsel) filed the action below against Indymac and Defendant-
Appellee OneWest Bank, FSB (collectively, Indymac).6 An amended 
complaint was filed on April 6, 2015. An errata was filed on April 7, 2015. 
The Khaleghis' corrected amended complaint alleged one 
count of UDAP in violation of HRS § 480–2 and one count of unjust enrichment. As described by the Khaleghis, the "gravamen" of their claims was "that Indymac (1) wrongly rejected a $3.4 million offer on the [P]roperty . . . and (2) lulled [them] into non-action [in the Foreclosure Action] by causing them to believe that the proceedings against them would be in rem and would not lead to a deficiency judgment." They claimed damages of $3.3 million (the amount they paid to satisfy the Deficiency Judgment), trebled pursuant to HRS § 480-13. 
Indymac moved to dismiss the amended complaint as a 
sanction under HRCP Rule 11. The circuit court treated the motion as a motion to dismiss under HRCP Rule 12(b)(6), and granted the motion. 
The Khaleghis appealed. We held: "The circuit court 
abused its discretion in treating [Indymac's] HRCP Rule 11 Motion for sanctions as an HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss." Khaleghi v. Indymac Ventures, LLC, No. CAAP-15-0000486, 2016 WL 4268709, at *4 (Haw. App. Aug. 11, 2016) (mem.) (Khaleghi II). 
6 The Khaleghis alleged that OneWest Bank was formed to acquire
certain of Indymac's assets and liabilities, and was Indymac's successor in
interest to the Khaleghis' note and mortgage. OneWest Bank and Indymac didnot dispute those allegations, were jointly represented in the circuit court,and are jointly represented on this appeal. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We vacated the dismissal and remanded for proceedings consistent 
with our memorandum opinion. The judgment on appeal was entered on September 8, 2016. No party petitioned for certiorari. 
Proceedings on Remand 
On remand, Indymac filed a motion for judgment on the 
pleadings under HRCP Rule 12(c) or, in the alternative, for 
summary judgment under HRCP Rule 56. The Khaleghis opposed the motion. The motion was heard on December 1, 2016. The circuit court granted the motion, stating in part: 
Res judicata precludes this action. The Count [sic] finds
that there was a final judgment on the merits. Both partiesare the same or in privity with the parties in the originalsuit, and the claims, defenses, and issues presented areidentical to the ones decided in the original suit or to a 
claim or defense that might have been properly litigated inthe first action but was not litigated or decided . 
(Emphasis added.) On January 11, 2017, the circuit court entered 
a written order and the Final Judgment. This appeal followed. 
POINTS OF ERROR 
The Khaleghis' opening brief raises five points of 
error: 
1. "The Trial Court Erred by Accepting
[Indymac]'s Res Judicata Argument, because[sic] They Did Not Establish the Right toAssert Res Judicata in the First Place"; 
2. "The Trial Court's Grant of Dismissal based [sic] on Res Judicata Was Error because [sic]that Defense Did Not Apply and/or Had BeenWaived"; 
3. "The Trial Court Erred by Granting Dismissalwith Prejudice at such [sic] an Early Stageof the Case, where [sic] No Factual RecordHad Been Developed regarding [sic] the TrialCourt's Ground for Dismissal and the Khaleghis' Arguments"; 
4. "The Trial Court Erred by Wholly Ignoring theIssue of Whether California Law Governed the 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Parties' Underlying Dispute, thereby [sic]
Inherently and Wrongly Holding that It DidNot"; and 
5. "The Trial Court Abused Its Discretion by NotAllowing [the Khaleghis] the Opportunity toAmend." 
(Emphasis omitted.) 
STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
Judgment on the Pleadings 
We review an order granting an HRCP Rule 12(c) motion 
for judgment on the pleadings de novo using the same standard 
applied by the circuit court. In re Off. of Info. Pracs. Op. 
Letter No. F16-01, 147 Hawai# i 286, 294, 465 P.3d 733, 741 
(2020). 
Summary Judgment 
We review an order granting summary judgment de novo 
using the same standard applied by the circuit court. Nozawa v. 
Operating Engineers Local Union No. 3, 142 Hawai# i 331, 338, 418 
P.3d 1187, 1194 (2018). 
Preclusive Doctrines "Application of res judicata [(claim preclusion)] is a 
question of law. Questions of law are reviewed de novo under the 
right/wrong standard." PennyMac Corp. v. Godinez, 148 Hawai# i 
323, 327, 474 P.3d 264, 268 (2020) (quoting E. Sav. Bank, FSB v. Esteban, 129 Hawai# i 154, 157, 296 P.3d 1062, 1065 (2013)). 
The applicability of collateral estoppel (issue 
preclusion) is also a question of law reviewed de novo. See In 
re Thomas H. Gentry Revocable Tr., 138 Hawai# i 158, 168, 378 P.3d 
874, 884 (2016). 
"The applicability of the collateral attack doctrine, 
which shares similarities with other preclusive doctrines such as collateral estoppel and res judicata, is a question of law which 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is reviewable de novo." In re Gentry Revocable Tr., 138 Hawai# i 
at 168, 378 P.3d at 884 (citations omitted). 
Amending Pleadings 
The denial of leave to amend a complaint is reviewed 
for abuse of discretion. Kealoha v. Machado, 131 Hawai# i 62, 74, 
315 P.3d 213, 225 (2013). 
DISCUSSION 
Standard for Decision We must first decide what standard applied to the 
circuit court's decision-making on Indymac's dispositive motion. 
The motion requested a judgment on the pleadings under HRCP Rule 12(c) or, alternatively, a summary judgment under HRCP Rule 56. A motion for judgment on the pleadings is (as the name suggests) decided based upon the allegations contained in the pleadings.
7 However, if matters outside the pleadings are 
presented and not excluded by the court, the motion is treated as one for summary judgment and disposed of as provided by HRCP Rule 56. See HRCP Rule 12(c). Indymac's motion argued claim preclusion and was 
supported by a number of exhibits: copies of pleadings, orders, motions, memoranda, findings of fact and conclusions of law, and other documents filed in the Foreclosure Action; and copies of the Khaleghis' consolidated opening brief and our summary disposition order in Khaleghi I. The Khaleghis' memorandum in opposition to Indymac's motion was supported by an affidavit of counsel, but presented no matters outside the pleadings. Under similar circumstances we held: 
[I]n ruling on a rule [sic] 12(c) motion, a court can also
take judicial notice of other facts. See Marsland v. Pang,
5 Haw. App. 463, 475, 701 P.2d 175, 186 (1985) (citing 5CCharles Alan Wright & Arthur R. Miller, Federal Practice and 
7 For purposes of HRCP Rule 12(c), "pleadings" are the complaint,
answer, counterclaim and answer thereto, cross-claim and answer thereto, andthird-party complaint and answer thereto. See HRCP Rule 7(a). 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Procedure § 1367 (1969)) ("A Rule 12(c) motion is designed
to provide a means of disposing of cases when the materialfacts are not in dispute and a judgment on the merits can beachieved by focusing on the content of the pleadings and anyfacts of which the court will take judicial notice."). 
Where collateral estoppel is used as a defense in an
HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) motion, judicial notice extends to priorrelated proceedings. See Ellis v. Crockett, 51 Haw. 45, 55,
451 P.2d 814, 821 (1969). Because a Rule 12(c) motionserves "much the same purpose" as a Rule 12(b)(6) motion,except that it comes after the conclusion of the pleadings,the same rule applies. Marsland, 5 Haw. [App.] at 474, 701
P.2d at 186. Judicial notice of the prior proceedingsextends to "the truth of facts asserted in documents such as orders, judgments[,] and findings of fact and conclusions oflaw because of the principles of collateral estoppel, resjudicata, and the law of the case." State v. Kotis, 91
Hawai #i 319, 342, 984 P.2d 78, 101 (1999) (citation
omitted). 
Here, Appellees raised the defenses of res judicata,
collateral estoppel, qualified immunity, and statute oflimitations in their Rule 12(c) motion. Thus, the CircuitCourt properly took judicial notice of the [previous federalcourt] proceeding and its relevant orders and judgments indetermining whether the claims in [the subsequent circuitcourt action between the same parties] are precluded orbarred. 
Therefore, we conclude that the Circuit court [sic]
did not err when it considered the orders and judgment from[the previous federal court action], but did not treat themotion [for judgment on the pleadings] as a motion forsummary judgment under HRCP Rule 56. 
Motoyama v. State, No. CAAP-13-0000168, 2016 WL 6879553, at *2 
(Haw. App. Nov. 22, 2016), reconsideration denied, No. CAAP-13-0000168, 2016 WL 7330562 (Haw. App. Dec. 16, 2016), cert. denied, SCWC-13-0000168, 2017 WL 1075483 (Haw. Mar. 22, 2017), cert. denied sub nom. Montoyama [sic] v. Hawai# i Dep't of Transp., 
No. 16-1544, 138 S. Ct. 300 (Mem), 199 L. Ed. 2d 42 (U.S. Oct. 2, 2017). 
All of the matters outside the pleadings presented by 
Indymac were subject to judicial notice by the circuit court, and by this court on appeal, under Rule 201 of the Hawaii Rules of Evidence.  Thus, in our de novo review of the circuit court's 
8
8 The Hawaii Rules of Evidence provide, in relevant part: 
Rule 201 Judicial notice of adjudicative facts.
(a) Scope of rule. This rule governs only judicial notice
of adjudicative facts. 
(b) Kinds of facts. A judicially noticed fact must be 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
decision, we apply the standard applicable to an HRCP Rule 12(c) 
motion for judgment on the pleadings. 
In a motion for judgment on the pleadings under HRCP Rule
12(c), the movant must clearly establish that no materialissue of fact remains to be resolved and that they areentitled to judgment as a matter of law. In considering amotion for judgment on the pleadings, the trial court isrequired to view the facts presented in the pleadings andthe inferences to be drawn therefrom in the light mostfavorable to the nonmoving party. 
Our task on appeal is to determine whether the circuit
court's order supports its conclusion that the movant isentitled to judgment as a matter of law and, by implication,that it appears beyond a doubt that the nonmoving party canprove no set of facts in support of its claim that wouldentitle it to relief under any alternative theory. 
In re Off. of Info. Pracs., 147 Hawai# i at 294, 465 P.3d at 741 
(citing Ruf v. Honolulu Police Dep't, 89 Hawai# i 315, 319, 972 
P.2d 1081, 1085 (1999)) (cleaned up). We are not, however, 
required to accept conclusory allegations on the legal effect of the facts alleged. Cf. Kealoha, 131 Hawai# i at 74, 315 P.3d at 
225 (noting on HRCP 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss, court is not required to accept conclusory allegations on legal effect of events alleged). 
Within this framework we examine each of the Khaleghis' 
points of error and arguments. 
1. Indymac established a foundation for
applying the preclusive doctrines. 
The Khaleghis contend that Indymac "did not establish 
the right to assert res judicata in the first instance." They 
argue that Indymac's motion for judgment on the pleadings cited 
one not subject to reasonable dispute in that it is either
(1) generally known within the territorial jurisdiction ofthe trial court, or (2) capable of accurate and readydetermination by resort to sources whose accuracy cannotreasonably be questioned. 
. . . . 
(d) When mandatory. A court shall take judicial
notice if requested by a party and supplied with thenecessary information. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
section 24 of the Restatement (Second) of Judgments, which deals 
with merger and bar, not claim preclusion. But Indymac's motion also cited Esteban and argued that claim preclusion applied when: 
(1) there was a final judgment on the merits, (2) both
parties are the same or in privity with the parties in theoriginal suit, and (3) the claim presented in the action in
question is identical to  the one decided in the original
suit, or to a claim or defense that might have been properly
litigated in the first action but was not litigated ordecided. 
Esteban, 129 Hawai# i at 160, 296 P.3d at 1068 (emphasis added). 
Indymac satisfied the first element by presenting 
copies of the Foreclosure Judgment, the Judgment Confirming Sale, 
the Deficiency Judgment, and our summary disposition order in Khaleghi I. It was appropriate for the circuit court to take judicial notice of the judgments entered in the Foreclosure Action, and of the appellate disposition of Khaleghi I. 
Indymac satisfied the second element because the 
Khaleghis' corrected amended complaint alleged, and Indymac did not dispute, that the Khaleghis and Indymac Venture were the parties to the Foreclosure Action, and that OneWest Bank was Indymac Venture's successor-in-interest to the Khaleghis' note and mortgage and the Deficiency Judgment. 
Indymac satisfied the third element by providing copies 
of the Khaleghis' HRCP Rule 60(b)(4) motion for relief from the Foreclosure Judgment and the order denying the motion; the Khaleghis' motion to set aside their defaults and the order denying that motion; the Khaleghis' opposition to Indymac's motion to confirm the foreclosure sale and the order confirming the sale; and the Deficiency Judgment. 
Indymac's motion also provided a foundation for 
application of issue preclusion (collateral estoppel). 
Collateral estoppel is an aspect of res judicata which
precludes the relitigation of a fact or issue which was
previously determined in a prior suit on a different claimbetween the same parties or their privies. Collateral estoppel also precludes relitigation of facts or issuespreviously determined when it is raised defensively by onenot a party in a prior suit against one who was a party in 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that suit and who [them]self raised and litigated the fact
or issue. 
To establish collateral estoppel and thereby bar the
relitigation of the issue, four requirements must be met:(1) the issue decided in the prior adjudication is identicalto the one presented in the action in question; (2) there isa final judgment on the merits; (3) the issue decided in theprior adjudication was essential to the final judgment; and(4) the party against whom collateral estoppel is assertedwas a party or in privity with a party to the prioradjudication. 
Kaho#ohanohano v. Dep't of Hum. Servs., 117 Hawai# i 262, 302, 178 
P.3d 538, 578 (2008) (cleaned up) (emphasis omitted) 
(reformatted). 
And Indymac's motion provided a foundation for 
application of the collateral attack doctrine. 
"A collateral 
attack is an attempt to impeach a judgment or decree in a proceeding not instituted for the express purpose of annulling, correcting or modifying such judgment or decree." In re Gentry 
Revocable Tr., 138 Hawai# i at 168–69, 378 P.3d at 884-85 (cleaned 
up). 
The party asserting that an action constitutes an
impermissible collateral attack on a judgment must establishthat: (1) a party in the present action seeks to avoid,defeat, evade, or deny the force and effect of the priorfinal judgment, order, or decree in some manner other than adirect post-judgment motion, writ, or appeal; (2) thepresent action has an independent purpose and contemplatessome other relief or result than the prior adjudication;(3) there was a final judgment on the merits in the prioradjudication; and (4) the party against whom the collateralattack doctrine is raised was a party or is in privity witha party in the prior action. 
Id. at 169, 378 P.3d at 885 (citation omitted). 
It was appropriate for the circuit court to take 
judicial notice of the documents proffered by Indymac, and to 
determine the nature of the various claims and issues that were litigated and decided, or that might have been litigated and decided, in the Foreclosure Action. 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. The circuit court could properly have
applied any of the preclusive doctrinesto the Khaleghis' UDAP and unjustenrichment claims. 
The Khaleghis' corrected amended complaint alleged: 
45. While [Indymac's motion for summary judgment and
interlocutory decree of foreclosure] was pending, in early-December 2010, a bona fide offer was made on the Property bya third-party would-be purchaser in the amount of$3,400,000.00. 
46. [The Khaleghis] requested that [Indymac] approve
a short-sale of the Property in this amount, which [Indymac]rejected. This discussion provided [Indymac] with notice ofthe market value of the Property at that time. 
. . . . 
49. [Indymac], after rejecting the $3.4 million
offer, proceeded with the Motion for Summary Judgment. . . . 
50. On or about February 16, 2011, the Court issued
its Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law and an Orderawarding Summary Judgment to INDYMAC VENTURE in [theKhaleghis'] absence and calculating the total amounts owedby [the Khaleghis] to INDYMAC VENTURE as being $
5,057,982.83
with interest accruing at $516.27 per day, other latecharges and attorneys' fees. 
51. The Court also ordered that INDYMAC VENTURE was 
entitled to a deficiency judgment against [the Khaleghis]for any difference between the amount owed under the Loanand the proceeds of the sale of the Property. 
. . . . 
63. Here, [Indymac] rejected the December 2010
$3.4 million offer made at fair market value, allowedinterest, penalties and chargeable costs to accrue, tooksteps to dampen competitive bidding, and then bid a fractionof the fair market value of the Property (26% to beprecise), only because [Indymac] knew that [the Khaleghis]would be required to make up any short fall by means of adeficiency judgment and had the means to do so. 
. . . . 
66. [Indymac], therefore, circumvented the
mechanisms built into the judicial foreclosure process toprotect debtors by: (i) obfuscating and failing toadequately disclose to [the Khaleghis] the potential for adeficiency judgment; (ii) failing to properly serve processon [the Khaleghis] in a manner that would have providednotice of the action and the relief [Indymac was] seeking;and (iii) proceeding thereafter in a manner ensured [sic]the sale of the Property at below market value and belowreasonable value at the direct expense of [the Khaleghis]. 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
67. [The Khaleghis] were never given a fair
opportunity to protect themselves from the foregoing unfair
and deceptive conduct, and the lack of such opportunityitself arose from [Indymac's] abuse of judicial process,unfair and deceptive lending practices and unfair anddeceptive servicing practices. 
We first address the Khaleghis' allegation that Indymac 
failed "to adequately disclose to [them] the potential for a 
deficiency judgment[.]" Paragraph 2.f. of Indymac's Foreclosure Action complaint prayed: 
if the proceeds of the [foreclosure] sale shall be
insufficient to pay the aforesaid sums to [Indymac] and itshall appear that a deficiency exists, deficiency judgmentshall then be entered against Defendants KHALEGHI, jointlyand severally, and that [Indymac] have execution thereof. 
The Khaleghis each submitted a declaration in support of their 
HRCP Rule 60(b)(4) motion for relief from the Foreclosure Judgment that stated: "I did not file a motion to set aside the default because IndyMac had attempted service under HRS §§ 634-23 and 634-24, indicating an intention not to seek deficiency judgment against me." The Khaleghis cite no evidence that IndyMac made any representation to them inconsistent with the prayer for a deficiency judgment made in the Foreclosure Action complaint. We find none in the record. The Khaleghis' subjective belief that they would not be personally liable for any deficiency was induced by their mistaken interpretation of the law, not by any act or omission of Indymac. 
The Khaleghis make five other arguments about why claim 
preclusion should not have been applied. First, the Khaleghis 
contend that claim preclusion is a common law defense that cannot defeat a statutory UDAP claim, citing Davis v. Wholesale Motors, Inc., 86 Hawai# i 405, 949 P.2d 1026 (App. 1997). 
Davis is inapposite. In that case the plaintiff sued 
Wholesale Motors for, among other things, UDAP under HRS § 480–2 in connection with the sale of a car. Wholesale Motors counterclaimed, alleging fraud, breach of contract, negligence, and malicious conduct by Davis. After a bench trial the court 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
found that Davis: made material misrepresentations on his credit 
application with the intent to deceive Wholesale Motors; wrote a check for the down payment that was dishonored for insufficient funds; and falsely stated that he owned his trade-in vehicle freeand clear of any liens. The trial court also found that Davis and Wholesale Motors "deceived each other into entering into the  
transaction." Id. at 413, 949 P.2d at 1034. The trial court 
concluded, in relevant part: 
5. The conduct of Wholesale Motors through its
employees, agents and representatives and the conduct of
[Davis] were reprehensible, grossly unfair, and deceptive . 
Essentially, they were attempting to "cheat" eachother. . . . 
Wholesale Motors may not be held liable to [Davis] on a
claim of unfair or deceptive trade practice; i.e., HRS§ 480–2. [Davis] was not an "innocent" consumer . He too 
engaged in unfair and deceptive acts, representations, andpractices with respect to the transaction. 
Id. (cleaned up). In Davis the defendant argued that the 
plaintiff's unclean hands barred the plaintiff from maintaining a statutory UDAP claim. We disagreed, holding that the equitable "unclean hands" defense is not an affirmative defense to a statutory UDAP claim. Id. at 418, 949 P.2d at 1039. 
Claim preclusion and issue preclusion are legal, not 
equitable, defenses. 
[U]nlike equitable estoppel, res judicata is a rule not only
"of fundamental and substantial justice" and "private peace"but of "public policy." Some courts have classified this as the doctrine's primary purpose. See Buromin Co. v. Nat'l 
Aluminate Corp., 70 F.Supp. 214, 217 (D. Del. 1947) ("Thedoctrine of res judicata is primarily one of public policy
and only secondarily of private benefit to the individuallitigants. It has its roots in the maxim that it concerns the public that there be an end to litigation when one partyhas had a full and free opportunity of presenting all thefacts pertinent to the controversy.")[.] Some commentators argue this distinction is significant enough that " in 
contemporary practice, [claim and issue preclusion] are notconsidered estoppels at all in spite of their nomenclature ." 
Brown, supra, at 376. 
Priceline.com, Inc. v. Dir. of Tax'n, 144 Hawai# i 72, 85, 436 
P.3d 1155, 1168 (2019) (cleaned up) (emphasis added) (citing 
Christopher Brown, A Comparative and Critical Assessment of 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Estoppel in International Law, 50 U. Miami L. Rev. 369, 376 
(1996)). The collateral attack doctrine is also a legal, not an equitable, concept. In re Gentry Revocable Tr., 138 Hawai# i at 
168, 378 P.3d at 884 (applying de novo standard of review to applicability of collateral attack doctrine). 
We have applied claim preclusion to preclude 
relitigation of a plaintiff's UDAP claim which was based upon allegations "substantively similar to claims found in its counterclaim" in a prior action. Aloha Unlimited, Inc. v. 
Coughlin, 79 Hawai# i 527, 536-37, 904 P.2d 541, 550-51 (App. 
1995). The supreme court has applied claim preclusion to preclude relitigation of other consumer protection statutes. Esteban
, 129 Hawai# i at 160-62, 296 P.3d at 1068-70 (applying 
claim preclusion to federal Truth in Lending Act claim). 
Here, Indymac does not contend that the Khalegis' 
unclean hands bar them from maintaining their statutory UDAP claim; it is the Khalegis who contend that Indymac's unclean hands bar Indymac and OneWest from relying on the legal defense of claim preclusion. The Khalegis are collaterally attacking the Deficiency Judgment; that contravenes the policy behind claim preclusion by encouraging, instead of preventing, a multiplicity of suits and limitless litigation. See Esteban, 129 Hawai# i at 
159, 296 P.3d at 1067. 
The Khaleghis have cited no case law 
equitably barring a defendant from asserting claim preclusion to defend against a collateral attack on a final judgment. 
The Khaleghis' potential remedies for Indymac's 
allegedly inequitable conduct in the Foreclosure Action would have been to oppose confirmation of the foreclosure sale, to oppose entry of the Deficiency Judgment, or to seek relief from the Deficiency Judgment under HRCP Rule 60(b)(3) ("(3) fraud . . . , misrepresentation, or other misconduct of an adverse party."). Claim preclusion, issue preclusion, and the collateral attack doctrine would not have applied to those remedies. See 
Godinez, 148 Hawai# i at 327-28, 474 P.3d at 268-69 (noting that 
claim preclusion and issue preclusion do not apply to an HRCP 
17 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rule 60(b) motion, because "an HRCP Rule 60(b) motion is a 
continuation of the original action.").
Second, the Khaleghis contend that claim preclusion is 
an equitable defense that should not have been available to Indymac, which had unclean hands. As stated above, claim preclusion, issue preclusion, and the collateral attack doctrine are legal, not equitable, defenses. Priceline.com, 144 Hawai# i 
at 85, 436 P.3d at 1168; In re Gentry Revocable Tr., 138 Hawai# i 
at 168, 378 P.3d at 884. 
Third, the Khaleghis contend that their UDAP and unjust 
enrichment claims should not have been precluded because the Foreclosure Judgment, the Judgment Confirming Sale, and the Deficiency Judgment were procured by fraud. But the Khaleghis never moved to set aside any of the judgments because of fraud pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(3), under which claim and issue preclusion would not have applied. See Godinez, 148 Hawai# i at 
327-28, 474 P.3d at 268-69. 
Rather, the Khaleghis' corrected 
amended complaint sought equitable relief and treble damages based on alleged misconduct that was, or could have been, alleged in the Foreclosure Action, and that were, or could have been, finally decided in Khaleghi I
.
Fourth, the Khaleghis contend that their UDAP and 
unjust enrichment claims are based upon Indymac's conduct after the foreclosure complaint was filed. That is true. But they then argue that their UDAP and unjust enrichment claims should not have been precluded because they had no opportunity to actually litigate those claims in the Foreclosure Action. That is only partly true. 
Indymac's allegedly unfair and deceptive refusal to 
consent to the $3.4 million third-party offer and to seek an allegedly inflated deficiency judgment was presented to the circuit court in the Foreclosure Action (in the Khaleghis' opposition to Indymac's motion to confirm the foreclosure sale, in their motion to set aside their defaults, and in their HRCP Rule 60(b)(4) motion). The facts upon which the Khaleghis' UDAP 
18 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and unjust enrichment claims are based were at issue in the 
Foreclosure Action; they formed the basis for entry of the Confirmation of Sale Judgment and calculation of the Deficiency Judgment. The UDAP claim, being based upon Indymac's alleged misconduct during the Foreclosure Action before entry of the Deficiency Judgment, could have been asserted as a counterclaim in the Foreclosure Action (had the Khaleghis not defaulted). Cf. 
Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 143 Hawai# i 249, 263, 428 P.3d 
761, 775 (2018) (holding that a foreclosure defendant may bring a counterclaim for wrongful foreclosure before the foreclosure actually occurs). 
Issue preclusion precludes "the relitigation of a fact 
or issue that was previously determined in a prior action on a different claim or cause of action between the same parties or their privies" and only applies "if the particular issue in question was actually litigated, finally decided, and essential to the earlier valid and final judgment." Uyeda v. Schermer, 144 
Hawai#i 163, 173, 439 P.3d 115, 125 (2019) (citing Dannenberg v. 
State, 139 Hawai# i 39, 59-60, 383 P.3d 1177, 1197-98 (2016)) 
(other citation omitted). 
Under such circumstances the Khaleghis 
are precluded from relitigating the issues which were presented to the circuit court in the Foreclosure Action: whether Indymac's failure to consent to the $3.4 million offer was unreasonable under the circumstances; whether the high bid of $2.788 million at the re-opened foreclosure auction was reasonable; and whether the resultant $2.5 million Deficiency Judgment was legally invalid. The Khaleghis are also precluded from collaterally attacking the Foreclosure Judgment, the Confirmation of Sale Judgment, and the Deficiency Judgment in this action alleging UDAP and unjust enrichment.
Fifth, the Khaleghis contend that res judicata should 
not apply because had they not defaulted in the Foreclosure Action, "the unfair and deceptive acts of [Indymac] could have been developed through discovery and used to defend against the deficiency[.]" 
The Khaleghis moved to set aside their defaults 
19 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in the Foreclosure Action. Their motion was denied. They did 
not appeal from the order denying their motion to set aside theirdefaults. They cite no legal authority for the proposition that judgment debtors can collaterally attack a default judgment by contending, in a subsequent lawsuit, that their defaults should  
have been set aside. Khaleghi I precludes the Khaleghis from 
pursuing claims that the Foreclosure Judgment, the Judgment Confirming Sale, and/or the Deficiency Judgment resulted from unfair or deceptive acts or practices by Indymac, or that Indymac was unjustly enriched by the Deficiency Judgment. That is the case under claim preclusion, issue preclusion, and the collateral attack doctrine. The circuit court acknowledged this when it stated: 
[S]uccessful prosecution of [the Khaleghis'] claims would
effectively nullify . . . : One [sic], foreclosure judgment;two, the order denying [the Khaleghis'] motion for relief;three, the order denying [the Khaleghis'] motion to setaside default; four, the order denying [the Khaleghis']motion to stay proceedings; five, the confirmation [of sale]order; and six, the deficiency judgment; and seven, the ICAdecision [in Khaleghi I]. 
[The Khaleghis] agree that the essence of their claim
is that the bank wrongfully rejected a higher offer on theproperty in October 2010 and that they were lulled intononaction in the foreclosure matter. 
[The Khaleghis']
argument is that the bank depressed the value of the home. . . in the foreclosure matter. The same is true for the arguments that the borrowers were wrongfully lulled intobelieving that there would be no deficiency judgment. The same factual basis on the foreclosure matter is even used to support these arguments [in the corrected amendedcomplaint]. 
If the Court were to change its mind now, it would
effectively nullify the Court's prior rulings. Moreover,the Court cannot provide the borrowers their requestedrelief without effectively reversing the deficiency judgmentand the rulings that gave rise to the deficiency judgment.The Court is not going to do that. 
The circuit court did not err by granting Indymac's motion for 
judgment on the pleadings. 
20 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3. The circuit court did not err by
dismissing the Khaleghis' correctedamended complaint with prejudice. 
The Khaleghis contend that their UDAP and unjust 
enrichment claims should not have been dismissed, but rather, 
"discovery should have been allowed into those areas where the [corrected amended complaint] and [Indymac] disputed [sic] the facts applicable to the latter's right to assert res judicata." But Indymac's motion was decided under HRCP Rule 12; the Khaleghis introduced no evidence outside the pleadings to convert the motion to one under HRCP 56. Moreover, the Khaleghis did not submit to the circuit court the affidavit or declaration required by HRCP Rule 56(f).
9 Finally, the Khaleghis do not explain what 
facts they hoped to discover that would affect the applicability of claim preclusion, issue preclusion, or the collateral attack doctrine. The circuit court did not err by dismissing the Khaleghis' corrected amended complaint with prejudice. 
4. The circuit court did not err by failing
to rule on the choice of law issue. 
The Khaleghis contend that the circuit court erred by 
failing to apply California law, under which the Khaleghis could 
only be liable to Indymac up to the value of the foreclosed property. The Khaleghis raised the choice of law issue in their HRCP Rule 60(b)(4) motion for relief from the Foreclosure Judgment. The circuit court applied Hawai# i law and eventually 
entered the Deficiency Judgment. 
The Khaleghis could and should 
9 HRCP Rule 56 provides, in relevant part: 
(f) When affidavits are unavailable . Should it appear
from the affidavits of a party opposing the motion [for
summary judgment] that the party cannot for reasons statedpresent by affidavit facts essential to justify the party'sopposition, the court may refuse the application forjudgment or may order a continuance to permit affidavits tobe obtained or depositions to be taken or discovery to behad or may make such other order as is just. 
The affidavit of the Khaleghis' counsel attached to their memorandum inopposition to Indymac's motion was conclusory and did not contain theinformation required by HRCP Rule 56(f). 
21 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
have raised the choice of law issue in the appeals that resulted 
in Khaleghi I. Their attempt to collaterally attack the Deficiency Judgment in this case is without merit. 
5. The circuit court did not err by not
granting the Khaleghis leave to amendtheir corrected, already-amendedcomplaint. 
The Khaleghis contend that the circuit court should 
have granted them leave to amend their corrected, already-amended 
complaint "to set forth in more detail the grounds on which they contended that res judicata did not apply[.]" Further amendment would have been futile because the alleged misconduct forming the basis for the Khaleghis' UDAP and unjust enrichment claims occurred before entry of the Deficiency Judgment; the Khaleghis have not argued that anything Indymac did, or failed to do, after 
entry of the Deficiency Judgment could form the factual basis for 
their UDAP or unjust enrichment claims. See Off. of Hawaiian 
Affs. v. State, 110 Hawai# i 338, 365, 133 P.3d 767, 794 (2006) 
(noting that leave to amend complaint may be denied where proposed amendments are futile). 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, the Final Judgment entered 
by the circuit court on January 11, 2017, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 23, 2022. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate Judge
22 James J. Bickerton, Stephen M. Tannenbaum,for Plaintiffs-Appellants. 
Jesse W. Schiel,Nicholas R. Monlux, Gabriele V. Provenza, for Defendants-Appellees. 