 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0003837
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ROBERT DIEGO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-0223)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Robert Diego (Diego) appeals from a
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered on September 16,
 
1
2013, in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit  (Circuit Court). 
Judgment was entered against Diego after a jury found him guilty
 of Attempted Murder in the Second Degree in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 705-500(1)(b) & 707-701.5(1) (2014)
2
 
1 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
 
2
 HRS § 705-500(1)(b) provides that
 
§705-500 Criminal attempt. (1) A person is guilty of an
attempt to commit a crime if the person:
 
. . . .
 
(b) Intentionally engages in conduct which, under the
circumstances as the person believes them to be,
constitutes a substantial step in a course of conduct
intended to culminate in the person's commission of
the crime.
 
HRS § 707-701.5(1) provides that "[e]xcept as provided in section
707-701, a person commits the offense of murder in the second degree if the
person intentionally or knowingly causes the death of another person."
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Count I), and Robbery in the First Degree in violation of HRS
 
3 4 
§ 708-840(1)(a) (Supp. 2012)  (Count II).
On appeal, Diego contends that the Circuit Court erred

 
in (1) denying his motion to change venue; (2) denying his
 
requests to ask the complaining witness (CW) certain questions
 about a prior bad act and his sexual orientation; (3) making
 certain findings of fact (FOF) and conclusions of law (COL)
 amounting to a determination that a statement by Diego to a
 
5
pretrial service officer was voluntary;  and (4) denying Diego's
motion for new trial.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs

 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Diego's
 points of error as follows and affirm.
1. Motion to Change Venue.
 The Circuit Court did not 
abuse its discretion in denying Diego's motion to change venue pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 21.6 
Diego contends that the Circuit Court's denial of his
 
motion deprived him of an impartial jury due to extensive media
 
3 HRS § 708-840(1)(a) provides that
 
§708-840 Robbery in the first degree. (1) A person commits
the offense of robbery in the first degree if, in the course
of committing theft or non-consensual taking of a motor
vehicle:
 
(a) The person attempts to kill another or
intentionally or knowingly inflicts or attempts to
inflict serious bodily injury upon another[.]
 
4 Diego was also charged via indictment with Assault in the First
Degree in violation of HRS § 707-710 (2014) (Count III). However, the jury
was instructed that it should only reach Count III if and only if the jury
found Diego not guilty of, or it could not reach a verdict on, Count I.
 
5
 Diego challenges FOF no. 34 and COL nos. 1 and 6 of the Circuit
Court's "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting State's
Motion to Determine Voluntariness of Statements by Defendant Robert Diego to:
1. Officer Casey Cabral, 2. Officer Krystal Kekela, and Lisa Jobes" entered
November 8, 2012.
 
6
 HRPP Rule 21(a) provides that a trial court, "shall transfer the
proceeding . . . to another circuit . . . if the court is satisfied that there
exists in the circuit where the prosecution is pending so great a prejudice
against the defendant that the defendant cannot obtain a fair and impartial
trial in the circuit." 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
coverage of this case, as well as other cases involving Diego.7
 
Diego's argument on appeal focuses almost exclusively on the
 
asserted pervasive notoriety arising from allegations in 2002­2003 that a mortuary owned by Diego and his family buried bodies
 in bags or directly in the ground, and not in the caskets sold
 for the deceased.
 
This situation does not rise to the "extreme 
situations" described in State v. Pauline, 100 Hawai
'i 356, 60 
P.3d 306 (2002), because it does not "present a substantial threat to the defendant's right to a fair trial." Id. at 366, 60 
P.3d at 316. 
In support of his motion, Diego submitted a total of
 
twelve articles, only five of which were published in 2011 or
 2012, and none of which appeared after October 2012. Jury
 selection began on April 30, 2013. Thus, there was no "barrage
 of inflammatory publicity immediately prior to trial amounting to
 a huge . . . wave of public passion." Id. (citation omitted).
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has also "clarified that 
'extensive knowledge in the community of either the crimes or the putative criminal is not sufficient by itself to render a trial constitutionally unfair.'" Id. (citation omitted). The five 
articles published after 2011 offer factual accounts of Diego's alleged crimes and were largely neutral. Thus, although the articles reference the mortuary issue and three of the articles include quotes from the CW in the instant case, we cannot conclude that such coverage amounts to the types of "extreme situations" described in Pauline. See id. at 367, n.7, 60 P.3d 
at 317, n.7 (dismissing any damaging effect from published statements that the defendant was a "convicted sex offender," "a liar, a thief and a spoiled little brat" and a "walking crime wave"). 
Even assuming the articles were inflammatory and
 
prejudicial, this court must examine "the jury selection process
 
7
 Regarding Diego's argument that the Circuit Court erred in not
authorizing money to conduct a poll of potential jurors to reveal prejudice in
the community, Diego cites no authority that demonstrates the Circuit Court
abused its discretion in denying such a request. Therefore, we find this
argument without merit.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to determine whether the trial judge took sufficient steps to 
shield the proceedings from the prejudicial effect of the publicity." State v. Keohokapu, 127 Hawai
'i 91, 103, 276 P.3d 
660, 672 (2012) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Diego's only contention on appeal is that the Circuit Court's voir dire and questionnaires were inadequate to identify jurors "who would be purposefully attempting to get onto the jury panel out of bias or hatred" toward Diego. We note that the potential jurors took an oath to answer questions truthfully. Further, "[i]f the mere opportunity for prejudice or corruption is to raise a presumption that they exist, it will be hard to maintain [a] jury trial under the conditions of the present day." Pauline, 100 Hawai
'i at 366, 60 P.3d at 316 (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted). In any event, our review of the transcripts demonstrates the Circuit Court adequately conducted voir dire into "the extent and nature of the specific matters of publicity to which jurors had been exposed." Id. at 
368, 60 P.3d at 318 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
2. The CW's Prior Bad Act & Sexual Orientation.
 The

 
Circuit Court (1) did not prejudicially err by limiting Diego's
 questioning of the CW regarding his 1971 conviction for second
 degree murder in the State of Missouri and (2) did not err in
 prohibiting questions regarding the CW's sexual orientation.
 
a. Prior Bad Act.

 
"Prior bad act" evidence under Hawai' i Rules of Evidence 
(HRE) Rule 404(b) (1993) is admissible when it is 1)
relevant and 2) more probative than prejudicial. A trial court's determination that evidence is "relevant" within the meaning of HRE Rule 401 (1993) is reviewed under theright/wrong standard of review. However, a trial court'sbalancing of the probative value of prior bad act evidenceagainst the prejudicial effect of such evidence under HRERule 403 (1993) is reviewed for abuse of discretion. 
State v. Torres, 85 Hawai 'i 417, 421, 945 P.2d 849, 853 
(App. 1997) (footnotes, citations, and internal quotation marks 
omitted). 
The Circuit Court ruled that Diego could introduce the
 
CW's prior conviction in support of his self-defense claim, but
 could not delve into the crime's facts and circumstances. Diego
 asserts that he should have been able to develop the CW's
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testimony during redirect because both the State and the CW
 
opened the door to the details of the murder.
 
During redirect, the Circuit Court overruled the
 
State's objection to Diego's question whether the CW's age (25)
 at the time of the murder made the murder "okay", noting only
 that the State opened the door to questions focusing on the time
 of the event. The Circuit Court struck only the CW's answer
8 to
 
that question upon a different objection by the State. The
 Circuit Court suggested to Diego that he rephrase his question,
 not that he move on to a different subject. Diego then chose to
 ask only one question on a different topic.
 
The CW's answer that there were "extenuating
 
circumstances" to the murder was stricken from the record.
9
 
Therefore, it was not unrebutted testimony as Diego contends. 
Diego also seems to contend that the State's cross-examination of
 the CW went unrebutted. However, again, it was Diego's choice to
 not rebut this testimony, as questions regarding whether the CW
 felt the murder was "okay" were not precluded by the Circuit
 Court's ruling. Diego was still able to place the fact of CW's
 prior murder conviction before the jury. To the extent Diego's
 ability to delve into the circumstances of that murder was
 limited, given the substantial age of the offense and apparently
 significant differences between the prior crime and the instant
 case, we conclude any error in limiting the examination was
 harmless.
 
b. Sexual Orientation.
 The Circuit Court denied

 
Diego's request to inquire into the CW's sexual orientation
 because "the issue is the conduct of [the CW] to the extent that
 Mr. Diego seeks to assert self-defense[, n]ot [the CW's]
 sexuality" and such a question potentially violates the CW's
 
8
 The CW answered: "There [sic] extenuating circumstances. If you
want me to go into it, I will."
 
9
 Diego asserts in passing that the Circuit Court's decision to
strike the CW's response as nonresponsive was in error. However, Diego makes
no substantive argument in regards to this contention, and thus does not carryhis burden to demonstrate that an error has occurred. See Bettencourt v. 
Bettencourt, 80 Hawai' i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995) ("The burden is
upon appellant in an appeal to show error[.]" (citations and internalquotation marks omitted)). 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
constitutional right to privacy. Evidence must be relevant to be
 
admissible. HRE Rule 402. To be relevant, evidence must tend to
 make a fact of consequence more or less probable. HRE Rule 401.
 
Diego testified at trial that he struck the CW with a
 
hammer because he was scared due to the CW's alleged sexual
 advances and that his first thought was that the CW was going to
 sexually assault or hurt him. Diego was not, however, permitted
 to ask the CW about the CW's sexual orientation. We conclude
 that a person's sexual orientation has no bearing on and is not
 relevant to whether the person would be more likely to commit or
 attempt a sexual assault. Diego cites no authority indicating
 that the CW's sexual orientation is relevant to whether Diego's
 actions constituted self-defense,
10 and there is persuasive
 
authority to the contrary. United States v. Bautista, 145 F.3d
 
1140, 1151-52 (10th Cir. 1998) (the right to present defense
 witnesses is subject to standards of relevance and materiality;
 testimony of complaining witness's homosexuality "was irrelevant
 and potentially highly prejudicial" to the murder charge or to a
 defense of "heat of passion"); United States v. Whalen, 940 F.2d
 1027, 1034 (7th Cir. 1991) (the trial court did not abuse its
 discretion in excluding evidence of the victim's prior homosexual
 behavior because nothing about the proffered evidence suggested
 that the victim intended to sexually assault Whalen); Maiorino v.
 Scully, 746 F. Supp. 331, 334 (S.D.N.Y 1990) (insufficient
 evidence to warrant jury instruction on sodomy "justification";
 
10 Under HRS § 703-304 (2014), Diego must have "reasonably believed"
deadly force was necessary to protect himself against "death, serious bodily
injury, kidnapping, rape, or forcible sodomy." State v. Lubong, 77 Hawai' i 
429, 433, 886 P.2d 766, 770 (App. 1994).
 
"Deadly force" is defined as 
force which the actor uses with the intent of causing or
which he knows to create a substantial risk of causing death
or serious bodily harm. Intentionally firing a firearm in
the direction of another person or in the direction which
another person is believed to be constitutes deadly force.
A threat to cause death or serious bodily injury, by the
production of a weapon or otherwise, so long as the actor's
intent is limited to creating an apprehension that he will
use deadly force if necessary, does not constitute deadly
force.
 
Id. at 432, 886 P.2d at 769 (emphasis and citation omitted).
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"evidence that [victims] were homosexuals simply is not
 
sufficient to support a reasonable inference that they intended
 to sodomize [defendants] forcibly"). Thus, whether the CW self-
identifies as gay was irrelevant.
3.
 Diego's Statement to Jobes.  The Circuit Court did
 
not err when it allowed Lisa Jobes (Jobes), a pretrial service
 officer employed by the Department of Public Safety, to testify
 regarding a statement that Diego allegedly made during a pretrial
 release interview
11 conducted while Diego was in custody.12
 
Diego challenges the circuit court's FOF no. 34 and
 
COLs nos. 1 and 6 that concluded his statement was not the result
 of custodial interrogation.
13 Diego's only argument is that
 
Jobes is an agent of the State who reports in-custodial
 statements to the police, thus her question constitutes custodial
 interrogation.
 
Even assuming Jobes was acting on behalf of the police,
 
her question was not reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating
 
11 Diego allegedly said: "Uh, no, thank you, Miss, I don't want to
be released. And bail is not a factor to me. What I did was wrong, and I'm
just going to go to court and ask to be placed at H triple C."
 
12 In his opening brief, Diego's argument is substantively founded in
the Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution, yet Diego only cites tothe Sixth Amendment and Article I, Section 14 of the Hawai' i State 
Constitution rights to the assistance of counsel. See State v. Luton, 83 
Hawai'i 443, 452-53, 927 P.2d 844, 853-54 (1996) (delineating the difference
between a Sixth Amendment and a Fifth Amendment analysis, and noting thatcombining the two presents a flaw in the appellant's argument). We also note that the challenged statements were made before Diego was indicted. At trial,Diego made a Fifth Amendment argument, and the trial court analyzed the issuewithin that framework. Thus, we only address Diego's challenge within theFifth Amendment framework. 
13
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
34.	 Ms. Jobes was not a police officer or acting on behalf
of the police and just asked whether or not Defendant
was going to apply for pretrial release.
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
1.	 The Statements made by the defendant were not the
subject of custodial interrogation and statements were
voluntarily made by the Defendant.
 
. . . .
 
6.	 Ms. Jobes [sic] question to the Defendant whether or
not he was going to apply for pretrial release was not
a question that leads one to believe that it would
lead to an inculpatory statement by the Defendant.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
response from Diego, and thus was not interrogation.14 State v.
 
Ikaika, 67 Haw. 563, 567, 698 P.2d 281, 284 (1985). COL no. 6 is
 
not wrong.
 Therefore, Diego has not demonstrated that the Circuit
 
Court erred in concluding in COL no. 1 that Diego's statement to
 Jobes was not the subject of custodial interrogation.
4. Motion for New Trial.
 Diego has failed to

 
demonstrate the Circuit Court abused its discretion denying his
 motion for new trial. On appeal, Diego presents no substantive
 argument besides referencing his argument on appeal related to
 the CW's prior bad act and sexual orientation. Diego cites no
 legal authority to suggest a trial court should grant a new trial
 in this instance. Furthermore, for the reasons stated above,
 Diego has not demonstrated that the Circuit Court prejudicially 
erred in its ruling on questions related to the CW's prior bad
 act and sexual orientation.
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of Conviction

 
and Sentence entered on September 16, 2013, in the Circuit Court
 of the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 25, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
William B. Heflin and

 
Brian J. De Lima,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Patricia A. Loo,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Hawai 'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
14
 According to her testimony, Jobes asked Diego "[i]f he would be
interested in applying for a bail study report for his hearing."
 
8
 