--------------------------------------------FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
NO. CAAP-10-0000188
 
COUNTY OF HAWAI' I, a municipal corporation
of the STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
UNIDEV, LLC, A Delaware Limited Liability Company,
Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; DOE NON-PROFIT ENTITIES 1-50;
DOE LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANIES 1-50; DOE ENTITIES 1-50,
Defendants.
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000019
 
COUNTY OF HAWAI' I, a municipal corporation
of the STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
UNIDEV, LLC A Delaware Limited Liability Company;
UNIDEV HAWAII, LLC, A Delaware Limited Liability Company;
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; DOE NON-PROFIT ENTITIES 1-50;
DOE LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANIES 1-50; DOE ENTITIES 1-50,
Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NOS. 09-1-264K & 10-1-427K)
 
AUGUST 31, 2012
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, REIFURTH and GINOZA, JJ.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
OPINION OF THE COURT BY GINOZA, J.
 
In this consolidated appeal, we address two separate
 
appeals from civil actions that were consolidated in the Circuit
 
Court of the Third Circuit (circuit court).1 In appeal No. CAAP­
10-0000188, UniDev, LLC (UniDev) appeals from the circuit court's
 
September 13, 2010 order expunging a lis pendens2 filed by UniDev
 
(Expungement Order), as well as the circuit court's December 1,
 
2010 order denying UniDev's motion for reconsideration of the
 
Expungement Order (Reconsideration Order). UniDev contends on
 
3
appeal that the circuit court erred in expunging its lis pendens
 
because: (1) UniDev's counterclaim under Hawaii's Uniform
 Fraudulent Transfer Act (HUFTA), Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
Chapter 651C, provides a proper basis for a 
lis pendens; (2) the
 
circuit court erroneously held that UniDev was not entitled to a
 
lis pendens, in part, because the HUFTA provides alternative
 
remedies, such as injunctive relief, that would not encumber
 
property; and (3) the circuit court also erroneously expunged the
 
lis pendens on the basis that UniDev failed to establish that it
 
was likely to prevail on its HUFTA claim.
 
1 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided.
 
2 Although it is subject to various definitions, when referring to a
lis pendens in this opinion, we refer to "[a] notice, recorded in the chain of
title to real property, required or permitted in some jurisdictions to warn
all persons that certain property is the subject matter of litigation, and
that any interests acquired during the pendency of the suit are subject to its
outcome." Black's Law Dictionary 1015 (9th ed. 2009). We interchangeably
refer to a "notice of pendency of action," which is the statutory language
used to describe a lis pendens in HRS § 634-51 (Supp. 2011).
3
 UniDev's opening brief does not comply with Rule 28 of the Hawai' i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) in that it does not contain a concise
statement of points of error that reflects "where in the record the allegederror was objected to or the manner in which the alleged error was brought tothe attention of the court[.]" We may therefore disregard the points raised
by UniDev. HRAP Rule 28(b)(4); In re Contested Case Hearing on the Water Use Permit Application Filed by Kukui (Molokai), Inc., 116 Hawai' i 481, 506, 174
P.3d 320, 345 (2007). In our discretion, we address the issues raised by
UniDev, but UniDev's counsel is cautioned to comply with HRAP Rule 28 in thefuture. 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In appeal No. CAAP-11-0000019, the County of Hawai' i 
(County) appeals from the circuit court's December 17, 2010 order 
granting UniDev's motion to compel alternative dispute resolution 
(ADR) and to stay the proceedings, as well as the circuit court's 
January 3, 2011 amended order (referred together as the ADR 
Orders). With respect to the ADR Orders, the County's points of 
error on appeal are that the circuit court erred: (1) by failing 
to rule that UniDev waived any right to compel arbitration; (2) 
by determining that the County was required to arbitrate pursuant 
to arbitration provisions contained in a Development Services 
Agreement (DSA) and an Amended and Restated Development Services 
Agreement (ADSA); (3) by determining that all of the County's 
claims were subject to arbitration; and (4) by determining that 
all of UniDev's counterclaims were subject to arbitration.4 
For the reasons expressed below, as to UniDev's appeal,
 
we hold that UniDev's HUFTA claim does not support the filing of
 
a lis pendens. Thus, the circuit court did not abuse its
 
discretion in expunging UniDev's lis pendens or in denying
 
UniDev's request for reconsideration of the Expungement Order. 
As to the County's appeal, we hold that the circuit
 
court incorrectly compelled the County to arbitrate all claims
 
and counterclaims under the arbitration provisions in the DSA and
 
ADSA. The County is bound only by the DSA's arbitration
 
provision, and its limited scope covers only a portion of the
 
County's negligence claim and a portion of UniDev's breach of
 
contract claim. UniDev did not waive its rights under the DSA
 
arbitration provision.
 
4
 The circuit court's ruling is couched in terms of requiring
alternative dispute resolution because the relevant provisions in the DSA and
ADSA address mediation and arbitration. The parties' arguments to this court,
however, focus on the requirement to arbitrate. We thus limit our discussion
 to the arbitration provisions in the DSA and the ADSA.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
I. Case Background
 
On March 2, 2006, UniDev and the County entered into 
the DSA, a contract in which UniDev was engaged to provide 
services related to the planning, pre-development, financing and 
construction of an affordable workforce housing project (Project) 
in Waikoloa in the County of Hawai' i. The County owned the 
property where the Project would be developed (Property), but the DSA contemplated that the County would transfer title to the 
Property to a: 
to-be-formed non-profit entity (the "Non-Profit"), which
Non-Profit shall in turn form a non-profit subsidiary or
affiliated entity to act as the borrower of the financing
for the Project (the "SPE") and shall enter into a ground
5
lease with the SPE with respect to the Site[. ]
In addition, the DSA memorialized the parties'
 
intention that "upon the formation of the SPE, the [County] shall
 
assign all of its rights and obligations in and under this
 
Agreement to the SPE." The DSA contained a provision mandating
 
alternative dispute resolution for "[a]ny dispute arising under
 
the terms" of the DSA. 
Pursuant to the DSA's terms, the County transferred
 
title to the Property to the Hawaii Island Housing Trust (HIHT),
 
which subsequently leased the Property to Waikoloa Workforce
 
Housing, LLC (WWH). The County also assigned the DSA to WWH by
 
entering into an "Assignment and Assumption Agreement"
 
(Assignment) with WWH, dated July 26, 2006, which states in part:
 
1. Assignment. Assignor [County] hereby grants,
conveys and assigns unto Assignee [WWH] all right, title and
interest of Assignor in, to and under all of the Contracts
 
5
 The County's complaint in Civil No. 09-1-264K alleges representations
were made by UniDev that the development could be structured so that the
County would have no continuing obligations or liabilities, and that the
development could be undertaken by a stand-alone, not-for-profit corporation
wholly independent of the County. UniDev's counterclaim alleges that Hawaii
Island Housing Trust (HIHT) and Waikoloa Workforce Housing, LLC (WWH) were
created to remove the County from active management of the Project. The
 record indicates HIHT became the "non-profit" and WWH became the "SPE"
contemplated under the DSA.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to the fullest extent that they are legally assignable . . .
 
.
 
2. Assumption. By accepting this Assignment and by
its execution, Assignee hereby accepts the assignment of the
Contracts, and assumes and agrees to perform all of the
terms, covenants and conditions of the Contracts therein
that would (except for this Assignment) be required to be
performed on the part of Assignor thereunder from and after
6
the date hereof and not before.[ ]
On February 21, 2008, about a year and seven months
 
after the assignment of the DSA to WWH, UniDev and WWH entered
 
into the ADSA, which states in part that UniDev and WWH "now wish
 
to amend the DSA to reflect certain changes in facts and
 
circumstances that have occurred since the DSA was first executed
 
by UniDev and the County." The parties agreed to "amend and
 
restate the DSA" as follows: 
1. Engagement. The Sponsor [(WWH)] hereby continues the
 
engagement of UniDev to undertake the Services in accordance
 
with the terms and conditions set forth in this Agreement;
provided, however, that UniDev shall not begin the Services
with respect to any Construction Phase of the Project until
such time as it has received a written notice to proceed
therefor from the Sponsor. UniDev hereby agrees to
undertake such Services in accordance with the terms and
 conditions set forth in this Agreement.
 
2. Agreement. This Agreement shall consist of the matters
set forth herein, including without limitation, Riders A, B,
C and D (collectively, the "Riders").
 
(Emphasis added). Certain provisions differ between the DSA and
 
ADSA, although the ADSA contains an arbitration provision
 
substantially similar to the one contained in the DSA. The
 
County was not a signatory to the ADSA.
 
On June 12, 2008, the County, HIHT, and WWH entered
 
into a "Development Financing Agreement", setting forth the terms
 
for the release of an additional $31 million to WWH which had
 
been appropriated by the County for use in furtherance of the
 
Project.
 
6 In "Schedule 1" to the Assignment, the DSA is listed as the contract
being assigned.
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In April 2009, WWH notified UniDev to cease work and to
 
submit its final invoices. The Property was thereafter returned
 
to the County.
 
II. Proceedings In The Circuit Court
 
Following UniDev's termination from the Project, the
 
County filed a lawsuit on July 1, 2009 in Civil No. 09-1-264K,
 
asserting five causes of action against UniDev: (1) false claims
 
in violation of HRS § 46-171; (2) intentional misrepresentation;
 
(3) fraudulent inducement; (4) negligent misrepresentation; and
 
(5) negligence.
 
On August 17, 2009, UniDev filed a Notice of Removal to 
the U.S. District Court for the District of Hawai' i. However, 
the federal district court subsequently remanded the case back to the circuit court. 
On March 29, 2010, UniDev answered the County's
 
complaint and filed a counterclaim against the County as well as 
WWH and HIHT. UniDev's counterclaim asserted four counts:
 
(1) breach of contract (against the County and WWH); (2) quantum
 
meruit (against the County and WWH); (3) intentional interference
 
with contract (against the County); and (4) fraudulent transfer
 
(against HIHT and the County). 
On November 23, 2010, the County filed a second
 
complaint against UniDev in Civil No. 10-1-427K, asserting the
 
following causes of action: (1) false claims in violation of
 
HRS § 46-171; (2) unfair and deceptive practices in violation of
 
HRS Chapters 480 and 481; (3) intentional misrepresentation;
 
(4) fraudulent inducement; and (5) negligent misrepresentation.
 
The circuit court consolidated Civil No. 09-1-264K and
 
Civil No. 10-1-427K on December 16, 2010. 
A. Lis Pendens
 
On April 1, 2010, UniDev filed a lis pendens with
 
respect to the Property and recorded the lis pendens in the
 
Bureau of Conveyances on April 6, 2010. On April 15, 2010, the
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
County filed a Motion to Dismiss Counter-Claim and to Expunge Lis
 
Pendens or in the Alternative for Partial Summary Judgment. 
Following a hearing, the circuit court entered an order granting
 
the County's motion to expunge the lis pendens, but denying the
 
remainder of the motion. UniDev filed a motion for
 
reconsideration of the Expungement Order, which the circuit court
 
denied. UniDev timely appealed.
 
B. ADR Orders
 
On August 2, 2010, UniDev filed a Motion to Compel ADR
 
and to Stay Proceedings (Motion to Compel ADR). During a hearing
 
on the motion, neither party asserted a material factual dispute
 
and no evidentiary hearing was held. On December 17, 2010, the
 
circuit court granted UniDev's Motion to Compel ADR. An amended
 
order was subsequently issued on January 3, 2011 to clarify which
 
proceedings were stayed pending ADR. The County timely appealed
 
the ADR Orders.
 
III. Standards of Review
 
A. Order Expunging Lis Pendens
 
"Whether a lis pendens should be expunged is a question 
to be resolved in the exercise of the trial court's discretion; 
accordingly, the trial court's decision is reviewed for an abuse 
of that discretion." Knauer v. Foote, 101 Hawai' i 81, 83, 63 
P.3d 389, 391 (2003) (quoting S. Utsunomiya Enters., Inc. v. 
Moomuku Country Club, 75 Haw. 480, 504, 866 P.2d 951, 964 
(1994)). An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has 
"clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or 
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a 
party litigant." Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 
Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26 (1992). 
B. Motion for Reconsideration
 
[T]he purpose of a motion for reconsideration is to allow
the parties to present new evidence and/or arguments that
could not have been presented during the earlier adjudicated
motion. Reconsideration is not a device to relitigate old
 
7
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
matters or to raise arguments or evidence that could and
should have been brought during the earlier proceeding.
 
Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 
100 Hawai' i 97, 110, 58 P.3d 608, 621 (2002) (quoting Sousaris v. 
Miller, 92 Hawai' i 505, 513, 993 P.2d 539, 547 (2000)) (internal 
quotation marks omitted). The appellate court reviews a trial 
court's ruling on a motion for reconsideration under the abuse of 
discretion standard. Id. 
C.	 Motion to Compel Arbitration
 
As expressed by the Hawai' i Supreme Court: 
A [circuit] court's order granting a motion to compel
arbitration and to stay proceedings pending arbitration is
reviewed de novo. The [circuit] court's decision is reviewed
using the same standard employed by the [circuit] court and
based upon the same evidentiary materials as were before it
in determination of the motion.
 
Haw. Med. Ass'n v. Haw. Med. Serv. Ass'n, 113 Hawai' i 77, 90, 148 
P.3d 1179, 1192 (2006) (quoting Fireman's Fund Ins. Co. v AIG
 
Haw. Ins. Co., 109 Hawai' i 343, 348, 126 P.3d 386, 391 (2006)). 
The trial court can only decide, as a matter of law, whether
to compel the parties to arbitrate their dispute if there is
no genuine issue of material fact regarding the existence of
a valid agreement to arbitrate. See Par–Knit Mills, Inc. v.
 Stockbridge Fabrics Co., 636 F.2d 51, 54 (3d Cir.1980).
Therefore, we hold that the standard of review applicable to
the trial court's decision in this case should be that which
 is applicable to a motion for summary judgment.
Accordingly, we review this case de novo, using the same
standard employed by the trial court and based upon the same
evidentiary materials "as were before [it] in determination
of the motion."
 
Koolau Radiology, Inc. v. Queen's Med. Ctr., 73 Haw. 433, 439-40,
 
834 P.2d 1294, 1298 (1992).
 
HRS § 658A-7 (Supp. 2011) provides, in pertinent part:
 
(a) On motion of a person showing an agreement to arbitrate
and alleging another person's refusal to arbitrate pursuant
to the agreement:
 
. . .
 
(2)	 If the refusing party opposes the motion, the
court shall proceed summarily to decide the
 
issue and order the parties to arbitrate unless
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
it finds that there is no enforceable agreement
to arbitrate.
 
(Emphasis added).7
 
A party seeking to compel arbitration must demonstrate
 
the existence of an enforceable arbitration agreement and that
 
the disputed matter is the type of claim that the parties agreed
 
to arbitrate. If the movant carries this burden, the burden then
 
shifts to the party opposing arbitration to present evidence on
 
its defenses to the arbitration agreement. 4 Am. Jur. 2d
 
Alternative Dispute Resolution § 98 (2007).
 
D. Contract Interpretation
 
As a general rule, the construction and legal effect
to be given a contract is a question of law freely
reviewable by an appellate court. The determination whether
a contract is ambiguous is likewise a question of law that
is freely reviewable on appeal. These principles apply
equally to appellate review of the construction and legal
effect to be given a contractual agreement to arbitrate.
 
Yogi v. Haw. Med. Serv. Ass'n, 124 Hawai' i 172, 174, 238 P.3d 
699, 701 (App. 2010) (quoting Brown v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co., 82 
Hawai'i 226, 239, 921 P.2d 146, 159 (1996)). 
IV. Discussion
 
A. Expungement of UniDev's Lis Pendens
 
HRS § 634-51 (Supp. 2011) sets forth the statutory 
requirements for the recording of a
 lis pendens in Hawai' i. 
§ 634-51 Recording of notice of pendency of action. 
In any action concerning real property or affecting the
 
title or the right of possession of real property, the
plaintiff, at the time of filing the complaint, and any
other party at the time of filing a pleading in which
affirmative relief is claimed, or at any time afterwards,
may record in the bureau of conveyances a notice of the
 
pendency of the action, containing the names or designations
 
7
 The Hawai' i Supreme Court adopted the summary judgment standard for
addressing a motion to compel arbitration based on HRS § 658-3 (1993 Repl.),
noting its requirement that "[i]f the existence of an arbitration agreement isin issue, 'the court shall proceed summarily to the [judge or jury] trial
thereof.'" Koolau Radiology, 73 Haw. at 439, 834 P.2d at 1298 (alteration in
original). Along with all of Chapter 658, HRS § 658-3 was repealed in 2001
and replaced with HRS Chapter 658A. HRS § 658A-7 is even clearer than thenow-repealed HRS § 658-3 in requiring that the trial court decide a motion tocompel arbitration "summarily." 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of the parties, as set out in the summons or pleading, the
object of the action or claim for affirmative relief, and a
description of the property affected thereby. From and
 after the time of recording the notice, a person who becomes
a purchaser or incumbrancer of the property affected shall
be deemed to have constructive notice of the pendency of the
action and be bound by any judgment entered therein if the
person claims through a party to the action; provided that
in the case of registered land, section 501-151, sections
501-241 to 501-248, and sections 501-261 to 501-269 shall
 govern.
 
This section authorizes the recording of a notice of
the pendency of an action in a United States District Court,
as well as a state court.
 
(Emphases added).
 
UniDev filed and recorded its lis pendens based on the
 
HUFTA claim asserted as part of its counterclaim in Civil No. 09­
01-264K. UniDev's HUFTA claim, pursuant to HRS Chapter 651C,8
 
8 The Hawaii Uniform Fraudulent Transfer Act (HUFTA) is codified in HRS
Chapter 651C. HRS § 651C-4 (1993 Repl.) states, in relevant part:
 
[§651C-4] Transfers fraudulent as to present and
future creditors. (a) A transfer made or obligation
incurred by a debtor is fraudulent as to a creditor, whether
the creditor's claim arose before or after the transfer was
 made or the obligation was incurred, if the debtor made the
transfer or incurred the obligation: 
(1)	 With actual intent to hinder, delay, or defraud
any creditor of the debtor[.]
 
HRS § 651C-5 (1993 Repl.) states, in relevant part:
 
[§651C-5] Transfers fraudulent as to present
creditors. (a) A transfer made or obligation incurred by a
debtor is fraudulent as to a creditor whose claim arose
 
before the transfer was made or the obligation was incurred
if the debtor made the transfer or incurred the obligation
without receiving a reasonably equivalent value in exchange
for the transfer or obligation and the debtor was insolvent
at that time or the debtor becomes insolvent as a result of
 the transfer or obligation. 
HRS § 651C-7(a) (1993 Repl.) sets forth remedies available in a HUFTA action,
including:
 
[§651C-7] Remedies of creditors. (a) In any action
for relief against a transfer or obligation under this
chapter, a creditor, subject to the limitations provided in
section 651C-8, may obtain:
( 1 )	 Avoidance of the transfer or obligation to the
 
extent necessary to satisfy the creditor's
 
claim;
 
(continued...)
 
10
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
asserts that WWH and HIHT fraudulently transferred their
 
respective interests in the Property to the County after WWH
 
became indebted to UniDev for development fees of at least $3.2
 
million. UniDev contends that, because its HUFTA claim seeks to
 
set aside a fraudulent transfer of property, this claim affects
 
the title or right to possession of real property and is thus a
 
proper basis for recording a lis pendens under HRS § 634-51.
 
1.	 The Circuit Court's Ruling
 
The circuit court rejected UniDev's contention that its
 
HUFTA claim could be the basis for its lis pendens. In its order
 
dated September 13, 2010, the circuit court explained its ruling
 
as follows:
 
1.	 Defendant's claims, including its claims for
fraudulent transfer do not seek title or affect title
 to property as Hawaii Revised Statutes ("H.R.S.") has
been interpreted. See S. Utsunomiya Enterprises, Inc.
vs. Moomuku Country Club, 75 Hawaii, 480, 866 P.2d 951
(1994). 
2.	 Although Defendant is correct that no Hawaii appellate
decision addresses the issue of lis pendens in the
 
context of a fraudulent transfer claim made pursuant
to Hawaii Revised Statutes ("H.R.S.") Ch. 651C (Hawaii
Uniform Fraudulent Transfer Act or "HUFTA") this Court
notes that HUFTA contains alternate remedies, i.e.
injunctive relief from further disposition of the
property, that would not encumber property. See
 
H.R.S. § 65[1]C-7(a)(3). Thus, Defendant has remedies
 which do not run afoul of the lis pendens requirements
set forth [in] S. Uts[u]nomiya. 
3.	 Therefore, HUFTA contains provisions by which a
creditor can be protected from further transfer or
dilution of the value of property in cases where it
 
8(...continued)
 
. . . . 
(3)	 Subject to applicable principles of equity and
in accordance with applicable civil rules of
procedure:
(A)	 An injunction against further disposition
by the debtor or a transferee, or both, of
the asset transferred or of other
 property;
 
. . . . 
(C)	 Any other relief the circumstances may
require. 
(emphasis added).
 
11
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[is] not seeking title for itself while avoiding the
dangers of abuses of the lis pendens procedure. A
 
carte blanche approval of a lis pendens [] when a
claim made pursuant to HUFTA is filed invites the
dangers sought to be avoided by S. Uts[u]nomiya.
 
4.	 In addition, even if a lis pendens was available,
Defendant has failed to introduce admissible evidence
 that it is likely to prevail on the merits of its
HUFTA claim or any other evidence upon which the court
could evaluate the propriety of a lis pendens in this
 
case.
 
(Footnote omitted).
 
The circuit court further noted its disagreement with
 
the federal district court's ruling in Sports Shinko Co. v. QK
 
Hotel, LLC, 457 F. Supp. 2d 1121 (D. Haw. 2006), which upheld a
 lis pendens based on a HUFTA claim. In Sports Shinko, and more
 recently in Valvanis v. Milgroom, 529 F. Supp. 2d 1206 (D. Haw.
 
9
2007), the U.S. District Court for the District of Hawai' i 
concluded that a HUFTA claim under HRS Chapter 651C, which sought 
statutory avoidance of a real property transfer, supports the 
recording of a lis pendens under HRS § 634-51. 
UniDev's appeal in this case raises a similar question
 
of whether a HUFTA claim, seeking to avoid an allegedly
 
fraudulent transfer of real property, supports the recording of a
 
lis pendens under HRS § 634-51. This is an issue of first
 
impression for Hawaii's appellate courts.
 
2.	 S. Utsunomiya
 
The seminal case in Hawai' i addressing the propriety of 
recording a lis pendens under HRS § 634-51 is S. Utsunomiya.10 
9
 Valvanis relied primarily on the ruling in Sports Shinko. See
 
Valvanis, 529 F. Supp. 2d 1206.
10 In S. Utsunomiya, plaintiff S. Utsunomiya Enterprises, Inc. (S.
Utsunomiya) entered into a letter of intent to purchase real property from
defendant Moomuku Country Club (Moomuku) and put down a $200,000 deposit.
After concluding that Moomuku could not convey free and clear title, S.
Utsunomiya notified Moomuku that it was rescinding the letter of intent and
demanded that the deposit be returned. S. Utsunomiya thereafter filed suit
seeking, inter alia, to recover its deposit and simultaneously filed a notice
(continued...)
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As an initial matter in S. Utsunomiya, the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
adopted the approach of cases from New York and California that 
"[i]n determining the validity of a lis pendens, courts have 
generally restricted their review to the face of the complaint" 
and that "the likelihood of success on the merits is irrelevant 
to determining the validity of the lis pendens." 75 Haw. at 505­
06, 866 P.2d at 964 (citing 5303 Realty Corp. v. O & Y Equity Corp., 476 N.E.2d 276, 280-81 (N.Y. 1984), and Urez Corp. v. Superior Court, 235 Cal. Rptr. 837, 842 (Cal. Ct. App. 1987)). 
We thus agree with UniDev that the circuit court erred
 
to the extent that it based its ruling on UniDev's failure to
 
show it was likely to prevail on the merits of its HUFTA claim. 
Under S. Utsunomiya, the propriety of a lis pendens is based on a
 
review of the complaint (or in this case the counterclaim), and
 
the likelihood of success on the merits is not relevant. 75 Haw.
 
at 505-06, 866 P.2d at 964. Given the overall analysis under S.
 
Utsunomiya, however, the circuit court's error in this regard was
 
harmless.
 
In construing HRS § 634-51, the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
in S. Utsunomiya determined that the statute was ambiguous as to its language "concerning real property or affecting title or the 
right of possession of real property[.]" 75 Haw. at 506-07, 866 
P.2d at 965. The supreme court further determined that the 
statute should be construed to restrict rather than broaden the 
application of the lis pendens doctrine, explaining: 
In order to place the purpose of HRS § 634–51 in
perspective, some historical reference is appropriate. HRS §
634–51 is clearly a codification of the common law doctrine
of lis pendens.
 
10(...continued)
of lis pendens
 alleging its deposit was made towards purchase of the property.
S. Utsunomiya thereafter amended its complaint and the lis pendens to allege a
lien on Moomuku's interest in the property, to the extent of the $200,000
deposit. 75 Haw. at 484-88, 866 P.2d at 956-57.
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
At common law [under the doctrine of lis pendens] the
mere existence of a lawsuit affecting real property
was considered to impart constructive notice that
anyone who acquired an interest in the property after
the suit was filed would be bound by any judgment in
that suit.
 
La Paglia, 215 Cal.App.3d at 1326, 264 Cal.Rptr. at 66
(citations omitted). Further,
 
[t]he purpose of the doctrine was to assure that a
court retained its ability to effect justice by
preserving its power over the property, regardless of
whether a purchaser had any notice of the pending
suit. Courts and commentators acknowledged the
doctrine's potentially harsh impact on innocent
purchasers, but they willingly accepted this as a
necessary concomitant to preserving the judicial
 power.
 
5303 Realty Corp., 64 N.Y.2d at 319, 486 N.Y.S.2d at 881,
 
476 N.E.2d at 280 (citations omitted); accord Kaapu, 72 Haw.
at 269, 814 P.2d at 397 ("'[t]he purpose of the doctrine is
to provide the courts with control over property involved in
actions pending before them'") (citation omitted). In this
 
regard, the doctrine of lis pendens protected a plaintiff
from having his or her claim to the property defeated by the
subsequent alienation of the property to a bona fida
purchaser during the course of the lawsuit. See Kaapu, 72
Haw. at 269, 814 P.2d at 397.
 
However, to ameliorate the harsh effect of the common
law rule on third parties, legislatures have, over time,
enacted lis pendens statutes to limit the legal fiction of
"constructive knowledge" of pending claims to those
instances where a notice of lis pendens was recorded. La
 Paglia, 215 Cal.App.3d at 1326, 264 Cal.Rptr. at 66; see
 5303 Realty Corp., 64 N.Y.2d at 319, 486 N.Y.S.2d at 881,
 476 N.E.2d at 280. In this respect, the history of lis
 
pendens legislation has been construed as indicative of the
intent to restrict rather than broaden application of lis
 pendens. Urez Corp., 190 Cal.App.3d at 1145, 235 Cal.Rptr.
 
at 839.
 
75 Haw. at 507-09, 866 P.2d at 965 (underline emphasis added).
 
Although acknowledging that there was authority in
 
other jurisdictions allowing a lis pendens when an equitable lien
 
action "concerned" land, the Hawai' i Supreme Court held that "we 
find more persuasive the authority that holds that the lis
 
pendens statute must be strictly construed and that the
 
application of lis pendens should be limited to actions directly
 
seeking to obtain title to or possession of real property." Id.
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 510, 866 P.2d at 966 (underline emphasis added). The supreme
 
court adopted the reasoning of the California Court of Appeals in
 
Urez, 235 Cal. Rptr. 837, which opted for a narrow construction
 
of the California lis pendens statute applicable to that case:
 
In holding that the lis pendens should have been expunged,
the California Court of Appeals reviewed the history of the
doctrine of lis pendens and then turned to the complaint,
observing that the claims for relief at issue were
 
essentially a fraud action seeking money damages
with additional allegations urged to support the
equitable remedies of a constructive trust or an
equitable lien. Plaintiff does not claim any
ownership or possessory interest in the subject
property. Rather, he seeks reinstatement or
creation of a "beneficial" interest in the
 property for the purpose of securing payment of
money owed him under his defunct second trust
deed.
 
[Urez, 235 Cal. Rptr. at 842]. The court concluded:
 
. . . At bottom, the "beneficial" interest
plaintiff claims in the subject property is for
the purpose of securing a claim for money
damages. In our view, allegation of this
interest is not an action affecting title or
possession of real property.
 
We conclude, therefore, that allegations
 
of equitable remedies, even if colorable, will
 
not support a lis pendens if, ultimately, those
 allegations act only as a collateral means to
 collect money damages. It must be borne in mind
 
that the true purpose of the lis pendens statute
is to provide notice of pending litigation and
not to make plaintiffs secured creditors of
defendants nor to provide plaintiffs with
additional leverage for negotiating purposes.
 
Id. at [842–43] (emphasis added). . . .
 
We find the discussion in Urez to be well-reasoned and
 
therefore adopt it here.
 
75 Haw. at 510-12, 866 P.2d at 966-67 (original brackets 
omitted). The Hawai' i Supreme Court further reasoned that a 
"narrow construction of Hawai' i's lis pendens statute is 
counseled by sound authority recognizing the real potential for 
abuse of lis pendens," Id. at 512, 866 P.2d at 967, and stated: 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Indeed, as we have noted, one court has acknowledged that
 
[w]hile the [California] lis pendens statute was
designed to give notice to third parties and not to
aid plaintiffs in pursuing claims, the practical
effect of a recorded lis pendens is to render a
defendant's property unmarketable and unsuitable as
security for a loan. The financial pressure exerted
on the property owner may be considerable, forcing him
to settle not due to the merits of the suit but to rid
 himself of the cloud upon his title. The potential
for abuse is obvious.
 
. . . This court is in accord.
 
Id. (quoting La Paglia v. Superior Court, 264 Cal. Rptr. 63, 66
 
(Cal. Ct. App. 1989)).
 
Applying these principles to the lis pendens filed in
 
that case, the S. Utsunomiya court held that:
 
A fair reading of Utsunomiya's amended complaint
reveals that it is predominantly a fraud and breach of
contract complaint (obviously amended to allege an equitable
lien) seeking damages. We agree with Moomuku that
Utsunomiya does not claim title to or a right of possession
of the property. Thus, HRS § 634-51 is not implicated and
Utsunomiya's amended lis pendens should have been expunged.
 
Id. at 513, 866 P.2d at 967 (emphasis added).
 
3. Application of S. Utsunomiya to This Case
 
In light of S. Utsunomiya, the crux of whether UniDev
 
had a proper basis for its lis pendens under HRS § 634-51 is
 
whether UniDev's HUFTA claim is an action "directly seeking to
 obtain title to or possession of real property." Id. at 510, 866
 
P.2d at 966. Restricting our review to the face of UniDev's
 
counterclaim, as required by S. Utsunomiya, it is apparent that
 
UniDev's HUFTA claim does not satisfy the requirements in S.
 Utsunomiya for recording a lis pendens.
 
The allegations specific to UniDev's HUFTA claim state:
 
39. On or about April 17, 2009, WWH became indebted
to UniDev for development fees due under the ADSA in an
amount to be proved at trial but not less than
$3,230,343.00.
 
40. On or about April 22, 2009, WWH transferred to
HIHT or to the County its leasehold interest in the land on
which the Project was being built, and HIHT transferred to
the County all of its interest in that land.
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
41. WWH's leasehold interest in the land on which
 
the Project was being built and HIHT's interest in that land
were their only substantial assets.
 
42. In exchange for WWH's transfer to HIHT or to the
County of its leasehold interest in the land on which the
Project was being built, WWH received nothing reasonably
equivalent in value, and as a result of the transfer, WWH's
debts greatly exceeded its assets.
 
43. In exchange for HIHT's transfer to the County of
its interest in the land on which the Project was being
built, HIHT received nothing reasonably equivalent in value,
and as a result of the transfer, HIHT's debts greatly
exceeded its assets.
 
44. WWH and HIHT made these transfers, and the
County accepted them, with actual intent to hinder, delay or
defraud UniDev in its efforts to collect the not less than
 $3,230,343.00 WWH owes it.
 
45. The transfers alleged above are fraudulent
transfers within the meaning of the Uniform FraudulentTransfer Act (Hawai' i Revised Statutes ch. 651C) that may be
avoided by UniDev. 
Significantly, UniDev's prayer for relief in its
 
counterclaim demands judgment:
 
A. For damages against the County and WWH in an
amount to be proven at trial but not less than $4 million;
 
B. For restitution from the County and WWH in an
amount to be proven at trial but not less than $3 million,
in the event damages are not awarded;
 
C. For an order avoiding WWH's transfer to HIHT or
to the County of its leasehold interest in the land on which
the Project was being built and HIHT's transfer to the
County of its interest in that land, to the extent necessary
to satisfy UniDev's counterclaims against WWH;
 
D. For costs of suit, including reasonable
attorney's fees; and
 
E. For all other relief the Court deems just and
 
proper.
 
(Emphasis added). As in S. Utsunomiya, UniDev does not seek to
 
directly obtain title to, or possession of, the Property. 
Rather, UniDev seeks to avoid the transfer of WWH and HIHT's
 
respective interest in the Property for the purpose of securing
 
payment of money which might potentially be owed if UniDev
 
succeeds on its counterclaims. This is not a direct claim for
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the Property, and further, because a fair reading of UniDev's
 
counterclaim establishes that its primary purpose is to obtain
 
money damages, the HUFTA claim is asserted for a purpose which
 
was rejected as a basis for a lis pendens in S. Utsunomiya. 75
 
Haw. at 511-12, 866 P.2d at 966-67.
 
4. Sports Shinko and Kirkeby
 
Based on the analysis in Sports Shinko, UniDev argues 
that its HUFTA claim is not merely a collateral means to collect 
money damages, but it is a statutory claim with a statutory 
remedy that, if successful, will change title to and possession 
of the Property. In Sports Shinko, the U.S. District Court for 
the District of Hawai' i reasoned in part that "[a]lthough the 
creditor/plaintiff is not directly seeking to obtain title for 
itself, it is enough that the creditor/plaintiff is directly 
seeking to obtain title for the debtor, on the 
creditor/plaintiff's behalf." 457 F. Supp. 2d at 1129 (relying 
on Kirkeby v. Superior Court, 93 P.3d 395 (Cal. 2004), and 
Hunting World, Inc. v. Superior Court, 26 Cal. Rptr. 2d 923 (Cal. 
Ct. App. 1994)). 
Given the analysis and holding in S. Utsunomiya,
 
however, we come to a different conclusion than the ruling in
 
Sports Shinko. The HUFTA, which pertains to the transfer of a
 
11
broad range of property (and not just real property),  provides
various remedies for a fraudulent transfer. See  HRS § 651C-7. 
UniDev points to the remedy under HRS § 651C-7(a)(1), which
 
11 "Transfer" is defined as "every mode, direct or indirect, absolute
or conditional, voluntary or involuntary, of disposing of or parting with an
asset or an interest in an asset, and includes a payment of money, a release,
a lease, and the creation of a lien or encumbrance." HRS § 651C-1 (1993
Repl.). "Asset" is defined as "property of a debtor but does not include:
(1) Property to the extent that it is encumbered by valid lien; (2) Property
to the extent that it is generally exempt under nonbankruptcy law; or (3) An
interest in property held in tenancy by the entireties to the extent that it
is not subject to process by a creditor holding a claim against only one
tenant." Id. "Property" is defined as "anything that may be the subject of
ownership." Id.
 
18
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
allows a creditor, subject to certain limitations, to obtain 
"[a]voidance of the transfer . . . to the extent necessary to 
satisfy the creditor's claim[.]" At bottom, however, this 
statutory remedy simply codifies a means to collect money 
damages. This falls short of the Hawai' i Supreme Court's ruling 
in S. Utsunomiya strictly construing HRS § 634-51. 
The HUFTA is silent with regard to lis pendens.  As
 
noted above, the HUFTA addresses fraudulent transfers of a broad
 
range of property, not just real property. A lis pendens, on the
 
other hand, applies only with respect to real property. See HRS
 
§ 634-51. Moreover, the HUFTA makes no distinction between real
 
property and other types of property that may be covered by that
 
chapter. Thus, there is nothing to suggest that HRS Chapter 651C
 
contemplates the recording of a lis pendens.
 
Sports Shinko also relied heavily on the California 
Supreme Court's opinion in Kirkeby. However, we conclude that 
Kirkeby is not persuasive given the Hawai' i Supreme Court's 
ruling in S. Utsunomiya. Indeed, it appears that Kirkeby is at odds with S. Utsunomiya. 
In Kirkeby,
12 the California Supreme Court construed
 
California statutes which allow a lis pendens to be filed when a
 
party to an action asserts a "real property claim," which in turn
 
was defined as "the cause or causes of action in a pleading which
 
would, if meritorious, affect (a) title to, or the right to
 
possession of, specific real property[.]" 93 P.3d at 398
 
(emphasis added). Based on its determination that "we cannot
 
ignore the plain language of the statute," (emphasis added), the
 
California Supreme Court held that the claim in that case seeking
 
to void the transfer of properties under California's Uniform
 
Fraudulent Transfer Act (CUFTA) would "affect title to specific
 
real property" if successful, and therefore, supported a lis
 
12 Kirkeby was decided in 2004, ten years after S. Utsunomiya.
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
pendens. Id. at 401. In reaching this conclusion based on the 
plain language of the California statutes, the court rejected the 
argument based on prior decisions of the California Courts of 
Appeal, including Urez and La Paglia, that a court "must look 
through the pleadings to ascertain the purpose of the party 
seeking to maintain notice of lis pendens." Id. at 400. The 
court determined that the "argument fails based on the plain 
language of the applicable statute." Id. The California Supreme 
Court's implicit rejection of the analysis in Urez and La Paglia 
is thus contrary to the Hawai' i Supreme Court's ruling in S. 
Utsunomiya, which relied extensively on the analysis in Urez and La Paglia.
13 
In short, the Hawai' i Supreme Court determined that the 
language of HRS § 634-51 was ambiguous and strictly construed it such that a lis pendens in Hawai' i is limited to "actions 
directly seeking to obtain title to or possession of real property." S. Utsunomiya, 75 Haw. at 510, 866 P.2d at 966. To 
the contrary in Kirkeby, although the specific language of the 
California statutes being construed was materially similar to HRS 
§ 634-51, the California Supreme Court relied on the plain 
language of its statutes to conclude that a CUFTA claim supported a lis pendens. See 93 P.3d at 401. Under the prevailing law in 
Hawai'i, HRS § 634-51 must be strictly construed. 
13 We must therefore disagree with the reasoning in Sports Shinko that:
 
In analyzing the doctrine of lis pendens and its
 
application to fraudulent transfer claims, the California
Supreme Court in Kirkeby relied on two earlier California
 lis pendens cases. Those same two cases-La Paglia and
 Urez-were relied on by the Hawaii Supreme Court in its
seminal decision on lis pendens in Utsunomiya. Indeed, as
discussed above, the Hawaii Supreme Court explicitly adopted
the reasoning of the Urez decision.
 
457 F. Supp. 2d at 1128. Rather than relying on Urez and La Paglia, the
 California Supreme Court in Kirkeby rejected the argument based on those cases
and instead relied on a plain reading of the applicable statute. See Kirkeby,
93 P.3d at 400.
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We further note that in addressing the potential for
 
abuse of the lis pendens statutes, the Kirkeby court reasoned
 
that the California statutory scheme provides many grounds for
 
expunging a lis pendens that should discourage such abuse. See
 
id. Grounds for expungement discussed in Kirkeby include: "if
 
the court finds that the claimant has not established by a
 
preponderance of the evidence the probable validity of the real
 
property claim[,]" which "therefore requires a 'judicial
 
evaluation of the merits' of a claimant's case[;]" and "even if a
 
claimant shows a probably valid claim, the court may still order
 
a lis pendens expunged if adequate relief for the claimant may be
 
secured by the giving of an undertaking." Id. Moreover, a
 
property owner may be entitled to attorney's fees and costs if
 
successful in expunging a lis pendens. Id.
 
Hawaii's lis pendens statute, on the other hand, does 
not similarly contain these avenues for expunging a lis pendens 
and protecting against the abusive use of a lis pendens. As discussed above, the potential for abuse in recording a lis pendens was a key concern to the Hawai' i Supreme Court in 
S. Utsunomiya and one of the reasons it strictly construed
 HRS § 634-51. See 75 Haw. at 512, 866 P.2d at 967.
 
5. Alternative Remedies Under the HUFTA
 
Finally, we address UniDev's argument that the circuit
 
court incorrectly expunged the lis pendens based, in part, on
 
grounds that the HUFTA contains alternative remedies, such as
 
injunctive relief, that would not encumber the Property. We do
 
not read the circuit court's order in the same way as UniDev. In
 
our view, the circuit court's reference to other remedies under
 
the HUFTA was for the purpose of explaining why it would be wrong
 
to give a "carte blanche" approval of a lis pendens whenever a
 
HUFTA claim is asserted, because it is possible under HUFTA for a
 
party to seek remedies that do not involve seeking title to the
 
subject property for the party. Based on this reading of the
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circuit court's September 13, 2010 order, we agree with the
 
circuit court that the assertion of a HUFTA claim does not
 
necessarily mean a lis pendens is authorized. Ultimately, a
 
court reviewing the propriety of a lis pendens must follow the
 requirements set out in S. Utsunomiya.
 
6. Conclusion Regarding the Lis Pendens
 
Accordingly, given that UniDev's HUFTA claim as
 
asserted in its counterclaim does not directly seek to obtain
 
title to or possession of the Property, the circuit court did not
 
abuse its discretion in granting the County's motion to expunge
 
UniDev's lis pendens in this case.
 
Because UniDev sets forth the same arguments in support
 
of its appeal of the Reconsideration Order, we likewise conclude
 
that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying
 
UniDev's motion for reconsideration.
 
B. The ADR Orders
 
On December 17, 2010, the circuit court granted
 
UniDev's motion to compel ADR and ruled that all of the County's
 
claims and all of UniDev's counterclaims were subject to the ADR
 
provisions in the DSA and the ADSA. The County challenges this
 
ruling, asserting that the circuit court: failed to rule that
 
UniDev waived any right to arbitration; erroneously determined
 
that the County was required to submit to arbitration pursuant to
 
the DSA and ADSA; and erroneously determined that all of the
 
County's claims and all of UniDev's counterclaims were subject to
 
arbitration.
 
Upon the filing of a motion to compel arbitration, the 
court determines: "1) whether an arbitration agreement exists 
between the parties; and 2) if so, whether the subject matter of 
the dispute is arbitrable under such agreement." Koolau 
Radiology, 73 Haw. at 445, 834 P.2d at 1300; see also Brown, 82 
Hawai'i at 238, 921 P.2d at 158; accord, HRS § 658A-6(b) (Supp. 
2011). 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
When a party opposing a motion to compel arbitration 
has claimed that the right to arbitrate has been waived, the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court has also decided the issue of waiver. See 
e.g., Fireman's Fund Ins. Co., 109 Hawai' i at 354-55, 126 P.3d at 
397-99; Ass'n of Owners of Kukui Plaza v. Swinerton & Walberg 
Co., 68 Haw. 98, 108-09, 705 P.2d 28, 35-37 (1985). 
We therefore address the issues raised by the County in
 
the following order: (1) whether an arbitration agreement exists
 
between the County and UniDev; (2) if so, whether the County's
 
claims and UniDev's counterclaims are arbitrable under the
 
agreement (i.e. come within the scope of the arbitration
 
agreement); and (3) if so, whether UniDev has waived its right to
 
arbitration.
 
1.	 Whether an Arbitration Agreement Exists Between
the County and UniDev
 
The County contends that the circuit court erred in
 
ruling that there are existing arbitration agreements between the
 
County and UniDev as contained in the DSA and ADSA. Regarding
 
the DSA, the County argues that it was no longer a party to that
 
agreement after the DSA was assigned to WWH. Regarding the ADSA,
 
the County argues it was never a party to that agreement, which
 
was executed between UniDev and WWH.
 
Public policy encourages arbitration as a means of 
settling differences and thereby avoiding litigation, however, 
"there still must be an underlying agreement between the parties 
to arbitrate." Luke v. Gentry Realty, Ltd., 105 Hawai' i 241, 
247, 96 P.3d 261, 267 (2004) (quoting Arrants v. Buck, 130 F.3d 
636, 640 (4th Cir. 1997)). 
It is undisputed that both the DSA and ADSA contain
 
substantially similar arbitration provisions.14 Moreover, both
 
14 UniDev and the County entered into the DSA on March 2, 2006. The
 
DSA's arbitration provision states in relevant part:
 
(continued...)
 
23
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
arbitration agreements are governed by HRS Chapter 658A.15
 
HRS § 658A-6(a) addresses the validity of an agreement to
 
arbitrate, stating: 
[§658A-6] Validity of agreement to arbitrate.  (a) An
agreement contained in a record to submit to arbitration any
existing or subsequent controversy arising between the
parties to the agreement is valid, enforceable, and
 irrevocable except upon a ground that exists at law or in
 
equity for the revocation of a contract.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
As noted above, we review a ruling on a motion to 
compel arbitration de novo and based on the same standards that 
apply to a summary judgment ruling. Brown, 82 Hawai' i at 231, 
921 P.2d at 151; Yogi, 124 Hawai' i at 174, 238 P.3d at 701. As 
the party seeking to compel arbitration, UniDev carries the 
initial burden of establishing that an arbitration agreement 
exists between the parties. If UniDev meets its initial burden, 
the burden shifts to the County to show that an arbitration 
14(...continued)
 
13. Dispute. Any dispute arising under the terms of this
 
Agreement that is not resolved within a reasonable period of
time by authorized representatives of UniDev and the Sponsor
shall be brought to the attention of the Chief Executive
Officer of UniDev and the Executive Director of the Sponsor
for joint resolution. Thereafter, if the matter in dispute
is still unresolved, then the parties shall in good faith
mutually appoint a mediator to mediate the dispute, provided
that if the parties cannot agree upon a mediator, then
either party may petition a court of competent jurisdiction
to appoint a mediator. If the matter in dispute is still
 
not resolved by mediation, then the parties shall submit the
 
matter to arbitration as provided in the "Uniform
 Arbitration Act" under State law.
 
(Emphasis added). On February 21, 2008, UniDev and WWH entered into the ADSA.
The ADSA's arbitration provision is materially similar to the DSA's
arbitration provision. County representatives did not sign the ADSA. 
15 In 2001, the Hawai' i legislature repealed HRS Chapter 658 and enacted
HRS Chapter 658A. HRS Chapter 658A is applicable to agreements to arbitrate
made on or after July 1, 2002. See HRS § 658A-3(a) (Supp. 2011). The DSA and 
ADSA were entered into on March 2, 2006 and February 21, 2008, respectively,
and thus HRS Chapter 658A is applicable to the arbitration provisions in bothagreements. 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
agreement does not exist. 4 Am. Jur. 2d Alternative Dispute
 
Resolution § 98 (2007). 
a. The DSA
 
There is no dispute that the County and UniDev executed
 
the DSA and that the DSA contains an arbitration provision. 
Thus, it appears that UniDev meets its initial burden of showing
 
that an arbitration agreement exists. The County contends,
 
however, that the Assignment from the County to WWH constituted a
 
novation which relieved the County of the DSA's arbitration
 
agreement. Alternatively, the County argues that the ADSA
 
between UniDev and WWH is a substituted contract which replaced
 
the DSA. We do not agree with either of these arguments.
 
Generally, a novation is but one type of a substituted
 
contract. The Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 279 (1981)
 
provides:
 
§ 279. Substituted Contract
 
(1) A substituted contract is a contract that is
itself accepted by the obligee in satisfaction of the
obligor's existing duty.
 
(2) The substituted contract discharges the original
duty and breach of the substituted contract by the
obligor does not give the obligee a right to enforce
the original duty.
 
"If a substituted contract brings in a new party it is called a
 
'novation[.]'" Id. cmt. a.16 "A novation is a substituted
 
contract that includes as a party one who was neither the obligor
 
nor the obligee of the original duty." Id. § 280 (1981).17
 
16 As to a novation, "[t]he performance to be rendered under the new
duty may be the same as or different from that to be rendered under the
original duty." Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 280 cmt. a (1981). The
 effect of a novation is that it "discharges the original duty, just as any
other substituted contract does, so that breach of the new duty gives no right
of action on the old duty." Id. cmt. b.
17 Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 280 is based on the former
Restatement (First) of Contracts § 424 (1932), which was relied upon by theHawai'i Supreme Court in Hawaii Builders Supply Co. v. Kaneta, 42 Haw. 111, 
112 (1957), in addressing the question of a novation. See Restatement 
(continued...)
 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Under this framework, the County's argument as to both
 
the Assignment and the ADSA is essentially that each document was
 
a novation with regard to the DSA, because WWH was substituted
 
for the County. For either the Assignment or the ADSA to have
 
been a novation, UniDev must have agreed to the discharge of the
 
County's duties under the DSA in consideration for the promise of
 
WWH to undertake those duties. See Haw. Builders Supply Co. v.
 
Kaneta, 42 Haw. 111 (Haw. Terr. 1957); Restatement (Second) of
 
Contracts § 280 cmt. c and d. "[A] discharge of a previous
 
contractual duty is one of the essential elements of a novation." 
Kaneta, 42 Haw. at 112.
 
[A] mere promise by a third party to assume the obligor's
 
duty, not offered in substitution for that duty, does not
 result in a novation, and the new duty that the third party
may owe to the obligee as an intended beneficiary is in
addition to and not in substitution for the obligor's
original duty. For a novation to take place, the obligee
 
must assent to the discharge of the obligor's duty in
 
consideration for the promise of the third party to
 undertake that duty.
 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 280 cmt. d (emphasis added).
 
The Assignment was not a novation. There is nothing in
 
the record on appeal evidencing that UniDev agreed to discharge
 
the County from its duties under the DSA. Even if, as the County
 
asserts, UniDev consented to the assignment of the DSA from the
 
County to WWH and UniDev's counterclaim asserts that WWH was set
 
up to "take over" the performance of the DSA, such evidence and
 
admissions by UniDev do not equate to a discharge of the County's
 
17(...continued)
(Second) of Contracts § 280 Rep. Note.
 
We recognize that the term novation has been given a broader meaning in
some authorities. 
For instance, one definition of a "novation" in Black's Law
Dictionary is: "The act of substituting for an old obligation a new one that
either replaces an existing obligation with a new obligation or replaces anoriginal party with a new party." Black's Law Dictionary 1168 (9th ed. 2009).
However, given the Hawai' i Supreme Court's prior reliance on the Restatement
(First) of Contracts in Kaneta, and because the Restatement provides a morecomprehensive authority as to both novations and substituted contracts, welook to that source for guidance. 
26
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
duties under the DSA. An assignment, without more, does not
 
discharge the original obligor under a contract.
 
A mere assignment does not release the assignor from
his or her obligations to the other party under the assigned
contract, absent an agreement that can be implied from facts
other than the other contracting party's consent to the
assignment; or the consent of the obligee.
 
Even if an assignee assumes the obligations of the
contract, the assignor remains secondarily liable as a
surety or guarantor.
 
6 Am. Jur. 2d Assignments § 129 (2008) (footnotes omitted).
 
Similarly, the ADSA executed between UniDev and WWH was
 
not a novation. There is nothing in the record before us that
 
reflects that UniDev, as obligee, agreed that the ADSA would
 
discharge the County's duties under the DSA.
 
The County's obligation under the DSA's arbitration
 
provision thus continues to exist.
 
b. The ADSA
 
We now turn to whether the arbitration provision in the
 
ADSA exists as between the County and UniDev. It is undisputed
 
that the County did not execute the ADSA. Thus, UniDev (a
 
signatory to the ADSA) seeks to enforce the ADSA arbitration
 
provision against the County (a nonsignatory to the ADSA). The
 
circuit court appears to have determined that the ADSA
 
arbitration provision applies to the County because the ADSA
 
"restates" the DSA.
 
The County argues that the circuit court erred because
 
the County was never a party to the ADSA and WWH did not enter
 
into the ADSA on behalf of the County.
 
UniDev contends that the ADSA arbitration provision
 
applies to the County because the ADSA simply restated the DSA
 
arbitration provision without relieving the County of its
 
obligations under the DSA. Alternatively, UniDev argues that the
 
County ratified WWH's actions and that WWH acted under the
 
apparent authority of the County with regard to the ADSA.
 
27
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
We do not agree with UniDev that the ADSA arbitration 
agreement applies to the County on the basis that the ADSA 
"restates" the DSA. UniDev cites no authority for this 
proposition and thus sets forth no basis, as a matter of law, 
that the County is bound by the ADSA's arbitration provision 
under this theory. Regardless of whether UniDev and WWH intended 
to restate the DSA by their respective execution of the ADSA, the 
County simply was not a signatory to the ADSA. "[A] party cannot 
be required to submit to arbitration any dispute which he has not 
agreed so to submit." Sher v. Cella, 114 Hawai' i 263, 267, 160 
P.3d 1250, 1254 (App. 2007) (quoting Merrill Lynch Inv. Managers 
v. Optibase, Ltd., 337 F.3d 125, 131 (2nd Cir. 2003)). We thus
 
conclude that the circuit court erred in this regard.
 
UniDev's alternative arguments are based on theories 
related to agency. In Luke, the Hawai' i Supreme Court declined 
to resolve the question of whether a signatory may bind a 
nonsignatory to an arbitration agreement, but referred to 
Thomson-CSF, S.A. v. Am. Arbitration Ass'n, 64 F.3d 773, 776 (2d 
Cir. 1995) for a discussion of the issue. 105 Hawai' i at 248 
n.11, 96 P.3d at 268 n.11. In Thomson-CSF, the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit stated that "[t]his Court has made clear 
that a nonsignatory party may be bound to an arbitration 
agreement if so dictated by the 'ordinary principles of contract 
and agency.'" 64 F.3d at 776 (citing McAllister Bros. v. A & S 
Transp. Co., 621 F.2d 519, 524 (2d Cir. 1980)).
18 Whether to 
compel arbitration is a matter of contract, see Sher, 114 Hawai' i 
at 267, 160 P.3d at 1254, and therefore we agree with Thomson-CSF 
that ordinary principles of contract and agency apply. 
18 The court in Thomson-CSF noted that, under common law principles of
contract and agency law, it had previously "recognized five theories for
binding nonsignatories to arbitration agreements: 1) incorporation by
reference; 2) assumption; 3) agency; 4) veil-piercing/alter ego; and
5) estoppel." 64 F.3d at 776.
 
28
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
UniDev argues that the County ratified the ADSA by 
suing UniDev for breaches of the ADSA and other alleged 
activities of the County. However, the County's complaints 
against UniDev do not assert claims for breach of the ADSA, and 
even if the County's claims could be construed in such a manner, 
UniDev fails to carry its burden to establish ratification. See 
Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Maalaea Kai, Inc. v. Stillson, 108 
Hawai'i 2, 13-14, 116 P.3d 644, 655-56 (2005) (stating that 
ratification requires "the affirmance by a person of a prior act 
which did not bind him but which was done or professedly done on 
his account, whereby the act, as to some or all persons, is given 
effect as if originally authorized by him") (citations omitted). 
The evidence that UniDev points to, primarily the Declaration of 
Craig Dougall (Dougall) attached to its Motion to Compel ADR 
filed in the circuit court, fails to establish that WWH entered 
into the ADSA on account of the County. Dougall, a former 
employee of UniDev and later the chief executive officer of WWH, 
attests that the assignment of the DSA to WWH, among other 
things, was done so that WWH would be an entity independent of 
the County. The evidence in the record does not support UniDev's 
argument based on ratification. 
UniDev also argues that WWH acted with the County's
 
apparent authority and thus the County is bound by the ADSA's
 
arbitration provision. "Apparent authority arises when 'the
 
principal does something or permits the agent to do something
 
which reasonably leads another to believe that the agent had the
 
authority he was purported to have.'" Cho Mark Oriental Food,
 
Ltd. v. K & K Int'l, 73 Haw. 509, 516, 836 P.2d 1057, 1062 (1992)
 
(quoting Hawaiian Paradise Park Corp. v. Friendly Broad. Co., 414
 
F.2d 750, 756 (9th Cir. 1969)). "The critical focus is not on
 
the principal and agent's intention to enter into an agency
 
relationship, but on whether a third party relies on the
 
principal's conduct based on a reasonable belief in the existence
 
29
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of such a relationship." Id. at 516-17, 836 P.2d at 1062
 
(citation omitted).
 
Again, UniDev relies primarily on the declaration of
 
Dougall. With regard to the County's conveyance of the Property
 
to HIHT and assignment of the DSA to WWH, Dougall attested that
 
these steps were taken "to remove the County from the executive
 
management of the Project and to have WWH, as a supposedly
 
independent entity, take over that responsibility, and also, in
 
part, to limit the County's liability for the Project." Although
 
Dougall also attests that the County remained intimately involved
 
with controlling and managing the Project, neither his
 
declaration nor any other evidence submitted by UniDev shows that
 
UniDev reasonably believed WWH was acting as the County's agent,
 
especially in regard to executing the ADSA. To the contrary, the
 
evidence shows, as articulated by Dougall, that the Project was
 
purposefully structured so that WWH would be an independent
 
entity (even if, arguably, WWH's independence later became a
 
point of contention between the parties).
 
Reviewing the motion and the evidence presented de novo 
and under the applicable summary judgment standards that apply to 
a motion to compel arbitration, see Koolau Radiology, 73 Haw. at 
439-40, 834 P.2d at 1298, we conclude that UniDev failed to 
establish that WWH had apparent authority to enter the ADSA as 
the County's agent. As the party seeking to compel arbitration, 
UniDev thus fails to carry its burden to establish that the ADSA 
applies to the County under UniDev's theory of apparent 
authority. See id.; Haw. Med. Ass'n, 113 Hawai' i at 90, 148 P.3d 
at 1192. 
We thus conclude that the circuit court erred in
 
determining that the ADSA arbitration agreement applies to the
 
County.
 
30
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2. Scope of the DSA Arbitration Agreement
 
We now consider whether the scope of the DSA's
 
arbitration provision covers the claims and counterclaims
 
asserted by the parties. The circuit court held that all of the
 
claims in the County's two complaints and in UniDev's
 
counterclaim were within the scope of the DSA and ADSA
 
arbitration provisions. Given our ruling above, we consider only
 
the DSA arbitration provision. The DSA's arbitration provision
 
covers "[a]ny dispute arising under the terms of this
 
Agreement[.]" 
"Although the public policy underlying Hawai' i law 
strongly favors arbitration over litigation, the mere existence 
of an arbitration agreement does not mean that the parties must 
submit to an arbitrator disputes which are outside the scope of 
the arbitration agreement." Hawaii Med. Ass'n, 113 Hawai' i at 
92, 148 P.3d at 1194 (quoting Brown, 82 Hawai' i at 244, 921 P.2d 
at 164). "What issues, if any, are beyond the scope of a 
contractual agreement to arbitrate depends on the wording of the 
contractual agreement to arbitrate." Id. (quoting Rainbow 
Chevrolet, Inc. v. Asahi Jyuken (USA), Inc., 78 Hawai' i 107, 113, 
890 P.2d 694, 700 (App. 1995), superseded by statute on other grounds as stated in, Ueoka v. Szymanski, 107 Hawai' i 386, 114 
P.3d 892 (2005)). "Arbitration is a matter of contract; so a 
party cannot be required to submit to arbitration any dispute 
which he has not agreed so to submit." Sher, 114 Hawai' i at 267, 
160 P.3d at 1254 (quoting Merrill Lynch, 337 F.3d at 131) 
(internal quotation marks omitted). "Any doubts concerning the 
scope of arbitrable issues should be resolved in favor of 
arbitration." Lee v. Heftel, 81 Hawai' i 1, 4, 911 P.2d 721, 724 
(1996) (quoting Moses H. Cone Mem'l Hosp. v. Mercury Constr. 
Corp., 460 U.S. 1, 24-25 (1983)) (brackets omitted). "As with 
any contract, the parties' intentions control, but those 
31
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
intentions are generously construed as to issues of
 
arbitrability." Id. (quoting Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler
 
Chrysler-Plymouth, Inc., 473 U.S. 614, 626 (1985)) (brackets
 
omitted).
 
As noted, under the DSA, arbitration is required for
 
"[a]ny dispute arising under the terms of this Agreement[.]" The
 
County argues that similar language has been held to be
 
"relatively narrow" under cases decided by the Ninth Circuit and
 
Hawaii's federal district court. The County relies on
 
Mediterranean Enterprises, Inc. v. Ssangyong Corp., 708 F.2d 1458
 
(9th Cir. 1983), Tracer Research Corp. v. National Environmental
 Services Co., 42 F.3d 1292 (9th Cir. 1994), and Cape Flattery
 Ltd. v. Titan Maritime LLC, 607 F. Supp. 2d 1179 (D. Haw.
 
2009).
19
 
UniDev, to the contrary, argues that this type of
 
arbitration clause has been construed broadly and interpreted to
 
encompass claims that touch matters covered by the parties'
 
contract or that have their roots in the relationship created by
 
the contract. UniDev relies on PRM Energy Systems, Inc. v.
 
Primenergy, L.L.C., 592 F.3d 830 (8th Cir. 2010); Oldroyd v.
 Elmira Savings Bank, FSB, 134 F.3d 72 (2nd Cir. 1998); Int'l
 Asset Mgmt., Inc. v. Holt, 487 F. Supp. 2d 1274 (N.D. Okla.
 2007); EFund Capital Partners v. Pless, 59 Cal. Rptr. 3d 340
 (Cal. Ct. App. 2007); and Eatoni Ergonomics, Inc. v. Research In
 Motion Corp., 633 F. Supp. 2d 109 (S.D.N.Y. 2009).
20
 
19 None of the cases cited by either the County or UniDev interpret
language identical to the arbitration provision in this case. For the cases
 
cited by the County: Mediterranean Enterprises construed an agreement
requiring arbitration for "[a]ny disputes arising hereunder[,]" 708 F.2d at
1461; Tracer Research Corp. construed an agreement requiring arbitration for
"any controversy or claim arising out of this Agreement[,]" 42 F.3d at 1295;
and Cape Flattery Ltd. construed an agreement requiring arbitration for "[a]ny
dispute arising under this Agreement[.]" 607 F. Supp. 2d at 1185.
 
20 PRM Energy Systems construed an agreement requiring arbitration for
"all disputes arising under" the agreement. 592 F.3d at 836-37. Oldroyd
 
(continued...)
 
32
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We conclude that the particular language agreed to by
 
the County and UniDev in the DSA arbitration provision was
 
intended to be fairly narrow. In cases construing agreements
 
requiring arbitration for disputes "arising under" or "arising
 
out of" the agreement or arising "hereunder," there is a split of
 
authority among federal courts as to how such language should be
 
interpreted. Some courts, primarily in the Ninth Circuit,
 
construe that type of arbitration language as being narrow and
 
restrict arbitration only to disputes relating to interpretation
 
and performance of the contract. See Mediterranean Enters.,
 
Inc., 708 F.2d 1458; In re Kinoshita & Co., 287 F.2d 951 (2d Cir.
 
1961); Cape Flattery Ltd., 607 F. Supp. 2d at 1185-88. On the
 other side, some courts construe such language broadly. See
 
Dialysis Access Ctr., LLC v. RMS Lifeline, Inc., 638 F.3d 367,
 380-82 (1st Cir. 2011) (rejecting Kinoshita); Battaglia v.
 McKendry, 233 F.3d 720, 725-27 (3d Cir. 2000); Gregory v.
 Electro-Mechanical Corp., 83 F.3d 382, 385 (11th Cir. 1996). We
 
need not decide that particular issue.
 
Here, the arbitration provision has further limiting
 
language, that arbitration be had for "[a]ny dispute arising
 
20(...continued)
construed an agreement requiring arbitration for "[a]ny dispute, controversy
or claim arising under or in connection with [Oldroyd's employment
agreement]." 
134 F.3d at 76. International Asset Management construed an
 
agreement requiring arbitration for "[a]ny disputes hereunder." 487 F. Supp.
2d at 1288. EFund Capital Partners construed an agreement requiring
arbitration for "[a]ny dispute or other disagreement arising from or out of
[the] Consulting Agreement[.]" 59 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 347. Eatoni Ergonomics
 
construed an agreement requiring arbitration for "any disputes under this
agreement[.]" 633 F. Supp. 2d at 112.
 
UniDev also points to two Hawai' i cases, Lee and Rainbow Chevrolet, but
these cases likewise interpret contract language different from the
arbitration provision in this case. Lee construed an agreement requiring
arbitration for "any dispute or claim in law or equity aris[ing] out of [theagreement.]" 81 Hawai' i at 2, 911 P.2d at 722. Rainbow Chevrolet construed 
an agreement requiring arbitration for "[a]ny dispute arising under [the]
lease or any addendum or other agreement incidental or ancillary to [the]Lease or any aspect of the relationship under the Lease between [San Jose] and[Rainbow.]" 78 Hawai' i at 110, 890 P.2d at 697. 
33
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
under the terms of this Agreement." (Emphasis added). Even 
though public policy strongly favors arbitration, the scope of 
arbitration ultimately depends on the wording of the contract. 
Haw. Med. Ass'n, 113 Hawai' i at 92, 148 P.3d at 1194. By 
choosing the specific and clear language in the DSA arbitration 
provision, the parties indicated their intent to require 
arbitration when a dispute implicates or involves the terms of 
the DSA. Therefore, arbitration is required for claims that 
involve construction or interpretation of the DSA's terms, or 
that require a determination of the parties' rights and/or 
obligations under the terms of the DSA. 
a. County's Claims
 
Applying the aforementioned principles to the County's
 
claims, we conclude that only a portion of the County's
 
negligence claim falls within the scope of the DSA's arbitration
 
provision. The County asserts the following claims: false claims
 
in violation of HRS § 46-171; intentional misrepresentation;
 
fraudulent inducement; negligent misrepresentation; negligence;
 
and unfair and deceptive practices in violation of HRS § 480-2
 
and § 481A-3. All but two of these claims are asserted in both
 
the County's complaint filed in Civil No. 09-01-264K (first
 
complaint) and the County's later complaint filed in Civil No.
 
10-1-427K (second complaint), with somewhat different underlying
 
factual allegations. Whether a claim falls within the scope of
 
an arbitration agreement turns on the factual allegations in the
 
complaint rather than the legal causes of action asserted. Cf.
 
Simula, Inc. v. Autoliv, Inc., 175 F.3d 716, 721 (9th Cir. 1999)
 
(citing Mitsubishi Motors Corp., 473 U.S. at 624 n.13) (examining
 
the factual allegations raised to determine which causes of
 
action were arbitrable). We thus analyze the allegations
 
underlying the claims, as asserted in the two complaints.
 
The County's cause of action for false claims does not
 
implicate the terms of the DSA. In the County's first complaint,
 
34
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
it alleges that UniDev submitted a false claim in April 2009
 
under the ADSA, to which the County was not a party and thus
 
under which it did not owe any funds. This complaint also
 
alleges UniDev made false claims by submitting invoices to WWH
 
for services already paid, knowing that WWH was receiving County
 
funds through various financing agreements. The County also
 
alleged that UniDev made various false statements to induce the
 
County to award the project to UniDev and enter into the DSA. 
None of these allegations involve the terms of the DSA.
 
The County's claim for intentional misrepresentation in
 
its first complaint is based on the allegation that 
"because under its DSA and Amended DSA with WWH, a portion
of UniDev's fees would be earned when funding was provided
to WWH for The Project, UniDev and/or UniDev Hawai' i 
intentionally made numerous false representations and
provided false documentation to the County to induce it to
 provide funding to WWH." 
(Emphasis added). Although the DSA is mentioned, it merely sets
 
the context that UniDev made misrepresentations to the County in
 
order to obtain funds during the time the DSA was assigned to
 
WWH. As identified in the first complaint, specific alleged
 
misrepresentations occurred from 2007 through 2008, which is
 
after the DSA had been assigned to WWH. Based on the allegations
 
in the first complaint, whether UniDev made intentional
 
misrepresentations to the County does not involve the terms of
 
the DSA. 
The County's claim for intentional misrepresentation in
 
the second complaint alleges that UniDev made misrepresentations
 
"in order to be awarded the Project and obtain funds from the
 
County[,]" including that UniDev: made misrepresentations in its
 
response to the County's Request for Proposal (which sought
 
proposals from potential developers to develop the Project);
 
submitted invoices to pay contractors and then failed to pay all
 
or a portion of the represented expenses; and misrepresented the
 
amounts to be paid to certain contractors. The second complaint
 
35
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
also alleges UniDev made misrepresentations in submitting
 
invoices for which UniDev had already received payment. None of
 
these allegations involve interpreting or construing the terms of
 
the DSA.
 
The County's claim for fraudulent inducement in the two
 
complaints alleges that UniDev made false representations to the
 
County for the purpose of inducing the County to award the
 
Project to UniDev, to induce the County to provide funding for
 
the Project, and to induce the County to pay false invoices. 
These allegations do not raise issues implicating the terms of
 
the DSA.
 
The County's claim for negligent misrepresentation is
 
based on allegations that UniDev made misrepresentations in order
 
to get funding pursuant to its DSA and ADSA with WWH, and to
 
induce the County to award the Project to UniDev, provide
 
funding, and pay false invoices. Again, the DSA is mentioned
 
simply to set the context for when the alleged misrepresentations
 
were made. The terms of the DSA are not implicated.
 
The County's claim for negligence alleges that UniDev
 
owed a duty to the County to use reasonable care in the
 
performance of its professional services. The County alleges, in
 
part, that pursuant to the DSA, prior approval was to be obtained
 
for certain consultant contracts and their expenses, with which
 
UniDev failed to abide, and that UniDev purported to be the
 
owner's representative but failed to take actions in the interest
 
of the County. These allegations require a determination of
 
UniDev's duties owed to the County under the DSA and UniDev's
 
performance related to those duties. To this extent, the terms
 
of the DSA are thus implicated and this part of the claim must be
 
arbitrated. To the extent that the County's allegations may
 
assert duties owed by UniDev under the ADSA, that part of the
 
claim is not arbitrable.
 
36
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As to the factual allegations underlying the County's
 
claim of unfair and deceptive trade practices, the County alleges
 
that UniDev: made misrepresentations as to its ability to obtain
 
financing, its experience in developing housing projects, and
 
that County funds would not be needed for the Project; submitted
 
false invoices; and failed to disclose relationships or
 
agreements with contractors that constituted conflicts of
 
interest that benefitted UniDev to the detriment of the County. 
The terms of the DSA have no bearing on these allegations.
 
In sum, only the County's claim for negligence, based
 
on UniDev's alleged duties under the DSA, implicates the terms of
 
the DSA between the County and UniDev. This portion of the
 
negligence claim must be submitted to arbitration. The other
 
claims asserted by the County are not within the scope of the
 
DSA's limited arbitration provision. 
b. UniDev's Counterclaims
 
UniDev asserts the following counterclaims against the
 
County: breach of contract; quantum meruit; intentional
 
interference with contract; and fraudulent transfer. To
 
determine whether these counterclaims are covered by the DSA's
 
arbitration clause, we consider the factual allegations asserted
 
by UniDev related to its counterclaims.
 
UniDev's claim for breach of contract against the
 
County is based on allegations that: the County and UniDev
 
entered into the DSA; the County assigned its rights under the
 
DSA to WWH, but the County remained intimately involved and WWH
 
was an alter ego, agent or instrumentality of the County; WWH was
 
the alter ego, agent or instrumentality of the County with regard
 
to the ADSA; under the DSA and ADSA, UniDev performed certain
 
services; under the DSA and ADSA, the County and WWH agreed to
 
pay UniDev certain fees; and the County and WWH breached the DSA
 
and ADSA by unilaterally halting the Project and refusing to pay
 
UniDev the agreed fees. To the extent these allegations assert
 
37
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the County breached the DSA, they implicate the terms of the
 
DSA and are thus arbitrable. All other allegations underlying
 
this claim deal with UniDev's theories based on alter ego or
 
agency, which do not involve interpreting the terms of the DSA
 
and thus are not within the scope of the DSA arbitration
 
provision.
 
UniDev's claim for quantum meruit is based on the 
services it performed from November 2004 through April 2009. UniDev alleges that the County substantially benefitted from 
UniDev's services and would be unjustly enriched if not required 
to pay UniDev for its services. "[A] claim for unjust enrichment 
requires only that a plaintiff prove that he or she 'confer[red] 
a benefit upon' the opposing party and that the 'retention [of 
that benefit] would be unjust.'" Durette v. Aloha Plastic 
Recycling, Inc., 105 Hawai' i 490, 504, 100 P.3d 60, 74 (2004) 
(citation omitted). UniDev's asserted claim for quantum meruit 
does not implicate the terms of the DSA and is not arbitrable. 
UniDev's claim of intentional interference with
 
contract is based on allegations that the County interfered with
 
contractual rights and obligations that existed from July 2006
 
through April 2009 as between WWH and UniDev under the DSA and
 
ADSA. The DSA was assigned to WWH in July 2006. These
 
allegations specifically focus on UniDev's contractual rights
 
with respect to WWH, not the County. Thus, this claim does not
 
involve the terms of the DSA as between the County and UniDev,
 
and therefore, is not arbitrable.
 
UniDev's claim for fraudulent transfer is based on
 
allegations that WWH became indebted to UniDev for fees under the
 
ADSA, and the transfer of WWH's leasehold interest in the
 
Property to HIHT and the subsequent transfer of HIHT's fee-simple
 
interest in the Property to the County was fraudulent as to
 
UniDev under the HUFTA. Specifically, UniDev alleges WWH and
 
HIHT transferred their interests in the Property to hinder, delay
 
38
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or defraud UniDev's efforts to collect fees owed by WWH. This
 
claim does not implicate the terms of the DSA and is not
 
arbitrable.
 
In sum, UniDev's counterclaim for breach of contract
 
against the County is arbitrable to the extent it alleges that
 
the County breached the DSA. In all other respects, UniDev's
 
counterclaims do not implicate the terms of the DSA and are thus
 
outside the scope of the DSA arbitration provision.
 
3. Waiver
 
We next address the County's argument that UniDev
 
waived any right to arbitrate. Contrary to UniDev's assertions,
 
the issue of waiver is properly before this court. Because
 
HRS § 658A-6 is identical to the revised Uniform Arbitration Act
 
(2000) (RUAA) § 6, we find the comments to RUAA § 6 to be
 
persuasive. Comment 5 to RUAA § 6 states that "[w]aiver is one
 
area where courts, rather than arbitrators, often make the
 
decision as to enforceability of an arbitration clause." Various
 
federal courts of appeals comport with this practice. See Marie
 
v. Allied Home Mortg. Corp., 402 F.3d 1, 13-14 (1st Cir. 2005)
 
(holding that waiver by litigation-related activity is
 
presumptively an issue for the court); accord Ehleiter v.
 
Grapetree Shores, Inc., 482 F.3d 207, 217-21 (3d Cir. 2007); JPD,
 Inc. v. Chronimed Holdings, Inc., 539 F.3d 388, 393-94 (6th Cir.
 
2008). 
Moreover, the policy rationales articulated in Radil v.
 
National Union Fire Insurance Co., 233 P.3d 688 (Colo. 2010) are
 persuasive. There, the Colorado Supreme Court held that, absent
 
a clear intent to the contrary expressed by the parties in the
 
arbitration agreement, litigation-based waiver is an issue for
 
determination by the trial court, not an arbitrator, in part
 
because: (1) trial courts are better-suited than arbitrators to
 
decide claims of litigation-based waiver, given that waiver
 
depends on the parties' conduct before the court and implicates
 
39
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial court procedures with which arbitrators may have less
 
familiarity; (2) sending waiver claims to an arbitrator is
 
inefficient because an arbitrator's determination that there was
 
a waiver sends the proceedings back to the trial court with no
 
progress with respect to the merits of the dispute; and (3) the
 
procedural question whether there was a litigation-based waiver
 
is unrelated to the merits of the dispute, which the parties
 
intended to be decided by an arbitrator. 233 P.3d at 694-95; see
 
also Good Samaritan Coffee Co. v. LaRue Distrib., Inc., 748
 
N.W.2d 367, 373-75 (Neb. 2008). We adopt these policy rationales
 
and conclude that a court, not an arbitrator, presumptively
 
should decide the issue of whether a party waived its right to
 
arbitrate by actively litigating. In light of the foregoing, and
 
because the arbitration provision in this case does not express a
 
contrary intent by the parties, we proceed to decide the waiver
 
issue.
 
The undisputed facts are as follows. On July 1, 2009,
 
the County filed its first complaint in Civil No. 09-1-264K. On
 
August 17, 2009, UniDev filed a Notice of Removal of Action to
 
Federal Court. On February 11, 2010, the federal court remanded
 
the action to the circuit court. On March 29, 2010, UniDev filed
 
its answer and counterclaim, which did not mention its right to
 
arbitrate. UniDev then served the County with its first set of
 
interrogatories and a request for production of documents, and
 
responded to the County's request for production of documents. 
On April 1, 2010, UniDev filed a lis pendens on the Property. On
 
April 15, 2010, the County filed a Motion to Dismiss Counterclaim
 
and to Expunge Lis Pendens or in the Alternative for Partial
 
Summary Judgment (Motion to Expunge Lis Pendens). On May 17,
 
2010, UniDev filed its opposition to this motion. On May 24,
 
2010, at a hearing held on the County's Motion to Expunge Lis
 
40
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Pendens, counsel for UniDev expressed UniDev's intention to
 
litigate in court and to not seek arbitration.21
 
On June 1, 2010, eight days after UniDev's counsel
 
stated that UniDev intended to litigate rather than arbitrate,
 
UniDev's counsel sent email correspondence to the County's
 
counsel inquiring about the "possibility of mediating" the
 
matter. The County responded by email on June 10, 2010, that it
 
would voluntarily participate in ADR, along with WWH and UniDev,
 
on the condition that the action would not be stayed pending the
 
outcome of mediation. UniDev's counsel responded the same day
 
that it would confer with its client and would be in touch. The
 
same day, June 10, 2010, WWH filed a motion to dismiss and/or
 
stay UniDev's counterclaim and to compel ADR with UniDev. Less
 
than two months later, on August 2, 2010, UniDev filed its Motion
 
21 In particular, the following verbal exchange took place between
UniDev's counsel, Mr. Fritz, and the court:
 
THE COURT: The second level of inquiry I have for the
parties is: In reviewing the development service agreement,
the amended and restated development service agreement, it
would appear to the Court that there are mandatory
alternative dispute resolution provisions that the parties
are required to undertake. And I guess neither party
addressed this in the motion, whether or not the claims are
ripe, absent the parties undertaking to mediate and/or
arbitrate any disputes on the underlying contract.
 
MR. FRITZ: I can answer that, but I have to go outside the
record, and I don't like to do that. But I will represent
to the Court that my client did request mediation on several
occasions and was rebuffed on every single one of them.
 
THE COURT: So why aren't you in court on a motion to –- or a
response to the motion, to require mediation?
 
MR. FRITZ: Because we don't read those provisions as
mandatory. We think they are waiveable. I mean, you know,
we requested mediation. The County refused; cancelled the
project. I think it would be futile to try to attempt a
mediation. It would waste everybody's time.
 
And even when there is an arbitration agreement, a binding
 
arbitration agreement in a contract, the parties are free to
 
disregard it and litigate in court, and that's what the
 parties have chosen to do in this case.
 
(Emphasis added). 
41
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to Compel ADR. On November 23, 2010, the County filed its second
 
complaint in Civil No. 10-1-427K.
 
The ADR Orders did not address waiver. The County
 
asserts that UniDev expressly waived its right to arbitrate on
 
the record on May 24, 2010. Moreover, the County contends that
 
UniDev's actions were inconsistent with any right to arbitrate
 
because UniDev failed to assert any right to arbitrate in its
 
answer, and UniDev also actively litigated by filing its notice
 
of removal, filing the lis pendens, opposing the County's Motion
 
to Expunge Lis Pendens, and participating in discovery. UniDev
 
argues that its actions did not constitute waiver and, moreover,
 
the County failed to show that it was prejudiced by UniDev's
 
actions. 
Waiver is "an intentional relinquishment of a known 
right, a voluntary relinquishment of rights, and the 
relinquishment or refusal to use a right." Fireman's Fund Ins. 
Co., 109 Hawai' i at 354, 126 P.3d at 397 (quoting Daiichi Haw. 
Real Estate Corp. v. Lichter, 103 Hawai' i 325, 346 n.17, 82 P.3d 
411, 432 n.17 (2003)). Due to the public policy encouraging 
arbitration as a means of settling differences, waiver of a 
contractual right to arbitration will not be lightly inferred. 
Rainbow Chevrolet, 78 Hawai' i at 114, 890 P.2d at 701. 
In Ass'n of Owners of Kukui Plaza, the Hawai' i Supreme 
Court held that a party may waive its right to arbitration by 
engaging in conduct "deemed inconsistent with a reliance on the 
contract." 68 Haw. at 109, 705 P.2d at 36. The following year, 
the Hawai' i Supreme Court held that "[t]he failure to make a 
timely assertion of the right to arbitrate constitutes a waiver 
of that right." Moorcroft v. First Ins. Co. of Haw., Ltd., 68 
Haw. 501, 503-04, 720 P.2d 178, 180 (1986). The following 
principles emerged: 
a party may waive its right to arbitration by (1) failing to
assert its right, Moorcroft v. First Ins. Co. of Hawaii,
 Ltd., 68 Haw. 501, 720 P.2d 178 (1986), or (2) taking
 
42
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
actions that are "'completely inconsistent with any reliance
thereon.'" Ass'n of [Owners] of Kukui Plaza v. Swinerton &
 
Walberg Co., 68 Haw. 98, 110, 705 P.2d 28, 36 (1985)
(citation omitted).
 
Rainbow Chevrolet, 78 Hawai' i at 114, 890 P.2d at 701; see also 
Shimote v. Vincent, 80 Hawai' i 96, 100, 905 P.2d 71, 75 (App. 
1995).22 
In addition to the principles set forth in Ass'n of 
Owners of Kukui Plaza, Rainbow Chevrolet, and Shimote, we also 
consider UniDev's argument that the County must show it has 
suffered prejudice from UniDev's conduct. The precise question 
is, given the County's claim that UniDev has waived its 
arbitration rights by engaging in conduct inconsistent with 
arbitration, whether the County must show that it suffered 
prejudice from UniDev's conduct. In Shimote, this court's 
analysis implicitly considered the prejudicial effects on the 
party opposing an untimely assertion of arbitration rights. 80 
Hawai'i at 101, 905 P.2d at 76 (noting that the defendants 
seeking arbitration had actively litigated for six years and their conduct "would easily lead the other parties to believe 
that [defendants] would proceed to trial."). Moreover, public 
policy favors arbitration and the waiver of a right to arbitrate 
will not be lightly inferred. Rainbow Chevrolet, 78 Hawai' i at 
114, 890 P.2d at 701. These considerations suggest that 
prejudice is a relevant factor before there can be a waiver. 
Decisions by other courts considering the issue have
 
concluded that prejudice is a relevant factor for this type of
 
waiver analysis. See e.g., Nev. Gold & Casinos, Inc. v. Am.
 
22 The cases from which these principles emerged were decided when HRS
Chapter 658 was in effect. The statutory framework under HRS Chapter 658
imposed a duty on the circuit court, whether or not any party soughtarbitration, to determine whether issues before it were referable to 
arbitration and to act accordingly pursuant to HRS § 658-5. Rainbow 
Chevrolet, 78 Hawai' i at 113-14, 890 P.2d at 700-01. The current statutory
scheme under HRS Chapter 658A, adopted in 2001, does not impose a similar
burden on the circuit courts. Instead, initiation of arbitration liesdirectly with the parties. 
43
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Heritage, Inc., 110 P.3d 481, 485 (Nev. 2005) ("[A] waiver may be
 
shown when the party seeking to arbitrate (1) knew of his right
 
to arbitrate, (2) acted inconsistently with that right, and
 
(3) prejudiced the other party by his inconsistent acts.");23
 
accord Fisher v. A.G. Becker Paribas Inc., 791 F.2d 691, 694 (9th
 
Cir. 1986); Gen. Star Nat'l Ins. Co. v. Adminstratia Asigurarilor
 de Stat, 289 F.3d 434, 438 (6th Cir. 2002); Com-Tech Assocs. v.
 Computer Assocs. Int'l Inc., 938 F.2d 1574, 1576 (2d Cir. 1991).
 
Moreover, because RUAA § 6 is identical to HRS § 658A­
6, the comments to this section are persuasive. Comment 5 to
 
RUAA § 6 states that "because of the public policy favoring
 
arbitration, a court normally will only find a waiver of a right
 
to arbitrate where a party claiming waiver meets the burden of
 
proving that the waiver has caused prejudice." Therefore, in
 
light of the foregoing, in reviewing the County's assertion that
 
UniDev has waived its arbitration rights by conduct inconsistent
 
with such rights, we consider whether the County has shown that
 
it has been prejudiced by UniDev's conduct.
 
The record indicates that UniDev moved to compel ADR a 
year after first removing the case to federal court and, upon 
remand, approximately five months after filing its answer. The 
parties had engaged in some litigation up to that point, but not 
extensively. Further, although UniDev conducted and responded to 
some discovery, participation in discovery is not completely 
inconsistent with arbitration. Fireman's Fund Ins. Co., 109 
Hawai'i at 354-55, 126 P.3d at 397-98. The discovery engaged in 
by the parties was not substantial. Moreover, the record 
indicates that a few days after UniDev stated it would litigate 
rather than seek arbitration, it contacted the County to inquire 
23 Nevada, like Hawai' i, has adopted the revised Uniform Arbitration Act
(2000). The revised Uniform Arbitration Act (2000) was applicable to Nev. Gold 
& Casinos, Inc. because the arbitration agreement in that case was entered
into after October 1, 2001, the effective date for Nevada's adoption of the
revised Uniform Arbitration Act (2000). See Nev. Rev. Stat. § 38.216. 
44
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
into the possibility of participating in ADR. Less than two
 
months after WWH filed its motion to compel ADR for UniDev's
 
counterclaims against WWH, UniDev filed its motion to compel ADR
 
against the County. As UniDev indicated at oral argument, the
 
circumstances changed when WWH sought to compel part of the case
 
into ADR. Under these circumstances, UniDev's conduct was not
 
inconsistent with its arbitration rights to the point of waiver.
 
Additionally, the County has not met its burden of
 
showing it was prejudiced. The County argues that it will suffer
 
prejudice if it is required to arbitrate because it "will be
 
forced to duplicate its efforts and expend substantial time and
 
resources." However, the possibility that some duplication will
 
result is not prejudicial to the County, especially considering
 
that less than five months elapsed from the time UniDev filed its
 
answer until it filed its Motion to Compel ADR. See Fisher, 791
 
F.2d at 698 (stating that the possibility that there may be some
 
duplication from parallel proceedings is not prejudicial).
 
The County has not demonstrated that UniDev waived its
 
right to arbitrate, including any showing of prejudice resulting
 
from the alleged inconsistent acts of UniDev. Therefore, under
 
these circumstances, we conclude that UniDev did not waive its
 
arbitration rights under the DSA.
 
V. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, as to UniDev's appeal in No.
 
CAAP-10-0000188, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion
 
in expunging UniDev's lis pendens or in denying UniDev's request
 
for reconsideration of the Expungement Order. Therefore, the
 
circuit court's order expunging UniDev's lis pendens, filed
 
September 13, 2010, and its order denying UniDev's motion for
 
reconsideration of the Expungement Order, filed December 1, 2010,
 
are affirmed. 
45
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As to the County's appeal in No. CAAP-11-0000019, we
 
conclude that the circuit court erred in compelling arbitration
 
for all of the County's claims and all of UniDev's counterclaims.
 
The circuit court's orders filed December 17, 2010 and January 3,
 
2011 are affirmed to the extent that they compelled arbitration
 
as to: the County's claim for negligence based on UniDev's duty
 
under the DSA; and UniDev's counterclaim for breach of contract
 
against the County, alleging the County breached the DSA. In all
 
other respects, the orders are vacated.
 
This case is remanded to the circuit court for further
 
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
Paul Alston
 
(Maren L. Calvert and
J. Blaine Rogers with him
on the briefs)
(Alston Hung Floyd & Ing)
for Defendant-Appellant in CAAP-10-0000188
and Defendants-Appellees in CAAP-11-0000019
 
Laureen L. Martin
 
(Joseph K. Kamelamela and
Julie K. Mecklenburg with her
on the briefs)
Deputies Corporation Counsel
for Plaintiff-Appellee in CAAP-10-0000188
and Plaintiff-Appellant in CAAP-11-0000019
 
John R. Lacy
Claire E. Goldberg
(Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel)
on the briefs only
for Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee
Hawaii Island Housing Trust
in CAAP-10-0000188
 
46
