NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000821
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
JENNIFER WAKEFIELD, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
BRIAN BARDELLINI and LAUREN AMPOLOS, Defendants-Appellants
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 16-1-1540)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
Defendants-Appellants Brian Bardellini ( Bardellini ) and
Lauren Ampolos ( Ampolos) (collectively, Appellants ) appeal from
the October 20, 2016 Judgment for Possession, the October 20,
2016 Writ of Possession, and challenge the October 11, 2016 Order
Granting Plaintiff Jennifer Wakefield's Motion for Summary
Judgment ( Order Granting Summary Judgment ), entered in the
District Court of the Second Circuit, Wailuku Division ( District
Court).1 
On appeal, Appellants raise three points of error, all
contending that the District Court erred in granting summary
1The Honorable Adrianne N. Heely presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
judgment in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee Jennifer Wakefield
(Wakefield ) on her summary possession claim.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Appellants' points of error as follows:
The threshold issue in this case is whether Appellants
raised a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Wakefield
was prohibited from evicting them pursuant to Hawaii Revised
Statutes ( HRS) § 521-74(a)(1) (2006).  HRS § 521-74(a) provides,
in relevant part:
 § 521-74 Retaliatory evictions and rent increases
prohibited.   (a) Notwithstanding that the tenant has no
written rental agreement or that it has expired, so long as
the tenant continues to tender the usual rent to the
landlord or proceeds to tender receipts for rent lawfully
withheld, no action or proceeding to recover possession of
the dwelling unit may be maintained against the tenant, nor
shall the landlord otherwise cause the tenant to quit the
dwelling unit involuntarily . . ., after:
(1) The tenant has complained in good faith to the
. . . landlord . . . of conditions in or
affecting the tenant's dwelling unit which
constitutes a violation of a health law or
regulation or of any provision of this chapter;
Here, in opposition to Wakefield's motion for summary
judgment, Bardellini submitted a September 8, 2016 declaration
that included:
3.    I have complained in good faith to the landlord,
Plaintiff herein, on a number of occasions of conditions in
or affecting Defendants dwelling unit.  The conditions
include:  1) dangerous contamination of household drinking
water and associated plumbing, 2) non disclosure of the fact
that there was a pre-existing problem with contamination of
household drinking water that put the health and welfare of
Defendants at risk, 3) the presence of little fire ants on
subject property, 4) the coercion, under threat of eviction
by Plaintiff, into receiving experimental chemicals instead
of known proven effective alternatives, 5) misrepresentation
by Plaintiff that the second "residence" on subject property
was permitted, when in fact, it was not permitted, and
contained dangerous electrical additions, and 6)
misrepresentation by Plaintiff without any consultation with
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
me that Plaintiff was renting out a portion of the same land
allocated and designated for myself and my wife’s use, to
other tenants, while collecting rent and not sharing that
rent with myself and my wife whom had previously received
that same portion of land from Plaintiff for our farm use.
4. Prior to any rent agreement consummated in
January 2015 between Plaintiff/Landlord and
Defendants/Tenants including myself and my wife to permit us
to farm the subject property owned by Plaintiff, without any
disclosure to us by Plaintiff, Plaintiff had entered into an
agreement with MISC [Maui Invasive Species Council] or HAL
[Hawaii Ant Lab] to allow the spraying or pesticide
application on the subject property prior to the first date
of entry of the rental agreement.  Myself and my wife did
not want further spraying of our plants for our own
protection.  Some of the reasons were that: 
a) 75% of the chemicals in the application schedule
specifically state regulations against use of
same on crops,
b) There are numerous natural, biological, and/or
organic controls recognized by the USDA as well
as over 60 years of research and evidence
efficacy,
c) They have refused to provide safety tests when
asked to do so,
d) Myself and my wife have complied with the
present schedule for 15 months and now there are
pests where there previously were no pests thus
confirming a failure to control and eradicate
pests on the subject property,
e) The experiment that constitutes the "efficacy"
for this chemical schedule is now a re-infested
site thus confirming further that the schedule
needs to be re-assessed,
f) When the HDOA asked to monitor the chemical
usage for safety, the eradicators immediately
and permanently discontinued previously labeled
"mandatory" chemicals from their schedule as
opposed to being overseen or monitored for
safety measures, and
g) The applicators have been witnesses [sic]
multiple times and admitted to knowingly
breaching federal safety regulations.
5. Plaintiff's conduct in sending a notice to
vacate was an act of retaliation against myself and my wife
for refusing to allow continued spraying of experimental
and/or toxic chemicals on our plants.  More importantly, at
the time of negotiations of the rental agreement, my wife
and I clearly notified Plaintiff that we were organic
farmers.  Notwithstanding, Plaintiff failed to disclose the
contract to use experimental chemicals and schedules,
knowing full well that myself and my wife were organic
farmers.
6. Had I known or had it been disclosed to me by
Plaintiff, before we secured a rent agreement from Plaintiff
in January 2015, that there was an agreement secured by
Plaintiff that would require spraying of experimental
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
chemicals that are unsafe or untested, or there was the
presence of a toxic contaminant in the drinking water and
plumbing system, myself and my wife would never have entered
into a rent agreement with Plaintiff.
7. Myself and my wife are being unfairly treated by
a landlord whom [sic] was not honest with us at the outset.
When Plaintiff sent a notice to vacate the subject property
within one day after we notified her of our concerns about
our health and safety in not wanting any further spraying of
experimental chemical schedules, Plaintiff without
justification retaliated against myself and my wife. 
8. We have been good tenants and paid on time each
month when the rent is due.  Our action to protect ourselves
in defense of our health and safety, in choosing a vendor of
our own choosing to protect ourselves is the right thing to
do.  Plaintiff should not be allowed to retaliate against us
when we earnestly want to work with the farming community to
uplift our friends, family and community.  Plaintiff's
retaliatory actions should not be rewarded by this Court. 
Appellants' opposition to Wakefield's summary judgment
motion was also accompanied by various exhibits related to the 
complaints identified in Bardellini's declaration.
Appellants' defense of retaliatory eviction is based
primarily on the contention that Wakefield's actions were in
retaliation for Appellants' refusal to allow the spraying of
pesticides on their organic farming products at the leased
property because of health and safety concerns.  Although
Bardellini's declaration identifies other concerns that
Bardellini or Ampolos reportedly raised to Wakefield at some
point during the course of Appellants' tenancy, paragraph 5 of
Bardellini's declaration makes clear that he perceived that
Wakefield retaliated against Appellants in response to
Appellants' refusal to allow the continuation of the pest control
measures instituted by Wakefield.  Thus, we consider whether
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Bardellini's declaration raised a genuine issue of material fact
as to this assertion of prohibited retaliation.
The supreme court recently reiterated how courts must
accord proper weight to a declaration submitted in opposition to
summary judgment:
Pursuant to HRCP Rule 56(e) (2000), affidavits
supporting or opposing a motion for summary judgment "shall
be made on personal knowledge, shall set forth such facts as
would be admissible in evidence, and shall show
affirmatively that the affiant is competent to testify to
the matters stated therein."  Thus, affidavits that state
ultimate or conclusory facts cannot be used in support of or
in opposition to a motion for summary judgment. . . . 
. . . .
HRCP Rule 56(e) provides that affidavits shall set
forth facts based on personal knowledge.  Thus, an affidavit
by its nature includes an affiant's own perception of the
matter. . . . 
HRCP Rule 56(e) does not preclude an affidavit from
being self-serving.  Indeed, . . . "most affidavits
submitted [in response to a summary judgment motion] are
self-serving." . . .  Thus, a party's self-serving
statements that otherwise comply with HRCP Rule 56(e) can be
utilized to defeat summary judgment. . . .  
Additionally, HRCP Rule 56(e) does not require a
statement in an affidavit to be corroborated in order to be
a qualifying affidavit under the rule. . . .  Nor has this
court ever held that an uncorroborated statement by a party
to the litigation is insufficient to raise a dispute as to a
material fact. . . . 
"Conclusory" is defined as "[e]xpressing a factual
inference without stating the underlying facts on which the
inference is based." . . .  An "inference" in turn is "a
conclusion reached by considering other facts and deducing a
logical consequence from them." . . . Thus, when an
assertion in an affidavit expresses an inference without
setting forth the underlying facts on which the conclusion
is based or states a conclusion that is not reasonably drawn
from the underlying facts, the assertion is considered
conclusory and cannot be utilized in support of or against a
motion for summary judgment. . . .  On the other hand, an
inference within an affidavit that is based on stated facts
from which the conclusion may reasonably be drawn is not
conclusory and may be used to support or oppose a motion for
summary judgment. 
To be sure, the underlying facts and the inference
must be based on personal knowledge and otherwise admissible
in evidence.  Inferences that amount to opinions thus must
satisfy relevant evidentiary rules that would apply were the
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
evidence offered through witness testimony.  Lay opinions
must be both "rationally based on the perception of
the"affiant and "helpful to a clear understanding of the
[affiant's] testimony or the determination of a fact in
issue."  An affiant generally may "give an opinion on an
ultimate fact involved in the case" when such an opinion is
properly supported by facts personally perceived.  But the
affiant "may not give opinions on questions of law as that
would amount to legal conclusions." . . .  Indeed, any legal
conclusions drawn by the affiant are not admissible
evidence, regardless of whether they are couched as the
affiant's opinion.  
The statements in Nozawa's declarations that she
always received excellent employment evaluations and that
she was not informed by Soquena of any work performance
issues were specific, factual information personally known
to Nozawa.  As additional support of her assessment
regarding her work performance, Nozawa highlighted that the
termination letter she received stated her discharge was the
result of reorganization—not disciplinary action.  In light
of these statements, Nozawa had a factual basis to
reasonably infer that she did not have work performance
problems and was fully capable of performing her duties at
the time of termination.  To the extent these conclusions
amounted to opinions, they were rationally based on Nozawa's
personal perceptions and may have been helpful to a clear
understanding of her declaration and a fact at issue, i.e.,
whether Local 3's claim that Nozawa was terminated for
deficient performance was a pretext for discrimination. 
Further, the statements did not amount to legal conclusions
because they were essentially factual in nature and did not
attempt to apply a legal standard.  Nozawa did not simply
state, for example, that her termination violated HRS
§ 378-2 or that it was motivated by discriminatory intent,
which would not have been admissible evidence that could be
considered for purposes of summary judgment.  
Because Nozawa did not express a conclusion without
stating the underlying facts or reach a conclusion that was
not reasonably drawn from the underlying facts, . . . these
statements were not conclusory and were in compliance with
HRCP Rule 56(e).  And to the extent that some of Nozawa's
statements were opinions, they were not clearly inadmissible
under governing evidentiary rules.
Accordingly, the circuit court erred in finding
that Nozawa's declarations were not competent evidence under
HRCP Rule 56 because they were self-serving, conclusory, and
uncorroborated.
Nozawa v. Operating Engineers Local Union No. 3, SCWC-14-0000021, 
2018 WL 1918238 at *6-8 (Haw. April 24, 2018) (citations and
footnotes omitted) (designated for publication).
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
We evaluate Bardellini's declaration in this light.
With regard to the pest treatment, Bardellini stated that he
complained in good faith to Wakefield about "the coercion, under
threat of eviction by [Wakefield], into receiving experimental
chemicals instead of known proven effective alternatives."  This
statement is based on Bardellini's personal knowledge of his
complaint to Wakefield and his perception of her response. 
However, Appellants do not cite any authority or otherwise
explain how the experimental nature of a pest control treatment
regime constitutes a violation of a health law or regulation or
of any provision of HRS chapter 521.
Bardellini further stated that "[m]yself and my wife
did not want further spraying of our plants for our own
protection" based on, inter alia, "75% of the chemicals in the
application schedule specifically state regulations against use
of same on crops" and that "[t]he applicators have been witnesses
[sic] multiple times and admitted to knowingly breaching federal
safety regulations."  The latter of these two bases does not
purport to be based on Bardellini's personal knowledge or
observation and reports hearsay admissions of safety regulations
made by unidentified applicators who have not provided sworn
statements to that effect and, thus, does not constitute
admissible evidence that could be considered for the purposes of
summary judgment.  
However, the former of these two bases for refusing
further spraying "for [their] own protection" – that 75% of
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
chemicals in the application schedule specifically state
regulations against use of same on crops – is based on stated
facts from which Bardellini's conclusion (that cessation of
spraying is for his family's protection) may reasonably be drawn
and may be used to oppose a motion for summary judgment.  To be
sure, at a trial or evidentiary hearing, Bardellini would bear
the burden of proving that Wakefield's pesticide application
program "constitutes a violation of a health law or regulation or
of any provision of [HRS chapter 521]" and the underlying facts
upon which Bardellini's perception is based would be subject to
challenge on cross-examination or through submission of evidence
to the contrary.  On a summary judgment motion, however, evidence
is necessarily viewed in the light most favorable to the non-
moving party.  Id. at *10.  Viewing Bardellini's declaration in
the light most favorable to Appellants, there is a genuine issue
as to whether Wakefield's reasons for terminating Appellants'
tenancy was retaliatory, pursuant to HRS § 521-74(a)(1).
Nevertheless, as the District Court and the parties
recognized, HRS § 521-74(b) further states, in relevant part:
(b) Notwithstanding [the retaliatory eviction
provisions of] subsection (a), the landlord may recover
possession of the dwelling unit if:
. . . . 
(2) The landlord seeks in good faith to recover
possession of the dwelling unit for immediate
use as the landlord's own abode or that of the
landlord's immediate family;
. . . .
(7) The landlord is seeking to recover possession on
the basis of a notice to terminate a periodic
tenancy, which notice was given to the tenant
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
previous to the complaint or request of
subsection (a).
Here, the District Court concluded that there was no
genuine issue of material fact that Wakefield established
entitlement to nevertheless recover possession of the property
based on HRS § 521-74(b)(2) & (7).  In support of her summary
judgment motion, Wakefield submitted a declaration that stated,
inter alia :
3. I own 82 Loomis Road, Haiku, Hawaii 96708 (the
"Property").  On December 27, 2014, I signed a lease for the
Property as Landlord with Defendants Brian Bardellini and
Lauren Ampolos as "Tenants". . . .
4. In November 2014, I purchased property located
at 220 Oha #oha Place, Makawao, HI with my then boyfriend,
David Dwelle. . . . 
5. From the purchase of the Makawao Property
onward, I have remained on the Makawao Property.  I am a
single mom, and live on the Makawao Property with my two
minor children.
6.    Mr. Dwelle and I ended our romantic relationship
in January 2016.
7. On April 20, 2016, I received an email from Mr.
Dwelle asking that I vacate the Makawao Property. [Copy
attached.]
8. On April 26, 2016, I sent an email to Defendants
Brian Bardellini and Lauren Ampolos that my relationship
with Mr. Dwelle had ended earlier in the year and that I
needed to move back into the 82 Loomis Road property with my
children. [Copy attached.]
As we did with Bardellini's declaration, we view
Wakefield's declaration in light of the supreme court's guidance
in Nozawa , set forth above.  Wakefield's declaration is based on
her personal knowledge of the termination of her romantic
relationship, her former boyfriend's request that she move out of
their shared home, and her perception of her need to move back
into the subject property.  Wakefield's declaration did not
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
express a conclusion that she needed to move back into the
property without stating the underlying facts or reach a
conclusion that was not reasonably drawn from the underlying
facts.  With her declaration, Wakefield submitted various
documents, including a Joint Tenancy Agreement dated November 15,
2014, in which Wakefield agreed, in essence, that she would move
out if she and Dwelle broke up.  Thus, Wakefield's declaration
was competent evidence supporting her recovery of the property
pursuant to HRS § 521-74(b)(2).
The issue of Wakefield's good faith basis for recovery
of the property for immediate use as her own residence and that
of her children is not addressed in Bardellini's declaration. 
Instead, Appellants point only to various exhibits, including
emails, that were submitted as attachments to their counsel's
declaration.  However, counsel was not a party to those email
conversations, did not assert any basis for claiming personal
knowledge of their authenticity or their content, and Wakefield
objected to their consideration both in the District Court and on
appeal.  We conclude that the purported emails are unsworn and
uncertified, thus plainly inadmissible, and cannot be considered
upon a summary judgment motion.  See Pioneer Mill Co. v. Dow , 90
Hawai#i 289, 297, 978 P.2d 727, 735 (1999) ("Documents that are
plainly inadmissible in evidence and are unsworn, not properly
sworn to, and/or uncertified cannot be considered upon a summary
judgment motion.  Furthermore, unless counsel wishes to
relinquish his or her role as advocate and become a witness in
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the case, an affidavit of counsel swearing to the truth and
accuracy of exhibits does not authenticate exhibits not sworn to
or uncertified by the preparer or custodian of those exhibits.")
(citations omitted).  Accordingly, even viewing the evidence in
the light most favorable to the non-moving party, we conclude
that the District Court did not err in ruling that,
notwithstanding HRS § 521-74(a), there was no genuine issue of
material fact as to Wakefield's entitlement to recover possession
of the subject property pursuant to HRS § 521-74(b)(2).2
For these reasons, the District Court's October 20,
2016 Judgment for Possession and Writ of Possession are affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 22, 2018.
On the briefs:
Keoni K. Agard,
for Defendants-Appellants.Presiding Judge
Jack R. Naiditch,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge
Associate Judge
2Thus, we need not reach the court's ruling as to HRS § 521-
74(b)(7).
11