NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-13-0005595
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JONATHAN HENLEY, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR NO. 13-1-0635)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Jonathan Henley (Henley) with third-degree 
assault. After a jury trial, Henley was found guilty as charged. 
1
The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)  sentenced
Henley to thirty days of imprisonment, increased his bail pending
 appeal from the $200 cash bail posted to $2,000 (cash only), and
 stayed the sentence pending appeal.
 
On appeal, Henley argues that: (1) there was

 
insufficient evidence to support his conviction; (2) the Circuit
 Court abused its discretion in raising his bail pending appeal;
 and (3) the Circuit Court abused its discretion in sentencing him
 to jail for a first offense. We affirm.
 
1The Honorable Patrick W. Border presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
Gary Massey (Massey), the complaining witness, was
 
sixty-eight years old and employed as a security guard at the
 
Colony Surf hotel and condominium (Colony Surf). Henley was
 nineteen years old at the time of the charged offense.
 
Sometime after 10:30 p.m. on November 9, 2012, Massey
 
and police officers responded to noise complaints regarding an
 apartment at the Colony Surf. There were 20 to 25 people in the
 apartment. The police and Massey asked those present to leave
 and cleared the apartment, until only the renter and two others
 remained. At about 12:30 a.m., Massey and the police returned to
 the apartment because the people who had been cleared out had
 returned and were again making noise.
 
Massey escorted Henley and Kalanikapu Copp (Copp) out
 
of the building. According to Massey, Henley directed a "barrage
 of insults" at Massey and called Massey a "fucking faggot haole." 
When they reached the bottom of the stairwell, Massey put his
 hand on the door to hold it open. Henley then head-butted Massey
 above the right eye. Massey felt a great deal of pain. Massey
 fell backward and Henley threw a couple of punches at Massey. 
While Henley stood over Massey, Massey grabbed one of Henley's
 testicles, causing Henley to scream and jump off Massey. During
 the ensuing struggle, Massey was also punched or kicked in the
 head.
 
Henley's and Copp's version of the incident differed
 
from Massey's version. According to Henley and Copp, Massey was
 the aggressor and initiated contact by grabbing Henley's arm. In
 response, Henley shoved Massey, and a struggle ensued during
 which Massey grabbed Henley by the testicles. Copp then
 intervened by punching Massey so that Massey would let go of
 Henley. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
We resolve Henley's arguments on appeal as follows.

 
A.
 
There was sufficient evidence to support Henley's 
conviction. Massey testified that Henley, without provocation, 
head-butted Massey, causing Massey to feel a great deal of pain. Henley's insufficiency argument is based on his and Copp's version of the incident. However, credibility determinations are for the trier of fact, and the jury apparently accepted Massey's testimony in finding Henley guilty. When viewed in the light most favorable to the State, there was sufficient evidence to support the jury's verdict. See State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 
33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998). 
B.
 
Henley's contention that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in raising his bail pending appeal from $200 to $2,000
 cash only is without merit. Henley argues that Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) § 804-4 (2014) does not provide a court with "any
 discretion to increase bail" pending appeal of a misdemeanor
 conviction. In making this argument, Henley plainly misreads HRS
 § 804-4.
 
HRS § 804-4 provides in relevant part: "The right to
 
bail shall continue after conviction of a misdemeanor, petty
 misdemeanor, or violation, and release on bail may continue, in
 the discretion of the court, after conviction of a felony until
 the final determination of any motion for a new trial, appeal,
 habeas corpus, or other proceedings" that challenges the
 defendant's conviction or sentence. The continued right to bail
 pending appeal after conviction for a misdemeanor provided by HRS
 § 804-4 clearly does not mean that the trial court is prohibited
 from changing the amount of bail or the bail conditions pending
 appeal after a conviction for a misdemeanor. Here, the Circuit
 Court did not deny Henley the right to bail pending appeal, but
 exercised its discretion in increasing the amount of his bail.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A defendant who is pending trial and is clothed with
 
the presumption of innocence is in a different position than a
 
defendant who has been adjudged guilty of a crime. A defendant
 who is pending sentencing is also in a different position than 
a defendant who has been sentenced to a term of incarceration. 
In addition, evidence adduced during the trial or sentencing may
 affect the trial court's evaluation of the appropriate bail
 amount and conditions for a defendant. We conclude that the
 Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in raising Henley's
 bail from $200 to $2,000 (cash only) pending his appeal. See HRS
 
§ 804-9 (2014) ("The amount of bail rests in the discretion of
 the justice or judge . . . ."); HRS § 804-6 (2014) ("Unless
 otherwise ordered by the court the bail bond given by any
 defendant prior to the defendant's conviction, shall, in cases
 where bail after conviction is permitted either absolutely or by
 order of the court, be continued as the bail of the defendant
 after conviction, and until the final determination of any
 subsequent proceedings in the cause." (emphasis added)).
 
C.
 
We reject Henley's contention that the Circuit Court 
abused its discretion in sentencing him to thirty days of incarceration. The sentencing court is vested "with wide discretion" in imposing sentence. State v. Rauch, 94 Hawai
'i 
315, 328, 13 P.3d 324, 337 (2000). "The authority of a trial court to select and determine the severity of a penalty is normally undisturbed on review in the absence of an apparent abuse of discretion or unless applicable statutory or constitutional commands have not been observed." State v. 
Cornelio, 84 Hawai
'i 476, 483, 935 P.2d 1021, 1028 (1997) (block 
quote format and citation omitted). 
The evidence showed that Henley assaulted Massey, a
 
sixty-eight-year-old man, by head-butting Massey above the right
 eye and that Henley also threw punches at Massey. We conclude
 that the Circuit Court did not abuse its wide discretion by
 sentencing Henley to thirty days of incarceration.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, January 29, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Shawn A. Luiz 
for Defendant-Appellant
 Chief Judge

Loren J. Thomas Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 Associate Judge

Associate Judge

 
5
 