 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000458 28-JAN-2026 08:10 AM Dkt. 71 OP 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
---o0o---
CAAP-24-0000458 
 
STATE OF HAWAI ‘I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. BRANDY BLAS and THOMAS BLAS, SR., Defendants-Appellees,
and DEBRA GERON, Defendant-Appellant. 
 
AND 
 
CAAP-24-0000667 
 
STATE OF HAWAI ‘I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. BRANDY BLAS, Defendant-Appellant, and
THOMAS BLAS, SR. and DEBRA GERON, Defendants-Appellees. 
 
AND 
 
CAAP-24-0000729 
 
STATE OF 
HAWAI ‘I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. BRANDY BLAS and THOMAS BLAS, SR., Defendants-Appellees,
and DEBRA GERON, Defendant-Appellant
and DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS & REHABILITATION,
Interested Party-Appellee.   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 AND 
 
CAAP-24-0000765 
 
STATE OF HAWAI ‘I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. BRANDY BLAS, Defendant-Appellant,
and THOMAS BLAS, SR. and DEBRA GERON, Defendants-Appellees.
and DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS & REHABILITATION,
Interested Party-Appellee. 
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CPC-24-0000150) 
 
 
JANUARY 28, 2026 
 
 
NAKASONE, CHIEF JUDGE, HIRAOKA AND WADSWORTH, JJ. 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKASONE, CHIEF JUDGE 
This consolidated appeal  involves challenges regarding 
bail and pretrial bail reports by detainees who are held without 
bail (no-bail detainees ). 
Appellants appeal from the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit's ( Circuit Court ) orders denying bail 
and its subsequent order denying their motions for Oahu Intake 
Service Center ( OISC) to prepare pretrial bail reports. 21
1 We consolidated these four bail-related appeals, CAAP-24-458,
24-667, 24-729, and 24-765, which all arise out of the same underlying
criminal case. In that case, Debra Geron ( Geron) and Brandy Blas ( Blas)
(collectively, Appellants ) are co-defendants currently pending trial for the
alleged abuse and subsequent 2024 death of G.B., a ten-year-old foster childin the custody of Blas and her husband, co-defendant Thomas Blas, Sr. Geron is Blas's mother who lived in the same household. Some of the chargesinvolve another foster child, five-year-old A.B., who was also in Blas'scustody during the relevant time period. 
2 The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong presided. 
2   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 While we affirm the Circuit Court's orders in this 
case, we clarify pursuant to State v. Carter, 154 Hawai ʻi 96, 546 
P.3d 1210 (App. 2024), cert. denied, SCWC-23-0000444, 2024 WL 
2786454 (Haw. May 30, 2024), that trial courts may not set bail 
for a no-bail detainee for the purpose of obtaining a pretrial 
bail report, as was suggested by Interested Party-Appellee State 
of Hawaiʻ i Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation 
(Department ) and the OISC in this case. We hold that the Intake 
Service Center ( ISC
) statute, Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 
353-10(b),  unambiguously excludes a no-bail detainee from 43
3 The Department entered an appearance and opposed Appellants'
motions for bail reports below and on appeal. 
4 HRS § 353-10, entitled "Intake service centers," sets forth the
duties of ISCs, which are established under the Department "in each of the
counties to screen, evaluate, and classify the admission of persons tocommunity correctional centers." HRS § 353-10(a) (2015 & 2024 Supp.). HRS §353-10(b)(3) and (b)(9) require ISCs to conduct pretrial risk assessments andprovide pretrial bail reports for "adult offenders," as follows: 
(b) The [ISCs] shall: 
(1) Provide orientation, guidance, and technicalservices; 
(2) Provide social-medical-psychiatric-psychologicaldiagnostic evaluation; 
(3) Conduct internal pretrial risk assessments on
adult offenders within three working days of
admission to a community correctional center;provided that this paragraph shall not apply topersons subject to county or state detainers orholds, persons detained without bail, persons
detained for probation violation, persons facing
revocation of bail or supervised release, andpersons who have had a pretrial risk assessmentcompleted prior to admission to a communitycorrectional center. For purposes of this
paragraph, "pretrial risk assessment" means an
objective, research-based, validated assessmenttool that measures an offender's risk of flight,risk of criminal conduct, and risk of violence orharm to any person or the general public while on
pretrial release pending adjudication. The 
pretrial risk assessment tool and proceduresassociated with its administration shall be 
3   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 periodically reviewed and subject to further
validation at least every five years to evaluate
the effectiveness of the tool and the procedures
associated with its administration. The findingsof periodic reviews shall be publicly reported; 
(4) Provide correctional prescription program planning
and security classification; 
(5) Provide other personal and correctional services
as needed for both detained and committed persons; 
(6) Monitor and record the progress of personsassigned to correctional facilities who undergofurther treatment or who participate in prescribedcorrectional programs; 
(7) Provide continuing supervision and control ofpersons ordered to be placed on pretrialsupervision by the court and persons ordered bythe director; 
(8) Make inquiry with the offender concerning theoffender's financial circumstances and include this information in the bail report; provided that
the department of corrections and rehabilitation's
pretrial services officers shall be providedlimited access for the purpose of viewing otherstate agencies' relevant data related to anoffender's employment wages and taxes; 
(9) Provide pretrial bail reports to the courts onadult offenders, within three working days ofadmission of the offender to a communitycorrectional center, that are ordered by the court
or consented to by the offender. A complete copy
of the executed pretrial risk assessmentdelineating the scored items, the total score, anyadministrative scoring overrides applied, andwritten explanations for administrative scoring
overrides, shall be included in the pretrial bail
report. The pretrial bail reports shall beconfidential and shall not be deemed to be publicrecords. . . . 
(Emphases added.) This opinion addresses only the underscored language atissue here in subsection (b)(3), pertaining to "persons detained withoutbail," whom we refer to as no-bail detainees. We express no opinion as tothe other categories of persons excluded in HRS § 353-10(b)(3). Because pretrial detainees include persons who have not yet been convicted of an
offense, in this opinion we use the term "detainee" instead of the term
"offender," as used in the statute. 
4   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 eligibility for a pretrial risk assessment and bail report 
completed on an expedited  basis "within three working days" of 
the detainee's admission to a community correctional center. HRS § 353-10(b) is silent regarding non-expedited pretrial risk 
assessments and bail reports that are requested for any detainee after the three-day expedited period has passed. We conclude that the provision of a non-expedited pretrial bail report, even for a no-bail detainee, is consistent with the legislative intent of HRS § 353-10(b) to increase opportunities for bail review and for ISCs to fulfill their core responsibility to provide pretrial bail reports to the courts. Because HRS § 353-
10(b) does not prohibit ISCs from providing a non-expedited 
pretrial bail report upon court request for any detainee, a trial court may thus request such a report for any detainee, even one held without bail. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
In CAAP-24-667, Blas appeals from the Circuit Court's 
October 7, 2024 "Order Denying Defendant's Motion for Supervised Release to [OISC] and/or Set Bail" ( Order Denying Blas Bail ). 
In CAAP-24-458, Geron appeals from the Circuit Court's 
June 7, 2024 oral ruling regarding bail, and its December 4, 2024 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Defendant Geron's Motion for Supervised Release or Bail 
Reduction with Conditions of Supervised Release" ( Order Denying 
Geron Bail ).
5 
In CAAP-24-765 (for Blas) and CAAP-24-729 (for Geron), 
Appellants appeal from the Circuit Court's October 12, 2024 
"Order Denying Brandy Blas and Debra Geron's Motions for an 
5 We construe Geron's timely filed Notice of Appeal from the June
7, 2024 oral ruling to include the December 4, 2024 Order Denying Geron Bail.
Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP) Rule 4(b)(4). 
5   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Order Instructing the [OISC] to Prepare and File a Pretrial Bail 
Report" ( Joint Order Denying Pretrial Bail Reports ). 
  Appellants raise the following points of error on appeal: (1) in the Order Denying Blas Bail, Blas challenges the 
Circuit Court's determinations regarding the flight risk presumption, serious risk of obstruction of justice, and serious risk of illegal activity under HRS § 804-3(b) and (c);
  (2) in 
the Order Denying Geron Bail, Geron challenges the Circuit Court's determinations that Geron "did not rebut the presumption that she present[ed] a serious risk" of "illegal activity" and that Geron posed a serious risk of obstruction of justice based 
on a first-degree hindering prosecution charge; and (3) in the 
Joint Order Denying Pretrial Bail Reports, Appellants challenge 
the Circuit Court's conclusion "as a matter of law" that OISC 6
6 HRS § 804-3 (2014 & 2023 Supp.), entitled "Bailable offenses,"
provides for the denial of bail for "serious crime[s]" where any of the
"serious risk[s]" set forth in subsections (b)(1) to (b)(4) are present, and
as relevant here, establishes a "rebuttable presumption" of a serious flight
risk in subsection (c), as follows: 
(b) Any person charged with a criminal offense shall be bailableby sufficient sureties; provided that bail may be denied
where the charge is for a serious crime, and: 
(1) There is a serious risk that the person will flee; 
(2) There is a serious risk that the person will obstructor attempt to obstruct justice, or therefore, injure,
or intimidate, or attempt to thereafter, injure, orintimidate, a prospective witness or juror; 
(3) There is a serious risk that the person poses a dangerto any person or the community; or 
(4) There is a serious risk that the person will engage in
illegal activity. 
(c) Under subsection (b)(1) a rebuttable presumption arises that
there is a serious risk that the person will flee or will notappear as directed by the court where the person is charged
with a criminal offense punishable by imprisonment for life
without possibility of parole. . . . 
6   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 "was not required to prepare a pretrial bail report under [HRS] 
§ 353-10[,]" and the denial of their motions requesting the reports. 
II. BACKGROUND 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai ʻi's (State) February 
14, 2024 19-count grand jury Indictment charged Blas, Geron, and Blas's spouse with various felony and misdemeanor offenses, including second-degree murder against Blas and Geron, and sought enhanced sentencing, based on Appellants' "multiple offender" status if convicted, and due to the "especially 
heinous, atrocious, or cruel" nature of the alleged murder. 
Along with the Indictment, no-bail bench warrants were issued against Blas and Geron. 
The Indictment charged Blas with ten counts, including 
second-degree murder in Count 1; kidnapping in Count 3; conspiracy to commit kidnapping in Count 5; first-degree 
unlawful imprisonment in Count 8; conspiracy to commit first-
degree unlawful imprisonment in Count 10; first-degree endangering the welfare of a minor in Count 13; first-degree hindering prosecution in Count 15; second-degree endangering the welfare of a minor in Count 17; persistent nonsupport in Counts 18 and 19. 
The Indictment charged Geron with six counts, 
including second-degree murder in Count 2; kidnapping in Count 4; conspiracy to commit kidnapping in Count 7; first-degree unlawful imprisonment in Counts 9 and 12; and first-degree hindering prosecution in Count 16. 
Blas's Motion to Set Bail On March 22, 2024, Blas filed a "Motion for Supervised 
Release to [OISC] and/or Set Bail" ( Blas's Motion to Set Bail ). 
At the May 1, 2024 hearing on the motion, the parties stipulated 
7
   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 that Blas did not have a criminal record. Blas testified that 
she was born and raised on O ʻahu; was thirty-six years old; most 
of her family lived on O ʻahu; aside from a single trip as a 
child, she had no personal recollection of leaving O ʻahu
; and she 
did not have a passport. The Circuit Court denied Blas's Motion 
to Set Bail, finding that Blas had been charged with "serious offenses" that qualified for denial of bail under HRS § 804-3(b), and applied the presumption that Blas posed a serious flight risk because she faced a penalty of life imprisonment 
without parole. The Circuit Court found that Blas's testimony 
did not rebut this rebuttable presumption under HRS § 804-3(c). Citing the grand jury's probable cause finding to charge Blas with Hindering in the First Degree and two counts of conspiracy, the Circuit Court also found Blas posed "a serious risk of obstruction" and "a serious risk" of "illegal activity" under 
HRS § 804-3(b). Blas timely appealed the October 7, 2024 Order 
Denying Blas Bail. 
Geron's Motion to Set Bail On May 22, 2024, Geron filed a "Motion for Supervised 
Release or Bail Reduction with Conditions of Supervised Release" (Geron's Motion to Set Bail ).
7 At the June 7, 2024 hearing on 
the motion, Geron's husband, William M. Geron, Sr., testified 
that he and Geron had been married for forty-seven years; Geron 
had "[n]ever been in trouble with the law before"; Geron was afraid of flying and travelling by boat; and Geron possessed 
title to a residence in O ʻahu. Under HRS § 804-3(c), the Circuit 
Court found that although Geron had been charged with crimes 
serious enough to warrant punishment of life imprisonment 
7 Geron's counsel noted that he had incorrectly titled the motion,
which should have read, "motion for supervised release or to set bail." 
8   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 without parole, her husband's testimony rebutted the presumption 
that she presented a serious flight risk. Despite the rebutted flight risk, the Circuit Court nevertheless denied bail because Geron presented "a serious risk of obstructing . . . justice" 
under subsection (b)(2), and "a serious risk" of "illegal 
activity" under subsection (b)(4), because the grand jury found probable cause to charge Geron with Hindering in the First Degree and conspiracy. Geron timely appealed the June 7, 2024 oral ruling for the December 4, 2024 Order Denying Geron Bail. 
Appellants' Motions for Pretrial Bail Reports Geron filed a September 27, 2024 "Motion for Order 
Instructing the [OISC] to Prepare and File a Pretrial Bail Report for Inmate Debra Geron," and Blas filed an October 2, 2024 "Motion for Order Instructing the [OISC] to Prepare and File a Pretrial Bail Report for Defendant Brandy Blas" (collectively, Motions for Pretrial Bail Reports ). Geron's 
motion challenged the Circuit Court's Order Denying Geron Bail 
"without the benefit or detriment of an OISC bail report." 
Blas's motion challenged the Circuit Court's Order Denying Blas Bail "without the benefit of an OISC investigation and pretrial bail report." Both Appellants' motions referred to previously filed letters from OISC ( OISC letters ) in connection with Blas's 
March 22, 2024 Motion to Set Bail, and Geron's May 22, 2024 
Motion to Set Bail, in which the OISC declined to submit 
pretrial bail reports under HRS § 353-10, due to Appellants' no-bail status.
8 
8 The OISC letters for both Blas and Geron stated: 
Pursuant to HRS 353-0010, persons detained without bail are
not eligible for a pretrial risk assessment. 
Should bail be set in this matter the OISC would submit a 
Pretrial Bail Report in response to this motion, however,due to the nature and severity of the instant offenses the 
9   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Appellants' Motions for Pretrial Bail Reports argued 
that ordering the OISC investigation and bail report pursuant to 
HRS § 353-10 "would allow an independent neutral third party to assess [Appellants'] pretrial risk assessment regarding risk of 
flight, risk of criminal conduct, and risk of violence or harm 
to any person or the general public" in the event Appellants were granted pretrial release. Geron also argued: "Geron's Catch 22 is that she cannot get a bail report because she is being held without bail," and in order to properly address issues surrounding the setting of bail, "she would need a bail report, which she cannot get because she is being held without 
bail." 
At the October 7, 2024 hearing on the Motions for 
Pretrial Bail Reports, the Circuit Court orally denied both 
motions, and filed the October 12, 2024 Joint Order Denying Pretrial Bail Reports, which Appellants timely appealed. 
III. JURISDICTION 
Before we turn to Appellants' points of error, we 
address the Department's challenge to this court's jurisdiction over Appellants' appeals in CAAP-24-729 and 24-765 from the Joint Order Denying Pretrial Bail Reports. 
The Department 
argues that this order does not fall within the collateral order exception to the final judgment requirement, and this court 
lacks jurisdiction. The Department claims that a pretrial bail 
report "does not ultimately decide whether a defendant is released on bail" and "does not involve an important right which would be irreparably lost if review had to await final 
OISC would not support any form of release for the
defendant. 
10   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  judgment"; and that these appeals "do[] not resolve an issue 
completely collateral to the merits of this case." 
"The existence of jurisdiction is a question of law 
that we review de novo under the right/wrong standard." 
State
v. Nakanelua, 134 Hawai ʻi 489, 501, 345 P.3d 155, 167 (2015) 
(citation omitted). 
A trial court's order or decision may be 
appealable even in the absence of final judgment under the collateral order exception, if it: "(1) fully disposes of the question at issue; (2) resolves an issue completely collateral to the merits of the case; and (3) involves important rights 
which would be irreparably lost if review had to await a final 
judgment." State v. Nicol, 140 Hawai ʻi 482, 486 n.7, 403 P.3d 
259, 263 n.7 (2017) (citation omitted). Under this exception, a 
denial of a pretrial motion to reduce bail is appealable, even 
in the absence of a final judgment. State v. Johnson, 96 Hawai ʻi 
462, 470 n.12, 32 P.3d 106, 114 n.12 (App. 2001). 
Here, the "question at issue[,]" i.e., whether the 
Circuit Court should have ordered OISC to prepare pretrial bail 
reports for Blas and Geron, is one that can be "fully dispose[d] of" in this appeal even without a final judgment, and is "completely collateral" to the merits of the underlying criminal 
case. See Nicol
, 140 Hawaiʻi at 486 n.7, 403 P.3d at 263 n.7 
(citation omitted). The question at issue concerns the 
statutory eligibility of no-bail detainees for pretrial bail reports under HRS § 353-10 in connection with a bail hearing. The resolution of this question involves "important rights" of pretrial detainees under HRS § 353-10, which would be irreparably lost if review had to await a final judgment in the 
criminal case. 
See id. Accordingly, we conclude we have 
jurisdiction to review Appellants' appeals from the Joint Order 
Denying Pretrial Bail Reports. 
11   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 IV. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
We apply an abuse of discretion standard of review to 
the Circuit Court's pretrial bail decisions. See Carter, 154 
Hawaiʻi at 101, 546 P.3d at 1215 (applying abuse of discretion 
standard of review to a trial court's decisions regarding 
release on bail and the amount of bail). 
We review findings of fact ( FOFs) under a "clearly 
erroneous standard," and conclusions of law ( COLs) "de novo" 
under the right/wrong standard. State v. Rodrigues, 145 
Hawaiʻi 
487, 494, 454 P.3d 428, 435 (2019) (citation omitted). 
"Additionally, a conclusion of law that presents mixed questions 
of fact and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard because the conclusion is dependent upon the facts and circumstances of the particular case." Id. (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
"The interpretation of a statute is reviewed de novo." 
Carter, 154 Hawai ʻi at 101, 546 P.3d at 1215 (citation omitted). 
V. DISCUSSION 
A. The Order Denying Blas Bail was within the Circuit
Court's discretion. 
Blas argues the Circuit Court erred by concluding that 
Blas did not rebut the presumption that she posed a serious 
flight risk, and that Blas presented serious risks of obstruction of justice and engaging in illegal activity, based solely on the charges in the Indictment. 
In the Order Denying Blas Bail, the Circuit Court 
"took judicial notice of the records and files in this case" and ruled as follows: 
1. On February 14, 2024 [Blas] was indicted by an Oahu
Grand Jury on ten (10) different criminal offenses. 
. . . . 
12   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 4. The Court finds that pursuant to [HRS] Section 804-3,
[Blas] is charged with a serious crime. 
5. The Court also notes that the crimes are so serious that the indictment language allows for theimprisonment without the possibility of parole. Thus,there is a presumption that exists as to serious risk
of flight. 
6. The Court finds that [Blas] has not rebutted that
issue. 
7. In addition to being charged with serious offenses, anda risk of flight, the court must also note that thereis a Hindering in the First Degree charge of whichthere is probable cause. 
8. As such, because of that finding, there is a serious
risk of obstruction by [Blas]. Additionally, given the
conspiracy charges, there also exists a serious riskthat [Blas] will engage in illegal activity. 
. . . . 
10. Therefore, the Court finds that [Blas] can and should
be held without bail. 
1. The application of the flight risk presumption
was not clearly erroneous. 
"[T]he bail denial determination under HRS § 804-3(b) 
involves a 'serious crime' determination and an analysis of the 
'serious risk' posed by the defendant." 
Carter, 154 Hawai ‘i at 
103, 546 P.3d at 1217. 
"Under HRS § 804-3(b), a person 'may be 
denied' bail for a 'serious crime' and if the trial court finds 
any of the 'serious risks' in (b)(1) through (b)(4) are present[.]" Id. at 102, 546 P.3d at 1216 (brackets omitted). 
HRS § 804-3(b)(1) sets forth one of the serious risks as "a 
serious risk that the person will flee[.]" HRS § 804-3(c) establishes a "rebuttable presumption" as to the subsection (b)(1) serious flight risk, "where the person is charged with a criminal offense punishable by imprisonment for life without possibility of parole." 
13
   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 Here, the Circuit Court found that the ten counts 
against Blas included "serious crime[s][,]" and the Indictment 
included a penalty of life imprisonment without the possibility of parole. After considering the evidence Blas presented at the 
hearing, the Circuit Court properly applied the serious flight 
risk presumption under HRS § 804-3(b)(1) and (c), and found that Blas "ha[d] not rebutted" the presumption that she was a serious flight risk. On this record, the Circuit Court did not clearly err in its mixed legal and factual determination that the presumption of serious flight risk was not rebutted. See
Rodrigues, 145 Hawai ʻi
 at 494, 454 P.3d at 435. 
2. The determinations of serious risk of 
obstruction and illegal activity were not
clearly erroneous. 
A trial court may deny bail where the defendant is 
charged with a serious crime under HRS § 804-3(a) and there is a 
serious risk under HRS § 804-3(b)(2) or (b)(4), that the 
defendant will obstruct justice or engage in illegal activity. 
Here, the Circuit Court found that Blas presented both a serious risk of obstruction and illegal activity, based on the probable cause determinations supporting the Indictment. 
Blas argues that the "mere existence of conspiracy 
charges" and "mere indictment for Hindering in the First Degree" cannot establish the "serious risk" under HRS § 804-3(b), and 
that "[t]here must be fact-specific demonstrations of risk, not 
generalized suspicions arising from the indictment." Blas does not supply any legal authority for these arguments. 
A grand jury indictment is not just a piece of paper, 
and does not rest on "mere" allegations or "generalized 
suspicions" as Blas contends. Hawaiʻi law requires an indictment 
to be based on probable cause. See Haw. Const. art. I, § 10; HRS §§ 801-1 and 806-7; Hawai ʻi Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 7. 
14   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 "'Probable cause' has been defined as a state of facts as would 
lead a person of ordinary caution or prudence to believe and conscientiously entertain a strong suspicion of the guilt of the 
accused." State v. Taylor, 126 Hawai ʻi 205, 218, 269 P.3d 740, 
753 (2011) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
"[T]o support an indictment, the prosecution must provide evidence of each essential element of the charged offense to the 
grand jury." Id. (citation omitted). The Hawai ʻi Supreme Court 
has described the grand jury as a protective shield against 
unfounded charges and arbitrary action, noting that: 
[the grand jury] functions as a barrier to reckless or
unfounded charges and serves as a shield against arbitraryor oppressive action, by ensuring that serious criminal
accusations will be brought only upon the considered
judgment of a representative body of citizens acting underoath and under judicial instruction and guidance. 
State v. Obrero, 151 Hawai ʻi 472, 482, 517 P.3d 755, 765 (2022) 
(citations modified). Appellants have pointed to no authority 
that precludes trial courts making bail decisions from 
considering the probable cause determinations of a grand jury, which has vetted the serious criminal accusations set forth in 
an indictment. See id.; Taylor, 126 
Hawaiʻi at 218, 269 P.3d at 
753. 
Here, the Circuit Court specifically referenced the 
two conspiracy charges (Counts 5, 10) and hindering prosecution 
charge (Count 15) in the Indictment to determine that Blas presented serious risks of illegal activity and obstruction. The Indictment in Counts 5 and 10 alleged Blas conspired to commit kidnapping and first-degree unlawful imprisonment by concealing the existence of the conspiracy by delaying 
notification to police when she and her co-conspirators found 
the alleged victim unresponsive; providing false information to emergency workers about the alleged victim's condition and 
15   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  circumstances; and deleting text messages between herself and 
co-conspirator Geron. The Indictment also alleged in Count 15 that Blas hindered the prosecution of Geron, by "suppressing, by an act of concealment, alteration, or destruction" physical 
evidence that may have aided in Geron's prosecution. The 
Circuit Court's reliance on the grand jury's probable cause determinations to deny bail for Blas under HRS § 804-3(b)(2) and (b)(4) was not wrong, and its "serious risk" determinations were 
not clearly erroneous. See Rodrigues, 145 Hawai ʻi at 494, 454 
P.3d at 435. 
Accordingly, we conclude the Order Denying Blas Bail 
was within the scope of the Circuit Court's discretion. See
Carter, 154 Hawaiʻi
 at 101, 546 P.3d at 1215. 
B. The Order Denying Geron Bail was within the Circuit
Court's discretion. 
Geron argues that the Circuit Court erred by (1) 
concluding that Geron "did not rebut the presumption that she 
presents a serious risk of engaging in illegal activity[,]"  and 
(2) "determining that a charge of Hindering in the First Degree 
alone justified the finding of a serious risk of obstruction of 
justice."   9
The Circuit Court found that Geron posed a serious 
risk of obstruction under HRS § 804-3(b)(2) in COL 12 of its order, and serious risk of illegal activity under HRS § 804-3(b)(4) in COL 14, as follows: 
12. Here, the Court finds and concludes that [Geron] does
present a serious risk of obstructing or attempting toobstruct justice. The Oahu Grand Jury found probable
cause that [Geron] engaged in the offense of Hindering 
9 Under HRS § 804-3(c), a rebuttable presumption that the defendant
presents a serious risk of engaging in illegal activity arises if thedefendant has a prior conviction for a serious crime involving violence, is
already on bail on a felony charge involving violence, or is on probation orparole for a serious crime involving violence. 
16   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  Prosecution in the First Degree related to the
investigation of this case. . . . There was no evidence
presented at the hearing that [Geron] did not pose a
serious risk of obstructing or attempting to obstructjustice. The Court adopts the probable cause findingby the Oahu Grand Jury as evidence that [Geron] poses aserious risk of obstructing or attempting to obstruct
justice. Cf. State v. Obrero, 151 Hawai ʻi 472, 482,
517 P.3d 755, 765 (2022) (extolling the virtue of a
grand jury as a barrier to "reckless and unfoundedcharges."). The second risk factor of HRS §804-3(b)applies. 
. . . . 
14. Here, the Court finds and concludes that [Geron] does
present a serious risk that she will engage in illegal
activity. 
The Oahu Grand Jury found probable cause
that [Geron] engaged in a conspiracy to commit
Kidnapping and a conspiracy to commit UnlawfulImprisonment in the First Degree. The Oahu Grand Jury
found probable cause that both conspiracies were
committed with two other individuals, and that [Geron]
engaged in overt acts to further the conspiracies.. . . There was no evidence presented at the hearingthat [Geron] does not pose a serious risk of engagingin illegal activity. 
The Court adopts the probable
cause finding by the Oahu Grand Jury as evidence that[Geron] poses a serious risk that she will engage in
illegal activity. Cf. State v. Obrero, 151 Hawai ʻi 
472, 482, 517 P.3d 755, 765 (2022) (extolling the
virtue of a grand jury as a barrier to "reckless and
unfounded charges."). 
The fourth risk factor of HRS§
804-3(b) applies. 
(Emphases added.) 
Geron's first contention that Geron rebutted "the 
presumption that she presents a serious risk of engaging in 
illegal activity" lacks basis because the Circuit Court did not 
apply this presumption. This presumption under HRS § 804-3(c) involves a prior conviction for a crime of violence, or probation, parole, or bail status involving a crime of violence. 
Geron's second challenge is to the Circuit Court's 
determination that she presented a serious risk of obstruction, 
and Geron also appears to challenge the serious risk of illegal 
activity determination. Regarding the latter determination, Geron argues that "[t]he mere existence of conspiracy charges 
17
   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 cannot independently satisfy the requirement to establish a 
'serious risk' under HRS §804-3(b)(4)," and "[t]here must be fact-specific demonstrations of risk, not generalized suspicions arising from the indictment." Geron similarly challenges the 
serious risk of obstruction determination, arguing that "the 
mere indictment for Hindering in the First Degree, absent specific evidence of any action or attempt by Geron to obstruct justice" was insufficient, and that "[n]o substantial evidence" supported the Circuit Court's determination of serious risk of obstruction. Geron cites no legal authority to support these challenges to the Circuit Court's "serious risk" determinations. 
Here, in COLs 12 and 14 set forth above, the Circuit 
Court specifically noted and considered the two conspiracy charges (Counts 7, 12) and hindering prosecution charge (Count 16) in the Indictment to determine that Geron presented serious risks of illegal activity and obstruction. The Indictment, in Counts 7, 12 and 16, contained detailed allegations against 
Geron identical to the allegations against Blas set forth supra. 
The Circuit Court's reliance on the grand jury's probable cause determinations to deny bail for Geron under HRS § 804-3(b)(2) and (b)(4) was not wrong, and its "serious risk" determinations 
were not clearly erroneous. See Rodrigues, 145 
Hawaiʻi at 494, 
454 P.3d at 435. 
Accordingly, we conclude the Order Denying Geron Bail 
was within the scope of the Circuit Court's discretion. See
Carter, 154 Hawai ʻi at 101, 546 P.3d at 1215. 
C. The Joint Order Denying Pretrial Bail Reports was
within the Circuit Court's discretion. 
The Circuit Court made the following findings 
(Findings ) in its Joint Order Denying Pretrial Bail Reports 
explaining why it would not order pretrial bail reports in this 
case: 
18   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2. The Court agrees with counsel, that if the court ordered
the [OISC] to prepare the Pretrial Bail report it would. 
3. The court finds that the [OISC] did not have to prepare
a pretrial bail report for this case. 
4. The Court finds that there were hearings that were
conducted for [Blas] and [Geron] regarding eligibility
for bail. These were evidentiary hearings wherewitnesses were called, testified, and cross examined atlength. During these hearings, the Court vetted all the
circumstances before it to make its decision that 
Defendants [Blas] and [Geron] can and should be heldwithout bail. 
5. The Court finds that a Pretrial Bail Report would not
have any additional information that would have been
relied on by the Court in crafting its decision. 
(Emphases added.) 
Appellants contend the Circuit Court "erred as a 
matter of law in concluding that [OISC] was not required to 
prepare a pretrial bail report under [HRS] §353-10,"  and 
"abused its discretion" by denying the Motions for Pretrial Bail Reports.  The Department counters that Appellants did not meet 
"the statutory requirements necessitating" a pretrial bail report under HRS § 353-10(b)(3) due to their no-bail status. The parties thus disagree as to whether, and under what circumstances, a no-bail detainee is eligible for a pretrial bail report under HRS § 353-10.   10
1. Under Carter, a trial court may not set bail
for a no-bail detainee for the purpose ofobtaining a pretrial bail report. 
We first address the parties' conflicting arguments 
regarding the propriety of a trial court's setting of bail for 
the purpose of obtaining a pretrial bail report for a no-bail 
10 Appellants' characterization of this determination in Finding 3
is inaccurate. Finding 3 does not mention the statute. We address Finding 3
infra. 
19   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 ‘
detainee, which was the method employed by the trial court in 
Carter. 
Appellants argue that "in contrast to the trial 
court's procedure used to obtain a pretrial bail report in 
Carter, [154 Hawai ʻi 96, 546 P.3d 1210], a circuit court has 
jurisdiction to order a pretrial bail report and risk assessment 
without the need for setting a bail amount." 
The Department 
responds that: "If the court wanted to consider bail and wanted a pretrial bail report, the court could have set [a] bail amount and then obtain a pretrial bail report to consider whether Blas 
would be eligible and possibly reduce the bail amount." The 
Department's proffered solution is identical to OISC's position below, see footnote 8 supra, that no pretrial bail report would be prepared because "persons detained without bail are not eligible for a pretrial risk assessment" under HRS § 353-10, but that "OISC would submit a Pretrial Bail Report" for the bail 
motion if bail was set. 
The Department and OISC's suggestions that a trial 
court should set bail for the purpose of obtaining a pretrial 
bail report for a no-bail detainee run afoul of Carter. 154 
Hawaiʻi at 104, 546 P.3d at 1218. 
 In Carter
, the trial court 
found that "no bail conditions could mitigate the non-appearance 
and public safety risks posed by" the defendant but nevertheless 
"set cash bail in the face of such risks" because it understood that "persons detained without bail are not eligible for a pretrial risk assessment." Id. at 98-99, 104, 546 P.3d at 1212-13, 1218. We held that the trial court's setting of $3.3 million bail for an indigent defendant for the purpose of obtaining a pretrial bail report constituted an abuse of 
discretion. Id. at 104, 546 P.3d at 1218. We explained that as 
applied to high-risk defendants like Carter, who was charged 
20   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 with serious crimes and presented serious risks, the 
determination of bail/no-bail is a risk-based analysis pursuant to HRS § 804-3, which is distinct from the financial circumstances analysis used to determine a "reasonable" amount 
of bail under HRS § 804-9. Id. at 101-03, 546 P.3d at 1215-17. 
Blas and Geron, like Carter, are on no-bail status because of the multiple serious risks the Circuit Court determined they presented. 
In Carter, we clarified why the setting of bail for 
such high-risk, no-bail detainees for the purpose of obtaining a bail report contravened applicable statutes. In this case, we 
explain that such an approach is also unnecessary because we 
conclude a trial court may order a pretrial bail report for a no-bail detainee after the first three days of the detainee's admission to the correctional center have passed. 
2. While HRS § 353-10(b) unambiguously excludes
no-bail detainees from eligibility for
expedited pretrial risk assessments and
pretrial bail reports, the statute's silenceregarding non-expedited pretrial risk
assessments and bail reports for any detainee
creates an ambiguity. 
Appellants acknowledge that HRS § 353-10(b)(3)'s 
requirement that OISC conduct an expedited pretrial risk 
assessment "shall not apply to" certain categories of detainees, 
including "persons detained without bail," such as Appellants. Appellants argue, however, that "[t]here was nothing precluding or excluding the circuit court from ordering a pretrial risk assessment and pretrial bail report at any time thereafter  or 
upon a motion for supervised release or the setting of bail." 
(Emphasis added.) 
The Department disagrees, on grounds that: "[t]he 
statute clearly carves out an exception that a pretrial risk 
21
   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 assessment does not need to be completed if a person is being 
detained without bail[,]" and "even though [Appellants] w[ere] requesting a pretrial bail report rather than a pretrial risk assessment, the bail report should be denied because the bail 
report contains a complete copy of the risk assessment which 
does not need to be provided since [Appellants are] being detained without bail." 
As explained below, we find persuasive Appellants' 
argument that after the initial expedited period has passed, "nothing" precludes the trial court "from ordering a pretrial risk assessment and pretrial bail report at any time 
thereafter." 
We are guided by the following principles of statutory 
construction: 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.Second, where the statutory language is plain andunambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plainand obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task of
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to
ascertain and give effect to the intention of thelegislature, which is to be obtained primarily from thelanguage contained in the statute itself. Fourth, wherethere is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctivenessor uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an
ambiguity exists. 
Carter, 154 Hawai ʻi at 101, 546 P.3d at 1215 (citation omitted). 
HRS § 353-10(b)(3) and (b)(9) address pretrial bail 
reports and pretrial risk assessments that are completed on an 
expedited basis. HRS § 353-10(b)(3)'s language that "this 
paragraph shall not apply to . . . persons detained without 
bail" unambiguously provides that certain categories of detainees, including the no-bail detainees at issue here, are excluded from the expedited pretrial risk assessment 
22
   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
 
  requirement. Thus, ISCs are not required to conduct expedited 
pretrial risk assessments for no-bail detainees. 
HRS § 353-10(b)(9) similarly provides that ISCs must 
provide expedited pretrial bail reports "to the courts" within 
three working days of the detainee's admission, and requires a 
"complete copy of the executed pretrial risk assessment" to "be included in the pretrial bail report." Reading both subsections (b)(3) and (b)(9) together, ISCs are thus not required to provide expedited pretrial bail reports to the courts for no-bail detainees, because no expedited pretrial risk assessments for mandatory inclusion in a pretrial bail report are conducted 
for such detainees. This means that no-bail detainees are 
ineligible for an expedited pretrial bail report. Therefore, under a plain reading of HRS § 353-10(b)(3) and (b)(9), no-bail detainees are unambiguously excluded from, and ineligible for, expedited pretrial risk assessments and pretrial bail reports. 
HRS § 353-10(b) does not address pretrial risk 
assessments and pretrial bail reports that may be requested after the three-day expedited period has passed. 
The statute 
does not expressly permit or preclude non-expedited pretrial bail reports. Despite the statutory silence regarding non-expedited pretrial bail reports, the parties in this case do not dispute OISC's general practice of providing such reports.
11 
Rather, Appellants and the Department specifically disagree on whether a no-bail detainee is eligible for any pretrial bail 
11 In the instant case, OISC refused to submit pretrial bail reports
for Appellants in letters filed on March 28, 2024 and May 30, 2024, more than
three working days after Appellants were arrested on February 16, 2024. In 
those letters, sent during the non-expedited time frame, OISC's refusals toprovide pretrial bail reports were based on Appellants' no-bail status, notbecause the expedited period had passed. OISC also offered to prepare bailreports if bail were set, which indicated that its refusal was not based on
the expiration of the three-working-day expedited period, and that OISC was
in agreement with the practice of providing non-expedited pretrial bailreports generally. 
23   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  report under HRS § 353-10(b). Appellants argue that the no-bail 
detainees' ineligibility for pretrial bail reports is based on timing, i.e., that the ineligibility is limited to the three-day expedited period only, and no-bail detainees are eligible 
thereafter. On the other hand, the Department argues that no-
bail detainees are permanently ineligible for pretrial bail reports based on their status as no-bail detainees. 
The ISC statute's silence regarding non-expedited 
pretrial risk assessments and bail reports renders it ambiguous. 
See Carter, 154 
Hawaiʻi at 101, 546 P.3d at 1215. "[C]ourts may 
resort to extrinsic aids in determining legislative intent[,]" 
and "[o]ne avenue is the use of legislative history as an 
interpretive tool." Hilo Bay Marina, LLC v. State, 156 
Hawaiʻi 
478, 488, 575 P.3d 568, 578 (2025) (citation omitted). We thus 
look to the legislative history of HRS § 353-10 to aid our interpretation. 
3. The legislative history of HRS § 353-10 and
related statutes reflects the legislature's
intent to provide increased opportunities for
bail review and its designation of ISCs' "core
responsibility" as the preparation of pretrial
bail reports. 
HRS § 353-10 has been amended numerous times since its 
original enactment in 1987. The amendments material to the 
issues here, regarding ISCs' preparation of pretrial bail 
reports generally, and the ineligibility of no-bail detainees for expedited pretrial risk assessments and expedited pretrial bail reports, were made in 2012 Act 141, 2012 Act 139, 2013 Act 67, and 2019 Act 179. We discuss each of these Acts below. 
2012 Act 141 (effective July 1, 2012) 
The 2012 legislature made two amendments to the ISC 
statute, set forth in Act 141 and Act 139. 
The first one, Act 
141, amended subsection (3) by removing "presentence 
24   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
    
 
 
 
 
 assessments" to focus ISCs on providing "pretrial assessments," 
and added a new section for ISCs' "pretrial supervision" of persons who were released, as follows: 
§353-10 Reentry intake service centers . . . . 
The centers shall: 
. . . . 
(3) Provide pretrial assessments on adult offenders
[for the courts and assist in the conduct of presentence assessments on adult offenders and
the preparation of presentence reports when
requested by the courts;] that are consented toby the defendant or that are ordered by the
court; 
. . . . 
(11) Provide continuing supervision and control of
persons ordered to be placed on pretrial
supervision by the court and persons ordered by
the director." 
2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 141, § 1 at 507-08 (strikethroughs, 
underscoring, and brackets in original). The legislature indicated that: "The purpose of this measure is to define how pre-trial bail assessments are initiated, and to provide 
statutory authority to the [Department] to supervise pre-trial 
persons ordered released from custody by the courts." H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 603-12, in 2012 House Journal, at 1176. 
As relevant here, this version of the statute did not 
exclude any categories of detainees from pretrial assessments; contained no expedited deadlines for the pretrial assessments; 
and did not reference pretrial bail reports at all. 
2012 Act 139 (effective January 1, 2013) 
The second amendment to the ISC statute the 2012 
legislature made was set forth in Act 139, which added sections 
(a) and (b) to HRS § 353-10. Section (3) became subsection (b)(3), which the legislature modified by specifying "internal 
25
   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 pretrial risk assessments," defining "pretrial risk assessment," 
adding expediting language for pretrial risk assessments, and excluding certain categories of detainees from expedited pretrial risk assessments, as follows: 
§353-10 Reentry intake service centers . (a) There
shall be within the department of public safety, a reentry
intake service center for adults in each of the counties 
. . . . 
(b) The centers shall: 
. . . . 
(3) [Provide] Conduct internal pretrial risk
assessments on adult offenders [for the courts 
and assist in the conduct of presentence
assessments on adult offenders and the preparation of presentence reports whenrequested by the courts;] within three workingdays of admission to a community correctional
center which shall then be provided to the
court for its consideration; provided that thisparagraph shall not apply to persons subject tocounty or state detainers, holds, or personsdetained without bail, persons detained for
probation violation, persons facing revocation
of bail or supervised release, and persons whohave had a pretrial risk assessment completedprior to admission to a community correctionalcenter. For purposes of this paragraph,
"pretrial risk assessment" means an objective,
research-based, validated assessment tool thatmeasures a defendant's risk of flight and riskof criminal conduct while on pretrial releasepending adjudication; 
. . . . 
2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 139, § 3 at 500-01 (strikethroughs, 
underscoring, and brackets in original). 
The policy rationale for imposing a three-working-day 
deadline was rooted in the legislature's finding that " Hawai iʻ's 
pre-trial process is one of the longest in the nation[,]" taking "several months on average," in contrast to bail review occurring in "just days or a few weeks in other jurisdictions," 
26   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 resulting in "millions of dollars spent needlessly on a growing 
pretrial population[.]" S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2146, in 2012 Senate Journal, at 876. As the legislature stated, 
[t]he pretrial [detainee] population has increased due to
longer lengths of stay. The purpose of this [amendment] isto require that an objective assessment be conducted withinthe first three working days of a person's commitment to a
community correctional center to allow the courts to more
quickly exercise discretion in determining whether torelease a pre-trial offender. 
2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 139, § 2 at 500 (emphasis added). More 
generally, the legislature indicated that its intent was to, inter alia, "reduce costly inefficiencies" in the "pretrial 
process," promote "more effective public safety strategies[,]" 
and reduce the "pretrial population" by requiring expedited assessments for quicker bail review by the courts. 2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 139, §§ 1-2 at 500. 
As relevant here, this amendment made expedited 
pretrial risk assessments a requirement, and at the same time, 
excluded no-bail detainees from this new requirement. Id.
2013 Act 67 (effective July 1, 2013) 
The 2013 legislature again amended HRS § 353-10 in Act 
67 Section 1, adding a new subsection (b)(8),
12 requiring ISCs to 
provide pretrial bail reports, as follows: 
(b) The centers shall: 
. . . . 
(3) [[(A)] Provide pretrial assessments on adult
offenders that are consented to by thedefendant or that are ordered by the court; and
[(B)]] Conduct internal pretrial risk
assessments on adult offenders within three working days of admission to a communitycorrectional center which shall then be provided to the court for its consideration; 
12 Now subsection (b)(9). Haw. Sess. Laws Act 179, § 13 at 581. 
27   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 provided that this paragraph shall not apply to
persons subject to county or state detainers,
holds, or persons detained without bail,
persons detained for probation violation,persons facing revocation of bail or supervisedrelease, and persons who have had a pretrialrisk assessment completed prior to admission to
a community correctional center. For purposes
of this [[]subparagraph[]], "pretrial riskassessment" means an objective, research-based,validated assessment tool that measures a defendant's risk of flight and risk of criminal
conduct while on pretrial release pending
adjudication; 
. . . . 
(8) Provide pretrial bail reports to the courts on
adult offenders that are consented to by the
defendant or that are ordered by the court.The pretrial bail reports shall be confidentialand shall not be deemed to be public records.A copy of a pretrial bail report shall be
provided only: 
(A) To the defendant or defendant's counsel; 
(B) To the prosecuting attorney; 
(C) To the department of public safety; 
(D) To any psychiatrist, psychologist, or
other treatment practitioner who istreating the defendant pursuant to a
court order; 
(E) Upon request, to the adult client
services branch; and 
(F) In accordance with applicable laws,persons, or entities doing research. 
2013 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 67, § 1 at 124-25 (strikethroughs, 
underscoring, and brackets in original). The legislature 
indicated "[t]he purpose and intent of this measure" was to "[r]equire [ISC]s to provide pretrial bail reports to the courts on adult offenders that are consented to by the defendant or that are ordered by the court"; and to "[p]rovide statutory authority to the courts to treat information contained in the 
28
   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
     
  
 
  pretrial bail reports as confidential[.]" S. Stand. Comm. Rep. 
No. 338, in 2013 Senate Journal, at 1022. Through various committee reports, the legislature emphasized that the ISCs' raison d'être, or "core responsibility," was to provide pretrial 
bail reports to enable courts to "receive detailed information, 
such as the defendant's medical, mental health, and substance abuse history, to assist with pretrial release decision-making." S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 338, in 2013 Senate Journal, at 1022; see also S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 536, in 2013 Senate Journal, at 1120 (identifying ISCs' "core responsibility in providing bail reports to the court"); H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1195, in 
2013 House Journal, at 1337 (clarifying ISCs' "core 
responsibility" as providing "pretrial bail reports . . . to the courts"); H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1572, in 2013 House Journal, at 1458 (same). 
 
As relevant here, the 2013 amendments reflected the 
legislature's designation of ISCs' "core responsibility" as the 
preparation of pretrial bail reports, but did not contain any 
expediting language for such pretrial bail reports or mandate the inclusion of a pretrial risk assessment in the pretrial bail report. 
2019 Act 179 (effective January 1, 2020) 
The 2019 legislature amended HRS § 353-10 to its 
current iteration,
13 by clarifying in subsections (b)(8) and 
(b)(9) that a pretrial bail report must include the pretrial risk assessment, as well as information regarding a detainee's "financial circumstances." 2019 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 179, § 13 at 581. The 2019 Amendments made subsection (b)(9) (regarding pretrial bail reports) consistent with (b)(3) (regarding 
13 HRS § 353-10 was amended again in 2022, but the changes were non-
substantive. 2022 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 278, § 29 at 793. 
29   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 pretrial risk assessments) by adding the expediting language for 
pretrial bail reports, as follows: 
(b) The centers shall: 
. . . . 
(3) Conduct internal pretrial risk assessments on
adult offenders within three working days ofadmission to a community correctional center[
which shall then be provided to the court for
its consideration]; provided that this
paragraph shall not apply to persons subject to
county or state detainers[,] or holds, [or]persons detained without bail, persons detainedfor probation violation, persons facingrevocation of bail or supervised release, and
persons who have had a pretrial risk assessment
completed prior to admission to a communitycorrectional center. For purposes of this[[]paragraph[]], "pretrial risk assessment"means an objective, research-based, validated
assessment tool that measures [a defendant's]
an offender's risk of flight, [and] risk ofcriminal conduct, and risk of violence or harmto any person or the general public while onpretrial release pending adjudication[;]. . . . 
. . . . 
(8) Make inquiry with the offender concerning theoffender's financial circumstances and include 
this information in the bail report; provided
that the department of public safety's pretrialservices officers shall be provided limitedaccess for the purpose of viewing other stateagencies' relevant data related to an
offender's employment wages and taxes; 
[
(8)] (9) Provide pretrial bail reports to the courts
on adult offenders, within three working daysof admission of the offender to a community
correctional center, that are [consented to bythe defendant or that are] ordered by thecourt[.] or consented to by the offender. A complete copy of the executed pretrial risk
assessment delineating the scored items, the
total score, any administrative scoringoverrides applied, and written explanations foradministrative scoring overrides, shall beincluded in the pretrial bail report. The 
pretrial bail reports shall be confidential and
shall not be deemed to be public records. . . . 
30   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 Id. at 580-81 (strikethroughs, underscoring, and brackets in 
original). 
The 2019 amendments were in response to a 2018 Hawai ʻi  
State Judiciary Criminal Pretrial Task Force report that 
recommended "legislation and revisions to criminal pretrial 
practices and procedures to increase public safety while maximizing pretrial release of those who do not pose a danger or a flight risk[.]" 2019 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 179, § 11 at 579; 
Hawaiʻi State Judiciary, Hawai ʻi Criminal Pretrial Reform: 
Recommendations of the Criminal Pretrial Task Force to the 
Thirtieth Legislature of the State of Hawai ʻi (2018). The 
legislature's purpose for these amendments to HRS § 353-10 was 
"to improve clarity and consistency in the criminal pretrial system" by requiring ISCs to "[c]onduct pretrial risk assessments and prepare bail reports within three working days 
of the offender's admission"; "[i]nquire and report on the 
offender's financial circumstances"; and "[i]nclude the fully executed pretrial risk assessment as part of the bail report[.]" 2019 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 179, § 12 at 580. 
Two additional related statutes, establishing an 
expedited bail hearing and mandating periodic bail reviews, were also enacted in Act 179, reflecting the legislature's intent to 
provide increased opportunities for bail review. See HRS § 1-16 
(2009) (providing that "[l]aws in pari materia, or upon the same subject matter, shall be construed with reference to each other" and that "[w]hat is clear in one statute may be called in aid to explain what is doubtful in another"). 
The first related 
statute, HRS § 804-7.5, established a new statutory right to a 
"prompt" bail hearing, defining "prompt hearing" as one "that 
occurs at the time of the defendant's arraignment, or as soon as 
31   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 practicable."  2019 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 179, § 15 at 582. The 
second related statute, HRS § 353-6.2, set forth a new mandate 
for community correctional centers to conduct "periodic reviews of pretrial detainees" ( periodic bail review ) at least once 
"every three months" to "reassess" a detainee's bail status by reviewing "whether new information or a change in circumstances" warranted reconsideration of such status; to transmit the periodic bail review report to the court and counsels; and for a court hearing to be conducted on any motion to modify bail filed pursuant to a periodic bail review report.  2019 Haw. Sess. 
1514
14 HRS § 804-7.5(b) (2014 & 2024 Supp.), entitled "Right to a prompt
hearing; release or detention," provides for a prompt bail hearing, as
follows: 
(b) Upon formal charge and detention, a defendant shall have the
right to a prompt hearing concerning: 
(1) Release or detention; and 
(2) Whether any condition or combination of conditions willreasonably ensure: 
(A) The defendant's appearance as required; and 
(B) The safety of any other person and the community. 
(c) At the hearing, the defendant shall have the right to be
represented by counsel . . . . The defendant shall beafforded an opportunity to testify at the hearing. The 
defendant and the prosecution shall both be afforded an
opportunity to present information by proffer or otherwise. 
(d) The rules concerning the admissibility of evidence incriminal trials shall not apply to the presentation and
consideration of information at the hearing. 
(e) The defendant may be detained pending completion of the
hearing. 
15 HRS § 353-6.2 (2015 & 2024 Supp.), entitled "Community
correctional centers; periodic reviews of pretrial detainees," provides: 
(a) The relevant community correctional centers, on aperiodic basis but no less frequently than every three
months, shall conduct reviews of pretrial detainees to
reassess whether a detainee should remain in custody orwhether new information or a change in circumstances 
32   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Laws Act 179, § 22 at 585. The legislature's purpose for 
mandatory periodic bail reviews was "to afford pretrial detainees greater and continuing opportunities to be released" by requiring "regular reviews . . . to identify pretrial 
defendants who may be appropriate for pretrial release or 
supervision[,]" and "[p]roviding the results of these reviews to the courts who may then consider modifying the previously issued bail order." 2019 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 179, § 21 at 585. The legislature indicated the 2019 amendments were enacted to "[s]upport best practices for an effective correctional system" and to "[i]mplement certain recommendations" of the Criminal 
Pretrial Task Force. 
Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 149, in 2019 Senate 
Journal, at 883, 2019 House Journal, at 1609. 
The legislative history of HRS § 353-10(b) set forth 
above reflects the legislature's desire to facilitate the 
efficient and safe reduction of the pretrial detainee population and ease the chronic overcrowding in community correctional 
centers. The legislature designated the preparation of pretrial 
bail reports as the ISCs' "core responsibility," which would aid the courts in their bail review. See, e.g., S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 338, in 2013 Senate Journal, at 1022. 
4. HRS § 353-10(b) does not prohibit ISCs from
conducting non-expedited pretrial risk
assessments and providing non-expedited 
warrants reconsideration of a detainee's pretrial
release or supervision. 
(b) For each review conducted pursuant to subsection (a),the relevant community correctional center shall
transmit its findings and recommendations by
correspondence or electronically to the appropriatecourt, prosecuting attorney, and defense counsel. 
(c) If a motion to modify bail is filed pursuant to a
recommendation made pursuant to subsection (b), a hearing
shall be scheduled at which the court shall consider the motion. 
33   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   pretrial bail reports to the courts for any
detainee, even one held without bail, upon
court request. 
The legislature intended to support increased 
opportunities for bail review -- at the beginning of a 
detainee's admission to a community center, by requiring 
expedited pretrial bail reports that would be prepared in time for the prompt bail hearing under HRS §§ 353-10(b) and 804-7.5 -- and continuing throughout a detainee's stay at the center, by mandatory periodic bail reviews for each pretrial detainee at least once every three months, with transmission of those reports to the trial court and counsels under HRS § 353-6.2. 
When reading HRS § 353-10(b) together with the periodic bail 
review mandated by HRS § 353-6.2 (requiring county correctional centers to conduct three-month reviews of all pretrial detainees without an exception for no-bail detainees), the ISC statute does not prohibit an ISC from conducting a non-expedited pretrial risk assessment or from preparing a non-expedited 
pretrial bail report upon court request, even for a no-bail 
detainee. See HRS § 1-16. 
To read HRS § 353-10(b) as disallowing non-expedited 
pretrial risk assessments and pretrial bail reports, where such specific prohibitory language is not found in the statute, would contravene the legislature's intent. 
We must avoid statutory 
interpretation that is "inconsistent, contradictory, and 
illogical." Moranz v. Harbor Mall, LLC, 150 Hawaiʻi 387, 398, 
502 P.3d 488, 499 (2022) (citation modified). A pretrial 
detainee's personal circumstances, whether familial, financial, or legal, may change during their detention awaiting trial. New information pertinent to their bail status may arise. Such new 
information or changed circumstances warrant informed bail 
review, aided by a pretrial bail report provided by the ISC. 
34   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  The ISC's provision of a non-expedited pretrial bail report, 
even for a no-bail detainee, is consistent with the legislature's intent to provide increased opportunities for bail review and for the ISC to fulfill its core responsibility of 
providing pretrial bail reports to the courts. Accordingly, we 
conclude that a trial court may request a non-expedited pretrial bail report for any detainee, even one held without bail. 
5. The Circuit Court's decision to not order 
pretrial bail reports under the circumstances
of this case was within the scope of itsdiscretion. 
Finally, we address Appellants' challenges to Finding 
3, in which the Circuit Court stated that OISC "did not have to 
prepare a pretrial bail report for this case[,]" and their contention that OISC was required, even without a court order, to automatically prepare a pretrial bail report "upon the filing 
of a bail motion." 
Appellants' argument that OISC is required to 
automatically prepare a pretrial bail report whenever a bail 
motion is filed "regardless of a court order[,]" is not supported by Carter, the sole legal authority upon which Appellants rely. 
Under HRS § 353-10, only expedited pretrial 
bail reports are automatically prepared by ISCs regardless of 
whether a motion is filed. We have already explained supra, 
that trial courts may request non-expedited pretrial bail reports to aid in their bail review, even for no-bail detainees. 
Here, Finding 3 (that OISC "did not have to prepare a 
pretrial bail report") must be viewed in context with Finding 2 preceding it, and Findings 4 and 5 that follow it. The Circuit 
Court acknowledged in Finding 2 that while it possessed the 
authority to order OISC to prepare pretrial bail reports, the Circuit Court declined to do so in Finding 3, finding that OISC 
35
   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  "did not have to prepare a pretrial bail report for this case." 
The Circuit Court then explained in Findings 4 and 5 why it elected not to order pretrial bail reports, citing the prior evidentiary bail hearings it had already conducted, during which 
the court "vetted all the circumstances" and "witnesses were 
called, testified, and cross examined at length." See Finding 4. Appellants' Motions for Pretrial Bail Reports did not present new information regarding their personal, familial, financial, or legal circumstances warranting another bail review, for which a non-expedited pretrial bail report would be useful. Under these specific circumstances, we conclude the 
Circuit Court's factual determination in Finding 5, that "a 
Pretrial Bail Report would not have any additional information that would have been relied on by the Court in crafting its decision" to deny bail, was not clearly erroneous. See
Rodrigues, 145 Hawai ʻi at 494, 454 P.3d at 435. 
Accordingly, we conclude the Joint Order Denying 
Pretrial Bail Reports was within the scope of the Circuit Court's discretion. See Carter, 154 Hawai ʻi at 101, 546 P.3d at 
1215. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the October 7, 
2024 Order Denying Blas Bail; the December 4, 2024 Order Denying 
Geron Bail; and the October 12, 2024 Joint Order Denying Pretrial Bail Reports, all filed by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit. 
36
   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
    
  
 
   
 On the briefs: 
 Walter J. Rodby,
for Defendant-Appellant
Debra Geron 
in CAAP-24-458 and CAAP-24-729 
 
Harrison L. Kiehm,
for Defendant-AppellantBrandy Blas
in CAAP-24-667 and CAAP-24-765 
 
Loren J. Thomas,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
State of Hawai ‘i 
in CAAP-24-458 and CAAP-24-667 
 
Brenton A. Inouye,
Deputy Attorney General
for Interested Party-Appellee
State of Hawai ‘i Department of
Corrections & Rehabilitation 
in CAAP-24-729 and CAAP-24-765 /s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Chief Judge 
 
/s/ Keith K. HiraokaAssociate Judge 
 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
37
 