NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0006069
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
BANK OF AMERICA, N.A., SUCCESSOR BY MERGER TO
BAC HOME LOANS SERVICING, LP FKA COUNTRYWIDE

HOME LOANS SERVICING LP, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CHARITO LABRADOR HERMANO, Defendant-Appellant, and
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; DOE ENTITIES 1-50; and DOE
GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0276)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Charito Labrador Hermano (Hermano)
 
appeals from the November 14, 2013 Judgment (Judgment), entered
 
in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee Bank of America, N.A., Successor
 
by Merger to BAC Home Loans Servicing, LP fka Countrywide Home
 Loans Servicing LP (the Bank or Bank of America), by the Circuit
 
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1
 
1
 The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Hermano raises the following points of error on appeal:
 
(1) The Circuit Court erred when it dismissed Hermano's
 
counterclaim;
 
(2) The Circuit Court erred when it granted the Bank's
 
motion for summary judgment and entered the interlocutory decree
 of foreclosure in its November 14, 2013 Findings of Fact,
 Conclusions of Law, Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary
 Judgment Against All Parties and for Decree of Interlocutory
 Foreclosure (FOFs, COLs, and Order);
 
(3) The Circuit Court erred when it entered a judgment
 
of foreclosure based on the FOFs, COLs, and Order; and
 
(4) The Circuit Court made erroneous FOFs and COLs.
 Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Hermano's points of error as follows: 
(1) Hermano argues that the Circuit Court erred in 
dismissing Hermano's Counterclaim because the Counterclaim satisfies the pleading requirements of Hawai
'i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 12(b)(6) "for the simple reason that if 
[she] proves the facts alleged and asserted in her counterclaim 
. . . , she will be entitled to relief." To satisfy Rule 8(a)(1), a pleading 
must contain either direct allegations on every material
point necessary to sustain a recovery on any legal theory,
even though it may not be the theory suggested or intended
by the pleader, or contain allegations from which an
inference fairly may be drawn that evidence on these
material points will be introduced at trial.
 
2
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Marsland v. Pang , 5 Haw. App. 463, 475, 701 P.2d 175, 186 (1985)
 
(quoting 5 Wright and Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure:
 
Civil § 1216, at 121-23 (1969)). Inadequate pleadings may be
 dismissed by motion under HRCP Rule 12(b)(6), however,
 
"[a] complaint should not be dismissed for failure to state
a claim unless it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiffcan prove no set of facts in support of his or her claimthat would entitle him or her to relief." In re Estate of 
Rogers, 103 Hawai' i 275, 280, 81 P.3d 1190, 1195 (2003)
(block quote format and citation omitted). "[O]urconsideration is strictly limited to the allegations of thecomplaint, and we must deem those allegations to be true."Id. at 281, 81 P.3d at 1196 (block quote format and citationomitted). 
"However, in weighing the allegations of the complaint
as against a motion to dismiss, the court is not required to
accept conclusory allegations on the legal effect of the
events alleged." 
Marsland v. Pang , 5 Haw. App. 463, 474,
701 P.2d 175, 186 (1985).
 
While a complaint attacked by a Rule 12(b)(6) motion

to dismiss does not need detailed factual allegations,
a plaintiff's obligation to provide the "grounds" of
his "entitlement to relief" requires more than labels
and conclusions, and a formulaic recitation of the
elements of a cause of action will not do. Factual
 allegations must be enough to raise a right to relief
above the speculative level on the assumption that all
of the complaint's allegations are true (even if
doubtful in fact).
 
Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 555 (2007)[.
]
 
Pavsek v. Sandvold, 127 Hawai 'i 390, 402-03, 279 P.3d 55, 67-68 
(App. 2012). 
Hermano explains the legal theory underlying her
 
Counterclaim as follows:
 
[The Bank] could not own the mortgage and the note because
they were securitized over three years ago and the trust
into which the note and mortgage were transferred was
dissolved and terminated. Therefore, [she] has pled all the
counterclaims based on the factual and legal theory that the
[Bank] does not own the note and the mortgage and,
therefore, has no right to bring this foreclosure action. 
[She] has relied upon 26 U.S.C. § 860, et seq for the
 
proposition that transfers out of the trust are void after
90 days of the closing date of the trust. Therefore, the
purported assignments were either forgeries or signed by
robo-signers and constitute fraudulent transfers.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Thus, Hermano's Counterclaim is premised on the theory
 
that because the Note and Mortgage were securitized and
 
"transferred" into a trust that terminated, and because any
 alleged transfers out of the trust are purportedly void, the Bank
 does not own the Note and Mortgage and has no right to bring the
 foreclosure action. 
However, Hawaii's state and federal courts have
 
consistently rejected the legal conclusion that "termination" of
 a trust comprising a securitized pool of mortgages necessarily
 ends the mortgagee's loan obligations. See, e.g., Bank of Am.,
 
N.A. v. Hill, No. CAAP-13-0000035, 2015 WL 6739087 (Haw. App.
 Oct. 30, 2015) (mem.) (dissolution of the lender could not
 prevent the assignment of the mortgage from MERS); Wells Fargo
 Bank, N.A. v. Hensley, No. CAAP-12-0000089, 2013 WL 1284990 (Haw.
 App. Mar. 28 2013) (SDO); see also Abubo v. Bank of New York
 Mellon, 2011 WL 6011787, at *8 (D. Haw. Nov. 30, 2011)
 (concluding that securitization is irrelevant to the assignee's
 standing to foreclose); Klohs v. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., 901 F.
 Supp. 2d 1253, 1259-60 (D. Haw. 2012) (holding that
 securitization does not alter the relationship or rights of the
 parties to the loan, but merely creates a separate contract,
 distinct from the plaintiff's debt obligations under the note). 
We conclude that Hermano's assertion that the alleged termination
 of the trust affects the Bank's standing to foreclose is without
 merit. 
Hermano also cites 26 U.S.C. § 860, et seq. (Chapter
 
860) for the proposition that any transfers out of the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
securitized trust are void after ninety days. Chapter 860 is a
 
portion of the Internal Revenue Service tax code dealing with
 deductions for deficiency dividends for Regulated Investment
 Companies and Real Estate Investment Trusts. See generally id. 
Chapter 860 appears to be inapplicable here as it addresses tax
 treatment and not the viability of legal interests in mortgages
 and properties that are part of Real Estate Mortgage Investment
 Conduits (REMICs). Hermano does not identify which provision of
 
Chapter 860's numerous subsections and provisions purportedly
 
support her argument. Accordingly, we conclude that Hermano's
 reliance on Chapter 860 is without merit.
 Hermano further argues that, because transfers out of 
the trust are void under Chapter 860, "purported assignments [from MERS to Bank of America] were either forgeries or signed by robo-signers and constitute fraudulent transfers." This argument is without merit as Hermano fails to identify any set of facts that, if proven, establish that the alleged robo-signers have harmed her. Hawai
'i courts have repeatedly concluded that such 
allegations are insufficient to raise a plausible claim of fraud or irregularity where the plaintiffs fail to state how alleged robo-signing of documents assigning a loan has harmed them. See, 
e.g., U.S. Bank N.A. v. Mattos, 137 Hawai
'i 209, 367 P.3d 703 
(App. 2016); Bank of New York Mellon v. Rumbawa, No. CAAP-15­0000024, 2016 WL 482170 (Haw. App. Feb. 4, 2016) (SDO); U.S. Bank Nat. Ass'n v. Benoist, No. CAAP-14-0001176, 2015 WL 7260350 at *4 (Haw. App. Nov. 12, 2015) (SDO) ("conclusory assertions of 'robo­signing' fail to state a plausible claim"); Bank of Am., N.A. v. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Hill, 2015 WL 6739087 at *8. In sum, conclusory assertions of
 
robo-signing fail to state a plausible claim for wrongful
 foreclosure. Thus, the legal theories that Hermano says she
 "relie[s] upon" for "all the counterclaims" are nothing more than
 "conclusory allegations on the legal effect of the events
 alleged" which this court is not required to accept. See
 
Marsland, 5 Haw. App. at 474, 701 P.2d at 186. 
On appeal, Hermano puts forth various alternative
 
theories for her counterclaims. 
As to the declaratory judgment cause of action in the
 
Counterclaim, Hermano argues that her claim, which challenges the
 validity of the assignment of the Mortgage from MERS to the Bank,
 has a legal basis because Bain v. Metropolitan Mortgage Group,
 Inc., 285 P.3d 34, 41 (Wash. 2012), "prov[es] that MERS is just a
 registration system for tracking ownership of the mortgages and
 was not a holder of the promissory note." Hermano's reliance on
 Bain is misplaced. First, Bain was decided in the context of a
 non-judicial deed-of-trust foreclosure, whereas the instant case
 is a judicial foreclosure of a mortgage. See Bain, 285 P.3d at
 
36. Thus, the procedures and law in Bain appear to be
 
inapplicable here. The Bain decision was limited to whether MERS
 is a "beneficiary" under the language of Washington's Deed of
 Trust Act, thus the analysis is different.
2 Id.; Wash. Rev. Code
 
2
 Compare Wash. Rev. Code Ann. § 61.24.005 (West 2015)
 
("'Beneficiary' means the holder of the instrument or document evidencing the 
obligations secured by the deed of trust, excluding persons holding the same

as security for a different obligation.") with HRS § 490:3-301 (2008)
("'Person entitled to enforce' an instrument means (i) the holder of the
instrument, (ii) a nonholder in possession of the instrument who has the
rights of a holder, or (iii) a person not in possession of the instrument who
(continued...)
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Ann. § 61.24.005 (West 2015). In addition, Bain is a Washington 
State case; upon review, we are not inclined to depart from the Hawai
'i cases that have consistently recognized the validity of 
assignments of mortgages by MERS where lenders granted to MERS, as nominee for lenders and lenders' successors and assigns, the right to exercise all of those interests granted by a borrower, including the right to foreclose and sell a property and to take any action required of a lender. See Bank of Am., N.A. v. Hill, 
2015 WL 6739087 at *6-7; Andrade v. U.S. Bank Nat. Ass'n, Civil No. 13–00255 LEK–KSC, 2013 WL 4552186 at *9–10 (D. Haw. Aug. 27, 2013); Camat v. Fed. Nat. Mortg. Ass'n, Civil No. 12–00149 SOM/BMK, 2012 WL 2370201 at *1, *7–8 (D. Haw. June 22, 2012); and Cooper v. Bank of New York Mellon, Civil No. 11–00241 LEK–RLP, 2011 WL 3705058 at *13 (D. Haw. Aug. 23, 2011). As the original lender here, House of Finance, granted to MERS, as nominee for lender and lender's successors and assigns, the right to exercise all of its mortgage interests, we conclude that Hermano's argument is without merit. 
As to Hermano's quiet title cause of action, the Bank
 
argued in its motion to dismiss that Hermano's claim fails
 "because she has not alleged that she is willing and able to
 tender the entire amount of indebtedness." Mier v. Lordsman,
 
Inc., 2011 WL 285862, at *13 (D. Haw. Jan. 27, 2011) ("in order
 to assert a claim for 'quiet title' against a mortgagee, a
 
2(...continued)
is entitled to enforce the instrument pursuant to section 490:3-309 [(lost or

destroyed)] or 490:3-418(d) [(acceptance by mistake)]. A person may be a
person entitled to enforce the instrument even though the person is not the
owner of the instrument or is in wrongful possession of the instrument.").
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
borrower must allege they have paid, or are able to tender, the
 
amount of indebtedness."). Hermano responded that, under Amina
 v. Bank of New York Mellon, Civ. No. 11-00714 JMS/BMK, 2012 WL
 3283513, at *4 (D. Haw. Aug. 9, 2012), a borrower does not need
 to tender payment in order to bring a quiet title action because
 the tender requirement does not make sense "where the borrower
 brings a quiet title action against a party who, according to the
 complaint, is not a mortgagee." However, Hermano fails to
 
acknowledge a critical clarification contained in the Amina
 
holding, which states: 
To be clear . . . this is not a case where Plaintiffs assert
 
that Defendant's mortgagee status is invalid (for example,
because the mortgage loan was securitized or because
Defendant does not hold the note). On their own, such
allegations would be insufficient to assert a quiet title
claim.
 
Id. at *5. Here, Hermano is indeed arguing that the Bank's
 
mortgagee status is invalid because the mortgage loan was
 securitized, and she also challenges the Bank's possession of the
 Note. Thus, the present circumstances were specifically
 distinguished in Amina's caveat quoted above. Accordingly,
 Hermano's reliance on Amina is misplaced.
 
Hermano's Unfair and Deceptive Trade Practices (UDAP)
 
cause of action alleges that Bank of America engaged in UDAP by
 attempting to foreclose on a mortgage loan which it did not own. 
As Hermano's claim is based on the theory that the Bank of
 America did not validly hold the note and mortgage, which we
 herein reject, the UDAP claim must fail.
 
Because Hermano's counterclaims consist entirely of
 
conclusory allegations which are unsupported by any viable legal
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
theory or authority, she can prove no set of facts in support of
 
her claims that would entitle her to relief. In re Estate of
 
Rogers, 103 Hawai 'i 275, 280, 81 P.3d 1190, 1195 (2003); see HRCP 
Rule 8; Marsland, 5 Haw. App. at 475, 701 P.2d at 186; Twombly,
 550 U.S. at 555. Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 did not err in granting the Bank's motion to dismiss Hermano's
 counterclaim for failure to state a claim upon which relief can
 be granted.
 
(2) Hermano contends that the Circuit Court erred in
 
granting the Bank's motion for summary judgment and the
 interlocutory decree of foreclosure because Hermano's opposition
 "contain[ed] abundant evidence that the Bank does not own the
 mortgage involved in this case," and that the court "engaged in a
 credibility decision and picked the Bank's evidence over
 Hermano's evidence." 
In moving for summary judgment, 

the moving party has the burden of producing support for its
claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material fact exists
with respect to the essential elements of the claim or
defense which the motion seeks to establish or which the
 motion questions; and (2) based on the undisputed facts, it
is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law. Only
when the moving party satisfies its initial burden of
production does the burden shift to the non-moving party to
respond . . . and demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to
general allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of
trial.
 
. . . . 
"Where the moving party is the plaintiff, who will
ultimately bear the burden of proving [the] plaintiff's
claim at trial, the plaintiff" has the initial burden of
establishing, by the quantum of evidence required by the
applicable substantive law, each element of its claim for
relief. Id. That is, the plaintiff must establish, as a
matter of law, each element of its claim for relief by the
proper evidentiary standard applicable to that claim. 
Beamer
v. Nishiki, 66 Haw. 572, 578, 670 P.2d 1264, 1270 (1983).
 
Where a plaintiff-moving party has satisfied its

obligation of showing, prima facie, that there is no genuine
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
issue of material fact and the plaintiff is entitled to a
judgment as a matter of law, the burden shifts to thedefendant-non-moving party to produce materials regarding
any affirmative defenses that have been raised pro forma in 
the pleadings. GECC Fin. Corp. v. Jaffarian, 79 Hawai' i at 
526, 904 P.2d at 540 (Acoba, J., concurring), concurringopinion adopted by the Hawai' i Supreme Court in GECC Fin. 
Corp. v. Jaffarian, 80 Hawai' i 118, 119, 905 P.2d 624, 625
(1995). If the defense produces material in support of an
affirmative defense, the plaintiff is then "obligated to 
disprove an affirmative defense in moving for summaryjudgment[.]" 
. . . .
 
We apply a three-step analysis in such a review.
Mednick v. Davey, 87 Hawai' i 450, 457, 959 P.2d 439, 446
(App. 1998).
 
First, we identify the issues framed by the pleadings
since it is these allegations to which the motion must
respond.
 
Secondly, we determine whether the moving party's
showing has established the material facts which justify a
judgment in movant's favor. The motion must stand
self-sufficient and cannot succeed because the opposition is
weak. 
Where a plaintiff is the moving party, this involves
examining whether the plaintiff has established prima facie,
the material facts necessary to establish the essential
elements of the claim or claims for which summary judgment
in the plaintiff's favor is being sought.
 
When a plaintiff's summary judgment motion prima facie
 
justifies a judgment on the plaintiff's claims, the third
and final step is to determine (1) whether the opposition
has demonstrated the existence of a triable, material
factual issue on the plaintiff's claims, or (2) if the
opposition has adduced evidence of material facts which
demonstrate the existence of affirmative defenses that would
 defeat the plaintiff's claim, whether the plaintiff has
demonstrated conclusively the non-existence of such facts.
Counter-affidavits and declarations need not prove the
opposition's case; they suffice if they disclose the
existence of a triable issue.
 
Ocwen Fed. Bank, FSB v. Russell, 99 Hawai 'i 173, 182-83, 53 P.3d 
312, 321-22 (App. 2002) (some citations omitted).
 
Here, the key issues framed by the pleadings are
 
whether Hermano defaulted on her loan obligation and whether the
 
Bank is therefore entitled to foreclose the loan. 
To be entitled to summary judgment in a foreclosure
 
action, a party must prove the following material facts: (1) the
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
existence of an agreement, (2) the terms of the agreement, (3)
 
default by the mortgagor under the terms of the agreement, and
 (4) the giving of the cancellation notice. Bank of Honolulu,
 
N.A. v. Anderson, 3 Haw. App. 545, 551, 654 P.2d 1370, 1375
 (1982). A foreclosing plaintiff must also establish that it is
 the holder of, or otherwise entitled to enforce, the promissory
 note and mortgage. See HRS § 490:3-301.
 
Here, the Bank submitted: (1) a promissory note,
 
executed by Hermano, promising repayment of a loan in the amount
 of $300,000, and naming House of Finance as the Lender; (2) an
 Allonge indorsing the note from House of Finance to Countrywide
 Bank, FSB; (3) a mortgage, duly executed, pledging the subject
 property as collateral in the event of default on Hermano's loan,
 naming House of Finance as Lender and MERS as mortgagee, and
 providing that MERS is acting as nominee for Lender and Lender's
 successors and assigns; (4) a signed and notarized assignment of
 mortgage from MERS to Bank of America, successor by merger to BAC
 Home Loans Servicing, LP, fka Countrywide Home Loans Servicing,
 LP, signed by David Perez; (5) a Certificate of Assistant
 Secretary of Bank of America, certifying that David M. Perez
 (Perez) is an "Authorized Officer" with authority to assign
 
mortgages where MERS is named as the mortgagee when the member
 
bank is also the current promissory note-holder, or if the
 mortgage loan is registered on the MERS System and is shown to be
 registered to the member bank (Certificate of Authorization), as
 
well as a Corporate Resolution by the MERS Corporate Secretary,
 
appointing officers of Bank of America, as assistant secretaries
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and vice presidents of MERS (MERS Corporate Resolution), with 
authority to undertake various actions, including assignment of 
mortgage liens; (6) a petition in the Hawai 'i Land Court for 
change of name and merger from BAC Home Loans Servicing, LP into Bank of America and a corresponding order from the Land Court for the registration of documents previously filed in the name of BAC Home Loans Servicing, LP to be registered in the name of Bank of America; (7) a Declaration of Indebtedness, signed by Mary Beth Fetkovich, Assistant Vice President at Bank of America, noting that Bank of America is successor by merger to BAC Home Loans Servicing, LP, fka Countrywide Home Loans Servicing, LP, and declaring that Hermano defaulted on her loan obligation and that the default had not been cured; (8) an Account Information Statement from Bank of America, N.A. evidencing Hermano's 
3
delinquent loan payments;  and (9) a Notice of Intent to
Accelerate, sent to Hermano. 
Thus, the Bank has shown the
 
existence of an agreement, the terms of the agreement, default by
 the mortgagor under the terms of the agreement, the giving of the
 cancellation notice, and documents evidencing that the Bank is
 the holder of the subject note and mortgage. Accordingly, the
 Bank made a prima facie showing of its right to foreclose,
 sufficient to be entitled to summary judgment. 
The burden thus shifted to Hermano to demonstrate the

 
existence of a genuine issue of material fact on the Bank's
 
3
 Hermano's delinquency is undisputed as she admits in a Declaration
labeled as "Exhibit 2" in her March 25, 2013 opposition that she was "making
regular payments on [her] mortgage up to . . . July of 2011" but then "stopped
making payments."
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
claims; alternatively, if Hermano then adduced evidence in 
support of affirmative defenses that would defeat the Bank's claim, then the burden would shift to the Bank to demonstrate conclusively the non-existence of genuine issues of material fact in support of such affirmative defenses. Russell, 99 Hawai
'i at 
183, 53 P.3d at 322. 
Hermano argues that: (1) there are genuine issues of
 
material fact based on the declaration and report of Hermano's
 expert that the subject mortgage is actually owned by the Fannie
 Mae REMIC 2009-4, and that the Bank only has servicing rights;
 (2) the purported assignment by MERS is highly suspect because
 Perez is a robo-signer; (3) the Bank lacks standing to bring a
 foreclosure action; (4) MERS is just a registration system and
 not an owner of the mortgage or holder of the note; (5) the
 affirmative defenses of assumption of risk, contributory
 negligence, fraud, and illegality require a trial; (6) the Bank
 is not the real party in interest; and that (7) the counterclaims
 for wrongful foreclosure, declaratory judgment, quiet title, and
 UDAP "require trial on the numerous legal and factual issues."  
First, Hermano's counterclaims for wrongful
 
foreclosure, declaratory judgment, quiet title, and UDAP, were
 dismissed in the order granting the Bank's Rule 12(b)(6) motion,
 which we affirm, as discussed above. These claims do not raise a
 genuine issue of material fact as to the Bank's summary judgment
 motion.
 
As to the argument that MERS is just a registration
 
system and not the owner of the Mortgage, as we have previously
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
held, such arguments fail where they are "inconsistent with the
 
plain language of the mortgage, which expressly establishes that
 MERS is the mortgagee under the security instrument and permits
 MERS to take action on the lender's behalf." Bank of New York
 
Mellon v. Rumbawa, 2016 WL 482170, at *3; Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.
 v. Yamamoto, No. CAAP–11–0000728, 2012 WL 6178303 at *1 (Haw.
 App. Dec. 11, 2012) (SDO). Here, the subject mortgage clearly
 states that MERS is the mortgagee under the security instrument,
 and it permits MERS to take action on the lender's behalf,
 including foreclosing on and selling the property. Thus,
 Hermano's argument has no merit. 
With regard to Hermano's contention that the purported
 
assignment by MERS is highly suspect because Perez is "on the
 list of known robo-signers," we note that Hermano raised this
 argument in opposition to the Bank's motion to dismiss the
 Counterclaim and at the initial hearing on the motion for summary
 judgment. At that hearing, Judge Ayabe requested from the Bank
 documents and a declaration "showing that Mr. Perez was
 authorized to sign on behalf of the lender," gave Hermano an
 opportunity to respond to any further submission by the Bank, and
 continued the motion until moved on. The Bank thereafter
 supplied, inter alia, the Certificate of Authorization and the
 MERS Corporate Resolution, referenced above, which together
 evidenced the authorization of Perez to assign the Mortgage from
 MERS to the Bank. Hermano provided no evidence in response;
 thus, the Circuit Court granted the Bank's motion for summary
 judgment. On appeal, Hermano relies on the same arguments made
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
prior to the Bank's submission of the Certificate of
 
Authorization and the MERS Corporate Resolution. We conclude
 that Hermano did not raise a genuine issue of material fact based
 on this assertion.
 
As to Hermano's challenge that the subject Mortgage is
 
owned by the Fannie Mae REMIC 2009-4, and that the Bank only has
 servicing rights, we first note that this argument is facially
 insufficient to challenge the granting of summary judgment. 
Under HRS § 490:3-301, a party need not own an instrument in
 order to enforce it. Second, securitization "[does] not modify
 the terms of the underlying obligation," and the "termination" of
 a securitized trust "does not modify the terms" either. Klohs,
 
901 F. Supp. 2d at 1259-60. Thus, even assuming that the loan
 was securitized and that the trust terminated, this set of facts
 would not affect MERS's assignment of the mortgage or House of
 Finance's indorsement of the note to Bank of America. 
Hermano's remaining claim is that because there was "no
 
valid assignment of the mortgage," the Bank "is not the real
 party-in-interest and, therefore, lacks standing to bring a
 foreclosure action." We conclude that the failure of Hermano's
 challenges to the validity of the assignment of the mortgage and
 the indorsement to the note leaves no support for this argument. 
Finally, Hermano argues that, because she "has relied
 
upon" the affirmative defenses of assumption of risk,
 contributory negligence, fraud, and illegality, these defenses
 "require a trial." However, Hermano cites no evidence in support
 of these affirmative defenses, and she does not discuss them in
 
15
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
any capacity beyond stating that they "require a trial." Because
 
Hermano has not adduced evidence of material facts which
 
demonstrate the existence of affirmative defenses that would
 defeat the plaintiff's claim, she has not met her burden of
 production. 
(3) In support of her contention that the Circuit
 
Court erred in granting the judgment of foreclosure, Hermano
 merely states that she "incorporates by reference her [earlier]
 Arguments" that the 
judgment of foreclosure in this case was wrongly filed based
on phony evidence from the Bank and the disregard of
Hermano's credible documentary evidence and opinions from
her expert witnesses to support the conclusion that the Bank
does not own the note and mortgage upon which this
foreclosure decree was filed and entered.
 
As we have concluded that the Circuit Court did not err
 
in granting the Bank's motion for summary judgment, we find no
 
error in the entry of the judgment of foreclosure. 
(4) Upon careful review of each of Hermano's
 
challenges to the Circuit Court's FOFs and COLs, we find no
 genuine issue of material fact as to the Circuit Court's FOFs and
 no error of law as to its COLs. Regarding additional arguments
 made in Hermano's opening brief, we decline to address arguments
 made in the first instance on appeal to this court. See HRS
 
§ 641-2 (Supp. 2015) ("The appellate court . . . need not
 consider a point that was not presented in the trial court in an
 appropriate manner.").
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's November 14,
 
2013 Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 22, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
R. Steven Geshell,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Charles R. Prather,Robin Miller,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
17
 