 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
 
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000058 22-DEC-2023 08:20 AM Dkt. 92 SO 
NO.  
CAAP-22-0000058  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
STATE OF HAWAI‘I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.  
KEKOA FIGUEROA, Defendant-Appellant   
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO.  1CPC-20-0000043)  
 
 SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Nakasone and Guidry, JJ.)  
Defendant -Appellant Kekoa Figueroa (Figueroa ) appeals 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence 
(Judgment) , filed on February 1, 2022 , and amended on 
December 27, 2022 by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
(circuit court ).1 For the reasons set forth below, we vacate the 
circuit court 's Judgment, and this case is remanded for a new 
trial. 
1 The Honorable Trish K. Morikawa presided.   
 
    
   
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In January 2020, Figueroa was charged via Felony 
Information, with Unauthorized Control of Propelled Vehicle 
(UCPV), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-836 
(2014).2 The Felony Information alleged that, 
On or about January 8, 2020, in the City and County of 
Honolulu, State of Hawai [‘]i, Kekoa Figueroa did 
intentionally or knowingly exert unauthorized control over 
a propelled vehicle, by operating the vehicle without the 
consent of German Dalo, owner of said vehicle, thereby 
committing the offense of Unauthorized Control of Propelled 
Vehicle, in violation of Section 708 -836 of the Hawaii 
Revised Statutes.  
Prior to trial, Figueroa filed Defendant's Motion to 
Suppress Evidence ( Motion to Suppress ), dated June 12, 2020, 
requesting that the circuit court suppress and preclude from use 
at trial the evidence obtained by the Honolulu Police Department 
(HPD) during Figueroa's brief investigative detention on 
January 8, 2020. Figueroa contended that Officers Lyle Maiava 
(Officer Maiava ) and Christopher Chu's ( Officer Chu ) "prolonged 
detention of Defendant for purposes other than to address a 
traffic infraction, to wit, failure to use turn signal, was an 
2 HRS § 708-836 (2014) states, in pertinent part, 
Unauthorized control of a propelled vehicle in the 
first degree. (1) A person commits the offense of 
unauthorized control of a propelled vehicle in the first 
degree if the person intentionally or knowingly exerts 
unauthorized control over another's propelled vehicle by 
operating the propelled vehicle without the owner's consent 
or by changing the identity of the propelled vehicle 
without the owner's consent. 
2   
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
illegal seizure," and that the introduction of evidence obtained 
during the detention thus violated his rights under Article I, 
Sections 5 and 7 of the Hawai ʻi State Constitution, and the 
Fourth, Fifth, and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States 
Constitution. 
The circuit court denied Figueroa's Motion to 
Suppress, after hearing the motion on January 7, 2021, and 
entered its Findings of Fact, Conclusions Of Law, and Order 
Denying Defendant's Motion to Suppress Evidence (Order) on 
February 19, 2021. In its Order, the circuit court made the 
following unchallenged findings of facts: 
1. The Court finds that State's Witnesses, Officers 
Christopher Chu ("Officer Chu") and Lyle Maiava ("Officer 
Maiava") were credible. 
2. On January 8th, 2020, at about 5:30 pm, HPD Officer 
Chu and HPD Officer Maiava were on duty in the City and 
County of Honolulu in a high crime area. 
3. While operating an unmarked vehicle on a Honolulu 
roadway and making checks, Officer Chu and Officer Maiava 
observed a male later identified as Kekoa Figueroa 
("Defendant") operating a moped bearing Hawai [‘]i Decal 
"Z18009." 
4. Defendant was observed by the officers turning onto 
Ke[‘]eaumoku Street without using a turn signal. 
5. Officer Chu, who was seated in the passenger seat of 
the unmarked vehicle, observed that the moped was being 
operated without any keys in the ignition. Officer Maiava 
independently observed the same. 
6. Officer Chu and Officer Maiava continued to follow 
the Moped, which turned into the Walmart parking lot 
located on Ke [‘]eaumoku Street. Without being pulled over 
by the HPD officers, the Defendant proceeded towards the 
entrance of Walmart and parked the moped near some soda 
machines. 
3   
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
7. Suspecting Defendant was operating the moped without 
authorization, Officer Chu and Officer Maiava parked their 
vehicle and approached Defendant on foot. 
8. While Officer Chu approached and spoke to the 
Defendant, Officer Maiava immediately conducted checks upon 
the moped and verified that the moped bearing Hawai [‘]i 
Decal "Z18009" is registered to a German Dalo ("Dalo"). 
9. Officer Maiava contacted Dalo's phone number; Dalo 
related that he is still the current owner of the moped, 
that he does not know a Kekoa Figueroa and that he did not 
give Kekoa Figueroa permission to use, operate, or possess 
his moped. 
10. Based on the phone records of Officer Chu's cell 
phone (that were entered into evidence as State's exhibit 
#4), the phone call from Officer Maiava to Dalo's phone 
number was initiated at 5:33 pm and lasted 6 minutes. 
  Based on the above-factual findings, the circuit court 
made the following conclusions of law:  
1. The Perez test is controlling for investigative 
stops such as in the instant case in determining whether 
the stop/detention was justified. State v. Perez , 
111 Hawaiʻi 392 (2006). 
2. The suspicion of HPD Officer Chu and HPD Officer 
Maiava (before approaching Defendant) that Defendant was 
operating the moped without authorization was reasonable. 
3. The investigative actions by the HPD officers were 
reasonable at their inception. 
4. The time period from when HPD Officers Chu and 
Maiava first saw Defendant until the end of the phone call 
to Dalo did not last longer than was necessary to 
effectuate the purpose of the detention (the investigation 
of the possible stolen moped), and was li mited in scope to 
that which justified the initial stop.[3] 
3 With respect to the timing, the circuit court further explained, 
At 5:30 the officers see the defendant operating the moped. 
The defendant had to drive to Walmart, park the moped. The 
officers had to park their car, walk to the defendant, get 
the VIN, run the VIN, and call the registered owner. 
(continued ...) 
4   
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5. The investigation for unauthorized control of a 
propelled vehicle and any seizure of Defendant pursuant 
thereto, was reasonably related in scope to the 
circumstances, which justified the interference in the 
first place. 
(Footnote added .) 
The matter proceeded to a jury trial. At trial, 
Figueroa raised, inter alia , a mistake -of-fact defense. Counsel 
for the State and Figueroa both agreed to the mistake -of-fact 
jury instruction set forth in the Court's Special Instruction 
No. 3, as modified by agreement, and the circuit court so 
instructed the jury. The jury reach ed its verdict on May 3, 
2021, finding Figueroa guilty as charged of UCPV. The circuit 
court entered its Judgment sentencing Figueroa to four years of 
probation with special condi tions. 
Figueroa raises two points of error on appeal. He 
contends: (1) "[t]he trial court erroneously concluded that the 
police had reasonable suspicion from the inception to detain 
Figueroa for purposes of investigating whether the moped was 
3(...continued) 
All of that occurred --if the call was made at 5:33, 
all of that occurred in three minutes. Therefore, a good 
chunk of that three minutes was following the defendant, 
parking and approaching the defendant. Thereafter, Officer 
Maiava talked to the registered owner for six minutes. 
Based on that information, the detention of the 
Defendant did not last longer than was necessary to 
effectuate the investigation of the possible stolen moped. 
5   
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stolen"; and (2) "[t]he [deputy prosecuting attorney ]'s improper 
remarks during his rebuttal closing argument substantially 
prejudiced Figueroa's right to a fair trial." 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we 
resolve Figueroa's contentions of error as follows: 
(1) We review the circuit court's denial of Figueroa's 
Motion to Suppress de novo to determine whether that ruling was 
"right" or "wrong." State v. Spillner , 116 Hawaiʻi 351, 357, 
173 P.3d 498, 504 (2007) (citation omitted). 
The proponent of the motion to suppress has the burden of 
establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the 
statements or items sought to be excluded were unlawfully 
secured and that his or her right to be free from 
unreasonable searches or seizures was violated under the 
fourth amendment to the United States Constitution and 
article I, section 7 of the Hawaiʻi Constitution.  
Id.  (citation omitted).  
An investigative search  is supported by the law 
enforcement officer's reasonable suspicion for conducting the 
investigative search. State v. Perez, 111 Hawaiʻi  392, 398, 141 
P.3d 1039, 1045 (2006). "[T]he  subject matter and intensity of 
the investigative detention must be limited to that which is 
justified by the initial stop."   State v. Iona, 144 Hawai ʻi 412, 
417, 443  P.3d 104, 109 (2019) (cleaned up).   
6   
 
  
 
 
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Reasonable suspicion exists where the officer can 
"point to specific and articulable facts which, taken together 
with rational inferences from those facts," demonstrate that 
"measured by an objective standard, a man of reasonable caution 
would be warranted in believing that criminal activity was afoot 
and that the action taken was appropriate." Perez, 111 Hawaiʻi 
at 398, 141 P.3d at 1045 (cleaned up) . A court determines 
whether reasonable suspicion exists based on consideration of 
the "totality of the cir cumstances." Spillner , 116 Hawaiʻi at 
357, 173 P.3d at 504 (citations omitted ). 
The record reflects that Officers Maiava and Chu had 
reasonable suspicion to carry out their brief investigative 
detention of Figueroa. Officers Maiava and Chu testified to 
observing that there was no key in the ignition of the moped 
that Figueroa was riding. Officer Chu testified that a moped 
being operated without a key was "very unusual," and that "from 
past experiences [the lack of a key] usually is a key indicator 
that the vehicle might possibly be stolen." The officers 
approached Figueroa after he had p ulled into the Walmart parking 
lot and parked the moped. They introduced themselves as police 
officers, obtained Figueroa's name, and then visually observe d 
and ran checks on the moped's vehicle identification number 
(VIN). Figueroa explains in his opening brief that "the VIN [] 
7   
 
  
  
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was openly indicated on the frame of the moped and the decal 
affixed to the rear of the moped." Officer Chu testified that 
the VIN could be observed just by looking at the moped. Officer 
Maiava testified that the VIN is readily observable because it 
is "visible to anybody that looks for it." 
The officers learned, based on their check of the 
moped's VIN that, while not reported stolen, the moped was not 
registered to Figueroa. Officer Maiava contacted the registered 
owner of the moped, German Dalo, by telephone. Dalo informed 
Officer Maiava, during a six -minute phone call at 5:33 p.m., 
that Figueroa did not have permission to operate the moped. 
Officers Maiava and Chu testified that they arrested Figueroa 
once they had verified that Figueroa did not have permission to 
operate the moped, and t hat Dalo wanted to prosecute. 
Based on the totality of the circumstances, we 
conclude that the brief detention of Figueroa was reasonable, 
did not last longer than necessary to investigate whether the 
moped was stolen, and was limited to effectuating the purpose of 
the detention to investigate whether the moped w as stolen. 
Iona, 144 Hawaiʻi at 417, 443 P.3d at 109; Spillner , 116 Hawaiʻi 
at 357, 173 P.3d at 504. The circuit court did not, on this 
record, err in denying Figueroa's Motion to Suppress. 
8   
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) We review Figueroa's contention of prosecutorial 
misconduct under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt 
standard. State v. Mainaaupo , 117 Hawaiʻi 235, 247, 178 P.3d 1, 
13 (2008). This court must first determine, 
(1) whether the conduct was improper; (2) if the conduct 
was improper, whether the misconduct was harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt; and (3) if the misconduct was not 
harmless, whether the misconduct was so egregious as to bar 
reprosecution. 
State v. Udo , 145 Hawaiʻi 519, 534 -35, 454 P.3d 460, 475 -76 
(2019) (citation omitted). In addressing whether improper 
conduct is harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, this court will 
consider "the nature of the alleged misconduct, the promptness 
or lack of a curative instruction, and the strength or weakness 
of the evidence against the defendant." Id. at 535, 454 P.3d at 
476 (citation omitted). "Prosecutorial misconduct is not 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt if there is a reasonable 
possibility that the misconduct complained of might have 
contributed to the conviction." Id. (cleaned up ). 
Figueroa specifically contends that the following 
misstatement of law, made by the deputy prosecuting attorney 
during rebuttal closing argument, was substantially prejudicial, 
9   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
BY [Deputy prosecuting attorney]: 
 Defense counsel argues that Mr. Figueroa thought  that 
this moped was, quote ,  "trash." Well, it's not hard to 
figure out if that moped belongs to somebody. He 
understands, he testified that he understands the concept 
of registration and title. He made no attempt to find out 
if it was trash or abandoned in any way.  
 
 Now, defense counsel, he harps on mistake of fact. 
So looking at page 20, he's saying that he thought that the 
moped was abandoned, but when we look at the elements of 
the offense, he needs to have permission from the owner. 
This isn't a case where he's
  saying that, you know, Jojo 
sold me the moped or some other person gave me permission, 
I'm mistaken, I thought –- I thought that the other person 
had authorization. This isn't that kind of situation. This is a situation where he found the moped ,  he didn't get 
permission from anybody. So the mistake of fact instruction doesn't apply because he's doing it without the owner's permission. He didn't seek permission from 
anybody. He didn't seek permission from not a single 
person. So for mistake of a fact –- fact to apply, he 
would have to say I got permission from Bobby down the street to drive this moped, and you would have to believe that testimony. That isn't the case here. He sought 
permission from literally no one, and the law requires him 
to seek permission.    
[Defense counsel]: Objection, misstates the law. 
THE COURT: Sustained. 
[Deputy prosecuting attorney]: The bottom line is 
that is not the situation in this case. He's not mistaken of fact. He knew that he –- he knew that he was operating 
that  moped without permission.  
 Defense counsel says he didn't have a chance to, 
like, try to get legal ownership by registering. The defendant himself testified that he had it for multiple 
weeks prior to driving it. He had every chance and all the 
time –- and he –- he had plenty of time to seek permission 
or seek –-  figure out who the owner was.  
 So in light of all that, the State would ask the 
ladies and gentlemen of the jury to reach the only verdict 
that is appropriate, that is guilty as charged. Thank you. 
(Emphasis added .) 
10   
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Figueroa contends that the circuit court 
erred because, although it sustained Figueroa's objection to the 
above remarks, it did not sua sponte  strike those remarks and/or 
issue a curative instruction. Figueroa's contention has merit.    4
4 The circuit court correctly instructed the jury on mistake -of-
fact, prior to the prosecutor's rebuttal closing argument, as follows, 
In any prosecution for an offense, it is a defense 
that the defendant engaged in that –- in the prohibited 
conduct under ignorance or mistake of fact  if the ignorance 
or mistake of fact –- sorry –- if the ignorance or mistake 
negates the state of mind required to establish an element 
of the offense .  
 
Thus, for example, a person is provided a defense to 
a charge based on an intentional or knowing state of mind if the person is mistaken (either reasonably, negligently, 
or recklessly) as to a fact that negates the person's state 
of mind required to establish an element of the offense; 
however, a reckless mistake would not afford a defense to a 
charge based on a reckless state of mind.  
 
The burden is upon the prosecution to prove beyond a 
reasonable doubt that the defendant was not ignorant or 
mistaken as to a fact that negates the state of mind 
required to establish an element of the offense. If the 
prosecution fails to meet its burden,  then you must find 
the defendant not guilty.  
(Emphasis added.) This instruction, along with the circuit court's general 
instruction that the jury must disregard any argument that "misstate[d] these 
instructions," did not cure the prosecutor's subsequent misstatement of the 
law. 
The prosecutor did not make a curative statement 
specifically directed at correcting the improper 
definitions that had been provided. Additionally, no 
curative instruction was given by the circuit court. 
Although the court generally instructed the jury p rior to 
closing arguments that "[s]tatements or remarks made by 
counsel are not evidence," this instruction did not 
neutralize the prosecutor's oral amendment to the 
accomplice instruction, which misstated the requirements of 
the law. 
State v. Basham , 132 Hawai ʻi 97, 111, 319 P.3d 1105, 1119 (2014). 
11   
 
  
 
  Mainaaupo  explained that the elements of UCPV under 
HRS § 708-836 are: "(1) the person's conduct of exerting control 
over a thing by operating it, (2) the attendant circumstance of 
the thing being 'another's' (i.e.,  the registered owner's) 
propelled vehicle, and (3) the attendant circumstance of the 
person's control/operation being without the registered owner's 
consent." 117 Hawaiʻi at 249, 178 P.3d at 15 (emphasis and 
bracketed text omitted). Thus, one of the elements of UCPV is 
the attendant circumstance of the vehicle being "another's."  
 
  
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court's failure to cure this misstatement was not 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Here, Figueroa's defense was based on an alleged 
mistake-of-fact as to the attendant circumstance of the moped 
being "another's"; Figueroa testified at trial that he found the 
moped in the "Ala Wai river" and that he mistakenly believed it 
to have been "trash." The deputy prosecuting attorney, in 
rebuttal closing argument, misstated to the jury that "the 
mistake of fact instruction doesn't apply" because, even if 
Figueroa "found the moped," he did not have "permission from 
anybody" to take the moped : 
This is a situation where he found the moped , he didn't get 
permission from anybody. So the mistake of fact 
instruction doesn't apply because he's doing it without the 
owner's permission. He didn't seek permission from 
anybody. 
12   
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
This was an incorrect characterization of Figueroa's mistake-of-
fact defense, which did not claim a factual mistake about the 
consent-from-registered -owner element, but asserted Figueroa's 
belief that the moped no longer belonged to another, and thus, 
consent could not or need not be obtained . 5 And because these 
misstatements about the mistake -of-fact defense were made during 
rebuttal closing argument, they were effectively the final word s 
to the jury regarding that defense. "If there is a reasonable 
possibility that error might have contributed to a conviction in 
a criminal case, then the error cannot be harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt, and the conviction must be set aside." 
State v. Klinge , 92 Hawaiʻi 577, 583, 994 P.2d 509, 515 (2000) 
(citation omitted) . We conclude, on this record, that the 
prosecutor's misstatement of law was not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt. 
For the foregoing reasons, the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit's Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence, 
5 The prosecutor misstated to the jury that Figueroa could not, 
based on the evidence, have acted under a mistake -of-fact. If the jury 
believed Figueroa's testimonial account --i.e., that he took what he 
believed to be "trash" from the "Ala Wai river" --it could have also found 
that Figueroa was acting under a mistake -of-fact, as properly defined. 
13   
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
filed on February 1, 2022,  and amended on December 27, 2022,  is 
vacated, and this case is remanded for a new trial.  
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, December 22, 2023. 
14  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
William H. Jameson, Jr., Chief Judge 
Deputy Public Defender For Defendant-Appellant. /s/ Karen T. Nakasone Associate Judge 
Brian R. Vincent, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
City and County of Honolulu, Associate Judge for Plaintiff-Appellee. 