NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000644
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
WARREN KEALA HORN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 13-1-331K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Warren Keala Horn (Horn) appeals 
from the "Order of Resentencing; Revocation of Probation" entered 
on August 4, 2016 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (circuit court).
1 Horn was convicted of one count of Felony 
Abuse of Family or Household Member in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 709-906(1) and (8), one count of Abuse of Family or Household Member in violation of HRS § 709-906(1), and one count of Ownership or Possession Prohibited in violation of HRS § 134-7(a) and/or (b) and (h), and was sentenced to probation. Thereafter, the State of Hawai
'i (State) filed a 
motion to revoke Horn's probation on the grounds that Horn 
1
 The Honorable Melvin Fujino signed the "Order of Resentencing;
Revocation of Probation" entered on August 4, 2016. The Honorable Ronald
 
Ibarra presided over the August 4, 2016 Hearing on Motion for Revocation of
Probation and to Resentence.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
1) committed a felony offense and 2) engaged in conduct that
 
threatened, annoyed, alarmed, harmed, or harassed the complaining
 witness (CW), in violation of the terms and conditions of his
 probation. The circuit court granted the State's motion and
 resentenced Horn to a maximum term of imprisonment of ten years.
 
On appeal, Horn contends that the circuit court:
 (1) abused its discretion in denying Horn's motions to
 
continue the revocation hearing because Horn was placed in an
 improper position having to choose to not testify in his own
 defense in order to avoid having such testimony used against him
 at his new criminal trial arising out of the same incident;
 
(2) erred by invading the province of the prosecutor by
 
sua sponte objecting to defense counsel's questioning of CW on
 re-cross when the State had opened the door on redirect regarding
 CW's ability to recall the incident, thereby denying Horn the
 right to a fair and impartial hearing;
 
(3) violated Horn's constitutional right to testify
 
when it failed to properly advise him of his right to testify
 pursuant to 
Tachibana v. State  and failed to ensure that Horn's
 
waiver of his right was voluntary and knowing;
 
(4) erred in admitting into evidence Horn's statements
 
to the police without the State first establishing that Horn's
 statement was voluntary;
 
(5) abused its discretion in revoking Horn's probation
 
where the circuit court's findings of fact were unsupported by
 the evidence presented, and did not indicate that Horn willfully
 and inexcusably failed to comply with the conditions of his
 probation.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we vacate and remand
 the case for further proceedings.
 
In his first point of error, Horn contends that the
 
circuit court abused its discretion in denying Horn's oral
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
requests to continue the hearing on the State's "Motion for
 
Revocation of Probation and Application for Warrant of Arrest"
 (Revocation Hearing) because doing so placed Horn in an improper
 position in having to choose to not testify in his own defense at
 the Revocation Hearing in order to avoid having such testimony
 used against him at his new criminal trial arising out of the
 same incident. Horn further argues that because he was compelled
 to not testify, he was not allowed a fair opportunity to
 controvert the State's evidence at the Revocation Hearing.
 
In resolving this point of error, we first address
 
whether or not any testimony provided by Horn at his Revocation
 Hearing could have been admissible at his new criminal trial. We
 then address whether Horn had "good cause" to request that the
 Revocation Hearing be continued until the conclusion of the new
 criminal case against him.
i.	 Any testimony provided by Horn at his Revocation
Hearing could have been admissible at his subsequent
criminal trial
 
Pursuant to the fifth amendment to the United States 
Constitution and article I, section 10 of the Hawai
'i 
Constitution, no person shall be compelled in any criminal case 
to be a witness against oneself, State v. Kupihea, 80 Hawai 'i 
307, 312, 909 P.2d 1122, 1127 (1996), thus, "a criminal defendant has the right to remain silent and not incriminate himself or herself in a criminal proceeding." State v. Kamana
'o, 103 Hawai 'i 
315, 320, 82 P.3d 401, 406 (2003) (citing State v. Russo, 67 Haw. 126, 131-33, 681 P.2d 553, 558-59 (1984); State v. Santiago, 53 Haw. 254, 265-66, 492 P.2d 657, 664 (1971)).
2 A defendant's 
testimony may not only potentially incriminate him in the 
2
 We note that this privilege against self-incrimination applies
during a probation revocation hearing. See Kamana' o, 103 Hawai' i at 321, 82
P.3d at 407 ("[T]he privilege against self-incrimination applies with equal
force during sentencing." (citations omitted)); State v. Villiarimo, 132Hawai'i 209, 219, 320 P.3d 874, 884 (2014) ("'When the court revokes
probation, it may impose on the defendant any sentence that might have been
imposed originally for the crime of which the defendant was convicted.' See 
HRS § 706–625(5). Thus, a revocation proceeding is akin to the initial
sentencing hearing."). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
criminal proceeding in which he is currently testifying, but may
 
also subject him to criminal liability later. Kupihea, 80
 
Hawai'i at 314, 909 P.2d at 1129; see also Simmons v. United 
States, 390 U.S. 377, 393 (1968) (noting that a defendant who
 wishes to establish standing "must do so at the risk that the
 words which he utters may later be used to incriminate him").
 
In State v. Flood, 159 N.H. 353, 355, 986 A.2d 626, 629
 
(2009), the Supreme Court of New Hampshire dealt with an issue
 almost identical to the one before us, wherein the defendant
 requested a continuance of her sentencing hearing until after the
 related criminal case against her was resolved. On appeal, the
 court recognized
 
that the decision whether to remain silent or to testify on
one's own behalf becomes particularly acute when the trial
court holds an imposition hearing prior to a related
criminal prosecution. The defendant must weigh whether to
testify and risk incrimination in the underlying criminal
prosecution, or to remain silent and be exposed to an
adverse decision, including imprisonment. By remaining
silent, the defendant cannot personally present mitigating
circumstances at the imposition hearing or personally deny
committing the alleged violations. While difficult, this
decision is a strategic one. This choice does not force the
 defendant to make an impermissible election between two
constitutional rights.
 
Id. at 355, 986 A.2d at 629.
 
We agree with the Flood court, and have found no
 
authority to support the opposite conclusion. A tension between
 
one's right to testify at a probation revocation hearing and
 one's right to remain silent does not amount to a constitutional
 violation. While a probationer may have a due process right to
 testify in his own defense at a probation revocation hearing,
 see, e.g., People v. Coleman, 13 Cal. 3d 867, 873, 533 P.2d 1024,
 1030-31 (1975), this right is satisfied where probationer has the
 option to testify at his probation revocation hearing. See
 
Flood, 159 N.H. at 357, 986 A.2d at 630.
3
 
3
 We also note that at a probation revocation hearing, which is akin
to a sentencing hearing, the defendant is entitled to allocution, which is
"the defendant's right to speak before sentence is imposed." State v. Chow, 
77 Hawai' i 241, 246, 883 P.2d 663, 668 (App. 1994). This right to allocution
is "constitutionally protected, independent and apart from the mandates ofstatute, under HRS § 706-604(1), and rule, under HRPP Rule 32(a)." Id. at 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In the instant case, Horn's counsel had, on four
 
occasions, requested that the circuit court continue the
 
Revocation Hearing until after Horn's new criminal case was
 resolved, because any testimony given by Horn at the Revocation
 Hearing in his own defense could potentially be used against him
 at his new trial. Horn had the option to testify in his own
 defense at the Revocation Hearing, however, he made the strategic
 choice not to testify in order to not risk incriminating himself
 at his upcoming trial. We conclude that the position Horn was
 placed in did not constitute a constitutional violation, and
 therefore any testimony that Horn could have given at the
 Revocation Hearing would not have been excepted from the general
 rule that a defendant's testimony may subject him to criminal
 liability in any later criminal proceeding. Accordingly, any
 testimony that Horn could have provided in his own defense at the
 Revocation Hearing could have been admissible at his subsequent
 criminal trial.
 
ii.	 Horn had "good cause" to request that the Revocation
Hearing be continued until the conclusion of the new
criminal case against him
 
We next consider whether the circuit court erred in
 
denying Horn's requests to continue the Revocation Hearing until
 
after Horn's new criminal case was resolved.
 
The appropriate standard for determining whether to grant a
continuance in a probation revocation or modification
proceeding should be the "good cause" standard. Pursuant to
 this test, a defendant must demonstrate that he or she has
"good cause" for requesting the continuance. Wright &
Miller, 3B Fed. Prac. & Proc.Crim. § 832 (4th ed.). Such a
 standard takes into account both "the request or consent of
the prosecution or defense . . . [and] the public interest
in [the] prompt disposition of the case." Id.
 
Villiarimo, 132 Hawai 'i at 217, 320 P.3d at 882. Hawai 'i 
appellate courts have considered what constitutes "good cause" in 
246-47, 883 P.2d at 668-69. Once the defendant is "afforded a 'personal
invitation to speak' under this procedure, no questions should arise in future
cases as to silence, ambiguity, or waiver with respect to the right of
allocution." Id. at 248, 883 P.2d at 670.
 
Here, Horn alleges no violation of his right to allocution.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
a variety of contexts, however, "[a]s a general rule, 'good
 
cause' means a substantial reason; one that affords a legal
 excuse." Id.
 (citations omitted). The supreme court has stated
 
that when considering whether a defendant's request to continue a
hearing constitutes "good cause," the court must assure that the
 defendant is given "a fair opportunity to supplement or
  
controvert the State's evidence at the revocation hearing." Id.
 
at 220, 320 P.3d at 885.
 
In 
Villiarimo, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court analyzed 
whether the defendant's request to continue his probation
 revocation hearing for the purpose of obtaining the testimony of
 a "trained medical professional," after the defendant's mental
 health was raised as an issue, constituted "good cause." In
 holding that Villiarimo had "good cause" to request a
 continuance, the supreme court reasoned:
 
Applying the good cause standard to the instant case, it is
evident that Villiarimo provided a "substantial reason" or
"legal excuse", see [State v. Senteno, 69 Haw. 363, 368, 742
P.2d 369, 373 (1987)], for the proceedings to be temporarily
suspended to obtain Dr. Fukumoto's testimony. The issue of
 Villiarimo's mental health was raised in the testimony of
the officer; however, as she was not a "trained medical
professional" the court prohibited her from testifying as to
whether Villiarimo was decompensating during the time of the
probation violations at issue and thus did not intentionally
violate the terms of his probation. Villiarimo's testimony
was the only testimony on decompensation at the proceeding,
but he could not medically substantiate the cause of the
decompensation and its likely effect on his behavior.
 
Dr. Fukumoto's testimony could have informed the court of
whether Villiarimo's condition affected his conduct during
the time of the violations, and if not, the reason why it
did not. This testimony would have been directly relevant
to Villiarimo's defense that there was insufficient evidence
 to demonstrate that he wilfully and inexcusably failed to
comply with the terms and conditions of his probation. See
 
State v. Quelnan, 70 Haw. 194, 767 P.2d 243 (1989) (holding
that a defendant has the right to "present a potentially
meritorious defense" at a probation hearing). Therefore,
Villiarimo had "good cause" for requesting a continuance to
obtain Dr. Fukumoto's testimony. Because this testimony was
at the heart of Villiarimo's defense to the probation
violations, the court's error in failing to grant a
continuance for Villiarimo to obtain Dr. Fukumoto's
 testimony was not harmless. Consequently, the court abused
its discretion in denying Villiarimo's request for a
continuance.
 
Id. at 220, 320 P.3d at 885. In short, the trial court had
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
abused its discretion in denying Villiarimo's request for a
 
continuance because testimony that was crucial to Villiarimo's
 defense would only have been available at a later hearing date.
 
Like Villiarimo, Horn presented a substantial reason
 
affording a legal excuse, for requesting a continuance. Because
 any testimony given by Horn at the Revocation Hearing could have
 been admissible at his new criminal trial, Horn was, in essence,
 forced to remain silent at the Revocation Hearing in order to not
 risk incriminating himself. We note the policy considerations
 behind holding a probation revocation hearing after a criminal
 trial arising out of the same conduct or incident.
4 However, the
 
mere fact that a related criminal charge is still pending at the
 time of a probation revocation hearing does not necessarily
 constitute "good cause" to grant a continuance.
 
In the instant case, it appears that Horn's own 
testimony may have been the only evidence that Horn could have presented in his defense at the Revocation Hearing. In considering "the request or consent of the prosecution or defense," Villiarimo, 132 Hawai
'i at 217, 320 P.3d at 882, we 
note that the State made no objections to Horn's multiple 
4
 
To the extent that petitioner's argument is based upon what
seems to be an unfair consequence of holding the violation
hearing before the criminal trial—that petitioner could be
convicted of violating his deferred sentence agreement, only
to be acquitted, pursuant to a higher burden of proof, at
his criminal trial—we sympathize. (Fn. omitted.) In the
 ordinary case, we see little public interest served by this
kind of timing. Were the order reversed, the alleged
violator could be held on high bail or without bail if he
were a poor bail risk. If there were a criminal conviction,
the subsequent violation decision would be simple; if there
were an acquittal, the court conducting the violation
hearing could proceed with full knowledge of that result,
remaining free to weigh evidence by a lower standard, but
having in mind the acquittal. The result is apt to be, if
not also (to) appear, more just.
 
. . .
 Perhaps . . . it would be preferable for the state to have
held the violation hearing after the criminal trial.
 
Coleman, 13 Cal. 3d at 887–88, 533 P.2d at 1041 (internal quotation marks
omitted) (quoting Flint v. Mullen, 499 F.2d 100, 104-05 (1st Cir. 1974)).
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
requests for a continuance, and the circuit court gave no reason
 
as to why the Revocation Hearing could not be postponed until
 after Horn's new criminal trial was over. In light of, inter
 alia, the fact that there was no objection to Horn's requests and
 no reason stated for the denial of those requests, we conclude
 that Horn sufficiently demonstrated "good cause" for a
 continuance and, thus, the circuit court abused its discretion.
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the circuit court's
 
"Order of Resentencing; Revocation of Probation" entered on
 August 4, 2016, and remand the case for further proceedings
 consistent with this Summary Disposition Order.
5
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, October 23, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Robert K. Olson,
(Olson & Sons),for Defendant-Appellant. 
David Blancett-Maddock,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
5
 Because we are vacating and remanding the case based upon Horn's
first point of error, we need not address the remaining points of error.
 
8
 