     
      
 
        
        
         
     . . . . NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000603 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
JOHANNA DURAN DECKER, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 3DTA-19-00803) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Chan, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Johanna Duran Decker (Decker), 
self-represented, appeals from the Judgment and Notice of Entry 
of Judgment, filed on July 25, 2019, in the District Court of the 
Third Circuit (District Court). 1
Decker was convicted of Driving Without a License, in 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 286-102(b)(3) (Supp.
2019),  and No No-Fault Insurance, in violation of HRS 2 
1 The Honorable Robert J. Crudele presided. 
2 HRS § 286-102 states, in relevant part: 
§286-102 Licensing. 
(
b) A person operating the following category or
combination of categories of motor vehicles shall be examined
as provided in section 286-108 and duly licensed by theexaminer of drivers: NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  . . . 
 
      
      
       
       
       
      
      
      
          
         
           
           
   § 431:10C-104(a) (2019).3 
On appeal, Decker contends that the District Court 
erred in convicting her because: (1) "sitting behind the steering 
wheel in the front left seat of Defendant's private automobile 
did not automatically prove she was engaged in the commercial act 
of 'driving' as defined by [HRS §] 286-2"; (2) "Plaintiff 
Medeiros testified in court that there were no advertisements on 
Defendant's automobile soliciting the use of automobile nor any 
evidence Defendant was engaged in transporting people or products 
as a driver"; (3) "Alicia Omelau, custodian of records at the 
Department of Motor Vehicles[,] testified that she did not know 
of any application/contract between Defendant and the DMV for a 
Hawaii State driver's license nor had a Hawaii State driver's 
license ever been issued"; (4) "[t]heir testimonies proved 
Defendant had not applied for the licensed occupation of any kind 
of driver (bus driver, uber driver, taxi driver, commercial 
driver, etc.), was not engaged in driving, and had not injured 
anyone nor damaged property that would be probable cause of a 
clearly and articulable crime for Plaintiff Medeiros to detain, 
identify, arrest and put to trial the Defendant"; (5) there was 
no probable cause to arrest her; (6) the District Court "had no 
jurisdiction over the Defendant living in the Hawaiian Kingdom 
and traveling upon lands of the Hawaiian Kingdom"; (7) there can 
be no penalty upon someone exercising the right to travel; (8) 
(
3) Passenger cars of any gross vehicle weight rating,
buses designed to transport fifteen or feweroccupants, trucks and vans having a gross vehicleweight rating of eighteen thousand pounds or less,and autocycles as described in paragraph (2) ofthe definition of "motorcycle" in section 286-2[.] 
3 HRS § 431:10C-104 states, in relevant part: 
§431:10C-104 Conditions of operation and registration 
of motor vehicles. (a) Except as provided in section
431:10C-105, no person shall operate or use a motor vehicleupon any public street, road, or highway of this State at anytime unless such motor vehicle is insured at all times under a motor vehicle insurance policy. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the judgment against her restricts her right to apply for the 
privilege of driving in the future; and (9) "one who is traveling 
upon their own highways can not [sic] be forced to contract and 
insure their own private automobile for any possible future 
accidents." 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we 
resolve Decker's points of error as follows: 
Points of Error 2, 3, and 4.4 Decker challenges 
witness testimony in Points of Error 2, 3, and 4. However, there 
is no transcript of the cited witness testimony in the record on 
appeal. It is the appellant's burden to demonstrate error in the 
record. State v. Hoang, 93 Hawai# i 333, 336, 3 P.3d 499, 502 
(2000). 
Decker's failure to include the transcript in the record 
on appeal effectively precludes this court from determining 
points of error 2, 3, and 4. See id. "Because we cannot verify 
the alleged error from the record in this case, and we will not presume error based upon a silent record, the presumption that 
the trial court acted without error must prevail." Id. 
Point of error 1. Contrary to Decker's claim, she was 
not convicted of Driving Without a License for merely sitting 
behind the steering wheel of her vehicle. 
Under HRS § 286-2 (2007), "'Driver' means every person 
who drives, operates, or is in actual physical control of a motor 
vehicle in any place open to the general public for purposes of 
vehicular traffic or who is exercising control over or steering a 
vehicle being towed or pushed by a motor vehicle," and "'Drive' 
means to drive, operate, or be in physical control of a motor 
vehicle in any place open to the general public for purposes of 
vehicular traffic." 
4 Points of error 2, 3, and 4 are discussed out of chronological
order here in order to logically address Decker's claims. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In its Findings of Fact,5 the District Court found 
that: Officer Medeiros observed a Toyota pickup truck traveling 
on Highway 130 in the County of Hawai# i; Highway 130 is a highway 
within the meaning of HRS §§ 431:10C-104 and 286-102; Officer Medeiros, using a radar gun, determined that the pickup truck was 
traveling in excess of the applicable speed limit; Officer 
Medeiros conducted a traffic stop of the vehicle and made contact 
with the driver, which was Decker; Decker failed to produce any 
driver's license or permit indicating that she was authorized to 
operate any type of motor vehicle; Decker was the operator of the 
Toyota pickup truck at the time of the traffic stop; and the 
Custodian of Records of the Driver's License and Registration 
Department of the County of Hawaii's search of its database 
failed to disclose that Decker had been issued any driver's 
license or permit by the State of 
Hawai# i.  Therefore, Decker's 
conviction for Driving Without a License was based upon Decker being the driver or operator of her vehicle, without being 
appropriately examined and duly licensed, and was not for merely 
sitting behind the steering wheel of the vehicle. 
Points of error 4 and 5. For the first time on appeal, 
Decker asserts a lack of probable cause for her arrest. 
"[A]bsent unusual circumstances, any defects in a pretrial 
determination of probable cause are rendered moot, or are without 
any effective remedy, which is much the same thing, by a 
subsequent conviction[.]" In re Doe, 102 Hawai# i 75, 78, 73 P.3d 
29, 32 (2003) (footnote and citation omitted). 
Point of error 6. Decker's claim that the District 
Court lacked jurisdiction over her because she was living and 
5 As stated above, Decker failed to include the transcript in the
record on appeal. Insofar as the District Court relied upon witness testimony
in forming the Findings of Fact recited infra,  the failure to include the 
transcript also precludes this court from determining any asserted error in
these Findings of Fact and we are thus bound by them. See Hoang, 93 Hawai #i 
at 336, 3 P.3d at 502; see also Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai #i 43, 63, 85 P.3d
150, 170 (2004) ("findings of fact that are not challenged on appeal arebinding on the appellate court" (brackets, ellipses, and citations omitted)). 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
traveling in the Kingdom of Hawai# i is without merit. State v. 
Kaulia, 128 Hawai# i 479, 487, 291 P.3d 377, 385 (2013) ("[W]e 
reaffirm that '[w]hatever may be said regarding the lawfulness' 
of its origins, 'the State of 
Hawai# i is now[] a lawful 
government.' Individuals claiming to be citizens of the Kingdom and not of the State are not exempt from application of the 
State's laws." (citations and ellipsis omitted)). 
Points of error 7 and 9. Decker claims that her 
convictions impose a penalty for and infringe upon her 
constitutional right to travel, and that she cannot be forced to 
obtain no-fault insurance as a condition of driving a vehicle. 
Driving is a privilege that only ripens into a constitutionally 
protected property interest once it is conferred. State v. 
Toyomura, 80 Hawai# i 8, 21, 904 P.2d 893, 906 (1995). Because 
Decker did not have a driver's license, she had no 
constitutionally protected property interest. 
Further, the right 
to travel under the United States Constitution is not implicated unless interstate travel is involved. State v. French, 77 
Hawai# i 222, 231, 883 P.2d 644, 653 (App. 1994). In this case, 
Decker's travel was limited to Highway 130 on 
Hawai# i island and 
thus did not constitute interstate travel. As to intrastate travel, the supreme court has recognized a right to freedom of 
movement under article I, section 2 of the Hawai# i Constitution, 
but has also recognized that it is subject to the State's police power to regulate an individual's conduct for the protection of 
society. Id. Thus HRS §§ 286-102 and 431:10C-104(b) are 
constitutional because the requirements on the operation of motor vehicles are rationally related to the purpose of the statutes 
and do not violate the right to freedom of movement. Id. at 
229-32, 883 P.2d at 651-54. 
Point of error 8. 
Decker states: "The Judgment against 
her, restricts in advance, Defendant's right to apply for the privilege of driving in the future if chosen to." As part of her 
sentence for No No-Fault Insurance, the District Court imposed a 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
90-day driver's license suspension. "The examiner of drivers 
shall not issue any license to any person: (1) Whose license has 
been suspended by a court of competent jurisdiction during the 
suspension period[.]" HRS § 286-104 (Supp. 2019). Thus, 
Decker's conviction for No No-Fault Insurance precludes her from 
obtaining a driver's license during the suspension period. 
However, Decker provides no argument as to why imposition of the 
suspension period is impermissible with respect to the privilege 
of driving. Therefore, the point of error is deemed waived. 
Hawai# i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(7). 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment and 
Notice of Entry of Judgment, filed on July 25, 2019, in the 
District Court of the Third Circuit, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 24, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Derrick H. M. Chan
Presiding Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge Leneigha S. Downs,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Hawai# i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Johanna Duran Decker,
Self-Represented, Defendant-Appellant. 
6 