NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000361 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
WW, Petitioner-Appellant,
v. 
DS, Respondent-Appellee,
and 
CHILD SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT AGENCY, STATE OF HAWAI# I,
Respondent-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(FC-P NO. 16-1-0149) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Reifurth and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Petitioner-Appellant WW1 (Father) appeals from the 
Stipulated Order (Stipulated Order) entered by the Family Court 
of the Second Circuit (Family Court)2 on February 15, 2018, and 
the Order Denying Motion for Reconsideration to Alter or to Amend 
Judgment or Order for Relief from Judgment or Order entered on April 4, 2018 (Order Denying Reconsideration). For the reasons 
explained below, we vacate both orders and remand to the Family 
Court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
I. 
Father initiated the action below on November 17, 2016, 
by filing a Petition for Paternity (Petition) against Respondent-
Appellee DS (Mother) and Respondent-Appellee Child Support 
Enforcement Agency, State of Hawai# i (CSEA). The Family Court 
convened an evidentiary hearing on Father's Petition on 
1 Only the parties' initials are used because this case involves
custody of a minor child. Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 571-54 (2018). 
2 The Honorable Douglas J. Sameshima presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
October 25, 2017. Father and Mother attended the hearing and 
were represented by their respective attorneys.   After a lunch 
recess, counsel informed the Family Court that a settlement had been reached. Counsel placed the terms of the settlement on the record. After the terms were recited, the Family Court stated: 3
THE COURT: I think we're done here. Put it in 
writing and we will -- I'll sign it. 
The Family Court did not ask Father or Mother on the record whether they understood and agreed with the settlement terms that had been placed on the record, if they had any questions about what had just taken place, or if anyone was forcing, pressuring, or threatening either of them into settling. However, Father and Mother were both represented by counsel. In a case involving a disputed settlement, the Hawai# i Supreme Court stated: 
Courts presume that attorneys abide by their professional
responsibilities; outside of disciplinary proceedings, we donot interfere with the attorney-client relationship andconduct relating thereto. Rule 1.4 of the Hawai #i Rules of 
Professional Conduct (HRPC)(1993) provides: 
(a) A lawyer shall keep a client reasonablyinformed about the status of a matter and promptly comply with reasonable requests forinformation. A lawyer who receives a writtenoffer of settlement in a civil controversy ...shall promptly inform the client of itssubstance unless prior discussions with theclient have left it clear that the proposal willbe unacceptable. 
(b) A lawyer shall explain a matter to the
extent reasonably necessary to permit the clientto make informed decisions regarding therepresentation. 
(Emphases added.) Clearly, it was the duty of Counsel No. 1,and not the court, to keep [the clients] reasonably informedabout the terms and conditions of settlement; we presume inour review that he did so. 
Regardless, it appears that [the
clients] were informed of and understood the terms ofsettlement before going on the record. Judge No. 2discussed settlement with each of them, in chambers, priorto calling the case. Additionally, at no point did CounselNo. 1 indicate that he needed more time to explain the termsof settlement to the [clients]; nor did [the clients]indicate to the court that they would like more time toconsider the settlement. 
3 CSEA did not participate in the hearing. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Assocs. Fin. Servs. Co. of Hawai# i v. Mijo, 87 Hawai# i 19, 31, 950 
P.2d 1219, 1231 (1998) (Mijo
). 
In this case, by letter dated January 23, 2018, 
Mother's counsel submitted a proposed stipulated order to the 
Family Court, with a copy to Father's counsel. On January 24, 2018, Father's counsel filed a response to Mother's counsel's letter, objecting to Mother's proposed stipulated order. Father's counsel also submitted an ex parte motion for an interim parenting order, which the Family Court denied on January 29, 2018. On February 15, 2018, the Family Court signed and filed the Stipulated Order as proposed by Mother's counsel; it was signed by Mother and her counsel but not by Father or by Father's counsel.
4 
On February 26, 2018, Father's counsel filed a motion 
for reconsideration to alter or amend the Stipulated Order. Mother's counsel filed a response and an errata. The Family Court's Order Denying Reconsideration was entered on April 4, 2018. Father, as a self-represented litigant, filed a notice of appeal on April 26, 2018. 
On May 4, 2018, the Family Court ordered the parties to 
prepare proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law pursuant to Hawai# i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 52(a) (2015).  The 
Family Court entered its Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law Regarding Stipulated Order (FOF&COL
) on June 18, 2018. 
Father filed his opening brief, as a self-represented 
litigant, on July 28, 2018. Mother did not file an answering brief or obtain an extension before the deadline on September 6, 2018. On November 15, 2018, Mother's counsel filed an improper Notice of Withdrawal of Counsel. 
Because the notice stated that 
Mother had elected to represent herself, provided Mother's mailing and email addresses, and was signed by Mother, this court treated the notice as a motion for withdrawal or discharge of appellate counsel pursuant to Hawai# i Rules of Appellate 
4 The record also contains an "Order Regarding Child Custody and
Parenting; Exhibit 'A'" that appears to have been prepared by Father's counsel
and that was filed, stamped (apparently by the court) as "unsigned" andwithout any Exhibit "A," on February 15, 2018. The record does not indicate when or how the document was transmitted to the Family Court. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 50 (2016). The motion was granted and 
Mother was given additional time to file an answering brief. On 
February 4, 2019, Mother filed a notice that she did not intend to file an answering brief. 
"[W]hen an appellee fails to respond, an appellant is 
required only to make a prima facie showing of error in order to obtain the relief sought." 
Omerod v. Heirs of Kaheananui, 116 
Hawai# i 239, 269, 172 P.3d 983, 1013 (2007). 
II. 
Father contends that the Family Court erroneously 
denied his motion for reconsideration because the Stipulated Order failed to accurately reflect the settlement terms purportedly placed on the record during the evidentiary hearing on October 25, 2017. Father specifically challenges the Family Court's findings of fact (
FOF) nos. 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 
22, 24, and 26, and conclusions of law (COL) nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, and 
5. 
A trial court's label of a finding of fact or a 
conclusion of law is not determinative of the standard of review. 
Crosby v. State Dep't of Budget & Fin., 76 Hawai# i 332, 340, 876 
P.2d 1300, 1308 (1994). Whether the parties entered into an agreement is essentially a question of fact. Mijo, 87 Hawai# i at 
28, 950 P.2d at 1228 (citation omitted). We review the family court's findings of fact under the "clearly erroneous" standard. "A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when, despite the evidence to support the finding, the appellate court is left with a definite and firm conviction, in reviewing the entire record, that a mistake has been committed." Id. (citation omitted). 
"A trial court's determination regarding the enforce-
ability of a settlement agreement is a conclusion of law review[ed] de novo." Id. (emphasis in original) (citation omitted). The family court's conclusions of law are "not binding upon an appellate court and are freely reviewable for their correctness." Fisher v. Fisher, 111 
Hawai# i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 
355, 360 (2006) (citation omitted). 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. 
Father's challenge to FOF nos. 15, 16, 17, 18, and 19 
raises a threshold issue. The Family Court found: 
15. There was agreement to use Mother's Exhibit AAA
(Proposed Order) . . . as the template for the settlement
negotiations between the parties and their counsel. . . . 
16. The parties used Mother's Proposed Order as the
template for the final order and negotiated modificationsand additions to the Proposed Order. 
The parties agreed
that those portions of the Proposed Order not specificallymodified or addressed would remain in the final order. Both parties had copies of the Proposed Order during thesettlement negotiations that lasted several hours. 
17. . . . Other provisions of the Proposed Order not
specifically addressed or read into the record were notchallenged by either party nor was there a request to deleteor modify those sections of the Proposed Order that wasbeing used as the template for the final Order. There was,therefore, agreement to all provisions of the Proposed Ordernot otherwise modified or addressed by the parties duringthe settlement negotiations. 
18.
 Upon agreement of the parties, the settled,
Stipulated [sic] Order was placed on the record. Bothcounsel acknowledged agreement on the record. When placingthe final agreement on the record, counsel for Mother stated"Okay. We're - I'm basically following that proposed orderand making changes where they are." 
Transcript of the
Proceedings, October 25, 2017, "Tr." at page 2, lines 15-17. 
19. Father's first proposed order was submitted on
February 26, 2018, attached to his Motion for Consideration[sic] filed on February 26, 2018. Father's proposed order
is incorrect in that it failed to track the template forsettlement that was used during negotiations of the finalsettlement and does not contain the provisions agreed to onthe record on October 25, 2017. 
(underscoring and parenthesis in original). The "Transcript of 
the Proceedings" cited by the Family Court was Exhibit "A" to Father's response to Mother's attorney's letter to the court dated January 23, 2018, filed on January 24, 2018. "Mother's Exhibit AAA" referred to by the Family Court was a document titled "Proposed Order." It was originally attached as Exhibit 1 to Mother's Trial Memorandum, filed on October 24, 2017, served by hand-delivery to Father's counsel on October 20, 2017. By email dated October 23, 2017, Mother's counsel sent Mother's Exhibit AAA to Father's counsel, asking him to "replace this with the one provided to you earlier." Exhibit 1 to Mother's Trial Memorandum and Mother's Exhibit AAA are identical except for the 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exhibit identification, and will be referred to as the "Proposed
Order." 
Father disputes that the Proposed Order was to provide 
any settlement terms not specifically stated when counsel placed 
the settlement terms on the record. The transcript of proceedings shows the following colloquy: 
THE COURT: Okay. And the record should reflect the 
presence of counsel and the parties. And, ah, we've had a
discussion? 
[MOTHER'S COUNSEL]: Yes. 
[FATHER'S COUNSEL]: Multiple. [MOTHER'S COUNSEL]: Multiple. THE COURT: And? [MOTHER'S COUNSEL]: We have an agreement. THE COURT: Good. [MOTHER'S COUNSEL]: Should I put it in the record? [FATHER'S COUNSEL]: Go ahead. THE COURT: Yes, please. [MOTHER'S COUNSEL]: Okay. We're -- I'm basically
following that proposed order and making changes where they
are. 
(underscoring added). Contrary to FOF 18, Father's counsel never 
explicitly "acknowledged agreement on the record." The Family Court did not ask Father's counsel whether Mother's counsel's statement – that she was "basically following that proposed order and making changes where they are" – was accurate. However, both attorneys then proceeded to refer to various settlement terms that were "written in the proposed order" as being "the same as it is now, pretty much[.]" After the modified terms were recited, the following exchange took place: 
THE COURT: Okay. Anything else? 
[FATHER'S COUNSEL]: No. 
THE COURT: I think we're done here. Put it in 
writing and we will -- I'll sign it. 
There is substantial evidence in the record to support the Family 
Court's finding that the parties agreed the Proposed Order would 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
serve as the template for the settlement, and that portions of 
the Proposed Order not modified would remain in the final order. 
IV. 
The remaining material issue presented by Father's 
appeal is whether the Stipulated Order accurately reflects the terms contained in the Proposed Order and any modifications placed on the record during the proceedings on the record. HFCR Rule 58 (2015) provides, in relevant part: 
(g) Preparation of stipulated order when provisions on
record. If a party or parties are present in court, with or
without an attorney, and state for the record that theparties stipulate to the entry of orders, the stipulationshall be reduced to writing by the attorney or partydesignated by the court, within 10 days, and shall beapproved by all parties and their attorneys, if any, unlesssuch a requirement is waived by the court. If a party whowas present in court fails or refuses to approve thestipulation and order within 5 days after receipt, the courtmay approve the stipulation and order without approval ofeither the party or the party's attorney, if any, providedthat the provisions are consistent with the provisionsstipulated to in court, and provided that the attorney orparty preparing the stipulation and order informs the courtin writing that either the party or the party's attorney, ifany, refused or failed to approve the stipulation and orderwithin the 5-day period. 
(emphasis added). HFCR Rule 58.1 (2015) provides, in relevant 
part: 
(a) Forms of stipulations and orders. A stipulation
not made in open court shall be in writing, signed by the
parties and/or their attorneys, and submitted to the courtfor approval. 
(emphasis added). The Stipulated Order was not signed by Father 
or Father's then-counsel. Accordingly, the material terms of the Stipulated Order must have been either "made in open court" or contained in the Proposed Order to be binding on Father.
5 
5 The applicability of HFCR Rule 58.1 to the Stipulated Order
distinguishes this case from Mijo, in which a settlement was enforced despite
there being a dispute over whether the plaintiff would "cancel" or "forgive"the defendants' loan. The disputed language in Mijo was found to be a taxconsideration which was held to be "not part of settlement." 87 Hawai #i at 
31-32, 950 P.2d at 1231-32. In this case, Father cannot be bound to astipulation that was not either in writing and signed by him or his counsel,
or made in open court – e.g., stated in the transcript of proceedings. 
7 FOF No. 24.b. FOF No. 24.a. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Father challenges FOF no. 24.a.: 
[24.] a. Provision 2; Page 2, Third paragraph,
Right to make final decisions: The language in the final
Stipulated Order is consistent with the Tr. at page 2, lines1-25. 
Mother is allowed to make final decisions after 
conferring between the parties. 
(underscoring in original). The transcript of proceedings shows 
that Mother's counsel stated: 
So, um, ah, as to the legal custody on page two the
understanding is that they will have joint legal custody,
um, if they're -- if they confer -- they have to confer, andif there's, um, no agreement with, um, in them conferring --conferring, they have to go to a mediator or a third partyto assist them make [sic] a decision, and if they're unableto, then they can go back to court -- ah, then mother makesthe final decision. 
(emphasis added). Father's counsel did not indicate 
disagreement. There was no further discussion of this issue. We disagree with Father's contention that the Stipulated Order can be read to mean that Mother's right to decide substantive matters when the parties cannot agree would preclude Father from further pursuing those matters in court; the Stipulated Order at page 2 states "Before returning to Court . . ." thus contemplating the parties' right to return to court on issues that cannot be resolved. FOF no. 24.a. is not clearly erroneous. 
Father challenges FOF no. 24.b.: 
[24.] b. Exchanges at Haliimaile park: The 
Stipulated Order states that when the child is not at
school, "All exchanges of the child shall be at Haliimailepark unless otherwise agreed between the parties." Order;
Page 3, paragraph 1, last line. 
That is confirmed in the 
Tr., page. [sic] 5, lines 9-12. The language regardingexchanges of the child is the same in the final Order as itwas in the Proposed Order and was not disputed or changed insettlement negotiations. 
(underscoring added). The underscored portion of the finding is 
erroneous because the drop-off and pick-up locations in the 
8 FOF No. 24.d. FOF No. 24.c. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Proposed Order are not only at school or at Haliimaile Park; they 
include Father's residence, Kahului McDonald's on Dairy Road, Hanzawa's Variety Store, or "at other locations if agreed upon by the parties." The transcript of proceedings states: 
[MOTHER'S COUNSEL]: All, um, drop-offs and pick-ups
will be at school. If they're not at school, they're on the
weekend, then it will be at Haliimaile Park; right? 
[FATHER'S COUNSEL]: Yeah. 
. . . . 
[MOTHER'S COUNSEL]: . . . Pick-up and drop-off at
Haliimaile. 
However, the Stipulated Order provides for various pick-up and 
drop-off locations including "school," "Haliimaile park," "St. Joseph Church parking lot, Makawao, Hawaii," or "at other locations if agreed upon by the parties." FOF no. 24.b. is clearly erroneous. 
Father challenges FOF no. 24.c.: 
[24.] c. Cancellation of visits if child is sick: 
The language was originally in the Proposed Order on page 4,
first full paragraph, specifically states that, "If thechild is seriously ill and child is under physician's care,physician's recommendations shall be followed, and [Mother]may cancel visits". That language was not challenged in the
settlement negotiations and, therefore, was accepted andremains as written in the final Order. 
The quoted language is contained in the Proposed Order. There is 
nothing in the transcript of proceedings indicating that the language was modified during settlement negotiations. FOF no. 24.c. is not clearly erroneous. 
Father challenges FOF no. 24.d.: 
[24.] d. Telephone access: Telephone access was
discussed at the hearing and, accordingly, in the Tr., page
17, lines 7-9, makes it clear that there is one telephonecall per day. 
This agreement was added to the final
Stipulated Order and is reflected on page 5, #7 "TelephoneAccess". 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Proposed Order stated: 
7. Telephone Access: The parents shall allow the
child reasonable telephone access to the other parent while
in his or her care. 
The transcript of proceedings states: 
[MOTHER'S COUNSEL]: Telephone access. Mother will 
initiate nightly -- nightly good night calls to father, ah,I mean, um, to father and then let the father and son talkand say good night. And will investigate, um, the abilityto get FaceTime and/or Skype in Haiku. 
[FATHER'S COUNSEL]: Wait, I thought that if available. 
[MOTHER'S COUNSEL]: If they --THE COURT: Yeah, if available. [FATHER'S COUNSEL]: It will be FaceTime. [MOTHER'S COUNSEL]: 
If available. Okay. 
. . . . 
[FATHER'S COUNSEL]: Um, my client would like to be
able to initiate phone calls, good night calls, or good
night Skype visits with [Child], ah --
THE COURT: 
Well, I -- I don't think there's a --
there's no bar from communication. Ah, the way it's set up,mom will initiate them. If dad has to go to something orhas a [sic] appointment or something and wants to talksooner, I don't think there's anything wrong with thateither. You're not barred from calling just to talk to him. 
[FATHER]: Oh, okay. I can make -- I can initiate the 
phone call then. 
THE COURT: Yeah. But mom -- but if you don't for
some reason, mom has an affirmative duty to at least make anattempt to get in touch with you. 
The issue of weekend good morning calls between Father and Child 
when Child was with Mother was raised but was never resolved during the record proceedings. The Stipulated Order provides: 
7. Telephone Access : There shall be no more than 
one call per day to either parent when the child is with the
other parent. The parent the child is with shall initiate anightly goodnight call to the other parent before bedtime sothat the child may say goodnight to the other parent.Father may investigate skype or facetime options, foravailability in Haiku. 
In the event the child asks to speak to the other
parent, the custodial parent shall call the other parent for 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the child. When the child is old enough, he may initiate
calls to his parents himself. 
FOF no. 24.d. is clearly erroneous. The Stipulated Order does 
not fully or accurately reflect the transcript of proceedings. 
FOF No. 24.e. 
Father challenges FOF no. 24.e.: 
[24.] e. Holiday Schedule: The Holiday Schedule
provision 8, pages. [sic] 5-6 of the final Stipulated Order
is the same as the Holiday Schedule in the Proposed Orderprovision 9, pages. [sic] 5-6. The Holiday Schedule has not
been modified and was the same one on the proposed orderused as a template for negotiation on October 25, 2017,there are no changes. The Tr., page 6, lines 11-12 reads,
"The holiday schedule is as written in the proposed order". 
The FOF accurately recites the content of the transcript. 
However, the holiday schedule in the Proposed Order differs from the holiday schedule in the Stipulated Order because the pick-up and drop-off locations are not the same. Since the holiday schedule is not as written in the Proposed Order, FOF no. 24.e. is clearly erroneous. 
FOF No. 24.f. 
Father challenges FOF no. 24.f.: 
[24.] f. Co-Parenting classes: Co-Parenting classes
was [sic] not modified. It was in the Proposed Order
template as #21 on page 9, and still in the final Stipulated
Order as #19 on page 9. 
The additional requirement in the
Proposed Order template that, "each parent shall continueparent education classes with appropriate agency......" wasdeleted from the final Stipulated Order, by agreement. 
The FOF accurately recites that paragraph 21 of the Proposed 
Order is identical to paragraph 19 of the Stipulated Order. However, the transcript of proceedings shows that the provision should not have been in the Stipulated Order: 
[MOTHER'S COUNSEL]: Um, that we took care of the
coparenting thing already. Um, we're withdrawing the
parenting education thing. 
FOF no. 24.f. is clearly erroneous. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
FOF No. 24.g. 
Father challenges FOF no. 24.g.: 
[24.] g. Reimbursement by Father to Mother for his
share of cost for Custody Evaluation: The total owed by
Father to Mother, according to the Transcript of October 25,2017, was, "one half of Dr. Simon's bill of $3,250.00 to momwithin the year". The final Stipulated Order states thatthe sum "of $3,250.00, paying a minimum of $270.00 permonth, within 12 months of the signing of this Order for hisshare of the cost of the Custody Evaluation." This was an agreement to pay the debt monthly over time. The agreedupon terms is not in the Transcript. 
The FOF accurately quotes the transcript of proceedings and a 
portion of paragraph 23 of the Stipulated Order. FOF no. 24.g. is correct that Father owed a total of half of the $3,250 bill. But the Stipulated Order also requires that "Payments shall be made by the 1
st of each month to the Respondent." FOF 24.g. is 
clearly erroneous because there is no agreement in the record about a minimum monthly payment due on the first day of each month. 
FOF No. 24.h. 
Father challenges FOF no. 24.h.: 
[24.] h. Reimbursement of Preschool Expenses: The
Stipulated Order states, Provision #24, page 11, that Father
shall reimburse Mother $1,950.00 by July 1, 2018, by payingher a minimum of $200 per month. 
The Tr. states that Father 
shall pay Mother $200.00 per month commencing November, 2017through July, 2018, Tr., page 12, lines 5-8. In an oversight the language negotiated by the parties fails tostate the specific amount of money Father owes, but it waspreviously stated in the Stipulated Order as $1,950.00, andthe Court finds this amount to be reasonable. 
The Stipulated Order states: 
24. Preschool Reimbursement : [Father] shall
reimburse [Mother] the sum of $1,950.00, paying a minimum of$200.00 per month, by July 1, 2018. 
The reimbursement is 
for preschool expenses paid for [sic] [Mother]. Paymentsshall be made by the 1
st of each month to the [Mother]. 
There was no equivalent provision in the Proposed Order. There 
is only one mention of preschool expenses in the transcript of proceedings: 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[MOTHER'S COUNSEL]: Okay. Um, um, Mrs. [sic] [W]'s
going to pay the second half of preschool this year, um, at
the rate of $200.00 a month starting November 2017 to July,ah, 2018. 
The transcript is ambiguous about who is paying the second half 
of preschool, and the total monthly payments do not add up to $1,950.00. FOF no. 24.h. is clearly erroneous. 
FOF No. 20 
Father also challenges FOF no. 20: 
20. The final Stipulated Order reflecting the
agreement of the parties was filed on February 15, 2018.
Said Order reflected a true and accurate representation ofthe parties' agreement regarding all issues, entered on therecord on October 25, 2017. See Exhibit "3", attached.[ ] 
6
(underscoring in original) (footnote added). Because the 
Stipulated Order contained material terms which were neither in the Proposed Order nor "made in open court," FOF no. 20 is clearly erroneous. 
COL No. 5 
Because of the clearly erroneous FOFs, COL no. 5, which
states: 
5. Mother's Stipulated Order, submitted to the
Court on January 23, 2018, accurately reflects the agreement
placed on the record as agreed to by the parties onOctober 25, 2017. 
(underscoring in original) is wrong as a conclusion of law, and 
would be clearly erroneous if regarded as a finding of fact. We need not address the remaining points of error presented by Father. 
V. 
For the foregoing reasons, the Stipulated Order and the 
Order Denying Reconsideration are vacated, and this case is 
6 There were no exhibits attached to the Stipulated Order. 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
remanded to the Family Court for further proceedings consistent 
with this opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 2, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
WW,
Petitioner-Appellant, Pro Se. 
Chief Judge
Lynn K. Kashiwabara,Deputy Attorney General,State of 
Hawai# i,
for Respondent-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
14 