NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000066
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
STANLEY S. L. KONG, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-0683(2))

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Stanley S.L. Kong (Kong) appeals
 
from the "Order Denying Defendant's Motion to Reconsider or
 
Reduce" (Order Denying Reduction of Sentence), filed on February
 5, 2015 in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (circuit
 court).
1
 
On appeal, Kong contends the circuit court erred when 
it denied Kong's Motion to Reconsider or Reduce filed pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 35(b), in which he 
sought to reduce his sentence, because: (1) the circuit court did not independently consider the merits of the motion; (2) the circuit court did not comply with the framework set forth in State v. Sinagoga, 81 Hawai
'i 421, 918 P.2d 228 (App. 1996) 
overruled on other grounds by State v. Veikoso, 102 Hawai 'i 219, 
1
 The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided, except where otherwise
indicated.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
226 n.8, 74 P.3d 575, 582 n.8 (2003); and (3) Plaintiff-Appellee 
State of Hawai 'i (State) violated the terms of a plea agreement 
when it objected to Kong's motion. 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm.
 
I. Background
 
On April 11, 2011, the circuit court filed a Judgment
 
of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) convicting Kong of Count 1:
 Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Second Degree and Count 2:
 Prohibited Acts Related to Drug Paraphernalia.
2 Kong was
 
sentenced to ten (10) years imprisonment for Count 1 and five (5)
 years imprisonment for Count 2 with terms to run consecutively
 for a total of fifteen (15) years imprisonment. 
On May 10, 2011, in a prior appeal in appellate case 
No. CAAP-11-393, Kong appealed from the Judgment. In that appeal, Kong (1) challenged his sentence, contending that the circuit court did not adequately justify the imposition of consecutive sentencing; (2) challenged the circuit court's use of Kong's Presentence Investigation (PSI) report in sentencing him because he contended it contained vacated convictions; and (3) contended the circuit court did not conduct a proper on-the­record colloquy when Kong terminated from the Maui Drug Court (MDC). State v. Kong, 129 Hawai
'i 135, 139, 295 P.3d 1005, 1009 
(App. 2013). This court affirmed Kong's conviction. Id. at 137, 
295 P.3d at 1007. The Hawai 'i Supreme Court accepted certiorari 
and on December 10, 2013, the supreme court affirmed this court's March 1, 2013 Judgment on Appeal. State v. Kong, 131 Hawai
'i 94, 
108, 315 P.3d 720, 734 (2013). 
On December 13, 2013, Kong filed a "Motion to
 
Reconsider or Reduce" pursuant to HRPP Rule 35(b), to reduce his
 sentence. On February 5, 2015, the circuit court entered the
 Order Denying Reduction of Sentence. 
On February 6, 2015, Kong timely appealed from the
 
Order Denying Reduction of Sentence.
 
2
 The Honorable Shackley F. Raffetto entered the Judgment.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II. Jurisdiction
 
As an initial matter, in its answering brief, the State
 
contends that we do not have jurisdiction over Kong's appeal
 
because Kong appealed from an order and not a judgment. Thus,
 the State contends this court lacks jurisdiction to consider the
 appeal pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 641-11 (Supp.
 2015), which provides in pertinent part: "[a]ny party aggrieved
 by the judgment of a circuit court in a criminal matter may
 appeal to the intermediate appellate court[.]" (Emphasis added.)
 
However, "[a] 'post-judgment order is appealable in its 
own right only if it meets the test of finality applicable to all judicial decisions.'" State v. Johnson, 96 Hawai
'i 462, 469, 32 
P.3d 106, 113 (App. 2001) (citation omitted). In Johnson, this court recognized that "[a] final order has been defined, albeit in the context of a civil case, as 'an order ending the proceedings, leaving nothing further to be accomplished. Consequently, an order is not final if the rights of a party involved remain undetermined or if the matter is retained for further action.'" Id. (citation omitted). Here, the circuit 
court's post-judgment Order Denying Reduction of Sentence ended the proceedings leaving nothing further to be accomplished. Thus, the order is appealable and we have jurisdiction over Kong's appeal.
III. The Circuit Court's Review of Kong's Motion
 
Kong contends that the circuit court abused its
 
discretion by denying his HRPP Rule 35(b) Motion to Reconsider or
 Reduce because the circuit court failed to independently consider
 the merits of the motion.
 
HRPP Rule 35(b) provides:
 
The court may reduce a sentence within 90 days after the
sentence is imposed, or within 90 days after receipt by the
court of a mandate issued upon affirmance of the judgment or
dismissal of the appeal, or within 90 days after entry of
any order or judgment of the Supreme Court of the United
States denying review of, or having the effect of upholding
the judgment of conviction. A motion to reduce a sentence
that is made within the time prior shall empower the court
to act on such motion even though the time period has
expired. The filing of a notice of appeal shall not deprive
 
3
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the court of jurisdiction to entertain a timely motion to
reduce a sentence.
 
Further,
 
[a] sentencing judge enjoys broad discretion in imposing
sentences. State v. Hussein, 122 Hawai' i 495, 503, 229 P.3d
313, 321 (2010). However, the court must consider the
factors set forth in HRS § 706–606 (1993). These samefactors also apply to the court's decision on an HRPP Rule
35(b) motion to reduce a sentence. State v. Kahapea, 111
Hawai'i 267, 278, 280–82, 141 P.3d 440, 451, 453–55 (2006).
It is presumed that the court has considered all of thestatutory factors "[a]bsent clear evidence to the contrary."
Hussein, 122 Hawai' i at 503, 229 P.3d at 321 (citation
omitted). Although the sentencing court is not required to
state its reasons for imposing a sentence, it is "urged and
strongly recommended" to do so. Id. at 503, 229 P.3d at 321
(citation omitted). 
State v. Sauceda, No. 30622, 2011 WL 1909112, at *1 (Haw. App.
 
May 18, 2011) (SDO) (emphasis added).

 
HRS § 706-606 (2014) provides:
 
§ 706-606 Factors to be considered in imposing a sentence.
The court, in determining the particular sentence to be
imposed, shall consider:
(1)	 The nature and circumstances of the offense and
 the history and characteristics of the
defendant;
(2)	 The need for the sentence imposed:
(a)	 To reflect the seriousness of the offense,
to promote respect for law, and to provide
just punishment for the offense;
(b)	 To afford adequate deterrence to criminal
conduct;
(c)	 To protect the public from further crimes
of the defendant; and
(d)	 To provide the defendant with needed
educational or vocational training,
medical care, or other correctional
treatment in the most effective manner;
(3)	 The kinds of sentences available; and
(4)	 The need to avoid unwarranted sentence
 disparities among defendants with similar
records who have been found guilty of similar
conduct.
 
Based on our review, the circuit court sufficiently
 
considered Kong's arguments for reducing his sentence. On May
 
15, 2014, Kong filed a "Memorandum in Support of Motion to
 Reconsider or Reduce" (Memorandum in Support) in which Kong
 requested a reduction in his sentence from fifteen to ten years
 because (1) Kong confessed and took responsibility for his
 actions; (2) Kong's co-defendant, who was charged as a
 
4

  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
principal/accomplice and also self-terminated from MCD, received
 
a concurrent five-year prison sentence; (3) a ten-year prison
 sentence better reflects the seriousness of the offense; and (4)
 a ten-year sentence would be less detrimental to Kong than
 fifteen years. Kong attached a document entitled "CCA-Saguaro
 Correctional Center Progress Report for the State of Hawaii." 
The document lists the programs that Kong completed, and among
 the required programs, Kong completed the Cognitive Skills,
 Parenting, and GED programs. The document indicates that Kong
 had not completed the Substance Abuse program. Kong also
 attached an excerpt from a publication entitled "Prisoners Once
 Removed[:] The Impact of Incarceration and Reentry on Children,
 Families, and Communities."
 
On May 20, 2014, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
Kong's Motion to Reconsider or Reduce. At the hearing, the court
 stated that it had reviewed the progress report that Kong
 attached to his Memorandum in Support of Motion and the circuit
 
court noted that Kong had not completed the Substance Abuse
 
program. The circuit court also stated that it reviewed the
 publication that Kong attached to his Memorandum in Support of
 Motion and read excerpts from the publication on the record.
 
On December 15, 2014, Kong filed a "Supplemental 
Memorandum in Support of Motion to Reconsider or Reduce" (Supplemental Memorandum in Support) in which Kong contended that previous convictions that were vacated more than fifteen years ago, and were also challenged in his previous appeal, were still being used against him. Kong attached (1) a Notice and Judgment on Appeal, dated December 7, 1994, in which this court vacated a judgment entered on October 13, 1992, convicting Kong in Criminal No. 92-0138(3) of Burglary in the Second Degree pursuant to HRS § 708-811 and Unauthorized Control of a Propelled Vehicle pursuant to HRS § 708-836; and (2) a Motion to Dismiss With Prejudice, filed on May 2, 1995, in which the State of Hawai
'i 
moved to dismiss Criminal No. 92-0138(3) with prejudice. Also on December 15, 2014, Kong filed a "Written Notice of Objection to 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Pre-Sentence Report and Other Materials Contained in the
 
Court File" (Written Notice of Objection). Kong stated that he
 objected and moved to strike, amend, delete and/or remove from
 the PSI report, inter alia, all references to Criminal No. 92­0138.
 
On January 15, 2015, the circuit court held a second
 
hearing regarding Kong's Motion to Reconsider or Reduce and Kong
 was present by telephone. The circuit court asked Kong if he had
 any other convictions besides the ones that were overturned and
 Kong responded that he had one prior conviction for burglary. 
The circuit court then asked Kong if the court should overlook
 the conviction that was not overturned and Kong responded, "no."
 The circuit court stated that Kong was still focused on the past
 and should have told the court what he wanted to do in the
 future, but would not deny the motion on that basis alone. The
 circuit court further stated:
 
This has already been -- this sentence was appealed, and the
Supreme Court reviewed it, and if the Supreme Court felt -­I understand the grounds when they look at these things. But
the appellate court -- the appellate court has really
scrutinized a lot of these cases, especially with the
composition of our present court. Even if it wasn't raised,
if they feel this was inherently unjust or unfair, they
would have sent it back, and they didn't.
And so -- and I understand that disparity, but I don't
know what Judge Raffetto's reasoning was, but that's what he
did, and I just don't see the grounds to reconsider it or
reduce it.
 
Thus, the circuit court considered each of Kong's arguments as to
 
why the court should reduce his sentence.
 
Finally, because there is no clear evidence to the 
contrary, we presume that the circuit court considered all of the factors listed in HRS § 706-606 when it denied Kong's Motion to Reconsider or Reduce. See Hussein, 122 Hawai
'i at 503, 229 P.3d 
at 321. Notably, the circuit court addressed the first factor of HRS § 706-606, "[t]he nature and circumstances of the offense and the history and characteristics of the defendant[,]" when the circuit court noted and Kong admitted that he was convicted of at least one prior instance of burglary. The circuit court 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
addressed the second factor, the need for the sentence imposed to
 
protect the public from further crimes of the defendant and to
 provide the defendant with needed correctional treatment, when it
 found that Kong did not discuss his plans for the future and had
 not completed his drug treatment program. Finally, the circuit
 court addressed the fourth factor, "[t]he need to avoid
 unwarranted sentence disparities among defendants with similar
 records who have been found guilty of similar conduct," when it
 considered Kong's argument that there was a disparity between his
 sentencing and his co-defendant's sentencing.
 
Therefore, the circuit court sufficiently considered
 
the merits of Kong's motion.
IV. Sinagoga Framework
 
Kong contends the circuit court failed to comply with
 
the framework set forth in Sinagoga to address Kong's challenge
 that the PSI report contained convictions that had been vacated. 
In
 Sinagoga , this court provided a five step process
 
for Hawai 'i courts to follow in cases where ordinary sentencing 
procedures are applicable and the court may use the defendant's
 prior convictions as a basis for imposing a prison sentence,
 including consecutive sentences. Sinagoga, 81 Hawai
'i at 447, 
918 P.2d at 254. The framework provides: 
Step one, the court shall furnish to the defendant or
defendant's counsel and to the prosecuting attorney a copyof the presentence report, HRS § 706-604, and any otherreport of defendant's prior criminal conviction(s). Steptwo, if the defendant contends that one or more of thereported prior criminal convictions was (1) uncounseled, (2)otherwise invalidly entered, and/or (3) not against thedefendant, the defendant shall, prior to the sentencing,respond with a good faith challenge on the record stating,as to each challenged conviction, the basis or bases for thechallenge. Step three, prior to imposing the sentence, thecourt shall inform the defendant that (a) each reportedcriminal conviction that is not validly challenged by thedefendant is defendant's prior, counseled, validly entered,criminal conviction, and (b) a challenge to any reportedprior criminal conviction not made by defendant beforesentence is imposed may not thereafter, absent good cause,be raised to attack the court's sentence. Step four, withrespect to each reported prior criminal conviction that thedefendant challenges, the [Hawai' i Rules of Evidence (HRE)]
shall apply, and the court shall expressly decide before thesentencing whether the State satisfied its burden of proving 
7
   Additionally, the supreme court held that it would not utilize plain
error review to address Kong's challenge to convictions in his PSI, noting
that the circuit court had based its imposition of consecutive sentencing on
Kong's extensive criminal record as a whole and the PSI reflected numerous
convictions other than the alleged vacated convictions. 131 Hawai' i at 107,
315 P.3d at 733. The supreme court noted the following:
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to the reasonable satisfaction of the court that the
 opposite of the defendant's challenge is true. Step five, if
the court is aware of the defendant's prior uncounseled or
otherwise invalid criminal conviction(s), it shall not
impose or enhance a prison sentence prior to expressly
stating on the record that it did not consider it or them as
a basis for the imposition or enhancement of a prison
sentence.
 
Id.
 
In Kong's prior appeal, the supreme court evaluated the
 
application of 
Sinagoga. The supreme court concluded that
 
Sinagoga applied to Kong's case because it "is a case where
 
'ordinary sentencing procedures are applicable and there was a
 possibility that the court may use Kong's prior conviction(s) as
 a basis for the imposition or enhancement of a prison sentence.'" 
Kong, 131 Hawai
'i at 105, 315 P.3d at 731 (citation and brackets 
omitted). However, the supreme court determined that because
 neither Kong nor his counsel objected to any of the convictions
 listed in the PSI report, "the circuit court did not err in
 relying on the PSI report." Id. at 107, 315 P.3d at 733
 
(footnote omitted). Thus, Kong did not satisfy the second step
 of the Sinagoga framework.
3
 
Sinagoga provides a procedure for courts to follow
 
during the imposition of a sentence. Here, Kong's HRPP Rule 35
 motion requested that the circuit court reevaluate a sentence
 that was already imposed to determine whether the sentence should
 
3
 
The PSI report also indicates that Kong was convicted of

seven felony burglaries. Thus, even excluding the burglary
conviction in Cr. No. 92–0138, the circuit court would have
been correct in noting that Kong's “extensive record”
included “six burglary convictions.” Although the vacated
convictions in Cr. No. 92–0138 would mean that Kong was
convicted of 8 total felonies, as opposed to the ten noted
by the circuit court, the PSI report nonetheless contained
sufficient information for the circuit court to reasonably
conclude that Kong had a history of “extensive criminality.”
 
Id. at 107 n.12, 315 P.3d at 733 n.12 (emphasis added).
 
8
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
be reduced.4 There is nothing in Sinagoga to suggest that it
 
applies to Kong's motion to reduce his sentence.
 
Nonetheless, although Sinagoga does not apply here, we
 
do not suggest that the circuit court should consider convictions
 
improperly entered on a PSI report. In fact, based on the
 record, it does not appear that the circuit court relied on the
 vacated convictions when it denied Kong's Motion to Reconsider or
 Reduce. On May 20, 2014, the circuit court held the initial
 hearing on Kong's motion and, given Kong's assertion at the
 hearing that the PSI contained convictions that were vacated, the
 court instructed Kong to file a separate motion to request a
 correction to the PSI report. The circuit court stated that a
 motion would give the State an opportunity to respond and the
 circuit court could then make a ruling about the PSI report. 
On January 15, 2015, the circuit court held another
 
hearing regarding the Motion to Reconsider or Reduce. The
 circuit court asked Kong if he had any other convictions "besides
 the ones that were overturned[.]" Kong responded that he had one
 other conviction.
5 The circuit court asked "should I overlook
 
that one, too[.]" Kong responded "no" and stated, "I'm just
 asking to be sentenced for something I did do, not for something
 I didn't do." The circuit court then stated, "[w]ell, I don't
 disagree with you there[.]"
 
Given the circuit court's instruction to file a motion
 
to correct the PSI report and its dialogue with Kong during the
 
4
 In evaluating the purpose behind HRPP Rule 35(b), prior to 1987, the
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure (FRCP) Rule 35 was substantially similar
to HRPP Rule 35. See Hussein, 122 Hawai' i at 512-13, 229 P.3d at 330-31; 3
Fed. Prac. & Proc. Crim. § 611 (4th ed.). Prior to the amendment of FRCP Rule 35, "[t]he function of Rule 35(b) [was] simply to allow the district court todecide if, on further reflection, the original sentence now seems undulyharsh." United States v. Smith, 650 F.2d 206, 208 (9th Cir. 1981)(citation
and internal quotation marks omitted); 3 Fed. Prac. & Proc. Crim. § 611 (4thed.)(FRCP Rule 35(b) "authorized the court to reduce a lawful sentence if, onfurther reflection, the court believed that it had been unduly harsh."). 
5
 Kong's assertion that he had one conviction, other than the ones
that were overturned, is not consistent with the record as noted by the
supreme court in the prior appeal. See Footnote 3, supra.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
January 15, 2015 hearing, it appears that the circuit court
 
recognized that some of Kong's convictions had been vacated and
 that the court did not rely on those vacated convictions when it
 denied Kong's Motion to Reconsider or Reduce.
V. Kong's Plea Agreement with the State
 
Kong contends on appeal that the State violated its 
plea agreement with Kong when it objected to Kong's Motion to Reconsider or Reduce. We note that Kong did not raise this issue before the circuit court. However, "[u]nder Hawai
'i precedent . 
. . breaches of plea agreements provide appropriate bases for appellate review under the plain error standard, inasmuch as a breach 'implicates' 'due process[.]'" State v. Miller, 122 
Hawai
'i 92, 101, 223 P.3d 157, 166 (2010) (citation omitted). 
HRPP Rule 52(b) provides that "[p]lain errors or defects affecting substantial rights may be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the court." 
Kong contends that he entered into a plea agreement
 
with the State before his original sentencing and points to a
 comment made by the Deputy Prosecutor at the January 15, 2015,
 hearing on Kong's Motion to Reconsider or Reduce. At that
 hearing, the State asserted that it "had made a plea agreement
 not to ask for consecutive sentences, which we did not, and Judge
 Raffetto let everybody know that, that was what his intention
 was." Kong does not dispute that at the time of his original
 sentencing, the State did not request consecutive sentencing.
 Kong instead contends that by opposing his Motion to Reconsider
 or Reduce, the State breached the plea agreement.
 
In opposing Kong's motion to reduce his sentence, the
 
State argued that the circuit court had "fully considered all of
 the relevant circumstances at the sentencing hearing[,]" that
 Kong had been given "repeated opportunities to engage in
 treatment through the Maui Drug Court Program, and in spite of
 the support and supervision, he failed to commit to the
 program[,]" and that the supreme court had reviewed Kong's
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
sentence. 
There is nothing in the record indicating that the
 
State violated a plea agreement that precluded the State from
 
requesting consecutive sentences. Thus, Kong's substantial
 rights were not affected and the circuit court did not plainly
 err. 
VI. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the Order Denying Defendant's
 
Motion to Reconsider or Reduce, filed on February 5, 2015, in the
 Circuit Court of the Second Circuit, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 29, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Benjamin E. Lowenthal,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Peter A. Hanano,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
11
 