FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
GREGORY A. KAZANAS, Defendant-Appellant
 
NO. CAAP-12-0001011
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-1592)

 
AUGUST 29, 2014
 
NAKAMURA, C.J., AND FUJISE, J., WITH FOLEY, J., DISSENTING
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
The use of a criminal defendant's voluntary statements

 
and admissions as evidence at trial is a critical component of
 
our criminal justice system. Voluntary statements and admissions
 are reliable. They provide key evidence necessary to solve
 crimes and facilitate our search for the truth. They provide
 assurance to the public that the culprit had been brought to
 justice and promote faith and confidence in our judicial system.
 
"Voluntary confessions are not merely a proper element
 
in law enforcement, they are an unmitigated good, essential to
 society's compelling interest in finding, convicting, and
 punishing those who violate the law[.]" Maryland v. Shatzer, 559
 
U.S. 98, 108 (2010) (internal quotation marks and citations
 omitted).
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Fifth Amendment protects a person from being
 
"compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself," 
and, in the context of a criminal investigation, prevents the
 police from forcing or coercing a suspect into making an
 incriminating statement. The requirements imposed by Miranda v.
 Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966), were designed to safeguard a
 defendant's privilege against compulsory self-incrimination. See
 
Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291, 297 (1980). 
In Miranda, the Court cited a variety of police
 
interrogation techniques which involved psychological coercion
 that were being used to extract incriminating statements from
 suspects in custody. Miranda, 384 U.S. at 448-58. "The concern
 
of the Court in Miranda was that the 'interrogation environment'
 created by the interplay of interrogation and custody would
 'subjugate the individual to the will of his examiner' and
 thereby undermine the privilege against compulsory
 self-incrimination." Innis, 446 U.S. at 299 (citation omitted). 
Therefore, the Court required that a suspect in custody receive a
 specified advice of rights, the Miranda warnings, before being
 subjected to custodial interrogation. Miranda, 384 U.S. at 478­
79. In determining whether a suspect in custody has been 
subjected to "interrogation" for purposes of Miranda, and thus entitled to Miranda warnings, "the ultimate question becomes 'whether the police officer should have known that his or her words or actions were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response[.]'" State v. Ketchum, 97 Hawai
'i 107, 
119, 34 P.3d 1006, 1018 (2001) (quoting State v. Ikaika, 67 Haw. 563, 567, 698 P.2d 281, 284 (1985). 
In this case, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i 
(State) charged Defendant-Appellant Gregory A. Kazanas (Kazanas) with first-degree unauthorized entry into a motor vehicle (UEMV) for allegedly grabbing and repeatedly punching the driver through the driver's side window. Kazanas's defense at trial was mistaken identity -- that he was not the person who had committed 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the alleged acts. However, after his arrest, Kazanas made an
 
incriminating statement to Officer Cristy-Lynn Avilla (Officer
 Avilla), who had been assigned to take Kazanas to the hospital.
 
Prior to taking Kazanas to the hospital, Officer Avilla
 
told Kazanas that he "was not allowed to talk about the case or
 say anything about what he had been arrested for," but she did
 not give Kazanas Miranda warnings. While at the hospital, in an
 attempt to calm Kazanas, who was making rude comments to others
 at the hospital, Officer Avilla made "small talk" with Kazanas by
 asking if he enjoyed Halloween that night and what kind of
 costumes he saw. A period of time passed. Kazanas then stated
 that "If people didn't upset me, I wouldn't have to punch them."
 
1
On appeal, Kazanas contends that the trial court  erred
in permitting Kazanas's statement to be introduced into evidence
 at trial, because he claims the statement was the product of a
 custodial interrogation. We conclude that Officer Avilla did not
 subject Kazanas to "interrogation" for purposes of 
Miranda and
 
that Kazanas's statement was not in response to "interrogation"
 by the Officer. Therefore, the absence of prior Miranda warnings
 by Officer Avilla did not provide a basis to suppress Kazanas's
 spontaneous and volunteered statement. Under the circumstances
 presented, we hold that the trial court properly permitted the
 State to introduce Kazanas's statement at trial. 
Kazanas also contends that the trial court erred in
 
permitting evidence of prior incidents involving Kazanas, which
 the State offered to rebut Kazanas's claim that his physical
 disabilities rendered him incapable of engaging in the conduct
 described by the complaining witness. We hold that the trial
 court did not err in permitting the State to introduce prior
 incidents involving Kazanas that were relevant to his physical
 capabilities, after Kazanas opened the door to such evidence.
 
1The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
 
3
   
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
BACKGROUND
 
I. Trial Evidence
 
A.
 
The following evidence was adduced in the State's case­
in-chief at trial. Shortly after midnight, in the early morning
 
of November 1, 2011, the complaining witness (CW) was driving a
 1990 White Mazda Protege through Waik
iki. The CW, who was 65,
 
had gone with three friends to Waik iki to observe the Halloween
 
festivities. The CW had just dropped off two of his friends,
 including the owner of the car, to get food, while the third
 friend, an elderly woman, remained in the backseat. The CW
 planned to pick up his two friends after they purchased the food.
 
While driving down K
uhio Avenue, the CW encountered a
 
group of people running across the street and stopped to let them
 pass. The CW testified that he drove forward slowly after the
 group had passed. However, as he entered the intersection, a
 straggler, "[o]ut of the blue," darted across the street, "ran
 headlong" into the CW's vehicle, tumbled, bounced up, and
 continued running. Another group of people, apparently believing
 
that the CW had hit this person, converged on the CW's car,
 
shouting, pounding on the windows, and rocking the car. The CW
 
heard the back window crack next to where his friend was sitting.
 
The CW testified that he saw a man on the hood of the
 
CW's car with heavy boots stomping against the windshield. The
 
man hopped down from the hood and moved to the driver's side of
 the car. The man then reached in through the open window,
 grabbed the CW around the neck, and punched the CW several times
 in the face with a closed right hand. The man spoke to the CW in
 an "[a]ngry, inebriated, and just pretty vehement" tone, and the
 CW could smell alcohol on the man's breath. The CW had a clear
 and unobstructed view of the man from the chest up.
 
Around 12:30 a.m., James Easley (Easley), a former
 
police officer for the Honolulu Police Department (HPD),
 witnessed an incident as Easely stood on K
uhio Avenue in a "sad
 
4
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
clown" costume. Easley testified he saw a man, whom he
 
recognized as Kazanas, dressed as a knight, wearing a metal mesh
 shirt. Easley saw Kazanas break the back window of the CW's car,
 run to the front of the car, jump on the hood, "kind of rolling
 on over," approach the driver's window, and repeatedly punch the
 driver through the open window. Another man, who appeared to be
 a friend of Kazanas, then grabbed Kazanas and pulled him away
 from the vehicle, and Kazanas eventually walked away from the
 scene.
 
Easley explained that he knew and recognized Kazanas
 
from a prior incident, several years earlier, in which Easley had
 responded as a police officer to a report that a man had jumped
 from the ninth floor balcony of the Aloha Surf Hotel. Kazanas
 was the man who had jumped or fallen from the ninth floor. 
Easley testified that he would never forget Kazanas or his name
 because Kazanas had survived the fall, having landed on a beach
 chair on the pool deck, and was coherent when Easley arrived. 
Easley was within twenty feet of Kazanas when Easley
 
first saw Kazanas break the back window of the CW's car. Easley
 then moved closer and eventually got to within about two feet of
 Kazanas when the man who appeared to be Kazanas's friend pulled
 Kazanas away from the car. Easley testified that he had a clear
 and unobstructed view of Kazanas from the time Kazanas broke the
 back window through when Kazanas was punching the driver. 
The CW drove away from the scene and found police
 
officers. The CW reported the incident and gave the police a
 description of his assailant. 
In the meantime, Easley, after walking away from the
 
scene, saw the police next to the CW's car. Easley informed one
 of the police officers that he had observed the incident and knew
 who the suspect was. As Easley continued walking through
 Waik
iki, he spotted Kazanas, notified the police, and watched
 
Kazanas until the police detained Kazanas. 
5
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The police drove the CW to the area where Kazanas was
 
being detained, and the CW identified Kazanas as the person who
 
had assaulted him. The CW made this identification within an
 hour after the incident. The CW also identified Kazanas in court
 as the man who had punched him.  The CW suffered injuries,
 
consisting of a bleeding left ear and interior cuts to the cheek
 
and gum area. 
After the CW identified Kazanas, the police arrested
 
Kazanas, and Kazanas was taken to a hospital by HPD Officer
 Christy-Lynn Avilla. Officer Avilla testified that she observed
 injuries to Kazanas's right hand area that "appeared to be cuts
 and fresh cuts." The State also introduced photographs taken of
 Kazanas's right hand, which Officer Avilla described as showing
 redness on the top of Kazanas's knuckles and minor scrapes around
 it. At the hospital, Kazanas stated, "If people didn't upset me,
 I wouldn't have to punch them." 
B. 
In the defense case, Kazanas called two friends, Simon
 
Farrington (Farrington) and Hans Madrid Kolbisen (Kolbisen), who
 testified that they had accompanied Kazanas to Waik
iki on the
 
night of the charged incident. Both Farrington and Kolbisen
 presented testimony that Kazanas was not the person who had
 assaulted the CW.
 
According to Farrington, he witnessed an incident in
 
which someone fought with the driver of a car, and Kazanas was
 not the person who fought with the driver. Farrington described
 the person who fought with the driver as about "5' 5" or 5' 6",
 with "darker skin," "maybe Filipino, Hawaiian, or something like
 that," whereas Farrington described Kazanas as 6' 2" and
 Caucasian.
 
According to Kolbisen, he witnessed the incident with
 
the car and observed a dark-skinned teenager, possibly Filipino,
 about 150 pounds, beating on the car and hassling the driver. 
6
  
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kazanas was not involved in the incident, but was standing next
 
to Kolbisen, watching the incident from about thirty yards away. 
Kazanas testified in his own defense at trial. 
Kazanas stated that he was about 6' 4" tall and weighted 220
 pounds. According to Kazanas, he went with several of his
 
friends to Waik
iki in the evening of October 31, 2011, and they
 
ended up at a club. Kazanas was in costume, dressed as a knight,
 
with a metal chain vest and a plastic sword. At one point,
 Kazanas left the club to walk to his father's house. However, on
 the way, he was "drop-kicked to the ground" and hit his head,
 when he tried to intervene to assist someone that was being
 attacked by others.
 
Kazanas acknowledged that, as Easley had testified,
 
Kazanas had previously fallen nine stories from the Aloha Surf 
Hotel. Kazanas stated that because of the injuries he sustained
 in the nine-story fall, he could not fully extend his right arm
 or bend his wrist. Therefore, he had to use his knuckles to push
 himself off the ground in order to get up after he was kicked to
 the ground. Kazanas explained that the red marks on the knuckles
 of his right hand, as shown in the photographs introduced by the
 State, were caused by his using his knuckles in this fashion.
2
 
After getting up, Kazanas stated that he shuffled away because he
 cannot run due to the injuries from the nine-story fall.
 
Kazanas testified that he rejoined his friends, who
 
told him that someone had been run over by a vehicle. They all
 proceeded to watch the commotion, which involved a "car being
 surrounded and people harassing the driver[.]" Kazanas watched
 
with his friends from a distance of about ten to fifteen feet. 
Kazanas recalled that someone had smashed the back window of the
 car, but indicated that his recollection of what happened during
 
2Kazanas had earlier called Morris "Keiha" Gomes (Gomes) as
a witness. Gomes testified that on October 31, 2011, at about
11:30 p.m., he saw Kazanas get kicked in the chest, fall to the
ground, then get up and take off running.
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the remainder of the evening was not good. Kazanas denied
 
jumping on the hood of the car or reaching into the car and
 punching the CW with his right hand, as the CW had testified. 
Kazanas explained that because of injuries he had sustained in
 the nine-story fall, he was not physically capable of engaging in
 such actions:
 
[Defense Counsel:] Q. Now, the witnesses are saying
that you had –- well, [the CW] is saying that the person

that hit him jumped on the hood of that white car; you
remember that?
 
[Kazanas:]  
A. I remember him saying that, yes.
 
Q. Yes. 
Now, did you jump on the hood of that car?
 
A. No, I did not.

 
Q. Okay. 
Would you be able to do that?
 
A. No, I would have to crawl up onto the hood.

 
Q. Why is that?

 
A. Because I can't jump.

 
Q. Why is that, that you can't jump?
 
A. My legs restrict me to jump. 
I have about 37
 
screws and seven rods in my legs from my hips to my feet;
it's like I'm wearing a pair of steel-toe boots all the
time. I can barely jump an inch or two off the ground.
 
. . . .
 
Q.
 Now, [the CW] is saying that you had reached in

the car and punched him with your right hand. Did you do
that?
 
A. No.
 
Q. Why?
 
A. I wouldn't have been able to reach into the car.
 
Q. Okay.
 
A. I have limited range of motion on my arm, my right

arm specifically.
 
Q. And that being you're not being able to fully

extend your arm?
 
A. Yes.

 
Kazanas testified that after he was arrested, he asked
 
to go to Queen's Hospital because he had been attacked earlier
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that evening and wanted to be checked out to make sure he had no
 
injuries. Kazanas acknowledged that at the hospital, he made the
 comment to Officer Avilla that "I wouldn't have to punch people
 if they didn't upset me," and he explained the comment as
 follows:
 
[Defense Counsel:] Q. Okay. Now, Officer Avilla
said that something to the effect that you had said "I

wouldn't have to punch people if they didn't upset me." You
 
heard her testify about that, right?
 
[Kazanas:] 
A. Yes
 
Q. Okay. 
Why did you say that?
 
A. I was under stress.
 
Q. And what were you talking about?
 
A. Nothing. I was just speculating to the fact that
they said that I was under arrest for an assault.
 
On cross-examination, the State sought to introduce
 
other incidents involving Kazanas that occurred after his nine-
story fall in 2005 to rebut Kazanas's claim that he was
 physically incapable of engaging in the acts alleged by the CW
 (and corroborated by Easley). The Circuit Court had previously
 granted Kazanas's motion in limine to exclude evidence of these
 prior incidents. The Circuit Court permitted the State to ask
 about the prior incidents, but limited the State's questioning to
 matters that related to Kazanas's physical actions in the prior
 incidents. The Circuit Court precluded the State from adducing
 evidence that Kazanas had been arrested or convicted with respect
 to the prior incidents.
 
Pursuant to the Circuit Court's ruling, the State
 
elicited evidence that: (1) on March 31, 2007, Kazanas ran and
 jumped over a waist-level fence, and that Kazanas and a male
 grabbed two other males from behind and punched them in the face;
 and (2) on April 21, 2006, Kazanas punched a woman in the face,
 arms, and legs.
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II. Pretrial Proceedings
 
A.
 
The State charged Kazanas by indictment with first-
degree criminal property damage (Count 1) and first-degree UEMV
 
(Count 2). On March 21, 2012, Kazanas filed a motion in limine
 seeking, among other things, to exclude (1) statements made by
 Kazanas to Officer Avilla at the hospital and (2) evidence of
 Kazanas's prior criminal record. On May 25, 2012, the State
 filed its "Notice of Intent to Use Evidence of Prior Acts"
 (Notice of Intent), in which the State gave notice of its intent
 to introduce evidence of Kazanas's engaging in assaultive conduct
 with respect to incidents occurring on April 21, 2006, and March
 31, 2007. These incidents occurred after Kazanas's nine-story
 fall. In the April 21, 2006, incident, Kazanas allegedly
 "ambushed" and physically assaulted his ex-girlfriend in her
 apartment and stole several items. In the March 31, 2007,
 incident, Kazanas and another person allegedly attacked two males
 from behind, and when the police subsequently located Kazanas, he
 allegedly fled and jumped over a fence before being apprehended. 
The State attached police reports and conviction records relating
 to these incidents. 
On May 29, 2012, the State filed a "Motion to Determine
 
the Voluntariness of Defendants' Statements to the Police"
 (Voluntariness Motion). The State sought, among other things, a
 finding by the Circuit Court that two statements made by Kazanas
 to Officer Avilla at the hospital were voluntarily made. The
 first statement was: "I wouldn't have to punch people if they
 didn't upset me." The second statement was: "If you didn't catch
 me now for this, you would've caught me later for something
 else." In support of its Voluntariness Motion, the State
 asserted that Kazanas made these statements "without any
 prompting or questioning by Officer Avilla." 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
The Circuit Court heard the parties' motions on
 
August 6, 2012. Officer Avilla was the sole witness called to
 
testify at the hearing. Officer Avilla testified that she was
 assigned to transport Kazanas from the place of his arrest to
 Queen's Hospital. Upon Kazanas's arrest, Officer Avilla informed
 him that "he was not allowed to talk about the case or say
 anything about what he had been arrested for."   She also told him
 
"multiple times that he was being arrested for UEMV First." 
Officer Avilla did not give 
Miranda warnings to Kazanas. 
On direct examination, Officer Avilla testified that
 
while at the hospital, Kazanas made two spontaneous statements to
 her. 
[Deputy Prosecuting Attorney:] Q. As you were in the
HPD room -- waiting room, did [Kazanas] say anything to you?

 
[Officer Avilla:] 
A. He said that -- he
 
spontaneously uttered, "If people didn't upset me, I

wouldn't have to punch them."
 
Q. Was this statement by [Kazanas] in response to any
questions that you asked him?
 
A. No, ma'am.

 
Q. Was this a voluntary statement?

 
A. It was a voluntary statement.
 
Q. Now, after [Kazanas] made that statement that he
wouldn't have to punch people if they didn't upset him, what
if anything did you say?
 
[Defense Counsel]:  
Your Honor, I have to object as to
the characterization as to voluntary.
 
The COURT:  
Sustained. That's a determination for the
 
Court to make.
 
Q. (By [Deputy Prosecuting Attorney]:) 
So I'm just
going re-ask this question. When [Kazanas] made the
statement "I wouldn't have to punch people if they didn't
upset me," what if anything did you say to [Kazanas]?
 
A.
 I immediately told him that it was still -- his

case was still under investigation and to stop what he was
saying, because it could be used against him in a court of
law.
 
Q.
 After you made that statement to [Kazanas], did

you try to engage him in any conversation?
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A. No, ma'am.
 
Q. Did you ask him any questions related to his
arrest?
 
A. No, ma'am.
 
Q. Did you threaten him in any way?
 
A. No, ma'am.
 
Q. Did you physically touch him in any way?
 
A. No, ma'am.
 
Q. Did [Kazanas] say anything else to you?
 
A. He did. Right after he had made that statement
and after I told him to not say anything else, he apologized
to me and he said that -- I'm sorry.
 
Q. Would there be anything to help you remember what
he said?
 
A. Yes, if can I see my report, please?
 
. . . .
 
Q. What then did [Kazanas] say to you?
 
A. [Kazanas] said to me, he apologized and said, "If
you didn't catch me now, you would have caught me for
something else later."
 
Q. And what did you say in response to that
statement?
 
A. I told him that what I had told him previously
still applied.
 
Q. And what was that that you had previously told
him?
 
A. That anything that he said in regards to the
investigation could be used against him and to stop what he
was saying.
 
On cross-examination, Officer Avilla testified that
 
prior to Kazanas making his statements, she had engaged in casual
 
conversation with Kazanas to calm him down by asking questions
 unrelated to the investigation because he was making rude
 comments to patients at the hospital.
 
[Defense Counsel:] Q. Okay. Now, when you say he
said to you, "I wouldn't have to punch people if they didn't

upset me," but before that you said that you didn't ask him
any questions, correct?
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[Officer Avilla:] A. I did ask him questions along
the lines, because when we were in the main area of the

hospital Mr. Kazanas was making comments that were rude and
other patients could hear it, so that's why we moved to the
HPD room or away from the public. And in response to his
comments, I was trying to ask him questions about if he
enjoyed Halloween that night, what kind of costumes did he
see, but nothing along the lines in reference to the
investigation, sir.
 
Q. All right. 
So when he was rude, he was talking
loudly?
 
A. Loudly and saying just upsetting things that if
the general public were to hear, it would upset them.
 
. . . .
 
Q. So as you were talking to him about enjoying
Halloween and the costumes, you never told him if he were to
respond, that he has a right to remain silent, correct?
 
A. Whenever -- when he had said that spontaneous
utterance, I did tell him, and I continuously told him,
because he kept asking me why am I here, why am I here, and
I told him that he was arrested for UEMV First.
 
Q. But while you were talking to him about enjoying
Halloween and carrying on a discussion with him -­
A. It wasn't a discussion, sir.
 
Q. All right. So you were asking him about how he
enjoyed Halloween?
 
A. Right.
 
Q. That's a question, correct?
 
A. It was to help him calm down and to get his mind
off of saying those rude things, sir.
 
Q. Okay. But you don't know what his response would
be, right?
 
A. No, sir.
 
Q. And you were asking about costumes as well?
 
A. Yes, sir.
 
Q. Okay. Before you were asking him these questions,
did you inform him that he had a right to remain silent?
 
A. No, sir. Well, when I arrested him, I told him
that he was not allowed to talk about the case or say
anything about what he had been arrested for.
 
13
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On redirect, Officer Avilla testified that Kazanas's
 
statements were not in response to her "small-talk" questions and
 
came "out of the blue":
 
[Deputy Prosecuting Attorney:] Q. The two statements
 
that we're discussing, one being "If people didn't upset me,
I wouldn't have to punch them," and the second statement
being "If you didn't catch me now for this, you would have
caught me for something else," was that in response to one
of these small talk questions that you mentioned that you
were engaging in with him?
 
[Officer Avilla:] 
A. No, ma'am. It wasn't in
 
response to our conversation.
 
Q. In fact, had there been a period of time that

passed between the small talk to try to calm him down and
the time he made these statements?
 
A. Yes, ma'am.
 
Q.
 Do you know about how much time passed?

 
A. I can't recall, but when he did make the
statement, I did tell him that he couldn't talk about it.
But it wasn't along the lines of what I had asked him, if
Halloween was fun and costumes; it was an utterance that was
just out of the blue, that was out of context of what we
were talking about.
 
After hearing Officer Avilla's testimony, the Circuit
 
Court orally ruled:
 
The two utterances testified by Officer Avilla, the
Court will be granting the State's motion for voluntariness
in part and denying it in part. The Court will grant the
State's Motion for Determination of Voluntariness as to the
 first statement that was, "I wouldn't have to punch people
if they didn't upset me." 
The Court believes that based 
 
upon the circumstances that were adduced during the hearing,
that that statement, although [Kazanas] was in custody,
clearly was in handcuffs in the custody of an HPD officer at
Queen's [Hospital], they were nonetheless, under all the
circumstances presented, voluntarily made, and they were not
in response to any sort of investigatory questioning by the
officer, and so that statement may be used. 
As to the second statement, the motion will be denied.
And to the extent that even if that statement was
 nevertheless determined to be voluntary, which the Court
believes it would otherwise be, the Court believes that the
nature of that statement is such that it is not relevant, it
is a comment by the defendant which touches upon his
character which clearly at this stage of the proceedings
would not be appropriate, and so the Court will deny that
aspect of the motion and will exclude that particular
evidence.

 
(Emphasis added.) The Circuit Court subsequently filed its
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
written "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part State's
 
Motion to Determine Voluntariness of Defendant's Statements to
 the Police." The Circuit found in relevant part:
 
1. [Kazanas's] statement to Officer Avilla, "I
would't have to punch people if they didn't upset me" was a
voluntary statement and is admissible.
 
2. [Kazanas's] statement to Officer Avilla, "If you
didn't catch me now for this, you would've caught me later
for something else" was a voluntary statement. However, the
statement is excluded on the basis of unfair prejudice to
[Kazanas].
 
C.
 
Regarding the evidence of Kazanas's prior acts, the
 
State argued that it was relevant to show that Kazanas was the
 
first-aggressor. Kazanas countered that there was no issue as
 far as self-defense or first aggressor because the defense at
 trial would be identification. The Circuit Court ruled that it
 was granting Kazanas's motion in limine and precluding the prior
 act evidence. The Circuit Court, however, stated that the State
 could revisit this ruling if the defense opens the door or things
 happen at trial that make the prior act evidence relevant. 
III. Verdict and Sentence
 
Based on the evidence presented at trial, the jury
 
found Kazanas not guilty of first-degree criminal property
 damage, as charged in Count 1, and guilty of first-degree OEMV,
 as charged in Count 2. The Circuit Court sentenced Kazanas to
 five years of probation, subject to the special condition that he
 serve a 90-day term of imprisonment. The Circuit Court entered
 its Judgment on October 23, 2012.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Kazanas contends that the Circuit Court erred in
 
admitting his statement to Officer Avilla that, "If people didn't
 upset me, I wouldn't have to punch them." Kazanas asserts that
 this utterance was elicited during a custodial interrogation, and
 thus, prior Miranda warnings were required. We disagree. 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A.
 
The requirements imposed by Miranda, 384 U.S. 436, were
 
designed to safeguard a defendant's privilege against compulsory
 
self-incrimination. See Innis, 446 U.S. at 297. In Miranda,
 
"the Court concluded that in the context of 'custodial
 interrogation' certain procedural safeguards are necessary to
 protect a defendant's Fifth and Fourteenth Amendment privilege
 against compulsory self-incrimination." Innis, 446 U.S. at 297. 
The Miranda Court cited a number of police interrogation
 techniques that used psychological ploys and pressure to obtain 
statements from suspects in custody. Miranda, 384 U.S. at 448­
58. "The concern of the Court in Miranda was that the
 
'interrogation environment' created by the interplay of
 interrogation and custody would 'subjugate the individual to the
 will of his examiner' and thereby undermine the privilege against
 compulsory self-incrimination." Innis, 446 U.S. at 299 (citation
 
omitted). Therefore, the Miranda Court required that a suspect
 in custody receive a specified advice of rights, i.e., Miranda
 warnings, before being subjected to custodial interrogation. 
Miranda, 384 U.S. 478-79.
 
B.
 
In the instant case, there is no dispute that Kazanas
 
was in custody when he made the challenged statement to Officer
 Avilla. Thus, the critical question in this case is whether
 Kazanas was subjected to "interrogation" when he made the
 statement. 
The United States Supreme Court defines "interrogation"
 
for Miranda purposes as referring to "express questioning or its
 functional equivalent." Innis, 446 U.S. at 300-01. "[T]he term
 
'interrogation' under Miranda refers not only to express
 questioning, but also to any words or actions on the part of the
 police (other than those normally attendant to arrest and
 custody) that the police should know are reasonably likely to
 elicit an incriminating response from the suspect." Id. at 301
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(footnotes omitted). Because the police "cannot be held
 
accountable for the unforeseeable results of their words or
 actions, the definition of interrogation can extend only to words
 or actions on the part of police officers that they should have
 known were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating
 response." Id. at 301-02 (footnote omitted). In Innis, the
 
Supreme Court explained that "'[i]nterrogation,' as
 conceptualized in the Miranda opinion, must reflect a measure of
 compulsion above and beyond that inherent in custody itself." 
Id. at 300. 
The Supreme Court also expressly recognized in Miranda
 
that:
 
Confessions remain a proper element in law enforcement. Any
statement given freely and voluntarily without any
compelling influences is, of course, admissible in evidence.
The fundamental import of the privilege while an individual
is in custody is not whether he is allowed to talk to the
police without the benefit of warnings and counsel, but
whether he can be interrogated. There is no requirement
that police stop a person who enters a police station and
states that he wishes to confess to a crime, or a person who
calls the police to offer a confession or any other
statement he desires to make. Volunteered statements of any
kind are not barred by the Fifth Amendment and their
admissibility is not affected by our holding today.
 
Miranda, 384 U.S. at 478 (emphases added; footnote omitted).
 
The Hawai 'i Constitution's privilege against self-
incrimination, set forth in Article I, Section 10, provides an 
independent source for the protections enumerated in Miranda. Ketchum, 97 Hawai
'i at 116, 34 P.3d at 1015. The Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court has essentially adopted the Innis definition of interrogation in applying Miranda under the Article I, Section 10. See id. at 119, 34 P.3d at 1018. In Ketchum, the supreme
 
court stated: "Generally speaking, interrogation, as used in a
 Miranda context, means express questioning or its functional
 equivalent[,]" and that "the ultimate question becomes whether
 the police officer should have known that his or her words or
 actions were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
response from the person in custody." Id. (internal quotation
 
marks, brackets, and citations omitted). 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has held that in determining 
whether "interrogation" has occurred, a court must consider the 
"totality of the circumstances . . . with a focus upon the officer's conduct, the nature of the question (including whether the question is a routine booking question), and any other relevant circumstance." Id. at 121, 34 P.3d at 1020 (internal 
quotation marks and footnotes omitted). In addition, "volunteered confessions or admissions, obtained independent of express police questioning or its functional equivalent, are admissible." Ikaika, 67 Haw. at 566, 698 P.2d at 284; State v. 
Naititi, 104 Hawai
'i 224, 236, 87 P.3d 893, 905 (2004). 
C.
 
In Ikaika, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court addressed whether 
a defendant's inculpatory statements made while in custody and after he requested a lawyer were the product of interrogation. Ikaika, 67 Haw. at 564, 698 P.2d at 282. The Defendant, Eldred Ikaika (Ikaika), was advised of his Miranda rights and he asked for lawyer, at which point all questioning ceased. Id. at 565, 
698 P.2d at 283. Lieutenant Richard Bartolome, who was acquainted with Ikaika but not involved in or familiar with the investigation, was responsible for fingerprinting Ikaika as part of Ikaika's booking process. Id. While preparing to fingerprint 
Ikaika, Lieutenant Bartolome said to Ikaika, "'What's happening? Must be heavy stuff for two detectives to bring you down here?'" Id. Ikaika responded that he had been picked up for questioning 
about a murder. Id. Without further comment by Lieutenant 
Bartolome, Ikaika stated: "'Bartolome I cannot lie to you, you've done a lot for me and you have been too nice to me. I shot the haole.'" Id. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that under the 
circumstances of the case, Ikaika had not been subjected to interrogation, and that his confession had been properly 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
admitted. Id. at 567, 698 P.2d at 285. The court stated that 
"[t]he test [for determining if Ikaika was subject to
 
interrogation] is whether the police officer should have known
 that his words or actions were reasonably likely to elicit an
 incriminating response from the Defendant." Id. The court held:
 
Lieutenant Bartolome was unaware of the circumstances
 
of the Defendant's detention and did not initiate any
questioning until Defendant approached him. His resulting
remarks were intended merely as a greeting. Bartolome asked
 no further questions and made no other remarks. Moreover,
the Defendant had had previous encounters with law
enforcement. He had been arrested, booked and processed for
prior offenses and had been advised of his constitutional
rights at least twice before. The Defendant had been jailed
on an unrelated misdemeanor in April 1981. At that time, he
was advised of his Miranda rights by his attorney who
specifically informed him that "loose lips sink ships"

referring to the inadvisability of speaking to police
without an attorney present.
 
Under these facts, we are unable to conclude that
Lieutenant Bartolome could have or should have reasonably 

foreseen that his words or actions would elicit an
 incriminating response from the Defendant. At most,
Bartolome could have expected that the Defendant respond to

his pleasantry by informing him of the reasons for the
Defendant's being booked and the case he was involved in.
The Defendant's confession was of the nature of an
 unsolicited, spontaneous statement made in the absence of
any police questioning.
 
Neither are we persuaded that the combined conduct of
the police officers reveals a pattern of coercion sufficient

to constitute interrogation.
 
Accordingly, the Defendant's constitutional rights
under both the United States and Hawaii State Constitutions

 
as articulated by Miranda and Edwards were not violated and
his confession properly admitted by the trial court.

 
Id. at 567-68, 698 P.2d at 284-85 (emphasis added). 
D.
 
We conclude, under the totality of the circumstances,
 
that Kazanas's statement, "If people didn't upset me, I wouldn't
 
have to punch them," was volunteered, unsolicited, and
 spontaneous, and was not in response to any interrogation by
 Officer Avilla. Because Kazanas's statement was not the product
 of interrogation by Officer Avilla, prior 
Miranda warnings were
 
not required. State v. Paahana, 66 Haw. 499, 503-04, 666 P.2d
 
592, 596 (1983).
 
19

  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The record shows that upon Kazanas's arrest, before he
 
made the incriminating remark, Officer Avilla told him that "he
 
was not allowed to talk about the case or say anything about what
 he had been arrested for."  While at the hospital, in order to
 
calm Kazanas, who was making rude remarks to other patients,
 
Officer Avilla's engaged in "small talk" with Kazanas by asking
 if he enjoyed Halloween that night and what kind of costumes he
 saw. There is no suggestion that Officer Avilla's "small talk"
 was a psychological ploy or tactic to induce Kazanas to make an
 incriminating statement. It is clear that Officer Avilla was not
 attempting, and did not intend, to elicit any statement from
 Kazanas about his case or the investigation. We do not believe
 that Officer Avilla should have reasonably foreseen, or that she
 should have known, that her "small talk" questions about enjoying
 Halloween that night and the kind of costumes Kazanas had seen
 would elicit Kazanas's non-responsive statement that "If people
 didn't upset me, I wouldn't have to punch them." As Officer
 Avilla testified, Kazanas's statement "was just out of the blue." 
Similar to Ikaika, Officer Avilla's innocuous questions
 
were akin to a "pleasantry" that did not call for any response
 related to the investigation, much less an incriminating
 response. Indeed, a period of time passed between Officer
 Avilla's "small talk" and Kazanas's incriminating statement, and
 Kazanas's statement itself was not responsive to Officer Avilla's
 questions. Kazanas's trial testimony confirms that his statement
 was not made in response to a question posed by Officer Avilla. 
When defense counsel asked Kazanas why he made the statement,
 Kazanas responded that he "was under stress," and when asked what
 he was talking about, Kazanas replied, "Nothing. I was just
 speculating to the fact that they said that I was under arrest
 for an assault."
3
 
3Also, similar to Ikaika, the record reflects that Kazanas
had prior encounters with law enforcement and the criminal
justice system, having previously been arrested and convicted of
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Under the totality of the circumstances, we hold that 
Officer Avilla's questions did not constitute interrogation as we 
are unable to conclude that Officer Avilla "should have known that . . . her words or actions were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response" from Kazanas. See Ketchum, 97 Hawai
'i 
at 119, 34 P.3d at 1018; Ikaika, 67 Haw. at 567, 698 P.2d at 284­85; see also, Mickey v. Ayers, 606 F.3d 1223, 1236 (9th Cir. 2010) ("Casual conversation is generally not the type of behavior that police should know is reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response."). Kazanas's statement was a "volunteered statement[]" that was "given freely and voluntarily without any compelling influences[.]" See Miranda, 384 U.S. at 
478. As in Ikaika, we conclude that Kazanas's statement was an
 
unsolicited, spontaneous statement that was not the product of
 interrogation. See Ikaika, 67 Haw. at 567-68, 698 P.2d at 284­
85. Accordingly, the Circuit Court did not err in permitting the
 
State to introduce Kazanas's statement at trial.
 
II.
 
Kazanas contends that the Circuit Court erred in
 
permitting evidence of prior incidents involving Kazanas,
 pursuant to Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b) (Supp.
 2013) and HRE Rule 403 (1993). We disagree.
 
A.
 
HRE Rule 404(b) provides, in relevant part:
 
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible
to prove the character of a person in order to show action
in conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible
where such evidence is probative of another fact that is of
consequence to the determination of the action, such as
proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan,
knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of mistake
or accident.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
HRE Rule 403 provides:
 
other offenses. 

21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its
probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of
unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the
jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or
needless presentation of cumulative evidence.
 
Under HRE Rule 404(b), evidence of "other crimes,
 
wrongs, or acts" is admissible when: (1) it is relevant to any
 
fact of consequence other than the defendant's propensity to
 commit the crime charged; and (2) its probative value is not
 substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. 
State v. Renon, 73 Haw. 23, 31–32, 828 P.2d 1266, 1270 (1992). A
 trial court's determination that evidence is relevant turns on
 
4
the application of HRE Rule 401 (1993)  and is reviewed under the
right/wrong standard. State v. Cordeiro
, 99 Hawai 'i 390, 404, 56 
P.3d 692, 706 (2002). The trial court's decision in balancing probative value against unfair prejudice involves the application of HRE Rule 403 and is reviewed for abuse of discretion. Id. A 
trial court does not abuse its discretion unless it "clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." State v. Matias, 74 Haw. 197, 203, 840 P.2d 374, 377 
(1992) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
B.
 
In support of his mistaken-identity defense, Kazanas
 
testified that due to the serious injuries he previously
 sustained in his nine-story fall, he was physically incapable of 
engaging in the conduct alleged by the CW, namely, jumping on the
 hood of the car and reaching into the car and punching the CW. 
In other words, Kazanas asserted that he could not have been the
 perpetrator because he was physically incapable of committing the
 
4HRE Rule 401 defines "relevant evidence" as follows: 
"Relevant evidence" means evidence having any
tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of
consequence to the determination of the action more
probable or less probable than it would be without the
evidence. 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
act alleged by the CW. Kazanas's testimony placed his physical
 
capabilities directly in issue and opened the door to the State's
 introduction of evidence of the prior incidents to show that
 after Kazanas's nine-story fall, he was physically capable of
 running, jumping, and punching others. See Green v. State, 831
 
S.W.2d 89, 94–95 (Tex. Ct. App. 1992) (stating that when the
 defendant opens the door, "the State is permitted to complete the
 picture by presenting evidence that would otherwise have been
 inadmissible"); Credille v. State, 925 S.W.2d 112, 116 (Tex. Ct.
 App. 1996) (applying Texas evidentiary rule, which "permits the
 introduction of otherwise inadmissible evidence when that
 evidence is necessary to fully and fairly explain a matter
 'opened up' by the adverse party"); State v. Malshuk, 857 A.2d
 282, 286 (Vt. 2004) (stating that where defense counsel attempts
 to impeach a witness's credibility by painting an incomplete
 picture, "the State may complete the picture with 'appropriate
 detail'").
 
Kazanas's testimony made the extent of his physical
 
capabilities after the nine-story fall highly relevant, and we
 cannot say that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in
 balancing the probative value of the evidence regarding the prior
 incidents against the risk of unfair prejudice, in allowing the
 State to introduce evidence of the prior incidents. Moreover,
 the Circuit Court gave limiting instructions to the jury before
 allowing the State to question Kazanas about the prior incidents
 and also during its charge to the jury. The limiting
 instructions advised the jury that it may only consider the
 evidence regarding the prior incidents "as bearing upon the
 credibility of [Kazanas] and whether [Kazanas] may or may not
 have certain physical capabilities." The limiting instructions
 further advised the jury that it may not consider the evidence as
 "establishing any violent or bad character of [Kazanas], or [as
 proving that] he acted in conformity therewith during the events
 underlying the alleged offenses in this case." 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Juries are presumed to follow a trial court's 
instructions. See State v. Brooks, 123 Hawai 'i 456, 471, 235 
P.3d 1168, 1183 (App. 2010). The Circuit Court's limiting 
instruction served to mitigate any unfair prejudice resulting from the evidence of the prior incidents. See id. ("The 
prejudicial effect of prior bad-act evidence can be reduced or eliminated by proper jury instructions."). We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in permitting the State to introduce evidence of the prior incidents involving Kazanas that were relevant to his physical capabilities. 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit

 
Court's Judgment.
 
On the briefs:

 
Randall I. Shintani
 
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Donn Fudo
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
24
 