FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
---o0o---
CRANDALL PENAFLOR, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
BOYD P. MOSSMAN, RICHARD A. PRIEST, JR., THOMAS P. GRISWOLD,
CITY & COUNTY OF MAUI, A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, ARE SUED IN
THEIR INDIVIDUAL AND OFFICIAL CAPACITIES, Defendants-Appellees.
NO. CAAP-15-0000514
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-0187(2))
NOVEMBER 30, 2017
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE
Plaintiff-Appellant Crandall Penaflor (Penaflor) was
convicted of two counts of first-degree sexual assault, first-
degree burglary, kidnapping, and first-degree terroristic
threatening.  Penaflor filed a direct appeal of these convictions
and numerous post-conviction challenges, but was unsuccessful in
overturning these convictions.1/ 
1/ Penaflor was originally convicted in 1991 of two counts of first-
degree terrororistic threatening.  In 2002, this court reversed one of
Penaflor's two first-degree terroristic threatening convictions on the ground
that it merged with his kidnapping conviction.  State v. Penaflor , No. 23939,
2002 WL 31375566, at *1 (Hawai #i App. Oct. 21, 2002) (SDO).FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In 2014, Penaflor, appearing pro se, filed a "State
Tort Civil Complaint" (Civil Tort Complaint) against participants
in his criminal case: the presiding judge, the Deputy Prosecuting
Attorney, his appointed defense counsel, and the County of Maui
(County).  The Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit
Court)2/ dismissed Penaflor's Civil Tort Complaint.  It also
entered an order declaring Penaflor to be a vexatious litigant
and imposing prefiling restrictions on Penaflor's ability to file
new litigation.
On appeal, Penaflor contends that the Circuit Court
erred in: (1) dismissing his Civil Tort Complaint; and (2)
declaring him to be a vexatious litigant pursuant to Hawaii
Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 634J.
This appeal presents the question of whether Penaflor,
who has failed to overturn his convictions, can file a civil tort
action raising claims that challenge the validity of his
convictions.  We conclude that the answer to this question is
"no."  We therefore affirm the Circuit Court's dismissal of
Penaflor's Civil Tort Complaint.   
With respect to the Circuit Court's vexatious litigant
order pursuant to HRS Chapter 634J, we conclude that the Circuit
Court erred in issuing this order.  In finding that Penaflor
satisfied the criteria for a vexatious litigant, the Circuit
Court apparently relied upon Penaflor's prior filing of
unsuccessful Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40
(2006) and federal habeas corpus petitions.  However, Penaflor's
prior HRPP Rule 40 and federal habeas corpus petitions do not
constitute "civil actions or proceedings" for purposes of HRS
Chapter 634J, and therefore, the Circuit Court could not rely on
these petitions to support its order declaring Penaflor to be a
vexatious litigant.  Because it appears that the Circuit Court
relied upon an improper basis in issuing its vexatious litigant
order, and because the record does not support a vexatious
litigant finding, we vacate the vexatious litigant order.
2/ The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided.
2FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
I.
A.
On May 18, 1990, a Maui grand jury returned an
indictment against Penaflor, charging him with: first-degree
burglary of the residence of D.C. (Count 1); first-degree
terroristic threatening of D.C. with the use of a handgun (Count
2); first-degree terroristic threatening of K.S. with the use of
a handgun (Count 3); kidnapping of D.C. (Count 4); first-degree
robbery of D.C. with a handgun (Count 5); first-degree sexual
assault of D.C. by strong compulsion, to wit, fellatio (Count 6);
and first-degree sexual assault of D.C. by strong compulsion, to
wit, vaginal intercourse (Count 7).  After a jury trial, Penaflor
was found guilty of Counts 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 7.
The presiding judge at Penaflor's trial was the
Honorable Boyd P. Mossman (Judge Mossman), the Deputy Prosecuting
Attorney in Penaflor's case was Richard A. Priest, Jr. (Priest),
and Penaflor's appointed defense counsel was Thomas P. Griswold
(Griswold).  The Circuit Court sentenced Penaflor to consecutive
terms of imprisonment as to each count of conviction, for a total
term of seventy years.  The Circuit Court entered its Judgment on
September 10, 1991.
Penaflor filed a direct appeal from his Judgment.  On
August 26, 1992, the Hawai #i Supreme Court issued a memorandum
opinion affirming the September 10, 1991, Judgment.  State v.
Penaflor, No. 15629 (Hawai #i Aug. 26, 1992) (mem.).
B.
On January 22, 1998, Penaflor filed, pro se, an HRPP
Rule 40 petition (First Rule 40 Petition).  Penaflor sought
relief based his claims that: (1) his counsel had provided
ineffective assistance; (2) his convictions were obtained through
perjured witness testimony; and (3) the jury was biased against
him.  The Circuit Court denied Penaflor's First Rule 40 Petition
without a hearing on the grounds that Penaflor had failed to
establish ineffective assistance of counsel and had waived his
remaining claims by failing to raise them on direct appeal. 
3FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Penaflor did not appeal the Circuit Court's order denying his
First Rule 40 Petition.
On February 28, 2000, Penaflor filed, pro se, a Motion
for Correction of Illegal Sentence pursuant to HRPP Rule 35 (Rule
35 Motion).  The Circuit Court denied Penaflor's Rule 35 Motion. 
On appeal, this court affirmed the Circuit Court's denial of
Penaflor's Rule 35 Motion, but noticing plain error, we reversed
Penaflor's first-degree terroristic threatening conviction on
Count 2, ruling that it merged with his kidnapping conviction on
Count 4.  State v. Penaflor , No. 23939, 2002 WL 31375566, at *1
(Hawai#i App. Oct. 21, 2002) (SDO).  
On September 11, 2006, Penaflor filed, pro se, his
second HRPP Rule 40 petition (Second Rule 40 Petition).  The
Circuit Court denied Penaflor's Second Rule 40 Petition on the
grounds that his claims were either previously ruled upon, or had
been waived by his failure to raise them in the First Rule 40
Petition.  Penaflor appealed the Circuit Court's order denying
his Second Rule 40 Petition.  On June 24, 2008, this court
affirmed the Circuit Court's order, holding that Penaflor failed
to present a colorable claim because all the claims in his Second
Rule 40 Petition had been waived or previously ruled upon. 
Penaflor v. State , No. 28527, 2008 WL 2503259, at *1-3 (Hawai# i
App. June 24, 2008) (SDO).  The Hawai# i Supreme Court denied
Penaflor's application for writ of certiorari from this court's
decision.    
In 2009, the Circuit Court held a resentencing hearing
in response to this court's decision to reverse Penaflor's
conviction on Count 2.  Penaflor was represented by counsel,
appeared by telephone, and requested that his sentences be
imposed to run concurrently.  The Circuit Court issued an 
Amended Judgment which sentenced Penaflor to the same consecutive
terms of imprisonment, minus the five-year term for Count 2 that
this court had reversed, resulting in a total term of
imprisonment of 65 years.  Penaflor appealed from the Amended
Judgment.  This court affirmed the Amended Judgment, explaining
4FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
that in reversing Count 2, we did not authorize the Circuit Court
to change its prior sentence other than to remove the sentence
for Count 2.  State v. Penaflor , No. 30313, 2011 WL 716199, at *2
(Hawai#i App. Feb. 25, 2011) (SDO).  Penaflor, pro se, filed an
application for writ of certiorari with the Hawai# i Supreme
Court, raising numerous issues.  The supreme court denied
Penaflor's application for writ of certiorari.  State v.
Penaflor, No. SCWC-30313, 2011 WL 2165128 (June 2, 2011). 
On January 20, 2012, Penaflor filed, pro se, a second
petition for writ of habeas corpus in the United States District
Court for the District of Hawai #i (Federal District Court).3/  
Penaflor raised two grounds for relief: (1) his consecutive
sentences violated Apprendi v. New Jersey , 530 U.S. 466 (2000),
and state law; and (2) ineffective assistance of trial and
appellate counsel.  The Federal District Court denied Penaflor's
Apprendi-related claim as procedurally barred and without merit. 
Penaflor v. Thomas, Civil No. 12-00050 LEK-BMK, 2012 WL 1802468,
at *6 (D. Hawai #i May 17, 2012).  The Federal District Court
denied Penaflor's claim of ineffective assistance of trial and
appellate counsel because he failed to show cause for his
procedural default and because he failed to demonstrate actual
innocence.  Id.  at *7-8.  With respect to actual innocence, the
Federal District Court stated: "Penaflor presents no new evidence
establishing that he is actually innocent of his crimes, or that
it is 'more likely than not that no reasonable juror viewing the
record as a whole would lack reasonable doubt of his guilt.'" 
Id. at *8.
Penaflor sought reconsideration of the Federal District
Court's ruling, alleging extraordinary circumstances and actual
innocence.  The Federal District Court denied the motion for
reconsideration.  Penaflor v. Thomas , Civil. No. 12-00050 LEK-
BMK, 2012 WL 2685096 (D. Hawai #i July 6, 2012).  
3/ Penaflor's first petition for writ of habeas corpus, filed after this
court had reversed Penaflor's conviction on Count 2, but before the Circuit
Court had filed its Amended Judgment, was dismissed by the Federal District
Court as premature.
5FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
C.
Penaflor appears to have filed, pro se, a civil rights
complaint against Judge Mossman, Priest, and Griswold in the
Circuit Court on December 11, 2013.4/  The Circuit Court
apparently struck the civil rights complaint for lack of
jurisdiction because it found that Penaflor's claims were based
on federal civil rights statutes.5/
D.
On March 25, 2014, Penaflor, pro se, filed his Civil
Tort Complaint at issue in this appeal against Judge Mossman,
Priest, Griswold, and the County (collectively, the
"Defendants").  Penaflor's Civil Tort Complaint alleged a number
of claims against the Defendants, including malicious
prosecution, false imprisonment, and ineffective assistance of
counsel.  The crux of Penaflor's Civil Tort Complaint was that as
the result of the Defendants' acts and omissions, Penaflor was
wrongfully convicted and imprisoned.  In his prayer for relief,
Penaflor requested that a declaratory judgment be issued stating
that the Defendants' alleged acts and omissions violated his
rights; that an evidentiary hearing be granted "to substantiate
[his] claims"; that he be released from custody upon the finding
that he was falsely convicted and imprisoned; and that he be
awarded compensatory and punitive damages against the Defendants.
Judge Mossman filed a motion to dismiss the Civil Tort
Complaint, arguing that Penaflor failed to state a claim for
relief against Judge Mossman, and that even if Penaflor stated a
4/ A copy of the civil rights complaint is not part of the record in
this case.  Griswold's counsel filed a declaration asserting that Penaflor had
filed the civil rights complaint and that Griswold had moved to dismiss the
complaint on the ground that original jurisdiction for the complaint was with
the federal district court.
5/ The declaration of Griswold's counsel states that the Circuit Court
filed a "Sua Sponte order Striking Plaintiff Crandall Penaflor's Civil Rights
Complaint, Filed on December 11, 2013" (Order Striking Complaint), which was
attached as an exhibit to the declaration.  The attached exhibit states: "IT
IS HEREBY ORDERED that Plaintiff Crandall Penaflor's Civil Rights Complaint,
filed on December 11, 2013, is stricken.  The Court finds that Plaintiff's
claims are based on federal civil rights statutes; therefore, this Court lacks
jurisdiction over the matter."
6FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
claim, Judge Mossman was protected by absolute judicial immunity.
Griswold filed a motion to dismiss Penaflor's petition for
declaratory judgment, a motion to declare Penaflor a vexatious
litigant under HRS Chapter 634J, and a motion to dismiss the
Civil Tort Complaint.  Priest and the County joined in Griswold's
motion to dismiss the petition for declaratory judgment and
Griswold's motion to declare Penaflor a vexatious litigant.  In
their joinder in Griswold's vexatious litigant motion, Priest and
the County also requested that the Circuit Court "dismiss all the
parties."  After holding a hearing on these motions, the Circuit
Court granted the motions and issued corresponding orders,
including an order declaring Penaflor to be a vexatious
litigant.6/  The Circuit Court subsequently entered a Judgment on
August 19, 2015, which we construed as dismissing Penaflor's
entire Civil Tort Complaint with prejudice.7/
DISCUSSION
Penaflor argues that the Circuit Court erred by
dismissing the Civil Tort Complaint.  As explained below, we
conclude that the Circuit Court properly dismissed the Civil Tort
Complaint. 
Penaflor's claims against Judge Mossman, Priest, and
Griswold arose from their respective roles as presiding judge,
prosecutor, and defense counsel in Penaflor's criminal
prosecution.8/  Penaflor alleged that as the result of 
6/ The transcript of the hearing was not included in the record on
appeal.  Penaflor's motion to have the Circuit Court provide the transcript to
him was denied.  
7/ This Judgment provides: "IT IS HEREBY ADJUDGED AND DECREED that the
Complaint filed herein on July 29, 2014 is dismissed with prejudice.  Judgment
is hereby entered in favor of Defendant Thomas P. Griswold and against the
Plaintiff."  By Order dated December 24, 2015, this court construed this
Judgment "as dismissing Penaflor's entire complaint with prejudice, thereby
resolving all the claims filed by Penaflor in his complaint and entering
judgment in favor of all the defendants."  We accordingly denied Judge
Mossman's motion to dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction.
8/ Penaflor's claims against the County were apparently based on his
contention that it was vicariously liable for the conduct of the other
Defendants.  His claims against the County were therefore contingent on his
establishing liability on the part of the other Defendants.
7FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Defendants' acts and omissions, he was wrongfully convicted and
imprisoned.  Penaflor's claims, in effect, constituted a
collateral attack on his convictions, for if he prevailed, it
would undermine the validity of his convictions.
A.
We conclude that the claims against Judge Mossman were
barred by judicial immunity.  A judge has absolute immunity from
liability for damages arising from his or her judicial actions in
a criminal prosecution.  Bullen v. Derego, 68 Haw. 587, 591-92,
724 P.2d 106, 109 (1986).
This immunity applies even when the judge is accused of
acting maliciously and corruptly, and it "is not for the
protection or benefit of a malicious or corrupt judge, but
for the benefit of the public, whose interest it is that the
judges should be at liberty to exercise their functions with
independence and without fear of consequences."
Id. at 592 n.3, 724 P.2d at 109 n.3 (quoting Pierson v. Ray , 386
U.S. 547, 554 (1967). 
Penaflor's claims against Judge Mossman stem wholly
from the actions Judge Mossman took and decisions he made in his
role as the judge presiding over Penaflor's criminal prosecution. 
As the presiding judge in Penaflor's criminal case, Judge
Mossman's alleged "errors may be corrected on appeal, but he
should not have to fear that unsatisfied litigants may hound him
with litigation charging malice or corruption."  Id.  We conclude
that Penaflor's claims against Judge Mossman were barred by
Judge's Mossman's absolute judicial immunity.  The Circuit Court
properly dismissed Penaflor's claims against Judge Mossman.  
B.
Penaflor's claims 
against Priest, Griswold, and the County raise the question of
whether Penaflor, whose criminal convictions have not been
overturned, may file a civil tort action that challenges the
validity of his convictions.  We conclude that the answer to this
question is "no" and that the Circuit Court properly dismissed
Penaflor's Civil Tort Complaint against Priest, Griswold, and the
County.
8FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1.
Under Hawai #i law, a person whose conviction remains
valid and has not been overturned cannot bring a claim for
malicious prosecution.  An essential element of the tort of
malicious prosecution is "that the prior [criminal] proceedings
were terminated in the plaintiff's favor[.]"  Reed v. City and
County of Honolulu, 76 Hawai# i 219, 230, 873 P.2d 98, 109 (1994)
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted); see Restatement
(Second) of Torts, § 658 (1997) ("To subject a person to
liability for malicious prosecution, the criminal proceedings
must have terminated in favor of the accused.").
In Heck v. Humphrey , 512 U.S. 477, 484-86 (1994), the
United States Supreme Court applied principles underlying the
limitation on malicious prosecution actions to suits seeking
damages pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983.9/  The Court noted that
"[o]ne element that must be alleged and proved in a malicious
prosecution action is termination of the prior criminal
proceeding in favor of the accused."  Id. at 484.  The Court
explained that
[t]his requirement "avoids parallel litigation over the
issues of probable cause and guilt . . . and it precludes
the possibility of the claimant [sic] succeeding in the tort
action after having been convicted in the underlying
criminal prosecution, in contravention of a strong judicial
policy against the creation of two conflicting resolutions
arising out of the same or identical transaction."
Id. (citation omitted; "[sic]" and ellipsis points in original). 
The Court further explained that "to permit a convicted criminal
defendant to proceed with a malicious prosecution claim would
permit a collateral attack on the conviction through the vehicle
9/ 42 U.S.C. § 1983 provides in relevant part:
Every person who, under color of any statute, ordinance,
regulation, custom, or usage, of any State or Territory or the
District of Columbia, subjects, or causes to be subjected, any
citizen of the United States or other person within the
jurisdiction thereof to the deprivation of any rights, privileges,
or immunities secured by the Constitution and laws, shall be
liable to the party injured in an action at law, suit in equity,
or other proper proceeding for redress . . . .
9FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of a civil suit[,]" and that "similar concerns for finality and
consistency," have led the Court to "generally decline[] to
expand opportunities for collateral attack[.]"  Id.  at 484-85
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted).  The Court
concluded that "the hoary principle that civil tort actions are
not appropriate vehicles for challenging the validity of
outstanding criminal judgments applies to § 1983 damages actions
that necessarily require the plaintiff to prove the unlawfulness
of his conviction or confinement, just as it has always applied
to actions for malicious prosecution."  Id. at 486.
Based on this reasoning, the Court held that
in order to recover damages for allegedly unconstitutional
conviction or imprisonment, or for other harm caused by
actions whose unlawfulness would render a conviction or
sentence invalid, a § 1983 plaintiff must prove that the
conviction or sentence has been reversed on direct appeal,
expunged by executive order, declared invalid by a state
tribunal authorized to make such determination, or called
into question by a federal court's issuance of a writ of
habeas corpus[.]
Id. at 486-87.  Therefore, a claim for damages that necessarily
implies the invalidity of a conviction or sentence is not
cognizable under § 1983 where the conviction or sentence has not
been invalidated.  Id. at 487.  Accordingly, the Court directed
that
when a state prisoner seeks damages in a § 1983 suit, the
district court must consider whether a judgment in favor of
the plaintiff would necessarily imply the invalidity of his
conviction or sentence; if it would, the complaint must be
dismissed unless the plaintiff can demonstrate that the
conviction or sentence has already been invalidated.
Id. at 487.
Courts from other jurisdictions have applied Heck's
reasoning and analysis to state tort claims that would
necessarily imply the invalidity of criminal convictions that
have not been overturned.  See Yount v. City of Sacramento , 183
P.3d 471, 484 (Cal. 2008) (concluding that the Heck analysis
applies to state tort claim for battery); Gibson v. Trant , 58
S.W.3d 103, 112, 116 (Tenn. 2001) (concluding that "the validity
of criminal convictions are not designed to be tested in the
10FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
civil tort arena," in precluding criminal defendants who have
failed to obtain post-conviction relief from suing their lawyers
for legal malpractice).
2.
We agree with the reasoning and analysis in Heck. 
Civil tort actions are not appropriate vehicles for challenging
the validity of criminal judgments.  The need for finality and
consistency mandates that a criminal defendant must first
overturn his or her conviction before raising civil claims that
necessarily require proof that the conviction was invalid.  The
criminal justice system provides numerous safeguards against
improper conviction, including requiring proof beyond a
reasonable doubt, the right to jury trial, the right to counsel,
the right to direct appeal, and procedures for seeking post-
conviction relief.  Criminal defendants like Penaflor may
challenge their convictions through a direct appeal and through
post-conviction proceedings pursuant to HRPP Rule 40, which
permits a criminal defendant to challenge a criminal judgment on
"any ground which is a basis for collateral attack on the
judgment."  HRPP Rule 40(a)(1)(v).  Allowing a criminal defendant
to file a civil suit that challenges the validity of his or her
existing conviction would undermine the post-conviction process
and contravene the strong judicial policy against inconsistent
judgments based on the same underlying facts.  We therefore hold
that a criminal defendant who has failed to overturn his or her
conviction cannot file a civil suit based on claims that
necessarily imply the invalidity of the conviction.  
Here, Penaflor's Civil Tort Complaint was based on
claims that necessarily imply the invalidity of his convictions. 
Penaflor raised claims for malicious prosecution, false
imprisonment, and ineffective assistance of counsel, prayed for a
declaratory judgment that the Defendants' alleged acts and
omissions violated his rights, and sought his release from
custody based on a determination that he was falsely convicted
and imprisoned.  Despite a direct appeal and numerous petitions
11FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
for post-conviction relief, Penaflor has failed to overturn his
convictions.  A judgment in favor of Penaflor on his Civil Tort
Complaint would be inconsistent with and would undermine the
court decisions which have denied his direct appeal and petitions
for post-conviction relief and have upheld his convictions. 
Given these circumstances, we conclude that the Circuit Court
properly dismissed Penaflor's Civil Tort Complaint against
Griswold, Priest, and the County.10/
II.
The Circuit Court issued an order declaring Penaflor to
be a vexatious litigant (Vexatious Litigant Order) under HRS
Chapter 634J.  The Vexatious Litigant Order also imposed
prefiling restrictions pursuant to HRS § 634J-7(a) and (b)
(2016)11/ on Penaflor's ability to file new litigation on his own
behalf as to the claims litigated in this case with respect to
Judge Mossman, Griswold, Priest, and the County Department of the
Prosecuting Attorney.   
10/ We note that while Preist and the County joined in Griswold's motion
to dismiss Penaflor's petition for declaratory judgment and motion to declare
Penaflor a vexatious litigant, they did not join in Griswold's motion to
dismiss the Civil Tort Complaint or file a separate motion to dismiss. 
However, because the justification for dismissing Penaflor's Civil Tort
Complaint against Griswold applies equally to Priest and the County, we affirm
the dismissal of the Civil Tort Complaint against Priest and the County.  See
Bonny v. Society of Lloyd's, 3 F.3d 156, 162 (7th Cir. 1993) ("A court may
grant a motion to dismiss even as to nonmoving defendants where the nonmoving
defendants are in a position similar to that of moving defendants or where the
claims against all defendants are integrally related.").  
11/ HRS § 634J-7(a) and (b) provide:
(a) In addition to any other relief provided in this
chapter, the court, on its own motion or the motion of any party,
may enter a prefiling order which prohibits a vexatious litigant
from filing any new litigation in the courts of this State on the
litigant's own behalf without first obtaining leave of the
presiding judge of the court where the litigation is proposed to
be filed.  Disobedience of this order by a vexatious litigant may
be punished as a contempt of court.
(b) The presiding judge shall permit the filing of
litigation only if it appears, after hearing, that the litigation
has merit and has not been filed for the purposes of harassment or
delay.  The presiding judge may condition the filing of the
litigation upon the furnishing of security for the benefit of the
defendants as provided in section 634J-4.
12FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Penaflor argues that the Circuit Court erred when it
declared him to be a vexatious litigant because he asserts that
this was "the first time that he has filed a [c]ivil rights
[c]omplaint against the named Defendant(s)."  We review a
determination that the plaintiff meets the statutory definition
for a vexatious litigant under an abuse of discretion standard. 
Ek v. Boggs , 102 Hawai# i 289, 294, 75 P.3d 1180, 1185 (2003).  As
explained below, we conclude that the Circuit Court abused its
discretion in issuing the Vexatious Litigant Order.
A.
HRS § 634J-1 (2016) defines "vexatious litigant" as
follows:
"Vexatious litigant" means a plaintiff who does any of the
following:
(1) In the immediately preceding seven-year period has
commenced, prosecuted, or maintained in propria
persona at least five civil actions other than in a
small claims court that have been:
(A) Finally determined adversely to the plaintiff;
or
(B) Unjustifiably permitted to remain pending at
least two years without having been brought to
trial or hearing;
(2) After litigation has been finally resolved against the
plaintiff, relitigates or attempts to relitigate in
propria persona and in bad faith, either:
(A) The validity of the determination against the
same defendant or defendants as to whom the
litigation was finally determined; or
(B) The cause of action, claim, controversy, or any
of the issues of fact or law, determined or
concluded by the final determination against the
same defendant or defendants as to whom the
litigation was finally determined;
(3) In any litigation while acting in propria persona,
files, in bad faith, unmeritorious motions, pleadings,
or other papers, conducts unnecessary discovery, or
engages in other tactics that are frivolous or solely
intended to cause unnecessary delay; or
(4) Has previously been declared to be a vexatious
litigant by any state or federal court of record in
any action or proceeding based upon the same or
substantially similar facts, transaction, or
occurrence.
HRS § 634J-1.
13FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
HRS § 634J-1 further defines the term "litigation," as
used in HRS Chapter 634J, to mean "any civil action or
proceeding, commenced, maintained, or pending in any state or
federal court of record."  Therefore, it is clear that HRS
Chapter 634J is directed at actions taken by a plaintiff in civil
actions or proceedings.  
B.
In this case, Griswold filed a motion to declare
Penaflor a vexatious litigant (Vexatious Litigant Motion), in
which Priest and the County joined.  In support of his Vexatious
Litigant Motion, Griswold cited the claims Penaflor had
previously raised in his unsuccessful post-conviction petitions
pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 and for writ of habeas corpus under 28
U.S.C. § 2254.  Griswold argued that Penaflor was raising the
same claims in his Civil Tort Complaint that he raised in his
post-conviction petitions.  Griswold also argued that Penaflor's
Civil Tort Complaint asserted claims that were raised in
Penaflor's civil rights complaint that the Circuit Court had sua
sponte stricken for lack of jurisdiction.  Griswold contended
that Penaflor was a vexatious litigant under paragraphs (2) and
(3) of the statutory definition.  
C.
We conclude that for purposes of HRS Chapter 634J,
post-conviction proceedings pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 and for writ
of habeas corpus under 28 U.S.C. § 2254 are not "civil actions or
proceedings" and thus do not constitute "litigation" under HRS
Chapter 634J.  HRS Chapter 634J is derived from and substantially
similar to the California vexatious litigant statute.  S. Stand.
Comm. Rep. No. 467, in 1993 Senate Journal, at 978; Ek, 102
Hawai#i at 294, 75 P.3d at 1185.  In In re Bittaker , 64 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 679, 683-84 (Cal. Ct. App 1997), a California court of
appeals held that a petition for writ of habeas corpus filed by a
prisoner was not a "civil action or proceeding" within the
meaning of the California vexatious litigant statute and thus did
14FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
not fall within the definition of "litigation" under that
statute.  It therefore held that the prisoner, who had previously
been declared a vexatious litigant, retained "the right to file a
petition for writ of habeas corpus unencumbered by vexatious
litigant procedures which apply to the filing of a civil action
or proceeding."  Id.  at 680.
Texas appellate courts, construing the Texas vexatious
litigant statute, which has the same definition of "litigation"
as Hawai# i's statute, have held that when a prisoner files an
application for writ of habeas corpus challenging his or her
confinement, "the proceeding is criminal, not civil, in nature." 
Aranda v. District Clerk , 207 S.W.3d 785, 786 (Tex. Crim. App.
2006); Walp v. Williams , 330 S.W.3d 404, 407 (Tex. Ct. App.
2010).  Accordingly, such an application for writ of habeas
corpus is not a "civil action" for purposes of the Texas
vexatious litigant statute and cannot be used to find the
prisoner to be a vexatious litigant or as the basis for filing
restrictions.  Id. 
These precedents from California and Texas support our
conclusion that for purposes of HRS Chapter 634J, post-conviction
proceedings pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 and for writ of habeas
corpus under 28 U.S.C. § 2254 are not "civil actions or
proceedings" and thus do not constitute "litigation" under HRS
Chapter 634J.  HRPP Rule 40 authorizes post-conviction petitions
which challenge the legality of a defendant's conviction or a
defendant's custody based on a conviction.  HRPP Rule 40(a)(1)
and (a)(2).  Because HRPP Rule 40 petitions challenge the
validity of a criminal defendant's conviction or confinement,
they are basically criminal, and not civil, in nature.  Indeed,
HRPP Rule 40 itself distinguishes between petitions challenging
the legality of a judgment of conviction or post-conviction
custody, which fall within the scope of HRPP Rule 40, and "civil"
actions which do not.  See HRPP Rule 40(c)(3); Hutch v. State ,
107 Hawai# i 411, 419-20, 114 P.3d 917, 925-26 (2005).  
15FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
HRPP Rule 40(c)(3) provides:
Separate Cause of Action.  If a post-conviction
petition alleges neither illegality of judgment nor
illegality of post-conviction "custody" or "restraint" but
instead alleges a cause of action based on a civil rights
statute or other separate cause of action, the court shall
treat the pleading as a civil complaint not governed by this
rule.  However, where a petition seeks relief of the nature
provided by this rule and simultaneously pleads a separate
claim or claims under a civil rights statute or other
separate cause of action, the latter claim or claims shall
be ordered transferred by the court for disposition under
the civil rules.
(Emphasis added).  HRPP Rule 40 also provides that appeals from a
judgment in HRPP Rule 40 proceedings may be taken in accordance
with procedures for appeals in criminal cases.  HRPP Rule 40(h).
Because a petition filed pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 is
not a "civil action or proceeding" and does not constitute
"litigation" for purposes of HRS Chapter 634J, it cannot be used
to support a finding that a person is a vexatious litigant.  In
other words, HRPP Rule 40 petitions do not "count" for purposes
of HRS Chapter 634J.  This also means that HRS Chapter 634J
cannot be used to impose restrictions on a person's ability to
file HRPP Rule 40 petitions.  Given the similarity between HRPP
Rule 40 petitions and petitions for writ of habeas corpus under
28 U.S.C. § 2254,12/ we conclude that 28 U.S.C. § 2254 petitions
for writ of habeas corpus should receive the same treatment under
HRS Chapter 634J as HRPP Rule 40 petitions.  
D.
Here, Griswold sought a declaration that Penaflor was a
vexatious litigant under paragraphs (2) and (3) of the statutory
definition.  The Vexatious Litigant Motion cited Penaflor's
numerous unsuccessful post-conviction petitions pursuant to HRPP
Rule 40 and for writ of habeas corpus under 28 U.S.C. § 2254,
which challenged the validity of his convictions and sentence.  
12/ 28 U.S.C. § 2254(a) authorizes a state prisoner to challenge his or
her custody as "in violation of the Constitution or laws or treaties of the
United States."
16FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Griswold argued that Penaflor was a vexatious litigant because he
was raising claims in his Civil Tort Complaint that had been
raised and rejected in the proceedings on his post-conviction
petitions.  However, because Penaflor's post-conviction petitions
did not constitute civil actions or proceedings within the
meaning of HRS Chapter 634J, they could not be used to support a
determination that Penaflor was a vexatious litigant.  
The Vexatious Litigant Motion also cited the prior
striking of a civil rights complaint filed by Penaflor.  However,
the civil rights complaint was not made part of the record.  In
addition, the copy of the order striking the civil rights
complaint indicates that there was no determination of the merits
of the claims raised, but that the complaint was struck for lack
of jurisdiction because it was based on federal statutes.  Under
these circumstances, we conclude that the record does not support
a determination that Penaflor was a vexatious litigant under
paragraph 2 of the vexatious litigant definition.
With respect to paragraph 3 of the statutory
definition, the Circuit Court did not find in its Vexatious
Litigant Order, and the record does not indicate, that Penaflor
filed any documents in bad faith or that he engaged in tactics
that were frivolous or solely intended to cause unnecessary
delay. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court abused
its discretion in declaring Penaflor to be a vexatious litigant
in this case, and we vacate the Vexatious Litigant Order.  We
note that our decision does not insulate Penaflor from being
declared a vexatious litigant should he meet the statutory
criteria in future civil litigation.  We also note that our
holding in this case that a criminal defendant who has failed to
overturn his or her conviction cannot file a civil suit based on
claims that necessarily imply the invalidity of the conviction
will apply to future civil complaints filed by Penaflor.
17FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court's
Judgment dismissing the Civil Tort Complaint, and we vacate the
Vexatious Litigant Order.
On the briefs:
Crandall Penaflor
Plaintiff-Appellant pro se.
Patricia Ohara
Robyn B. Chun
Deputy Attorneys General
for Defendant-Appellee
Boyd P. Mossman.
David A. Sereno
for Defendant-Appellee
Thomas P. Griswold.
Thomas W. Kolbe
Caleb P. Rowe
Deputies Corporation Counsel
for Defendants-Appellees
Richard A. Priest, Jr. and
County of Maui.
18