NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
NO. CAAP-23-0000046 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
  
STATE OF HAWAIʻ I, Plaintiff-Appellee, 
v. 
MAGNO FRANCO, Defendant-Appellant 
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-22-00838) 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Nakasone, Chief Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.) 
 
Defendant-Appellant Magno D. Franco (Franco) appeals 
from the District Court of the First Circuit's (district court) 
August 31, 2022 "Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment" (2022 Judgment),
1 and January 24, 2023 "Notice of 
Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment" (2023 Judgment).
2 
 
1  The Honorable James S. Kawashima presided.  
 
2  The Honorable Alvin K. Nishimura presided.   Electronically Filed
Intermediate Court of Appeals
CAAP-23-0000046
16-JAN-2026
07:48 AM
Dkt. 58 SONOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
2 On June 14, 2022, the State of Hawaiʻ i (State) charged 
Franco by Complaint with one count of Operating a Vehicle Under 
the Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII
) in violation of Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1) (2020).3  Following a 
bench trial, the district court found Franco guilty of the charged offense, and entered the 2022 Judgment, which fined 
Franco $250 along with accompanying fees.  Franco appealed the 
2022 Judgment in case no. CAAP-22-0000551, but stipulated to the 
dismissal of the appeal so that jurisdiction could revert to the 
district court for a ruling on Franco's license revocation.  The 
district court entered the 2023 Judgment, which revoked Franco's 
license for one year, but stayed judgment pending appeal.  This appeal followed. 
On appeal, Franco raises two points of error, 
contending that: (1) the State failed to adduce substantial 
evidence to support Franco's conviction for OVUII; and (2) the 
district court's failure to strike "testimony that impermissibly 
stated a legal conclusion" constituted plain error.  (Formatting 
altered.) 
 
3  HRS § 291E- 61(a)(1) states, in relevant part, 
 
(a) A person commits the offense of [OVUII] if the person 
operates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
 
 
(1)
 While under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair the person's normal mental 
faculties or ability to care for the person and 
guard against casualty[.]
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
3 Upon careful review of the record, briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration 
to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, 
we resolve Franco's points of error as follows: 
(1) Franco contends that "the State failed to adduce 
substantial evidence that [Franco] had intentionally, knowingly 
or recklessly operated his vehicle while under the influence of 
alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair his normal mental faculties or ability to care for himself and guard against 
casualty."    
We consider the evidence adduced at trial "in the 
strongest light for the prosecution when . . . pass[ing] on the 
legal sufficiency of such evidence to support a conviction."  
State v. Kalaola, 124 Hawaiʻi 43, 49, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010) 
(citation omitted).  The test on appeal is whether there was 
substantial evidence to support the conviction.  Id. 
"Substantial evidence . . . is credible evidence which 
is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person 
of reasonable caution to support a conclusion."  Id. (cleaned 
up).  The trial judge in a bench trial, as the trier of fact, 
"is free to make all reasonable and rational inferences under 
the facts in evidence, including circumstantial evidence."  
State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 249, 831 P.2d 924, 931 (1992) 
(citation omitted).   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
4 The State called two witnesses at trial: Honolulu 
Police Department (HPD) Officer Nelson Ky (Officer Ky), and 
Officer Ty Ah Nee (Officer Ah Nee).  Officer Ky testified that 
on May 27, 2022, he observed a vehicle driving in the wrong 
direction on a one-way street.  Officer Ky followed the vehicle 
into a McDonald's parking lot, where he pulled over the vehicle 
and observed that the driver, Franco, had "glassy, red eyes."  
Officer Ky "could smell a strong odor of alcohol" while standing about two feet away from Franco.   
Officer Ah Nee, who administered Franco's three-part 
standardized field sobriety test (SFST), testified as to 
Franco's conduct and actions while performing the SFST.  
"[E]vidence of a driver's conduct and physical actions while 
performing a SFST is not only relevant to probable cause for an 
arrest, but is also admissible as indicia of whether a driver 
was OVUII beyond a reasonable doubt."  State v. Jones, 148 
Hawaiʻi 152, 172, 468 P.3d 166, 186 (2020).   
While administering the horizontal gaze nystagmus 
test, Officer Ah Nee observed that Franco's "eyes were red, 
watery, glassy," and that "[t]here was a strong odor of a 
consumed alcoholic type beverage coming from his person."  
During the walk-and-turn test, Officer Ah Nee observed that 
Franco exhibited six of eight clues indicating impairment: the 
inability to stand with his right foot in front of his left foot NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
5 on the line; taking fourteen and sixteen heel-to-toe steps when 
he was instructed to take nine; missing multiple heel-to-toe 
steps; stepping off the line twice; "shuffl[ing] both feet" 
during his turn; and appearing to lose his balance on steps 9 
and 10.  During the one-leg stand test, Officer Ah Nee observed 
that Franco's "raised foot was swaying," that Franco raised his 
arms once, and that he "count[ed] a couple of numbers twice."   
On this record, we conclude that there is substantial 
evidence that Franco's operation of a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol was in an amount sufficient to impair his 
normal mental faculties or ability to care for himself and guard 
against casualty.   
(2) Franco contends that "[t]he district court plainly 
erred in failing to strike Officer Ah Nee's testimony that 
impermissibly stated a legal conclusion."  (Formatting altered.)  
Franco specifically challenges, for the first time on appeal, 
Officer Ah Nee's statements that "there was a lot of impairment" as to Franco's walk-and-turn test, and "[a]s a whole, that there 
was an -- some kind of intoxicant that was impairing [Franco's] 
ability to divide his attention."   
Hawaiʻi Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 52(b) states 
that "[p]lain errors or defects affecting substantial 
rights may be noticed although they were not brought to the 
attention of the court."  Therefore, an appellate court may 
recognize plain error when the
 error committed affects 
substantial rights of the defendant. 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
6 State v. Metcalfe, 129 Hawaiʻ i 206, 222, 297 P.3d 1062, 1078 
(2013) (cleaned up).  "Erroneous admission of evidence may 
constitute plain error if a fair trial of the accused was thereby impaired, or if it substantially prejudiced the 
accused."  State v. Cummings, 49 Haw. 522, 528, 423 P.2d 438, 
442 (1967) (cleaned up).   
"[I]t is well-settled that opinion testimony should 
not merely tell the fact-finder what result to reach, and witnesses are not permitted to give legal conclusions."  Jones, 
148 Hawaiʻ i at 173, 468 P.3d at 187 (citations omitted).  Franco 
contends that the district court improperly admitted Officer Ah 
Nee's testimony of Franco's "impairment" in performing the SFST, 
and in his "ability to divide his attention."  We agree that 
Officer Ah Nee was not allowed to render his expert opinion as to Franco's "impairment."  See id. at 174, 468 P.3d at 188 
(holding "that police officers may no longer testify, whether in 
a lay or expert capacity, that a driver appeared 'intoxicated'") 
(footnote omitted).  
We conclude, however, that the admission of Officer Ah 
Nee's testimony on Franco's "impairment" did not constitute 
plain error.  The record reflects that the district court 
reached its conclusion regarding Franco's impairment based on 
the properly admitted testimony of Franco's "smell of alcohol" and performance on the SFST.  In a bench trial, "it is presumed
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
7 that the presiding judge will have disregarded the incompetent 
evidence and relied upon that which was competent."  State v. 
Kiese, 126 Hawaiʻi 494, 507, 273 P.3d 1180, 1193 (2012) (cleaned 
up).  The district court explained that, 
I think the smell of alcohol is sufficient to satisfy the 
influence of alcohol portion.  And so what I'm really 
looking at is a sufficiency to impair normal mental 
faculties. 
 
And in that regard, I find the State has met its 
burden primarily through the SFST testimony.  As [defense counsel] points out, it's sort of a calisthenics thing.  
But all I'm looking at is how able were you to follow 
simple instructions at the time.  And inability to do so on all three tests along with some swaying and along with, you 
know, stepping off line and raising arm -- all of that 
suggests to me and frankly proves beyond a reasonable doubt that there is an impairment of normal mental faculties. 
 
(Emphasis added.)  On this record, Franco's right to a fair 
trial was not impaired, and Franco was not otherwise 
"substantially prejudiced." 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the 2022 Judgment 
and the 2023 Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻ i, January 16, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
Taryn R. Tomasa, 
Deputy Public Defender, for Defendant-Appellant.  
Loren J. Thomas, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, City and County of Honolulu, for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
 /s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
Chief Judge 
 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth Associate Judge  
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
Associate Judge
 