NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-21-0000012 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF 
HAWAI#I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
JOANN I. BENSON, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
HONOLULU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 1DCC-19-0012806) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Ginoza, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Joann I. Benson appeals from: 
(1) the "Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order" (
Restitution 
Order) entered by the District Court of the First Circuit, 
Honolulu Division on November 12, 2020; and (2) the "Amended 
Judgment and Notice of Entry of Amended Judgment" entered by the 
district court on September 29, 2021.   For the reasons explained 
below, we affirm the Restitution Order and the Amended Judgment. 1
On April 30, 2019, Benson's dog (O
den) bit Afatia
Ali#ilua on his right forearm. Benson was cited by Honolulu 
Police Department Officer Eric 
Hokama for negligent failure to 
control a dangerous dog, in violation of Revised Ordinances of 
Honolulu (ROH) § 7-7.2 (1990 & Supp. No. 12, 2-08) (NFCDD). She 
1 The Honorable William M. Domingo presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pleaded not guilty to the charge. She was tried by the district 
court on March 4, 2020. 
At trial, Ali# ilua testified that on April 30, 2019, at 
around 10:45 a.m., he was in the Market City parking lot. 
He 
walked "between cars going to get me something for eat." As he was walking, a dog's "whole head came out" of a car's window and "went snatch my right arm, forearm." He "poked the dog's eye" with his left hand and the dog released his arm. At the time of the incident, "[o]nly the dog was in the back seat" of a white, four-door Toyota with the window down halfway. He never saw the dog before he passed the car. 
Officer Hokama testified that on September 14, 2019, he 
"conducted a traffic stop for a vehicle [Benson] had owned, a Toyota Corolla, for expired tax and safety." He stated, "when I ran the plate in our case report system, it came out there was a pending dog bite case involving that vehicle[.]" 
As he 
approached the vehicle, Benson was seated in the driver's seat and a "pit bull kind of looking dog" "was in the back seat and the window was cracked a little bit." The dog was not on a leash. Officer Hokama testified that when he informed Benson of the pending dog bite case, "she just said she will take care of it at court and then so I just gave her the citation." 
Benson testified in her own defense. She drove her car 
to Market City on April 30, 2019. She brought Oden with her, but left him in the car when she went to Foodland and Walgreens. She left Oden in the back seat and rolled the window down about four inches for ventilation. She stated she had left Oden in the car by himself before and he never attacked anyone. She never had any issue because Oden's "face is pretty big. I didn't think he'd . . . be able to come out of there at all, . . . let alone approach anybody or bite anyone." On cross-examination, Benson testified that she did not put a leash on Oden and he was not in a kennel while in her car. 
After closing arguments, the district court issued its 
oral ruling: 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Okay. So we had Mr. Ali #ilua who testified that on April
30th about 10:45 A.M. he's a Robert's Hawaii school bus 
driver; that he drop[p]ed off his school charter at theFoodland area in Market City which is in the City and Countyof Honolulu, state of Hawaii. 
He was in the parking lot. 
He decided to go get something to eat in the area, and
as he was walking through the parking lot between cars, allof a sudden he said the dog snatched his right forearm whichmeans the dog bit his forearm. He testified it was rightforearm and did show in court that there was a purplish scarwhich was that, it was bleeding a lot. 
And he testified that there was a dog that had jumped
out of that car with his whole head and bit his arm at which point he used his left hand to poke the dog in the eye andat which point the dog released and moved back into the car.He grabbed his hand to try to stop the bleeding. 
There was 
a couple there that noticed what was going on and they, um,they took a picture of the car as far as the license, uh,and called the police and also an ambulance. 
Mr. Ali #ilua also testified that he did not see or 
notice that there was a dog in the car, did not provoke thedog, did not stick his hand through the window opening forthe dog to -- to bite him, and there was no provocation onhis part. He testified also that the window was halfway downwhich this court finds it was greater than four inchesbecause the dog was able to completely put his head out.But it is a pit bull. Even Ms. Benson testified that it hasa big head. 
And, uh, also testified that when the police came --
well, actually the owner came, which he identified asMs. Benson, he told her that the dog had just bitten his armand that the police were on their way. She stated that she was sorry. And he said that, "Wait," you know. "Staybecause the police are coming," and she stated that she hadto leave and left him a message or a piece of paper with hername on it. I'm not sure whether or not there was any phonenumber on there or anything else to contact her. Um, he wastreated apparently by the EMS and he did show his wound incourt. 
The second witness which was called was Corporal
Hokama who had testified on September 14, 2019, some fivemonths -- sorry, five months after the incident he stopped awhite sedan because of, um, expired safety -- uh, safetytags. And as he was running the check on the carregistration, there was a notification that there was apending dog bite case. 
And he spoke with Ms. Benson, who he recognized and
identified in court, regarding that and she stated thatshe'll take care of it in court and so he gave her acitation. He noticed that there was a dog in the back seat.He noticed it was a pit bull and noticed the window in theback was cracked a little bit. 
[Benson] did take the stand, testified that she was
present on that particular day, had gone to Market City withher dog Oden. He was two and a half years old. Um, and shewent to Market City to get some food. Normally she tries topark in areas where there are people who won't be walking by 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the car and there was some shade there too. But she 
testified that on that day there was -- the parking lot wasfull so she took the only available space with any possibleshade, left Oden in the back seat. He was not in a kennel. Did not have a leash on at that point. 
And she testified that she did crack the window 
approximately four inches down so that he could get someventilation. 
She also testified that the -- Oden's face is 
big. She also testified that he has not acted aggressivelyalthough neighbors' friends tried to provoke him when theycall on the dog and hit the screen which causes him to bark. 
The court finds that based on the testimony and
specifically of Mr. [Ali #ilua] that he was just walking by,
didn't expect anything to happen at this point, did not seea dog, did not provoke a dog, and he was bitten by the dog,the whole head had just come out. 
The court finds also that based on testimony and the
disputed facts that the window was not cracked down fourinches as Ms. Benson stated as the window was at least halfway down as Mr. [Ali #ilua] stated for -- in order to
enable th[e] dog to come out. 
So based on the fact of the window not being -- she
did take some measures but they were negligent --negligently failed to prevent anything that would relayprovocation -- non-provocation on that. 
So therefore the 
court finds that the State has proved beyond a reasonabledoubt that Ms. Benson is guilty of the charge of dangerousdog. 
The Restitution Order and the Amended Judgment were 
entered. This appeal followed. 
Benson raises one point of error on appeal: "Benson's 
conviction requires reversal where there was no substantial 
evidence that Benson negligently failed to control a dangerous dog or negligently failed to take reasonable measures to prevent her dog from attacking Ali# ilua." 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has stated: 
We have long held that evidence adduced in the trial
court must be considered in the strongest light for the
prosecution when the appellate court passes on the legalsufficiency of such evidence to support a conviction; thesame standard applies whether the case was before a judge ora jury. The test on appeal is not whether guilt isestablished beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there wassubstantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trierof fact. Indeed, even if it could be said in a bench trialthat the conviction is against the weight of the evidence,as long as there is substantial evidence to support therequisite findings for conviction, the trial court will beaffirmed. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Substantial evidence" as to every material element of
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person ofreasonable caution to support a conclusion. And as trier of fact, the trial judge is free to make all reasonable andrational inferences under the facts in evidence, includingcircumstantial evidence. 
State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai# i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 
(2007) (cleaned up) (reformatted). 
ROH § 7-7.2 (1990 & Supp. No. 12, 2-08) provides, in 
relevant part: 
Prohibited acts — Conditions on owner – Penalties. 
(a) A dog owner commits the offense of negligent failure
to control a dangerous dog,[2] if the owner
negligently fails to take reasonable measures toprevent the dog from attacking, without provocation, aperson . . . and such attack results in: . . . (2)bodily injury to a person other than the owner. 
Based on the charge in State v. Argus, No. CAAP-17-
0000340, 2019 WL 3384851 (Haw. App. July 26, 2019) (SDO), we held 
that 
the offense of NFCDD requires proof that the accused:
(1) owned, harbored, kept, or had custody of a dog;(2) negligently failed to take reasonable measures toprevent the dog from attacking without provocation; and(3) which resulted in bodily injury to a person other thanthe owner. ROH § 7-7.2. 
Id. at *1. Given the circumstances in this case, it appears the 
same elements apply here as well. 
Benson does not contest that she owned Oden, that 
Ali#ilua did not provoke Oden, or that Ali# ilua  sustained bodily 
injury. She contends she did not "negligently fail[] to take reasonable measures to prevent her dog from attacking Ali# ilua" 
because "there was no evidence presented that would suggest Benson should have been aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that her dog would attack Ali# ilua, since her dog had never 
2 "Dangerous dog" is defined as "any dog which, without provocation,
attacks a person or animal. A dog's breed shall not be considered in
determining whether or not it is dangerous." ROH § 7-7.1 (1990 & Supp. No.12, 2-08). 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attacked, bitten, or been aggressive to any persons before 
without provocation." She cites Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 702-206 ("Definitions of states of mind").3 
HRS § 702-206 (2014) provides, in relevant part: 
(4) "Negligently." 
(a) A person acts negligently with respect to his conduct
when he should be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk taken that the person's conduct isof the specified nature. 
(b) A person acts negligently with respect to attendantcircumstances when he should be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances exist. 
(c) A person acts negligently with respect to a result ofhis conduct when he should be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that his conduct will causesuch a result. 
(d) A risk is substantial and unjustifiable within themeaning of this subsection if the person's failure toperceive it, considering the nature and purpose of hisconduct and the circumstances known to him, involves agross deviation from the standard of care that alaw-abiding person would observe in the samesituation. 
Contrary to Benson's contention, "negligently" under 
HRS § 702-206 "does not involve a state of awareness on the part 
of the defendant." HRS § 702-206 cmt. (2014). "Rather, negligence involves the inadvertent creation by the defendant of a risk of which the defendant would have been aware had the defendant not deviated grossly from the standard of care that a law-abiding person would have observed in the same situation." Id. 
ROH § 7-7.2(b) defines "reasonable measures to prevent 
the dog from attacking" as including, among other things, measures required to be taken under Article 4 of ROH Chapter 7 "to prevent the dog from becoming a stray[.]" A "stray" is, among other things, any dog in a "public place, except when under the control of the owner by leash, cord, chain or other similar 
3 ROH § 7-7.1 provides, in relevant part: 
"Negligently" shall have the same meaning as is ascribed to
the term in HRS Section 702-206. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
means of physical restraint[.]" ROH § 7-4.1 (1990 & Supp. 
No. 19, 7-2011). 
In Argus we held that the defendant negligently failed 
to take reasonable measures to prevent his dog from attacking the complaining witness because the complaining witness's testimony established that "the dog that bit her while she was walking on a public sidewalk, was unleashed." 2019 WL 3384851, at *3. We stated that the defendant's "failure to keep his dogs on a leash constitutes negligence on his part" under ROH § 7-7.2. Id. at *3 
n.5. 
Further, in State v. MacDonald, No. 28793, 2009 WL 
245436 (Haw. App. Jan. 30, 2009) (mem.), this court recognized that ROH § 7-7.2 does not require evidence of a dog's previous bite. There, we stated: 
On its face, ROH § 7–7.2 does not state that the
ordinance applies only to owners of dogs that have
previously bitten a person. By its plain and unambiguouslanguage, the ordinance applies whenever a dog owner"negligently fails to take reasonable measures to preventthe dog from attacking, without provocation, a person . . .and such attack results in . . . bodily injury to a personother than the owner." The only instance where a "prior"attack by a dog would be relevant is at sentencing[.] 
Id. at *5. 
In this case, the district court found that Benson left 
her dog in her car in a public place, unleashed, with the window 
"at least halfway down[.]" This finding was supported by substantial evidence, and was not clearly erroneous. The district court did not err in concluding that Benson negligently failed to take reasonable measures to prevent Oden from biting Ali#ilua. 
Based on the foregoing, the Restitution Order entered 
by the district court on November 12, 2020, and the Amended Judgment entered by the district court on September 29, 2021, are affirmed. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 2, 2022. 
On the briefs: 
Ashlyn L. Whitbeck,
Deputy Public Defender,State of Hawai# i,
for Defendant-Appellant. /s/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge Loren J. Thomas,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
8 