NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0000022
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
EDEN L. PANADO, Appellant-Appellant, v.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Appellee-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0151)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley and Fujise, JJ., with
Nakamura, C.J., dissenting)
 
Appellant-Appellant Eden L. Panado (Panado) appeals 
from the November 9, 2012 "Decision And Order Affirming The Final 
Decision Of The Board Of Trustees Of The Employees' Retirement System Of The State Of Hawai
'i" and the December 13, 2012 Final 
Judgment filed in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1
 (circuit
court) in favor of Appellee-Appellee Board of Trustees Employees' Retirement System of the State of Hawai
'i (ERS Board). 
On appeal, Panado contends the circuit court erred by
 
concluding that an October 9, 2004 incident resulting in Panado's
 permanent incapacitation for employment did not occur "at a
 definite time and place" so as to qualify her for service-
connected disability retirement benefits (ERS benefits) under
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 88-79 (2012 Repl.) and Hawaii
 
Administrative Rules (HAR) § 6-22-8 (effective 2009-2013).2
 
Panado carries the burden of proving she is eligible
 
for ERS benefits under HRS § 88-79 and HAR § 6-22-8. HAR § 6-23­31 (effective 2009-2013) ("the party initiating the proceeding
 shall have the burden of proof, including the burden of producing
 evidence and the burden of persuasion.") "The degree or quantum
 of proof shall be a preponderance of the evidence." Id. ERS
 
benefits are available, upon application, to an ERS member "who
 has been permanently incapacitated for duty as the natural and
 proximate result of an accident occurring while in the actual
 performance of duty at some definite time and place, or as the
 cumulative result of some occupational hazard, through no wilful
 negligence on the member's part[.]" HRS § 88-79(a). To
 determine whether or not an ERS member's application meets these
 criteria, the ERS Board "may accept as conclusive . . . [a]
 finding to this effect by the medical board."
3 HRS § 88-79(d)(2).
 
As defined under HRS Chapter 88, which governs pension
 
and retirement systems, "[a]n accident is an unlooked for mishap
 or untoward event which is not expected or designed. Further,
 the retirement statute makes it clear that the member must have
 been permanently incapacitated 'as the natural and proximate
 
2 Both the circuit court and Panado cite to HAR § 6-22-4 (effective
1984-2009) (concerning the medical board's "Engagement of other specialists"),
but this is likely a clerical error. The regulation applying the "definite
time and place" criterion is HAR § 6-22-8 ("Medical board's certifications and
findings"). Previous to their amendment in 2009, HAR § 6-22-4 and HAR § 6-22­8 had the same titles and substantively similar content. HAR §§ 6-22-4; 6-22­8. 
3
 HRS § 88-79(d)(2) provides, in relevant part:
 
§88-79 Service-connected disability retirement. . . . .
 
(d) The [ERS] board may determine whether or not the
disability is the result of an accident occurring while in the
actual performance of duty at some definite time and place and
that the disability was not the result of wilful negligence on the
part of the member. The board may accept as conclusive:
 
(1) The certification made by the head of the agency in
which the member is employed; or
 
(2) A finding to this effect by the medical board.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
result of an accident occurring while in the actual performance 
of duty at some definite time and place.'" Lopez v. Bd. of 
Trustees, Employees' Ret. Sys., State of Hawai 'i, 66 Haw. 127, 
130-31, 657 P.2d 1040, 1043 (1983) (citation omitted). 
Panado contends the circuit court erred by finding the
 
October 9, 2004 incident did not constitute an "accident" under
 HRS § 88-79 because it did not occur at a "definite time and
 place[.]" Panado specifies the circuit court's statement:
 
during the course of [Panado's] shift, her job required her
to either lift, push, pull, that type of activity with
respect to these boxes. So during a period of time.
 
Now, whether or not this type of activity over a course of
 
an eight-hour shift constitutes an accident at some definite time
 and place, the [circuit c]ourt will say that given its plain
 ordinary meaning, the answer is no.
 
Panado argues two points in support of her contention:
 
(1) the October 9, 2004 incident presents facts "virtually
 
identical" to those in a case in which the employee was awarded
 ERS benefits (Myers v. Bd. of Trustees of Employees' Ret. Sys.,
 68 Haw. 94, 704 P.2d 902 (1985)); and (2) the circuit court erred
 by too narrowly construing the meaning of "a definite time and
 place" under HRS § 88-79 and HAR § 6-22-8. Myers, 68 Haw. 94,
 
704 P.2d 902 (affirming the circuit court's reversal of ERS
 Board's decision to deny ERS benefits to a member). 
We conclude that this case presents a different
 
situation than that examined in Myers and the circuit court's
 construal of "a definite time and place" was not clearly
 erroneous. HRS § 88-79. Accordingly, we decline to disturb the
 circuit court's ruling. 
In Myers, the facts were undisputed whereas two
 
disputes surround the facts of Panado's injury – whether the
 injury: (1) arose over the course of moving and lifting boxes
 during an eight hour shift or at the particular moment when
 Panado dropped a box, and (2) is a permanent or temporary
 aggravation of back and neck injuries sustained previous to the
 alleged "accident." The undisputed facts in Myers were as
 follows: 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[Appellee], a state employee, was preparing to conduct a
training class. He lifted a half-full one-hundred cup
coffee maker weighing approximately thirty-five pounds, and
after carrying it a distance, turned and attempted to set it
on a table. At that point, he heard a snap in his back. He
experienced sharp pains across his left lower back into the
hollow of his buttocks, and shortly began experiencing a
pulsating pain radiating down his right leg. Lifting the
coffee pot was part of his normal and routine preparation
for conducting the management class.
 
Myers, 68 Haw. at 95, 704 P.2d at 903 (emphasis added).
 
Unlike the injured employee in Myers, Panado's
 
descriptions of when and where the pain from the alleged accident
 
occurred are inconsistent and disputed.
 
On January 19, 2010, Panado testified she "really
 
didn't remember exactly what it was, that exact action that
 happened that got me hurt in the first place" until she had a
 conversation with a coworker "just a few months ago[.]" The
 conversation caused Panado to remember the specific event on
 October 9, 2004 that caused her injury occurred when she dropped
 a box.
 
On occasions closer in time to the October 9, 2004
 
incident and prior to the January 19, 2010 hearing, Panado
 consistently stated that she developed neck and lower back pain
 after the repetitive lifting of boxes of paper and loading
 printers over the course of her eight hour shift, which would not
 constitute an "accident" as defined in HRS § 88-79 or HAR § 6-22­2 (effective 2009-2013).
 
Hearings Officer Junell Lee (Lee) noted the following
 
consistent reports from Panado prior to the January 19, 2010
 hearing. Panado's October 12, 2004 Report of Industrial Injury
 states she was repetitively lifting and moving heavy boxes. On
 October 13, 2004, four days after the alleged accident, Inam
 Rahman, M.D. examined Panado and reported her chief complaint as
 "hurt from her working place from pushing and lifting boxes." 
Medical records of Bernard M. Portner, M.D.'s examination of
 Panado on November 8, 2004 contain Panado's description of events
 leading to her injury: "From Friday night 11:30 pm (10/8/04)
 until Saturday morning 0745 AM (10/9/04) I was printing special
 forms on 2 impact printers and reports on Xerox printer. I was
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
repetitively lifting & moving heavy boxes to & from the
 
printers." Panado's May 1, 2006 application for ERS benefits
 states she was printing forms and felt pain while lifting forms
 to load and unload between printers. Lee found the new version
 Panado presented of the alleged accident to lack credibility.
 
Injuries resulting in "permanent" aggravation of pre­
existing conditions may qualify under HRS § 88-79(a). Id.
 
(providing for members who are "permanently incapacitated" as a
 result of injuries arising from accidents). The medical board is
 prohibited from considering in its recommendation and reports "a
 permanent incapacity that is caused by or results from the
 natural deterioration, degeneration, or progression of a non-
service connected pre-existing condition" and the ERS Board is
 prohibited from granting disability retirement benefits for such
 a condition. HAR § 6-22-7 (effective 2009-2013).
 
Another fact disputed by the parties concerns whether
 
Panado's disabled condition after the October 9, 2004 incident is
 a permanent or temporary aggravation of Panado's ongoing health
 problems consequent to a 1994 motor vehicle accident that injured
 her back and fibromyalgia. Medical examiners presented
 conflicting opinions. Donald K. Maruyama, M.D. (Dr. Maruyama)
 opined that Panado "may" suffer "mild permanent aggravation"
 resulting from October 9, 2004 incident. Rowlin L. Lichter, M.D.
 (Dr. Lichter) disagreed with this opinion because it was based on
 Panado's "self-serving reports" and the finding is "essentially
 contrary to the objective evidence."
 
Lee "agree[d] with Dr. Lichter's objection to Dr.
 
Maruyama's caveat" and concluded, Panado "sustained a temporary
 aggravation of her low back condition on October 9, 2004, but was
 back at pre-injury state by the October 24, 2005 date of Dr.
 Maruyama's [independent medical evaluation]." The disputed
 relationship between Panado's ongoing health condition and
 injuries consequent to the October 9, 2004 incident raises
 questions about the "definite time and place" at which the
 alleged accident occurred, a fact that was not at issue in Myers.
 Panado contends this court should apply a de novo
 
standard of review to the undisputed fact that the alleged
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
accident occurred at her workplace during her eight-hour work
 
shift. The issue under review, however, is more accurately
 characterized as a mixed question of law and fact: whether the
 circuit court erred by narrowly construing the phrase "a definite
 time in place" as used in HRS § 88-79(a) and HAR § 6-22-2 to
 exclude the "repetitive lifting and moving of heavy boxes during
 the course of [Panado's eight hour] shift[.]"
 
We conclude the circuit court properly deferred to ERS
 
Board's application of HRS § 88-79(a) and HAR § 6-22-8 to this
 mixed question of law and fact. Id.; see Camara v. Agsalud, 67
 
Haw. 212, 216, 685 P.2d 794, 797 (1984) ("in deference to the
 administrative agency's expertise and experience in its
 particular field, the courts should not substitute their own
 judgment for that of the administrative agency where mixed
 questions of fact and law are presented. This is particularly
 true where the law to be applied is not a statute but an
 administrative rule promulgated by the same agency interpreting
 it.") (citations omitted). 
The medical board, Lee, and the ERS Board determined
 
that an injury spanning an eight-hour work shift is not definite
 enough to constitute an "accident" under HRS § 88-79. The
 medical board certified that Panado's incapacity is not "the
 result of an accident occurring while [Panado was] in the actual
 performance of duty at some definite time and place[.]" Patricia
 Chinn, M.D., chair of the medical board, explained: "[a]n
 accident needs to occur at a specific date and time. It's not
 over a stretch of hours. It is not something that occurs and
 then developed symptoms the following day." Lee "conclude[d]
 that [Panado] did not establish [sic] burden of proof that her
 incapacity was the result of an accident occurring while in the
 actual performance of duty at some definite time and 
place . . . ." The ERS Board incorporated Lee's findings of fact
 and conclusion of law into its final decision. This court
 declines to substitute its judgment for that of the ERS Board and
 its agents in their interpretation and application of HRS § 88­79. See Camara, 67 Haw. at 216, 685 P.2d at 797.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the November 9, 2012 
"Decision And Order Affirming The Final Decision Of The Board Of Trustees Of The Employees' Retirement System Of The State Of Hawai
'i" and the December 13, 2012 Final Judgment both filed in 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 26, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Philip W. Miyoshi
(Miyoshi & Hironaka)for Appellant-Appellant. Associate Judge 
Patricia Ohara Kyle K. ChangDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Appellee-Appellee. Associate Judge 
7
 