 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000696 19-DEC-2025 10:51 AM Dkt. 37 SO 
NO. CAAP-23-0000696 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAI#I 
TOAN QUACH, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Respondent-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(S.P.P. NO. 1CPN-23-0000017; CRIMINAL NO. 1PC071000242) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, and Wadsworth, J.,
and McCullen, J., dissenting) 
Petitioner-Appellant Toan Quach (Quach
) filed a 
petition under Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 
alleging that when he pled guilty to two drug offenses in 2007, 
he did not understand the proceedings because they were translated "in the wrong language" – Vietnamese, rather than his first language, the Chinese dialect Chaozhou. 
The Circuit Court 
of the First Circuit1/ (Circuit Court) denied the petition without 
a hearing, concluding that Quach's ground for relief was "patently frivolous and without a trace of support in [the] record." 
Quach appeals from the "Findings of Facts, Conclusions 
of Law and Order Denying Rule 40 Petition Without a Hearing" (Order Denying Rule 40 Petition) entered on October 20, 2023, by 
the Circuit Court. Quach contends that the Circuit Court erred: 
(1) "in failing to comply with . . . HRPP Rule 40(e) by not 
1/  The Honorable Clarissa Y. Malinao presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
affording Quach an opportunity to amend his petition"; and (2) 
"in finding that the i[s]sues raised by Quach were frivolous and Quach 'provided no evidence' that he lacked understanding" of his guilty plea and its consequences. (Capitalization altered.) 
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant 
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve Quach's contentions as follows, and vacate and remand. 
I. Background 
On May 8, 2007, Quach pled guilty to two counts: 
Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1243, and Unlawful Use of 
Drug Paraphernalia, in violation of HRS § 329-43.5(a). He was 
later sentenced to five years of probation, with imprisonment of one year suspended, and substance abuse and mental health treatment. 
On May 16, 2023, Quach filed his "Petition to Vacate, 
Set Aside, or Correct Judgement or to Release Petit[i]oner from Custody" (Rule 40 Petition or Petition).  Under penalty of 
perjury, he alleged one ground for relief and supporting facts, 
as follows: 
A. Ground one: When I pled Guilty, I did not understand
the proceedings because they were translated in thewrong language. 
[Supporting facts]: I am a Chinese Vietnamese and a citizen 
of Viet Nam. I grew up in Vietnam in a Chinesecommunity speaking the Chinese dialect ChaoZhou as myfirst language. Vietnamese is my second language andwas not used that much. When a [sic] pled to mycharges in circuit court, there was a nativeVietnamese court interpreter translating for me fromEnglish to Vietnamese and vice versa. My attorneytold me that I should plead guilty to both charges andto answer "yes" to the judge's questions when thejudge questioned me. I was very scared and I ampoorly educated. The court interpreter usedVietnamese for all legal terms used by the judge inquestioning me. Because Vietnamese is my secondlanguage, I did not understand these words. I was too afraid to speak up and just said "yes" to the judge'squestions although I did not understand what he wassaying. I did not understand that I was entitled to a Chinese interpreter or exactly what I was pleadingguilty to. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
On September 19, 2023, the State filed its "Answer to 
Petition for Post-Conviction Relief (Rule 40, HRPP), Filed 
May 16, 2023." The State explained that it had requested a transcript of the May 8, 2007 plea hearing in the underlying criminal case, but the shorthand notes from which transcripts are prepared had been destroyed in accordance with the court's retention schedule. Nevertheless, the State argued that the evidence in the record – specifically, the court minutes of the hearing on May 8, 2007, the guilty plea form signed by Quach, and the entire procedural history of the case – indicated that Quach's claim was patently frivolous and without a trace of support. 
On October 20, 2023, the Circuit Court entered the 
Order Denying Rule 40 Petition. The court concluded that proof of "manifest injustice" is required to set aside a guilty plea pursuant to HRPP Rule 40, and "[m]anifest injustice occurs when a defendant makes a plea involuntarily or without knowledge of the direct consequences of the plea." The court then quoted Eli v. State, 63 Haw. 474, 477, 630 P.2d 113, 116 (1981), for the proposition that "in the absence of a silent or minimal record, the burden is on petitioner to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that his constitutional right was not voluntarily and intelligently waived." (Brackets omitted.) According to the court, "[Quach] has not stated any facts or provided any evidence to rebut this presumption in Ground 1" and "has also not stated any facts or provided any evidence related to the trial judge's on-the-record colloquy that would demonstrate that [Quach] did not have a full understanding of his guilty plea and its consequences." The court concluded that "[a]fter a careful review of [the underlying criminal case] and [the Rule 40 case], . . . the ground [Quach] raised is patently frivolous and without a trace of support in either record." 
On November 20, 2023, Quach filed a notice of appeal in 
the Circuit Court. It appears the receiving clerk did not electronically file the notice of appeal with this court, as required by Hawai# i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 3(a). 
Nevertheless, in the circumstances of this case, we consider the 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
notice of appeal to have been timely filed. 
II. Discussion 
We review a circuit court's denial of an HRPP Rule 40 
petition without a hearing de novo, under the right/wrong 
standard. See Dan v. State
, 76 Hawai#i 423, 427, 879 P.2d 528, 
532 (1994). 
Under HRPP Rule 40(f), the circuit court must grant a 
hearing "[i]f a petition alleges facts that if proven would entitle the petitioner to relief . . . . 
However, the court may 
deny a hearing if the petitioner's claim is patently frivolous and is without trace of support either in the record or from other evidence submitted by the petitioner." The Hawai# i Supreme 
Court has further explained: 
As a general rule, a hearing should be held on a Rule 40
petition for post-conviction relief where the petitionstates a colorable claim. To establish a colorable claim,the allegations of the petition must show that if taken astrue the facts alleged would change the verdict [oroutcome], however, a petitioner's conclusions need not beregarded as true. Where examination of the record of the trial court proceedings indicates that the petitioner'sallegations show no colorable claim, it is not error to denythe petition without a hearing. The question on appeal of adenial of a Rule 40 petition without a hearing is whetherthe trial record indicates that Petitioner's application forrelief made such a showing of a colorable claim as torequire a hearing before the lower court. 
Dan, 76 Hawai#i at 427, 879 P.2d at 532 (emphasis omitted) 
(quoting 
State v. Allen, 7 Haw. App. 89, 92-93, 744 P.2d 789, 
792-93 (1987)). 
We find Quach's second point of error dispositive. He 
contends that the Circuit Court erred in concluding that his Rule 
40 Petition is patently frivolous and without a trace of support in the record. He argues that Dan was overruled by Wilton v. State
, 116 Hawai#i 106, 170 P.3d 357 (2007), as to the proper 
standard for establishing a colorable claim, and he need only allege facts that, if true, "would show a possible impairment, not a probable impairment, of a meritorious defense." He further argues that the Circuit Court erred in finding that Quach provided no evidence that he lacked understanding of his guilty plea and its consequences. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dan – in particular, its stated standard for 
establishing a colorable claim under HRPP Rule 40 (quoted supra) 
– has not been overruled. Indeed, the Dan standard has been repeatedly cited and relied on by the supreme court after Wilton. See, e.g., Rapozo v. State, 150 Hawai# i 66, 77-78, 497 P.3d 81, 
92-93 (2021); Stanley v. State, 148 
Hawai#i 489, 500, 479 P.3d 
107, 118 (2021); Lewi v. State, 145 Hawai# i 333, 345, 452 P.3d 
330, 342 (2019). Quach's argument appears to be based on the rule that the impairment of only a "potentially meritorious defense" is required for an ineffective assistance of counsel claim. The reasoning in Dan does not conflict with this rule and, in any event, Quach expressly denies he is asserting an ineffective assistance of counsel claim. Under Dan, to establish a colorable claim in this context, the allegations of the Petition must show that if taken as true, the facts alleged would change the outcome. See Dan, 76 Hawai# i at 427, 879 P.2d at 532; 
see also State v. Delyon, No. 30365, 2011 WL 2611291, at *3 (Haw. App. June 30, 2011) (Mem. Op.) (applying this standard to the petitioner's claim that his no contest plea was not knowingly made). 
We conclude that the Petition meets this standard. 
Quach stated under oath that: (1) although he is a citizen of Vietnam, his first language is the Chinese dialect Chaozhou; (2) Vietnamese is his second language, and "was not used that much" when he was growing up; (3) during his plea hearing, a native Vietnamese court interpreter translated for him from English to Vietnamese and vice versa; (4) the court interpreter used Vietnamese "for all legal terms" used by the judge in questioning him; (5) because Vietnamese is his second language, he did not understand what the judge was saying; and (6) he was poorly educated and too afraid to speak up, so he followed his lawyer's instructions to say "yes" to the judge's questions. 
These are 
specific factual allegations, not conclusions. Quach's factual allegations, if taken as true, state a colorable claim that he did not enter a knowing and intelligent guilty plea because his interpreters spoke the wrong language (Vietnamese rather than his Chinese dialect). The record, when considered with the Petition, 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
does not render this claim patently frivolous and without a trace 
of support. Thus, the Circuit Court should have held a hearing to weigh the evidence and determine whether Quach was entitled to withdraw his plea to correct a "manifest injustice" or to obtain other appropriate relief in these circumstances. HRPP Rule 32(d); see Delyon, 2011 WL 2611291, at *3; Medeiros v. State, 2015 WL 9466006, at *2 (Haw. App. Dec. 22, 2015) (SDO). 
Relying on Eli, the Circuit Court concluded, and the 
State contends on appeal, that Quach was required to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that he did not enter a knowing and voluntary guilty plea and that "manifest injustice" occurred. That is not the applicable standard, however, merely to obtain an evidentiary hearing under Rule 40. See supra. Where, as here, 
the petitioner has stated a colorable claim that they did not enter a knowing and intelligent guilty plea, Eli's preponderance of the evidence standard applies more properly at the Rule 40 evidentiary hearing stage "[i]f the record is not silent or minimal."
2/ See Eason v. State, 157 Hawai# i 252, 272-76, 576 P.3d 
765, 785-89 (2025) (applying Eli's preponderance of the evidence standard after a Rule 40 evidentiary hearing; concluding that the record was not minimal, and the petitioner's no contest plea was made voluntarily, knowingly and intelligently). 
The Circuit Court also concluded that Quach "has . . . 
not stated any facts or provided any evidence related to the trial judge's on-the-record colloquy that would demonstrate that the Petitioner did not have a full understanding of his guilty plea and its consequences." This conclusion ignores the factual allegations in the Petition, which address this very subject and are stated under penalty of perjury. See Najera v. State
, 143 
Hawai#i 83, 91, 422 P.3d 661, 669 (App. 2018) (concluding that 
the petitioner stated a colorable Rule 40 claim based on the facts alleged in the petition); 
Medeiros, 2015 WL 9466006, at *2 
(same); Delyon, 2011 WL 2611291, at *4 (same); HRPP Rule 40(f) (the circuit court may deny a hearing if the petitioner's claim "is without trace of support either in the record or from other 
2/ There is no indication in Eli that the HRPP Rule 40 petition was
dismissed without a hearing. 
6    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence submitted by the petitioner") (emphasis added). In 
these circumstances, where Quach's allegations were sufficiently specific to state a colorable claim, he was not required to provide additional corroborating evidence merely to obtain a hearing on his claim. That is part of the purpose of an evidentiary hearing. 
The State argues that even without a transcript of the 
May 8, 2007 plea hearing, the court minutes of the hearing and the guilty plea form signed by Quach indicate that he knowingly and voluntarily entered his plea and had no problem with the interpreter. 
The dissent makes a similar point. The State 
further argues that the entire history of the case, including the court minutes of several other hearings, indicate that Quach had no problems understanding Vietnamese interpreters. The dissent catalogues this history and reaches the same conclusion.
   3/
We, too, have considered the record and both the State 
and the dissent's account of it. For the reasons further explained below, however, we do not agree that Quach's Petition can be summarily disposed of without a hearing when both the record and the factually specific allegations in the Petition are considered. 
3/ Relying primarily on Eli and State v. Hutch , 107 Hawai #i 411, 417,
114 P.3d 917, 923 (2005), the dissent would first determine whether the
alleged facts in a Rule 40 petition, taken as true, would entitle thepetitioner to relief, and then examine the original trial record, if not
silent or minimal, for support ( i.e., corroborating evidence). The dissent 
concludes, based primarily on the procedural history of the case and the
minutes of Quach's plea hearing, that Quach's claim of language difficultylacks even a trace of such support. 
We do not read the relevant authorities as imposing this kind of
corroborating evidence requirement in these circumstances. 
HRPP Rule 40 
states that a petition can be denied "if the claim is patently frivolous andwithout trace of support either in the record or from other evidence submittedby the petitioner." (Emphasis added.) Here, Quach's claim, if taken as true,is not patently frivolous. See supra. The original trial record also makes
clear that Quach had difficulty understanding the proceedings in English –hence, the need for an interpreter. Moreover, the record on appeal includesQuach's factually specific Petition, stated under penalty of perjury. This is 
the equivalent of a declaration, i.e., "other evidence submitted by the
petitioner" to support his claim. Cf. Nozawa v. Operating Engineers Local
Union No. 3
, 142 Hawai #i 331, 339, 418 P.3d 1187, 1195 (2018) (noting that the
civil procedure summary judgment rule "does not require a statement in an
affidavit to be corroborated in order to be a qualifying affidavit" and thesupreme court has never "held that an uncorroborated statement by a party tothe litigation is insufficient to raise a dispute as to a material fact."). 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
In our view, the State and the dissent make a 
reasonable argument that Quach's claim of language difficulty 
lacks credibility based on the record of the underlying proceedings. But in these circumstances, this kind of credibility determination should be made by the Circuit Court at the hearing of the Petition under the applicable HRPP Rule 40 standards. Given the rather unique nature of Quach's allegations – i.e., that he did not understand his guilty plea and its consequences because the court interpreter spoke his second language – the apparent absence in the record of any difficulties with interpreters does not conclusively disprove his claim or necessarily establish that Quach knowingly and voluntarily entered his plea. At a hearing on Quach's Petition, it will be up to the Circuit Court as the trier of fact to determine the credibility of Quach's allegations, which are taken as true in deciding whether he was entitled to a hearing, as well as any other supporting evidence he may offer. The Circuit Court will be "required to look at the entire record in order to determine whether the petitioner's claims . . . are credible and worthy of belief[,]" to determine whether the record is or is not minimal, and to impose the corresponding burden and standard of proof. Eli, 63 Haw. at 477, 630 P.2d at 116. 
The dissent takes issue with the lack of specificity in 
the Petition's request for relief, which asks the Circuit Court to "grant all relief to which [Quach] may be entitled in this proceeding." 
The Circuit Court did not deny the Petition on this 
basis, construing it as an effort by Quash to withdraw his guilty plea. For its part, the State asserts that "[t]here is nothing unclear or confusing about the Petition" and likewise views it as "essentially trying to withdraw [Quach's] guilty plea." On remand, after conducting the required evidentiary hearing, the Circuit Court will be in a better position to determine appropriate relief in these rather unique circumstances if Quach prevails on the merits of his claim. 
The State argues in the alternative that Quach has 
waived his rights under HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) and this court's decision in Den Van Nguyen v. State, No. CAAP-11-0000575, 2012 WL 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
4454735 (Haw. App. Sept. 26, 2012) (SDO), because he failed to 
timely appeal his convictions and has not shown extraordinary circumstances justifying his delay in filing the Petition. We disagree. Quach alleges that he was poorly educated and did not understand that he was entitled to a Chinese interpreter at the time of the plea hearing, and he did not know he could bring a Rule 40 petition such as this "until very recently." Taking these allegations as true, we cannot conclude that Quach "knowingly and understandingly" failed to raise the issues asserted in the Petition at an earlier time. See HRPP Rule 
40(a)(3); Delyon, 2011 WL 2611291, at *5. 
On this record, the Circuit Court erred in denying the 
Petition without a hearing. Given our disposition, we need not reach Quach's first point of error. 
III. Conclusion 
For the reasons discussed above, the "Findings of 
Facts, Conclusions of Law and Order Denying Rule 40 Petition Without a Hearing" entered on October 20, 2023, by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, is vacated, and the case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition Order. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai#i, December 19, 2025. 
On the briefs: 
Earle A. Partington 
for Petitioner-Appellant. 
Robert T. Nakatsuji, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Respondent-Appellee. /s/ Keith K. HiraokaPresiding Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
 
     
  
 DISSENTING OPINION BY MCCULLEN, J. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The circuit court determined Toan Quach's Hawai‘ i Rules 
of Penal Procedure (HRPP
) Rule 40 ground for relief was patently 
frivolous and without a trace of support in the record. I would 
hold that the circuit court was correct. 
Sixteen years after pleading guilty and almost eleven 
years after completing his sentence of probation, Quach 
(represented by counsel) filed an HRPP Rule 40 petition alleging that, when he pled guilty, he "did not understand the 
proceedings because they were translated in the wrong language," 
Vietnamese instead of ChaoZhou. After considering the entire 
record, as it must, the circuit court denied Quach's petition 
without a hearing, concluding his ground was "patently frivolous 
and without a trace of support in either record."
1 
In today's decision, the majority concludes the 
circuit court was wrong because Quach's alleged facts, if taken as true, would change the outcome, and a "credibility 
determination should be made by the Circuit Court at the hearing 
of the Petition." Majority at 8. 
I respectfully disagree. After reviewing the trial 
court record, as controlling caselaw requires, I would hold 
1 Case number 1PC071000242 is the 2007 criminal proceeding in which the 
Honorable Micheal A. Town entered the judgment of conviction, and case number 
1CPN-23-0000017 is the 2023 HRPP Rule 40 proceeding in which the Honorable 
Clarissa Y. Malinao entered the order denying Quach's HRPP Rule 40 P etition.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 that, even when taking as true Quach's factual allegations 
(Vietnamese was the wrong language), his claim (his plea was not 
voluntarily and knowingly entered) is patently frivolous and 
without a trace of support in the record. Thus, an evidentiary 
hearing was not warranted. 
II. DISCUSSION 
A. Legal Framework 
1. Guilty pleas 
"The U.S. Constitution and the Hawai‘ i Constitution  
require a plea to be voluntarily and knowingly entered." Eason
v. State, 157 Hawai‘i 252, 271, 576 P.3d 765, 784 (2025).  
"Hawai‘i case law requires the circuit court make an affirmative 
showing by an on-the-record colloquy wherein the defendant is 
shown to have a full understanding of what the plea of guilty 
. . . connotes and its consequences." Id. at 272, 576 P.3d at 
785 (internal quotation marks omitted). "When the record is not silent or minimal, the petitioner seeking relief under Rule 40 
on the ground that the guilty plea was entered involuntarily has 
the burden 'to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that his 
constitutional right was not voluntarily and intelligently 
waived.'" Id. (quoting Eli v. State, 63 Haw. 474, 477, 630 P.2d 
113, 116 (1981)). 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 2. HRPP Rule 40 
HRPP Rule 40 provides post-conviction relief from 
judgment or custody. HRPP Rule 40 dictates whether an 
evidentiary hearing is or is not required: 
If a petition alleges facts that if proven would 
entitle the petitioner to relief, the court shall grant a 
hearing which may extend only to the issues raised in the 
petition or answer. However, the court may deny a hearing
if the petitioner's claim is patently frivolous and is 
without trace of support either in the record or from other 
evidence submitted by the petitioner.  
HRPP Rule 40(f) (emphasis added). 
Thus, in reviewing a petition for HRPP Rule 40 relief, 
the circuit court must hold a hearing when the alleged facts, if 
proven, would entitle the petitioner to relief. Id.In other 
words, a hearing should be held if the HRPP Rule 40 petition 
states a colorable claim. Dan v. State
, 76 Hawai‘i 423, 427, 
879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994). "To establish a colorable claim, the 
allegations of the petition must show that if taken as true the 
facts alleged would change the verdict." Id.
But the circuit court need not hold a hearing if the 
claim is patently frivolous and without a trace of support in 
the record or from other evidence the petitioner submits. 
HRPP 
Rule 40(f); see Dan
, 76 Hawai‘i at 427, 879 P.2d at 532. 
Key here is "[w]here examination of the 
record of the 
trial court proceedings indicates that the petitioner's allegations show no colorable claim, it is not error to deny the 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 petition without a hearing." Dan, 76 Hawai‘ i at 427, 879 P.2d at 
532 (emphasis added). 
"The question on appeal of a denial of a Rule 40 
petition without a hearing is whether the trial record indicates 
that the Petitioner's application for relief made such a showing 
of a colorable claim as to require a hearing before the lower 
court." Id. (some emphases omitted). "In this regard, the 
appellate court steps into the trial court's position, reviews the same trial record, and redecides the issue." Barnett v.
State, 91 Hawai‘ i 20, 26, 979 P.2d 1046, 1052 (1999) (emphasis 
added and brackets omitted) (quoting Dan, 76 Hawai‘ i at 427, 
879 P.2d at 532). 
Consequently, Hawai‘ i appellate decisions have looked 
to the record, or lack thereof, in determining whether or not an evidentiary hearing was required: 
In Hutch v. State
, the Hawai‘i Supreme Court determined 
that the defendant's alleged facts, if taken as true, would 
entitle him to relief. 107 Hawai‘ i 411, 417, 114 P.3d 917, 923 
(2005). The supreme court did not end its analysis there, 
however. The supreme court then determined it "must also 
consider the record before overturning the court's denial of the 
petition without a hearing." Id.The supreme court then held, 
"based upon Appellant's Rule 40 petition and an independent 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 examination of the record, that Appellant has made a showing of 
a colorable claim." Id. at 419, 114 P.3d at 925. 
In Foo v. State, although the Hawai‘ i Supreme Court 
determined that the defendant did not allege "facts" indicating 
the proceedings were misleading, it nonetheless examined the 
record and determined that "[t]he record of the court 
proceedings fails to support a colorable claim that he 
misunderstood 'the effect of his guilty plea.'" 106 Hawai
‘i 102, 
116, 102 P.3d 346, 360 (2004) (brackets omitted). Thus, the 
circuit court did not err in determining that the defendant's 
claim as to parole was patently frivolous. Id.
In D'Ambrosio v. State, this court considered the lack 
of a record in ordering an evidentiary hearing. 112 
Hawai‘i 446, 
466, 146 P.3d 606, 626 (App. 2006). With a silent record, this court determined that the defendant made a colorable claim and the circuit court erred in denying that portion of his petition 
as being "frivolous and without a trace of support from the 
record." Id.This court then ordered an evidentiary hearing to 
sort things out. Id.
 at 466-67, 146 P.3d at 626-27. 
3. Summary 
In sum, Hawai‘i appellate decisions appear to require a 
three-step analysis in determining whether an evidentiary hearing is required: 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 First, the court must determine whether the alleged 
facts, if taken as true, would entitle the petitioner to the 
relief sought. See Dan, 76 Hawai‘ i at 427, 879 P.2d at 532. If 
the alleged facts would entitle the petitioner to the relief 
sought, the court must continue to the second step of the 
analysis. 
Second, the court must determine whether the record is 
silent or minimal. If the record is silent or minimal, an 
evidentiary hearing should be held, and the burden is on the State to prove the plea was entered voluntarily and knowingly. 
Eli, 63 Haw. at 477, 630 P.2d at 116. If not, the court must 
continue to the third step of the analysis. 
Third, where the trial court record is not silent or 
minimal, the court must independently examine the record. Where 
the "Rule 40 petition and an independent examination of the 
record" shows the petition "made a showing of a colorable claim," the circuit court should hold an evidentiary hearing on 
the petition as to that claim. Hutch
, 107 Hawai‘i at 419, 114 
P.3d at 925. But "[w]here examination of the 
record of the
trial court proceedings indicates that the petitioner's 
allegations show no colorable claim, it is not error to deny the 
petition without a hearing." Dan
, 76 Hawai‘i at 427, 879 P.2d at 
532 (emphasis added). 
6   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 B. Quach's Factual Allegations and Claim 
Turning to Quach's HRPP Rule 40 Petition, his sole 
ground for seeking relief was as follows: 
"When I pled Guilty, I did not understand the 
proceedings because they were translated in the 
wrong language." 
1. The alleged facts may warrant relief 
First, Quach's alleged facts, if proven, could entitle 
him to some type of relief.2 As factual bases to support his 
claim, Quach explained that ChaoZhou was his first language and 
Vietnamese, which was his second language, "was not used that 
much." Quach asserted that the "court interpreter used 
Vietnamese for all legal terms used by the judge in questioning 
me" and "[b]ecause Vietnamese is my second language, I did not 
understand these words," "did not understand what [the judge] was saying," and did not understand "what I was pleading guilty 
2 I note that a petition for post- conviction relief "shall . . . state 
the relief requested." HRPP Rule 40(c)(1). But Quach, through his counsel, 
made no effort to identify the relief he seeks as required. In a general 
manner, he "requests that the Court grant all relief to which [he] may be entitled in this proceeding." 
Does Quach want to withdraw his guilty plea? Does he want another 
opportunity to plea with a ChaoZhou interpreter? Does he want to go to trial? 
Quach already served his sentence of probation. Without knowing the 
particular relief Quach seeks, it is unclear how the allegations "if proven 
would entitle [him] to relief." See HRPP Rule 40(f) (emphasis added). 
In evaluating Quach's HRPP Rule 40 Petition, today's decision does not 
hold Quach to this requirement. 
7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
  
 to." Quach said he was "too afraid to speak up" and his 
attorney told him to say "yes" to the judge's questions. 
Taking these alleged facts as true, Quach may be 
entitled to relief. See id.
But, although the facts alleged are taken as true when 
determining whether a hearing should be held, the petitioner's legal conclusion drawn from those facts need not be taken as 
true. See id. For purposes of the present analysis, I do not 
take as true Quach's legal conclusion that his guilty plea was not made voluntarily and knowingly, which is the claim he is 
ultimately proffering. 
2. Record is not silent or minimal 
Second, the record is not silent or minimal. 
Although there is no transcript of the change of plea 
proceeding, the record contains the detective's declaration, police report, pretrial bail report, guilty plea, filings 
pertaining to probation, statement of compliance, and minutes 
from the criminal proceedings. 
Thus, unlike D'Ambrosio, we have a trial court record 
to review.
3 
3 I do not consider the HRPP Rule 40 petition itself to be "other 
evidence" under HRPP Rule 40(f). And although Quach declared under penalty 
of perjury that his asserted facts are true and correct, the asserted facts 
are already taken as true for determining whether an evidentiary hearing 
should be held. 
8   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 3. Quach's claim is without a trace of support in the 
record 
Third, an independent examination of the trial court 
record shows that, even when taking Quach's factual allegations 
(Vietnamese was the wrong language) as true, his claim (his plea 
was not voluntarily and knowingly entered) is patently frivolous and without a trace of support in the trial court record. 
a. Examination of the record 
In February 2007, a Honolulu Police Department officer 
observed Quach sitting in a Chinatown alley holding a glass pipe 
containing a white substance. According to the police report, 
Quach "related that he was only packing the pipe for his friend" and "he already smoked earlier." 
By information, the State 
charged Quach with Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree (cocaine) and Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia (glass 
pipe). 
At the first hearing, on February 15, 2007, Deputy 
Public Defender (DPD) Travis Stephens requested a Vietnamese 
interpreter for Quach and the case was continued. 
At the second hearing, on February 22, 2007, DPD 
Edward Aquino appeared with Quach and Vietnamese Interpreter Tuan Jensen-Lech. Quach pled not guilty and DPD Aquino reviewed 
the advisements form with Quach and the interpreter. 
At the third hearing, on April 12, 2007, Quach 
appeared with DPD Henry Ting and Vietnamese Interpreter Jensen-
9
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
    Lech. There, Quach stipulated to a continuance requested by the 
State and waived his HRPP Rule 48 and speedy trial rights. 
At the fourth hearing,4 the May 8, 2007 Change of Plea 
hearing, Quach appeared with DPD Ting and Vietnamese Interpreter 
"Mrs. Crumpton." Quach "stated that he does understand some Eng[lish]." Quach pled guilty. The circuit court questioned 
Quach as to his guilty plea through the interpreter. Quach 
provided a factual basis for his guilty plea through the 
interpreter and the circuit court found that Quach "entered his 
guilty plea knowingly and voluntarily with the understanding of 
the nature of the charges and the consequences of his pleas 
w[ith] the assistance of the interp[reter]." (Formatting 
altered.) The circuit court, however, reserved ruling on the 
plea and ordered a presentence report. 
At the fifth hearing, on May 17, 2007, Quach appeared 
with DPD Ting and Vietnamese Interpreter "Mrs. Crumpton." The court took judicial notice of the pretrial bail report and 
addressed Quach through the interpreter, granting Quach's motion 
for supervised release. 
At the sixth hearing, on July 17, 2007, Quach appeared 
with DPD Ting and Vietnamese Interpreter Steve Nguyen. Quach addressed the court through the interpreter. The circuit court 
4 The Honorable Fa‘auuga L.  To‘oto‘o presided for Judge Town. 
10   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 accepted Quach's guilty plea and sentenced him to a five-year 
term of probation. 
At the seventh hearing, on October 29, 2007, DPD Ting 
informed the court that Quach needed a Vietnamese interpreter, 
and the hearing was continued. 
At the eighth hearing, on November 5, 2007, Quach 
appeared with DPD Ting and Interpreter Tammy Lam regarding Quach's participation in the Salvation Army Addiction Treatment 
Program. The circuit court indicated it wanted "the probation 
department to particularize this case as to [Quach's] language 
and work needs." (Formatting altered.) 
At the ninth hearing, on December 4, 2007, DPD Ting 
and Vietnamese Interpreter Nina Nguyen appeared, but Quach did 
not. DPD Ting informed the court that Quach tested positive for drugs on November 30, 2007, in violation of his probation 
requirements. 
At the tenth hearing, on December 21, 2007, Quach 
appeared with DPD Ting and Vietnamese Interpreter Nina Nguyen. 
Quach addressed the court through the interpreter. Quach was 
sentenced to time served, released, and ordered to report to his 
probation officer. 
At the eleventh and final hearing in the record, on 
September 11, 2008, Quach appeared with DPD Ting. The record does not reflect that an interpreter was present. Quach 
stipulated to the State's motion for modification of his terms 
11
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 and conditions of probation. The court conducted a colloquy 
with Quach. 
The court granted the State's motion, sentencing 
Quach to time served and ordering him to report to his probation officer. 
On December 27, 2012, Adult Client Services filed a 
Certificate of Discharge as Quach completed his term of probation. 
b. Analysis of the record 
Significantly, the record shows the circuit court 
expressly found that Quach "entered his guilty plea knowingly 
and voluntarily with the understanding of the nature of the charges and the consequences of his plea w[ith] the assistance 
of the interp[reter]." (Formatting altered.) And the record 
shows the court was acutely aware of Quach's language needs as 
the court stated during the eighth hearing that it wanted "the 
probation department to particularize this case as to [Quach's] 
language and work needs." 
Over the course of eighteen months and eleven 
hearings, with three public defenders and five different interpreters, nothing in the record before, during, or after 
Quach's guilty plea contradicts the circuit court's finding that 
Quach's plea was knowingly and voluntarily made, and that he 
understood to what he was pleading, i.e., possessing cocaine and 
a glass pipe. 
12
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 Importantly, the record shows that, on two occasions, 
Quach's counsel specifically requested a Vietnamese interpreter, 
not a ChaoZhou interpreter. DPD Stephens requested a Vietnamese 
interpreter in the first hearing and DPD Ting requested a 
Vietnamese interpreter in the seventh hearing. In addition, DPD Aquino reviewed the advisements form with Quach using the 
Vietnamese interpreter. Had there been any difficulties 
communicating through a Vietnamese interpreter, these deputies 
would have been duty-bound to inform the court. And Quach 
expressly states in his Opening Brief that he is not asserting 
that his counsel was ineffective. 
Moreover, Quach's factual allegation that Vietnamese 
was the wrong language is isolated to when he pled guilty. He 
makes no similar assertion for the other hearings, where he communicated through a Vietnamese interpreter, including when he 
waived his right to a speedy trial (third hearing) or addressed 
the court at sentencing (sixth hearing). 
Also, Quach fails to identify the specific legal terms 
or words the court used in its colloquy that he now realizes he 
did not understand when interpreted in Vietnamese. I note the 
usual guilty plea colloquy does not contain burdensome legal terms. The court typically asks about the defendant's age, 
schooling, ability to read and write, consumption of drugs or 
alcohol within forty-eight hours, treatment for mental illness, 
and clarity of mind. The court identifies the charges (here, 
13
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  
 
     possessing cocaine and the glass pipe). The court asks if the 
defense attorney explained the charges, applicable defenses, and 
the proffered evidence. The court asks if the defendant 
understands the maximum penalties and other consequences, and 
that they have a right to a trial and to require the State to prove the charges beyond a reasonable doubt. And the court asks 
if the defendant discussed the plea with their attorney, is 
satisfied with their attorney, and if there are any complaints 
about their attorney. 
The record here contains no transcripts of the actual 
colloquy conducted. That is because Quach waited sixteen years 
to challenge his guilty plea, long after the shorthand notes 
from which transcripts are prepared had been destroyed pursuant 
to the trial court's retention schedule.
5 See Den Van Nguyen v.
State
, 128 Hawai‘i 311, 288 P.3d 129, No. CAAP-11-0000575, 2012 
WL 4454735, at *2 (App. Sept. 26, 2012) (SDO) (explaining that the petitioner waived his right to seek relief where, among 
other things, he "waited until after the court reporter's 
records were disposed of, in conformity with the records 
retention schedule for circuit courts, and a transcript of his 
no-contest plea hearing could not be produced, to file his 
5 Since 1999, the circuit court's document retention policy has 
permitted the destruction of the court reporters' shorthand notebooks and 
stenographic notes used in the creation of transcripts ten years after trial, 
unless transcribed. Den Van Nguyen v. State
, 128 Hawai‘i 311, 288 P.3d 129, 
No. CAAP- 11-0000575, 2012 WL 4454735, at *1 n.4 (App. Sept. 26, 2012) (SDO). 
14   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
     
 
      
      
 
  
 
 
      
   
  Petition" and "provide[d] no explanation, much less 
extraordinary circumstances, to justify his inordinate delay in 
raising the issues asserted in his Petition"). 
As already noted, the minutes from the May 8, 2007 
Change of Plea hearing reflect that the circuit court expressly found Quach entered his plea knowingly and voluntarily. Nothing 
in the trial court record contradicts the circuit court's 
finding. And nothing in the trial court record supports Quach's 
claim that his plea was not voluntarily and knowingly entered.
6 
III. CONCLUSION 
After reviewing the extant trial court record, 
including minutes of the eleven hearings over the course of eighteen months, I would hold that the circuit court was 
correct. Even when taking as true Quach's factual allegations (Vietnamese was the wrong language), his legal claim (his plea 
was not voluntarily and knowingly entered) is patently frivolous 
and without a trace of support in the trial court record. 
Therefore, I respectfully dissent. 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge 
6 Determining that there is no trace of support in the trial court 
record does not, as today's decision suggests, impose a "corroborating 
evidence requirement" when evaluating whether an evidentiary hearing must be 
held. Majority at 7 n.3. Instead, it complies with the requirement to 
review the factual allegations in the petition and independently examine the 
trial court record, where the record is not silent or minimal. 
15 