NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000266
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MARK C. KELLBERG, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
CHRISTOPHER J. YUEN in his capacity as
Planning Director, County of Hawai 'i,
and COUNTY OF HAWAI 'I, Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0157)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Mark C. Kellberg (Kellberg) appeals
 
from the February 28, 2012 Final Judgment and various orders
 
entered in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit1
 (circuit 
court) which inter alia granted summary judgment on all counts in 
favor of Defendants-Appellees Christopher J. Yuen (Planning
Director) and the County of Hawai 'i (together, County). 
This case arises from Kellberg's challenge of the 
subdivision of a 49–acre parcel of land located in Ninole, County 
of Hawai 'i (Subject Property). On July 19, 2013, we remanded the 
case to the circuit court to dismiss for lack of subject matter jurisdiction, reasoning Kellberg had received an appealable decision in the form of the Planning Director's October 23, 2006 letter, failed to appeal to the Board within the 30 day time limit, and thus failed to exhaust his administrative remedies. 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided until December 17, 2010. The
 
Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided thereafter. 
  A. Subject Property
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kellberg v. Yuen, No. CAAP-12-0000266 (Haw. App. June 20, 2013)
 
(mem.), 129 Hawai 'i 451, 303 P.3d 1228. 
On January 22, 2014, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held (1) 
the October 23, 2006 letter was not an appealable decision and
 (2) Kellberg received no notice of the subdivision approval so
 his failure to exhaust administrative remedies was excused. 
(Kellberg Decision). See Kellberg v. Yuen, SCWC-12-0000266, 2014
 
WL 235461 (Haw. Jan. 22, 2014). 
The Kellberg Decision vacated
 
the July 19, 2013 Judgment on Appeal and remanded the case to
 this court to consider the remaining issues. See id.
 
On remand, we consider whether the circuit court
 
properly granted summary judgment on all counts in favor of the
 County. 
The issues relating to the jurisdiction of the circuit
 
court before and after remand are resolved by the Kellberg
 Decision and are moot. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
The following is taken from the Kellberg Decision:
2
 
Kellberg owns property adjacent to the Subject
Property. On May 22, 2000, Virginia Goldstein, the Planning
Director at the time, sent a letter to Robert Williams,
President of Prudential Orchid Isle Properties, reflecting
the Planning Department's determination that the Subject
Property consisted of six pre-existing lots. A map was
attached to Goldstein's letter, reflecting five adjoining
lots in the larger 48.47–acre portion of the Subject
Property, and a sixth smaller, 0.600–acre non-contiguous lot
(identified as Lot 4 on the map). [(Emphasis added.)]
 
In December 2003, the then-owners of the Subject
Property wrote to Christopher Yuen, who had taken over as
Planning Director, stating that they would like to
consolidate and re-subdivide the property. 
The owners wrote
 
that it was their belief that there were at least "seven
 
usable lots of record located" on the property. (Emphasis
added). 
On June 2, 2004, the Planning Director responded to
the owners and wrote that based on a review of the relevant
 records, the Planning Department had determined that "the
subject property consist[s] of two (2) separate legal lots
of record[.]" (Emphasis added). One of the lots included the
small non-contiguous plot.
 
In 2004, Michael Pruglo purchased the Subject
Property. In a letter dated January 15, 2005, Sidney M.
Fuke, a planning consultant working with Pruglo, wrote to
the Planning Director to memorialize a January 12, 2005
discussion between Fuke and the [Planning] Director. Fuke
wrote that at the January 12 meeting, the [Planning]
Director confirmed that he "would accept the six (6) lots
 
2
 Footnotes omitted. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
acknowledged in the May 22, 2000 letter as lots of
record[.]"
 
On April 7, 2005, Fuke filed a "Consolidation/
Resubdivision Application" (SUB 05–000064) with the Planning
Department, on Pruglo's behalf. In the accompanying letter,
Fuke reiterated that pursuant to Goldstein's May 22, 2000
letter and Fuke's January 15, 2005 discussion with the
current Planning Director, the Subject Property was
determined to have six pre-existing lots.
 
The preliminary plat map included with the
application, dated April 6, 2005, identifies the larger
48–acre portion of the Subject Property as "Parcel 1," and
divides Parcel 1 into six lots, labeled "1–A" through "1–F."
However, the smaller, 0.6–acre non-contiguous lot from the
Planning Department's May 22, 2000 letter is not included as
part of the proposed subdivision. Instead, the
non-contiguous lot is labeled "Parcel 2."
 
On June 1, 2005, the Planning Director granted
tentative approval of the preliminary plat map.
 
On July 1, 2005, Fuke submitted a final plat map to
the Planning Director. Consistent with the preliminary map,
the final plat map identifies the larger portion of the
Subject Property as "Parcel 1" and shows this portion
divided into six lots. The smaller non-contiguous portion of
the property, while reflected in the map, is no longer
identified as "Parcel 2" or by any label.
 
On July 11, 2005, the Planning Director sent a letter
to Fuke, providing, "FINAL SUBDIVISION APPROVAL NO.
SUB–05–000064." The letter stated, "Please be informed that
final subdivision approval for recordation is hereby granted
to the final plat map as attached herewith inasmuch as all
requirements of the Subdivision Code, Chapter 23, as
modified have been met." (Emphasis added).
 
According to Kellberg, he first became aware of the
subdivision of the Subject Property a month later on August
11, 2005, when he observed a "for sale" sign on the Subject
Property, and a realtor later called him with an offer to
sell him a newly created lot along his property line. The
next day, he went to the Planning Department. He asked an
employee about filing an appeal and was informed that the
thirty-day period for appeals had already passed. He asked
to speak to the Planning Director, but was told that he was
unavailable. Kellberg then left his contact information and
asked that the [Planning] Director call him later that day.
When the [Planning] Director did not contact him as
requested, Kellberg again visited the Planning Department on
August 16 and left his contact information. However, the
[Planning] Director did not call him.
 
In a letter dated August 16, 2005, Kellberg informed
the Planning Director that he had recently learned of the
subdivision approval and that he was "writing to make [the
Planning Director] aware of serious omissions and errors" in
the approved subdivision plan. In relevant part, Kellberg
noted that the final subdivision plan on file with the
Planning Department divides the Subject Property into seven
lots rather than six lots. The seventh lot consisted of the
 smaller, non-contiguous parcel reflected in the Planning
Department's May 22, 2000 map as Lot 4. Kellberg wrote,
"Your agreement to honor the previous administration's six
pre-existing lot determination (as per your 01/12/05 meeting
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with Mr. Fuke), allows a six lot subdivision of the subject
property, while the 'final' subdivision plan on file with
your office divides the subject property into seven lots."
 
Kellberg concluded his letter by stating that he "can
appreciate that at this late date, the errors and omissions
I have noted will be difficult to correct, and certainly
inconvenient for all parties involved." He wrote, "I would
encourage your prompt intervention in this matter[.]"
 
On October 19, 2005, the first subdivision lot was
sold.
 
In a letter dated January 17, 2006, Kellberg again
wrote to the Planning Director. He stated that in the five
months since his first letter, he had called the Planning
Director's office and left numerous messages, with no
response. He reiterated that the most serious error in the
subdivision approval was that it failed to recognize Lot 4
and created seven lots instead of the agreed-upon six lots.
He concluded by requesting a response and an account of the
steps the Planning Director had taken to correct the
identified errors.
 
On February 17, 2006, Kellberg wrote to the County of
Hawai'i Office of the Corporation Counsel (Corporation
Counsel) with his concerns regarding the subdivision.
Corporation Counsel responded on February 24, 2006, and
encouraged Kellberg to continue attempting to contact the
Planning Director and also noted that Kellberg could
consider appealing the matter to the Hawai' i County Board of
Appeals (BOA).
 
In a letter dated March 5, 2006, Kellberg wrote to the
Planning Department, stating that he was writing "at the
suggestion of Corporation [Counsel] . . . to request
information concerning the [BOA]."
 
On March 21, 2006, the Chairman of the BOA responded
to Kellberg's March 5 letter to the Planning Department. The
Chairman stated that "[a]ccording to our records, 
the
Planning Director granted Final Subdivision Approval on July
11, 2005 for the 6–lot subdivision of the subject property."
(Emphasis added). The Chairman continued by informing
Kellberg that the BOA rules required an appeal from the
Planning Director's decision to be filed within thirty days
of the decision: "For your information, Section 8–3, Time
Limit for Filing Appeal, of Part 8 . . . states that an
appeal from the decision of the Planning Director shall be
filed within thirty (30) days after the decision." A copy of
the BOA's Rules of Practice and Procedures and a General
 Petition form were enclosed with the letter.
 
On April 19, 2006, Pruglo and Fuke submitted a new
consolidation and resubdivision application for the Subject
Property (SUB 06–000333). The plan involved consolidating
the non-contiguous parcel with another parcel created by the
previous subdivision.
 
On June 19, 2006, Kellberg wrote a third letter to the
Planning Director. According to Kellberg, he had become
aware of the pending subdivision application and asked the
Planning Director to notify him when the subdivision
application was approved.
 
On August 25, 2006, Kellberg's counsel, Stephen D.
Whittaker, wrote to the Planning Director at Kellberg's
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
request. The letter provided that it was regarding
"Subdivision Plan SUB–05–000064; Resubdivision Plan
06–000333." Whittaker wrote that it was his assumption that
"an appeal is premature in that Mr. Kellberg has not
received notice of any action purporting to approve the
'resubdivision' . . . and on June 19, 2006, he asked, in
writing, to be notified 'when tentative approval has been
granted . . . for the resubdivision.'"
 
On October 23, 2006, more than a year after Kellberg's
first letter, the Planning Director responded by letter to
Kellberg and Whittaker. The [Planning] Director stated that
he was writing in response to Kellberg's letters of August
16, 2005, January 17, 2006, and June 19, 2006, and to
Whittaker's letter of August 25, 2006. The [Planning]
Director wrote, "The number of pre-existing lots on [the
Subject Property], and their subsequent use in Sub. 05–00064
and the pending Sub. 06–000333 seems to be the most
important issue."
 
With respect to the number of pre-existing lots, the
Planning Director acknowledged that the Planning Department
had previously recognized six lots on the subject property,
per the Department's May 22, 2000 letter. The [Planning]
Director further acknowledged that in the Department's June
2, 2004 letter, the Department only recognized two lots.
The Director stated, "This was a mistake, because the
Department should have respected the previous
determination."
 
The [Planning] Director explained that he subsequently
informed Fuke that the Department "would honor" the May 22,
2000 recognition of six lots. Accordingly, Pruglo's
subdivision application was based on recognizing six
pre-existing lots. The Director also acknowledged that
"there was a mistake in the approval" of the subdivision
application because the Planning Department had not
accounted for the non-contiguous lot:
 
As Mr. Kellberg correctly points out, there wasa
mistake in the approval of that subdivision. One of
the six recognized lots was a 0.699 acre portion of
Grant 11,070. For some reason, it was not contiguous
with the remainder of TMK No. 3–2–2–35. In the
 consolidation/resubdivision, the Planning Department
did not notice that this noncontiguous portion had
been included in the lot count. Thus, it remained
separate, and is now TMK No. 3–2–2–110. Thus, with the
six lots in Sub. 05–00064 and parcel 110, there are
now seven lots instead of six.
 
(Emphases added). The [Planning] Director then stated that he
would not be taking any action to "undo this situation at this
time" because the subdivision had already "received final
subdivision approval and at least some of the lots have been
sold:"
 
I am not going to do anything to undo this
situation at this time. Sub. 05–0064 has
 received final subdivision approval and at least
some of the lots have been sold. Given that
 parcel 110 is physically separated from the
remainder of Sub. 05–00064, and from any
property owned by the subdivider, I cannot see a
way to erase its separate existence.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The [Planning] Director concluded his letter by
apologizing for not responding earlier and informing
Kellberg that the Planning Department staff had been
"instructed to send copies of future correspondence from our
office concerning Sub. 06–000333 and any revisions of Sub.
05–00064."
 
In a letter dated February 6, 2007, Kellberg responded to
the [Planning] Director. Kellberg stated that he had reviewed the
revised final plat map referenced in the [Planning] Director's
January 19, 2007 letter, and the "major defect" regarding the
non-contiguous lot remained. Kellberg continued, "[A]nd so I
thought I would avail myself of the opportunity to ask you to
reconsider your stated position that you are 'not going to do
anything to undo this situation at this time.'" Kellberg cited §
23–74(c) of the [HCC], providing that the [Planning] Director's
"approval for recordation of the final plat by the director shall
not relieve the subdivider of the responsibility for any error in
the dimensions or other discrepancies. Such errors or
discrepancies shall be revised or corrected, upon request, to the
satisfaction of the director." Kellberg wrote that it was his
belief that this provision "would give you the legal power to
require Mr. Fuke and Mr. Pruglo to correct the mistake, regardless
of the cost or inconvenience to themselves."
 
Kellberg noted that Fuke and Pruglo still owned two
pairs of abutting lots in the subdivision. Accordingly, it
was within the [Planning] Director's power "to resolve the
original lot count 'mistake' by simply notifying Mr. Fuke
and Mr. Pruglo that they are required to combine one or the
other of these abutting pairs into a single lot, thereby
reducing the total number created to the requisite six."
 
On June 15, 2007, the Planning Director wrote a letter
briefly responding to Kellberg, which did not address the
concerns raised by Kellberg.
 B.
 Circuit Court Proceedings
 
1.
 
On May 11, 2007, Kellberg filed a Complaint inthe circuit
court against the County Defendants. In Count I, Kellberg alleged
that he is a "person aggrieved by the decision of [the Planning
Director] to approve SUB–05–00064." He further alleged that the
Planning Director had continually refused to revise the
subdivision approval to comply with Chapter 23 of the County Code,
despite the [Planning] Director's acknowledgment that there was a
mistake in the approval of the seven-lot subdivision. The
 [Planning] Director had also refused to require Pruglo to comply
with the law.
 
In Count II, Kellberg alleged that he was entitled to a
declaratory judgment regarding "the application of the [HCC] to
SUB–05–00064 and [the Planning Director's] arbitrary decision to
disregard the limitations of Section 23–67 and to create seven (7)
lots out of one in violation of Section 23–7 [(governing
pre-existing lots)]."
 
Under Count III, Kellberg claimed that as an adjacent
landowner, he has a property interest in the subdivision. He
 stated that the County Defendants approved the subdivision
"without correcting patent defects" and without providing any
notice or due process to him. He alleged that the subdivision
approval therefore violated his right to due process under the
Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution and
 article I, section 5 of the Hawai' i Constitution. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Count IV, Kellberg alleged that the Planning Director
abused his discretion and violated statutes by refusing to apply
[HCC] § 23–67, requiring tentative approval of the preliminary
plat map to be deemed void without timely submission of a final
map, and § 23–74(c), requiring errors in subdivisions to be
revised or corrected to the director's satisfaction.
 
In Count V, Kellberg alleged that he was entitled to an
injunction requiring the Planning Director to bring the
subdivision into compliance with the [HCC] and prohibiting the
County Defendants "from permitting more than two (2) lots on the
Subject Property and from allowing any subdivision of the Subject
Property other than in accordance with [HCC]."
 
Finally, in Count VI, Kellberg claimed that his property had
been adversely and materially impacted by the subdivision and by
the County Defendants' refusal to correct the mistakes that had
been made.
 
2.
 
On January 9, 2008, the County filed a Motion to Dismiss the
Complaint (First Motion to Dismiss). The County argued that the
Complaint must be dismissed because Kellberg "has not alleged any
concrete interest which gives rise to standing on his part to
bring this suit."
 
Following a hearing on the motion, the court entered an
order denying the County's First Motion to Dismiss on April 1,
2008. The court found that Kellberg, "as the owner of real
property adjoining SUB–05–00064, has standing to assert the claims
in the Complaint."
 
On July 23, 2008, the County Defendants filed a Motion to
Dismiss for Failure to Exhaust Administrative Remedies (Second
Motion to Dismiss). The County Defendants noted that pursuant to
[HCC] § 23–5, any person aggrieved by the [Planning] Director's
decision "may, within thirty days after the director's decision,
appeal the decision to the board of appeals." The County
Defendants argued that Kellberg was aware of the subdivision in
August 2005, and "the Planning Director, in a letter dated October
23, 2006, refused to accede" to Kellberg's requests. The County
Defendants argued that Kellberg had not appealed any decision of
the [Planning] Director to the BOA within the required thirty-day
time frame. Accordingly, the circuit court lacked subject matter
jurisdiction over the case because Kellberg had failed to exhaust
all available administrative remedies.
 
Kellberg responded that the circuit court has original
jurisdiction over the Complaint, which alleged violations of the
state and federal Constitution and violations of statutes.
 Kellberg argued that even if the court found that the Planning
Department or BOA has unique expertise regarding any issues raised
in the Complaint, the doctrine of primary jurisdiction required
the action to be stayed rather than dismissed.
 
A hearing on the Second Motion to Dismiss was held on
September 5, 2008. In response to the court's questions regarding
notice of the subdivision to Kellberg, counsel for the County
Defendants argued that the Planning Director's October 23, 2006
letter "says this was a final decision and nothing else could have
occurred." Thus it was the County Defendants' position that
Kellberg had until November 23, 2006 to file an appeal.
 
However, the court responded that the letter was "somewhat
ambiguous or at least confusing" because the Chairman appeared to
be saying that the final subdivision approval was on July 11,
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2005, and Kellberg should have filed an appeal by August 11, 2005,
which was well before the Chairman's letter.
 
On September 30, 2008, the circuit court entered its
findings of fact, conclusions of law and order denying the Second
Motion to Dismiss. The court found "the County has not shown that
there were administrative processes available to Mr. Kellberg
providing meaningful and adequate notice of SUB 05–00064 and an
opportunity to appeal the Planning Director's decision."
 
The court concluded that it had "original jurisdiction of
Plaintiff's Complaint which, under the circumstances, is not
subject to dismissal for failure to exhaust administrative
remedies." The court further concluded that Kellberg "did not fail
to exhaust available administrative remedies and, instead, the
Court finds that, under the circumstances presented on the motion,
Plaintiff did not have an available administrative remedy."
 
On May 27, 2009, Kellberg filed a "Motion for Partial
Summary Judgment on Count I (Violation of Statute), Count II
(Declaratory Judgment) and Count IV (Abuse of Discretion)" (Motion
for Partial Summary Judgment). Kellberg argued that there was no
genuine issue of material fact that the County Defendants had
violated the County Code by approving the subdivision, which
"yielded seven (7) lots out of six (6)[.]" Additionally, Kellberg
claimed that the Planning Director, who acknowledged the "mistake"
in his subdivision approval, was required to correct the mistake.
 
In response, the County Defendants argued that the
"determinations of pre-existing lots as well as the approval of
the number of lots in a consolidation and re-subdivision are
 determinations within the discretion of the Planning Director."
 
On May 29, 2009, the County Defendants filed a "Motion to
Dismiss Pursuant to Rule 12(b)(6) of the Hawaii Rules of Civil
Procedure" (Third Motion to Dismiss). The County Defendants argued
that no private cause of action exists to permit Kellberg to
challenge the Planning Director's actions regarding the County
Code.
 
On June 19, 2009, a hearing was held on Kellberg's Motion
for Partial Summary Judgment. The court explained that it was
"inclined to . . . flesh out the record at the County level" by
granting Kellberg's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment "in the
form of an order remanding this back down to the County for a
appeal before the Board of Appeals." The court further explained
that it was finding that "Kellberg was denied an appeal before the
Board of Appeals based on the October 23, 2006, decision of the
director," but stopping short of finding a specific violation of
the subdivision approval and "leaving that up to the Board of
Appeals." The court stated that it was "sending it back to the
Board of Appeals to process" Kellberg's "[a]ppeal of the October
23 decision."
 
On July 24, 2009, the court filed its order granting the
Motion for Partial Summary Judgment. The order provided, "IT ISORDERED ADJUDGED AND DECREED that [Kellberg] should have beenallowed to appeal the decision of October 23, 2006 pursuant to theprovisions of Section 23–5 of the [HCC] but [Kellberg] was deniedsuch an opportunity to appeal." The order continued, "The Courtremands this case to the Board of Appeals for the County ofHawai'i regarding the Appeal of the Decision of the [Planning]
Director found in the October 23, 2006 letter to Mr. Kellberg." 
On the same day, the court entered its order denying the
County Defendants' Third Motion to Dismiss, reaffirming that
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiff, as the owner of real property adjoining SUB–05–00064,
has standing to assert the claims in the Complaint."
 C. Board of Appeals Proceedings
 
On September 15, 2009, Kellberg filed a "General Petition
for Appeal of Decisions by Planning Director" (Petition) with the
Board of Appeals. In his Petition, Kellberg stated that he sought
"reversal, modification, or remand" of "three major decisions" of
the Planning Director, "to whatever extent is necessary" to
satisfy the [HCC]: 1) the January 12, 2005 decision to honor the
May 22, 2000 determination that the Subject Property contained six
pre-existing lots; 2) the July 11, 2005 decision to grant final
subdivision approval; and 3) the October 23, 2006 letter stating
that the [Planning] Director would do nothing to bring the
subdivision into compliance.
 
On October 21, 2009, the County Defendants filed a motion to
dismiss the Petition.
 
The BOA held a hearing to consider the Petition and the
motion to dismiss on November 13, 2009. Counsel for the County
Defendants argued that "[a]ny ruling by Judge Hara . . . cannot
confer additional jurisdiction to the Board" and that Judge Hara
"made no determination" that the BOA "should accept jurisdiction
[.]" Counsel also argued that if the BOA took "October of 2006 as
the date of the decision . . . then any appeal would have had to
been filed no later than . . . November 22, 2006."
 
Kellberg and his counsel questioned "what decisions are
included in that October 2006 letter." Kellberg's counsel further
argued that whether the October letter could be characterized “as
a final decision that in the ordinary course might be appealable”
was not relevant to the BOA's decision on the Petition.
 
The BOA voted 5–1 to grant the motion to dismiss the
Petition. On February 19, 2010, the BOA filed its findings of
fact, conclusions of law, and decision and order (Decision and
Order). The BOA found that Kellberg was appealing "from a written
decision of the Planning Director dated October 23, 2006 . . .
informing Appellant that the Planning Department would take no
further action on a complaint by Appellant regarding consolidation
and re-subdivision application SUB 05–000084." The BOA found that
Kellberg "filed an appeal from the [Planning] Director's Decision
on September 15, 2009."
 
The BOA further found that Kellberg "received notice of the
requirements regarding the time for filing a notice of appeal to
the [BOA] on March 5, 2006 prior to the October 23, 2006 letter
from the Planning Director."
 
The BOA concluded that Kellberg's appeal was filed "beyond
the time permitted to file an appeal," and the BOA therefore
lacked jurisdiction to consider the appeal. Accordingly, the BOA
determined that Kellberg's appeal was "dismissed and the decision
of the Planning Director . . . affirmed."
 D. Circuit Court Proceedings Continued
 
1.
 
On March 4, 2010, Kellberg filed a "Motion for Partial
Summary Judgment on Count V (Injunction) and for Injunction
against the County of Hawaii" (Motion for Injunction) with the
circuit court. Kellberg requested an order granting summary
judgment on Count V of the Complaint, seeking an injunction
remanding the case to the Planning Department with instructions to
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Planning Director to bring the subdivision into compliance
with the County Code, and enjoining the County Defendants from
"allowing the further sale, transfer of ownership, or development
and improvement of lots created" by the subdivision until
compliance is demonstrated.
 
Kellberg argued that he had fully complied with the circuit
court's July 24, 2009 order granting the Motion for Partial
Summary Judgment, but was "deliberately and effectively prevented"
by the County Defendants "from obtaining the relief intended by
the Court." Kellberg argued that the BOA's treatment of his appeal
demonstrated that Kellberg "never had, nor would have ever been
allowed to have, an administrative remedy with regard to any
aspect of SUB 05–00064."
 
The County Defendants argued in response that the BOA
rendered its final decision in its Decision and Order filed on
 February 22, 2010, but Kellberg did not file an appeal from this
Decision and Order. Thus the BOA's findings "are final and have a
preclusive effect upon the issues concerning the exhaustion of
administrative remedies and the jurisdiction of the circuit court
with respect to this case."
 
A hearing on the Motion for Injunction was held on April 28,
2010. At the hearing, counsel for the County Defendants argued
that "the problem" with the case was that although the circuit
court "remanded" the case to the BOA, the case "never came up from
the board of appeals." The court responded, "[D]idn't [the BOA]
finally dismiss the appeal on the same grounds that I found that
Mr. Kellberg had a basis to go ahead and have an appeal, and that
is—the timing of all of these matters did not allow him to
adequately lodge an appeal with the board?" The court clarified
that it had remanded the case to the BOA to "see what kind of
 remedies they had if they were, in fact, convinced that the
subdivision laws, as I was convinced, was not complied with."
 
The court concluded that it was "inclined to go ahead and
grant the motion," but also stated that the court was "reluctant"
because "the issue of whether or not there may be adequate
remedies at law in terms of damages would preclude the granting of
a motion for summary judgment."
 
Nearly five months later, on September 22, 2010, the circuit
court filed an order denying the Motion for Injunction. The order
provided that the court's July 24, 2009 order remanding the matter
to the BOA rendered Count V of the Complaint "moot as the remand
addressed Mr. Kellberg['s] right and opportunity to be heard
referred to in Count V."
 
On October 15, 2010, the circuit court filed a second order
denying the Motion for Injunction. The order was largely identical
to the initial order. The second order additionally provided that
Kellberg's "failure to exhaust his administrative remedies
forecloses this court from further action in this matter."
 
2.
 
On April 21, 2011, the County Defendants filed a "Motion for
Summary Judgment" (Motion for Summary Judgment) on all claims,
asking the court to dismiss the Complaint.
 
In relevant part, the County Defendants argued that Kellberg
had failed to exhaust his administrative remedies. Pursuant to
 [HCC] § 23–5, Kellberg "had thirty days to appeal the Planning
Director's decision to recognize six pre-existing lots or grant
final subdivision approval." "However, Plaintiff failed to file an
appeal with the BOA until the Court ordered him to do so."
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On May 3, 2011, Kellberg filed a memorandum in opposition to
the Motion for Summary Judgment. Kellberg noted that the circuit
court had already determined in its September 30, 2008 order
denying the Second Motion to Dismiss, that the County had not
shown there were administrative processes available to Kellberg
that provided notice and an opportunity to appeal the subdivision
approval. Accordingly, Kellberg argued that the Motion for Summary
Judgment should be denied as an untimely motion for
reconsideration.
 
A hearing on the Motion for Summary Judgment was held on May
11, 2011. On June 16, 2011, the court filed an order granting the
Motion for Summary Judgment as to all counts. The order provided
only that "the record reflects the absence of any genuine issue of
material fact."
 
On February 28, 2012, the court filed a Final Judgment in
favor of the County Defendants and against Kellberg on all counts
of the Complaint.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
We review summary judgments de novo. See Kamaka v. 
Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai 'i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 
91, 103 (2008). Under Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 
Rule 56(c), the circuit court must grant a motion for summary 
judgment when the moving party: (1) has shown that there is no genuine issue regarding any material fact, and (2) is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Id. "A fact is material if proof 
of that fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties." Id. 
If the moving party meets its burden of production, the 
non-moving party must present admissible evidence showing specific facts about essential elements of each claim to avoid summary judgment. See Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 
322-23 (1986). We view the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party; factual inferences are made in favor of the non-moving party. See Kamaka at 117 Hawai
'i 104, 176 P.3d 
103.
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
On July 24, 2009, the circuit court entered summary
 
judgment in favor of Kellberg on Counts 1, 2, and 4 (2009 Order). 
On September 22, 2010 and October 15, 2010, the circuit court
 
denied Kellberg's motion for summary judgment on Count 5. On
 June 16, 2011, the circuit court granted summary judgment in
 
11
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
favor of the County on all counts, superceding the prior orders
 
(2011 Order). We review the 2011 Order de novo. 
A. The circuit court erroneously granted summary
judgment in favor of the County on counts 1 and 2.
 
Count 1 alleges Kellberg is a person aggrieved by the 
decision of the Planning Director to approve SUB–05–00064. Count 
1 asserts that under the Hawai 'i County Code (HCC) Chapters 23 
and 25 (Subdivision and Zoning Codes, respectively) no more than 
two lots could be determined to be preexisting lots on the 
Subject Property. Count 1 further alleges that the Planning Director failed to ensure the subdivision complied with the Subdivision Code, despite the Planning Director's acknowledgment that there was a mistake in the approval of the seven-lot subdivision. 
Count 2 alleges the approval of SUB-05-00064 was void
 
under HCC § 23-67 because the revised final plat for SUB–05–00064
 was not submitted within a year of the Planning Director's
 tentative approval. Count 2 alleges that Kellberg was entitled
 to a declaratory judgment regarding the application of the
 Subdivision Code to SUB-05-00064 and the Planning Director's
 "arbitrary decision to disregard the limitations of Section 23-67
 and to create seven (7) lots out of one in violation of Section
 23-7 of the [Subdivision Code]."
 
In Hawai
'i, it is not necessary to plead legal theories 
with precision. See Leslie v. Est. of Tavares, 93 Hawai 'i 1, 4, 
994 P.2d 1047, 1050 (2000). A complaint need only set forth a short and plain statement of the claim that provides the defendant with fair notice of what the plaintiff's claim is and the grounds upon which the claim rests. See Hall v. Kim, 53 Haw. 
215, 221, 491 P.2d 541, 545 (1971) (holding it is "not necessary to plead under what particular law the recovery is sought") (citation and internal quotation mark omitted). The purpose of pleading is to facilitate a proper decision on the merits. See 
id. The claims in Counts 1 and 2 overlap somewhat, and identify 
applicable and inapplicable law, but raise two questions: (1) did 
12
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the approval of SUB-05-00064 comply with the Subdivision and
 
Zoning Codes, and (2) was the approval of SUB-05-00064 invalid?3
 
i. The approval of SUB-05-00064 violated the
Subdivision and Zoning Codes and is invalid.
 
Neither party disputes the material facts. The County
 
appears to contend that since Kellberg agrees that no genuine
 issues of material fact exist, he cannot contest the 2011 Order's
 conclusion that the County was entitled to judgment as a matter
 of law:
 
Although Kellberg disagrees with Judge Ibarra's decision, he
apparently does not dispute that he failed to put forth any
evidence that there were genuine issues of material fact
which precluded summary judgment. In fact, Kellberg stated
to the Circuit Court "there are no disputed questions of
material fact[."]
 
This contention is contrary to HRCP Rule 56(c). See Kamaka, 117 
Hawai'i at 104, 176 P.3d at 103 (summary judgment is proper under 
HRCP Rule 56(c) when the moving party has shown that there is no 
genuine issue regarding any material fact, and is entitled to judgment as a matter of law). 
Subdivisions must comply with state law and county
 
regulations. See HCC § 23-23. The "minimum sizes of various
 
types of lots shall be in conformance with the provision of
 chapter 25, Zoning Code[.]" HCC § 23-33. SUB–05–00064 is
 located within an agricultural district, zoned A-20a. The
 minimum number of acres required by designation A-20a is twenty
 per lot. See HCC § 25-5-71. SUB–05–00064 divided 48.47 acres
 
into six lots, creating lots less than 20 acres. However, the
 requirements of the Subdivision and Zoning Codes do not apply to
 consolidation and resubdivision actions that result in the same
 or fewer number of lots than existed before the action. See HCC
 
§ 23-7 and HCC § 25-2-11.
4 Consequently, the key facts in this
 
3
 These questions were directly and indirectly addressed extensively
by the parties' various circuit court motions and memoranda.
 
4
 HCC § 23-7 (2005) provides: 
Section 23-7. Applicability to consolidation or
resubdivision action.
 
The requirements and standards of this chapter shall
not apply to consolidation and resubdivision action
 
(continued...)
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
case are the number of lots that existed before the consolidation
 
and resubdivision action and the number of lots that resulted. 
The County's interpretation of the key facts is
 
contrary to the undisputed record.
 
What [Kellberg] conveniently ignores is that the
Subject Property was seven lots, well before [Kellberg] even
contemplated purchasing his property and before the county
 enacted the subdivision ordinance. The County simply
recognized that [the Subject Property] consisted of at least
six pre-existing lots based upon a prior determination in
2000.
 
(Italics added.) The Subject Property consists of a 48.47 parcel
 
and a non-contiguous .699 acre parcel. The May 22, 2000 pre­existing lot determination, honored by the Planning Director,
 determined the 48.47 acre parcel had, at most, 5 pre-existing
 lots. The non-contiguous parcel constituted the sixth pre­existing lot. The preliminary and final plat maps submitted by
 the subdivider and approved by the Planning Director divided the
 48.47 acre parcel into six lots. Later, in his October 23, 2006
 letter to Kellberg, the Planning Director confirmed there were
 six total lots on the subject property before the consolidation
 and resubdivision action, and due to his department's failure to
 account for the non-contiguous parcel, seven lots resulted from
 the action.
 
The County maintains the "Planning Director was very
 
forthright and  admitted a mistake had been made in counting the
 
lots, not that the subdivision should not have been granted."
 
4(...continued)
resulting in the creation of the same or fewer number of
lots than that which existed prior to the
consolidation/resubdivision action; provided that the
director, upon conferring with the director of public works
and manager-chief engineer of the department of water
supply, may require necessary improvements to further the
public welfare and safety.
 
HCC § 25-2-11  provides:
 
Section 25-2-11. Waiver of requirements in consolidation and
resubdivision actions
 
If the director finds the public welfare and safety
will not be violated, the director may waive portions or all
of the requirements and standards of this chapter for
consolidation and resubdivision action resulting in creation
of the same or less number of lots than that which existed
 [before] the consolidation or resubdivision action[.]
 
14
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Emphasis added.) This mistake, however, is the undisputed fact
 
that entitles Kellberg to judgment as a matter of law. Since
 more lots resulted from the approved action than existed before
 the action, SUB–05–00064 was not exempt from the requirements of
 the Subdivision and Zoning Codes. 
See HCC § 23-7 and HCC § 25-2­
11. And since the Subdivision and Zoning Codes apply,
 SUB–05–00064 violates, at a minimum, HCC § 23-33 and HCC § 25-5­71. 
HCC § 23-62 provides the planning director "shall 
disapprove a preliminary plat or a subdivision map where the subdivider has failed to comply with the provisions of chapter 25, zoning code." 
HCC § 23-62(c). The use of "shall" makes § 
23-62 mandatory and provides the Planning Director with no discretion to accept a subdivision application that, as here, fails to comply with the Zoning Code. See Leslie v. Bd. of 
Appeals of Cnty. of Hawai
'i, 109 Hawai 'i 384, 393-94, 126 P.3d 
1071, 1080-81 (2006) (use of "shall" in various Subdivision Code provisions made the provisions mandatory and left the planning director without discretion to accept a subdivision application absent strict compliance with such provisions). Consequently, the approval of SUB-05-00064 was invalid and Kellberg is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law on Counts 1 and 2.
B. Count 3 is moot. 
Count 3 alleged that Kellberg, as an adjacent 
landowner, had a property interest in the subdivision and that 
his right to due process under the U.S. and Hawai
'i Constitutions 
were violated when the County approved SUB-05-00064 "without correcting patent defects" and without providing him with notice of the subdivision action or an opportunity to be heard. Given our holding on the substantive statutory counts, Kellberg's constitutional claims are moot. 
C. Count 4 is moot.
 
Count 4 alleged that the Planning Director abused his
 
discretion and violated statutes by refusing to apply HCC
 § 23–67, requiring tentative approval of the preliminary plat map
 to be deemed void without timely submission of a final map, and
 § 23–74(c), requiring errors in subdivisions to be revised or
 
15
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
corrected to the director's satisfaction. Because the Planning
 
Director lacked discretion to approve SUB-05-00064 and the
 approval was invalid, as discussed above, there was no discretion
 to be abused. Consequently, the issue is moot.
D. Counts 5 and 6.
 
The circuit court entered summary judgment in favor of
 
the County on Counts 5 and 6, which essentially went to the
 relief sought by Kellberg because the circuit court held Kellberg
 did not prevail on Counts 1-4. Because we hold Kellberg should
 have prevailed on Counts 1 and 2, we vacate the circuit court's
 summary judgment in favor of the County on Counts 5 and 6.
5
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Accordingly, the February 28, 2012 Final Judgment is
 
vacated and this case is remanded to the circuit court to enter
 summary judgment in favor of Kellberg on Counts 1 and 2, and also
 remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion,
 including any appropriate relief pursuant to the summary judgment
 to be entered on Counts 1 and 2 in favor of Kellberg.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 28, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Mark C. Kellberg
(on the opening brief)
Plaintiff-Appellant pro se. 
Presiding Judge
 
Associate JudgeAssociate Judge Stephen D. Whittaker
(on the reply brief)
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
Michael J. Udovic 
Laureen L. Martin Deputies Corporation Counsel,County of Hawai
'i 
for Defendants-Appellees. 
5
 Our vacating of the summary judgment in favor of the County on
Counts 5 and 6 should not be construed as a ruling that Kellberg is entitled
to an injunction prohibiting the County "from permitting more than two (2)
lots on the Subject Property," which he is not, or any other specific form of
relief. Rather, the circuit court may consider other appropriate relief on
remand.
 
16
 