NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000581 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I
, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
ALLAN MICHAEL G. FELICIANO,
aka ALLAN M. GAMON FELICIANO,
Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 3FFC-17-0000029) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ., and
Leonard, Presiding Judge, dissenting) 
Defendant-Appellant Allan Michael G. Feliciano, also 
known as Allan M. Gamon Feliciano (Feliciano), appeals from the 
Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence (
Judgment), entered 
on June 2, 2017, in the Family Court of the Third Circuit (FamilyCourt).  After a jury trial, Feliciano was convicted of Abuse 
of Family or Household Member, in violation of Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 709-906(1) (Supp. 2016).
  2/1/
1/  The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided. 
2/ HRS § 706-906(1) provides, in relevant part: 
It shall be unlawful for any person, singly or in concert,
to physically abuse a family or household member . . . . 
For the purposes of this section: 
. . . . 
"Family or household member": 
(continued...) 2/(...continued) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Feliciano contends that the Family Court 
erred in allowing the State to adduce at trial evidence of a 
prior bad act that Feliciano allegedly committed in February 2016, when he allegedly pushed the complaining witness (CW), his 
then-wife, out of a chair. 
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant 
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues 
raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we affirm the Judgment for the reasons set forth below. 
I. RELEVANT BACKGROUND 
On February 2, 2017, Feliciano was charged by complaint 
with "intentionally, knowingly or recklessly physically abus[ing the CW], a family or household member," in violation of HRS § 709-906(1). The charge stemmed from an incident in the early morning hours of January 14, 2017 in which Feliciano allegedly struck the CW in the face.
3/ In his disclosure of defenses filed 
on March 7, 2017, Feliciano asserted that at trial, he "may rely on [several] defenses," including that he "lacked the specific state of mind required to commit the offense charged," and that he acted in "[s]elf defense[.]" 
On April 21, 2017, the State filed a notice of intent 
to use evidence of Feliciano's "prior bad acts" at trial – namely, "[f]acts and [c]ircumstances documented in police report C17001634 and in interviews with [the CW] detailing an incident in 2016 in which [Feliciano] pushed [the CW] out of a chair" (the 
chair incident).  In response to Feliciano's subsequent motion in 
limine to exclude the evidence, the State asserted, among other 
(a) Means spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, former
spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, persons in adating relationship as defined under section 586-1,persons who have a child in common, parents, children,persons related by consanguinity, and persons jointlyresiding or formerly residing in the same dwellingunit[.] 
3/ The incident followed a party at the home of Feliciano and the CW
on the evening of January 13, 2017. Hence, the complaint alleged thatFeliciano committed the charged offense "[o]n or about the 13th day ofJanuary, 2017[.] 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
things, that: (a) the chair incident contributed to the CW's 
medical use of marijuana; (b) Feliciano, through counsel, had indicated an intention to raise at trial the issue of the CW's use of marijuana on the night of January 13, 2017; (c) the State intended to elicit testimony of the chair incident as necessary to explain the CW's medical use of marijuana; and (d) the chair incident was also relevant to rebut Feliciano's expected defenses of ignorance or mistake and self-defense, as noted in Feliciano's disclosure of defenses and proposed special jury instructions. 
Prior to the start of trial on June 1, 2017, the 
Circuit Court denied Feliciano's motion to exclude evidence of the chair incident,
4/ in the following exchange: 
[Deputy Prosecuting Attorney ( DPA)]: -- far as the
prior bad acts, the State is just trying to reserve its
ability to bring up a prior incident between the defendantand the [CW] with regard --
THE COURT: You did provide notice --
[DPA]: Yes. THE COURT: -- so yes. So you talking about prior actions of the defendant
may be relevant? 
[DPA]: If that --THE COURT: If the --[DPA]: -- her marijuana usage is brought up. THE COURT: If the door is opened. [DPA]: Yes. THE COURT: So well to that extent, if the motion in
limine is prohibiting that, motion is denied. 
At trial, during Feliciano's opening statement, defense 
counsel portrayed the CW as "under the influence of various 
substances" on the night of January 13, 2017, and claimed that Feliciano's "actions were justified." Specifically, defense counsel stated: 
The evidence will show that nothing that [the CW] did
on that night made sense. She was under the influence of 
various substances. She was behaving aggressively. At the end of the night she was in bed with another man in the homethat she and her husband purchased together. 
4/ A written order denying Feliciano's motion in limine was entered
on June 13, 2017. 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . Feliciano is not guilty of abuse of family or
household member. He was the one who was acting reasonably
that night. His actions were justified and they were
 permitted under the law.5/
Moments later, defense counsel described the couple's "rocky" 
relationship: 
He loved his wife. He loved his job. They owned a
home. He's proudly serving his country. Things started to
get rocky and within the last couple years they got more andmore rocky. There were nights that [CW] was not cominghome. 
Defense counsel then returned to the night of the incident, 
stating in part: 
Now, again, nothing that [the CW] did on that night
made sense. . . . 
Now [Feliciano] goes to bed and there are couple of
people still hanging out. Around 2:00 in the early morning
he wakes up. He notices that [the CW] is not withhim. . . . 
He walks out into the living room. In the living room
is a couch that folds out into a bed. 
The couch is folded 
out into the bed. And under the blankets on that couch he sees his wife and his friend. They're asleep. 
. . . So he wakes her up and what he does is
reasonable. He asks her to come to bed. . . . 
And for a little bit, [the CW] agrees. She's groggy.
Intoxicated. . . . 
And then they get into an argument and she pushes him.
She lunges at him. And she says, "Take your drunken friendto bed. Take your friend to bed." Again, nothing is makingsense and he reacts and he slaps her, and he reactsreasonably. . . . 
Following opening statements, the State called the CW 
as its first witness. The CW testified that on the evening of 
January 13, 2017, she and Feliciano had a get together with friends at their home. The CW did not have anything to drink that night, but she did use marijuana. She explained that she had a medical marijuana license — that she suffered from chronic back pain and used marijuana for pain management. She confirmed that at the gathering that night, Feliciano was drinking alcohol "the whole time."     
5/ Similarly, in her closing statement, defense counsel argued that
the CW acted under "intoxication by marijuana," and that Feliciano "ha[d] no
obligation under the law to stand there and take it." 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
The CW further testified that when "some roughhousing" 
broke out between two of the guests, Feliciano became involved in 
the argument, and the CW tried to calm him down to keep him from fighting. As the CW talked to Feliciano, he grabbed and twisted her wrist. The CW then went into the house, shut off the lights, pulled out the bed from the couch, and fell asleep on the couch bed with her clothes on. In the early morning, she was pulled out of the bed by Feliciano, and she saw that one of his friends was also sleeping on the couch bed with his clothes on. The CW told Feliciano that "[she] didn't wanna go and sleep in the room with him, in the same bed, and [she] told him to take his friend with him 'cause [she] was sleeping on the couch first." After that, Feliciano, who was "under the influence of alcohol," "got mad at [her.] And . . . he said, 'Oh, why you don't wanna come sleep in the room with me, 'cause I hurt you? You don't know what hurting is. You don't know what abuse is. I'll show you.'" Then, according to the CW, Feliciano struck her on the left side of her face with his right fist. She said that both of her hands were "at her side" when Feliciano struck her, and that she "blacked out and . . . fell on the ground" after being hit. 
On cross-examination, defense counsel initially asked 
the CW about her marijuana use, her medical marijuana card, and other prescribed medications she was taking. Defense counsel also asked the CW about the couple's separation for several months prior to the night that Feliciano struck her: 
Q. . . . . 
And at this time around January you were not
actually staying at that Mamalahoa home frequently, were
you? 
A. I had just moved back, yeah. 
Q. Okay. 
How long had you been gone before? 
A. About six months. 
Q. And you were – 
A. I was separated. 
Q. -- staying at your parents' house before
then – 
A. Yeah. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defense counsel did not ask why the couple had separated. 
During his own testimony, Feliciano disputed the CW's 
account of events on the night at issue. He testified that after 
a get together with friends at the couple's home, he fell asleep in the master bedroom and woke up to find that the CW was not in bed. He went to look for her and found her sleeping in the living room on the pull-out couch bed "under the covers with one of [his] friends." Feliciano stated that he woke up the CW and pulled her up to go back to the bedroom; as they were walking, she pulled her hand away, became angry, and kept pushing him until he reacted by slapping her face. 
Feliciano further testified: 
Q. (By [defense counsel]) . . . [Y]ou're aware that at
this time [the CW] is on a number of medications; is that
right? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Including marijuana? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Okay. Were you on any sort of medication? 
A. No. I didn't need any of that stuff to try and get
anything out. 
On direct examination, Feliciano also testified about 
his marital relationship with the CW, including the roughly six-
month period before January 2017 when the couple separated and the CW was living at her parents' home. Feliciano stated that the relationship began to deteriorate after the CW "started going heavy on marijuana usage" and that the CW eventually "moved out on her own." He testified, in relevant part, as follows: 
Q. Okay, and then if you can briefly just describe to us
your marriage to [the CW]. 
A. At the beginning it was great. You know, we were
newlyweds. We did everything together. We compromised.
Just this past few years she started going heavy onmarijuana usage and she stopped going to work. I would come home from work and I would just catch her watching TV,smoking all day. I would have to clean up after the animalsand cook dinner at night after working all day. 
. . . . 
Q. (By [DEFENSE COUNSEL]) So you mentioned that you would
get home after working and [the CW] would be home? 
A. Yes, she would be home. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q. Okay, and this is in the context of things were a little
bit rocky in your relationship earlier this year; is that
fair to say? 
A. Yes. She wouldn't -- like during --
Q. . . . You mentioned that she would smoke marijuana.
Where would she get her marijuana from? A. She would make deals with her friends. She would buy
from her friends. Q. Okay, and then after things started going downhill, did
you guys ever talk about separating? A. She wanted to separate but I didn't want to separate. I 
felt like we could try and work something out. Q. So had you talked to her about working things out? 
A. I have but she wanted to separate because --
Q. So at some point did you separate? 
A. Yes, we did. 
Q. Okay, and what did that involve? 
A. Before January we were separated for about six months.
She was living at her parents' house and I was up at the
house. I didn't want to separate. She moved out on her own. She would come home once in a while but during thattime frame she got into a lot of trouble. She crashed --
[DPA]: Objection. THE COURT: Sustained. 
Later in his testimony, Feliciano further discussed the 
couple's separation as follows: 
Q. So you had just previously testified that [the CW] had
not been living there but was she there on that
night? 
A. She was. 
Q. And can you tell us, what was she doing at the party? 
A. She was there. We were -- she was actually staying
there for about a week and a half now. We were trying to
work things out. 
On cross-examination, the State asked Feliciano about 
finding the CW on the couch with his friend: 
Q. And when you saw them, you got upset; correct? 
A. Yes, yes, I did. 
Q. And part of the reason you got upset is because you had
been cheated on before? 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
A. Correct.6/ 
Q. So you thought [the CW] was sleeping with your friend in
a more than just laying next to each other? 
A. It looked like it, yes. 
Q. In your own house; correct? 
A. Correct. 
Q. And you were angry? 
A. Well, I was more worried. I was sad. 
Q. And you were so angry, you pulled her out of the bed? 
A. That's incorrect. 
Q. You didn't pull her out of the bed? 
A. I didn't pull her out of the bed in an angrily [sic]
manner. Q. Why pull her up at all? 
A. So she could come to bed with me. 
Q. Shouldn't she make that decision herself? 
A. To sleep with another man? 
Q. Can you force -- do you think you should be able to
force your wife to come to bed with you? 
. . . . 
A. Yes, it was her choice to stay I guess. 
(Footnote added.) 
Shortly after this testimony, the State followed up 
with Feliciano about the couple's prior separation, and he 
testified as follows: 
Q. Now, you mentioned that [the CW] wanted to separate and
she had moved out earlier? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Why did she move out? 
A. She had her –- to be honest, I don't really know why,
the real reason why she wanted to separate. Q. Did she move out because of something you had done
to her? A. Not that I recall. 
Q. Did she move out because of something you had done to 
6/ Feliciano testified that the person who had previously cheated on
him was not the CW. 
8  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
her in February of last year? 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Objection. 
THE COURT: Overruled. Opened the door. 
A. I don't– I don't remember doing anything to her in
February. Q. (By [the DPA]) Did you push her out of a chair in
February because you were upset about something to eat? 
A. No, I didn't
. 
After the defense rested and the jury left the 
courtroom, the State said it would call the CW as a rebuttal 
witness. The following exchange then occurred: 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: So if the State does not get into
these prior bad acts that were brought out, then we won't
need a surrebuttal. The prosecutor asked --
THE COURT: Well, this is a different issue, whether
the State did elicit proper foundation to address what thecourt over your objection ruled or overruled your objection,being the door was opened as far as he doesn't have adrinking problem, he -- and the other incident for which shesaid that a reason for her moving out is that --
[DPA]: The only thing I'm going to --
THE COURT: What's the rebuttal then? [DPA]: It's the self-defense, whether or not she was
pushing him, and the chair incident. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: That's the concern, the chair
incident. This is an entire other incident. He should have 
an opportunity to explain. 
[DPA]: He just did. 
THE COURT: He was given the opportunity to deny it.
That's the reason -- because he raised it himself that she 
moved out and he asked the question why is she moving out. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Okay, but depending on her
testimony, what she says, this new information, which wemight not be aware of, that's the concern. 
THE COURT: So the only incident for which the
prosecutor is going to seek rebuttal is why she moved outand it is because of the chair because you raised that andhe denied it, not any other reasons.
7/ 
7/ As the dissent points out, the prosecutor then stated: "I'm not
going to ask her about why she moved out at all. I'm going to ask her aboutthe chair incident."  The court responded: "But that's the reason why youpointed the question to him as a reason for her moving out." The prosecutorthen said, "Right, and he denied it. . . . If I asked her why she moved out,there may be other things[,]" and the court responded, "Maybe you can point --I'll ask you a leading question, did you move out because of that incident,and she can say yes or no." That is essentially how the State asked the
(continued...) 
9 7/(...continued) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Following a brief recess, the proceedings continued 
without the jury. The Circuit Court stated, in relevant part: 
THE COURT: . . . [S]o I'm going to read the
instruction before she testifies. You are about to hear 
evidence that the defendant at another time may havecommitted other wrongs. This is the allegation, pushing outof a chair, right? This evidence, if believed by you, maybe considered only on the issue of the relationship of theparties, and do not consider this evidence for any otherreason. You must not use this evidence to conclude that because defendant at another time may have engaged in otherwrongs that he is a person of bad character and, therefore,must have committed the offense charged in this case. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: No objection. 
[DPA]: No objection. THE COURT: And this will be given prior to her
testimony and that's the only time that the court will give
this instruction. 
After the jury returned to the courtroom, a bench 
conference was held: 
THE COURT: This is a bench conference on the record. 
The reason the court is giving this instruction and to
allow the rebuttal question is because defendant testified
on the relationship between the parties by saying she useddrugs or marijuana and that-- well, the relationship wasraised and the inference was also left that she moved out for different reasons. That was the inference. And the court has also looked at the 403 balancing factor,prejudicial versus probative, and finds this is moreprobative than prejudicial. 
After the conclusion of the bench conference, the 
Circuit Court instructed the jury as follows: 
THE COURT: Back on the record. . . . 
So, Ladies and Gentlemen, you are about to hear
evidence that the defendant at another time may have
committed other wrongs. This evidence, if believed by you,may be considered only on the issue of the relationship ofthe parties. You must not -- do not consider this evidence for any other reason. You must not use this evidence to conclude that because the defendant at another time may havecommitted other wrongs that he is a person of bad characterand, therefore, must have committed the offense charged inthis case. 
question in rebuttal. See infra
. Thus, it appears that in stating, "I'm not
going to ask her about why she moved out at all," the prosecutor was merelydeclining to ask an open-ended question that conceivably could have invitedother prejudicial testimony regarding Feliciano. Instead, at the court'ssuggestion, the State elicited narrower testimony regarding the chairincident, which was the minimum necessary to obtain its probative value. See 
infra. 
10  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
The CW was called as a rebuttal witness and testified, 
in relevant part, as follows: 
Q. In -- when you moved out in 2016, did you move out
because he pushed you out of a chair in February of 2016? 
A. Yes, yes. 
II. DISCUSSION 
Feliciano contends that the Circuit Court abused its 
discretion when it allowed the State: (1) to cross-examine him 
about the chair incident; and (2) to call the CW to rebut Feliciano's testimony denying the chair incident. The State argues, and the Family Court ruled, that Feliciano "opened the door" to this evidence by testifying on direct examination that the CW's marijuana usage had led to the deterioration of the couple's relationship and their temporary separation. The State further argues that the same evidence, when analyzed independently under Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b),
8/ 
was: (1) relevant, and (2) more probative than prejudicial. 
We address each of these contentions, in turn, below. 
A. Opening-the-Door Doctrine 
"The 'opening the door' doctrine is essentially a rule 
of expanded relevancy . . . ." State v. Lavoie, 145 Hawai# i 409, 
422, 453 P.3d 229, 242 (2019) (quoting State v. James, 677 A.2d 
734, 742 (N.J. 1996)). "Under this doctrine, when one party introduces inadmissible evidence, the opposing party may respond by introducing inadmissible evidence on the same issue." Id. 
(emphasis added; brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai# i 462, 497, 946 P.2d 32, 67 (1997)). However, the opening-
the-door doctrine "generally does not allow a party to admit evidence that is otherwise inadmissible to rebut an opponent's 
8/ HRE Rule 404(b) provides, in part: 
Other crimes, wrongs, or acts.  Evidence of other crimes,
wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character of
a person in order to show action in conformity therewith. Itmay, however, be admissible where such evidence is probativeof another fact that is of consequence to the determinationof the action, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent,preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, modus operandi, orabsence of mistake or accident. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
relevant and admissible evidence." Id. at 423, 453 P.3d at 243 
(emphasis added) (citing Clark v. State, 629 A.2d 1239, 1244 (Md. 
1993)). 
Here, Feliciano argues that his testimony about the 
CW's marijuana use and its effect on the couple's relationship was only "slightly relevant" to either side's theory of the case. The State, on the other hand, contends that "the entire defense was to portray the [the CW] as an unfaithful and intoxicated person of bad character[.]" The State further contends that "[d]efense counsel's presentation at trial suggested the evidence of [the CW's] use of marijuana was very relevant[,]" and that Feliciano adduced the evidence to undermine the CW's character and credibility. Neither party contends — nor did the Family Court rule — that Feliciano's testimony was irrelevant or otherwise inadmissible. Further, we conclude that Feliciano's testimony was relevant to the couple's relationship, including the reason for their prior separation, as further discussed below. Accordingly, because Feliciano's testimony regarding the CW's marijuana use was admissible, the State's cross-examination of Feliciano and the CW's rebuttal testimony regarding the chair incident, if otherwise inadmissible, would not generally be admissible under the "opening the door" doctrine. 
In Lavoie, however, the supreme court recognized 
"authority from other jurisdictions for the proposition that the door may also be opened to inadmissible evidence when a party offers admissible evidence that is false or misleading if considered in isolation." 145 Hawai# i at 424, 453 P.3d at 244; 
see id. at 424 n.30, 453 P.3d at 244 n.30 (citing Valadez v. Watkins Motor Lines, Inc., 758 F.3d 975, 981 (8th Cir. 2014) (holding that a party may open the door to inadmissible evidence to the extent that the inadmissible evidence "clears up a false impression" or "clarifyies or completes an issue opened up by opposing counsel") (brackets omitted); United States v. Osazuwa, 564 F.3d 1169, 1175 (9th Cir. 2009) (same); United States v. Brown, 921 F.2d 1304, 1307 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (same); State v. Carlson, 767 A.2d 421, 425 (N.H. 2001) (same)). The court concluded that "such a rule would not apply here even if this 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
court were to adopt it because no aspect of [the witness's] 
testimony was shown to be false or misleading."9/ Lavoie, 145 
Hawai# i at 424, 453 P.3d at 244. 
Here, in contrast, Feliciano presented evidence and 
argument, as part of his theory of the case, to portray the CW as an unfaithful, drug-abusing spouse who was responsible for the couple's prior separation, as well as for Feliciano's conduct on the night he struck her. In this context, Feliciano's testimony created at least the strong impression that the CW's marijuana usage had led to the deterioration of the couple's relationship and their temporary separation. On cross-examination, before any objection by defense counsel, he denied that the CW had moved out "because of something [he] had done to her." Under these circumstances, the State's further cross-examination of Feliciano about the chair incident challenged his account of the reason for the couple's separation. Similarly, the CW's rebuttal testimony directly rebutted Feliciano's account by linking the couple's separation to the chair incident. This evidence, in turn, shed light on the purportedly true nature of the couple's relationship. The State thus offered direct evidence which, if believed, would show that Feliciano's testimony regarding the couple's relationship and separation was false or misleading. Cf. Lavoie, 145 Hawai# i at 424, 453 P.3d at 244 (no indication 
that a witness's testimony was likely to convey a false impression where it was never shown that instances of abuse had any relation to the couple's separation). 
9/ The supreme court also stated that it "may have implicitly
rejected the rule [that a party may open the door to inadmissible evidence
that clears up a false or misleading impression] in Fukusaku[.]" Lavoie, 145
Hawai #i at 424, 453 P.3d at 244. We do not read Fukusaku as having reached
this result. There, the court concluded that general testimony elicited froman expert on cross-examination by defense counsel about the absence of bloodon the cushions in the defendant's apartment did not open the door totestimony about inadmissible test results indicating the presence of blood insome areas of the apartment. See 85 Hawai #i at 497, 946 P.2d at 67. The 
latter results came from tests that were subject to false positive reactions,and confirmatory tests had not been conducted to conclusively establish thepresence of human blood. 
The trial court thus ruled that the test results 
were not relevant, and that, even if relevant, they were more prejudicial thanprobative. Id. at 496-97, 946 P.2d at 66-67. Fukusaku
 therefore did not 
present a situation where a party was shown to have offered evidence creatinga false or misleading impression. 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Although Feliciano now contends that the couple's 
relationship and separation were only "slightly relevant," at 
trial, he attributed the couple's "rocky" relationship to the CW's marijuana use. Indeed, defense counsel later tied the CW's marijuana use to Feliciano's self-defense justification, arguing to the jury that "intoxication by marijuana" was "not a defense to [the CW's] actions" on the night of the alleged offense, and Feliciano "ha[d] no obligation under the law to stand there and take it." 
"When a defendant leaves the trier of fact with a false 
or misleading impression, the State is entitled to counter with evidence to refute the impression created by the defendant and cure the misleading advantage." Carlson, 767 A.2d at 425 
(quoting State v. MacRae, 677 A.2d 698, 704 (N.H. 1996)). We conclude that under these circumstances, where Feliciano offered evidence that could be shown to be false or misleading in isolation, the State's cross-examination of Feliciano and the CW's rebuttal testimony regarding the chair incident were admissible to place Feliciano's testimony in its proper context and to correct the allegedly false impression created by that testimony. See Clay v. State, 102 S.W.3d 794, 797 (Tex. App. 
2003) ("Where the defendant delves into part of a subject, the [prosecution] is entitled to inquire into the whole of the matter in order to explain it or correct a false impression, even if the later evidence might otherwise be inadmissible."). The Family Court therefore properly admitted the evidence for that purpose. 
B. Probative Value and the Danger of Unfair Prejudice 
We further conclude that, even apart from the opening-
the-door doctrine, the State's introduction of the prior-bad-act 
evidence independently passes muster under HRE Rule 404(b). Under that rule, "any purpose for which bad-acts evidence is introduced is a proper purpose so long as the evidence is not offered solely to prove character." State v. Acker, 133 Hawai# i 
253, 277, 327 P.3d 931, 955 (2014) (quoting State v. Yamada, 116 Hawai# i 422, 435, 173 P.3d 569, 582 (App. 2007)). 
Here, the State's cross-examination of Feliciano was 
offered for at least one proper purpose, namely, to show the full 
14  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
context of the couple's relationship and, relatedly, to test 
Feliciano's credibility as a witness after he testified that the CW's marijuana use led to the couple's separation. See State v. 
Locken, 134 Hawai# i 376, 381, 341 P.3d 1176, 1181 (App. 2014). 
Similarly, the CW's rebuttal testimony contradicted Feliciano's denial that the CW had moved out because of the chair incident, thereby impeaching Feliciano's credibility. See id. At the same 
time, the cross-examination and rebuttal testimony served to rehabilitate the CW's character and credibility, which Feliciano had sought to undermine through his testimony. As such, the line of questioning and the rebuttal testimony were probative of issues of consequence in the case. See HRE Rule 404(b). 
The full context of the couple's relationship also bore 
on Feliciano's self-defense justification. Feliciano was charged with intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly causing physical abuse of a family or household member in violation of HRS § 709-906(1).
10/ He claimed that he was justified in that he acted in 
self-defense, thereby putting in dispute his state of mind when he struck the CW. See Arakawa, 101 Hawai# i at 32-33, 61 P.3d at 
543-44. In particular, the context of the couple's relationship, including Feliciano's alleged prior abuse of the CW, was probative of whether he reasonably believed that striking the CW was immediately necessary for the purpose of protecting himself against the CW's alleged use of unlawful force against him.
11/ 
10/ Because HRS § 709-906 does not specify the state of mind required,
HRS § 702-204 (2014) provides the default. See State v. Arakawa, 101 Hawai #i 
26, 32, 61 P.3d 537, 543 (App. 2002). 
Section 702-204 provides, in relevant
part: "When the state of mind required to establish an element of an offense
is not specified by the law, that element is established if, with respectthereto, a person acts intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly." 
11/ While the Hawai #i appellate courts have not directly addressed the
interplay between a defendant's self-defense claim and his or her prior actsof domestic abuse against the same victim, a number of courts in otherjurisdictions have concluded that such acts can be admissible in somecircumstances to rebut a defendant's self-defense claim, "usually by provingthat the defendant could not reasonably have feared the victim or that he orshe acted inconsistently with a reactionary defensive outburst." 
See State v. 
Richards
, 879 N.W.2d 140, 148 (Iowa 2016) (citing several cases). In 
Richards, for example, the Iowa Supreme Court held that evidence of thedefendant's prior acts of domestic violence against the victim was probativeof whether the defendant acted, as he claimed, in furtherance of a belief thathe needed to protect himself against imminent injury at the victim's hands.879 N.W. 2d at 152. Similarly, in State v. Dukette, 761 A.2d 442, 446-47(N.H.
 2000), the New Hampshire Supreme Court ruled that "evidence that the
(continued...) 
15 11/(...continued) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
See HRS § 703-304; State v. Augustin, 101 Hawai# i 127, 128, 63 
P.3d 1097, 1098 (2002) ("With respect to the use-of-force 
defenses, the defendant's belief must be 'reasonable[.]'" (citing HRS § 703-300 (1993) ("'Believes' means reasonably believes."))). 
The record shows that the Family Court also weighed the 
probative value of the alleged prior abuse against the danger of unfair prejudice. See HRE Rule 403.
12/ The Family Court's 
balancing under HRE Rule 403 is reviewed for an abuse of discretion. State v. Richie, 88 Hawai# i 19, 37, 960 P.2d 1227, 
1245 (1998). Here, based on our review of the record, we cannot conclude that the Family Court abused its discretion in determining that the evidence was more probative than prejudicial and thus admitting the evidence. 
When weighing probative value versus prejudicial 
effect, a court must consider a variety of factors, including: 
the strength of the evidence as to the commission of
the other crime, the similarities between the crimes,the interval of time that has elapsed between thecrimes, the need for the evidence, the efficacy ofalternative proof, and the degree to which theevidence probably will rouse the jury to overmasteringhostility. 
State v. Renon, 73 Haw. 23, 38, 828 P.2d 1266, 1273 (1992) 
(quoting State v. Castro, 64 Haw. 633, 644, 756 P.2d 1033, 1041 (1988)). 
First, the evidence of the chair incident was clear and 
direct, as it was based on the testimony of the victim, the CW. See Richards, 879 N.W.2d at 152 ("[a] victim's testimony, standing alone, satisfies the requirement of clear proof" (quoting State v. Jones, 464 N.W.2d 241, 243 (Iowa 1990))). Feliciano disputes the CW's credibility, as she admitted on cross-examination that she moved out several months after the 
defendant previously committed unprovoked assaults upon the alleged victim to
which the alleged victim did not respond violently undermine[d] thedefendant's argument that she reasonably believed the alleged victim was aboutto use unlawful . . . force against her." 
12/ HRE Rule 403 provides for the exclusion of relevant evidence where
"its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfairprejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or byconsiderations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation ofcumulative evidence." 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
chair incident. However, the CW's testimony was sufficient to 
support the probative value of the evidence, and it was for the jury to determine the CW's credibility. 
Second, there were similarities between the chair 
incident and the present offense, both of which were acts of domestic violence directed toward the same victim. Indeed, Feliciano concedes that the similarities between the two incidents "probably weigh[] in favor of the State." While the incidents were not identical, we conclude that the similarities weighed in favor of admitting the chair-incident evidence. 
Third, the interval of time that elapsed between the 
chair incident and the present offense – less than a year – did not diminish the probative value of the context of the relationship. See, e.g., Richards, 879 N.W.2d at 144, 153 
(affirming admission of evidence of other abusive acts that allegedly occurred "within the previous year"); Dukette, 761 A.2d at 446 (the other acts "were not so removed in time as to render them irrelevant" because they occurred within three years of the charged conduct (citing State v. Allen, 514 A.2d 1263, 1268 (N.H. 1986))). Here, again, Feliciano admits that this factor "probably weighs in favor of the State[,]" and we reach the same conclusion. 
Fourth, the need for the evidence was substantial. The 
trial was largely a credibility contest between Feliciano and the CW, and Feliciano sought to undermine the CW's character and credibility by portraying her as an unfaithful, drug-abusing spouse who was responsible for the couple's prior separation. Under these circumstances, the State's cross-examination of Feliciano and the CW's rebuttal testimony regarding the chair incident were admissible to impeach Feliciano's credibility, to rehabilitate the CW's credibility, and to provide the jury with a fuller picture of the couple's relationship. 
In addition, the evidence regarding the chair incident 
helped to rebut Feliciano's self-defense justification. During her opening statement, defense counsel asserted that on the night the CW was struck, "[s]he was under the influence of various substances[,]" and "was behaving aggressively." Defense counsel 
17 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
continued: "[Feliciano] was the one who was acting reasonably 
that night. His actions were justified and they were permitted under the law." (Emphasis added.) Similarly, in her closing, defense counsel argued that the CW acted under "intoxication by marijuana," and that Feliciano "ha[d] no obligation under the law to stand there and take it." In this context, evidence of the chair incident was probative of whether Feliciano, as he claimed, could have reasonably believed that striking the CW was immediately necessary for the purpose of protecting himself. See 
supra. 
Fifth, given Feliciano's denial of the chair incident, 
the efficacy of alternative proof was low. In fact, it does not appear there was any alternative proof available. 
Sixth, the degree to which the evidence would rouse the 
jury to overmastering hostility was low. The CW answered only a single "yes" or "no" question regarding the chair incident; she was not permitted to describe any resulting injury; and the chair incident as briefly described appeared to have been less violent than the present offense, and was thus unlikely to rouse the jury to overmastering hostility. See, e.g., Richards, 879 N.W.2d at 
152 ("the district court carefully circumscribed the scope of the other acts testimony and thereby limited its potential prejudicial impact" (citing State v. Rodriquez, 636 N.W.2d 234, 243 (Iowa 2001))). 
Indeed, the testimony regarding the chair incident was 
much narrower, and far less likely to engender ill will in the jury, than the prior-bad-act evidence considered in State v. Gallagher, 146 Hawai# i 462, 463 P.3d 1119 (2020). There, the 
supreme court ruled that the trial court abused its discretion in allowing the admission of four prior incidents that "involved aggressive, obscenity-laden, and angry misconduct by [the defendant] toward the [complaining witnesses,]" including testimony regarding "specific details of each incident in which [the defendant] had harassed the family[,]" as well as the escalating nature of the incidents, the terror they engendered, and the protective countermeasures they prompted. Id. at 470, 
472, 463 P.3d at 1127, 1129. In analyzing the HRE Rule 404(b) 
18 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
factors, the court deemed the four prior incidents, which did not 
involve property damage, only marginally probative of the defendant's awareness or knowledge of the extent of damage his actions would cause in the underlying offense, which involved property damage to a vehicle. Id. at 472, 463 P.3d at 1129. 
The court further found that the "extensive surrounding details of the incidents," – in particular, "the recounting of the [complaining witnesses'] ongoing fear of [the defendant]" – "had no bearing on this issue." Id. Rather than present these 
details, "the State could have elicited a much less elaborate recounting of the prior incidents, greatly limiting testimony to the aspects of the incidents that ostensibly bore on [the defendant's] state of mind." Id. at 473, 463 P.3d at 1130; see 
also id., 463 P.3d at 1130 ("the number of prior incidents should have been limited to the minimum sufficient to obtain the asserted probative value the conduct offered"). Ultimately, the court concluded that "the number of prior incidents and the involved circumstances had a high potential to rouse the jury to overmastering hostility against [the defendant]." Id. at 474, 
463 P.3d at 1131 (internal quotation marks omitted) (citing State v. Behrendt, 124 Hawai# i 90, 106, 237 P.3d 1156, 1172 (2010)). 
Here, in contrast, just one prior bad act – the chair 
incident – was admitted into evidence, and that act, like the present offense, involved domestic violence directed at the CW. In addition, no prejudicial details (e.g., resulting injury to, and fearful reactions by, the CW) were elicited. Rather, consistent with the court's admonition in Gallagher, the State elicited "a much less elaborate recounting of the prior incident[]," which bore on the context of Feliciano and the CW's relationship, and was probative of their respective credibility during trial. See supra. In short, here, the narrow testimony 
regarding the chair incident was higher in probative value, with a much lower potential for prejudicial effect, than the prior-bad-act evidence that was ruled inadmissible in Gallagher. 
In addition, immediately before the CW's rebuttal 
testimony regarding the chair incident, the Family Court gave the jury a limiting instruction, which properly informed the jury 
19 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the evidence, if believed, could be considered only on the 
issue of the parties' relationship, and must not be considered to determine that Feliciano was a person of bad character. The jury is presumed to follow the trial court's instruction, and the limiting instruction served to mitigate any unfair prejudice resulting from the evidence of the chair incident. See Locken, 
134 Hawai# i at 381, 341 P.3d at 1181; see also Richards, 879 
N.W.2d at 153 ("The district court followed 'the better practice' and gave the jury a limiting instruction curtailing the danger of unfair prejudice." (citing State v. Bayles, 551 N.W.2d 600, 608 (Iowa 1996))). 
Feliciano argues that the limiting instruction was 
"nullified" by another limiting instruction that the Family Court provided in its final instructions to the jury before deliberation. That instruction stated: 
THE COURT: . . . You have heard evidence that the defendant 
at another time may have engaged in other acts. This evidence, if believed by you, may be considered only on theissue of defendant's motive to commit the offense charged.Do not consider this evidence for any other reason. You must not use this evidence to conclude that because the defendant at other times may have engaged in other acts thathe is a person of bad character and, therefore, must havecommitted the offense charged in this case. In consideringthe evidence for the limited purpose for which it has beenreceived, you must weigh it in the same manner as you wouldall other evidence in this case and consider it along withall other evidence in this case. 
Feliciano contends that this "'motive' instruction," when read in 
conjunction with the limiting instruction that was given before the CW's rebuttal testimony, was confusing and misleading. 
We note that Feliciano did not object to this 
instruction during trial, and, on appeal, he does not assert any alleged deficiency in the instruction as a point of error.
13/ He 
merely contends that it undermined the efficacy of the earlier limiting instruction. We disagree. 
Immediately prior to giving the "motive instruction," 
the Family Court provided the following instruction to the jury: 
Several times during the trial, I've told you that
certain evidence was allowed in this trial for a particular 
13/ Indeed, Feliciano requested that the Family Court's jury
instructions include Instruction 2.03, Other Crimes, Wrongs or Acts from the
Hawai #i Pattern Jury Instructions - Criminal. 
20 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
and limited purpose. When you consider that evidence, you
must limit your consideration to that purpose. 
This instruction evoked the court's earlier limiting instruction, 
given immediately before the CW's testimony regarding the chair incident, which instructed the jury that evidence of Feliciano's "other wrongs," if believed, could be considered only on the issue of the relationship of the parties and not to determine that Feliciano was a person of bad character. 
In contrast, the subsequent "motive instruction" 
referred to evidence that Feliciano may have engaged in "other acts," which, if believed, could be considered only on the issue of Feliciano's motive to commit the offense charged. We do not read this instruction as referring to the "other wrong," i.e., the chair incident, about which the CW testified. There was also testimony regarding other acts of Feliciano (e.g., an alleged substance abuse problem) that may have been relevant to Feliciano's motive or intent to commit the offense. The "motive instruction" did not nullify the prior limiting instruction that the Family Court gave to mitigate any unfair prejudice resulting from the evidence of the chair incident. 
III. CONCLUSION 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Family Court did not 
abuse its discretion in allowing the State (1) to cross-examine Feliciano about the chair incident, and (2) to call the CW to rebut Feliciano's testimony denying the chair incident. We therefore affirm the Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence, entered on June 2, 2017, in the Family Court of the Third Circuit. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, August 31, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
21 
William H. Jameson, Jr.,Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant. 
Linda L. Walton,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Hawai# i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 