 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-11-0000549
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
' OF THE STATE OF HAWAII 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ALDEN ASAO IHA, Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
JASE A. VENIEGAS, Defendant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR NO. 09-1-1762)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Alden Asao Iha (Iha) appeals from
 
the Amended Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence
 
(Amended Judgment) entered on July 20, 2011, by the Circuit Court
 of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 Plaintiff-Appellee State
 
of Hawai' i (State) charged Iha by felony information with second-
degree theft, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 708-831(1)(b) (Supp. 2012).
2 The State alleged that Iha did
 
1
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 
2 HRS § 708-831(1)(b) provides: 
(1) A person commits the offense of theft in the second
degree if the person commits theft:
 
. . .
 
(b)	 Of property or services the value of which exceeds
$300[.]
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"intentionally receive, retain or dispose of" property of the
 
complaining witness (CW), which exceeded $300 in value, knowing
 that the property had been stolen, with intent to deprive the CW
 of the property.
 
Iha's charge stemmed from the CW's observation of two
 
men stealing a surfboard and a standup paddle board from the CW's
 residence at about 11:30 p.m. While the theft was in process,
 the CW told his wife to call 911. Iha was stopped by the police
 a short time later, after he was seen driving a Ford Bronco with
 the CW's two boards sticking out the back. Jase A. Veniegas
 (Veniegas) and Tiare Kuehnl (Kuehnl) were passengers in Iha's
 vehicle.
 
After a jury trial, Iha was found guilty as charged.
3
 
The Circuit Court sentenced Iha to five years of probation,
 subject to the special condition that he serve one year of
 imprisonment.
 
On appeal, Iha contends: (1) there was insufficient
 
evidence to support his conviction; (2) the Circuit Court erred
 in admitting the testimony of a police appraiser regarding the
 value of the CW's property; (3) the Circuit Court erred in
 preventing Iha from questioning the lead detective about Kuehnl's
 statements to the detective and whether the detective recommended
 charging her; (4) the Circuit Court erred in setting aside its
 prior order directing the State to return Iha's Ford Bronco; and
 (5) the Circuit Court erred in denying Iha's request for the
 return of his posted bail. 
As explained below, we affirm Iha's conviction and
 
sentence, but we remand the case for further proceedings with
 respect to the disputes over Iha's Ford Bronco and his posted
 bail.
 
3
 Prior to Iha's trial, Veniegas, who had been charged in separate
counts of the same felony information as Iha, pleaded guilty to the reduced
charge of second-degree burglary and guilty as charged to second-degree theft.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
We resolve the issues raised by Iha on appeal as
 
follows:
 
A.
 
Iha argues that there was insufficient evidence to show
 
that he intended to receive, retain, or dispose of the CW's
 
surfboard and standup paddle board, knowing that they had been
 stolen, and that he had exercised any control over them. We
 disagree.
 
The CW testified that at about 11:30 p.m., he looked
 
out his bedroom window and saw two male figures carrying his
 standup paddle board. The CW ran to check on his boards and
 discovered that two of his boards were missing. The CW went to
 the front of his residence and he saw a Ford Bronco parked on the
 street with his two boards sticking out the back. The CW ran to
 the Bronco and slapped the back of the Bronco with his hand as it
 pulled away. The Bronco did not stop but drove away with its
 lights off. A short time later a police officer stopped the
 Bronco. Iha was driving. 
At trial, Iha testified that he dropped off Veniegas
 
and Kuehnl on the CW's street and later came back to pick them
 up. When Iha came back, he saw them standing on the side of the
 street with two surfboards, which they loaded into his Bronco. 
Iha testified that at this point, he did not know that the boards
 were stolen, but that he came to realize the boards were stolen
 when a man approached the Bronco and hit the car as Iha drove
 away. In his post-arrest statement to the police, however, Iha
 admitted that he knew Veniegas and Kuehnl were going to "rip"
 something, but that he agreed to drive them because it was his
 understanding that they would give him money. Iha testified that
 once he realized the boards were stolen, he pulled over and told
 Veniegas and Kuehnl to get out and take the boards, but they
 refused. Iha testified that his plan was then to simply drive
 Kuehnl to her home. He admitted, however, that when the police
 pulled over the Bronco, with Iha, Kuehnl, and Veniegas inside, he
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was in Kahala, which is in the opposite direction from Kuehnl's
 
house, his purported destination. According to Iha's testimony,
 he and Veniegas were the only males in the Bronco when he was
 pulled over.
 
We conclude that when viewed in the light most
 
favorable to the State, there was sufficient evidence to support
 Iha's conviction.
 
B.
 
The Circuit Court did not err in admitting the
 
testimony of a police appraiser regarding the value of the CW's
 stolen boards. To prove second-degree theft, the State was
 required to establish that the property stolen exceeded $300 in
 value. The CW testified that the boards stolen were (1) a 10­foot "BT" brand longboard he had bought several years earlier for
 about $700; and (2) a 11'6" "Naish" standup paddle board, which
 he received as a gift a year before, but had cost about $1,500
 brand new.
 
The Circuit Court also admitted the testimony of
 
Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Sergeant Dwayne Takayama
 (Sergeant Takayama) that the fair market value of the standup
 paddle board and 10-foot surfboard were $1,000 and $200,
 respectively. Sergeant Takayama had been trained and certified
 to appraise property, had appraised items in 200 to 300 cases,
 and had testified as an expert appraiser 20 to 25 times. 
Sergeant Takayama based his appraisal on a verbal description of
 the boards, and research he had done on eBay, craigslist, and
 local "Buy & Sells." He confirmed his opinion as to the boards'
 appraised value after viewing photographs of the boards at trial. 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in admitting the
 testimony of Sergeant Takayama regarding the value of the CW's
 boards.
 
C.
 
Iha argues that he was denied a fair trial because the
 
Circuit Court prevented him from challenging the credibility of
 the statement Kuehnl made to HPD Detective Laurie Takamoto
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Detective Takamoto) or inquiring about any "favorable
 
consideration" given to Kuehnl by the government. Specifically,
 Iha was prevented from questioning Detective Takamoto about
 Kuehnl's out-of-court statement to Detective Takamoto and whether
 Detective Takamoto recommended that Kuehnl be charged with any
 offense. 
Kuehnl did not testify at trial and the State did not
 
attempt to introduce any of Kuehnl's out-of-court statements. 
Iha has not shown the relevance of the questions he was prevented
 from asking, and we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err
 in sustaining the State's objections to those questions.
 
D.
 
After Iha's arrest, the HPD on November 9, 2009, seized 
his Ford Bronco for administrative forfeiture. The first attempt at administrative forfeiture was terminated, apparently because HPD failed to send a written request for forfeiture to the Office of the Prosecuting Attorney, City and County of Honolulu (Prosecutor's Office), within 30 days of the seizure as required by HRS § 712A-7(4) (1993). On February 1, 2010, the second attempt at administrative forfeiture was initiated. However, on April 21, 2010, the Department of the Attorney General, State of Hawai'i (Attorney General), dismissed the Prosecutor's Office's 
petition for administrative forfeiture, without prejudice, because the vehicle identification number in the caption was incorrect. On April 28, 2010, the third attempt at administrative forfeiture was initiated. The Prosecutor's Office filed a petition for administrative forfeiture with the Attorney General, and on May 6, 2010, Iha filed his opposition to the petition. The record in this case, however, does not contain any further information on the outcome of the third attempt at administrative forfeiture. 
Meanwhile, on December 10, 2009, Iha filed a motion in
 
this case for the return of his Bronco. The prosecutor did not
 object to Iha's motion. On January 12, 2010, the Circuit Court
 entered an order granting Iha's motion and ordering that the
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Bronco be returned to Iha forthwith (Order to Return Bronco). On
 
March 8, 2010, Iha filed a motion to compel the State to return
 the Bronco (Motion to Compel Return of Bronco) when the HPD,
 apparently citing forfeiture proceedings, refused to comply with
 the Circuit Court's Order to Return Bronco. On March 23, 2010,
 the State filed a motion to set aside the Order to Return Bronco
 (Motion to Set Aside Order to Return Bronco), arguing that due to
 administrative forfeiture proceedings, the Circuit Court was
 divested of jurisdiction to order the return of the Bronco. On
 June 15, 2010, the Circuit Court entered an order granting the
 State's Motion to Set Aside Order to Return Bronco. The Circuit
 Court ruled that it was granting the State's motion because the
 Circuit Court "lacked subject matter jurisdiction" to issue the
 Order to Return Bronco, when it issued the order.
4
 
On appeal, Iha argues that the Circuit Court erred in 
granting the State's Motion to Set Aside Order to Return Bronco. Iha contends that the Circuit Court's prior Order to Return Bronco was "res judicata" and therefore the Circuit Court could not set it aside. However, final judgment had not been entered in the case when the Circuit Court granted the State's Motion to Set Aside Order to Return Bronco. Accordingly, we conclude that the doctrine of res judicata did not preclude the Circuit Court from reconsidering its prior Order to Return Bronco. See Cho v. 
State, 115 Hawai' i 373, 383-84, 168 P.3d 17, 27-28 (2007) 
(holding that a trial court has the inherent power to reconsider, modify, or rescind interlocutory orders prior to the entry of final judgment). 
We further conclude, however, that the Circuit Court's
 
reason for setting aside the Order to Return Bronco -- that it
 lacked subject matter jurisdiction to enter the order -- was
 erroneous under the facts of this case. The State acknowledges
 
4
 The Circuit Court mistakenly referred to the date of the Order to
Return Bronco as January 21, 2010, rather than the correct date of January 12,
2010.
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the first attempt at administrative forfeiture was
 
terminated due to "time constraints," apparently because the HPD
 failed to send a written request for forfeiture to the
 Prosecutor's Office within 30 days of the seizure as required by
 HRS § 712A-7(4). It therefore appears that there was no validly
 pending administrative forfeiture proceeding at the time the
 Circuit Court issued its Order to Return Bronco which could
 possibly have served to divest the Circuit Court of jurisdiction
 to issue the Order to Return Bronco.
5 Accordingly, the Circuit
 
Court's reason for granting the State's Motion to Set Aside Order
 to Return Bronco was erroneous. 
As noted, the record does not reflect the outcome of
 
the third attempt at administrative forfeiture, and those
 proceedings may be relevant to the dispute over the Bronco raised
 in this case. Under these circumstances, we vacate the Circuit
 Court's order granting the State's Motion to Set Aside Order to
 Return Bronco and remand the case for further proceedings. On
 remand, the Circuit Court may consider the results of the
 administrative forfeiture proceedings along with any other
 relevant evidence in addressing the parties' claims regarding the
 Bronco. 
E.
 
After Iha was indicted, the Circuit Court set bail at
 
$11,000. Michael Iha (Michael) posted the $11,000 bail in cash. 
When Iha failed to appear for sentencing, the Circuit Court
 issued a bench warrant on May 4, 2011, and forfeited Iha's bail. 
On May 26, 2011, Iha filed a motion to set aside the bench
 warrant, to reinstate his bail, and to reschedule sentencing. 
However, he was arrested on the bench warrant that same day. At
 the rescheduled sentencing, the Circuit Court did not rule on
 Iha's motion, but found that it was "moot."
 
5
 Given the facts of this case, we do not address the issue of whether
the Circuit Court would have jurisdiction to order the return of property that
was the subject of a validly pending administrative forfeiture proceeding.
 
7
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Iha argues that the Circuit Court erred in denying his 
request for the return of the $11,000 cash bail posted by
 
6
Michael. HRS § 804-51 (Supp. 2012)  provides that when a court
"forfeits any bond or recognizance given in a criminal cause,"
 
the court shall immediately enter judgment in favor of the State
 and cause execution to issue thereon after thirty days from the
 date notice of the judgment is given to the surety on the bond,
 unless within that thirty-day period, the principal or surety
 files a motion showing good cause why execution should not issue
 upon the judgment. 
The State acknowledges that "[t]here does not appear to
 
be a written order forfeiting bail or any evidence as to whether
 Michael was given notice[.]" Without a record of notice, it is
 unclear when the thirty-day clock began. Additionally, the State
 acknowledges that "there is no written order denying a motion to
 set aside bail forfeiture."
 
6
 HRS § 804-51 provides in relevant part:
 
Whenever the court, in any criminal cause, forfeits any bond
or recognizance given in a criminal cause, the court shall
immediately enter up judgment in favor of the State and against
the principal or principals and surety or sureties on the bond,
jointly and severally, for the full amount of the penalty thereof,
and shall cause execution to issue thereon immediately after the
expiration of thirty days from the date that notice is given via
personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the surety or sureties on the bond, of the entry of the judgment
in favor of the State, unless before the expiration of thirty days
from the date that notice is given to the surety or sureties on
the bond of the entry of the judgment in favor of the State, a
motion or application of the principal or principals, surety or
sureties, or any of them, showing good cause why execution should
not issue upon the judgment, is filed with the court. If the
 motion or application, after a hearing held thereon, is sustained,
the court shall vacate the judgment of forfeiture and, if the
principal surrenders or is surrendered pursuant to section 804-14
or section 804-41, return the bond or recognizance to the
principal or surety, whoever shall have given it, less the amount
of any cost, as established at the hearing, incurred by the State
as a result of the nonappearance of the principal or other event
on the basis of which the court forfeited the bond or
 recognizance. If the motion or application, after a hearing held
thereon, is overruled, execution shall forthwith issue and shall
not be stayed unless the order overruling the motion or
application is appealed from as in the case of a final judgment.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The record does not show that the Circuit Court ordered
 
the forfeiture of Iha's bail in compliance with HRS § 804-51 or
 
that the Circuit Court considered whether there was good cause
 for setting aside the bail forfeiture. Accordingly, we remand
 the case to the Circuit Court for determination of whether Iha
 demonstrated good cause to set aside the forfeiture of his bail. 
II.
 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Amended Judgment with
 
respect to Iha's conviction and sentence. We vacate the order
 granting the State's Motion to Set Aside Order to Return Bronco,
 and we remand the case for further proceedings consistent with
 this Summary Disposition Order with respect to Iha's Ford Bronco
 and the forfeiture of his bail.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 30, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Andre' S. Wooten 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Brian R. Vincent Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9
 