 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000579 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
GABRIEL STAN, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CRIMINAL NO. 1CPC-17-0001113) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Gabriel Stan (Stan) appeals from 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's  (C
ircuit Court) Amended 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Amended Judgment) entered on 
May 24, 2018.  Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i (State) 
charged Stan via Complaint  filed on August 14, 2017 with Robbery 321
1 The Honorable Fa'auuga L. To'oto'o presided. 
2 Stan's Notice of Appeal filed July 20, 2018 appealed from the
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered on May 16, 2018, rather than from
the Amended Judgment entered May 24, 2018 which reflected the correct spellingof Stan's first name. We construe Stan's appeal as an appeal from the AmendedJudgment. See State v. Bohannon, 102 Hawai #i 228, 236, 74 P.3d 980, 987
(2003). 
3 The Complaint charged as follows: 
On or about August 7, 2017, in the City and County of
Honolulu, State of Hawai #i, GABRIEL STAN, while in the
course of committing theft, and while armed with a dangerousinstrument, did use force against the person of HanaOkuyama, a person who was present, with intent to overcomeHana Okuyama's physical resistance or physical power ofresistance and/or did threaten the imminent use of forceagainst the person of Hana Okuyama, a person who waspresent, with intent to compel acquiescence to the taking ofor escaping with the property, thereby committing theoffense of Robbery in the First Degree, in violation of
(continued...) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3(...continued) in the First Degree (Robbery First Degree) in violation of Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (
HRS) § 708-840(1)(b)(i) and/or § 708-
840(1)(b)(ii) against Hana Okuyama (Okuyama).  Following a jury trial, Stan was found guilty as charged and sentenced to a 
twenty-year term of imprisonment for Robbery First Degree in violation of HRS § 708-840(1)(b)(i)(2014).
4 
On appeal, Stan contends that: (1) the Circuit Court 
erred by failing to sua sponte instruct the jury on the included offense of Robbery in the Second Degree (Robbery Second Degree); 
(2) the Circuit Court abused its discretion when it denied Stan's 
motion for mistrial after a witness for the State used the word "victim" twice during testimony; and (3) Stan's right to a fair trial was violated due to prosecutorial misconduct based on the prosecutor's improper question during direct examination, which unfairly undermined Stan's identification defense. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude Stan's appeal is without merit.
(1) Included Offense Instruction 
In his first point of error, Stan contends that the 
Circuit Court erred when it failed to sua sponte instruct the 
jury on the included offense of Robbery Second Degree (Robbery 
Section 708-840(1)(b)(i) and/or Section 708-840(1)(b)(ii) of
the Hawai #i
 Revised Statutes. 
4 HRS § 708-840(1)(b)(i), Robbery First Degree, states in pertinent
part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of robbery in the
first degree if, in the course of committing theft ornon-consensual taking of a motor vehicle: 
. . . . (b) The person is armed with a dangerous instrument or a
simulated firearm and: 
(i) The person uses force against the person of anyone
present with intent to overcome that person's physicalresistance or physical power of resistance . . . . 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Second Degree) under HRS § 708-841(1)(a) (2014)5 because there 
was a rational basis in the evidence for the jury to consider 
that charge. Neither Stan nor the State requested an instruction for Robbery Second Degree. 
The Robbery First Degree subsection (1)(b)(i) offense 
at issue here and Robbery Second Degree both contain the common material element of using force against the other person with intent to overcome the other person's physical power of resistance, in the course of committing theft. The higher grade offense of Robbery First Degree requires an additional material element of proof that the perpetrator be "armed with a dangerous instrument." HRS § 708-840(2) defines "dangerous instrument" as any weapon or instrument "which in the manner it is used or threatened to be used is capable of producing death or serious bodily injury." Stan argues that the jury may have found that the knife used by Stan was not a "dangerous instrument" under the Robbery First Degree statute, HRS § 708-840(1)(b), because there was evidence from which the jury could infer the knife was not a "dangerous instrument" under State v. Radcliffe, 9 Haw. App. 628, 645, 859 P.2d 925, 935 (1993).
6 Stan argues that from Okuyama's 
testimony that Stan displayed the knife and pointed it at her chest, "the jury could have concluded that the knife being pointed at her chest was inadvertent or incidental." Stan urges that the jury "could have decided that, in the manner in which Stan held or used the knife, or threatened to use it, the 
5 HRS § 708-841(1)(a), Robbery Second Degree, provides that "[a]
person commits the offense of robbery in the second degree if, in the course
of committing theft" the person "uses force against the person of anyonepresent with the intent to overcome that person's physical resistance orphysical power of resistance[.]" 
6 In Radcliffe, we held that the trial court's instruction to the
jury in a Robbery First Degree case, that "[a] knife is a dangerousinstrument" was a misstatement of the law and improperly "took the question ofthe knife's use from the jury." 9 Haw. App. at 645, 859 P.2d at 935. We concluded, "[t]his was especially prejudicial to Defendant in view of[complainant]'s and [witness]'s trial testimony that Defendant was merelywaving the knife around and not holding it against [complainant]'s throat" asthey indicated in their previous statements to the police. Id. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence did not establish it was a 'dangerous instrument' beyond 
a reasonable doubt." 
Where an omission of jury instructions is at issue on 
appeal, "the standard of review is whether, when read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." State v. 
Flores, 131 Hawai# i 43, 57-58, 314 P.3d 120, 134-35 (2013) 
(internal citations, alterations, and quotation marks omitted). A "trial court is not obligated to charge the jury with respect to an included offense unless there is a rational basis in the evidence for a verdict acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and convicting him of the included offense." Id. at 50, 
314 P.3d at 127 (internal citations omitted). 
In this case, Okuyama testified that once she stepped 
outside the McDonald's on Kûhiô Avenue, a male she identified as Stan approached her after he had been following her, and when he came within a one-foot distance of her, Stan showed his knife, threatened her, and demanded her bag. Stan pulled Okuyama's bag, which was hanging from her arm, and pointed the knife directly at her chest, below her left shoulder. Stan's pulling caused Okuyama to fall when Okuyama did not let go of the bag. Okuyama fell from the steps outside the McDonald's and onto the ground. Okuyama's knees were scratched and bloody from the fall. Okuyama was "very scared." Stan ran away, but Okuyama saw him two to three hours later when the police had detained him, and she identified Stan as the male who had tried to take her bag. 
Okuyama's account of the robbery incident was 
corroborated by two eyewitnesses. Eyewitness Shangrila Peralta (Shangrila), a resident from Washington who was visiting Honolulu 
with her family for a wedding, testified that she saw a white 
male, whom she identified as Stan, pull shopping bags from an Asian female (Okuyama) who was screaming. Stan pulled Okuyama down off the steps of McDonald's while tugging at Okuyama's bag. As Okuyama fell to the ground, Shangrila told the male to stop. Stan paused and looked at Shangrila before running off. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Shangrila's brother, eyewitness Czardemund Peralta (Czar), also 
heard a loud scream and saw a male throw a Japanese female onto 
the ground. Czar saw a male holding a knife and struggling to pull the female's purse or shopping bag away from her, before he ran off. Czar identified the male as Stan. Czar immediately chased Stan down Kûhiô Avenue and Seaside Avenue. Czar said he chased Stan because he "actually thought [Stan] had stabbed her 'cause I saw the knife," and Czar didn't want Stan to run away. After checking to see that Okuyama was okay, Shangrila then ran after Czar to make sure he was okay. Later, Honolulu Police Department (HPD) officers recovered a white plastic bag from 
Shangrila which turned out to contain, a "[t]urquoise 
kitchen-type knife with an 8-inch blade," which was submitted as evidence. 
Shangrila testified that Stan had the white plastic 
bag in his hand during the incident. A bystander gave Shangrila the white plastic bag as she was chasing Czar and Stan, and the bystander told Shangrila that Stan had dropped it. 
Based on our review of the evidence as to the element 
of "dangerous instrument," there was no rational basis in the record for the jury to acquit Stan of Robbery First Degree and convict him of Robbery Second Degree. See Flores, 131 Hawai# i at 
50, 314 P.3d at 127. Stan's contention is without merit. 
(2) Motion for Mistrial 
In his second point of error, Stan contends that the 
Circuit Court abused its discretion by refusing to grant Stan's 
oral motion for a mistrial for a violation of a motion in limine, because the State's police officer witness used the word "victim" twice during his testimony. 
The first occurrence was when the 
officer described his arrival at the scene on August 7, 2017: 
Q Where did you proceed to from your location on
Kalakaua? 
A From that particular area, I went to Kalakaua
and Seaside, which is in Waikiki where H&M is
right now. That's where I saw some of the bystanders flagging me down about the incident,and the male had taken off from that area. So I then asked where did the incident occur, and theyled me or they told me that it happened on Kuhio 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at the McDonald's. So then I moved on from that 
area to the area where the victim was –-
Q Okay. 
A -- to figure out if she needed treatment first
and what happened. 
(emphasis added). Stan did not object at this point during the 
officer's testimony. When the second reference to the term "victim" occurred, defense counsel moved to strike the response, and the Circuit Court promptly did so, as follows: 
Q Okay. At that point what was the purpose of
detaining the defendant? 
A Since the defendant matched the description, I
just wanted to make sure that that was positively the
male that the victim had been looking for, we had beenlooking for. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Move to strike the response, Your
Honor. 
THE COURT: Okay. Part of the officer's 
description of the complainant as the victim, you
folks have to disregard that statement by the policeofficer. 
(emphases added). When Stan orally moved for a mistrial the 
following day, the Circuit Court denied the motion. 
"The denial of a motion for mistrial is within the 
sound discretion of the trial court and will not be upset absent a clear abuse of discretion." State v. Plichta, 116 Hawai# i 200, 
214, 172 P.3d 512, 526 (2007) (citing State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai# i 
405, 411, 984 P.2d 1231, 1237 (1999)). 
Counsels and witnesses 
should refrain from using the term "victim," as the term is "conclusive in nature and connotes a predetermination that the person referred to had in fact been wronged." State v. Mundon, 
129 Hawai# i 1, 26, 292 P.3d 205, 230 (2012) (citing State v. 
Nomura, 79 Hawai# i 413, 416, 903 P.2d 718, 721 (App. 1995)). 
Avoiding the use of the term "victim" in a trial is consistent with the principles of the "presumption of innocence and the maintenance of fairness and impartiality during the trial[.]" Id. In Mundon
, where two witnesses referred to the complainant 
as "victim" in their testimony, the supreme court found reversal 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the conviction was not warranted where "the use of the term 
'victim' in the limited circumstances of th[e] case was not prejudicial" to the defendant. Id. at 26, 292 P.3d at 230. In 
State v. Austin, 143 Hawai# i 18, 31, 422 P.3d 18, 31 (2018), the 
supreme court held in a murder case, where "there was no dispute as to whether [the decedent] had been the object of a crime, and the key issue at trial was the identity of the perpetrator, the State's use of the term 'victim' did not connote Austin's guilt." (brackets added) (emphasis in original). Under these circumstances, the supreme court concluded that the trial court did not err in permitting the State or its witnesses from referring to the decedent as "the victim" at trial. Id. 
In this case, while the police officer witness 
improperly used the term "victim" twice, the Circuit Court immediately struck the response and provided a curative instruction to the jury. Juries "are presumed to . . . follow all of the trial court's instructions." State v. Knight, 80 
Hawai# i 318, 327, 909 P.2d 1133, 1142 (1996) (citation omitted). 
The minimal use of the term "victim" in this case, by a single witness twice in his testimony, promptly cured by the Circuit Court, did not constitute prejudice warranting reversal of Stan's conviction. See Mundon, 129 Hawai# i at 26, 292 P.3d at 230. 
Similar to the situation in Austin, where there was no dispute in this case that Okuyama had been the object of a robbery, and the key issue at trial was identification, a single witness's use of the term "victim" twice during his testimony, did not connote Stan's guilt. See Austin, 143 Hawai# i at 31, 442 P.3d at 31. 
There was no abuse of discretion by the Circuit Court in denying Stan's motion for mistrial under these circumstances. See id.; 
Plichta, 116 Hawai# i at 214, 172 P.3d at 526. 
(3) Violation of the Motion in Limine 
In his third point of error, Stan contends that he was 
denied his right to a fair trial and suffered from prosecutorial 
misconduct when the State's improper question led an HPD officer to testify that the knife recovered in the robbery investigation 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was the same knife the officer observed in Stan's possession 
earlier on the same day of the incident, in violation of a motion in limine. Stan argues that because his defense at trial was misidentification, the HPD officer's improper testimony undermined his defense. 
"The term 'prosecutorial misconduct' is a legal term of 
art that refers to any improper action committed by a prosecutor, however harmless or unintentional." State v. Maluia, 107 Hawai# i 
20, 25, 108 P.3d 974, 979 (2005)(italics and internal quotation marks in original). 
"Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are 
reviewed under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, which requires an examination of the record and a determination of 'whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of might have contributed to the conviction.'" Austin, 143 Hawai# i at 28, 422 P.3d at 28 (citing State v. 
Sawyer, 88 Hawai# i 325, 329 n.6, 966 P.2d 637, 641 n.6 (1998) 
(quoting State v. Balisbisana, 83 Hawai# i 109, 114, 924 P.2d 
1215, 1220 (1996))). 
"Prosecutorial misconduct warrants a new 
trial or the setting aside of a guilty verdict only where the actions of the prosecutor have caused prejudice to the defendant's right to a fair trial." Id. at 39-40, 422 P.3d at 
39-40 (quoting 
State v. Clark, 83 Hawai# i 289, 304, 926 P.2d 194, 
209 (1996) (quoting State v. McGriff, 76 Hawai# i 148, 158, 871 
P.2d 782, 792 (1994))). 
When determining whether the alleged 
prosecutorial misconduct rises to the level of reversible error, this court considers three factors: (1) the nature of the alleged misconduct; (2) the promptness or lack of a curative instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant. Id. at 40, 422 P.3d at 40. 
In this case, the State questioned the officer about 
the knife and the officer's prior observation of that knife, as follows: 
Q [(PROSECUTOR)]: Okay. Did you ever learn that a knife
had been used? 
A [(POLICE OFFICER WITNESS)]: Yes. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 Q And did you get a description of the knife? 
A Yes, I did. Q And what was the description of the knife that you
got? 
A It was a blue – bluish turquoise knife is the color
that it was, inside of a sheath. 
Q Did you – had you seen this knife before? A Yes, I have. Q And can you I guess – can you – in general terms can
you describe to the jury when you saw this turquoise
knife. 
A On the same day that I had gotten this flag-down, I
had arrested a male on that same morning, early in themorning. And that male that I had arrested in thatinstant, he relayed to me that he had a knife on hiswaistband. He then showed me the knife, exposed theknife, and it was that same bluish turquoise knifethat I observed in that investigation that night. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Objection. Move to strike.
Motions in limine. 
(emphasis added). During a bench conference, defense counsel 
referenced the following ruling made, prior to the start of trial, during a March 5, 2018 motions in limine hearing: 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: The specific ruling in motions in
limine is he could describe what he saw earlier that daybut not make the conclusion that it was the same knife. I think that was specifically ruled on by the Court. And he has since testified that it's the same knife. So I think that needs to be, No. 1, stricken. And you know,at this point I'm going to ask for a mistrial. 
THE COURT: The officer is about to testify --
isn't the testimony that the defendant is seen, observedwith the knife? 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Right. But I specifically asked
after that that he cannot make the conclusion that it's the same knife. 
[PROSECUTOR]: I can just ask him to -- to
describe. 
THE COURT: The Court will give you a
cautionary instruction to strike the part of theofficer's answer concluding that the knife is the sameknife. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Your Honor, while I'm here, I'm
going to make a motion for mistrial because it's aviolation of the motions in limine. This is a policeofficer and the prosecution should have advised him not 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to make this statement. 
THE COURT: All right. Motion denied. 
. . . . 
THE COURT: All right. Officer, resume your
chair before we continue. 
Ladies and gentlemen, part of the officer's
answer indicating the knife that he had seen earlier isthe same knife involved in the incident -- you folks areordered to disregard this part of the answer from thepolice officer. 
Okay? Thank you very much. 
(emphasis added). We apply the three factors to the trial record 
to determine whether the prosecutorial misconduct rises to the level of reversible error. See Austin, 143 Hawai# i at 40, 422 
P.3d at 40. 
The first factor requires consideration of the nature 
of the misconduct. The prosecutor's question to the officer as to whether he had seen "this knife before" violated an in limine ruling that prohibited the officer's conclusion that the knife recovered in the robbery case was the "same knife" as the one the officer had seen Stan in possession of earlier that same day.
  7
7 The Circuit Court's in limine  ruling was less than clear, on the
one hand precluding the "same knife" testimony, but also allowing the
prosecutor to elicit testimony from the officer who recovered "the knife thatturned out to be the same knife." The pertinent portion of the transcriptreads: 
THE COURT: So you may -- you may refer to this earlierincident minus any testimony going to defendant seenstabbing a tree. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Your Honor, I would also ask that the
conclusion that it's the same knife not be allowed. 
THE COURT: Take out the same knife, but knife of the same
color found -- describe the knife and this is the color of the knife, and then take it from there to your -- yourarresting officer who recovered the same, the knife thatturned out to be the same knife. 
[PROSECUTOR]: Okay. THE COURT: So -- okay. So earlier -- so State allowed to 
elicit testimony about a knife. Defendant arrested earlier as indicated by defense counsel and a knife was found onhim. Okay. That's fine minus the testimony about seeingthe defendant stabbing the tree earlier with the knife.Okay? 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: And just the description; right? 
(continued...) 
10 7(...continued) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(emphasis added). This was misconduct. See Maluia, 107 Hawai# i 
at 25, 108 P.3d at 979. 
Because the improper question constituted prosecutorial 
misconduct, we examine the second factor regarding the promptness 
or lack thereof, of any curative instruction to the jury. See 
Austin, 143 Hawai# i at 40, 422 P.3d at 40. Here, a curative 
instruction was promptly given to the jury, which was specifically told to disregard the "same knife" testimony. 
The 
jury is presumed to have complied with the Circuit Court's instruction. See State v. Underwood, 142 Hawai# i 317, 327, 418 
P.3d 658, 668 (2018) (when a trial court promptly addresses the impropriety, the improper remarks are generally considered cured by the court's instruction to the jury because "it is presumed that the jury abided by the court's admonition to disregard the statement.") (quoting State v. McGriff, 76 Hawai# i 148, 160, 871 
P.2d 782, 794 (1994)). 
The third factor requires consideration of the strength 
or weakness of the evidence against the defendant. See Austin, 
143 Hawai# i at 40, 422 P.3d at 40. The evidence against Stan in 
support of the Robbery First Degree charge was strong. 
Okuyama, 
a 19-year-old university student from Japan, was walking back to her hotel alone, when she noticed Stan followed her and "smiled at her," which made her "nervous" and "very scared." Okuyama unequivocally identified Stan as the person who had been following her and waiting for her outside of McDonalds, when he robbed her by threatening her with a knife and pointing it at her chest. Czar confirmed seeing Stan trying to pull Okuyama's bags 
THE COURT: Yes. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Okay. THE COURT: All right. 
So Ms. Prosecutor, please make note
of that. [PROSECUTOR]: Yes. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
from her while he had a knife. Czar saw this from a "pretty 
close" distance, "[m]aybe 15 feet" away. Eyewitness Shangrila also saw the incident between Stan and Okuyama from about 20 feet away and corroborated Okuyama's account of what occurred. Shangrila turned in a white plastic bag that another bystander had given to her after the chase, explaining that Stan had dropped it. Shangrila had also seen Stan holding the white bag during the robbery incident. Shangrila handed over the white bag to the police. The bag contained the knife. There was overwhelming evidence to support the jury's verdict that Stan was the person responsible for robbing Okuyama while threatening her with a knife. We conclude that any misconduct in this case does not rise to the level of reversible error, nor was Stan denied his right to a fair trial. See Austin, 143 Hawai# i at 39-40, 422 
P.3d at 39-40. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Amended 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, entered May 24, 2018, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i March 30, 2021. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge
12 William K. Li,for Defendant-Appellant 
Donn Fudo,
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 