NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0000063
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ANTHONY COSTANTE, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-1000)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Anthony Costante (Costante) appeals
 
from the "Order of Resentencing; Revocation of Probation"
 
(Revocation Order) entered on May 14, 2012, and the "Amended
 Order of Resentencing; Revocation of Probation" (Amended
 Revocation Order) entered on August 27, 2012 in the Circuit Court
 of the First Circuit (circuit court).
1 These orders revoked
 
Costante's probation under Hawaii's Opportunity Probation with
 Enforcement (HOPE) program and inter alia sentenced him to ten
 years imprisonment with credit for time served. 
After being granted HOPE probation, Costante violated
 
the terms of his probation two months later when he had a
 positive drug test. He was given fifteen days in jail for that
 first violation. Several weeks later, Costante again violated
 the terms of his probation and, as a result, the circuit court
 
1
 With regard to the orders on appeal, the Honorable Steven S. Alm
presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
revoked his probation because Costante had (1) refused to submit
 
to a urinalysis or failed to submit to urinalysis within two
 hours of instruction and (2) failed to report to his probation
 officer upon his release from custody for the first violation.
 
Although Costante filed an untimely notice of appeal on
 
February 1, 2013, we address the case on the merits.
2
 
Costante's point of error on appeal is that "[t]he
 
Trial Court improperly assumed the role as advocate for the State
 in directing the State to file a motion to revoke and further, in
 [revoking] Appellant's Hope Probation." Costante requests that
 this court vacate the Revocation Order and the Amended Revocation
 Order and remand the matter for proceedings before a different
 judge. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the applicable law, we resolve Costante's point of error
 as follows and affirm.
 I. Relevant Procedural History
 
In this case, Costante was charged with Robbery in the
 
Second Degree and he entered a plea of no contest. At a
 December 7, 2011 hearing before the Honorable Glenn J. Kim,
 Costante requested and was granted HOPE probation. In the
 "Judgment of Conviction and Probation; Sentence; Notice of Entry"
 (Judgment) filed on December 7, 2011, Costante was sentenced to
 five years HOPE Probation. At the sentencing hearing, Judge Kim
 explained the terms and conditions of Costante's probation, and
 Costante signed an acknowledgment form agreeing to the terms of
 his probation. 
The conditions of Costante's probation included inter
 
alia that: he report to his probation officer as ordered by the
 court or his probation officer; he not "possess, use, or consume
 
2
 The Hawai' i Supreme Court has stated, "[i]n criminal cases, we have
made exceptions to the requirement that notices of appeal be timely filed."
State v. Irvine, 88 Hawai' i 404, 407, 967 P.2d 236, 239 (1998). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
any alcohol, unprescribed or illegal drug"; he submit to
 
urinalysis and/or other alcohol/drug testing protocol as directed
 by his probation officer and that "[a]ny positive finding(s) [or]
 a failure to provide a valid specimen within two hours[] . . .
 may be considered prima facie evidence of probation violation[.]" 
On December 27, 2011, a HOPE Warning Hearing (Warning
 
Hearing) was held with the Honorable Steven S. Alm presiding. 
Among other things, the court warned Costante that if he had been
 the sentencing judge, Costante may have received the open term
 sentence rather than HOPE probation given Costante's history. 
The court further advised Costante that if he made mistakes
 during probation, the manner in which he handled those mistakes
 would be significant in how the court would view the
 circumstances.
 
Less than two months later, on February 16, 2012,
 
Probation Supervisor Gerald Oyasato filed a Motion for
 Modification of the Terms and Conditions of Probation (First
 Motion for Modification). In his affidavit, the probation
 supervisor asserted that Costante had a positive drug screen/test
 for Amphetamine and Methamphetamine on February 8, 2012. A
 hearing was held on February 21, 2012, before Judge Alm. 
Costante was sentenced to 15 days in jail, with credit for time
 served from the date of his arrest on the probation violation,
 and also ordered to see his probation officer when he got out of
 jail and to obtain and maintain mental health treatment and
 services. During the hearing, Judge Alm reminded Costante that
 if he had been the initial sentencing judge, Costante likely
 would have gone to prison. The court also warned Costante that
 the only reason Costante was getting 15 days in jail was because
 he did report. The court further advised Costante, "remember
 what I said, if you run away it probably means the open term the
 very first time." On the same day, the circuit court filed the
 Order Granting Motion for Modification of the Terms and
 Conditions of Probation sentencing Costante to inter alia 15 days
 of jail. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
About three weeks later, on March 12, 2012, Senior
 
Probation Officer Calvin J. Ung (Probation Officer Ung) filed a
 
Motion for Modification of the Terms and Conditions of Probation
 (Second Motion for Modification). In his affidavit, Probation
 Officer Ung attested that (1) on March 7, 2012, Costante refused
 to submit to a urinalysis or failed to submit to urinalysis
 within two hours of instruction, and (2) Costante failed to
 report to his probation officer upon his release from custody.
 
At an April 5, 2012 hearing on the Second Motion for
 
Modification, the circuit court continued the hearing and
 requested that the State file a motion to revoke probation. 
On April 13, 2012, the State filed a "Motion for
 
Revocation of Probation and Resentencing" (Motion for Revocation)
 requesting that the court "revoke probation granted to
 [Costante]" and "resentence him to imprisonment in full." 
A hearing was held on April 18, 2012, at which Costante
 
agreed that he violated conditions of his probation. Costante
 requested that he be permitted to enter a drug treatment program,
 while the State requested that Costante be sentenced to the open
 term of ten years imprisonment. The circuit court revoked
 Costante's probation and sentenced him to ten years imprisonment,
 with credit for time served. 
The circuit court filed the Revocation Order on May 14,
 
2012, and the Amended Revocation Order on August 27, 2012. 
II. Discussion
 
Costante asserts that the circuit court improperly took
 
on the role of prosecutor and advocate for the State by
 requesting that the State file a motion to revoke probation,
 thereby failing to act impartially. 
A reversal on grounds of judicial bias or misconduct 
is warranted only when it is demonstrated that the trial court proceedings were unfair. Aga v. Hundahl, 78 Hawai
'i 230, 242, 
891 P.2d 1022, 1034 (1995). "Unfairness, in turn, requires a clear and precise demonstration of prejudice." Id. Where a 
party offers no proof of the trial judge's alleged bias other 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
than the circumstantial evidence of the judge's adverse rulings,
 
"[s]uch evidence, without more, is insufficient to support a
 claim of judicial bias. Id.
 
The circuit court's request that the State file a
 
motion to revoke did not prejudice Costante. As Costante
 accurately points out, the circuit court did explicitly request 
that the State file a motion to revoke probation. However,
 pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statute ยง 706-625(1) (2013 Supp.), "on
 application of a probation officer, the prosecuting attorney, the
 defendant, or on its own motion, after a hearing," the court may
 revoke probation. (Emphasis added.) Because the circuit court
 could have simply revoked probation on its own motion, rather
 than by instructing the State to file a motion, Costante cannot
 show that he was prejudiced by the circuit court's request that
 the State file a motion to revoke.
 
Moreover, the circuit court did not err in revoking
 
Costante's probation. Costante claims that because the probation
 officer did not initially seek revocation in March 2012, the
 probation officer did not see the violations as substantial. 
This argument has no merit. As noted above, the terms of
 Costante's probation included, among other things, that he:
 report to his probation officer as ordered by the court or his
 probation officer; submit to urinalysis and/or other alcohol/drug
 testing protocol as directed by his probation officer and that
 "[a]ny positive finding(s) [or] a failure to provide a valid
 specimen within two hours[] . . . may be considered prima facie
 evidence of probation violation[.]" It is undisputed that
 Costante violated both of these conditions, and did so after
 already having had a previous probation violation and having been
 repeatedly warned that he must meet the terms of his probation. 
Moreover, notwithstanding the circuit court's explicit warning
 against running, Costante failed to report to his probation
 officer as required by the circuit court and was arrested
 pursuant to a bench warrant.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THEREFORE, the "Order of Resentencing; Revocation of
 
Probation," entered on May 14, 2012 and the "Amended Order of
 
Resentencing; Revocation of Probation," entered on August 27,
 2012 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 5, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Shawn A. Luiz 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6

 