 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000436 26-JAN-2024 07:51 AM Dkt. 150 SO 
NO.  
CAAP-21-0000436  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
TERI LYNN JENSEN PHILLIPS, Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
LEWIS BENJAMIN EUGENE PHILLIPS, Defendant-Appellant  
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY  COURT OF THE THIRD  CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO.  3DV19100218K)  
 
 SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.) 
Defendant -Appellant Lewis Benjamin Eugene Phillips 
(Husband) appeals, self -represented, from the Decree Granting 
Absolute Divorce ( Divorce Decree ) filed on July 6, 2021 and 
amended on July 1, 2022 by the Family Court of the Third Circuit 
(family court).1 
1 The Honorable Mahilani E.K. Hiatt presided over entry of the 
July 2021 Divorce Decree. The Honorable Kimberly B. Taniyama presided over 
entry of the July 2022 Amended Divorce Decree.   
 
   Husband raises three points of error on appeal. From 
what we are able to discern,  Husband contends that the family 
court erred: (1) by failing to allow him a continuance "to 
obtain substitute and effective counsel"; (2) "in failing to 
recognize the procuring of [his] agreement at mediation was the 
result of grossly ineffective assistance of counsel, the 
appearance of collusion between counsels and the mediator, and 
[his] detrimental reliance upon erroneous facts and 
information"; and (3) in entering the Divorce Decree because 
"the decree and property settlement resulting from mediation are 
patently unconscionable, one-sided and inequitable, [and] the result of duress and unfair surprise[.]"  2
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we affirm. 
I. Background 
Husband and Plaintiff -Appellee, Teri Lynn Jensen 
Phillips ( Wife), were married on August 3, 2004. On December 9, 
2019, Wife filed a complaint seeking a divorce. Husband and 
2 This court granted Appellee's Motion to Strike Husband's 
December 3, 2021 Opening Brief, and December 6, 2021 Schedule of Points and 
Error; Husband's September 23, 2022 Amended Opening Brief ( Amended Opening 
Brief) is the operative opening brief in this appeal. The Amended Opening 
Brief is non -compliant with Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP) 
Rule 28(b) in various respects. We apply a liberal interpretation to 
pleadings prepared by self -represented litigants, so as not to foreclose them 
from appellate review for failure to comply with court rules. See Erum v. 
Llego, 147 Hawaiʻi 368, 380 -81, 465 P.3d 815, 827 -828 (2020). The arguments 
Husband raises in his Amended Opening Brief are thus addressed to the extent 
discernible. 
2   
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wife have no children together, and this matter solely involves 
the division of Husband and Wife's marital assets and debt s. 
Prior to the court granting the Divorce Decree, 
Husband and Wife participated in mediation on January 26 -27, 
2021. Husband was represented by attorney Christopher Eggert, 
Esq. (mediation counsel ) at the mediation. The record reflects 
that the parties reached agreement to the terms of a mediated 
settlement agreement ( Mediation Agreement ). Husband assented to 
the terms of the Mediation Agreement at the mediation 
proceeding. However, Husband subsequently refused to sign the 
proposed Divorce Decree that i ncorporated the terms of the 
Mediation Agreement . Husband's mediation counsel filed a Motion 
to Withdraw as Counsel ( Motion to Withdraw ), representing that 
the relationship between Husband and mediation counsel had 
"irrevocably broken down." The court heard the Motion to 
Withdraw on March 29, 2021, and granted mediation counsel's 
request to withdraw. 
At the hearing on the Motion to Withdraw, Husband 
informed the family court that he had already retained William 
Reece, Esq. ( Reece) as his new attorney going forward, 
MR. OLSON [Wife's counsel]: . . . If Mr. Phillips 
does retain another attorney, if that attorney would 
contact me and I will be happy to discuss this matter with 
him. 
MR. PHILLIPS: Already been hired. 
MR. OLSON: And who is that, sir? 
MR. PHILLIPS: William. 
3   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: Is that the first name or the last name?  
 
MR. PHILLIPS: First name. I'm sure he knows who he 
is. He's a criminal justice attorney. Okay. All right. 
I don't have his last name memorized.  
 
THE COURT: Is he an attorney here in Kailua -Kona, 
sir?  
 
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes, on the Big Island.  
 
THE COURT: Is it William Reece, R -E-E-C-E?  
 
MR. PHILLIPS: William Reece.   
THE COURT: Okay. So if you have retained Mr. Reece, 
I think that that answers Mr. Olson's question. In which 
case, Mr. Olson will only be communicating with your 
attorney, just because you now are represented. So he wouldn't be having direct contact with you. I guess, Mr. 
Olson, you will reach out to Mr. Reece then?  
MR. OLSON: Yes, I will write him a letter and give 
Mr. Reece this April 15th deadline. Just to be clear, 
April 15th deadline, that's to reach a written agreement. 
It's not just to respond what's wrong with the agreement. 
So I expect a prompt response, a nd I would like to have, if 
there is going to be any agreement, be memorialized by the 
15th. 
THE COURT: Okay. Well, hopefully, if you reach out 
to Mr. Reece that you can get the ball rolling in that 
direction, Mr. Olson. 
Despite his representation to the family court and Wife's 
counsel, it appears that Husband had not in fact retained Ree ce. 
Husband proceeded self -represented during the remainder of the 
family court proceedings. 
The family court continued the matter to April 29, 
2021, at which time it heard Wife's Motion to Enforce Settlement 
Agreement ( Motion to Enforce ). At the evidentiary hearing on 
the Motion to Enforce, the family court accepted the video and 
audio recording from the mediation into evidence without 
objection from Husband. Husband submitted no written argument 
4   
 
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and presented no evidence, but was permitted by the family court 
to present his argument at the hearing as follows,  
THE COURT: Thank you. Mr. Phillips, anything you 
want to say with respect to the motion to enforce the 
settlement agreement?  
The Court would note that there was no memo filed in 
opposition, but I will give you an opportunity now, if you want to make your argument.  
MR. PHILLIPS: I would certainly appreciate that, and 
thank you.  
 
THE COURT: Okay. 
MR. PHILLIPS: My response will only take one to two 
minutes of the Court's time.  
 I have it written down, so please bear with me if the 
grammar doesn't come through appropriately. But before I 
can answer, I need to reveal a few things.  
 My current lawyer has not communicated successfully 
to me. The last conversation was several weeks back, with 
him informing me as to additional fees being required to 
take on my case.  
 
This required a discussion with Christopher Eggert, 
which I can only assume that they had a discussion.  
 
Here is what I believe may be a possible Big Island 
lawyer nepotism occurring. That's my opinion. The Court 
can ignore it, if you want.  
 
I feel I must contain [sic] an off -island Kaua[ ‘]i 
attorney, who will not be prejudiced in any way with 
regards to the mediation dialogue and divorce.  
 
I beg for a continuance to discover this attorney so 
that they can continue with the answer, but I will continue with what I have written down. Then you may answer at 
will.  
 
My last Covid shot will be May 2nd, just for 
information purposes only, and the next time (indiscernible) will be in court, I would prefer to be in 
court in personal attendance.  
 
Mediation was asked by your Honor on the original 
predecree relief hearing. Both counsels answered yes. I have it in writing where I would have preferred to have 
gone to court, but mediation was not my preferred course of 
action.  
5   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Because I was told by Mr. Eggert to keep quiet and 
(indiscernible) from your Honor, I could not voice my 
concerns for this during the court hearing.  
 
I was blind -sided in the mediation by what is called 
a Category -- 
THE COURT: Go ahead, sir. How much more time do you 
need? 
MR. PHILLIPS: Another minute. 
THE COURT: Okay. 
MR. PHILLIPS: I was blind -sided by what is called a 
Category 3, which I can prove without a shadow of a doubt 
that this does not apply to me. I attempted to settle 
under false pretenses.    
 
My attorney did not give me ample time during the 
meeting and was more concerned with leaving the meeting to 
work with other client's problem on my dime.  
 I had a home equity loan with (indiscernible) Federal 
Credit Union on a (indiscernible) with that both of our 
names were on property, completely excluded altogether in 
the mediation process.  
 She wishes to return to her motion to her state home 
to (indiscernible) items after the sale of that home, all 
of which were brought from Alaska.  
 
This was my choice to make a home for me -- by her. 
Excuse me. This was her choice to make home with me in New 
York state. My second home in Hawai [‘]i was on -- 
THE COURT: Mr. Phillips, what I want to hear is any 
objection to the motion to enforce the settlement 
agreement. 
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes. 
THE COURT: That's what's before the Court now. Can 
you address the motion, please? This is just saying you 
don't agree to what happened. I want to know specifically 
why you think the Court should not enforce the settlement 
agreement, please. 
MR. PHILLIPS: That I was --coerced, I guess. That I 
was blind -sided, and that there was property that was 
completely out of the mediation agreement. And I also did 
not wish to go to a mediation. I don't know how to answer 
that for you, your Honor. 
THE COURT: Okay. I think because you are unable to 
answer that and provide any evidence of that. 
6   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
So, Mr. Olson, any further argument or can the Court 
go ahead and rule? 
MR. OLSON: I would ask the Court to go ahead and 
rule. 
(Emphasis added.) 
After hearing Husband's argument, the family court 
orally granted Wife's Motion to Enforce.   The family court 
explained the basis for its enforcement of the Mediation 
Agreement as follows,  
[I]t is crystal clear to the Court that both parties were 
represented by counsel, certainly during the mediation, as 
well as the recording that the Court watched in full, in 
which Mr. Peters, Daniel Peters, the mediator, neutral 
mediator who facilitated th e mediation put on the record 
specifically all of the terms of the settlement agreement. 
It was clear, plain and unambiguous. 
    . . .. 
You [Husband] have presented no evidence of any 
fraud, misrepresentation, concealment, coercion, being 
blind-sided or any other misleading incidents.  
 
The Court would note that you [Husband] were 
attentive during the entire recording, that at the end of it in response to Mr. Peters' questions you indicated verbally affirmatively that you understood the allocation 
of the debts and the assets, quote, "exactly what we 
discussed, "  quote, " yes, let [sic] make this divorce 
happen."   You gave a thumbs up at the end of the recording.  
(Emphasis added.) 
   The family court entered its Order Granting Plaintiff 
Teri Lynn Jensen Phillips's Notice and Motion to Enforce 
Settlement Agreement and for Attorneys [sic] Fees on June 16, 
2021, and the Divorce Decree on July 6, 2021. The Divorce 
Decree memorialized the terms of the mediation agreement.3  
3 Husband did not appeal the family court's Order granting the 
Motion to Enforce. He appealed from the Divorce Decree. On June 7, 2022, 
(continued . . .) 
7   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We address Husband's three contentions of error in 
turn.  
  
 II. Discussion 
A. Husband's Request for a Continuance 
  Husband contends that the family court erred by 
failing to allow him a continuance "to obtain substitute and 
effective counsel." We review the family court's ruling under 
the abuse of discretion standard.  
[T]he family court possesses wide discretion in making its 
decisions and those decision [s] will not be set aside 
unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus, [an 
appellate court] will not disturb the family court's 
decisions on appeal unless the family court disregarded 
rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial 
detriment of a party litigant and its decision clearly 
exceeded the bounds of reason. 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawaiʻi 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(quoting In re Doe, 95 Hawaiʻ i 183, 189-90, 20 P.3d 616, 622-23 
(2001)).  
  At the outset, we note that Husband represented to the 
family court, at the March 29, 2021 hearing on the Motion to 
Withdraw, that he had retained new counsel. The family court proceeded on Husband's representation that he was being 
represented by attorney Reece. Husband appeared self-
(. . . continued) 
this court issued an "Order for Temporary Stay and Temporary Remand" to the 
family court because the Divorce Decree was not "final and appealable because 
it provides that it 'shall not be effective and shall have no legal effect 
whatsoever until it is sign ed by both parties, ' but does not reflect the 
parties' signatures." The family court filed an Amended Decree Granting 
Absolute Divorce (Amended Divorce Decree ) on July 1, 2022. 
8   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
represented, however, at the April 29, 2021 hearing on the 
Motion to Enforce. 
While Husband requested a continuance at the Motion to 
Enforce, purportedly to retain "an off-island Kaua[ʻ]i attorney " 
due to "Big Island lawyer nepotism," the record reflects that he 
presented argument at the hearing. In response to the family 
court's question as to "why you think the Court should not 
enforce the settlement agreement," Husband alleged that he was 
"coerced," "blind -sided," "that there was property that was 
completely out of the mediation agreement[,]" and that he "also 
did not wish to go to a mediation." The family court noted the 
lack of evidence to support those allegations . 
We conclude, on this record, that the family court did 
not abuse its discretion by not continuing the hearing on the 
Motion to Enforce. 
B. Husband's Allegations of Ineffective Assistance of Counsel, 
Collusion, and Detrimental Reliance 
Husband contends the family court "erred in failing to 
recognize the procuring of [his] agreement at mediation was the 
result of grossly ineffective assistance of counsel, the 
appearance of collusion between counsels and the mediator, and 
[his] detrimental reliance upon erroneous facts and information 
as to applicable law under the facts." Husband contends, 
without identifying any supporting evidence, "that but -for the 
restrictions of COVID, the imposed remote litigation scen ario 
9   
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
outlined above,4 and the imperative nature of counsel's 
inaccurate advice, [Husband] would have never allowed such an 
obviously unfair settlement to have occurred." 
We construe Husband's contention of ineffective 
assistance of counsel as a contention that his mediation 
counsel's alleged ineffectiveness, and his mistaken reliance on 
counsel's advice, caused him to enter into an unfavorable 
Mediation Agreement. Husband thus appears to have sought, on 
this basis, a unilateral recission of the Mediation Agreement. 
Husband does not point to any evidence that would support his 
allegations of ineffective assistance, "collusion" between 
counsel and the mediator, or hi s "detrimental reliance" on 
"erroneous facts and information" provided to him by counsel. 
At the outset, we note that "[t]he family court in 
divorce cases must enforce all valid and enforceable premarital 
agreements, marital agreements, and/or divorce agreements." 
Epp v. Epp, 80 Hawaiʻi 79, 88, 905 P.2d 54, 63 (App. 1995); see 
also Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 572-22(c) (Supp. 2021) 
("All contracts made between spouses, whenever made, whether 
before or after June 6, 1987, and not otherwise invalid because 
of any other law, shall be valid."). 
4 The record reflects that the mediation proceedings were conducted 
remotely during the COVID -19 pandemic, and that the mediator, Husband, Wife, 
and Husband and Wife's respective counsel appeared at the video conference. 
The family court hearing on the Motion to Withdraw was conducted remotely, 
with all parties appearing via Zoom. The hearing on the Motion to Enforce 
was conducted in -person, but Husband was permitted to appear via Zoom . 
10   
 
  
 
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Contrary to Husband's contention that he was not a 
willing participant in mediation, the record reflects his active 
and affirmative participation at the mediation proceeding and 
his verbal consent to the terms of the Mediation Agreement. The 
recording of the mediation proceeding, which was introduced into 
evidence and viewed by the family court at the hearing on the 
Motion to Enforce, shows that Husband nodded his head several 
times, raised issues, and expressly agreed to the allocation of 
assets and debt s as being "exactly what we discussed." Husband 
affirmatively represented to the mediator that he understood the 
terms of the Mediation Agreement that he was entering into. We 
find no evidence in the record that Husband objected to the 
mediation proceedin g, or that he was unsatisfied with his 
counsel's assistance or advice during the mediation proceeding. 
Moreover, the record does not support a contention 
that Husband's active and affirmative participation during the 
mediation resulted from his "detrimental reliance" on "erroneous 
facts or information" presented during the course of the 
mediation proceedi ng. Husband's conclusory allegations to the 
family court below, that "[the] entire recording [of the 
mediation proceeding] is moot, because I never wished to go to 
mediation, and [Husband's mediation counsel] had fired a whole 
bunch of stuff at me the day before, which I had no idea what 
any of it meant[,]" are not supported by the record. In the 
absence of any supporting evidence, Husband presents no 
11   
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
discernible argument of ineffective assistance or detrimental 
reliance. See  In re Guardianship of Carlsmith, 113 Hawaiʻi 236, 
246, 151 P.3d 717, 727 (2007)  ("[An appellate]  court may 
disregard a particular contention if the appellant makes no 
discernible argument in support of that position.")  (cleaned 
up). We conclude that the family court did not err in enforcing 
the Mediation Agreement through entry of the Divorce Decree.  
C. Husband's Allegations of Unconscionability 
  Husband contends on appeal that the Divorce Decree was 
"unconscionable, one-sided and inequitable, [and] the result of duress and unfair surprise," claiming that he did not 
voluntarily and knowingly enter into the Mediation Agreement. 
"Unconscionability  is a question of law this court reviews de 
novo." Balogh v. Balogh, 134 Hawaiʻ i 29, 37, 332 P.3d 631, 639 
(2014).  
  Even assuming that Husband properly preserved his 
argument that the Divorce Decree is unconscionable, one-sided, and inequitable,
  his argument lacks merit. Husband relies 
entirely on Balogh  to support his contention of 
unconscionability. The Balogh  court, in recognizing that "the 5
5   Husband argued below, without any supporting evidence, that he 
was "blind- sided" and "attempted to settle under false pretenses." He did 
not specifically contend at the hearing on the Motion to Enforce that the 
Mediation Agreement was "unconscionable." "Legal issues not raised in the 
trial court are ordinarily deemed waived on appeal." Ass' n of Apartment 
Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort, Co.,  Ltd.,  100 Hawaiʻi 97, 107, 
58  P.3d 608, 618 (2002).  
12   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
family court must enforce all valid and enforceable postmarital 
and separation agreements[,]" explained that,  
[S]pouses may expressly contract for a different division 
of marital partnership property, and the family court must 
enforce all valid and enforceable agreements with regard to 
marital property division. See HRS § 572 -22 (2006) ("All 
contracts made between spouses . . . not otherwise invalid 
because of any other law, shall be valid.") [.] 
 . . . . 
A postmarital or separation agreement is enforceable if the 
agreement is not unconscionable and has been voluntarily 
entered into by the parties with the knowledge of the 
financial situation of the other spouse. 
 
 . . . . 
Unconscionability encompasses two principles: one -sidedness 
and unfair surprise. One -sidedness (i.e., substantive 
unconscionability) means that the agreement leaves a post -
divorce economic situation that is unjustly 
disproportionate . Unfair surprise (i.e., procedural 
unconscionability) means that one party did not have full 
and adequate knowledge of the other party's financial 
condition when the marital agreement was executed . A 
contract that is merely inequitable is not unenforceable. 
Id. at 39-41, 332 P.3d at 641 -43 (cleaned up ) (emphasis added). 
Husband's contentions of unconscionability, unfair 
surprise, and "one -sidedness" are not supported by the record. 
The record shows that, pursuant to the terms of the Mediation 
Agreement, real and personal property were divided between 
Husband and Wife. Debt s were also allocated between Husband and 
Wife. Both Husband and Wife separately approved, at the close 
of the mediation proceeding, the agreed -upon division of 
property and debt s outlined by the mediator. Husband does not 
demonstrate that the terms of the Mediation Agreement were 
"unjustly disproportionate," or that he "did not have full and 
13   
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
     
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
adequate knowledge of [Wife's] financial condition" at the time 
of mediation. 
Moreover, Husband's contention that the Mediation 
Agreement was reached under duress is not supported by the 
record evidence. In the absence of any supporting evidence, we 
cannot conclude that the family court erred in enforcing the 
Mediation Agreement th rough entry of the Divorce Decree. 
On this record, we conclude that the family court did 
not err in enforcing the terms of the Mediation Agreement 
through its entry of the Divorce Decree. 
III. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, the Family Court of the 
Third Circuit's Decree Granting Absolute Divorce, filed on 
July 6, 2021 and amended on July 1, 2022, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘i, January 26 , 2024. 
14  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
Lewis Benjamin Eugene Acting Chief Judge 
Phillips, 
Self-represented /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
Defendant-Appellant. Associate Judge 
Peter S.R. Olson, /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 