   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000010
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE INTEREST OF L.T. 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S No. 08-11683)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Appellant-Mother (Mother) appeals from the Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights, filed on January 6, 2011 in the
 
Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).1
 
On appeal, Mother challenges Findings of Fact Nos. 53,
 
57, 58, 59, 63, 64, 65, 66, 68, 69, 70, 73, 75, 100, 101, 102,
 
109, 110, 111, 112, 117, 118, 119, 120, 122, and 124 and
 
Conclusions of Law Nos. 10, 11, 12, and 13. Although Mother
 
challenges specific Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, she
 
does not provide individual arguments as to each challenged
 
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law. Instead, Mother
 
"objects to the Findings of Facts and Conclusions of Law on the
 
grounds that she is willing and able to provide a safe family
 
home for her child, with the assistance of a service plan and is
 
able to provide a safe family home, with the assistance of a
 
service plan, in the reasonable foreseeable future." "Mother
 
1
 The Honorable Bode A. Uale presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
further contends that she has engaged in court ordered services
 
which were designed to help her provide a safe family home for
 
her child, and therefore the trial court was in error by finding
 
by clear and convincing evidence that she could not provide a
 
safe family home for her child, even with the assistance of a
 
service plan, within a reasonable amount of time."
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Mother's points of error as follows:
 
Contrary to Mother's claim, there was clear and
 
convincing evidence that Mother was not presently willing and
 
able to provide her child, L.T., with a safe family home, even
 
with the assistance of a service plan and that it was not
 
reasonably foreseeable that Mother would become willing and able
 
to provide a safe family home, even with the assistance of a
 
service plan, within a reasonable period of time, which shall not
 
exceed two years from L.T.'s entry into foster care.
 
L.T. first entered foster care on January 31, 2008 due
 
to Mother testing positive for amphetamines, methamphetamine, and
 
marijuana. At the time, Mother acknowledged that she used
 
illegal drugs because it was a "long weekend." However, during
 
the permanent custody hearing nearly three years later, Mother
 
denied ever testing positive for drugs, including the test which
 
caused DHS to initiate this case. Although Mother self-reported
 
that she was clean and sober since 2009, Mother missed multiple
 
drug testing dates from 2009 to 2010, which she knew would be
 
presumed by DHS to be a positive drug test result. Despite
 
Mother's claim that she participated in AA/NA meetings from one
 
to three times a week, Mother did not know which of the twelve
 
step programs she was at and could not name any of the twelve
 
treatment steps. After nearly three years, Mother had not
 
completed substance abuse treatment and Mother did not learn from
 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the services that she participated in. Therefore, there was
 
clear and convincing evidence that Mother was not presently
 
willing and able to provide a safe family home, even with the
 
assistance of a service plan, due to her inability to address her
 
substance abuse problem. 
Mother did complete parenting and domestic violence
 
classes. However, Mother was also required to participate in
 
individual therapy. Mother's therapist concluded that Mother
 
would need to strengthen her support network, express new coping
 
skills and utilize them on a regular basis, and demonstrate she
 
has the ability to care for her son before being clinically
 
discharged. Mother's anticipated clinical discharge from
 
individual therapy was unknown nearly three years after L.T.
 
first entered foster custody and one year from the date which
 
Mother started individual therapy. 
Mother admitted that DHS intervened on three previous
 
occasions involving four other children. All four of the other
 
children are no longer in her care and custody. The prior
 
interventions in 1999, 2002, and 2007 were due to Mother's drug
 
abuse. This case was initiated due to Mother's drug abuse. 
Mother's history of substance abuse and present case show that
 
Mother is unable or unwilling to address her substance abuse
 
problem. Therefore, there was clear and convincing evidence that
 
it was not reasonably foreseeable that Mother would become
 
willing and able to provide a safe family home, even with the
 
assistance of a service plan, within a reasonable period of time. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, the Order Terminating Parental Rights, filed
 
on January 6, 2011 in the Family Court of the First Circuit is
 
affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 31, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Randal I. Shintani 
for Mother-Appellant Chief Judge 
Kristl K. Ishikane Mary Anne MagnierDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Petitioner-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4 