 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000652
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
RICHARD HOMER GIBSON, JR., Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-0105)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Richard Homer Gibson, Jr. appeals
 
from the Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, entered on
 
July 3, 2012 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit ("Circuit
 Court").
1 Gibson was found guilty of the lesser-included offense
 
of Assault in the Third Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised
 Statutes § 707-712 (2014), which is a misdemeanor. Gibson was
 sentenced to seven months incarceration and ordered to pay $55 to
 the Crime Victim Compensation Fund.
 
On appeal, Gibson argues that (1) there was
 
insufficient evidence to convict him, and (2) the Circuit Court
 abused its discretion in sentencing him to seven months
 imprisonment. Specifically, Gibson contends that the
 circumstances surrounding his conviction show that he was "trying
 to get out of a negative situation," that he is disabled and has
 a number of psychiatric medical conditions, and that he asked his
 attorney to withdraw prior to sentencing because he felt that he
 was not being adequately represented. Gibson adds that there is
 no evidence showing that he has a prior criminal record, that
 this is his first offense, and emphasizes that the offense is a
 misdemeanor. Generally, Gibson contends "when it is a first
 
1
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
offense, a person is given an opportunity to go on probation to
 
see how well they do." Gibson also asserts that he was provided
 with ineffective assistance of counsel at trial, so his sentence
 was tainted because trial counsel and Gibson were at odds. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Gibson's points of error as follows, and affirm:
 
(1) Contrary to Gibson's claim, when the evidence is 
viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution, as we must on appeal, there was sufficient evidence to support a prima facie case so that a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a reasonable doubt that Gibson committed Assault in the Third Degree. See State v. Grace, 107 Hawai
'i 133, 139, 111 P.3d 28, 
34 (App. 2005) (standard of review). 
There was testimony that Gibson was belligerent and 
dismissive when confronted about hitting the Complaining Witness's ("CW") vehicle while parking his car. After speaking with CW's husband inside the post office, Gibson got into his car, reversed, and then drove forward toward him. After stopping, Gibson looked at the CW, revved his engine, and drove his car into the CW, causing her to flip over the windshield and to land on the pavement. The CW testified that she suffered back pain when she landed. "[T]he mind of an alleged offender may be read from his acts, conduct and inferences fairly drawn from all the circumstances." State v. Stocker, 90 Hawai
'i 85, 92, 976 
P.2d 399, 406 (1999) (quoting State v. Sandino, 64 Haw. 427, 430, 642 P.2d 534, 536–37 (1982)) (internal quotation marks omitted). From Gibson's acts and conduct, and the inferences fairly drawn from all of the circumstances, sufficient evidence was presented for the Circuit Court to conclude that Gibson intended to cause bodily injury to the CW. 
(2) Gibson contends that the sentence in this case of 
seven months incarceration was an abuse of discretion, excessive, and cruel and unusual in violation of the United States and Hawai
'i constitutions. We first note that a court is authorized 
to sentence a person convicted of a misdemeanor to prison for as 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
much as one year. Haw. Rev. Stat. § 706-663 (2014). Therefore,
 
a sentence of seven months is not "so disproportionate to the
 conduct proscribed and . . . of such duration as to shock the
 conscience of reasonable persons or to outrage the moral sense of
 the community." See State v. Kumukau, 71 Haw. 218, 227, 787 P.2d
 
682, 687 (1990) (quoting State v. Freitas, 61 Haw. 262, 267-68,
 602 P.2d 914, 920 (1979)). 
The factors to be considered in imposing a sentence are
 
governed by HRS § 706-606 (2014).
2 Nothing in the statute
 
precludes a court from imposing a sentence of imprisonment on a
 defendant for his misdemeanor conviction although he lacks a
 prior criminal history.
 
Gibson also claims that he should not have been
 
sentenced to seven months incarceration because he suffers from
 physical and mental health issues. The documents in the record
 to which Gibson points relate to the court's pre-trial request
 
2	 HRS § 706-606 states:
 
Factors to be considered in imposing a sentence. The
 
court, in determining the particular sentence to be imposed,
shall consider:
 
(1)	 The nature and circumstances of the offense and
 the history and characteristics of the
defendant;
 
(2)	 The need for the sentence imposed:
 
(a)	 To reflect the seriousness of the offense,
to promote respect for law, and to provide
just punishment for the offense;
 
(b)	 To afford adequate deterrence to criminal
conduct;
 
(c)	 To protect the public from further crimes
of the defendant; and
 
(d	 
To provide the defendant with needed

educational or vocational training,
medical care, or other correctional
treatment in the most effective manner;
 
(3)
	 The kinds of sentences available; and
 
(4)	 The need to avoid unwarranted sentence
 disparities among defendants with similar
records who have been found guilty of similar
conduct.
 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 706-606.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
that he be evaluated for competency. The responsive medical
 
reports, then, only describe Gibson's condition in enough detail
 to support the conclusion that Gibson was competent to stand
 trial. Thus, Gibson has failed to demonstrate that the Circuit
 Court abused its discretion by failing to consider the factors
 under HRS § 706-606 and sentencing him to seven months
 imprisonment.
 
Finally, Gibson asserts that his sentencing hearing was 
"tainted" by ineffective assistance of trial counsel. In Hawai
'i, a "defendant has the burden of establishing . . . 1) 
that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." State v. 
Wakisaka, 102 Hawai
'i 504, 513-14, 78 P.3d 317, 326-27 (2003) 
(citations, footnote, and internal quotation marks omitted). However, Gibson presents no argument as to how the Circuit Court's sentencing decision was affected by his alleged disagreement with his trial counsel. As a result, Gibson has failed to demonstrate ineffective assistance of trial counsel. See State v. Kane, No. 28678, 2009 WL 826843 at *4 (Haw. Ct. App. Mar. 25, 2009) (rejecting ineffective assistance of counsel claims because appellant "fail[ed] to provide any discernable argument to support them."). 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Amended Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence, entered on July 3, 2012 in the Circuit
 Court of the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 13, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Daphne E. Barbee,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Jefferson R. Malate,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Hawai
'i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4

 