NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000746 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
U
.S. BANK TRUST, N.A., AS TRUSTEE FOR LSF9
MASTER PARTICIPATION TRUST, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
PATRICK LOWELL VERHAGEN; PATRICK LOWELL VERHAGEN,
TRUSTEE OF THE PATRICK LOWELL VERHAGEN REVOCABLE 
TRUST DATED OCTOBER 29, 1999, Defendants-Appellants,
and 
WELLS FARGO BANK, N.A., Defendant-Appellee,
and 
DOES 1 THROUGH 20, INCLUSIVE, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 16-1-0147(1))  
AMENDED SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Ginoza, Chief Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Patrick Lowell Verhagen 
and Patrick Lowell Verhagen, Trustee of the Patrick Lowell 
Verhagen Revocable Trust Dated October 29, 1999 (collectivelyVerhagen
) appeal from the Judgment entered on September 25, 2017, 
by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).  The 
Judgment was entered pursuant to the Circuit Court's "Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law; Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure 1
1 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Filed January 31, 2017" (Summary Judgment Order) also entered on 
September 25, 2017. 
On appeal, Verhagen argues the Circuit Court erred in 
granting summary judgment in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee U.S. 
Bank Trust, N.A., as Trustee for LFS9 Master Participation Trust (U.S. Bank), when there were genuine issues of material fact as 
to whether U.S. Bank had standing to bring a foreclosure action 
against Verhagen. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as well as the relevant legal authorities, we resolve Verhagen's points of error as follows, and we vacate and remand.
I. Background 
In its "Verified Complaint to Foreclose Mortgage" filed 
on March 23, 2016 (Verified Complaint), U.S. Bank alleged that 
Patrick Verhagen executed and delivered an Adjustable Rate Note 
(Note) dated September 24, 2007, to original lender Washington 
Mutual Bank, F.A. (Washington Mutual). The Verified Complaint 
further asserted that "[U.S. Bank] is the current holder of the 
Note with standing to prosecute the instant action by virtue of the blank indorsement to the Note, which thereby converted the Note to a bearer instrument, and because [U.S. Bank] is in possession of the indorsed in blank Note." The Verified Complaint also asserted that the Note was secured by a Mortgage, dated September 24, 2007, in favor of Washington Mutual, and that the Mortgage was subsequently assigned to JP Morgan Chase Bank (JPMorgan) via an assignment recorded on November 24, 2014, and 
then assigned to U.S. Bank via an assignment recorded on July 31, 
2015.
2 
Attached to the Verified Complaint is a "Verification 
to Foreclosure Complaint" executed by Julia Jackson (Jackson), an 
2 The Assignment of Mortgage recorded on November 24, 2014, states that
the Mortgage was assigned by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, as
receiver of Washington Mutual, to JPMorgan. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Authorized Signatory" of Caliber Home Loans, Inc. (Caliber), 
which "has the contractual right and responsibility to service 
the Loan on behalf of [U.S. Bank]." Jackson's verification states, in relevant part, that she reviewed the Verified Complaint and "hereby confirm[s] the factual accuracy of the statements contained therein to the best of my knowledge," that she has "verified and hereby confirm[s] possession of the original Note by Plaintiff," and that "[t]he Note is indorsed in blank, which thereby converted the Note to a bearer instrument." 
On January 31, 2017, U.S. Bank filed a motion for 
summary judgment and attached, inter alia, a declaration by Alyssa Salyers (Salyers), a "Foreclosure Document Specialist II" 
employed by Caliber. Verhagen opposed the summary judgment 
motion, asserting, inter alia, that U.S. Bank failed to establish possession of the original Note when U.S. Bank filed the Verified Complaint, and thus failed to establish standing under Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai# i 361, 390 P.3d 1248 (2017) 
(Reyes-Toledo I). On September 25, 2017, the Circuit Court entered the Summary Judgment Order and the Judgment, from which Verhagen appealed. 
While this appeal was pending, U.S. Bank filed in the 
Circuit Court a "Motion to Ratify and/or Amend Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law; Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure Filed January 31, 2017; and Judgment, Entered on September 25, 2017" (Motion to Ratify). In filing the Motion to Ratify, U.S. 
Bank cited Rule 60(b) of the Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(
HRCP) and the procedure under Life of the Land v. Ariyoshi
, 57 
Haw. 249, 252, 553 P.2d 464, 466 (1976), seeking to have the 
Circuit Court certify how it would rule so that U.S. Bank could request a temporary remand of the case back to the Circuit Court. The Motion to Ratify noted that U.S. Bank had addressed the Reyes-Toledo criteria prior to the hearing on its motion for summary judgment, but asserted that after it submitted the proposed foreclosure judgment to the Circuit Court, the Hawai# i 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Supreme Court had issued U.S. Bank N.A. v. Mattos, 140 Hawai# i 
26, 30, 398 P.3d 615, 619 (2017), which U.S. Bank noted 
"clarified the evidentiary standard applicable in foreclosure cases." 
U.S. Bank thus asserted that the new requirements in 
Mattos arguably had not been considered by the Circuit Court and thus U.S. Bank sought to have the Circuit Court clarify that it had considered the evidence under the appropriate legal standard that now existed following Reyes-Toledo and Mattos. The Motion to Ratify contained, inter alia, a supplemental declaration by Melinda Patterson (Patterson), an "Authorized Officer" employed 
by Caliber. The Patterson supplemental declaration states, in 
part, that "Plaintiff, or its agent on Plaintiff's behalf, was in possession of the original wet-ink, indorsed in blank Note when the above-captioned foreclosure action was commenced on March 23, 2016 and since" and that "Plaintiff, its agent on Plaintiff's behalf, or Plaintiff's counsel on Plaintiff's behalf, have been in possession of the original indorsed in blank Note since before this foreclosure action was commenced on March 23, 2016." 
Patterson also attests to the existence of a 
"Certification" executed by Jennifer Martin (
Martin), an 
"Authorized Signatory, Collateral Management" and employee of Caliber, which purports to "evidence that the original wet ink, indorsed in blank Note was in Caliber's possession on Plaintiff's behalf on February 9, 2016" and "indicates that the original wet-ink Note was indorsed in blank no later than February 9, 2016, as the original wet-ink Note was electronically scanned and uploaded to Caliber's business records on or before February 9, 2016 and the scanned copy of the original wet-ink Note that was uploaded to Caliber's business records on or before February 9, 2016 contains a blank indorsement on page 6 of the Note." 
In addition, Patterson declared that an attached 
"Attorney's Bailee Letter Agreement" (A
ttorney Bailee Letter) 
signed by Jennifer Williams (Williams), an "Authorized Signatory" 
employed by Caliber, is evidence that "the original wet-ink, 
indorsed in blank Note was transmitted to Plaintiff's legal 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel on or around December 9, 2016 and was received by 
Plaintiff's counsel on or around December 14, 2016." 
The Motion to Ratify was in essence a request for the 
Circuit Court to indicate that it would take further action on U.S. Bank's motion for summary judgment, considering the additional submissions of Patterson's supplemental declaration and the other attachments thereto. 
On July 27, 2018, the Circuit Court granted the Motion 
to Ratify and also entered its inclination to reconsider the September 25, 2017 Summary Judgment Order and Judgment "under the currently applicable legal standard that has developed since Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure Filed January 31, 2017 (the "MSJ") was heard and decided on April 6, 2017, and based on the evidence submitted[.]" The Circuit Court confirmed that, should the intermediate court of appeals allow a partial remand, the Circuit Court intends to reconsider the Judgment and enter an order and judgment ratifying and/or amending the Judgment consistent with the currently applicable legal standard and evidence submitted, and/or setting aside the Judgment and entering an amended Judgment that will provide the same relief accorded in the original Judgment nunc pro tunc to September 25, 2017, when the original Judgment was entered. 
On August 10, 2018, U.S. Bank filed in this court a 
"Motion for Temporary Remand and for Fourth Extension of Time to File Answering Brief." This court granted the motion in part under the procedure set forth in Life of the Land (permitting a trial court to consider a Rule 60(b) motion during the pendency of an appeal and "if the trial court indicates that it is inclined to grant the motion, application may then be made to the appellate court for a remand."), noting that the Circuit Court had indicated its inclination to amend the Judgment. Hence, the case was temporarily remanded to the Circuit Court. 
On October 8, 2018, the Circuit Court entered an 
"Amended Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law; Amended Order 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and for 
Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure" (Amended Summary Judgment 
Order) and an Amended Judgment. Jurisdiction then reverted to 
this court. 
II. Discussion 
In order to establish a right to foreclose, the 
foreclosing plaintiff must establish standing, or entitlement to 
enforce the subject note, at the time the action was commenced. Reyes-Toledo I, 139 Hawai# i at 367-70, 390 P.3d at 1254-57. As 
expressed by the 
Hawai# i Supreme Court, 
a foreclosing plaintiff must prove "the existence of
an agreement, the terms of the agreement, a default bythe mortgagor under the terms of the agreement, andgiving of the cancellation notice," as well as proveentitlement to enforce the defaulted upon note. 
Bank of America, N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 143 Hawai# i 249, 263-64, 
428 P.3d 761, 775-76 (2018) (quoting Reyes-Toledo I, 139 Hawai# i 
at 367-68, 390 P.3d at 1254-55) (format altered). 
Moreover, a declaration in support of a summary 
judgment motion must be based on personal knowledge, contain 
facts that would be admissible in evidence, and show that the declarant is competent to testify to the matters contained within the declaration. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. Behrendt, 142 Hawai# i 
37, 44, 414 P.3d 89, 96 (2018) (citing Mattos, 140 Hawai# i at 30, 
398 P.3d at 619; 
Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 56(e); 
Rules of the Circuit Courts of the State of Hawai# i Rule 7(g)). 
Inadmissible evidence "cannot serve as a basis for awarding or denying summary judgment." Id. (quoting 
Haw. Cmty. Fed. Credit 
Union v. Keka, 94 Hawai# i 213, 221, 11 P.3d 1, 9 (2000)). 
In the context of foreclosures, the Hawai# i Supreme 
Court has adopted certain criteria for admissibility of promissory notes, including whether an employee of a business that receives records from another business can be a "qualified witness" to establish a sufficient foundation for admission of such records under Hawaii Rules of Evidence (
HRE) Rule 
6  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
803(b)(6).  Mattos, 140 Hawai# i at 30-33, 398 P.3d at 619-622; 
Behrendt, 142 Hawai# i 37, 44-46, 414 P.3d 89, 96-98; Nationstar 
Mortgage LLC v. Kanahele, 144 Hawai# i 394, 402-404, 443 P.3d 86, 
94-96 (2019). In Mattos, the Hawai# i Supreme Court relied on the 
analysis in State v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawai# i 354, 365-66, 227 P.3d 
520, 531-32 (2010), stating: 3
Fitzwater addressed the admissibility of business documents
authenticated by an employee of another business, stating: 
A person can be a "qualified witness" who canauthenticate a document as a record of regularlyconducted activity under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) or itsfederal counterpart even if he or she is not anemployee of the business that created the document, orhas no direct, personal knowledge of how the documentwas created. As one leading commentator has noted: 
... [sic] The phrase "other qualified witness" is
given a very broad interpretation. The witness need only have enough familiarity with the record-keepingsystem of the business in question to explain how therecord came into existence in the ordinary course ofbusiness. The witness need not have personalknowledge of the actual creation of the documents orhave personally assembled the records. In fact, thewitness need not even be an employee of therecord-keeping entity as long as the witnessunderstands the entity's record-keeping system. 
There is no requirement that the records have been
prepared by the entity that has custody of them, aslong as they were created in the regular course ofsome entity's business. 
3 HRE Rule 803(b)(6) states: 
Rule 803 Hearsay exceptions; availability ofdeclarant immaterial.  The following are not excluded
by the hearsay rule, even though the declarant isavailable as a witness: 
. . . . 
(b)
 Other exceptions. 
(6) Records of regularly conducted activity. A
 memorandum, report, record, or data
compilation, in any form, of acts, events,conditions, opinions, or diagnoses, made inthe course of a regularly conductedactivity, at or near the time of the acts,events, conditions, opinions, or diagnoses,as shown by the testimony of the custodian
or other qualified witness [.] 
(Emphasis added). 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The sufficiency of the foundation evidence depends in
part on the nature of the documents at issue.Documents that are "standard records of the typeregularly maintained by firms in a particular industrymay require less by way of foundation testimony thanless conventional documents proffered for admission asbusiness records." 
Thus, an employee of a business that receives records
from another business can be a qualified witness whocan establish a sufficient foundation for their admission as records of the receiving business underHRE Rule 803(b)(6). 
Mattos, 140 Hawai# i at 32, 398 P.3d at 621 (quoting Fitzwater, 
122 
i at 366, 227 P.3d at 532). Hawai#
Subsequently, as further explained in Behrendt
: 
The court in Mattos held that a witness may be qualified toprovide the testimony required by HRE Rule 803(b)(6) even ifthe witness is not employed by the business that created thedocument or lacks direct, personal knowledge of how thedocument was created. Id. "There is no requirement that
the records have been prepared by the entity that hascustody of them, as long as they were created in the regularcourse of some entity's business." Id. (quoting State v. 
Fitzwater, 122 Hawai #i 354, 366, 227 P.3d 520, 532 (2010)).
The witness, however, must have enough familiarity with therecord-keeping system of the business that created therecord to explain how the record was generated in theordinary course of business. Id. 
Records received from another business and incorporated intothe receiving business' records may in some circumstances beregarded as "created" by the receiving business. Id. 
Incorporated records are admissible under HRE Rule 803(b)(6)when a custodian or qualified witness testifies that thedocuments were incorporated and kept in the normal course ofbusiness, that the incorporating business typically reliesupon the accuracy of the contents of the documents, and thecircumstances otherwise indicate the trustworthiness of the document. See id.; Fitzwater, 122 Hawai #i at 367-68, 227
P.3d at 533-34. 
142 Hawai# i at 45-46, 414 P.3d at 97-98 (emphases added). 
Here, neither the verification by Jackson, the 
declaration by Salyers, nor the supplemental declaration by 
Patterson, contain the necessary foundation to support admission of the Note under Mattos, Behrendt or Kanahele to establish that U.S. Bank had possession of the Note when it commenced this foreclosure action, as required by Reyes-Toledo I. 
In her verification, which was attached to the Verified 
Complaint, Jackson asserted "I have verified and hereby confirm possession of the original Note by [U.S. Bank][,]" and that "the 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Note is indorsed in blank[.]" However, Jackson does not 
establish she is a qualified witness under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) foradmission of the Note. In terms of her qualifications to admit the Note, Jackson's verification states only that she is "employed as a[n] Authorized Signatory by [Caliber], and that:  
2. I have access to and am familiar with Caliber's 
books and records regarding the Loan, including Caliber's
servicing records and copies of the applicable loandocuments. I am familiar with the manner in which Caliber maintains its books and records, including computer recordsrelating to the servicing of the Loan. Caliber's records are made at or near the time of the occurrence of the matters set forth in such records, by an employee orrepresentative with knowledge of the acts or eventsrecorded. Such records are obtained, kept and maintained byCaliber in the regular course of Caliber's business.Caliber relies on such records in the ordinary course of itsbusiness. 
Jackson's verification does not state that she is a custodian of 
records for Caliber. Further, her verification does not demonstrate that she has "enough familiarity with the record-keeping system of the business that created the record to explain how the record was generated in the ordinary course of business." Behrendt, 142 Hawai# i at 45, 414 P.3d at 97; Mattos, 
140 
Hawai# i at 32-33, 398 P.3d at 621-22. Thus, Jackson's 
verification fails to establish that she is a "qualified witness" for purposes of admitting the Note under the HRE Rule 803(b)(6). 
The Salyers Declaration, attached in support of U.S. 
Bank's summary judgment motion, likewise does not establish that Salyers is a custodian of records for Caliber or a qualified witness with regards to admitting the Note. 
Salyers, a 
"Foreclosure Document Specialist II" employed by Caliber, attestsin pertinent part:  
2. I have access to and am familiar with Caliber's 
books and records regarding the Loan, including Caliber's
servicing records and copies of the applicable loandocuments. I am familiar with the manner in which Caliber maintains its books and records, including computer recordsrelating to the servicing of the Loan. Caliber's records are made at or near the time of the occurrence of the matters set forth in such records, by an employee orrepresentative with knowledge of the acts or eventsrecorded. Such records are obtained, kept and maintained byCaliber in the regular course of Caliber's business.Caliber relies on such records in the ordinary course of itsbusiness. Caliber's records include and incorporate records 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for the Subject Loan obtained from JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.
("Prior Servicer"), the prior loan servicer for the SubjectLoan. The records obtained by Caliber from the PriorServicer are kept and maintained by Caliber in the ordinarycourse of its business for the purpose of maintaining anaccounting of payments received, expenses incurred, andamounts advanced with regard to the Subject Loan, and suchrecords are relied upon by Caliber in the regular course ofits business. 
However, Salyers does not attest to being familiar with the 
record-keeping system of Washington Mutual or JP Morgan. See Behrendt, 142 Hawai# i at 45-46, 414 P.3d at 97-98; Mattos, 140 
Hawai 
#i at 32-33, 398 P.3d at 621-22. 
Finally, even the supplemental declaration by Patterson 
fails to establish under Mattos and Behrendt that she is a custodian of records or a qualified witness for purposes of admitting the Note as evidence pursuant to HRE Rule 803(b)(6). Patterson attests, in pertinent part: 
2. I have access to and am familiar with Caliber's 
books and records regarding the Loan, including Caliber's
servicing records and copies of the applicable loandocuments. I am familiar with the manner in which Caliber maintains its books and records, including computer recordsrelating to the servicing of the Loan. Caliber's records are made at or near the time of the occurrence of the matters set forth in such records, by an employee orrepresentative with knowledge of the acts or eventsrecorded. Such records are obtained, kept and maintained byCaliber in the regular course of Caliber's business.Caliber relies on such records in the ordinary course of itsbusiness. Caliber's records include and incorporate recordsfor the Loan obtained from JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. ("PriorServicer"), the prior loan servicer for the Loan. The records obtained by Caliber from the Prior Servicer are keptand maintained by Caliber in the ordinary course of itsbusiness for the purpose of maintaining an accounting ofpayments received, expenses incurred, and amounts advancedwith regard to the Loan, and such records are relied upon byCaliber in the regular course of its business. The information regarding the Loan transferred to Caliber fromthe Prior Servicer has been validated in many ways,including, but not limited to, going through a due diligencephase, review of hard copy documents, and review of thepayment history and accounting of other fees, costs, andexpenses charged to the Loan by Prior Servicer. It is Caliber's regular practice, after these phases are complete,to receive records from prior servicers and integrate theserecords into Caliber's business records at the time of acquisition. Once integrated, Caliber maintains and relieson these business records in the ordinary course of itsmortgage loan servicing business. 
Like Jackson and Salyers, Patterson does not attest to being 
familiar with the record-keeping system of JP Morgan (the prior 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
servicer) or Washington Mutual (which purportedly created and 
indorsed the Note in blank). 
Without the required foundation for admission of the 
Note, Patterson's assertion that U.S. Bank, or its counsel Aldridge Pite, LLP (Aldridge Pite), was in possession of the 
original Note when this action was filed does not meet the 
requirements under Reyes-Toledo I, Mattos, or Behrendt. Further, Patterson's reliance on an Attorney Bailee Letter Agreement, signed by Caliber "Authorized Signatory" Williams and a representative from Aldridge Pite, and the Certification signed by Caliber "Authorized Signatory" Martin, are similarly unhelpful in establishing the requirements under Reyes-Toledo I. Neither document helps to establish a sufficient basis to admit the Note, the Certification does not certify possession of the original Note by U.S. Bank at the time the Verified Complaint was filed, and the Attorney Bailee Letter was executed approximately nine months after U.S. Bank commenced the foreclosure action. 
Finally, we reject U.S. Bank's argument that Verhagen's 
failure to file an opposition to the Motion to Ratify constituted a waiver of Verhagen's right to challenge the Motion to Ratify or the Patterson declaration on appeal. The Motion to Ratify sought to have the Circuit Court clarify its previous summary judgment ruling. For purposes of summary judgment: 
the moving party has the burden of producing support for its
claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material fact existswith respect to the essential elements of the claim ordefense which the motion seeks to establish or which the motion questions; and (2) based on the undisputed facts, itis entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law. Only
when the moving party satisfies its initial burden ofproduction does the burden shift to the non-moving party torespond to the motion for summary judgment and demonstratespecific facts, as opposed to general allegations, thatpresent a genuine issue worthy of trial. 
Mattos, 140 Hawai# i at 30, 398 P.3d at 619 (emphasis added). 
Here, where U.S. Bank as summary judgment movant did not meet its 
initial burden, the burden did not shift to Verhagen. 
Moreover, 
the ultimate burden of persuasion always remains with U.S. Bank and requires U.S. Bank to convince the court that no genuine 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
issue of material fact exists and that it is entitled to summary 
judgment as a matter of law. Id. U.S. Bank did not establish 
its entitlement to summary judgment and Verhagen's failure to challenge the Motion to Ratify is of no consequence in our review of the summary judgment rulings by the Circuit Court. 
In light of the admissible evidence in the record, U.S. 
Bank failed to demonstrate that it was in possession of the original, blank indorsed Note at the time this action was commenced. We need not address Verhagen's other arguments, including his contention that the blank indorsement on the Note by Cynthia A. Riley was fraudulent. 
Viewing the facts and inferences in the light most 
favorable to Verhagen, as we must for purposes of reviewing a summary judgment ruling, Reyes-Toledo I, 139 Hawai# i at 371, 390 
P.3d at 1258, there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether U.S. Bank had standing and was entitled to enforce the subject Note when this foreclosure action was commenced. 
Thus, 
under Reyes-Toledo I
, Mattos and Behrendt, U.S. Bank has not met 
its initial burden to show that it was entitled to summary judgment for the decree of foreclosure.
III. Conclusion 
Based on the foregoing, the following entered by the 
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit are vacated: 
(1) the September 25, 2017 Judgment; (2) the September 25, 2017 "Findings of Fact and 
Conclusions of Law; Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure Filed January 31, 2017"; 
(3) the October 8, 2018 "Amended Judgment"; and (4) the October 8, 2018 "Amended Findings of Fact and 
Conclusions of Law; Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure Filed January 31, 2017." 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
This case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further 
proceedings.4 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 2, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
Gary Victor Dubin,
Frederick J. Arensmeyer,for Defendants-Appellants. 
David B. Rosen,
David E. McAllister,Justin S. Moyer,for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge 
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
Associate Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
4 On remand, the parties may need to address the Hawai #i Supreme
Court's "Order Regarding Foreclosure or Non-Judicial Foreclosure RelatedActions: Certification of Compliance With the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, andEconomic Security Act in Foreclosures" issued on June 26, 2020, which wasfurther extended by way of an order filed by the Hawai #i Supreme Court on
August 28, 2020. 
13 