NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001082
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
PARJIANA RAZAVI,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
PUALANI ESTATES AT KONA COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION,
HAWAIIANA MANAGEMENT COMPANY, LTD.,
Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-513K)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Parjiana Razavi (Razavi) appeals
 
from an April 17, 2015 "Final Judgment" of the Circuit Court of
 
1
the Third Circuit  (circuit court).
 
On appeal, Razavi contends:
 
(1)
 the circuit court erred in granting Defendants-
Appellees Pualani Estates at Kona Community Association and
 
Hawaiiana Management Company, Ltd.'s (together, Pualani Estates)
 
Motion to Enforce Settlement Agreement filed August 27, 2013
 
(Pualani Estates' Motion to Enforce) because the record
 
establishes that the July 7, 2011 Mutual Release Agreement
 
(Settlement Agreement) was entered into under coercion and duress
 
and was not voluntary;
 
(2) alternatively, if the Settlement Agreement was
 
voluntary, the circuit court erred in denying Razavi's December
 
1
 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
19, 2012 "Motion to Enforce Settlement Agreement and For Award of
 
Costs" and/or granting Pualani Estates' Motion to Enforce because
 Razavi complied with the Settlement Agreement, or, at the least
 fact issues precluded granting either motion; and
 
(3) the circuit court abused its discretion in awarding
 
Pualani Estates its attorney fees and costs.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude Razavi's
 appeal is without merit.
 
(1) The circuit court did not grant Pualani Estates'
 
first Motion to Enforce dated July 27, 2011 and filed August 2,
 2011. The parties' subsequent settlement on August 26, 2011, and
 related entry of the "Stipulation to Dismiss All Parties and All
 Claims With Prejudice and Order" on August 29, 2011, superceded
 the July 7, 2011 Settlement Agreement and rendered Pualani
 Estates' first Motion to Enforce moot.
 
(2) At an evidentiary hearing held May 9, 2013, the 
circuit court ruled in favor of Pualani Estates on the one factual issue in dispute, whether Razavi had complied with the terms of the Settlement Agreement requiring the walls fronting her property be "removed, rebuilt, reconstructed and/or otherwise remodeled to conform to the engineering plans of Witcher Engineering LLP dated May 15, 2006[.]"
2 A finding of fact will 
not be overturned on appeal unless, "despite evidence to support the finding, the appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction in reviewing the entire evidence that a mistake has been committed." Minton v. Quintal, 131 Hawai
'i 167, 184, 
317 P.3d 1, 18 (2013). 
The evidence admitted during the evidentiary hearing
 
supports the circuit court's factual finding that Razavi did not
 comply with the Witcher Plan as required by the Settlement
 Agreement. Both Razavi and Witcher, who appeared as an expert
 witness, testified the Witcher Plan provided that the walls
 
2
 Witcher Engineering LLP is owned by Bruce Witcher (Witcher) and
prepared the Engineer's Findings Report (Witcher's Plan). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fronting the property had to be 18 inches, 18 inches, 21 inches,
 
and 18 inches in height, respectively, at the four points shown
 in the plan. Witcher testified that if a contractor used the
 Witcher Plan to build a wall in conformance, the front wall would
 be 18 inches high as shown on the plan. Both Razavi and Witcher
 testified the walls as currently built exceed those measurements. 
Witcher further testified the walls as currently built were not
 in strict conformance with the Witcher Plan "[b]ecause to be in
 strict conformance, you would have the exact elevations that are
 on this plan." Finally, the Settlement Agreement at paragraph
 4.f. provides that Pualani Estates would "pay the remaining sum
 of $4,000.00 to [Razavi] once the walls fronting the Property are
 determined by [Pualani Estates] to be in conformance with the
 engineering plans of Witcher Engineering LLP dated May 15, 2006."
 (Emphasis in original.)
 
There was no dispute that the Settlement Agreement
 
specifically required the walls be "removed, rebuilt,
 reconstructed and/or otherwise remodeled to conform to the
 [Witcher Plan]," and that they "must be rebuilt in accordance
 with the [Witcher Plan]." There is no dispute that the Witcher
 Plan specifically provides the height of the front walls at the
 four described points be 18 inches, 18 inches, 21 inches, and 18
 inches tall. There was no dispute that the walls as currently
 built exceeded this height. And there was no dispute that Razavi
 has failed to remove, rebuild, reconstruct, or otherwise remodel
 her front walls to reduce their height to those specified in the
 Witcher Plan.
 
Because the circuit court had ruled following the
 
evidentiary hearing that Razavi did not conform her walls to the
 Witcher Plan, it also properly granted Pualani Estates' Motion to
 Enforce.
 
(3) The circuit court granted an award of reasonable
 
attorneys' fees to Pualani Estates pursuant to both Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 42lJ-l0 (2004 Repl.) and 607-14 (Supp.
 
2014). HRS chapter 42IJ governs Planned Community Associations
 
and provides that "[a]ll costs and expenses, including reasonable
 attorneys' fees, incurred by or on behalf of the association
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
for . . ., [e]nforcing any provision of the association
 
documents . . . against a member . . . shall be promptly paid on
 demand to the association by such person or persons[.]" HRS
 § 42lJ-10(a). Section 421J-10(a) further provides "[i]f a member
 is not the prevailing party in any court action against an
 association . . . to enforce any provision of the association
 documents or this chapter, then all reasonable and necessary
 expenses, costs, and attorneys' fees incurred by the association
 shall be awarded to the association[.]"
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the April 17, 2015 "Final
 
"Judgment" of the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 11, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Rebecca A. Copeland
for Plaintiff-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Jason M. Tani Daniel M. Chen Lisa Strandtman (Rush Moore)for Defendants-Appellees. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
4
 