NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000334 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MAGGIE KWONG, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(HONOLULU DIVISION)
(CASE NO. 1DTA-17-02539) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Maggie Kwong (Kwong
) appeals from 
the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment 
entered on March 14, 2019 (Judgment), by the Honolulu Division of 
the District Court of the First Circuit (
District Court).   After 
a bench trial, the District Court convicted Kwong of Operating a 
Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII), in 
violation of HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) (2007). 21
1 The Honorable William M. Domingo presided over the trial. 
2 HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) provides: 
(continued...) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2(...continued)Kwong raises two points of error on appeal, arguing 
that the District Court: (1) erred in refusing to take judicial 
notice of the fact that 30 miles per hour (mph) is the equivalent 
of 44 feet per second; and (2) plainly erred in failing to obtain 
her personal consent to the parties' stipulation that the arresting officer was qualified to administer standardized field 
sobriety tests (SFST). 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Kwong's points of error as follows: 
(1) Kwong argues the District Court erred in refusing 
to take judicial notice of the fact that 30 mph is the equivalent of 44 feet per second. As an initial matter, it does not appear the District Court ultimately rejected Kwong's judicial notice request. Rather, the record shows that although the District Court initially declined to take judicial notice, the District Court appeared agreeable when defense counsel explained why 
§ 291E-61 
Operating a vehicle under the influence of
an intoxicant.  (a) A person commits the offense of
operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if
the person operates or assumes actual physical control of avehicle: 
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair the person's normalmental faculties or ability to care for theperson and guard against casualty[.] 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judicial notice would be appropriate, saying, "Right, right . . 
continue." 
Nevertheless, the District Court was not required to 
take judicial notice of Kwong's proffered fact. To be clear, the fact that 30 mph is the equivalent of 44 feet per second is 
proper for judicial notice under Hawai# i Rules of Evidence (HRE) 
Rule 201(b) (2016),
3 in that it is "capable of accurate and ready 
determination by resort to sources whose accuracy cannot 
reasonably be questioned," and the mathematical computation leading to that result is indisputable. Nonetheless, a court is required to take judicial notice of an adjudicative fact only "if requested by a party and supplied with the necessary information." HRE Rule 201(d). To the extent the conversion of 30 mph to feet per second requires mathematical calculations, Kwong should have supplied the District Court with some means to verify the figures for which she sought judicial notice. See, 
e.g., Drake v. Holstead, 757 S.W.2d 909, 911 (Tex. App. 1988). As Kwong failed to do so, the District Court was not required to take judicial notice. See HRE Rule 201(d). 
Even assuming, arguendo, that the District Court 
erroneously refused to take judicial notice that 30 mph equates 
3 HRE Rule 201(b) provides: 
(b) Kinds of facts. A judicially noticed fact must be
one not subject to reasonable dispute in that it is either
(1) generally known within the territorial jurisdiction ofthe trial court, or (2) capable of accurate and readydetermination by resort to sources whose accuracy cannotreasonably be questioned. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 to 44 feet per second, such error would be harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt. See Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) 
Rule 52(a).4 Specifically, the District Court did not preclude 
Kwong from relying on the fact that 30 mph is 44 feet per second. 
Kwong expressly used that fact in cross-examining the arresting 
officer, Officer Josh Wong (Officer Wong). Kwong also expressly 
referenced that fact in her motion for judgment of acquittal and 
relied on that fact in her closing argument.5 
Moreover, the crux of Kwong's argument on appeal is to 
question the District Court's credibility determinations. At 
trial, Officer Wong testified, inter alia, that he was traveling about 30 mph on Kapiolani Boulevard and was about 30 feet behind 
a truck that was turning left onto Isenberg Street, when Kwong's car moved across two lanes and ultimately cut in between him and the truck. Officer Wong testified that he started to slow down when he saw Kwong changing lanes and slammed on his brakes when her car cut in front of him. Kwong contends that the fact that a car going 30 mph travels 44 feet per second renders the foregoing events "impossible," and that, had the District Court judicially noticed that 30 mph is 44 feet per second, "it would have been 
4 HRPP Rule 52(a) provides that "[a]ny error, defect, irregularity
or variance which does not affect substantial rights shall be disregarded." 
5 The District Court allowed Kwong to incorporate her arguments for
her motion for judgment of acquittal into her closing argument. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evident to the court that [Officer Wong's] testimony was not 
credible."   6
It is "well-settled that an appellate court will not 
pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence[.]" State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai# i 87, 
101, 997 P.2d 13, 27 (2000) (citations omitted); State v. Monteil, 134 Hawai# i 361, 368, 341 P.3d 567, 574 (2014) ("It is 
not the role of the appellate court to weigh credibility or resolve conflicting evidence."). Rather, "[i]t is for the trial judge as fact-finder to assess the credibility of witnesses and to resolve all questions of fact[.]" State v. Eastman
, 81 
Hawai# i 131, 139, 913 P.2d 57, 65 (1996) (citation omitted). It 
is also established that the trial judge, as fact-finder, "may accept or reject any witness's testimony in whole or in part." Id. (stating it was within the trial court's prerogative to believe witness's prior inconsistent statements and to disbelieve that witness's oral testimony in court); State v. Jhun
, 83 
Hawai# i 472, 483, 927 P.2d 1355, 1366 (1996) ("Witnesses may be 
6 Kwong asks the court to take judicial notice of "this photo map"
attached to her opening brief; the map appears to be an aerial shot of the
Kapiolani Boulevard/Isenberg Street intersection, with Kwong's notations as towhere she, Officer Wong, and the truck were when Kwong changed lanes the nightof the incident, as testified to by Officer Wong. Kwong did not supply thiscourt with the "necessary information" to verify the annotated map's accuracy,including the source of the map. See HRE Rule 201(d). We thus decline to 
take judicial notice of it. Moreover, the photo map was not introduced belowand is not part of the record on appeal. Although the appellate courts maytake judicial notice of exhibits not made a part of the record on appeal,where the "equity of the situation dictate[s]", there is no grounds offeredfor doing so in this case and we find none. See, e.g., In re Thomas H. Gentry
Revocable Trust, 138 Hawai #i 158, 171 n.8, 378 P.3d 874, 887 n.8 (2016).
1. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
inaccurate, contradictory, and even untruthful in some portions 
of their testimony, and yet be entirely credible in other portions of their testimony."). 
The District Court clearly found Officer Wong credible 
at least as to the testimony the court expressly relied upon in its rulings.
7 On this record, we will not disturb the District 
Court's implicit finding that Officer Wong was credible. 
(2) The District Court did not err in accepting the 
stipulation as to Officer Wong's qualifications to administer the SFST. During its examination of Officer Wong, the prosecution advised the District Court it was offering Kwong's counsel a stipulation regarding the officer's training, experience and qualifications, and Kwong's counsel agreed that he wanted to enter into the stipulation. The prosecution then placed the stipulation on the record: 
[THE PROSECUTION]: . . . The stipulation would be
Officer Wong has been trained and experienced and qualified
to administer as well as evaluate the SFST in accordance with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administrationstandards as well as the internal HPD protocols. He'll be testifying only as a lay witness as to the walk-and-turn andthe one-legged stand portions of the test. He won't be mentioning any clues or draw any legal conclusions as towhether Defendant passed or failed any portions of the test. 
THE COURT: Okay. And as far as the [Horizontal Gaze
Nystagmus ( HGN)]? 
[THE PROSECUTION]: No HGN, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: Okay. Very well. 
7 In summarizing the facts relied upon in its ruling, the District
Court did not note how fast Officer Wong was going or how close he was to the
truck or intersection. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The District Court did not ask Kwong on the record 
whether she agreed to or approved the stipulation. Kwong 
contends that constitutes plain error, relying on State v. Murray, 116 Hawai# i 3, 10-13, 169 P.3d 955, 962-65 (2007). In 
Murray, the supreme court held that "a knowing and voluntary waiver of a defendant's fundamental right must come directly from the defendant, and requires the court to engage in a colloquy with the defendant." Id. at 11, 169 P.3d at 963 (citation omitted). 
The fundamental right at issue in Murray was the 
defendant's right to have the State prove every element of an offense to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt.  Id. at 10-12, 169 
P.3d at 962-64. 8
In State v. Wilson, 144 Hawai# i 454, 445 P.3d 35 
(2019), however, the supreme court held that a colloquy was notrequired where the defendant's attorney stipulated to a police officer's qualifications to conduct SFSTs:  
[T]he stipulation in this case did not establish facts
satisfying any elements of the charged offense. To convict Wilson of OVUII, the State was required to prove that sheoperated a vehicle "while under the influence of alcohol inan amount sufficient to impair [her] normal mental facultiesor ability to care for [herself] and guard againstcasualty." HRS § 291E-61(a)(1). Stipulating that theofficer was "qualified and certified to conduct the [SFST]and that he received specialized training in administering 
8 Murray was being prosecuted for Abuse of a Family or Household
Member in violation of HRS §§ 709-906(1) and (7) (Supp. 2006). Murray, 116
Hawai #i at 5, 169 P.3d at 957. In order to establish a class C felony, the
State was required to prove that Murray had a second or subsequent convictionfor abuse of a family or household member within two years before the allegedoffense. Id. at 7, 169 P.3d at 959. During the hearing on pretrial motions,
Murray's attorney stipulated that Murray had prior convictions within twoyears; the attorney then argued that evidence of Murray's prior convictionsneed not be presented to the jury because of the stipulation. Id. at 5, 169
P.3d at 957. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and grading all of the [SFSTs]" is not in itself proof that
Wilson was operating a vehicle or that she was impaired.Thus, the stipulation in this case did not amount to awaiver of Wilson's fundamental right to have every elementof a charged offense proven beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Neither did the stipulation significantly impinge on
Wilson's confrontation rights. Unlike the evidentiarystipulation at issue in Casey, the stipulation in this casedid not serve as a substitute for evidence from which a factfinder could conclude that any element of the chargedoffenses was satisfied in whole or in part. Instead, thisstipulation was to an evidentiary foundation involving thequalifications of a witness. Under the circumstances, wecannot say that the stipulation so infringed upon Wilson'sright to confront Officer Hattori that a colloquy wasrequired. 
Id. at 464-65, 445 P.3d at 45-46 (footnote omitted). 
In this case, as in Wilson, the District Court was not 
required to have a colloquy with Kwong before accepting her 
stipulation to Officer Wong's qualifications to administer the SFST. 
For these reasons, the District Court's March 14, 2019 
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 25, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
8 Earle A. Partington, for Defendant-Appellant. 
Brian R. Vincent, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu for Plaintiff-Appellee. 