FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
---o0o---
THE ESTATE OF JOANNA LAU SULLIVAN,
A
KA JOANNA NGIT CHO LAU SULLIVAN, Deceased 
NO. CAAP-17-0000826 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(LP NO. 15-1-0698) 
MARCH 20, 2020 
FUJISE, PRESIDING JUDGE, LEONARD, J.; AND
CIRCUIT JUDGE SOUZA, IN PLACE OF GINOZA, C.J.,
AND CHAN, HIRAOKA AND WADSWORTH, JJ., ALL RECUSED 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J. 
This case arises out of a petition for the probate of a 
will and the appointment of a personal representative to 
administer the decedent's estate. One of the decedent's children petitioned for the appointment of a special administrator to properly administer a potential claim against the decedent's estate planning attorney, who is now the personal representative of the decedent's estate. The potential claim is that the FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attorney may have negligently advised the decedent and/or 
provided her with materially inaccurate information, which she allegedly relied on to the detriment of her estate or certain beneficiaries of her estate. 
As explained below, we hold, inter alia, that under 
Hawai# i law: (1) a special administrator is appointed when a 
personal representative cannot or should not act temporarily, such as when a conflict of interest exists; (2) a fundamental duty of a personal representative is to act as a fiduciary, consistent with the best interests of the estate and successors to the estate; (3) a personal representative cannot properly administer an estate with respect to evaluating issues related to a legally-cognizable claim against the personal representative himself because his self-interest creates a conflict with his fiduciary duties to the estate; (4) based on the potential claims identified by the petitioner here, we cannot conclude that there is no justiciable claim subject to the administration of the estate; and (5) therefore, the appointment of a special administrator is necessary under the circumstances of this case. 
Petitioner-Appellant Colleen H.A. Sullivan (Colleen) 
appeals from the Amended Judgment on Order Denying Petition to Appoint a Special Administrator (Amended Judgment), entered on 
November 9, 2017, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
sitting in probate (Probate Court).
1 Colleen also challenges the 
Probate Court's Order Denying Petition to Appoint a Special 
1 The Honorable R. Mark Browning entered the Amended Judgment. 
2   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Administrator (Order Denying Appointment), entered on February 
27, 2017, as well as an earlier judgment, which was entered on 
February 27, 2017 (Judgment).2 
I. BACKGROUND 
The Decedent, Joanna Ngit Cho Lau Sullivan (Mrs. 
Sullivan), along with her husband, Maurice J. Sullivan (Mr. 
Sullivan), started the Foodland Super Market, Limited (Foodland) chain of grocery stores. Mr. and Mrs. Sullivan had four children: Respondent-Appellee Maureen Jenai Sullivan Wall 
(Jenai); Respondent-Appellee Kathleen Weng Ai Sullivan Wo 
(Kitty); Patrick Joseph Dick Ming Sullivan (Patrick); and, Colleen. Mr. Sullivan died in 1998. 
Foodland stock is not publically traded. At some time 
in or prior to 2001, all four children owned shares of Foodland 
common stock. In 2001, Patrick and Colleen sold all of their Foodland common shares to Mrs. Sullivan, Jenai, and/or Kitty. Patrick and Colleen have not been actively involved with the operation of Foodland. 
The Joanna Lau Sullivan Family Limited Partnership 
(Joanna FLP) is a limited partnership holding closely held stock 
of Foodland. At some time prior to December 28, 2011, Mrs. 
Sullivan transferred all of her 21.33% interest of common shares in Foodland to the Joanna FLP. 
Respondent-Appellee Elliot H. Loden (Loden), who is now 
the personal representative of Mrs. Sullivan's estate (Estate), 
2 The Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan initially presided over these
proceedings and entered the Order Denying Appointment and the Judgment. 
3   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was Mrs. Sullivan's estate planning attorney. It appears that 
Mrs. Sullivan's estate plan included a will (Will) and a trust, 
entitled the Revocable Trust of Joanna Ngit Cho Lau Sullivan 
(Trust).3 The Will, which was executed in 2008, and the Trust 
apparently were both drafted by Loden. The Will named Loden as the Personal Representative. Both the Will and Trust include a "no-contest" provision. 
On or about September 28, 2012, Mrs. Sullivan filed a 
2011 United States Gift (and Generation-Skipping Transfer) Tax Return (2011 Return).  The 2011 Return reported certain cash 
gifts to Mrs. Sullivan's children and grandchildren. The 2011 Return also reported gifts, dated December 28, 2011, transferring 
general and limited partnership interests in the Joanna FLP to Jenai and Kitty. The 2011 Return included an appraisal of Foodland business interests - performed by Loden, who signed it as Appraiser and Attorney-At-Law - to support the valuation of the Joanna FLP interests gifted by Mrs. Sullivan. Loden's appraisal purportedly employed two different methods of valuing Foodland, ultimately rejecting a method based on capitalization of earnings
4 and instead adopting a method based on book value, 
which was purportedly derived from a Foodland balance sheet and profit and loss statements. The appraisal also applied a 
3 It appears that, in her capacity as Grantor and initial Trustee,
Mrs. Sullivan executed the Trust on August 5, 1986, and amended it on August
15, 2013. Although an excerpt from the 2013 amended Trust is in the record,neither the 1986 Trust nor a full copy of the 2013 amended Trust appears inthe record on appeal. Among other things, the amended Trust names Loden asthe successor Trustee. 
4 The appraisal stated that Foodland had net operating losses in
each of the four prior years. 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"reasonable minority interest and lack of marketability" discount 
of 25% to the derived "final fair market value" to reflect a minority ownership interest in a closely-held business. 
On or about May 9, 2013, Mrs. Sullivan filed a 2012 
United States Gift (and Generation-Skipping Transfer) Tax Return (
2012 Return). The 2012 Return reported additional gifts, dated 
January 3, 2012, transferring additional general and limited partnership interests in the Joanna FLP to Jenai and Kitty. The 2012 Return again included an appraisal of Foodland business interests - signed by Loden as Appraiser and Attorney-At-Law -that was essentially identical to the appraisal supporting the 2011 Return. The Loden appraisals, which were dated July 27, 2012, and April 15, 2013, both valued the "donor's" 21.33% interest in Foodland as of a valuation date of December 2011, at $1,359,787. 
Mrs. Sullivan passed away at the age of 94 on September 
2, 2015. 
On October 22, 2015, Loden filed a Petition for Probate 
of Will and for Appointment of Personal Representative (Petition 
for Probate). The Petition for Probate requested that the Will be admitted to probate as and for the Last Will and Testament of 
Mrs. Sullivan and that Loden be named as the Personal Representative. On January 11, 2016, the Probate Court entered an order granting the Petition for Probate and naming Loden as the Personal Representative. 
In May of 2016, Colleen's counsel obtained copies of 
the 2011 and 2012 Returns. Colleen's counsel engaged the 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
services of Mark Hunsaker, a certified public accountant 
accredited in business valuation, certified business appraiser, and certified valuation analyst (Hunsaker), to review the 
appraisals submitted with the returns. Hunsaker opined, for 
various reasons, that Loden's appraisals of Foodland "are not trustworthy valuations." 
On September 12, 2016, Colleen's counsel wrote to 
Loden's counsel regarding "a potentially significant problem with the administration of [Mrs. Sullivan]'s estate and trust." The gravamen of the letter was that, if Loden's appraisals undervalued the Joanna FLP interests gifted to Jenai and Kitty, Mrs. Sullivan would have received and relied upon erroneous information that was material to her estate plan in attempting to equalize gifts among her children. The letter suggested that such an error might be rectified through a "reallocation" of residual assets.
5 The letter went on to provide that it would be 
in Loden's best interests to get a proper valuation of the Joanna FLP interests prior to any significant distribution of Estate or Trust assets. The letter concluded by pointing out the "complication" that the appraisals in question were prepared by the current Personal Representative, and proposing that Loden either step down as Personal Representative and Trustee, or that a Special Administrator be appointed to secure a new appraisal(s) of the Joanna FLP interests. 
5 It appears that Colleen has since abandoned the reallocation
theory, perhaps recognizing the significant potential downside of challenging
the distributions set forth in the Will and Trust. 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On October 4, 2016, Loden's counsel responded. 
Counsel 
noted Loden's professional experience in business valuation and 
disputed that Mrs. Sullivan intended equal distributions to her children, as opposed to equitable distributions. Loden challenged Hunsaker's conclusions, noting in particular that the sole purpose of Loden's appraisals was for use in the filing of the respective 2011 and 2012 Returns. 
On October 13, 2016, Colleen's counsel replied, 
indicating, inter alia, Loden's potential malpractice liability and resulting conflict of interest. Colleen again requested that Loden agree to the appointment of a Special Administrator. On October 24, 2016, through counsel, Loden declined to do so. 
On November 3, 2016, Colleen filed a Petition to 
Appoint a Special Administrator (Petition to Appoint), which 
sought the appointment of a Special Administrator to obtain 
financial information regarding the valuation of the 2011 and 2012 limited partnership gifts for the purpose of determining the value of the gifts and "the effect of an appropriate valuation on the estate." The Petition to Appoint submits that Mrs. Sullivan's estate plan shows an attempt to treat her four children more or less equally, in particular, that the limited partnership gifts were offset by cash gifts to Colleen and Patrick in the Trust, which was amended in the same time frame as the limited partnership gifts. The Petition to Appoint asserts that, depending on the result of the valuation, either the Estate 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or the aggrieved beneficiaries might pursue a claim against 
Loden.6 
Loden opposed the Petition to Appoint, noting his 
professional experience and, inter alia, disputing that Mrs. Sullivan intended to treat her children equally. Loden denied that he had any conflict of interest in carrying out any part ofthe duties as Personal Representative of the Estate. Jenai and Kitty also opposed the Petition to Appoint, disputing the validity of Hunsaker's conclusions and objecting to the cost theEstate would incur if the Petition to Appoint were granted.  
 
In response to the objections, Colleen further noted 
alleged deficiencies in the Loden appraisals and contended that 
Mrs. Sullivan would have relied on the valuation of her gifts to Jenai and Kitty in determining the amount of her separate gifts to Colleen and Patrick that were (apparently) provided through the 2013 amendment to the Trust. Colleen further stated that, if Loden's valuations overstated the value of the gifted partnership interests, an overpayment of estate taxes would result, thus harming the Estate.
7 Colleen clarified that she was not 
contesting any part of Mrs. Sullivan's estate plan; rather, she submitted, there was "strong evidence" that Loden may have negligently advised or provided erroneous information to Mrs. 
6 The Petition to Appoint is somewhat vague on what, if any, other
remedial action might be taken by the Estate if, in fact, a further valuation
resulted in a determination that the gifted limited partnership interests werematerially undervalued. 
7 This proposition was supported by a further Hunsaker declaration.
An earlier declaration had otherwise addressed Hunsaker's opinions regardingthe Loden appraisals. 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Sullivan, which Mrs. Sullivan relied on to the detriment of the 
Estate and/or her beneficiaries. 
On January 19, 2017, the Probate Court held a hearing on 
the Petition to Appoint. 
No oral testimony was taken. After 
arguments by counsel, the Probate Court ruled that, "based upon the records and files in this case, including the submissions and arguments by counsel, I'm going to respectfully deny the petition." 
The Order Denying Appointment and Judgment were entered 
on February 27, 2017. After Colleen's initial appeal was dismissed for lack of appellate jurisdiction, the Amended Judgment was entered on November 10, 2017, and Colleen timely filed a notice of appeal from the Amended Judgment. II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Colleen raises two points of error on appeal, contending 
that the Probate Court erred in concluding that: (1) the circumstances of the matter do not require the appointment of a special administrator under the applicable statute; and (2) Loden's appraisals were adequate and trustworthy. III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
Colleen sought the appointment of a special 
administrator pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 560:3-
614 (2018), which provides, in relevant part: 
§ 560:3-614 Special administrator; appointment. A 
special administrator may be appointed:
. . . .  
(2) In a formal proceeding by order of the court on
the petition of any interested person andfinding, after notice and hearing, thatappointment is necessary to preserve the estateor to secure its proper administration includingits administration in circumstances where a 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
general personal representative cannot or should
not act. If it appears to the court that anemergency exists, appointment may be orderedwithout notice. 
This statute grants the Probate Court the discretion to 
appoint a special administrator under the stated circumstances. 
Accordingly, we review the Probate Court's decision to deny a request for any appointment of a special administrator under the abuse of discretion standard. Cf. In re Estate of Damon
, 119 
Hawai# i 500, 503, 199 P.3d 89, 92 (2008) (interpreting Hawai# i 
Probate Rules (HPR) Rule 28(a), which provides that the court 
may 
appoint a master, to grant the court with discretion, which is reviewed for an abuse of discretion); In re Puana, CAAP-16-000881, 2018 WL 2928008, *2 (Haw. App. June 12, 2018) (SDO) (reviewing the dismissal of a petition for the appointment of conservator under HRS § 560:5-401, which provides that a conservator may be appointed, for abuse of discretion). 
"An abuse of discretion occurs where the probate court 
bases its ruling on an erroneous view of the law or on a clearly erroneous assessment of the evidence." Estate of Damon
, 119 
Hawai# i at 503, 199 P.3d at 92 (quotation marks omitted). "In 
other words, '[a]n abuse of discretion occurs where the trial court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.'" 
In re Trust Agreement Dated June 
6, 1974
, 145 Hawai# i 300, 310, 452 P.3d 297, 307 (2019) (citations 
omitted). 
Colleen contends that the Probate Court erred in 
determining that Loden's appraisals were adequate and trustworthy.
 
10  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
No express findings of fact concerning the adequacy or 
trustworthiness of Loden's appraisals were entered by the Probate Court. It thus appears that Colleen submits that the Probate Court must have found, inter alia, that the appraisals were adequate and trustworthy in order to deny the appointment of a special administrator. Findings of fact are reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard. See, e.g., Furukawa v. Honolulu 
Zoological Soc'y
, 85 Hawai# i 7, 12, 936 P.2d 643, 648 (1997). 
IV. DISCUSSION A. Appointment of a Special Administrator As set forth above, under HRS § 560:3-614(2), upon a 
petition from an interested person and after proper notice and a hearing, the Probate Court may appoint a special administrator where such an appointment "is necessary to preserve the estate or to secure its proper administration including its administration in circumstances where a general personal representative cannot or should not act." 
HPR Rule 56 spells out a number of situations 
where a special administrator might be appropriate and necessary.8 
8 HPR Rule 56 provides: Rule 56. WHEN APPROPRIATE. 
An interested person may seek appointment of a special
administrator where necessary to preserve the estate or to
secure its proper administration, including but not limitedto situations where: 
(a) the existence of assets to be probated is
uncertain, and an administrator is required to locate oridentify assets, including investigating the merits ofpursuing a lawsuit or claim for relief; or 
(b) no probate assets exist, but an administrator is
necessary either to complete an action of the deceased or toact on behalf of the deceased or the deceased's estate (other than receipt of no-fault insurance benefits),including but not limited to releasing legal or equitable
(continued...) 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
8HPR Rule 56(f) specifically contemplates an appointment in a 
situation such as this one, where "a conflict of interest arisesor a situation develops where the personal representative cannotor should not act temporarily, and a special administrator is appointed for the specific purpose of either resolving the conflict issue or temporarily acting until the personal representative can resume full powers."
 9  
(...continued)
interests of the deceased and executing documents in pending
or threatened litigation where the deceased is a defendant;or 
(c) for some reason, a probate cannot be opened
rapidly enough to allow the commencement of a lawsuit beforethe running of the statute of limitations or the filing of aresponse or objection in cases where the deceased or theestate is a defendant; provided, however, that the specialadministrator's authority under this paragraph (c) shall belimited to a period of no longer than six (6) months, and apersonal representative must be appointed prior to obtainingcourt approval of any settlement; or 
(d) an emergency or other situation exists such
that the estate will be prejudiced unless a specialadministrator is appointed pending appointment of apersonal representative; or 
(e) objections have been filed to the probate of a
will or to the appointment of a personal representative, andit is advisable to appoint a special administrator toadminister the estate with the powers of a personalrepresentative, but not with the power of distribution,pending resolution of the objections; or 
(f) a conflict of interest arises or a situation 
develops where the personal representative cannot or shouldnot act temporarily, and a special administrator isappointed for the specific purpose of either resolving theconflict issue or temporarily acting until the personalrepresentative can resume full powers. 
All petitions seeking the appointment of a
special administrator shall set forth the grounds forseeking the appointment. 
9 With respect to HPR Rule 56(f), the Commentary to HPR 56 states,
in relevant part: 
Many practitioners are uncertain of the proper use of
a special administration, and some have, once a specialadministration is established, attempted to run a completeprobate without having a personal representative appointed.
(continued...) 
12 9(...continued)FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, it is undisputed that, as a beneficiary of the 
Trust and a devisee of the Estate, as well as a child of Mrs. 
Sullivan, Colleen is an interested person. See HRS § 560:1-201 (defining "interested person" to include, inter alia, heirs, devisees, children, and beneficiaries). Colleen has raised a potential claim that either the Estate or she might have against Loden, who is the Personal Representative of the Estate, as well as the Trustee of the Trust, arising out of the legal and/or otherprofessional services that Loden provided to Mrs. Sullivan in conjunction with her estate plan. Simply stated, the potential claim is that Loden may have negligently advised Mrs. Sullivan and/or provided Mrs. Sullivan with materially inaccurate information – i.e.,  materially inaccurate valuations for the 
gifted limited partnership interests – which Mrs. Sullivan allegedly relied on in making the Will and/or the Trust, to the  
This rule provides guidance as to the appropriate situations
in which a special administrator should be appointed. 
. . . . 
Paragraphs (e) and (f) address the need for a special
administrator when the regular probate proceeding has beencommenced. 
Under paragraph (e), a special administrator may
be appointed where a will contest or objections to theappointment of a specific individual as personalrepresentative have been filed; rather than hold upadministration of the estate pending resolution of thecontested matter, a special administrator can be appointedwith all powers of a personal representative except for thepower of distribution. 
Paragraph (f) clarifies that a special administrator
may be appointed even though a personal representative hasbeen appointed and is acting where, for a limited period orwith respect to a specific issue, the personalrepresentative cannot or should not act. For example, if thepersonal representative has filed a creditor's claim againstthe estate, a special administrator may be appointed for thesole purpose of evaluating, allowing or disallowing, anddefending the claim, while the personal representative cancontinue to serve on other issues. . . . 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
detriment of the Estate or certain beneficiaries of the Estate, 
including Colleen. 
It is alleged that Mrs. Sullivan relied on the 
value of the gifts made to two of her children in determining what to leave to her other two children. Thus, improperly low valuations may have led Mrs. Sullivan to bequeath her other children lesser assets or amounts. On the other hand, given the size of the Estate, improperly high valuations might cause the Estate to incur excess estate taxes, as the value of the gifted limited partnership interests would be carried forward to Mrs. Sullivan's estate tax return. 
The parties make various arguments concerning the merits 
of a potential claim or claims against Loden, which arguments are addressed briefly below, but it was and is premature to attempt to evaluate the merits of any such claim(s). The essential issue before the Probate Court was not whether such claim(s) are meritorious, but rather whether Loden, as Personal Representative of the Estate, could properly administer the Estate with respect to evaluating issues related to a potential claim against Loden himself. The answer is clearly no. 
The duties and powers of a personal representative are 
set forth in Part 7 of Hawaii's Uniform Probate Code, which includes: 
§ 560:3-703 General duties; relation and liability to
persons interested in estate; standing to sue.  (a) A 
personal representative is a fiduciary who shall observe the
standards of care applicable to trustees as described bysection 560:7-302. A personal representative is under a dutyto settle and distribute the estate of the decedent in accordance with the terms of any probated and effective willand this chapter, and as expeditiously and efficiently as isconsistent with the best interests of the estate. The personal representative shall use the authority conferredupon the personal representative by this chapter, the terms 
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the will, if any, and any order in proceedings to which
the personal representative is party for the best interestsof successors to the estate. 
. . . . 
(c) Except as to proceedings which do not survive the
death of the decedent, a personal representative of adecedent domiciled in this State at the decedent's death has the same standing to sue and be sued in the courts of thisState and the courts of any other jurisdiction as thedecedent had immediately prior to death. 
Thusly, under Hawai# i law, the most fundamental duty of 
a personal representative is to act as a fiduciary. A fiduciary 
is "[s]omeone who is required to act for the benefit of another person on all matters within the scope of their relationship; one who owes to another the duties of good faith, loyalty, due care, and disclosure[.]" 
Black's Law Dictionary
 743 (10th ed. 2014). 
The statute specifically directs that a personal representative must act consistent with the best interest of the estate and for the best interests of successors to the estate.
10 Part (c) of the 
statute authorizes a personal representative to file suit on behalf of an estate.
11 
Accordingly, a personal representative has a duty to 
evaluate whether it is in the best interests of the estate and/or persons entitled to receive property of the estate to pursue a claim or file a lawsuit. Here, as the person against whom a potential claim might lie, assuming a legally-cognizable claim might exist, Loden's self-interest was plainly adverse to his 
10 "'Estate' includes the property of the decedent, trust, or other
person whose affairs are subject to [Hawaii's Uniform Probate Code]." HRS 
§ 560:1-201. "'Successors' means persons, other than creditors, who areentitled to property of a decedent under the decedent's will or [Hawaii'sUniform Probate Code]." Id. 
11 HRS § 560:3-715(22) further provides that a personal
representative, acting reasonably for the benefit of interested persons, may
prosecute or defend claims for, inter alia , the protection of the estate. 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fiduciary duty as Personal Representative of the Estate. See
, 
e.g., Leslie v. Estate of Tavares
, 91 Hawai# i 394, 405, 984 P.2d 
1220, 1231 (1999) (discussing conflict of interest arising from 
self-interest that was adverse to fiduciary duty). 
In response to the potential claim(s) against him 
identified by Colleen, Loden first argues that there would be no damages to the Estate because undervaluation would have saved the Estate taxes. 
Loden also disputes that there is any problem with 
his valuations, citing his experience and reputation. He argues that in cases of conflicting evidence, credibility determinations should not be disturbed on appeal, and there was substantial evidence to support the trustworthiness of his appraisals. He questions Colleen's motives in raising the issue, noting the "context" of other ongoing disputes between Colleen and her sisters. Finally, he contends that any damages arising out of improper valuations are speculative. 
Loden's arguments fail to address his fiduciary duties, 
his self-interest in avoiding potential claims against him, and his conflict of interest in representing the Estate with respect to these issues. 
Jenai and Kitty argue that a special administrator is 
not necessary because there is no conflict of interest. They submit that the fact that Loden valued the gifted partnership interests that they received is not a basis for appointing a special administrator because any IRS challenge to the valuations in the gift tax returns is now (arguably) time-barred. They do not address Loden's conflict of interest arising out of potential 
16 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
claims against Loden by the Estate and/or Colleen arising out of 
undervaluation or overvaluation of the gifted partnership interests. 
Jenai and Kitty also argue that the Probate Court did 
not abuse its discretion in denying the appointment of a special administrator because the Estate would unnecessarily incur fees and expenses for a special administrator and a new appraisal of the gifted partnership interests. 
We note, however, that Colleen 
attempted to secure the financial information supporting Loden's valuation, as well as the financial information that Hunsaker opined was necessary to undertake a proper valuation. Her efforts were rebuffed, first by Jenai and Kitty's attorneys, then by Foodland's attorneys, and then by Loden's attorneys. We make no judgment as to whether Jenai, Kitty, and/or Foodland were or were not within their rights to refuse to cooperate with Colleen's out-of-court efforts to evaluate Loden's appraisals. However, under the circumstances of this case, we cannot conclude that the expenses associated with the appointment of a special administrator, without more, constituted sufficient grounds for denying the Petition to Appoint. 
As discussed above, the ultimate merit of any potential 
claim against Loden is not ripe for review. In addition, Loden's self-interest is clearly in conflict with his fiduciary duties as the Personal Representative of the Estate in evaluating and acting on any such claim. Nevertheless, a legally-cognizable claim against Loden must exist in order to warrant the appointment of a special administrator in this case. In other words, if the 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Petition to Appoint failed to describe a claim against Loden upon 
which relief could be granted, then the Probate Court would not have abused its discretion in denying the petition, notwithstanding Loden's self-interest in avoiding the defense of a claim against him. 
Loden, Jenai, and Kitty argue that there is no claim 
against Loden because the IRS's statute of limitations applicable to the 2011 and 2012 Returns has run. However, that argument fails to address the gravamen of the potential claim(s) against Loden, as presented to the Probate Court in conjunction with the Petition to Appoint – that is, Loden may have negligently advised Mrs. Sullivan and/or provided Mrs. Sullivan with materially inaccurate information – i.e., materially inaccurate valuations for the gifted limited partnership interests – which Mrs. Sullivan allegedly relied on in making the Will and/or the Trust, to the detriment of the Estate or certain beneficiaries of the Estate, including Colleen. It is alleged that Mrs. Sullivan relied on the value of the gifts made to two of her children in determining what to leave to her other two children. Thus, improperly low valuations may have led Mrs. Sullivan to bequeath her other children lesser assets or amounts. On the other hand, given the size of the Estate, improperly high valuations might cause the Estate to incur excess estate taxes. 
This potential claim is, at least primarily, in the 
nature of legal or other professional malpractice.
12 The issue of 
12 It appears that, notwithstanding somewhat lengthy discussions in
the briefs, all of the parties agree that the Probate Court did not rule on
(continued...) 
18 12(...continued)FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
whether a malpractice claim can be brought against a decedent's 
attorney (or other professional) by a non-client beneficiary was addressed by the 
Hawai# i Supreme Court in 
Blair v. Ing
, 95 Hawai# i 
247, 21 P.3d 452 (
2001).13 In Blair, after an extensive review of 
case law in other jurisdictions, the supreme court held that "where the relationship between an attorney and a non-client is such that we would recognize a duty of care, the non-client may proceed under either negligence or contract theories of recovery." Id. at 259, 21 P.3d at 464. While the holding in Blair was specific to the facts and circumstances of that case, the supreme court held that the appellants alleged facts that, if proven, would show that the attorney owed them, as beneficiaries of the subject trust, a duty to draft the trust in accordance with the decedents' intent to transfer their assets to the appellants with the minimum tax consequences. Id. at 263, 21 P.3d at 468. The 
supreme court further held that the appellant had alleged facts in their complaint that, if proven, would show that they were intended third party beneficiaries of the contract between the attorney and the decedent trust settlors, thus entitling them to 
the no-contest provisions in the Will and Trust and, therefore, the
interpretation and application of those provisions are not implicated in thisappeal. 
We nevertheless note that, while it does not appear that Colleen's
filing of the Petition to Appoint constitutes a contest or attack on the Willor Trust, and seeking relief against Loden would not appear to constitute aclaim against any part of the Estate, we express no opinion as to whetherColleen might be, in effect, disinherited if she pursues any sort of claim forredistribution of the Estate. 
13 As discussed above, HRS § 560:3-703(c) gives a personal
representative of an estate the same standing to sue as the decedent hadimmediately prior to death, unless the particular claim at issue does notsurvive the death of the decedent. 
19 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
recover. Id. For those reasons, the supreme court concluded that 
the trial court had erred in dismissing the appellants' negligence 
claim and third party beneficiary claim against the attorney. Id.
The case now before us is not even at the pleading stage 
that was analyzed in 
Blair. However, as noted above, if the 
Petition to Appoint had not identified any legally-cognizable claim against Loden, the Probate Court would have been within its discretion to deny the appointment of a special administrator in this case. However, based on the potential claim(s) identified in the Petition to Appoint – that Loden may have negligently advised Mrs. Sullivan and/or provided Mrs. Sullivan with materially inaccurate information, which she allegedly relied on in making the Will and/or the Trust, to the detriment of the Estate or certain beneficiaries of the Estate, including Colleen – we cannot conclude that there was no justiciable claim subject to the administration of the Estate. 
As we have previously concluded that Loden's self-
interest is clearly in conflict with his fiduciary duties as the Personal Representative of the Estate in evaluating and acting on any claim against Loden himself, we further conclude that the Probate Court abused its discretion in denying, in toto, the Petition to Appoint. That said, we recognize that the relief requested in the Petition to Appoint went beyond a generalized request to appoint a special administrator to act with respect to the matters for which Loden has a conflict of interest. The Petition to Appoint sought, inter alia, the appointment of a particular individual selected by Colleen to undertake particular 
20 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
tasks identified in the Petition to Appoint. 
As no argument has 
been made as to the scope of the duties and powers of a special 
administrator in this case, we express no opinion on the matter. On remand, the Probate Court may consider anew Colleen's requests for relief as to the scope of the duties and powers of a special administrator, as well as the positions and arguments of other interested persons with respect to the appointment. 
B. The Adequacy and Trustworthiness of Loden's Appraisals Although identified as a point of error, Colleen does 
not argue that the Probate Court made a specific determination that Loden's appraisals were adequate and trustworthy. Rather, it appears that Colleen argues that the Probate Court must have concluded that the appraisals were adequate and trustworthy in conjunction with the denial of the Petition to Appoint. Loden argues that this court should not disturb the Probate Court's determination of the credibility of the witnesses and the weight of the evidence. Jenai and Kitty state that they believe Loden's appraisals were properly conducted. However, the Probate Court did not make any factual findings regarding Loden's appraisals, one way or the other. Indeed, there were declarations in support of and challenging the adequacy and trustworthiness of Loden's appraisals. 
We conclude that this issue was not ruled on by the 
Probate Court and appellate review would be premature. V. CONCLUSION 
For these reasons, the Probate Court's November 9, 2017 
Amended Judgment, as well as the February 27, 2017 Order Denying 
21 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appointment and Judgment are vacated. 
This case is remanded to
the Probate Court for further proceedings consistent with this 
Opinion.  
On the briefs: Paul Alston,
Kristin L. Holland,(Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing),
 and 
Thomas E. Bush,(Thomas E. Bush Law Office, LLLC),for Petitioner-AppellantCOLLEEN H.A. SULLIVAN. 
Carroll S. Taylor,
(Taylor, Leong & Chee),
 and 
Emily Y. Kawashima Waters,for Respondent-AppelleeELLIOT H. LODEN, Personal Representative. 
Rhonda L. Griswold,
Summer G. Shelverton,Pôhai A.N. Campbell,(Cades Schutte LLP),for Respondents-AppelleesMAUREEN JENAI SULLIVAN WALL and KATHLEEN WENG AI SULLIVAN WO. 
22 