FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAI# I  
---o0o---
STATE OF 
HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
RICHARD JOSE TORRES, Defendant-Appellant
NO. CAAP-20-0000464  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CRIMINAL NO. 1CPC-18-0001532) 
APRIL 8, 2021  
LEONARD, PRESIDING JUDGE, HIRAOKA AND WADSWORTH, JJ.
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.  
This appeal arises out of a defendant's pretrial 
detention and commitment to the custody of the Director of the 
State of Hawai# i (State) Department of Health (Director of 
Health
). As discussed herein, we hold that pursuant to the 
applicable statute, a criminal defendant who has been ordered to 
be detained pretrial in the custody of the Director of Health, in  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
an institution for detention, assessment, care, and treatment, 
shall receive credit for the time of detention in such institution, as well as receive any other statutory credit due for time served in a correctional institution. 
Defendant-Appellant Richard Jose Torres (Torres) 
appeals from the May 27, 2020 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence 
as to Count 1 (Judgment), and challenges the July 9, 2020 
Findings of Fact [(FOFs)] and Conclusions of Law [(COLs)] and 
Order Denying Defendant's Motion for Correction of Illegal 
Sentence, for Reduction of Sentence, for a New Trial, or 
Alternatively, to Dismiss Felony Information as De Minimis (Order 
Denying Relief) entered against him by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 
I. BACKGROUND 
On January 10, 2018, Defendant-Appellant Torres was 
arrested at Kûhiô Beach Park in the City and County of Honolulu 
on suspicion of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree and Park Closure. 
Torres was held for two days and then released 
pending investigation by the Honolulu Police Department. 
On September 25, 2018, the State filed a Felony 
Information and Non-Felony Complaint (C
omplaint) charging Torres 
with Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, in violation 
of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1243 (2014), and Park 
1 The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong presided. 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Closure, in violation of Revised Ordinances of Honolulu 
§ 10-1.2(a)(12) (2017). 
Upon a finding of probable cause and 
issuance of a bench warrant, Torres was arrested on September 27, 2018. Bail was set at $11,000 and Torres never posted bail. 
On January 3, 2019, while Torres was detained and 
awaiting trial at the Oahu Community Correctional Center (OCCC), 
on motion of defense counsel, the Circuit Court ordered an 
examination of Torres's fitness to proceed to trial. On March 18, 2019, the Circuit Court found Torres unfit to proceed and suspended these criminal proceedings until further court order. The Judicial Determination of Unfitness to Proceed, Suspension of Proceedings and Order of Commitment to the Custody of the 
Director of Health (Unfitness Order), states, inter alia: 
A. The proceedings against [Torres] are suspended
until further order of the Court. 
B. During suspension of the proceedings: 
1) [Torres] is committed to the custody of
the Director of Health to be placed at the Hawaii State 
Hospital or an appropriate institution for detention, care,
and treatment  for so long as such unfitness shall endure. 
2) [Torres's] commitment shall take effect
upon the filing of this Order. 
3) The person having present custody of
[Torres], or if [Torres] is not in custody, then counsel for
[Torres], shall forthwith make arrangements for suchcommitment. . . . 
. . . . 
C. [Torres] shall not be authorized to leave the
institution in which he is placed without prior Court order. 
(Emphasis added). 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Following a series of fitness hearings and submissions 
by the court-appointed examiners, on December 11, 2019, the 
Circuit Court found Torres fit to proceed to trial and entered a 
Judicial Determination of Fitness to Proceed and Order (
Fitness 
Order). In the Fitness Order, the court confirmed Torres's 
pretrial status of incarceration at OCCC with bail set at 
$11,000. 
A bench trial was conducted on February 20, 2020. The 
Circuit Court found Torres guilty of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree and not guilty of Park Closure. The court entered a Judgment of Acquittal as to the Park Closure charge and 
requested a pre-sentencing investigation and report (PSI), which 
was submitted on May 14, 2020. 
At sentencing on May 27, 2020, the Circuit Court heard 
arguments from the prosecution, defense, and Torres himself. In 
response to the court's inquiry as to whether the defense had any "additions or corrections" to the PSI, counsel raised the issue of pretrial credit for time served, noting deficient and/or a lack of certifications as to Torres's time in the custody of the Director of Health, as well as Torres's time detained at OCCC between his arrest and commitment to the Director of Health. The Circuit Court engaged in the following discussion with defense counsel regarding the period for which Torres was to receive credit for time served: 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: . . . Mr. Torres was held in custody from
that September 27, 2018 date. 
MR. BETTENCOURT: Right. 
THE COURT: Bail was set. He obviously was not able
to post bail. 
He came in for arraignment on this case on October
4th, 2018. He came into arraignment for both cases at this
time and remained in custody with the Department of PublicSafety until March 18, 2019, at which point the CircuitCourt found Mr. Torres unfit to proceed and committed him tothe custody of the Director of the Department of Health.And as Mr. Torres indicated, he eventually found himself inKahi Mohala. 
THE DEFENDANT: 
Right. 
THE COURT: He remained in the custody of the
Department of Health all the way up until December 11th of2019, when he was found fit to proceed. The cases were reinstated and he was transferred back into the custody ofthe Department of Public Safety. 
So Mr. Torres should have received credit from 
September 27, 2018 when the bench warrant was served up
until March 18th, 2019 when he was found unfit to proceed.He should have also began receiving credit when the case wasreinstated on December 11th, 2019, when the case was resetfor trial, all the way up until today. 
That should be the 
proper accounting of credit for Mr. Torres. 
. . . . 
MR. BETTENCOURT: Well, we object on constitutional
grounds. There's no excuse for excluding the time in which
he was in custody. If he had walked away from Kahi Mohala,he could have been charged with escape, because he was incustody. 
. . . . 
MR: BETTENCOURT: Because if he's in custody for
purposes of escape, he's in purpose -- in custody forpurposes of being in -- confined. 
THE COURT: Well, at minimum the dates that the court
has indicated should be calculated for credit. 
MR BETTENCOURT: 
Right. 
THE COURT: Subject to any additional finding that the
time that he was in the custody of the Department of Health
may also be included as credit. I'll leave that for smarte
r 
judges to decide. But at the very minimum, by this court's
calculation, Mr. Torres should have at least on the order of11 to 12 months of credit. 
. . . . 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: . . . and as Mr. Bettencourt indicated,
depending on the constitutional analysis for the time with
Department of Health, that might even be increased. But at a very minimum, those are the numbers --
MR. BETTENCOURT: I don't know of any statutory
provision that excludes that time. 
THE COURT: I suppose it would be the definition of
custody, right? 
But other than the dispute on the actual amount of of
credit, Mr. Bettencourt. 
MR. BETTENCOURT: Yeah. 
(Emphasis added). 
The Circuit Court sentenced Torres to serve an 
indeterminate term of three years imprisonment with credit for 
time served, referencing "the minimum of which the court has already outlined at the beginning of this sentencing hearing."
  
The following exchange ensued: 2
THE DEFENDANT: . . . you're gonna give me for 20
months' credit already. 
THE COURT: You will get at least the 11 to 12 months. 
THE DEFENDANT: What? How come you're not gonna give
-- credit me for the time in Kahi Mohala. 
THE COURT: I don't know if the statute allows that. 
If the statute allows and you're eligible for that credit,
you will get it. I just don't know -- I'm not saying thatyou don't get it. 
THE DEFENDANT: Yeah. 
THE COURT: I just don't know if you get that credit. 
THE DEFENDANT: When do you think I'm gonna find out? 
2 The court also ordered Torres to pay a $500 fine and $105 Crime
Victim Compensation ( CVC) fee. Although Torres does not challenge the CVC fee
on appeal, it appears that the court plainly erred in imposing the fee despite
its finding that "[a]ll other fees and costs are waived for inability to pay."See State v. Pulgados, 148 Hawai #i 361, 370, 477 P.3d 155, 164 (App. 2020)
("If it is determined that the defendant is unable to pay the CVC fee, thenthe sentencing court must waive the imposition of the CVC fee as stated in HRS§ 351-62(a), as well as HRS § 706-605(6)."). 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
MR. BETTENCOURT: We may have to file a motion on that
and raise it that way. 
THE COURT: But for all the time that you were in at
O.C.C.C., you get credit. There's no doubt about that in my
mind. 
THE DEFENDANT: 
Uh-huh. 
THE COURT: I'm not sure about the time in Kahi 
Mohala. 
. . . . 
THE DEFENDANT: . . . So I still might have about --
about a year and a half more to go. 
THE COURT: Something like -- it might -- it depends
on what the Parole Board sets. 
THE DEFENDANT: Yeah, but, you know, I -- yeah, I did
the nine months. I did all the programs there. 
THE COURT: Well, they may have you do it again. And 
I don't know exactly what the Paroling Board is gonnarequire. 
(Emphasis added). 
The Judgment reflects the three-year term and that 
Torres was "to receive credit for time served," but it does not 
specify whether that credit was to include Torres's commitment to the custody of the Director of Health. 
On June 15, 2020, pursuant to Hawai# i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP 
) Rule 35(a), Torres filed a Motion for Correction 
of Illegal Sentence, for Reduction of Sentence, for a New Trial, 
or Alternatively, to Dismiss Felony Information as De Minimis 
(HRPP Rule 35 Motion), arguing, inter alia, that the court failed 
to properly apply the statutes governing credit for time served. 
The HRPP Rule 35 Motion requested, inter alia: 
1. An Order of Resentencing, after requiring the
Department of Public Safety to comply with H.R.S.§ 706-671(1) by providing this Court with adocumentation of all of time that Defendant TORRES was 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
detained prior to sentencing in a "State or local
correctional or other institution" prior tosentencing; 
2. An Order of Resentencing pursuant to H.R.P.P. Rule35(a), after performing its judicial function ofinterpreting and applying the statutory provisions ofH.R.S. § 706-671(1) as statutorily including theHawai #i State Hospital and Kahi Mohala under the
phrase "State or local correctional or other 
institution ", and such legal application is both
required and authorized by this Court's inherentjudicial power that cannot be delegated to anyexecutive agency[.] 
Torres argued that "the complete absence of any statute 
or legislative history authorizing a limitation of the expansive 
and differential language requires this Court to grant the presentence credit sought, despite the failure of the Director [of] DPS to perform his statutory duty." Torres maintained that his sentence was "statutorily and constitutionally deficient due to the failure of [the Circuit Court] to interpret and effectuate the legislative intent behind [HRS §§] 704-406 and 706-671." 
On June 23, 2020, the court heard arguments on the HRPP 
Rule 35 Motion and determined that time spent in the custody of the Director of Health is ineligible for credit. The Order Denying Relief, entered on July 9, 2020, includes the following COLs concerning Torres's pretrial detention credit: 
2. Under [HRS] § 706-671(1), the phrase "When a Defendant
who is sentenced to imprisonment has previously beendetained in any State or local correctional or otherinstitution...." does not include an institution under the authority of the Director of Health. Therefore, aDefendant should not receive credit for time served while in the Custody of the Director of Health. 
3. The commentary to HRS § 706-671 clearly specifies thattime spent in incarceration before sentence becredited; as previously mentioned, incarceration doesnot include time spent with the Director of Health. 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4. As a result, the interpretation of the term
incarceration is also at issue. 
5. The supplemental commentary is even clearer statingthat a convicted person shall receive credit for anytime served in any state or local correctionalfacility. Here, given the language of the statute andthe commentary, it is this Court's interpretation thatany time spent with the Director of Health is notincluded as time in a local correctional facility.
See HRS § 706-671 cmt. 
Torres timely filed a notice of appeal. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Torres raises two points of error on appeal, contending 
that: (1) the Circuit Court failed to properly construe the 
statutory language concerning pretrial detention credit, and imposed non-statutory constraints on the provisions of HRS § 706-671(1) that conflict with the remedial intent of the Hawai# i 
Penal Code and violates Torres's constitutional rights to due process, equal protection, and freedom from double punishment; and (2) there is no evidence in the record to support the Circuit Court's FOFs and/or COLs that Torres's involuntary detention by the Director of Health pursuant to the Unfitness Order, at the secured facilities of Kahi Mohala, was not substantially the same custody as pretrial detention in the custody of the Department of 
Public Safety (DPS). 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW 
The Circuit Court's COLs, including with regard to 
questions of statutory interpretation and constitutional law, are 
reviewed de novo, under the right/wrong standard. See Haw. Nat'l Bank v. Cook, 100 Hawai# i 2, 7, 58 P.3d 60, 65 (2002); State v. 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rauch, 94 Hawai# i 315, 323, 13 P.3d 324, 332 (2000). "[T]he 
right/wrong standard . . . allows the appellate court to examine 
the facts and answer the question without being required to give any weight to the trial court's answer to it." State v. Russo, 
141 Hawai# i 181, 189, 407 P.3d 137, 145 (2017) (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
"A conclusion of law that is 
supported by the trial court's findings of fact and that reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be overturned." Dan v. State, 76 Hawai# i 423, 428, 879 P.2d 528, 
533 (1994) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). IV. DISCUSSION 
Torres contends, and the State agrees, that the Circuit 
Court erred in (1) failing to give Torres credit for the time he was detained in the custody of the Director of Health, and (2) failing to obtain a complete certification of the length of Torres's detention(s), prior to sentence, from the officer(s) that had custody of Torres. 
HRS § 706-671(1) (2014) provides, in relevant part: 
§ 706-671 Credit for time of detention to sentence;
credit for imprisonment under earlier sentence for same
crime.  (1) When a defendant who is sentenced to
imprisonment has previously been detained in any State or
local correctional or other institution  following the
defendant's arrest for the crime for which sentence is 
imposed, such period of detention following the defendant'sarrest shall be deducted from the minimum and maximum terms of such sentence. The officer having custody of thedefendant shall furnish a certificate to the court at the 
time of sentence, showing the length of such detention of
the defendant prior to sentence in any State or local
correctional or other institution , and the certificate shall 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
be annexed to the official records of the defendant's 
commitment. 
(Emphasis added). 
HRS § 704-406 (Supp. 2019) provides, in relevant part: 
§ 704-406 Effect of finding of unfitness to proceed
and regained fitness to proceed.  (1) If the court
determines that the defendant lacks fitness to proceed, theproceeding against the defendant shall be suspended . . .
and the court shall commit the defendant to the custody  of 
the director of health to be placed in an appropriateinstitution for detention , assessment, care, and
treatment[.] 
(Emphasis added). 
"When construing a statute, our foremost obligation is 
to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the legislature, 
which is to be obtained primarily from the language from the statute itself." State v. Camara, 81 Hawai# i 324, 329, 916 P.2d 
1225, 1230 (1996). 
Where there is no ambiguity in the language of a statute,
and the literal application of the language would notproduce an absurd or unjust result, clearly inconsistentwith the purposes and policies of the statute, there is noroom for judicial construction and interpretation, and thestatute must be given effect according to its plain andobvious meaning. 
Tax Found. of Haw. v. State, 144 Hawai# i 175, 203, 439 P.3d 127, 
155 (2019) (citation and brackets omitted). 
Here, the plain language of HRS § 706-671(1) is 
unambiguous. When this statute refers to being detained in any 
state or local "correctional or other institution," it is plainly 
not limited to correctional institutions. (Emphasis added). The 
directive of HRS § 704-406 is equally clear in that, upon a 
determination of unfitness to proceed, a trial court shall, inter 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
alia, commit a defendant to the custody of the Director of Health 
to be placed in "an appropriate institution for detention, 
assessment, care, and treatment." (Emphasis added). 3
"'It is a cardinal rule of statutory construction that 
courts are bound, if rational and practicable, to give effect to 
all parts of a statute, and that no clause, sentence, or word shall be construed as superfluous, void, or insignificant if a construction can be legitimately found which will give force to and preserve all the words of the statute.'" Cty. of Kaua# i v. 
Hanalei River Holdings Ltd., 139 Hawai# i 511, 526, 394 P.3d 741, 
756 (2017) (quoting Camara v. Agslud, 67 Haw. 212, 215-16, 685 P.2d 794, 797 (1984)). Although courts may look to a statute's commentaries as interpretive aids, we may not use them to supplant clear statutory language and introduce ambiguity where none clearly appears. See State v. Maelega, 80 Hawai# i 172, 178-
79, 907 P.2d 758, 764-65 (1995). 
Here, the Circuit Court relied on the Commentary to HRS 
§ 706-671 to limit the statute's application to a defendant's time detained in a correctional facility, disregarding the 
3 The terms "detained" or "detention" are equally unambiguous.
Black's Law Dictionary defines "detention" as "[t]he act or an instance of
holding a person in custody; confinement or compulsory delay." Black's Law Dictionary 563 (11th ed. 2019). It is clear that an order of commitment pursuant to HRS § 704-406 includes custodial detention and that the committeddefendant is not free to leave the subject institution. Indeed, here, theCircuit Court's Unfitness Order included that Torres "shall not be authorized to leave the institution in which he is placed without prior Court order." 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statute's distinct reference to "other" institutions.4 This is 
clearly wrong. 
Accordingly, we hold that pursuant to HRS § 706-671(1), 
a criminal defendant who has been detained pretrial in the 
custody of the Director of Health, in an institution for detention, assessment, care, and treatment pursuant to HRS § 704-406, shall receive credit for the time of detention in such institution, as well as receive any credit due under HRS § 706-671(1) for time served in a correctional institution. In this case, the Circuit Court erred in concluding, in the Order Denying Relief, that Torres shall not receive credit for time he was detained in the custody of the Director of Health pursuant to the Unfitness Order. 
In addition, with respect to the process for 
determination of credit for time served, HRS § 706-671(1) requires that: 
The officer having custody of the defendant shall furnish a 
certificate to the court at the time of sentence , showing
the length of such detention of the defendant prior to 
4 While the Commentary relied on by the Circuit Court speaks in
terms of "time spent in incarceration before sentence," it does so in order to
point out that the statute is intended to provide "some equalization" betweendefendants who obtain pre-sentence release and those who do not. HRS § 706-671 cmt. (2014). It does not address the issue at bar. 
Similarly, the guidance provided by the Supplemental Commentary
relied on by the Circuit Court is that (a) the statutory credit applies toboth minimum and maximum terms, and (b) the 2012 amendment to the statute wasintended to clarify that a defendant is not entitled to credit for time servedfor a subsequent crime. HRS § 706-671 supp. cmt. (2014). Although theSupplemental Commentary uses the (incomplete) phrase "in any state or localcorrectional facility" in stating the guidance concerning minimum and maximumterms, it does so while addressing a different issue than the one at bar andnot as guidance on whether the statute should be interpreted as limiting itsapplication to detention in correctional facilities. See id. 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sentence in any State or local correctional or other
institution , and the certificate shall be annexed to the
official records of the defendant's commitment. 
(Emphasis added). 
Here, it does not appear that either DPS or the 
Director of Health provided this mandatory certification to the 
Circuit Court at or prior to sentencing. In addition, in State v. Mason, 79 Hawai# i 175, 184, 900 P.2d 172, 181 (App. 1995), 
this court held that "it is the duty of the sentencing court to determine the amount of credit to be awarded the defendant when presented with a claim for uncredited time." 
Therefore, on 
remand, both DPS and the Director of Health must comply with HRS 
§ 706-671(1) forthwith
, and provide the Circuit Court with a 
certificate showing the length of Torres's detention, prior to 
the sentence imposed in this case for his conviction of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, in their respective "State or local correctional or other institution[s]" in which Torres was detained. Thereafter, the Circuit Court shall determine the amount of credit to be awarded Torres in conjunction with an amended judgment of conviction and sentence as to Count 1 (or other order of resentencing).
5 
In light of the above, we need not address Torres's 
other arguments. 
5 In addition, in the interests of justice and efficiency, the
Circuit Court may reconsider its ruling that Torres must pay a CVC fee of $105
notwithstanding its determination that Torres is unable to pay other fees andmaking no determination that Torres is or will be able to pay the CVC fee.See supra n.2. 
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
V. CONCLUSION 
For these reasons, we vacate in part the May 27, 2020 
Judgment, with respect to sentencing only, and vacate the July 9, 
2020 Order Denying Relief. 
This case is remanded to the Circuit 
Court for resentencing in accordance with this Opinion. On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
15 David Glenn Bettencourt, for Defendant-Appellant. 
Brian R. Vincent, Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu, for Plaintiff-Appellee. 