  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000537
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee
v.
 
JAMES CARVALHO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(Puna Division)
(CASE NO. 3DTC-13-018771)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant James Carvalho (Carvalho) by amended 
complaint with using a false certificate of inspection (Count 1); driving without a license (Count 2); and driving without motor vehicle insurance as a second offense (Count 3). After a bench trial, the District Court of the Third Circuit (District Court)
1 
acquitted Carvalho of Count 1 and found him guilty as charged of Counts 2 and 3. The District Court entered its Judgment on 
February 11, 2014. 
On appeal, Carvalho contends: (1) there was
 
insufficient evidence to support his conviction for driving
 
without a license; (2) the driving without a license charge was
 
1The Honorable Harry P. Freitas presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defective; and (3) the District Court erred in failing to
 
properly advise him of his right to testify or not to testify. 
We reverse Carvalho's conviction for driving without a license,
 but otherwise affirm the District Court's Judgment.
 
I.
 
We resolve the arguments raised by Carvalho on appeal
 
as follows:
 
1. We conclude that there was insufficient evidence
 
to support Carvalho's conviction for driving without a license. 
Carvalho argues, and the State does not dispute, that the
 evidence showed that Carvalho had an active driver's license that
 had not yet expired, but that his license had been suspended. 
Carvalho, however, was not charged in the amended 
complaint with driving while his license was suspended, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 286-132 (2007).
2 
Instead, he was charged with driving without a license, in violation of HRS § 286-102 (2007 & Supp. 2014), which required the State, among other things, to prove that Carvalho operated a motor vehicle "without first being appropriately examined and duly licensed as a qualified driver" of that category of motor vehicle. The State argues that it can prosecute a person who drives with a license that has been suspended under either HRS § 286-102 or HRS § 286-132. We disagree. Although the State may have presented sufficient evidence to prove that Carvalho drove while his license was suspended in violation of HRS § 286-132, it did not present sufficient evidence to show that he drove without a license in violation of HRS 286-102. See State v. Matautia, 81 
Hawai
'i 76, 83, 912 P.2d 573, 580 (1996) (concluding that except 
for the common requirement that the defendant must have operated 
2HRS § 286-132 provides:
 
Except as provided in section 291E-62, no resident or
nonresident whose driver's license, right, or privilege to operate
a motor vehicle in this State has been canceled, suspended, or
revoked may drive any motor vehicle upon the highways of this
State while the license, right, or privilege remains canceled,
suspended, or revoked.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
a motor vehicle, the statutory elements for the offenses of
 
driving without a license and driving while a license is
 suspended "are totally different"). Accordingly, we reverse
 Carvalho's conviction for driving without a license.
 
2. Because we are reversing Carvalho's conviction for
 
driving without a license, we need not address his claim that the
 driving without a license charge was defective. 
3. Carvalho contends that his conviction on Count 3
 
must be vacated because the District Court failed to properly
 advise him of his right to testify or not to testify. We
 disagree. 
Carvalho exercised his right to testify and testified 
in his own defense at trial. In State v. Lewis, 94 Hawai
'i 292, 
12 P.3d 1233 (2000), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that "the 
colloquy requirement to advise a defendant that he or she has a right not to testify," which it imposed in Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai
'i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995), "is required only in cases in 
which the defendant does not testify." Lewis, 94 Hawai 'i at 295, 
12 P.3d at 1236 (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). The supreme court explained the distinction between the situation where a defendant does not testify and where the defendant does testify. 
We see no reason to adopt a collateral Tachibana colloquy
for instances where a defendant chooses to testify. It has
 been suggested that while the procedural safeguard of a
waiver proceeding is required where a defendant does not
testify, a similar proceeding is unnecessary if a defendant
chooses to testify because of the likelihood that (1) the
defendant has received "one or more such advisements from
 law enforcement officials during the course of a criminal
investigation," (2) defense counsel would not "allow a
defendant to take the stand without a full explanation of
the right to remain silent and the possible consequences of
waiving that right," and (3) any defendant who testifies
would expect to be cross-examined.
 
We concur that when a defendant takes the stand to present
his or her own defense, the probability is great that the
defendant and his or her counsel will have discussed the
 advantages and risks of testifying, the nature of the
defense(s) to be presented during the defendant's testimony,
and the subjects upon which the defendant will likely be
challenged on cross-examination. Such a discussion must
 necessarily bring home to a defendant that, by taking the
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stand, he or she will have waived his or her right not to
testify. In light of this greater probability, there is
"less need for intervention by the trial court and an
on-the-record advisement concerning these matters before the
defendant testifies."
 
In view of the foregoing, we hold that Tachibana does not
require that the court engage in the colloquy if the
defendant chooses to testify in his or her own behalf.
 
Id. at 296, 12 P.3d at 1237 (brackets, citations, and footnotes
 
omitted).
 
Based on Lewis, we conclude that Carvalho's claim that 
his conviction on Count 3 must be vacated because the District Court did not properly advise him of his right to testify or not to testify is without merit. Carvalho provides no basis for believing that his lawyer failed to properly advise him of his rights. Indeed, Carvalho's lawyer stated: "Your Honor, I would certify on the record that I did discuss with Mr. Carvalho his Tachibana rights." Carvalho also fails to provide a persuasive reason for this court to conclude that his decision to testify was anything other than voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently made. See id. at 296, 12 P.3d at 1237; State v. Monteil, 134 
Hawai
'i 361, 373, 341 P.3d 567, 579 (2014). We therefore affirm 
Carvalho's conviction on Count 3. 
II.
 
Based on the foregoing, we reverse Carvalho's
 
conviction and sentence on Count 2 for driving without a license,
 and we affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment in all other respects.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 29, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Craig W. Jerome 
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant
 Chief Judge
Patricia A. Loo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
4
 