NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000510 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JP MORGAN CHASE BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MARGARET J. YOUNG, JORDAN M. YOUNG,
Defendants-Appellants,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-50, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-0224)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Margaret J. Young and Jordan M.
 
Young (together, Youngs) appeal from the following entered in the
 
1
Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit  (circuit court): (1) the
 
"Renewed Findings Of Fact, Conclusions Of Law, Order Granting

 
Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment Against All Parties And
 
For Interlocutory Decree Of Foreclosure Filed May 3, 2013,"
 entered January 2, 2014; and (2) the "Renewed Judgment," entered
 January 28, 2014.
 
On appeal, the Youngs contend the circuit court erred

 
in granting the motion for summary judgment (MSJ) of Plaintiff-
Appellee JP Morgan Chase Bank, National Association (Chase)
 
because (1) Chase failed to admit the Youngs' loan general ledger
 
into evidence; (2) there were genuine issues of material fact as
 
1
 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to whether Chase owned the loan; (3) the affirmation of Chase's
 
attorney should have been stricken as defective; and (4) summary
 judgment was premature given the Youngs' discovery needs.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude the
 Youngs' appeal is without merit.
1. General Ledger
 
The Youngs contend that "Chase deliberately failed to
 
submit into evidence a verified loan General Ledger" and,
 
therefore, the circuit court erred in granting Chase's MSJ.
 Although Chase did not initially attach a general ledger to their
 MSJ, the circuit court gave leave for Chase to supplement their
 MSJ with a general ledger and continued the MSJ hearing until
 Chase had done so. Chase subsequently attached the general
 ledger and transaction history, along with an affidavit from
 Chase's attorney, to its supplemental motion for summary judgment
 filed June 12, 2013.
 
The Youngs also appear to challenge the sufficiency of 
Chase's admitted general ledger. We are unable to consider the merits of the Youngs' challenge because the Youngs failed to include the transcript of the June 4, 2013 or July 25, 2013 MSJ hearings (MSJ Transcripts) in the record on appeal. The Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court has held that "[t]he burden is upon appellant in an appeal to show error by reference to matters in the record, and he [or she] has the responsibility of providing an adequate transcript. The law is clear in this jurisdiction that the appellant has the burden of furnishing the appellate court with a sufficient record to positively show the alleged error." Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai
'i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 
558 (1995) (citations and quotation marks omitted). Without the transcript from the hearing, we have no basis upon which to review the propriety of the circuit court's decision or the merits of the Youngs' appeal. See id.; see also Lepere v. United 
Public Workers, Local 646, AFL-CIO, 77 Hawai
'i 471, 473, 887 P.2d 
1029, 1031 (1995); Union Bldg. Materials Corp. v. Kakaako Corp., 
2
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5 Haw. App. 146, 153, 682 P.2d 82, 88 (1984); Tradewinds Hotel,
 
Inc. v. Cochran, 8 Haw. App. 256, 266, 799 P.2d 60, 66 (1990)
 (holding that the court is unable to review asserted errors where
 appellant has failed to provide a transcript of proceedings
 below).
2. Standing to Foreclose
 
The Youngs contend that Chase lacked standing to
 
foreclose on their Mortgage because Chase was not adequately
 
assigned the Promissary Note (Note) and Mortgage from Washington
 
Mutual Bank, F.A. (Washington Mutual). First, the Youngs argue
 
that it was a federal crime for Washington Mutual to assign the
 
Note to Chase because Washington Mutual had filed for bankruptcy
 and been appointed a receiver before assigning the Note to Chase. 
In support of their argument, the Youngs attached a copy of
 Washington Mutual's voluntary petition for bankruptcy and a
 report from Offices of the Inspector General to their opposition
 to motion for summary judgment (Opposition to MSJ).
 
"When a motion for summary judgment is made and 
supported as provided in this rule, an adverse party may not rest upon the mere allegations or denials of the adverse party's pleading, but the adverse party's response, by affidavits or as otherwise provided in this rule, must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Hawai
'i Rules 
of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(e); see K.M. Young & Assoc., 
Inc. v. Cieslik, 4 Haw. App. 657, 664, 675 P.2d 793, 799 (1983) 
(holding that the non-moving party in a properly supported motion for summary judgment must respond by setting forth specific facts showing a genuine issue of material fact). The Youngs failed to offer specific facts demonstrating that their Note and Mortgage were part of the bankruptcy estate, establish how a stay would have affected Washington Mutual, or determine how the appointment of a receiver affected Washington Mutual. 
Second, the Youngs contend that "Chase was unable to
 
claim that it was assigned a mortgage entered into by [Washington
 Mutual] on March 4, 2008, when in fact [Washington Mutual] ceased
 to exist and had no capacity to contract as of January 1, 2005,
 more than three years earlier . . . ." The Youngs raised this
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argument in their Opposition to MSJ and attached a page from a
 
United States Securities and Exchange Commission report in
 support of their argument. The included page states, in part: 
On January 1, 2005, the [First American Title Insurance
Company's (Company)] state savings bank, the former
Washington Mutual Bank merged into [Washington Mutual], and
ceased to exist; subsequently, [Washington Mutual] changed
its name to Washington Mutual Bank . . . . Consequently, the
Company no longer owns a state savings bank that is subject
to regulation and supervision by the Director of Financial
Institutions of the State of Washington.
 
The Youngs failed to present evidence demonstrating how the
 
merger would have affected Washington Mutual in the current
 proceedings. Therefore, the Youngs failed to show a genuine
 issue of material fact as to any of their challenges to Chase's
 MSJ. See K.M. Young, 4 Haw. App. at 664, 675 P.2d at 799. 
Finally, the Youngs contend that Washington Mutual did
 
not adequately endorse the Note to Chase, as required under
 Hawaii's Uniform Commercial Code, because the Note contains a
 blank endorsement. Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 490:3-205(b)
 
(2011 Repl.) permits blank endorsements and provides
 
(b) If an indorsement is made by the holder of an
instrument and it is not a special indorsement, it is a
"blank indorsement". When indorsed in blank, an instrument
becomes payable to bearer and may be negotiated by transfer
of possession alone until specially indorsed.
 
This court has repeatedly held that under HRS § 490:3­
205(b), "a trial court does not err in finding that a plaintiff 
is the holder of a note when the plaintiff bears the note, a blank endorsement establishes that the plaintiff is the holder of the note, and there is a declaration stating that the note is a true and accurate copy of the note in the plaintiff's possession." Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. Pasion, No. 
CAAP-12-0000657, 2015 WL 4067259, at *3 (App. June 30, 2015) cert. dismissed, No. SCWC-12-0000657, 2015 WL 4607737 (Haw. July 30, 2015); see Mortgage Elec. Registration Sys., Inc. v. Wise, No. CAAP–11–0000444, 2012 WL 5971062, at *1 (App. Nov. 29, 2012), aff'd on other grounds, 130 Hawai
'i 11, 304 P.3d 1192 (2013). 
Here, Chase provided evidence that it possessed the Note, the blank endorsement established that Chase could possess the Note, and the MSJ attached a declaration establishing that the Note was a true and accurate copy of the Note in Chase's possession. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, the assignment of the Note to Chase was sufficient and
 
the circuit court did not err in granting summary judgment in
 favor of Chase.
 
3. Attorney Affirmation
 
The Youngs contend the attorney affirmation from
 
Chase's attorney should be stricken because the affirmation does
 
not conform with HRS § 667-18 (Supp. 2014). Specifically, the
 Youngs argue that the affirmation is insufficient because it
 "merely provided hearsay" and admits that Chase's representatives
 "were unable to attest to the 'accuracy of the notarizations
 contained in the documents' as unable to be 'reliably evaluated,'
 and 'could not make any representations about affidavits or other
 notarized documents that were not (a) created by
 [Chase] . . . and (b) signed by [Chase.]'"
 
HRS § 667-18 provides that "[a]n attorney who files a
 
complaint in a mortgage foreclosure action shall affirm in
 writing, under penalty of perjury, that to the best of the
 attorney's knowledge, information, and belief the allegations
 contained in the complaint are warranted by existing law and have
 evidentiary support." Chase's attorney filed an "Affirmation of
 Attorney" on May 3, 2013, which provided, in relevant part:
 
2. I received communication from representative of
[Chase] regarding this action declaring that the
representative (a) personally reviewed [Chase's] documents
and records relating to this case for factual accuracy; and
(b) confirmed the affidavit(s) and any other notarized
documents, the representative could not make any
representations about affidavits or other notarized
documents that were not: (a) created by [Chase] following
the borrower's most recent default and (b) signed by [Chase]
either in its capacity as servicer, attorney-in-fact, or
beneficiary under current procedures that ensure personal
review by the signatory and execution in the presence of a
notary as the "accuracy of the notarizations contained in
the documents" cannot otherwise be reliably evaluated.
 
. . . .

 
3. Based upon my communication with representatives of
[Chase], and upon my own inspection and other reasonable
inquiry under the circumstances, I affirm that to the best
of my knowledge, information, and belief, the Summons,
Complaint, and other papers filed with the Court in this
matter contain no false statements of fact or law and that
 [Chase] has legal standing to bring this foreclosure action.
 
The attorney affirmation affirmed that, to the best of the
 
attorney's knowledge, information, and belief, the allegations
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
found in the Complaint were warranted by existing law and had
 
evidentiary support in the form of confirmed affidavits and
 notarized documents. The attorney affirmation satisfied the
 requirements under HRS § 667-18.
 
We are unable to consider the merits of the Youngs' 
other challenges to the evidentiary sufficiency of the statements made in the affirmation because the Youngs failed to include the MSJ Transcripts in the record on appeal. Without the transcript from the hearing, we have no basis upon which to review the propriety of the circuit court's evidentiary rulings. See 
Lepere, 77 Hawai
'i at 473, 887 P.2d at 1031. 
4. HRCP Rule 56(f) Request for Continuance 
The Youngs also contend the circuit court erred in
 
denying their request for more time to conduct discovery. In
 their Opposition to MSJ, the Youngs argued that additional time
 for discovery for "standing issues [was] obviously needed in the
 form of document production and oral depositions . . . to
 determine the standing/jurisdictional facts of this case[.]" The
 Youngs' attorney attached an affidavit to the Opposition to MSJ
 that provided:
 
3. In order to determine whether the claimed
 
assignment of the subject mortgage and note to [Chase], for
example, is valid, I need to take the oral depositions of
the signatories thereto, as well as to secure the relevant
and material production of documents from [Chase], from the
Receiver and the Bankruptcy Trustee for [Washington Mutual]
as well.
 
We construe the Youngs' request for more time as a
 
request for continuance, pursuant to HRCP Rule 56(f).2 Ralston
 
v. Yim, 129 Hawai 'i 46, 63, 292 P.3d 1276, 1293 (2013) ("HRCP 
Rule 56(f) is the appropriate means by which parties can ensure 
that they have adequate time to respond to a motion for summary 
2
 [HRCP] Rule 56. Summary Judgment
 
. . . .
 
(f) When Affidavits are Unavailable. Should it appear
from the affidavits of a party opposing the motion that the
party cannot for reasons stated present by affidavit facts
essential to justify the party's opposition, the court may
refuse the application for judgment or may order a
continuance to permit affidavits to be obtained or
depositions to be taken or discovery to be had or may make
such other order as is just.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
judgment."). We review a circuit court's denial of a request for 
continuance under an abuse of discretion standard of review. See 
Associates Fin. Servs. Co. of Hawaii, Inc. v. Richardson, 99 Hawai
'i 446, 454, 56 P.3d 748, 756 (2002). Given that the Youngs 
have failed to include any of the MSJ Transcripts in the record on appeal, we are unable to review whether the circuit court abused its discretion in denying the Youngs' request for continuance. See Lepere, 77 Hawai
'i at 473, 887 P.2d at 1031. 
Therefore, the circuit court's denial of the Youngs' request must remain undisturbed. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the January 2, 2014 "Renewed
 
Findings Of Fact, Conclusions Of Law, Order Granting Plaintiff's
 Motion for Summary Judgment Against All Parties And For
 Interlocutory Decree Of Foreclosure Filed May 3, 2013," and the
 January 28, 2014 "Renewed Judgment," both entered in the Circuit
 Court of the Fifth Circuit are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 24, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Gary Victor Dubin
Frederick J. Arensmeyer
(Dubin Law Offices)for Defendants-Appellants.
 
Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge 
Charles R. Prather

 
Sofia Hirosane McGuire
 
(RCO Hawaii)for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
7
 