NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000906
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
GREGORY FOWLER HAAS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 12-1-002K)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Leonard, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Gregory Fowler Haas (Haas) by amended 
complaint with second-degree assault with a dangerous instrument of James Smith (Count 1); second-degree assault with a dangerous 
1
instrument of Gafatasi Napoleon (Napoleon)  (Count 2); first-
degree assault of Shadely Haynes (Haynes) (Count 3); and third-
degree assault of Jack Keanaaina (Count 4). The charges against
 Haas stem from an incident in which Haas allegedly used a cow
 bone to assault others. 
I.

 
Before the jury was selected, the State moved to
 
dismiss Count 1, and the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
 
2
(Circuit Court)  dismissed Count 1 with prejudice.  
1"Napoleon" was apparently misspelled "Napolean" in the amended
complaint.
 
2The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At trial, the State introduced evidence of a post-
arrest statement made by Haas. Haas told the police that his son
 
had died in 2005 from drugs and bad stuff, and Haas referred to
 drugs and alcohol "out here" and bad things going on. According
 to Haas, he went out to threaten people and made a mistake. Haas
 also talked about wanting to avenge the death of his friend. 
Haas was carrying a cow bone looking for the person he believed
 had killed his friend. He got into an altercation with people he
 did not know. Haas admitted that he attacked some people with a
 "club," which he said was a "cow bone." Haas identified
 photographs taken at the scene by the police as depicting the
 bone he used "against everybody there."
 
According to Napoleon, he saw Haas chasing Haynes, and
 
Haas had an object in his hand which Haas used to strike Haynes
 in the back of the head. Haas also used the object to strike
 Napoleon on the head. The police recovered three pieces of bone
 from the scene, which along with photographs of the pieces of
 bone recovered, were admitted in evidence. 
Dr. Richard McDowell (Dr. McDowell) was the emergency
 
physician at Kona Community Hospital who treated Haynes and
 Napoleon on the night of the incident. Dr. McDowell was
 qualified, without objection, as an expert in the field of
 emergency medical treatment. During his testimony, Dr. McDowell
 used medical records relating to his treatment of Haynes and
 Napoleon, including a CT scan ordered for Haynes, to refresh his
 recollection. Dr. McDowell testified that Haynes had suffered an
 epidural hematoma, a blood clot on the brain, which was a life-
threatening injury that created a substantial risk of death. Dr.
 McDowell explained that an epidural hematoma is one of the most
 time-critical injuries a person can sustain and that a person
 with this condition must be taken for neurosurgery as quickly as
 possible. Dr. McDowell testified that Napoleon sustained a
 forehead laceration and scalp laceration that constituted a major
 avulsion, laceration, or penetration of the skin. The Kona
 Community Hospital medical treatment records for Haynes (State's
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Exhibit 39) and for Napoleon (State's Exhibit 41) were
 
subsequently admitted in evidence. 
The jury found Haas guilty as charged of Counts 2 and
 
3, and it acquitted Haas of Count 4. The Circuit Court entered
 its Judgment on October 28, 2015. 
II.
 
On appeal, Haas contends: (1) the State failed to lay a
 
sufficient foundation for the admission of the hospital medical
 records of Haynes (State's Exhibit 39) and Napoleon (State's
 Exhibit 41); and (2) there was insufficient evidence to show that
 the instrument used fits within the definition of a dangerous
 instrument. We affirm.
 
III.
 
We resolve the issues raised by Haas on appeal as
 
follows. 
A.
 
Haas contends that the State failed to lay a sufficient
 
foundation for the admission of the hospital medical records of
 Haynes and Napoleon in evidence. In particular, he argues that
 the Circuit Court erred in admitting the records showing the
 results of the CT scan of Haynes, which Dr. McDowell relied upon
 in his testimony regarding the extent of Haynes' injuries.
3
 
We conclude that any error of the Circuit Court in
 
admitting into evidence the hospital records of Haynes, including
 the results of his CT scan, was harmless beyond a reasonable
 doubt. Dr. McDowell's expert testimony about his diagnosis of
 Haynes and the extent of Haynes' injuries did not require the
 admission of the records of the CT scan into evidence. Dr.
 McDowell was qualified, without objection, as an expert in the
 field of emergency medical treatment. Dr. McDowell testified
 that a CT scan of Haynes was ordered in connection with Haynes'
 
3Although Haas' point of error challenges the foundation for the
admission of the hospital records for both Haynes and Napoleon, his argument
only directly addresses the admission of Haynes' records, and in particular,
the records reflecting the results of Haynes' CT scan. We focus our
 discussion on the records directly challenged by Haas.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
examination and that CT scans were something that he looked at to
 
make diagnosis and treatment decisions. 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 703 (1993) provides
 
in relevant part: 
The facts or data in the particular case upon which an
expert bases an opinion or inference may be those perceived
by or made known to the expert at or before the hearing. If
 
of a type reasonably relied upon by experts in the
particular field in forming opinions or inferences upon the
subject, the facts or data need not be admissible in
evidence.
 
(Emphasis added.) HRE Rule 703 permits an expert to render
 
opinions "based on data not admissible in evidence so long as 'of
 a type reasonably relied upon by experts in the particular
 field.'" Commentary to HRE Rule 703. Haas does not dispute that
 the results of a CT scan are the type of data reasonably relied
 upon by emergency physicians, like Dr. McDowell, in rendering an
 opinion about the diagnosis or the extent of a patient's
 injuries.
4 Dr. McDowell's expert opinion about Haynes' injuries
 
4Indeed, the Commentary to HRE Rule 703 addresses the situation
presented by this case and explains that the admission of the underlying
hospital records is not required for a physician to render an opinion
regarding the diagnosis of his or her patient. The Commentary to HRE Rule 703
provides:
 
[HRE] Rule 703 allows opinions based on data not admissible
in evidence so long as "of a type reasonably relied upon by
experts in the particular field." The Advisory Committee's Note
to Fed. R. Evid. 703 points out:
 
The rule is designed to broaden the basis for expert
opinions beyond that current in many jurisdictions and to
bring the judicial practice into line with the practice of
the experts themselves when not in court. Thus a physician
in his [or her] own practice bases his [or her] diagnosis on
information from numerous sources and of considerable
 variety, including statements by patients and relatives,
reports and opinions from nurses, technicians and other
doctors, hospital records, and X rays. Most of them are
 admissible in evidence, but only with the expenditure of
substantial time in producing and examining various
authenticating witnesses. The physician makes
life-and-death decisions in reliance upon them. His [or
her] validation, expertly performed and subject to
cross-examination, ought to suffice for judicial purposes.
 
(Brackets omitted.)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was admissible even if Haynes' CT scan had not been admitted in
 
evidence. Accordingly, we conclude that assuming arguendo that
 the Circuit Court erred in admitting into evidence the records of
 Haynes' CT scan and his other hospital records without an
 adequate foundation, any such error did not affect the outcome of
 the case and was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
5
 
B.
 
Haas contends that there was insufficient evidence to
 
prove that the instrument used fits within the definition of a
 dangerous instrument. We disagree.
 
Of Haas' convictions, only his conviction on Count 2
 
for second-degree assault against Napoleon involved a charge that
 required proof of the use of a dangerous instrument. The
 definition of "dangerous instrument" for purposes of second-
degree assault includes any "weapon, device, instrument,
 material, or substance, whether animate or inanimate, which in
 the manner it is used or is intended to be used is known to be
 capable of producing death or serious bodily injury." Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 707-700 (2014). 
We conclude that when viewed in the light most
 
favorable to the State, there was sufficient evidence to show
 that Haas assaulted Napoleon with an instrument that constituted
 a dangerous instrument. The State presented evidence that Haas
 was carrying a cow bone and that he used the cow bone to attack
 Napoleon and Haynes by striking them in the head with it. The
 attack on Haynes resulted in serious bodily injury. The State
 also introduced pieces of bone recovered from the scene and
 photographs of the pieces of bone recovered. We conclude that
 the State presented sufficient evidence to show that in
 assaulting Napoleon, Haas used a dangerous instrument, namely, a
 cow bone, "which in the manner it [was] used or [was] intended to 
5Our analysis also applies to any challenge by Haas to the admission of
Napoleon's hospital records.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
be used [was] known to be capable of producing death or serious
 
bodily injury." See HRS ยง 707-700. 
IV.

 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court's
 
Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, October 31, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Dean T. Kauka 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Dale Yamada Ross Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6

 