NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-10-0000007
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ROBERT G. BABSON, JR.,
ANN C. BABSON, JOY BRANN, PAULA BROCK, and
DANIEL GRANTHAM, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
 
1
SCOTT T. NAGO,  Chief Elections Officer,
State of Hawai 'i; and STATE OF HAWAI 'I,
Defendants-Appellants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0378(3))

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)

 
Plaintiffs-Appellees Robert G. Babson, Jr., Ann C. 
Babson, Joy Brann, Paula Brock, and Daniel Grantham 
(collectively, the "Plaintiffs") filed a complaint for declaratory and injunctive relief against Defendants-Appellees Kevin Cronin, who was then the Chief Election Officer, and the State of Hawai
'i (collectively, the "State"). Plaintiffs 
challenged the Chief Election Officer's (1) "adoption" of the federal voluntary voting system guidelines for use in State and 
1The complaint filed in this case named Kevin Cronin, the Chief Election
Officer at that time of the State of Hawai' i (State), as a defendant.
Pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 43(c)(1) (2010), Scott
T. Nago, the current Chief Election Officer, is automatically substituted as a
party for Kevin Cronin, the former Chief Election Officer.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
county elections and (2) use of telephone lines or the internet 
to transmit ballot counts and election results for final tabulation. Plaintiffs contended that these "methodologies" constituted "rules" that the Chief Election Officer should have, but did not, adopt pursuant to the requirements of the Hawai
'i 
Administrative Procedures Act (HAPA), Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 91. 
The Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit
 
2
Court) granted summary judgment in favor of Plaintiffs, and it
issued a permanent injunction enjoining the State from engaging
 in conduct in conformance with the challenged practices until
 rules were promulgated pursuant to HRS Chapter 91. The Circuit
 Court further ruled that the injunction would automatically be
 lifted "if rules are adopted pursuant to HRS Chapter 91." 
Thereafter, the Chief Election Officer promulgated rules
 regarding the use of the federal voluntary voting system
 guidelines and the transmission of election results. 
Accordingly, the dispute underlying this case has been resolved,
 and this case is moot. 
As a general rule, courts will not address moot issues.

 
However, the State argues on appeal that exceptions to the
 mootness doctrine apply to warrant our determination of whether
 the Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of
 Plaintiffs. The State further argues that Plaintiffs lacked
 standing to file their lawsuit and that the Circuit Court erred
 in awarding attorneys' fees against the State.
 
As explained below, we hold that: (1) at minimum,
 
Plaintiff Robert G. Babson, Jr. (Robert Babson) had standing to
 support the filing of Plaintiffs' lawsuit; (2) the exceptions to
 the mootness doctrine asserted by the State do not apply; and (3)
 the Circuit Court erred in awarding attorneys' fees against the
 State because the State has sovereign immunity. 
2The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
In the aftermath of the 2000 presidential election,
 
Congress passed the Help America Vote Act of 2002 (HAVA),
 
currently codified at 52 U.S.C.A. §§ 20901 et seq. (West, Westlaw
 through P.L. 113-162).
3 HAVA mandated that voting systems used
 
by states in a federal election meet certain minimum
 requirements, but did not prevent a state from establishing
 election technology and administrative requirements that exceeded
 HAVA's minimum requirements. See 52 U.S.C.A. §§ 21081, 21084. 
HAVA authorized federal funding to assist the states in meeting
 HAVA's requirements. See 52 U.S.C.A. § 20901.
 
HAVA established the Election Assistance Commission
 
(EAC), 52 U.S.C.A. § 20921, which was charged with adopting
 "voluntary voting system guidelines[.]" 52 U.S.C.A. § 20922(1). 
In 2005, the EAC released the 2005 Voluntary Voting System
 Guidelines (2005 VVSG). In announcing the adoption of the 2005
 VVSG, the EAC stated: "These guidelines are voluntary. States
 may adopt them entirely, in part or not at all. States may also
 choose to enact stricter performance requirements for voting
 systems."
 
The 2005 VVSG describes its purpose and scope as
 
follows:
 
The purpose of the Voluntary Voting System Guidelines
 
[(VVSG)] is to provide a set of specifications and
requirements against which voting systems can be tested to
determine if they provide all the basic functionality,
accessibility and security capabilities required of voting
systems. The VVSG specifies the functional requirements,
performance characteristics, documentation requirements, and
test evaluation criteria for the national certification of
 
voting systems. The VVSG is composed of two volumes: Volume
I, Voting System Performance Guidelines and Volume II,
National Certification Testing Guidelines.
 
3HAVA was previously codified at 42 U.S.C. §§ 15301 et seq. , but was
editorially reclassified under Title 52, United States Code, Chapter 209,
effective September 1, 2014. We will cite to the current codification.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
Prior to the 2008 election, the Hawai 'i Office of 
Elections issued a Request for Proposal (RFP), seeking proposals 
from qualified entities for a "New Leased Voting Equipment System" (New System) "to collect, tabulate, and report votes" for the 2008 through 2016 Primary, General, and Special Elections held in Hawai
'i. The RFP described the essential features of, 
and requirements for, the New System, including the requirement that "[t]he New System shall meet or exceed the [2005 VVSG]."
4 
Among other things, the RFP required that the New System include "[s]ecure data transmission capability from [(1)] the polling places in each county to the central vote count system site for that county[]" and (2) "the County of Hawaii, County of Maui, and County of Kauai central vote count system sites to the City & County of Honolulu central vote system site[.]" 
In response to the RFP, three entities submitted
 
proposals, and the Office of Elections awarded the contract to
 Hart Intercivic, Inc. on January 31, 2008.
 
III.
 
A.
 
On July 14, 2008, Plaintiffs filed a Complaint against
 
the State, seeking declaratory and injunctive relief. In their
 Complaint, Plaintiffs challenged the Chief Election Officer's
 "adoption of the [2005 VVSG] for use in state and county
 elections" and "use of telephone lines or the internet for
 transmitting ballot counts and election results for final
 tabulation." Plaintiffs sought a declaration that these 
"methodologies" constituted "rules" under HAPA and an injunction
 prohibiting the State from engaging in the challenged practices
 without first complying with the rule-making procedures required
 
4The RFP provided that "if a proposed New System does not meet any
specific requirement, the Offeror may propose an alternate feature that
provides a functional equivalent[,]" with the Evaluation Committee having the
sole discretion to determine whether the alternate feature provided a
functional equivalent.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
under HAPA. The Circuit Court summarized Plaintiffs' Complaint
 
as follows:
 
[T]he Complaint seeks a determination that (1) the
methodology and process by which the Chief Election[]Officer . . . uses electronic voting machines and uses theinternet and/or telephone lines are rules within the meaningof HRS § 91-1(4), (2) the particular methodologies the[Chief Election Officer] has chosen were not promulgatedpursuant to the rulemaking requirements of [HAPA], (3) theprocess contemplated by the [Chief Election Officer] isinvalid insomuch as it is conduct based on a rule not promulgated pursuant to the rulemaking requirements of HAPA,and (4) the [Chief Election Officer] and the State ofHawai'i be prohibited from conducting elections with the use
of Direct Recording Electronic ("DRE") ballots and theprocess associated with the same without rules firstpromulgated pursuant to HAPA. 
Plaintiffs also sought an award of reasonable attorneys' fees and
 
costs.
 
B.

 
Shortly after filing their Complaint, Plaintiffs filed
 
a motion for preliminary injunction. The State opposed the
 motion, arguing among other things that Plaintiffs lacked
 standing and had failed to satisfy the standards for a
 preliminary injunction. The Circuit Court denied Plaintiffs'
 motion for preliminary injunction.
 
Plaintiffs and the State filed counter-motions for
 
summary judgment and submitted joint exhibits in support of their
 motions.
5 The Circuit Court granted Plaintiffs' motion for
 
summary judgment and denied the State's motion.
 
In its order, the Circuit Court rejected the State's
 
contention that Plaintiffs lacked standing to bring their
 lawsuit, reasoning as follows:
 
Defendants argue that Plaintiffs' allegations are
built entirely on abstract, conjectural, and hypothetical
circumstances and that there is no evidence that any of them
have been deprived of their right to vote or that their
votes have ever been mishandled. This argument, however,
mischaracterizes the type of injury Plaintiffs allege.
Plaintiffs are not arguing that they have been deprived of
the right to vote or that their votes have been mishandled. 
5Plaintiffs and the State had earlier filed counter-motions for summary
judgment, which the Circuit Court denied without prejudice.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Instead, Plaintiffs are challenging the legality of the
process that the [Chief Election Officer] and the Office of
Elections undertook when adopting the 2005 VVSG. Plaintiffs
 have suffered actual injury in being deprived of the
opportunity to participate in the rulemaking process and
having administrative "rules" being promulgated, the failure
of which Plaintiff[s] assert is in violation of HRS Chapter
91. Plaintiffs suffer threatened injury in that their right
to vote may be infringed due to "rules" promulgated in
violation of HRS Chapter 91. This actual and threatened
 injury is fairly traceable to the Defendants' "action," or,
in this instance, non-action in failing to promulgate rules
in accordance with HAPA. A favorable decision, namely a
declaratory judgment by the Court that the [Chief Election
Officer] and Office of Elections must review and consider
the adoption of the 2005 VVSG under the rulemaking
provisions of HRS Chapter 91[,] would provide relief for
Plaintiffs' injury. Consequently, Plaintiffs do not lack
standing.
 
With respect to the "central issue" raised by
 
Plaintiffs' Complaint and the summary judgment motions, the
 
Circuit Court concluded that the Chief Election Officer's
 adoption of the 2005 VVSG and a voting system that transmits
 election results over telephone lines or the internet constituted
 "rules" within the meaning of HAPA. As part of its analysis, the
 Circuit Court stated:
 
In incorporating the 2005 VVSG into the 2006 RFP, and by
requiring that the new voting system "shall meet or exceed"
the 2005 VVSG, the [Chief Election Officer] issued a
"statement of general or particular applicability and future
effect" that implemented or prescribed the policy of the
Office of Elections, namely, that any proposed new voting
system would have to meet or exceed the 2005 VVSG, or have a
proposed alternate feature that provides a functional
equivalent. In effect, the [Chief Election Officer] set
voting equipment requirements and specifications in the RFP.
 
. . . Even though the 2005 VVSG does not expressly
state that it is intended or required to be adopted by
states as administrative rules, the [Chief Election Officer]
and the Office of Elections did, in fact, adopt the 2005
VVSG as its own requirements by incorporating the 2005 VVSG
into the RFP and stating that any proposed new voting system
would have to meet or exceed the 2005 VVSG, or have a
proposed alternative feature that provides a functional
equivalent. Rather than select the 2005 VVSG, Defendants
could have selected a different set of guidelines.
Defendants['] adoption of the 2005 VVSG constitutes an
exercise of discretion that [HAPA] requires be done through
rulemaking.
 
The Circuit Court granted Plaintiffs' motion for
 
summary judgment and their requests for declaratory and
 
6

  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
injunctive relief. The Circuit Court ordered the issuance of a
 
permanent injunction enjoining the State "from any conduct in
 conformance with the [2005 VVSG] or transmitting ballot counts
 and election results by telephone line or the internet until
 rules have been promulgated pursuant to [HAPA][.]" The Circuit
 Court further ordered that its "permanent injunction shall have
 no effect on any rules promulgated pursuant to [HAPA]" and that
 "[the State] will not be required to return to this Court seeking
 a lifting of this injunction if rules are adopted pursuant to
 [HAPA]."
 
In response to the Circuit Court's permanent 
injunction, the State formally promulgated rules that expressly authorize the Chief Election Officer to utilize a voting system or voting systems that comply with one, or a combination, of several specified federal voting system standards, including the 2005 VVSG and subsequent versions of the VVSG adopted by the EAC. See Hawai
'i Administrative Rules (HAR) §§ 3-176-1, 3-176-2 
(2010).6 The State also promulgated rules regarding the 
transmission of election results electronically. See HAR § 3­
172-93 (2010). The rules were adopted after a public hearing and were approved by the Governor. 
C.
 
After prevailing on their motion for summary judgment,
 
Plaintiffs moved for the award of attorneys' fees and costs. 
Plaintiffs sought attorneys' fees pursuant to the private
 attorney general doctrine. The State opposed Plaintiffs' request
 for attorneys' fees, arguing that (1) the award of attorneys'
 fees against the State was barred by sovereign immunity and (2)
 Plaintiffs had failed to satisfy the conditions for the award of
 attorneys' fees under the private attorney general doctrine. The
 Circuit Court granted the Plaintiffs' motion for attorneys' fees
 and costs, and it awarded Plaintiffs $18,960.00 in attorneys' 
6The 2005 VVSG provides standards for the secure transmission of
election results.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fees, plus $758.40 in general excise tax thereon, and $1,077.36
 
in costs, for a total award of $20,795.76
 
The Circuit Court entered its Final Judgment on

 
September 9, 2010, and this appeal followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, the State argues that the Circuit Court

 
erred in ruling that Plaintiffs had standing to bring their
 lawsuit, and that if Plaintiffs lacked standing, the Circuit
 Court's Final Judgment must be vacated. The State alternatively
 argues that if Plaintiffs had standing, then this court should
 find an exception to the mootness doctrine to reach the merits of
 the Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment in favor of
 Plaintiffs, which has been rendered moot by the State's
 subsequent promulgation of rules. In challenging the Circuit
 Court's summary judgment order, the State argues that the Circuit
 Court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Plaintiffs
 because the RFP specifications regarding compliance with the 2005
 VVSG and the secure electronic transmission of votes did not
 constitute "rules" within the purview of HAPA. Finally, the
 State argues that even if Plaintiffs had standing and the Circuit
 Court properly ruled on the merits in granting summary judgment
 in Plaintiffs' favor, the Circuit Court erred in awarding
 attorneys' fees to Plaintiffs pursuant to the private attorney
 general doctrine.
 
As explained below, we hold: (1) Plaintiff Robert
 
Babson, at minimum, had standing; (2) the merits of the
 underlying dispute is moot, and the exceptions to the mootness
 doctrine asserted by the State do not apply; and (3) the State
 did not waive its sovereign immunity regarding the award of
 attorneys' fees, and therefore, the Circuit Court erred in
 awarding attorneys' fees against the State under the private
 attorney general doctrine.
 
I.
 
We first address the question of Plaintiffs' standing. 
The State argues that Plaintiffs lacked standing because they
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
failed to meet the injury-in-fact test, which requires a showing 
that: "(1) he or she has suffered an actual or threatened injury as a result of the defendant's wrongful conduct, (2) the injury is fairly traceable to the defendant's actions, and (3) a favorable decision would likely provide relief for a plaintiff's injury." Bush v. Watson, 81 Hawai
'i 474, 479, 918 P.2d 1130, 
1135 (1996). 
However, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court recently held in 
Asato v. Procurement Policy Board, 132 Hawai 'i 333, 322 P.3d 228 
(2014), that plaintiffs seeking declaratory relief pursuant to 
7
HRS § 91-7 (2012),  as the Plaintiffs are in this case, are not
required to satisfy the injury-in-fact test in order to obtain standing. Asato, 132 Hawai
'i at 341, 322 P.3d at 236. Instead, 
for standing under HRS § 91-7, a plaintiff need only meet the less stringent requirement of showing that he or she is "affected by or involved with the validity of an agency rule." Id. at 343, 
322 P.3d at 238 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
In Asato, the plaintiff, Lloyd Y. Asato (Asato), filed 
a complaint for declaratory and injunctive relief, asserting that an administrative rule promulgated by the State Procurement Policy Board (Board) conflicted with the Hawai
'i Public 
Procurement Code, HRS Chapter 103D, and was therefore invalid. Id. at 336-37, 322 P.3d at 231-32. Asato challenged the rule that permitted the Board, under certain circumstances, to procure professional services where less than three potential qualified 
7HRS § 91-7 provides:
 
(a) Any interested person may obtain a judicial declaration
as to the validity of an agency rule as provided in subsection (b)
herein by bringing an action against the agency in the circuit
court of the county in which petitioner resides or has its
principal place of business. The action may be maintained whether
or not petitioner has first requested the agency to pass upon the
validity of the rule in question.
 
(b) The court shall declare the rule invalid if it finds
that it violates constitutional or statutory provisions, or
exceeds the statutory authority of the agency, or was adopted
without compliance with statutory rulemaking procedures.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
persons had been identified, which Asato alleged violated the
 
statutory requirement that "'the selection committee shall rank a
 minimum of three persons based on the selection criteria and send
 the ranking to the head of the purchasing agency.'" Id. at 345,
 
322 P.3d at 240 (brackets omitted) (quoting HRS § 103D-304(g)). 
Asato maintained that he brought the complaint pursuant to HRS 
§ 91-7 and that he also had standing to pursue the action as a
 taxpayer. Id. at 336, 322 P.3d at 231. 
The supreme court held that Asato had standing under
 
HRS § 91-7, "which allows '[a]ny interested person' to obtain 'a
 judicial determination as to the validity of an agency rule.'" 
Id. at 341, 322 P.3d at 236 (brackets in original).
8 The supreme
 
court concluded that unlike an "aggrieved person" in a contested
 case under HRS Chapter 91, for whom an injury in fact must be
 shown, an "interested person" is "subject to less stringent
 standing requirements[,]" and "an interested person need not show
 injury in fact in order to bring an action pursuant to HRS 
§ 91-7." Id. at 344, 322 P.3d at 239 (internal quotation marks
 
omitted). The supreme court noted that "our courts have
 broadened standing in actions challenging administrative
 decisions" and that it "has adopted a broad view of what
 constitutes a personal stake in cases in which the rights of the
 public might otherwise be denied hearing in a judicial for[u]m." 
Id. (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Because
 Asato "sought to sustain the objectives of the procurement code,"
 the supreme court concluded that "his action was a case of public
 interest" and that "relaxed standing requirements would apply." 
Id. at 345, 322 P.3d at 240 (internal quotation marks, citation,
 and footnote omitted).
 
The supreme court held that "based on the plain
 
language of HRS § 91-7, . . . any interested person is one who
 
8Because the supreme court found standing based on HRS § 91-7, it did
not reach Asato's claim of taxpayer standing or standing under HRS § 632-1
(1993), the general declaratory judgment statute. Asato, 132 Hawai' i at 341,
n.9, 322 P.3d at 236, n.9. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is, without restriction, affected by or involved with the
 
validity of an agency rule." Id. at 343, 322 P.3d at 238
 
(internal quotation marks, brackets, and citation omitted). The
 court held that Asato qualified as an "'interested person'" and
 had standing under HRS § 91-7 "because, as a taxpayer challenging
 a specific public bidding procedure, he may be affected by the
 validity of a regulation that allegedly allowed an illegal
 expenditure of public funds." Id. 
Based on Asato, we conclude that, at minimum, Plaintiff 
Robert Babson has standing pursuant to HRS § 91-7. Although Asato does not set forth the precise contours of who qualifies as an "interested person," we conclude that Robert Babson sufficiently demonstrated that he has standing as a person "affected by or involved with the validity of an agency rule." See id. The record shows that Robert Babson submitted an 
affidavit asserting, among other things, that he had voted in every federal election since 1970; that he had been a registered voter in Hawai
'i and had voted in every election since 1992; that 
he had served as a "precinct official" and an "official observer" in elections held in Hawai
'i; and that he had written to the 
Office of Elections and the Attorney General regarding his observations and concerns regarding the election system. Like Asato, Robert Babson demonstrated that "he may be affected" by the State's alleged adoption of rules relating to policies for voting systems and the transmission of election results, without complying with the procedures for promulgating rules under HAPA. 
In Asato, the supreme court concluded that Asato had
 
standing because he may be affected, as a taxpayer, by the use of
 an alleged invalid regulation in awarding government procurement
 contracts. In this case, we similarly conclude that Robert
 Babson has standing because he may be affected, as a registered
 voter who has been actively involved in the elections process, by
 the State's alleged improper adoption of rules relating to
 policies for voting systems and the transmission of election
 results, without the public participation required by HAPA for
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
promulgating rules, which Robert Babson claims infringed on and
 
violated his right to vote. Because our conclusion that
 Plaintiff Robert Babson had standing is sufficient to support the
 filing of the lawsuit in this case, we need not decide whether
 the other Plaintiffs also had standing.
 
II.

 
A.
 
Before we can address the State's arguments regarding
 
the substantive merits of the Circuit Court's grant of summary
 judgment in favor of Plaintiffs, we must determine whether the
 dispute over the substantive merits is moot.
 
[A] case is moot if it has lost its character as a present,
live controversy of the kind that must exist if courts are
to avoid advisory opinions on abstract propositions of law.
The rule is one of the prudential rules of judicial self-
governance founded in concern about the proper -- and
properly limited -- role of the courts in a democratic
society. We have said the suit must remain alive throughout
the course of litigation to the moment of final appellate
disposition to escape the mootness bar.
 
Doe v. Doe, 116 Hawai 'i 323, 326, 172 P.3d 1067, 1070 (2007) 
(formatting altered; citation omitted).
 
The mootness doctrine is said to encompass the
circumstances that destroy the justiciability of a suit
previously suitable for determination. Put another way, the
suit must remain alive throughout the course of litigation
to the moment of final appellate disposition. Its chief
 purpose is to assure that the adversary system, once set in
operation, remains properly fueled. The doctrine seems
 appropriate where events subsequent to the judgment of the
trial court have so affected the relations between the
 parties that the two conditions for justiciability relevant
on appeal -- adverse interest and effective remedy -- have
been compromised.
 
. . . .
 
The duty of this court, as of every other judicial
tribunal, is to decide actual controversies by a judgment
which can be carried into effect, and not to give opinions
upon moot questions or abstract propositions, or to declare
principles or rules of law which cannot affect the matter in
issue in the case before it. 
Wong v. Board of Regents, University of Hawaii, 62 Haw. 391, 394­
95, 616 P.2d 201, 203-04 (1980).
 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We conclude that the dispute underlying this case is
 
moot. Plaintiffs challenged the State's "adoption" of the 2005
 
VVSG through the issuance of its RFP to lease voting system
 equipment and its use of telephone lines or the internet to
 transmit election results without first promulgating rules
 pursuant to HAPA. The State subsequently promulgated rules
 pursuant to HAPA to authorize the challenged practices. Thus,
 the dispute over whether the State was required to promulgate
 rules before engaging in the challenged practices is moot. See
 
Wong, 62 Haw. at 396, 616 P.2d at 205 (holding that an action
 seeking a declaratory judgment to require the University to
 comply with HAPA with respect to a statement regulating student
 conduct was rendered moot by the University's subsequent
 compliance with HAPA).
9
 
B.
 
The State, however, argues that the public interest 
exception to the mootness doctrine applies. "When analyzing the public interest exception, we look to '(1) the public or private nature of the question presented, (2) the desirability of an authoritative determination for future guidance of public officers, and (3) the likelihood of future recurrence of the question.'" Doe, 116 Hawai
'i at 327, 172 P.3d at 1071 (citation 
omitted). The State also argues that this case falls within the exception to the mootness doctrine for cases involving a legal issue which is capable of repetition, yet evading review. See 
Wong, 62 Haw. at 396, 616 P.2d at 204. 
The State frames the issue presented by this appeal as
 
"whether technical specifications are rules 'improperly adopted'
 through the issuance of an RFP[.]" The State's implicit
 assumption is that the Circuit Court's ruling will require the
 State to adopt rules whenever the State seeks to acquire
 
9Plaintiffs have represented to this court that they believe this case
is moot, in light of the State's adoption of rules pursuant to HAPA, and that
the State's appeal of the summary judgment order is subject to dismissal on
mootness grounds. 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
equipment through an RFP which contains technical specifications. 
The State argues that because government agencies routinely issue
 RFPs containing technical specifications to acquire equipment,
 the Circuit Court's ruling will have broad and far-reaching
 effects, which justify the application an exception to the
 mootness doctrine.
 
We disagree with the State's premise that the Circuit
 
Court's ruling will broadly apply whenever a government agency
 acquires equipment through an RFP which contains technical
 specifications. Instead, we conclude that the Circuit Court's
 ruling was based on, and is limited to, the particular
 circumstances presented by the facts of this case. Because of
 the limited nature of the Circuit Court's ruling and its lack of
 general applicability to other government procurements, and
 because there is no indication that the issue presented in this
 case regarding the Chief Election Officer's incorporation of the
 2005 VVSG into an RFP without first adopting rules is likely to
 recur, we conclude that the State's asserted exceptions to the
 mootness doctrine do not apply.
 
C.
 
For purposes of HAPA, the term "rule" 
means each agency statement of general or particular
applicability and future effect that implements, interprets,
or prescribes law or policy, or describes the organization,
procedure, or practice requirements of any agency. The term
 does not include regulations concerning only the internal
management of an agency and not affecting private rights of
or procedures available to the public, nor does the term
include declaratory rulings issued pursuant to section 91-8,
nor intra-agency memoranda. 
HRS § 91-1(4) (2012).
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has instructed that in 
determining whether an agency's statement constitutes a "rule" 
under HAPA, the court must "inquire into the nature of the [agency's] powers and responsibilities under . . . [the] law and also the purpose and effect" of the agency's statement. Aguiar 
v. Hawaii Housing Authority, 55 Haw. 478, 482, 522 P.2d 1255,
 1259 (1974). In other words, the determination of whether an
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
agency's statement constitutes a "rule" under HAPA is specific to
 
the agency and the statement at issue and is done on a case-by­case basis. This determination requires a particularized
 assessment of the statement's purpose and effect in light of the
 specific powers and responsibilities granted to the agency by the
 Legislature.
 
Generally, an agency's contract with a private party 
does not constitute a "rule" subject to HAPA. See Ah Ho v. Cobb, 
62 Haw. 546, 617 P.2d 1208 (1980). In Ah Ho, the Hawai
'i Supreme 
Court held that a contract between the Hawai 'i Board of Land and 
Natural Resources and a private party to rent excess transmission capacity in the Moloka
'i Irrigation System did not constitute a 
rule subject to HAPA. Id. at 547, 549-53, 617 P.2d at 1210-13. 
In support of its decision, the supreme court cited the reasoning of cases under the federal Administrative Procedures Act (FAPA), which specifically exempts agency contracts from FAPA's notice and hearing requirements: 
The practical necessity for the public contracts
exception is apparent. It would be altogether unreasonable
to require the various agencies of government to publish
notice in the Federal Register and to hold hearings each and
every time they entered into, rescinded, or canceled a
government contract; the burden in time and expense would be
extraordinary.
 
Id. at 553, 617 P.2d at 1213 (quoting Rainbow Valley Citrus Corp.
 
v. Federal Crop Ins. Corp., 506 F.2d 467, 469 (9th Cir. 1974)).
 
Here, the Circuit Court's ruling was based on a 
particularized assessment of the nature of the specific powers and responsibilities conferred on the Chief Election Officer by the Legislature and the purpose and effect of the incorporation of the 2005 VVSG into the RFP. The Circuit Court focused on the core responsibilities of the Chief Election Officer under Hawai
'i 
law, stating that "[t]he [Chief Election Officer] is charged by State law to administer all state elections, including making, amending, and repealing rules and regulations governing the establishment, use, and operation of all voting systems now in use or to be adopted in the State." The Circuit Court then 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evaluated the particular purpose and effect of the Chief Election
 
Officer's incorporation of the 2005 VVSG into the RFP for voting
 system equipment in light of the Chief Election Officer's core
 responsibilities. Based on this particularized evaluation, the
 Circuit Court concluded:
 
In incorporating the 2005 VVSG into the 2006 RFP, and by
requiring that the new voting system "shall meet or exceed"
the 2005 VVSG, the [Chief Election Officer] issued a
"statement of general or particular applicability and future
effect" that implemented or prescribed the policy of the
Office of Elections, namely, that any proposed new voting
system would have to meet or exceed the 2005 VVSG, or have a
proposed alternate feature that provides a functional
equivalent.
 
We do not read the Circuit Court's ruling as broadly 
applying whenever a government agency uses an RFP containing 
technical specifications to acquire equipment. Rather, we conclude that consistent with existing precedent, the Circuit Court rendered a decision that was specific to and dependent upon the particular agency and statement at issue. Because of the particularized nature of the Circuit Court's ruling, we conclude that our review of the merits of the Circuit Court's decision to grant summary judgment in favor of Plaintiffs would not serve to provide "an authoritative determination for future guidance of public officers[.]" See Doe, 116 Hawai
'i at 327, 172 P.3d at 
1071. There are already numerous published opinions setting forth general principles to apply in determining whether an agency's statement constitutes a rule under HAPA. We also conclude that the particular issue raised by this case concerning the Chief Election Officer's incorporation of the 2005 VVSG into an RFP without first adopting rules is not likely to recur, and therefore, it is not an issue that is "capable of repetition, yet evading review." See Wong, 62 Haw. at 396, 616 P.2d at 204. 
Accordingly, the State's asserted exceptions to the mootness doctrine are inapplicable. 
III.
 
Because the underlying dispute is moot, we evaluate the
 
State's challenge to the award of attorneys' fees based on the
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
assumption that the Circuit Court's decision on the merits was 
correct, which means that Plaintiffs were the prevailing parties. See Queen Emma Foundation v. Tatibouet, 123 Hawai
'i 500, 510-11, 
236 P.3d 1236, 1246-48 (App. 2010). The State argues that the Circuit Court erred in awarding attorneys' fees against it pursuant to the private attorney general doctrine because the State asserts that it "has not waived its [sovereign] immunity from [P]laintiffs' claim for money damages[.]" We agree.
10 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court's decision in Kaleikini v. 
Yoshioka, 129 Hawai 'i 454, 304 P.3d 252 (2013) is dispositive. 
In Kaleikini, the supreme court stated that an award of attorneys' fees to a prevailing party "is inherently in the nature of a damage award" and that "the sovereign State is immune from suit for money damages, except where there has been a clear relinquishment of immunity and the State has consented to be sued." Id. at 467, 304 P.3d at 265 (internal quotation marks and 
citations omitted). The supreme court noted that "HRS § 661-1(1) contains a limited waiver of sovereign immunity for claims against the State of Hawai
'i that are founded upon a statute." 
Id. (internal quotation marks, citation, footnote, and brackets omitted). It recognized, however, that "[i]t is well settled that a provision allowing for declaratory or injunctive relief is not a waiver of the State's sovereign immunity, but rather an exception to the sovereign immunity doctrine for which no waiver is necessary." Id. at 468, 304 P.3d at 266. In other words, 
because sovereign immunity does not preclude an action against the State for declaratory or injunctive relief in the first place, no waiver of sovereign immunity can be implied from a statute that only authorizes suits for declaratory or injunctive relief against the State. See id. 
10Because we conclude that the Circuit Court's award of attorneys' fees
was improper because the State did not waive its sovereign immunity, we do not
address the State's alternative argument that the conditions for applying the
private attorney general doctrine were not met. 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Based on these principles, the supreme court rejected
 
Kaleikini's argument that HRS § 6E-13(b) served to waive the
 
State's sovereign immunity. Id. The supreme court held that
 
because HRS § 6E-13(b) only permitted suits to be brought against
 the State for restraining orders or injunctive relief, it did not
 waive the State's sovereign immunity from the award of attorneys'
 fees under the private attorney general doctrine. Id. 
In this case, Plaintiffs filed an action against the 
State seeking declaratory and injunctive relief. Plaintiffs contend that the State's waiver of its sovereign immunity is founded on HRS Chapter 91, on which their claims against the State were based. However, in their Complaint, the only specific provision of HRS Chapter 91 cited by Plaintiffs as authorizing their claims for relief was HRS § 91-7, which only authorizes an action against the State for declaratory relief. Plaintiffs do not identify any provision of HRS Chapter 91 that would authorize an action against the State beyond an action for declaratory or injunctive relief. In Kaleikini, the supreme court concluded that a statute that only allows suits to be brought against the State for declaratory or injunctive relief does not waive the State's sovereign immunity. Kaleikini, 129 Hawai
'i at 468, 304 
P.3d at 266. Based on Kaleikini, we conclude that the State did not waive its sovereign immunity from the award of attorneys' fees in this case and that the Circuit Court erred in awarding such fees against the State. 
CONCLUSION
 
We hold that Plaintiff Robert Babson, at minimum, was
 
an "interested person" under HRS § 91-7 and had standing to
 support the filing of Plaintiffs' lawsuit. We further hold that
 the dispute underlying this case is moot and that the exceptions
 to the mootness doctrine asserted by the State do not apply. We
 therefore do not address the State's challenge to the merits of
 the Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment in favor of
 Plaintiffs, and we dismiss as moot the State's claim on appeal
 that the Circuit Court erred in granting Plaintiffs' motion for
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
summary judgment. Finally, we hold that the State did not waive
 
its sovereign immunity from Plaintiffs' claim for attorneys'
 fees. Accordingly, we vacate the portion of the Circuit Court's
 Final Judgment that awarded attorneys' fees (and general excise
 tax thereon) to Plaintiffs under the private attorney general
 doctrine.
11
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, September 17, 2014. 
Kimberly Tsumoto Guidry
Deputy Solicitor General
Girard D. Lau
 Solicitor General for Defendants-Appellants
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Lance D. Collins

 
(Law Office of Lance D.
Collins) for Plaintiffs-Appellees
 
11Aside from its claims that Plaintiffs lacked standing and should not
have prevailed on the merits, the State did not challenge the award of costs
in favor of Plaintiffs. See Kaleikini, 129 Hawai' i at 469 n.14, 304 P.3d at
267 n.14 ("HRS § 607–24 waives the State's immunity for costs 'in all cases inwhich a final judgment or decree is obtained against the State.'" (bracketsomitted)). We therefore affirm the Circuit Court's Final Judgment to theextent that it awarded costs in favor of Plaintiffs. 
19
 