NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000186 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
FRANCISCO KAKATIN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 13-1-0049)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Francisco Kakatin (Kakatin) appeals
 
from the September 9, 2013 "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence"
 
(Judgment) and December 6, 2013 "Order Denying Motion for
 
Reconsideration of Sentence" (Order Denying Reconsideration) both
 
1
 entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit
 
court). Kakatin pled guilty to one count of unauthorized entry
 
into motor vehicle in the first degree in violation of Hawaii
 
2
Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 708-836.5 (2014 Repl.)  and was
sentenced to serve a term of five years of imprisonment.
 
1
 The Honorable Randall K.O. Lee presided.
 
2
 HRS ยง 708-836.5 provides:
 
ยง708-836.5 Unauthorized entry into motor vehicle in
the first degree.  (1) A person commits the offense of
unauthorized entry into motor vehicle in the first degree if
the person intentionally or knowingly enters or remains
unlawfully in a motor vehicle, without being invited,
licensed, or otherwise authorized to enter or remain within
the vehicle, with the intent to commit a crime against a
person or against property rights.
 
(2) Unauthorized entry into motor vehicle in the first
degree is a class C felony.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Kakatin raises only one point of error. 
Kakatin argues that the Judgment should be vacated and his case 
remanded for a new trial because he was denied "effective assistance of counsel when: (1) despite [Kakatin's] insistence on trial, his attorney convinced him to forego trial and plead guilty as charged; and (2) his attorney failed to follow up on [Kakatin's] own efforts at getting into a substance abuse treatment program." Kakatin argues that if the record contains insufficient evidence to support his claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, this court should affirm the Judgment without prejudice to a subsequent Hawai
'i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 petition.3 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude that
 Kakatin's appeal is without merit.
 
Kakatin notes that "it appears [his] appeal [of the
 
Judgment] has been allowed to proceed" even though it was
 untimely filed due to Kakatin's attorney's failure to discuss
 with Kakatin "his right to appeal . . . or of the deadline for
 appealing . . . ."
4
 
3 HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) provides that Rule 40 proceedings are not
available 
where the issues sought to be raised . . . were
waived. . . . [A]n issue is waived if the petitioner
knowingly and understandingly failed to raise it and it
could have been raised before the trial, at the trial, on
appeal, in a habeas corpus proceeding or any other
proceeding actually conducted, or in a prior proceeding
actually initiated under this rule, and the petitioner is
unable to prove the existence of extraordinary circumstances
to justify the petitioner's failure to raise the issue.
There is a rebuttable presumption that a failure to appeal a
ruling or to raise an issue is a knowing and understanding
failure.
 
4
 In response to this court's "Order to Show Cause" (OSC) filed
March 14, 2014, Kakatin filed an "Amended Statement of Jurisdiction" on March28, 2014 requesting "that this [c]ourt relax [Hawai' i Rules of Appellate
Procedure (HRAP)] Rule 4(b) and consider the instant appeal on the merits"because "[i]n the instant case, either prior counsel was unaware of HRAP Rule4(b), did not discuss HRAP Rule 4(b) with [Kakatin], or failed to file atimely notice of appeal despite instructions to do so from [Kakatin]." 
(continued...)
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
But for two exceptions, a notice of appeal in a 
criminal case is untimely if not "filed within 30 days after 
entry of the judgment or order appealed from." HRAP Rule 4(b)(1). One of the two exceptions to this general rule is when "an appeal from a judgment of conviction [is filed] within 30 days after the entry of any order denying" "a timely motion in arrest of judgment under Rule 34 of the [HRPP] or for a new trial under Rule 33 of the [HRPP] . . . ." HRAP Rule 4(b)(2). The other exception to the rule is when the notice of appeal was not timely filed due to the ineffective assistance of counsel. See 
State v. Alpaca, 96 Hawai
'i 17, 23, 25 P.3d 792, 798 (2001) 
(holding that "the failure of Aplaca's counsel to timely file the notice of appeal does not divest Aplaca of his right to appeal" because a defendant "is 'entitled, on his first appeal, to effective counsel who may not deprive him of his appeal by failure to comply with procedural rules[.]'" (citation omitted)). 
Here, Kakatin's January 6, 2014 notice of appeal of the
 
September 9, 2013 Judgment was filed more than thirty days after
 the entry of judgment in violation of HRAP Rule 4(b)(1), Kakatin
 did not file a motion under HRPP Rules 33 or 34, and the record
 before this court does not support a finding that the
 untimeliness of Kakatin's appeal was the result of Akamu's
 ineffective assistance of counsel. We therefore hold that this
 court lacks appellate jurisdiction over Kakatin's appeal from the
 Judgment because neither of the untimeliness exceptions apply. 
We note that Kakatin's appeal of the Order Denying
 
Reconsideration is timely. However, Kakatin makes no argument in
 support of his appeal of the Order Denying Reconsideration, which
 
4(...continued)
Also on March 28, 2014, "Kakatin's former court-appointed counsel,
Kellen Kenji Akamu [(Akamu)] of the Office of the Public Defender," filed a
response to the OSC declaring that on September 25, 2013, he discussed with
Kakatin "the pros and cons of appealing" and "whether the filing of a Motion
for Reconsideration of Sentence would be warranted." Akamu declared that
 "Kakatin requested a Motion for Reconsideration of Sentence" and "never
requested [Akamu] to file an appeal on his behalf." Akamu also declared that
 "Kakatin did not provide any new information to [Akamu] which would have
caused [Akamu] to recommend filing an appeal."
 
In consideration of Akamu's response to the OSC, this court filed
an Order on April 2, 2014 ordering "that no further action will be taken
against [Akamu]."
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
constitutes a waiver of his appeal. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7)
 
("Points not argued may be deemed waived.").
 
Furthermore, based on the transcripts from the circuit 
court's September 9, 2013 sentencing hearing, Kakatin's October 
2, 2013 Motion for Reconsideration of Sentence, and the transcripts of the November 5, 2013 hearing on the motion, we hold that the circuit court did not err in denying Kakatin's Motion for Reconsideration of Sentence because (1) Kakatin failed to heed the circuit court's clear warning that its inclination to sentence Kakatin to probation hinged on whether Kakatin stayed out of trouble during supervised release and (2) a five-year term of imprisonment is not an abuse of discretion in light of Kakatin's criminal record and history with court-ordered drug rehabilitation programs. See State v. Oughterson, 99 Hawai
'i 
244, 253, 54 P3d 415, 424 (2002) (holding that a circuit court's ruling with regard to a party's motion for reconsideration is reviewed on appeal for an abuse of discretion). 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the December 6, 2013 "Order
 
Denying Motion for Reconsideration of Sentence" entered in the
 Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed. 
This Summary Disposition Order is without prejudice to
 
Kakatin raising the issue of ineffective assistance of counsel in
 a HRPP Rule 40 petition. If Kakatin's HRPP Rule 40 petition
 alleges facts with regard to his claim of ineffective assistance
 of counsel that if proven would entitle him to relief, he shall
 be granted a hearing on that issue pursuant to HRPP Rule 40(f).
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 30, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Randall K. Hironaka 
(Miyoshi & Hironaka)for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Sonja P. McCullenDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
4

 