NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000569
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JUNIOR LARRY HILLBROOM, as Trustee of the JLH TRUST, Plaintiff-
Appellant, v. DAVID LUJAN, Defendant-Appellee, JOHN DOES 1-10,
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10, CORPORATIONS, AND/OR
OTHER ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-2072)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
1
Plaintiff-Appellant Keith Waibel (Waibel) , as Trustee
of the JLH Trust (Trust), appeals from the June 30, 2011 Final
 
Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (Circuit Court).
2
 
On appeal, Waibel argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
in granting summary judgment in favor of Defendant-Appellee
 David J. Lujan (Lujan) because: (1) the Guam Probate Court's
 Orders were not entitled to full faith and credit; (2) the
 decision "effectively overruled a prior order issued by another
 Circuit Court;" (3) "material issues of fact existed as to
 whether Lujan" (a) "breached his contract with Waibel and the
 Trust," (b) breached his fiduciary duties as Waibel and the
 Trust's attorney, and (c) "engaged in other actionable
 
1
 On April 9, 2014, this court entered an Order granting the
substitution of Junior Larry Hillbroom (Hillbroom), as Trustee of the JLH
Trust, in place of the former trustee Waibel. However, as the events leading
up to and during the briefing of this appeal were taken by Waibel, we will
continue to refer to him throughout this opinion.
 
2
 The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
misconduct;" and (4) the award of attorneys' fees and costs to
 
Lujan was therefore improper.
 
I.
 
The Trust was created for Hillbroom's benefit as the
 
3
biological son of Larry L. Hillblom,  co-founder of the package
delivery company DHL after his apparent death in an airplane
 crash on May 21, 1995. At the time the Trust was created,
 Hillbroom was a minor child and pretermitted heir of the Hillblom
 Estate. Hillbroom turned eighteen years old in 2002, but until
 that time, the Guam guardianship court supervised and approved
 all distributions from the Trust.
 
On September 29, 1995, the Guam Guardianship Court
 
appointed Hillbroom's biological grandmother, Naoko Imeong
 (Naoko) as co-guardian and co-guardian ad litem with her
 daughter, Hillbroom's biological mother, Kaelani Kinney (Kinney).
 
On November 5, 2001, Waibel, on behalf of the Trust,
 
and pursuant to the decision of the Protectors of the Trust,
 filed an application with the Guam Guardianship Court to approve
 the expenditure of $250,000 to "purchase or build a house for
 Naoko" and her husband "for their personal use and property." 
The application was approved on November 7, 2001.
 
In a meeting conducted in Hawai
'i in 2002, Waibel asked 
Lujan, who also represented the Trust in other matters, to take on the task of finding a residence to buy or build for Naoko and her husband. Waibel transferred the $250,000 to Lujan. Lujan held the funds for Naoko and her husband, Marciano Imeong (collectively, "the Imeongs") while they searched for a house or a site to build a house. During this time, a portion of the funds were used for the living and personal expenses for the Imeongs and Hillbroom.
4 
3
 According to Appellee, "Hillbroom" is a misspelling of "Hillblom".
 
4
 On February 1, 2007, Edward C. Arriola, a Guamanian attorney
representing Lujan regarding Lujan's management of the $250,000, faxed a
letter to Waibel's attorney, Brian K. Yomono (Yomono), informing the latter
that Lujan's position regarding the $250,000 was that he received the funds
from the Trust for the purpose of the construction of a house for the Imeongs,
that he held the funds in trust, subject to "the potential set off for funds
advanced to the Imeongs" and that the funds were "not the property of the
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
After Naoko's death on August 29, 2006, probate
 
proceedings for her estate commenced in Guam on March 17, 2008. 
The Guam Probate Court's December 2, 2008 Decree Settling Final
 Account of Administrator and Final Distribution (2008 Decree)
5
 
included the remainder of the $250,000 to buy/build Naoko's
 residence--$185,000--as an asset of the estate, and ordered that
 the money be distributed to Naoko's five identified heirs.
 
On October 7, 2008, Waibel filed the instant Complaint,
 
alleging that Lujan: (1) breached his fiduciary duty to Waibel
 and the Trust; (2) was negligent in carrying out the task to
 buy/build Naoko's residence; (3) breached a contract to complete
 the task; (4) failed to return funds, thereby breaching an
 obligation in the nature of assumpsit; (5) breached his duty as
 an agent of Waibel and the Trust; (6) converted the moneys given
 to him by not using them for the intended purpose and deposited
 them in his own account; and (7) was, as a result of the
 foregoing "willful and wanton misconduct," liable for punitive
 damages.
 
On May 22, 2009, Lujan moved to dismiss the Complaint
 
and argued that the Complaint was "an improper collateral attack
 on a dispositive order of another court," i.e., the 2008 Decree. 
Lujan also filed a Motion to Dismiss Complaint for Lack of
 Jurisdiction on May 22, 2009. On April 1, 2010, the Circuit
 
4(...continued)
[Trust] but that of the estates [sic] of" the Imeongs. 
The letter went on to
 
state, 
The attached EX PARTE APPLICATION TO APPROVE PROTECTORS'
 
ACTION REGARDING JLH, JOINDER BY Naoko Imeong, Guardian for
Jr. Larry Hillbroom, and ORDER of Judge Lamorena
substantiate this position. Upon initiation of probate
proceedings for the Imeongs, and upon Order by the Court,
Mr. Lujan will deposit the funds with the Administrator.
 
(Capitalization in original.)
 
5
 On October 6, 2008, the administrator of the estate filed the
First and Final Account, Report of Administration and Petition for Final
Distribution in the Guam Probate Court. An amended First and Final Account,
Report of Administration and Petition for Final Distribution was filed on
November 20, 2008, correcting the remaining amount held by Lujan from $250,000
to 185,000.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
6
Court issued orders denying both Lujan's motions and
specifically found it had jurisdiction over this case.
 
On August 31, 2010, the administrator of Naoko's
 
estate, Antonio N. Sinzi (Sinzi) petitioned the Superior Court of
 
Guam "for an order to reopen probate proceedings for the limited
 purpose of proving that funds distributed to the heirs of the
 decedent were in fact property of the decedent and that such
 distribution was appropriate." (Petition to Reopen Probate) To
 that petition was attached Sinzi's declaration, which stated that
 the November 7, 2001 order "directed" Waibel to deposit the
 $250,000 with Lujan "for the benefit of" the Imeongs, the funds
 were used "expressly for the benefit" of the Imeongs and
 Hillbroom while Naoko was still alive and after Naoko's death,
 Lujan transferred the sum of $185,000 to Sinzi's counsel along
 with declarations of Lujan and his secretary, Carlyn A. Torres
 (Torres), as to the cash advances made.
7 Sinzi's declaration
 
also reported, "The propriety of this transfer of the funds to
 the estate as one of its assets has been challenged [in] an
 unrelated action, Keith Waibel as Trustee of the JLH Trust v.
 David Lujan et al., Civil Action 08-1-2072-1D EEH, filed in the
 Circuit Court of the First Circuit, State of Hawaii."
 
On October 27, 2010, the Superior Court of Guam entered
 
its Decision and Order (2010 Order). The court found that the
 $250,000 "was for the purpose of purchasing or building a house
 for [Naoko] which was ultimately to be her personal property. It
 is crystal clear from the Order that the Two Hundred Fifty
 Thousand Dollars ($250,000.00) or any house purchased or built
 from the proceeds is to be the personal property of [Naoko]." 
The court also found that Waibel received constructive notice of
 the advances to Naoko and Hillbroom from the $250,000 and the
 deposit of the $185,000 balance of the funds with Sinzi,
 Administrator of Naoko's estate, as well as constructive notice
 of the probate proceedings, through Vida Imeong, a Protector of
 
6
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
7
 The declarations of Lujan and Torres are not included in this
record.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Trust during the probate proceedings, yet Waibel did not
 
object to the distributions or deposit.
 
On February 8, 2011, Lujan filed a Motion for Summary
 
Judgment, or in the Alternative, Motion to Stay Proceedings,
 urging that the Circuit Court enter judgment in his favor as
 Waibel's claims "are now moot and this Court should grant full
 faith and credit" to the 2010 Order, or, in the alternative,
 grant a stay to allow Waibel "to address his claims directly with
 the Superior court of Guam to avoid the risk of inconsistent
 results." At the hearing on Lujan's motion, the Circuit Court
 reasoned, 
Based on the Court's review of all the matters that have
 
been submitted with respect to this motion for summary
judgment, the Court grants the motion for summary judgment,
finds that the decision and order of the Guam probate court
is entitled to full faith and credit and resolves the issues
 with respect to this case and that the $250,000.00 payment
from the trust to [Lujan] was for the Imeongs and not
property of the trust and improperly went to the estate on
their deaths.
 
The Circuit Court appeared to believe the Guam Court's
 
determination that the remainder of the house grant was properly
 property of Naoko's estate was dispositive of Waibel's claims:
 
[A]t the time that the protectors approved the $250,000.00
transfer at their meeting, that the trustee transfer their
money and they went before the court and the court approved
that, that was a transfer of $250,000.00 from the trust to
the guardians for a house. And if that was the case and
 then the money went to Mr. Lujan, he held it, it eventually
went to their probate estate, summary judgment is
appropriate, there is no claim.
 
And I understand you view it differently, that there
was a breach of fiduciary duty, that there was a contract,
but the Court sees the guardianship proceeding order,
protectors made a decision at a meeting to have the trustee,
the court approved that, actions were taken subsequent to
that, there is credibility issues about that. The emails
 indicate that [Waibel] understood that the money was with
[Lujan] for the purchase of a residence for those
individuals, it would have been in their name, the money out
of the trust.
 
Consequently, the Circuit Court granted Lujan's motion.8
 
8
 On March 24, 2011, the Circuit Court filed its order granting
Lujan's Motion for Summary Judgment, stating,
 
1) the Order entered on November 7, 2001, by the
Superior Court of Guam, which references [Waibel's] Ex Parte
Application to Approve Protectors' Action Regarding JLH,
(continued...)
 
5
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lujan subsequently filed a Motion for attorneys' fees
 
and costs, and on May 26, 2011, the Circuit Court granted Lujan's
 
motion, ordering Waibel to pay a total of $68,227.19.
 
On June 30, 2011, the Circuit Court entered judgment in
 
favor of Lujan and against Hillbroom on all claims. This timely
 appeal followed.
 
II.

 
The heart of Waibel's appeal rests in his position that
 
the Circuit Court erred in granting Lujan's motion for summary
 judgment based on its ruling that the 2010 Order was entitled to
 "full faith and credit" and was dispositive of his claims in this
 case. We review the grant of summary judgment by the Circuit
 Court de novo. Freddy Nobriga Enters. v. Dep't of Hawaiian Home
 
Lands, 129 Hawai
'i 123, 128, 295 P.3d 993, 998 (App. 2013). 
"Valid judgments of another state are entitled to full
 
faith and credit in this jurisdiction." Guray v. Tacras, 119
 
Hawai'i 212, 217, 194 P.3d 1174, 1179 (App. 2008) (internal 
quotation marks omitted) quoting Tougas v. Tougas, 76 Hawai 'i 19, 
28, 868 P.2d 437, 446 (1994).9
 
8(...continued)
dated November 5, 2001, is controlling and entitled to full

faith and credit;
 
2) the [2010 Order, entered] by the Superior Court of
Guam is controlling and entitled to full faith and credit;
 
3) These Orders resolve the issues with respect to
this case; and
 
4) the $250,000 payment from the [Trust to Lujan]
belonged to [the Imeongs] as their personal property and was
not the property of the [Trust].
 
9 Article IV, Section 1 of the United States Constitution provides:
 
Full Faith and Credit shall be given in each State to the

public Acts, Records, and judicial Proceedings of every
other State. And the Congress may by general Laws prescribe
the Manner in which such Acts, Records and Proceedings shall
be proved, an the Effect thereof.
 
Congress has provided that "[t]he records and judicial proceedings of any
court of any [U.S.] State, Territory or Possession" "shall have the same full
faith and credit in every court within the United States . . . as they have
by law or usage in the courts of such State, Territory or Possession from
which they are taken." 28 United States Code (U.S.C.) § 1738 (1948). Guam is
 
a territory ceded to the United States. 48 U.S.C. § 1421 et seq. The
 
"judicial authority of Guam" includes "a trial court designated as the
'Superior Court of Guam' . . . established by the laws of Guam." 48 U.S.C.
 § 1424(a)(1).
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A judgment is valid if:
 
1.	 the court rendering it had jurisdiction to act
judicially in the case;
 
2.	 the party against whom the judgment is sought to be
invoked had reasonable notice of the litigation and
was afforded a reasonable opportunity to be heard;
 
3. 	it was rendered by a competent court; and
 
4. 	it is in compliance with the rendering state's
requirements for the valid exercise of its court's
powers.
 
Id.
 
The Circuit Court identified two orders to which it
 
would give full faith and credit. Waibel challenges this
 
decision only as to the 2010 Order. With regard to that order,
 as did the Circuit Court, we focus on the second requirement of a
 valid judgment. It is undisputed that Waibel was "the party
 against whom the judgment [was] sought to be invoked." 
As to reasonable notice, the parties do not point to
 
any evidence in the record that shows Waibel was served, by
 personal service, mail, publication or posting, of the Petition
 to Reopen. The Superior Court of Guam ruled that Waibel had
 received constructive notice of the probate proceedings, but did
 not decide that Waibel had constructive notice of the Petition to
 Reopen Probate that resulted in the 2010 Order. Lujan does not
 argue that Waibel knew Sinzi would petition the Guam Superior
 Court to reopen the probate proceedings for any reason, let alone
 for the purpose of litigating the propriety of Lujan's handling
 of the $250,000. Thus, it appears from this record that Waibel
 received no notice or had any knowledge of the proceedings
 leading to the 2010 Order.
 
Although "state proceedings need do no more than
 
satisfy the minimum procedural requirements of the Fourteenth
 Amendment's Due Process Clause in order to qualify for the full
 faith and credit guaranteed by federal law," Kremer v. Chem.
 
Constr. Corp., 456 U.S. 461, 481 (1982), where other methods of
 issue preclusion would not be applied where the party against
 whom the earlier decision is asserted did not have a "full and
 fair opportunity" to litigate the claim, Kremer, 456 U.S. at 480­81, full faith and credit should also be denied. See also Baker
 
by Thomas v. General Motors Corp., 522 U.S. 222, 239 n.12 (1998)
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(in a subsequent action in another state, attempt to enforce
 
injunction against GM employee from testifying without GM's
 permission) ("The Michigan judgment is not entitled to full faith
 and credit, we have endeavored to make plain, because it
 impermissibly interferes with Missouri's control of litigation
 brought by parties who were not before the Michigan court.")
 
Therefore, we hold that the 2010 Order should not have
 
been given full faith and credit and used to defeat all of
 Waibel's claims and as the March 24, 2011, order reveals no other
 basis for the grant of summary judgment, it must be vacated.
10
 
Our disposition of this issue makes it unnecessary to address
 Waibel's other argument regarding the entry of summary judgment
 "effectively overrul[ing]" Judge Kim's denial of Lujan's May 22,
 2009 motions to dismiss and requires that we vacate the order
 awarding to Lujan attorneys' fees and costs as prevailing party
 in an assumpsit case.
 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the June 30, 2011
 
Final Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 and remand for further proceedings consistent with this
 memorandum opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 30, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Brian K. Yomono

 
for Plaintiff-Appellant. Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Sidney K. Ayabe,

Calvin E. Young, and
Monica K. Suematu (Ayabe, Chong, Nishimoto, Sia
& Nakamura)
for Defendant-Appellee.
 
10
 Waibel also argues that the Circuit Court, as an additional basis
for its decision, considered matters of credibility. However, our review of
the Circuit Court's remarks at the hearing and the subsequent written order do
not lead us to the conclusion that it relied on credibility matters as a basis
for its decision. Rather, the Circuit Court merely noted these matters in the
course of its discussion with counsel.
 
8
 