  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000793
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
J.F., Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
J.F., Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 10-1-135K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In this post-divorce decree proceeding, Defendant-
Appellant J.F. (Mother) appeals from the "Findings of Fact,

 
Conclusions of Law, and Order of the Court" (Order), filed
 
August 16, 2012, in the Family Court of the Third Circuit (Family
 Court).
1 In the Order, the Family Court modified its original
 
child custody award by giving J.F. (Father) sole legal and
 physical custody of Mother and Father's child (Child) subject to
 Mother's reasonable right of visitation.
 
On appeal, Mother appears to raise the following
 
2
 (1) the Family Court's findings "should be denied"
 issues:
1
 The Honorable Aley K. Auna, Jr. presided.
 
2
 Mother's opening brief does not comply with Rule 28 of the Hawai' i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) in a variety of ways, including that she
does not indicate where in the record she objected to the errors she nowcontends were made by the Family Court or where she brought the errors to theattention of the Family Court. However, in an effort to decide Mother's appealon the merits, we will address her contentions as best as they can be
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
because they are not supported by declarations or affidavits;
 
(2) the Family Court should not have considered Father's
 contention that Mother is unable to care for Child because it was
 hearsay and/or there was contrary evidence presented; (3) the
 custody evaluation was not justified and the custody evaluator
 was not independent; (4) Mother received ineffective assistance
 of counsel; (5) the Family Court erred in ruling that there were
 material changes in circumstance that warranted a change in
 Child's custody; and (6) Mother should be awarded attorney's fees
 and costs.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted and having given due consideration to the arguments
 advanced and the issues raised, as well as the relevant legal
 authorities, we resolve Mother's points of error as follows and
 affirm.
 I. The Family Court's Findings and Consideration of Evidence
 
Mother variously appears to challenge the Family
 
Court's findings of fact, the Family Court's determinations on
 the credibility of witnesses, the admissibility and/or weight of
 certain evidence, and the custody evaluation.
 
As to Mother's challenge to the Family Court's findings 
of fact, she does not point to any specific finding of fact to which she objects and she fails to present any argument or evidence to refute the Family Court's findings of fact. This point is therefore waived pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). 
Mother also contends that Father made hearsay
 
statements and false statements that should not have been
 considered by the court and that the Family Court overlooked
 recommendations made by Carlene Greenlee (Greenlee), a social
 worker with the Department of Human Services. There is no merit
 
2
   (...continued)
discerned. See O'Connor v. Diocese of Honolulu
, 77 Hawai' i 383, 385-86, 885
P.2d 361, 363-64 (1994). 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in Mother's contention about hearsay evidence. Moreover, "it is 
not the province of the appellate court to reassess the credibility of the witnesses or the weight of the evidence[.]" In re Doe, 95 Hawai
'i 183, 197, 20 P.3d 616, 630 (2001). 
Although there may have been some conflicting evidence as to the custody issue, it was within the discretion of the Family Court to assess the credibility and weight of the evidence presented. From our review of the record, the Family Court did not abuse its discretion. 
Mother further contends that the Family Court was not
 
justified in ordering a custody evaluation, and that the custody
 evaluator, Dr. Jeffrey Cumes (Dr. Cumes), was not independent
 
because Father owed him money. We do not agree. Pursuant to
 
HRS ยง 571-46(a)(4) (Supp. 2012), the Family Court is authorized
 to order a custody evaluation "[w]henever good cause appears
 therefor[.]" Given the record, the Family Court had ample
 justification to order the custody evaluation in this case. 
Additionally, we find no support in the record for Mother's claim
 that Dr. Cumes was not independent.
 II. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
 
Mother claims she received ineffective assistance of 
counsel because her counsel failed to secure Dr. Cumes's testimony at the evidentiary hearing. There does not appear to be authority in Hawai
'i that allows an ineffective assistance of 
counsel claim in a child custody case, especially where a party retained their own attorney. Hawai
'i has recognized a right to 
effective assistance of counsel in proceedings involving the termination of parental rights, In re RGB, 123 Hawai
'i 1, 18-19, 
229 P.3d 1066, 1083-84 (2010), but that is not the circumstance of this case. Moreover, even if we assume there were such a right in this case, Mother has not demonstrated that the proceedings in the Family Court were fundamentally unfair as a result of her counsel's alleged incompetence. Id. at 25, 229 
P.3d at 1090. Mother does not indicate how she was prejudiced to the extent that she was denied a fair proceeding. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. Material Change of Circumstances
 
The core of Mother's appeal is that there were no 
material changes to the parties' circumstances to warrant a 
change in the Child's custody. "To obtain the family court's change of a custody order, the movant 'must show a material change of circumstances since the previous custody order, and must show that such a change of custody is in the best interest of the child.'" Egger v. Egger, 112 Hawai
'i 312, 318, 145 P.3d 
855, 861 (App. 2006) (quoting Nadeau v. Nadeau, 10 Haw. App. 111, 121, 861 P.2d 754, 759 (1993)); see HRS 571-46(a)(6) (Supp. 2013). 
We review whether a material change in circumstances
 
has been demonstrated under the right/wrong standard. Hollaway
 
v. Hollaway, CAAP-12-0000816, 2014 WL 1744074, at *6 (App.
 Apr. 30, 2014, as corrected May 1, 2014); Davis v. Davis, 3 Haw.
 App. 501, 506, 653 P.2d 1167, 1171 (1982). 
At the time of the initial custody order, Father agreed
 
that Mother should have primary physical custody of Child. 
However, in subsequent proceedings relevant to this appeal,
 Father raised numerous arguments as to why a material change in
 circumstances had occurred warranting a change in the Child's
 custody. After ordering a custody evaluation by Dr. Cumes and
 receiving Dr. Cumes' evaluation report of March 26, 2012, the
 Family Court issued orders that awarded temporary physical
 custody to Father. Then, after further hearings, the Family
 Court issued its August 16, 2012 Order determining that Father
 had met his burden of showing a material change of circumstances
 such that a change of custody was warranted. 
In its Order, the Family Court made certain findings
 
and also concluded that the custody evaluation by Dr. Cumes was
 significant in the court's initial award of temporary physical
 custody to Father and further, that Dr. Cumes's recommendations
 are "persuasive and well founded." 
Given Dr. Cumes's custody evaluation and the findings
 
by the Family Court, there were a number of material changes that 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
occurred after the initial custody order. First, Mother's 
brother (Uncle), who apparently suffers from emotional issues, moved back to Hawai
'i and was residing for a time in the same 
house as Mother and Child (they were all residing with the parents of Mother and Uncle). In the custody evaluation, Dr. Cumes raised concerns about Mother permitting Child to have continued contact with Uncle after it was clear that Uncle had significant emotional problems, had attempted to commit suicide, and allegedly sexually assaulted Child. Moreover, although Mother had rented a home of her own, her financial circumstances were uncertain and there was no assurance that she would not move back into her parents' home. Second, Mother was stopped for driving under the influence of alcohol and Child was in the vehicle. The Family Court noted that this was a one-time incident. Third, the Family Court found that Child is caught in the middle of disputes between Mother and Father and tries to appease both parents. Fourth, the Family Court concluded that Mother and Father are unable to communicate with each other appropriately and effectively. Fifth, the custody evaluation notes that Father's living circumstances are now such that he can provide a more stable situation and can offer the safer and more nurturing environment. These changed circumstances are referred to in the custody evaluation and/or the Family Court's Order. 
Given the record in this case, we conclude the Family
 
Court was correct in ruling that Father met his burden to
 demonstrate a material change in circumstances warranting the
 change in custody.
 IV. Attorney's Fees and Costs
 
Under HRS ยง 580-47(f) (Supp. 2013), the Family Court
 
had discretion whether to award attorney's fees and costs. The
 Family Court did not abuse its discretion in not awarding
 attorney's fees and costs to Mother.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Findings of
 
Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order of the Court," filed on
 
August 16, 2012, by the Family Court of the Third Circuit is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 22, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
J.F. Defendant-Appellant, pro se
 
Presiding Judge
J.F. Plaintiff-Appellee, pro se
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
6
 