 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-19-0000519 14-MAY-2024 08:23 AM Dkt. 111 SO 
NO. CAAP-19-0000519 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
THE WEST MOLOKAI RESORT ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS, 
Plaintiff-Counter-Claim Defendant-Appellee, v. 
KALUAKOI POOLSIDE, LLC, Defendant-Counterclaimant-Appellant, 
MOLOKAI PROPERTIES, LTD., Intervenor-Defendant-Appellant, 
and, JOHN DOES 1-100; JANE DOES 1-100; 
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-100; DOES PARTNERSHIPS 1-100, 
Defendants. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2CC161000404) 
  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.) 
  Defendant-Counterclaimant-Appellant Kaluakoi Poolside, 
LLC (Kaluakoi) and Intervenor-Defendant-Appellant Molokai 
Properties, Ltd. (Molokai Properties) appeal from the Circuit 
Court of the Second Circuit's  (1) June 21, 2019 order denying 
Kaluakoi's motion to modify or correct the arbitrator's award 1
1 The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided.   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and Molokai Properties' joinder to Kaluakoi's motion to modify 
or correct (Order); and (2) June 21, 2019 final judgment. 
Kaluakoi and Molokai Properties contend the circuit 
court erred in confirming a Partial Final Award of Arbitrator and a Final Award of Arbitrator (together, Arbitration Award) 
and entering final judgment against them in favor of Plaintiff-
Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee West Molokai Resort Association 
of Apartment Owners (Association) because Molokai Properties was 
not a party to the arbitration, and the Arbitration Award and 
final judgment should have been against Kaluakoi only.
2 
2 More specifically, Kaluakoi contends the circuit court erred in 
refusing to correct or modify the Arbitration Award where: 
(1) the Arbitration Award contains an evident mistake referencing 
"Respondents" (plural) even though Kaluakoi was the only 
participating respondent; 
(2) the arbitrator "made an award on a claim not submitted" 
because there is no theory binding Molokai Properties; 
(3) the Arbitration Award is "imperfect as a matter of form not affecting the merits of the decision" as it references both 
"Respondent" (singular) and "Respondents" (plural); and 
(4) the Arbitration Award "purports to bind non- party Molokai 
Properties without any cogent legal or factual reasons to do 
so." 
Molokai Properties contends: 
(1) "Vacatur (and/or modification) was warranted under HRS 658A"; 
(2) it was denied procedural due process; and 
(3) the circuit court should have held an evidentiary hearing on its purported participation in the arbitration proceedings. 
In its answering briefs, Association asserts there was no error by the 
Arbitrator or the circuit court in confirming the Arbitration Award because 
Kaluakoi is a wholly owned subsidiary of Molokai Properties, has "no 
identity separate and apart from" Molokai Properties, and Molokai Properties 
was notified of and participated in the arbitration. 
2   
 
 
   Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve this 
appeal as discussed below. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Under Hawai‘ i Revised Statutes (HRS) chapter 658A, the 
Uniform Arbitration Act, the court may vacate an arbitration 
award if the arbitrator exceeded their authority or there was no 
agreement to arbitrate, unless the person participated in the arbitration without objecting. 
HRS § 658A-23 (2016). HRS 
chapter 658A also allows the court to modify or correct an award if there is an evident mistake or the award was made on a claim 
not submitted. HRS § 658A-24 (2016). 
If a party files a motion to vacate an arbitration 
award and presents a prima facie basis for vacating the award, 
the circuit court should conduct an evidentiary hearing and render findings of fact and conclusions of law in support of 
granting or denying the motion to vacate if material facts are 
in dispute. Nordic PCL Constr. Inc. v. LPIHGC, LLC
, 136 Hawaiʻi 
29, 43-44, 358 P.3d 1, 15-16 (2015). 
Kaluakoi requested the circuit court vacate, correct, 
or modify the Arbitration Award pursuant to HRS §§ 658A-23, -24. 
Kaluakoi asserted that Molokai Properties was "not a party to 
this Circuit Court action and did not participate as a party in 
the underlying arbitration[.]" 
Kaluakoi also asserted that 
3   
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Molokai Properties "never signed any arbitration agreement 
regarding the 2016 Arbitration Proceeding." 
In rendering its decision, the circuit court did not 
conduct an evidentiary hearing. Instead, the circuit court "presumed" the Arbitrator thought Molokai Properties 
participated in the arbitration because (1) the Arbitrator 
listed Molokai Properties in the caption; (2) the Arbitration 
Award repeatedly referred to respondents (plural); and (3) Todd 
Svetin (Svetin) attended the arbitration proceedings for Molokai 
Properties. 
First, the Arbitrator listing Molokai Properties in 
the caption of the Arbitration Award did not establish Molokai 
Properties participated in the arbitration because the Arbitrator used different captions. For example, the caption in 
the Arbitrator's April 5, 2018 decision (concluding Association 
and Kaluakoi did not reach a binding settlement following the 
2015 settlement discussions) did not include Molokai Properties. 
Instead, the caption named various doe defendants, and 
Association used this same caption in its circuit court 
complaint. And the caption in the Arbitrator's August 10, 2017 decision (finding the Cades firm was disqualified from 
representing Kaluakoi) listed both Kaluakoi and Molokai 
Properties as respondents, matching the caption Association used 
4   
 
 
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in its Statement of Claim. But no explanation was provided for 
these varying captions. 
Next, although the Arbitration Award may have 
repeatedly referred to "respondents," there were no findings or conclusions explaining why Molokai Properties would be liable 
under the Cross Easement Declaration, the 2009 Partial 
Arbitration Award, or 2011 Modifying Agreement. Rather, the 
Arbitrator found that after Molokai Properties acquired the 
hotel in 2002, it conveyed the hotel to Kaluakoi, its 
subsidiary. The Arbitrator did not explain why Molokai 
Properties would remain liable after the conveyance. And, at 
the arbitration hearing, although one of the McCorriston 
attorneys indicated she represented the "respondents," the other two McCorriston attorneys indicated they represented the 
"respondent." 
Finally, Svetin introduced himself at the July 25, 
2018 arbitration hearing by stating, "Good morning, Todd Svetin 
for Molokai Properties." Svetin, however, did not expressly 
indicate whether he was appearing as a party or as a witness. 
Based on the arbitration hearing excerpts in the record, Svetin appears to have testified as a witness, as he was questioned by 
Association's counsel, Kaluakoi's counsel, and the Arbitrator. 
If Svetin was appearing as more than a witness, under the 
Dispute Prevention and Resolution (DPR) rules "[a]ny legal or 
5   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
other authorized representative who will be participating in an 
arbitration proceeding must enter an appearance in writing with 
DPR and the other party(s) at least thirty (30) days before the 
commencement of the arbitration hearing."3 Arb. Rules, Proc. & 
Protocols of Disp. Prevention & Resol., Inc. Rule IV(4) (2015), 
https://dprhawaii.com/dpr-rules/ [https://perma.cc/CN6R-SKB3]. 
Association does not point to where in the record Svetin made 
such an appearance. 
Thus, the record does not support the bases upon which 
the circuit court made its decision, and it is not apparent from 
the record that Molokai Properties agreed to, or participated 
in, the arbitration at issue. 
Moreover, after granting Molokai Properties' motion to 
intervene at the May 24, 2019 hearing on Kaluakoi's motion to modify or correct, the circuit court noted Molokai Properties 
was only a party "as of today" and acknowledged it "glossed 
over" the distinction between Molokai Properties and Kaluakoi 
3 We note that, according to the record, Svetin is not an attorney. 
Although not in effect at the time of the 2018 arbitration hearing, the 
current DPR rules conform with common law requiring a corporation to be 
represented by an attorney. Arb. Rules, Proc. & Protocols of Disp. Prevention & Resol., Inc. Rule IV(4) (2019) (providing that "except in 
limited circumstances, corporations, partnerships, limited liability companies and other entities must be represented by licensed attorneys") 
https://dprhawaii.com/wp- content/uploads/2019/12/2019- 12-30-2020-Arbitration-
Rules-Final-Version.pdf [https://perma.cc/YBF8- 848J]; see Oahu Plumbing & 
Sheet Metal, Ltd. v. Kona Constr., Inc., 60 Haw. 372, 374, 590 P.2d 570, 572 
(1979) (explaining "a corporation cannot appear and represent itself either in proper person or by its officers, but can do so only by an attorney 
admitted to practice law"); 9A Fletcher Cyclopedia of the Law of 
Corps. § 4463 (2023). 
6   
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
during earlier arguments on Association's motion to confirm the 
Arbitration Award. 
Because the circuit court did not conduct an 
evidentiary hearing or make findings in support of its decision, and it is not apparent from the record Molokai Properties agreed 
to, or participated in, the arbitration, we vacate the June 21, 
2019 Order and final judgment, and we remand this case to the 
circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this 
summary disposition order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘ i, May 14, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
 Presiding Judge 
David J. Minkin,  
Shanlyn A.S. Park, /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
Jesse J.T. Smith, Associate Judge 
(McCorriston Miller Mukai  
MacKinnon), /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
for Defendant- Associate Judge 
Counterclaimant-Appellant  
Kaluakoi Poolside, LLC. 
 Joachim P. Cox, 
Robert K. Fricke, 
Abigail M. Holden, (Cox Fricke), for Intervenor-Defendant-
Appellant Molokai Properties, 
Ltd.  
Terrance M. Revere, 
Amanda L. Dutcher, for Plaintiff-Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee West 
Molokai Resort Association of 
Apartment Owners. 
7 