NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000198
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
LORNA M. MACASO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 15-1-1059)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Lorna M. Macaso (Macaso) with harassment, in
 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 711-1106(1)(a)
 (2014).
1 The Complainant, Dominador Macaso, Jr., was Macaso's
 
ex-husband, and they had a child (Child) together. During a
 bench trial before the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family
 
2
Court),  the State presented evidence that on the day of the
charged incident, Complainant went to Macaso's house to pick up
 Child. Macaso was angry at Complainant because he was fifteen
 
1HRS § 711-1106(1)(a) provides that "[a] person commits the
offense of harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy, or alarm
any other person, that person . . . [s]trikes, shoves, kicks, or
otherwise touches another person in an offensive manner or
subjects the other person to offensive physical contact[.]"
 
2The Honorable Gale L.F. Ching presided.
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
minutes late which would cause Macaso to be late for a job
 
interview. While Complainant was carrying Child, Macaso called
 him names, punched him twice in the face with a closed hand, and
 also struck him in the stomach.
3 The Family Court found Macaso
 
guilty as charged. It sentenced her to six months probation and
 required her to attend anger management classes until clinically
 discharged. The Family Court entered its Amended Judgment on
 March 13, 2015.
 
On appeal, Macaso argues that her conviction must be
 
overturned because the Family Court's Tachibana colloquy
4 was
 
inadequate and thus rendered her waiver of her right to testify
 invalid. She also asserts that because English is not her
 primary language, there was a "possible language barrier" which
 is a "salient fact" in determining whether her waiver was valid. 
We conclude that Macaso'a Tachibana claim is without merit and
 affirm her conviction.
 
BACKGROUND
 
The proceedings at issue in this case, including

 
Macaso's entire trial, took place on the same day.
 
I.

 
Prior to commencing trial, the Family Court asked
 
defense counsel whether Macaso needed an interpreter and was
 informed that she did not need one:
 
THE COURT: And, [defense counsel], your client, does
she need an interpreter?

 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  
Uh, I don’t believe so, Your
Honor. I have spoken with her extensively. I've
 
interviewed her. I can effectively communicate with her.
 
THE COURT:  
Okay. You want to just ask her some
 
3The trial transcript shows Complainant as testifying that
Macaso "punch me on my face and pinch me on my stomach[,]" but
Complainant, another witness, and the prosecutor subsequently
refer to Complainant being hit or struck in the stomach by
Macaso. In closing argument, defense counsel stated that
Complainant testified he was punched in the stomach. 
4Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai 'i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995). 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
things and put that on the record that she doesn’t need
an -­
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Do you need an interpreter?
 
MS. MACASO: No. I understand English. But, uh, it's
okay for me if, uh, it's English, but, uh, sometimes there's

a word that I can't understand. If you elaborate it, I can
understand.
 
THE COURT: Given that, [defense counsel], what's your

position?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Have you not understood any words
that have been spoken so far today?
 
MS. MACASO: Uh, I understand.
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Okay. Um, I don't believe she
needs an interpreter.
 
II.
 
Also before trial, the Family Court provided Macaso
 
with a pretrial advisement pursuant to State v. Lewis,  94 Hawai 'i 
292, 12 P.3d 1233 (2000), as supplemented by State v. Monteil,
 
134 Hawai 'i 361, 341 P.3d 567 (2014). Macaso stated that she 
understood the Family Court's advisement. The following exchange
 took place:
 
THE COURT: Okay. I'm going to read you something.
Please listen carefully.

 
Before the court allows the defense to rest, it is
critical that you understand your right to testify or not to
testify in this trial. The decision is completely up to you
and no one can force you to decide one way or the other.
This decision is solely yours. If you decide to testify,
the State of Hawaii will be allowed to cross-examine you.
If you decide not to testify, your decision cannot be used
against you or considered in any way whatsoever. Do you
understand that?
 
[MACASO]: 
Yes, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT:  
Have you heard everything of what I've
gone over with you?
 
[MACASO]:  
Yes, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT:  In addition if you exercise your right not
to testify, the court cannot use it against you in any way.
Do you understand that?
 
[MACASO]:  
Yes, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: 
Okay. So you've heard everything that I
went over with you?
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[MACASO]: (No audible response.)
 
THE COURT: Is that a yes?

 
[MACASO]: Yes, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: And you understood everything?
 
[MACASO]: Yes, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: Do you have any questions of the court at
this time?
 
[MACASO]: No, Your Honor.

 
THE COURT: Okay. I'm not going to ask you for your
answer on this matter at this time. 
I'm going to revisit
this issue again or give you some time to talk it over with
your attorney. Okay.
 
[MACASO]: Yes, Your Honor.

 
THE COURT: And at the appropriate time we'll come
back to this again. 
Okay.
 
[MACASO]: Yes, Your Honor.

 
THE COURT: All right. Thank you. Anything else,
Counsel?
 
[PROSECUTOR]: Nothing.
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Nothing further, Your Honor.
 
III.
 
After the State completed its case in chief and
 
immediately prior to the defense resting, the Family Court
 
engaged in the following Tachibana colloquy:
 
THE COURT: Okay. Um, before we proceed I'm going to
return to the Tachibana.

 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Uh, may I have a moment to speak
with my client outside?
 
THE COURT: Sure.
 
. . . .
 
THE COURT:  
We're back on the record. The record
 
should reflect the presence of the defendant, her counsel,
and the prosecutor.
 
Um, you can have a seat. I'm just going to review the
Tachibana matter again. Okay.
 
[DEFENSE COUSNEL]: 
Thank you, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: Just please listen carefully. Before the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
court allows the defense to rest, it is critical that you
understand your right to testify or not to testify in this
trial. The decision is completely up to you and no one can
force you to decide one way or the other. This decision is
 solely yours.
If you decide to testify, the State of Hawaii will be
allowed to cross-examine you. If you decide not to testify,
your decision cannot be used against you or considered in
any way whatsoever. In addition if you exercise your right
not to testify, this court as the finder of fact cannot use
this against you in deciding this case. Okay?
 
Have you heard everything that the court has gone over
with you? 
[MACASO]: Yes, Your Honor. 
THE COURT:
 I'm sorry? 
[MACASO]:  Yes, Your Honor. 
THE COURT:  Okay. And did you understand what the
court has gone over with you?

 
[MACASO]:  
(No audible response.)
 
THE COURT:  Did you understand what the court stated?

 
[MACASO]:  Yes, Your Honor
.
 
THE COURT:  
Okay. And do you have any questions of
the court at this time
?
 
[MACASO]:  No, Your Honor
.
 
THE COURT:  
Okay. Um, have you made a decision on
this matter whether to testify or not to testify?

 
[MACASO]:  
Um, not to testify, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: Okay. 
And you've discussed this with your
attorney?
 
[MACASO]: Yes, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT:  
Okay. Um, has anyone made any promises,
threats, or pressured you in any way concerning your

decision?
 
[MACASO]: 
No, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT:  
Is this your own decision and yours alone?
 
[MACASO]: 
Yes, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT:  
Is your mind clear?
 
[MACASO]:  
Yes, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT:  
And what is your date of birth?
 
[MACASO]:  
Uh, April 18, 1971.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: Okay. Do you have any difficulty with the
English language?
 
[MACASO]: Um, yes, Your Honor.

 
THE COURT: Okay.
 
[MACASO]: Sometimes.
 
THE COURT: 
Sometimes. But with respect to what, uh,
you and your attorney has discussed and what the court and

you have discussed, have you been able to understand what
we've been talking about?
 
[MACASO]: Yes, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: Okay. And you -- did you need an
interpreter?
 
[MACASO]: Uh, no, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: 
Okay. Are you suffering from any type of
mental or emotional issues?

 
[MACASO]: 
No, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: 
Have you taken any drugs, medication, or
alcohol within the last 48 hours?

 
[MACASO]:  
No, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT:  
And is your mind clear?
 
[MACASO]: 
Yes, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT:  Do you have any questions of the court or

of your attorney at this time?
 
[MACASO]: 
(No audible response.)
 
THE COURT: Do you have any questions of the court, of

me, or of your attorney at this time that you would like to
ask?
 
[MACASO]: No, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Um, is there any -- counsels have
any further colloquy in this area -­
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: No, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: -- that you would want the court to ask
counsel?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: No, Your Honor.
 
[PROSECUTOR]: 
No, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: 
Okay. Okay. Based -- based on what has
 
been discussed with the defendant, the court finds that the
defendant has made a knowing, voluntary, and informed
decision not to testify and has done so with a full
understanding of the consequences of the decision.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Thank you, Your Honor.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
DISCUSSION
 
Macaso concedes that the Family Court's pretrial
 
advisement complied with the requirements of Lewis and Monteil.5
  
Macaso also concedes that the Family Court "did advise [Macaso]
 
of all the rights that Tachibana requires[.]"6 Macaso, however,
 
argues that the Family Court's Tachibana colloquy was inadequate
 because the Family Court "did not sufficiently ascertain whether
 or not [Macaso] understood those rights." In particular, Macaso
 
5In Lewis , the Hawai 'i Supreme Court required that before
trial, courts must "(1) inform the defendant of his or her
personal right to testify or not to testify and (2) alert thedefendant that, if he or she has not testified by the end of thetrial, the court will briefly question him or her to ensure thatthe decision not to testify is the defendant's own decision."
Lewis, 94 Hawai 'i at 297, 12 P.3d at 1238. In Monteil, the
supreme court added the requirement that "the trial courts wheninforming the defendant of the right not to testify during thepretrial advisement must also advise the defendant that theexercise of this right may not be used by the fact finder todecide the case." Monteil, 134 Hawai
'i at 373, 341 P.3d at 579. 
6In Tachibana , the supreme court stated that the trial court
should advise the defendant:
 
that he or she has a right to testify, that if he or

she wants to testify that no one can prevent him or her
from doing so, and that if he or she testifies the
prosecution will be allowed to cross-examine him or
her. In connection with the privilege against
self-incrimination, the defendant should also be
advised that he or she has a right not to testify and
that if he or she does not testify then the jury can be
instructed about that right.
 
Tachibana, 79 Hawai
'i at 236 n.7, 900 P.2d at 1303 n.7 (brackets
omitted) (quoting State v. Neuman, 371 S.E.2d 77, 82 (W. Va.1988). 
Macaso refers to each element of the Tachibana advisement as
 
a "right" she was required to understand to validly waive her
right to testify. For simplicity, we also use the term "right"
when referring to each element of the Tachibana advisement.
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contends that the Family Court failed to engage her in a
 
"meaningful exchange" regarding whether she understood her
 rights, and therefore it lacked an "objective basis" for finding
 that she knowingly and voluntarily waived her right to testify. 
We disagree with Macaso's arguments.
 
I.
 
We look to the totality of the facts and circumstances 
to determine whether Macaso's waiver of her right to testify was voluntarily and intelligently undertaken. See State v. Han, 130 
Hawai
'i 83, 89, 306 P.3d 128, 134 (2013). Here, the Family Court 
provided Macaso with a pretrial advisement pursuant to Lewis and Monteil, and Macaso told the Family Court she understood what the court had said and did not have any questions at that time. After the State had completed its case in chief and immediately before the defense rested, the Family Court advised Macaso of the rights required by Tachibana. The Family Court then asked Macaso if she understood what the court had stated, and she answered, "Yes, Your Honor." The Family Court asked Macaso if she had any questions, and she said, "No[.]" After Macaso informed the Family Court that she decided not to testify, the Family Court confirmed through additional questioning of Macaso that she had discussed her decision with her attorney; that she was not pressured in any way concerning her decision; that the decision not to testify was her decision; that her mind was clear; and that she did not need an interpreter and had been able to understand what she and her attorney had discussed and what she and the Family Court had been talking about. The Family Court then again asked Macaso whether she had any questions for the court and also whether she had any questions for her attorney. Macaso responded, "No, Your Honor." The Family Court also asked defense counsel whether any further colloquy was desired, and defense counsel said no. 
Based on the record in this case, we conclude that the
 
Family Court's Tachibana colloquy with Macaso was sufficient. 
The Family Court's questioning of and exchanges with Macaso were
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sufficient to enable it to ascertain that Macaso understood her
 
rights. In particular, Macaso explicitly acknowledged
 understanding her rights and told the Family Court that she did
 not have any questions. We conclude that the Family Court's
 colloquy provides assurance that Macaso understood her rights,
 and it provided an objective basis to support the Family Court's
 finding that Macaso "made a knowing, voluntary, and informed
 decision not to testify and has done so with a full understanding
 of the consequences of the decision." 
II.
 
Citing the Tachibana colloquy provided in State v. 
Christian, 88 Hawai
'i 407, 414-15, 967 P.2d 239, 246-47 (1998), 
Macaso argues that the Tachibana colloquy in her case was deficient because the Family Court did not stop after advising her of each right of the Tachibana advisement to ask whether she understood that right. We disagree. 
Although the Hawai
'i Supreme Court concluded in 
Christian that "the trial judge assiduously followed the procedures mandated in Tachibana[,]" Christian, 88 Hawai
'i at 
420, 967 P.2d at 252, and has cited the Tachibana colloquy in Christian as a model, see Han, 130 Hawai
'i at 91 n.6, 306 P.3d at 
136 n.6, the supreme court has not held that the method used to conduct the Tachibana colloquy in Christian is the only way to obtain a valid waiver. Indeed in Han, the supreme court stated that the first time the trial court should have requested a response from the defendant was after the trial court had advised the defendant that he had a right to testify, that the decision to testify was his alone, that no one could force him to testify, that he had the right to remain silent, and that if he exercised that right, the jury would be instructed not to hold that against him. Han, 130 Hawai
'i at 90-91, 306 P.3d at 135-36.7 
7In Han, the supreme court also noted that the trial court
had failed to advise the defendant that if he testified, the
prosecution would be allowed to cross-examination him, as well asother ways in which the trial court's advisement of rights variedfrom that described in Tachibana
. Han, 130 Hawai 'i at 93 n.8, 
9

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Accordingly, stopping after each right of the Tachibana
 
advisement to determine whether the defendant understands that
 right is not a per se requirement for an adequate Tachibana
 colloquy.
8 That said, because the method used in Christian to
 
conduct the Tachibana colloquy has been cited favorably by the
 supreme court, it provides a safe harbor and clear method for
 establishing a valid Tachibana colloquy. 
III.
 
Macaso relies upon Han in arguing that the Tachibana 
colloquy in this case was deficient. We conclude that Macaso's reliance on Han is misplaced. Unlike in this case, the trial court in Han did not ask Han whether he understood his rights, did not obtain Han's acknowledgment that he understood his rights, did not ask Han if he had any questions about his rights, and did not advise Han of all the rights required by Tachibana. See Han, 130 Hawai
'i at 88, 90-91, 306 P.3d at 133, 135-36. Han 
is therefore distinguishable and does not control the decision in this case. 
In this case, the Family Court advised Macaso of all
 
the rights required by Tachibana, asked Macaso whether she
 understood those rights, obtained her acknowledgment that she
 understood her rights, and determined that she did not have any
 questions about her rights. There is nothing in the record to
 suggest that Macaso lacked an understanding of her rights. We
 conclude that the Tachibana colloquy in this case was adequate
 
306 P.3d at 138 n.8.
 
8In State v. Pomroy, 132 Hawai 'i 85, 319 P.3d 1093 (2014),
the supreme court cited the trial court's reciting "a litany of
rights" and then asking the defendant whether he "understoodthat" in support of its conclusion that the trial court hadfailed to engage the defendant in a "true colloquy." Pomroy, 132 
Hawai
'i at 93, 319 P.3d at 1101. However, the supreme court
further noted that "it is unclear which right 'that' referenced"and cited other indications in the record of the defendant's lack of understanding of his rights in holding that his waiver of hisright to testify was invalid. Id. at 93-94, 319 P.3d at 1101-02. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and that Macaso's on-the-record waiver of her right to testify
 
was valid.
 
IV.
 
Our conclusion is not affected by the "salient fact"
 
that English does not appear to be Macaso's primary language. 
The Family Court established through its inquiries on the record
 that Macaso's command of the English language was sufficient for
 a valid waiver of rights. Before trial, Macaso's counsel advised
 the Family Court that he did not believe Macaso needed an
 interpreter as he had interviewed her, had spoken with her
 extensively, and was able to communicate with her effectively. 
Macaso also confirmed that while she might need elaboration for
 certain words, she understood English and did not need an
 interpreter. During the Family Court's Tachibana colloquy,
 Macaso reaffirmed that she did not need an interpreter and
 further acknowledged that she understood what she and the court
 had been discussing, which included the court's advisement of her
 rights. Accordingly, the record shows that Macaso's command of
 English was sufficient for her to understand the Family Court's
 advisement of rights and to validly waive her right to testify.
 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Family Court's 
Amended Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, April 13, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Samson Shigetomi
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
James M. Anderson Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
11

 