NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000427
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 FAITH KADOTA, Appellant-Appellant,
v.
 
DIRECTOR, STATE OF HAWAI 'I DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL
 
RELATIONS; AND STATE UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI 'I PAYROLL OFFICE,
Appellees-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-1904-08 RAN)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Appellant-Appellant Faith Kadota (Kadota) appeals from
 
the Final Judgment of the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
1
(circuit court),  entered on March 27, 2012, affirming the
Employment Security Appeals Referees' Office Decision 1101849 in 
favor of Appellees-Appellees Director, State of Hawai 'i 
Department of Labor and Industrial Relations (DLIR) and State University of Hawai
'i Payroll Office (UH). Kadota, previously 
employed as a secretary for the John A. Burns School of Medicine at UH, filed a claim for unemployment benefits, which was denied by the DLIR Unemployment Insurance Division (UID). The denial was affirmed by the DLIR Employment Security Appeals Referees' Office (hereinafter Appeals Officer), which was then affirmed by the circuit court. 
Kadota contends that the circuit court erred when it:

 
(1) affirmed the Appeals Officer's determination that Kadota was
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
not able and available for work; and (2) concluded that the
 
Appeals Officer did not abuse her discretion when she denied
 Kadota's request to postpone the hearing to obtain counsel.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Kadota's
 points of error as follows and affirm.
(1) 
	Availability under HRS § 383-29(a)(3).  The issue
 
2
here is whether Kadota's caregiving responsibilities for her
disabled sister restricted her availability to accept full-time

 
work under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 383-29(a)(3) (2014),
 which provides in relevant part:
 
§383-29 Eligibility for benefits. (a) An unemployed
individual shall be eligible to receive benefits with
respect to any week only if the department finds that:
 
. . .
 
(3)	 The individual is able to work and is available
 
for work[.]
 
(Emphases added.) Availability is further defined in Hawai 'i 
Administrative Rules (HAR) § 12-5-35, which provides in pertinent
 
part:
 
§12-5-35 Availability. (a) An individual shall be
deemed able and available for work within the meaning of
section 383-29(a)(3), Hawaii Revised Statutes, if the
individual is able and available for suitable work during
the customary work week of the individual's customary
occupation which falls within the week for which a claim is
filed.
 
2 DLIR and UH contend that the Appeals Officer's finding that Kadota
did not make the required "work search contacts" is a dispositive issuebecause Kadota failed to challenge the finding on appeal. We decline to rule on the issue of work search contacts and instead affirm on other grounds.Under Hawai' i Administrative Rules (HAR) § 12-5-35(c), Kadota was required to
make a minimum of three work search contacts each week, and to submit a recordof the contacts upon request by the department. However, the claims examinerdid not question Kadota's work search contacts and instead that issue wasfirst raised by the Appeals Officer at the end of the appeals hearing, atwhich point the Appeals Officer asked Kadota to send in her list of worksearch contacts. The issue of work search contacts was not set forth in the notice of the hearing and Kadota was not advised of a right to a recess toaddress the new issue. See HAR § 12-5-93(e)(14). The Appeals Officer based
her decision in part on the issue of Kadota's work search contacts, but Kadotadid not have the opportunity to fully address this issue at the appealshearing. Moreover, the circuit court decision does not mention or rely on thework search contacts issue. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . . 
(2) An individual shall be deemed available 
for work only if the individual is ready
and willing to accept employment for whichthe individual is reasonably fitted bytraining and experience. The individual must intend and wish to work, and theremust be no undue restrictions either 
self-imposed or created by force of
circumstances which prevent the individualfrom accepting employment. 
. . . . 
(b)
 The individual must be willing to accept the wages
and hours and days of employment that are prevailing or
customary in the community in which the individual is
seeking work. . . .
 
(Emphases added.)
 
In her previous employment with UH, Kadota was
 
considered a civil service employee with a regular schedule from
 
7:45 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., though a past supervisor allowed Kadota
 to vary her schedule from 8:30 a.m. to 5:15 or 5:30 p.m.
 depending on her sister's needs. Kadota reported that she spent
 approximately 4-9 hours per day caring for her sister, who was
 challenged and lived in an independent group home. The Appeals
 Officer determined that Kadota had "failed to establish that she
 is available for work within the meaning of the law[,]" based on
 the following findings:
 
Although claimant contends that her caregiving activities
takes place outside of customary work hours, claimant was
unwilling to disclose specific details about her sister's
daily needs and activities. . . . Claimant was unwilling to
estimate the actual amount of time she has spent caring for
her sister since she filed her claim for unemployment, nor
was she willing to disclose what hours of the day she has
spent with her sister. Further, the fact that claimant had
ongoing attendance problems at her last job is
circumstantial evidence that claimant is not available for
 full time work during the customary hours of her occupation.
The evidence is sufficient to establish that claimant's care
 for her sister is an undue restriction that prevents
claimant from accepting full time employment.
 
(Emphasis added.) The circuit court affirmed, determining that
 
"the Appeals Officer's decision that [Kadota] was not able and
 available for work is not clearly erroneous in view of the
 reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
 record."
 
3

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3  The parties likewise address the issue under the clearly erroneous
standard.  See Int'l Bhd. of Elec. Workers, Local 1357 v. Hawaiian Tel. Co.,
68 Haw. 316, 322, 713 P.2d 943, 950 (1986) ("Agency fact findings are
reviewable for clear error.").
4On appeal, Kadota argues that the circuit court's
conclusion was wrong because she "stated that she is available
for work on Monday through Friday during regular working hours in
the UID employment questionnaires and repeatedly explained that
her sister's care-giving needs could be met outside of regular
working hours with only some [accommodation.] "  (Emphasis added.) 
 "Review of a decision made by a court upon its review
of an administrative decision is a secondary appeal.  The
standard of review is one in which [the appellate] court must
determine whether the court under review was right or wrong in
its decision."  Tauese v. State Dep't of Labor & Indus.
Relations, 113 Hawai #i 1, 25, 147 P.3d 785, 809 (2006) (citations
and quotation marks omitted).   
The determination of whether a claimant is "available
for work" within the meaning of the law "depends to a large
extent upon the facts and circumstances in each case."  Foodland
Super Mkt. v. Agsalud, 3 Haw. App. 569, 573, 656 P.2d 100, 104
(1982).  Moreover, under HRS § 383-29(a)(3), an "unemployed
individual shall be eligible to receive benefits . . . only if
the department finds that [t]he individual . . . is available for
work[.]"  (Emphasis added.)  Thus, whether a claimant is
"available for work" is a factual issue, and the clearly
erroneous standard applies.3  Tauese, 113 Hawai# i at 25, 147 P.3d
at 809.  "A decision of an administrative agency is clearly
erroneous if it is not supported by substantial evidence in the
record, or if the court is left with a definite and firm
conviction that a mistake has been made in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole record." 
Foodland, 3 Haw. App. at 572-73, 656 P.2d at 103; HRS § 91-
14(g)(5) (2012). 
In Foodland , the court discussed the purpose of the
availability determination:
[The court] must, of course, be guided by the precept that
the Hawaii Unemployment Security Law should be liberallyNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
construed in order to achieve the beneficent purpose of
relief of workers under the stress of unemployment
occasioned through no fault of their own. The intention of
 the [unemployment compensation] act is to provide benefits
for the person who is willing and ready to obtain employment
so that he may support himself and his family, and the
phrase "available for work" is designed to test his
continued and current attachment to the labor force. 
Whether one is "available for work," within the meaning of
the act, depends to a large extent upon the facts and
circumstances in each case. No precise line can be drawn
between availability and unavailability and, in making that
demarcation in each case the interests of the witnesses, the
probability of their assertions, the admitted facts and
other relevant facts and circumstances should be considered
 so that benefits will be paid only to eligible persons.
 
3 Haw. App. at 573-74, 656 P.2d at 103-04 (internal citation
 
omitted).
 
Kadota does not contend that the issue of family
 
caregiving is an improper basis to determine her availability for
 work. Indeed, it appears that generally, "refusal to be
 available during certain hours because of family obligations is
 considered a disqualification for unemployment benefits." 76 Am.
 Jur. 2d Unemployment Compensation § 150 (2005).
 
Examination of the record convinces us that there is
 
substantial evidence to support the Appeals Officer's finding as
 to Kadota's unavailability for work, and thus the circuit court
 was correct in concluding that the Appeals Officer's finding was
 not clearly erroneous. Kadota repeatedly gave conflicting
 statements about whether she could work full time and care for
 her sister simultaneously. For example, in the initial
 eligibility questionnaires that Kadota submitted to the claims
 office, she stated that: she could work Monday through Friday,
 but left blank a question as to the hours she was willing and
 able to work and also indicated that her primary problem in
 finding a job was her caregiving situation; she did not have any
 alternative arrangements in the event that her caregiving duties
 conflicted with her work hours; and she would need an
 "empathetic" and "compassionate" employer who would allow her a
 flexible schedule to care for her sister. 
Throughout the Appeals hearing, both the Appeals
 
Officer and the attorney for UH attempted to elicit specific
 information about Kadota's caregiving responsibilities, but
 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kadota did not give direct answers to many of the questions. It 
appears that the Appeals Officer considered Kadota's testimony and determined that her representations that she could work full-time Monday through Friday were not credible. "[T]he issue of credibility is within the primary responsibility of the state agency as fact finder, and its determinations will not be disturbed lightly." In re Kauai Elec. Div. of Citizens Util. 
Co., 60 Haw. 166, 188, 590 P.2d 524, 539 (1978). "It is well settled . . . that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence." Steinberg v. Hoshijo, 88 Hawai
'i 10, 18, 960 P.2d 
1218, 1226 (1998). For instance, the Appeals Officer specifically found that "[c]laimant was not willing to estimate how much time she has spent caring for her sister on a daily basis from April 10, 2011 [the date from which she sought benefits] through the date of the hearing, nor was she willing to disclose what hours of the day she spent with her sister during that period of time." In addition, the Appeals Officer found that the "[e]mployer contends that during a disciplinary meeting about claimant's attendance, claimant brought up the fact that she needed to care for her disabled sister." 
Having reviewed the record, there was reliable,
 
substantial, and probative evidence to support the Appeals
 Officer's decision. The plain and unambiguous language of the
 administrative rule requires that "there must be no undue
 restrictions either self-imposed or created by force of
 circumstances which prevent the individual from accepting
 employment." HAR § 12-5-35(a)(2). Given Kadota's restrictions
 regarding her preferred schedule, the Appeals Officer was not
 clearly erroneous in finding that Kadota was unavailable for
 work. 
(2) Denial of Request to Postpone the Hearing. 
Kadota's second point of error is that the circuit court erred
 when it determined that the Appeals Officer did not abuse her
 discretion in denying Kadota's oral request to postpone the
 appeals hearing. Kadota argues that the hearing should have been
 rescheduled so that she could obtain legal counsel because she
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was intimidated by the presence of UH's counsel at the hearing
 
and would have been more clear in answering questions had she
 also been represented. 
The Appeals Officer based her denial on the fact that
 
Kadota had not notified the office in advance, in accordance with
 the hearing instructions, and that Kadota had not yet arranged
 for legal representation. First, there is no doubt that Kadota
 received and read the hearing instructions, given that she
 properly filed a written request to postpone the first scheduled
 hearing. Second, although Kadota claims she was surprised that
 UH had counsel at the hearing, the hearing instructions clearly
 provide that "[a]ll parties may be represented by an attorney or
 authorized agent."
 
Review of the record reveals that the Appeals Officer
 
conducted the hearing in a manner to "protect the rights of all
 parties" consistent with HAR § 12-5-93(e)(4), and fulfilled her
 obligation under HAR § 12-5-93(e)(11), which requires giving
 "every assistance that does not interfere with the impartial
 discharge of the referee's official duties" where a party is not
 represented by counsel. The Appeals Officer reminded Kadota that
 "the claims examiner found that your care for your sister was an
 undue restriction. So this hearing is your opportunity to show
 that your care giving for your sister would not prevent you from
 accepting employment."
 
In sum, although the Appeals Officer clearly had the
 
discretion to continue the hearing under HAR § 12-5-93(e)(21), we
 cannot say that she abused this discretion in denying Kadota's
 untimely request. Not only did Kadota fail to follow the proper
 procedures, she also gave vague answers about her efforts to
 retain legal counsel. Thus, the circuit court did not err in its
 ruling that the Appeals Officer did not abuse her discretion. 
Therefore,
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the March 27, 2012 Final
 
Judgment entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
 
affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 26, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
David A. Fanelli
 
(Law Offices of 
David A. Fanelli, LLLC)
for Appellant-Appellant
 Presiding Judge
Associate JudgeAssociate JudgeFrances E.H. Lum 
Li-Ann Yamashiro Deputy Attorneys GeneralDepartment of the Attorney GeneralLabor Division for Appellee-AppelleeDirector, State of Hawai
'i 
Department of Labor andIndustrial Relations 
Christine Tamashiro 
Associate General Counsel University of Hawai
'i 
for Appellee-AppelleeUniversity of Hawai
'i 
8
 