  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000550
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
ANNA LIZA O. HA, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
CARE HAWAII, INC., Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
DOE PERSONS 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; ROE "NON-PROFIT" CORPORATIONS
1-10 AND ROE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0612(GKN))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Anna Liza O. Ha (Ha) appeals from
 
the "Order Denying [Ha]'s Motion to Vacate Arbitration Final
 
Award dated February 18, 2015" (Order Denying Ha's Motion to
Vacate)1 entered on July 1, 2015, in the Circuit Court of the
 
Third Circuit (Circuit Court).2
 
On appeal, Ha contends that the Circuit Court erred
 
when it refused to vacate and instead confirmed the final
 
arbitration award because: (1) the award should have been vacated
 
1
 Hawaii Revised Statutes § 658A-28 (2016) does not authorize an appeal
from an order denying a motion to vacate an arbitration award, instead
authorizing appeals from an order confirming an arbitration award. However,
the Order Denying Ha's Motion to Vacate expressly confirmed the arbitration
award, thereby conferring jurisdiction to this court over the instant appeal. 
2
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
as procured by fraud pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 658A-23(a)(1) (2016)3 where Defendant-Appellee CARE Hawaii,
 
Inc.'s (CARE Hawaii) chief witnesses committed perjury at the
 
arbitration hearing; (2) the final arbitration award violated
 
public policy; and (3) arbitrator Riki May Amano (Arbitrator)
 
exceeded her authority by considering and dismissing Ha's
 
statutory Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO)
 
claim. 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm. 
I.	 Background
 
CARE Hawaii provides adult mental health services 
through a contract with the State of Hawai' i. Ha worked as a 
case manager for CARE Hawaii from July 27, 2009 until her 
termination on September 17, 2012. Ha's duties included performing initial assessments when a client was first assigned to her, then working on a recovery plan to help the client become stable and independent. The instant appeal arises from the arbitration of a dispute regarding the termination of Ha's employment with CARE Hawaii.
A.	 Underlying Circumstances 
On September 13, 2011, Ha was issued a verbal warning
 
for violating CARE Hawaii's Rules on Conduct Rule 24 (Discourtesy
 
or rudeness) and Rule 31 (Use of abusive, profane or obscene
 language). The verbal warning report by Ha's supervisor,
 Chanelle Matsuda (Matsuda), indicated Ha had referred to a team
 
leader as a "dickhead" during a conversation with CARE Hawaii's
 
Director of Community Based Case Management, Joey Caballes
 (Caballes) and CARE Hawaii's Office Manager and Compliance
 
Manager, Alex Kuch (Kuch). 
3
 HRS § 658A-23 provides in pertinent part: 
[§658A-23] Vacating award.  (a) Upon motion to the
court by a party to an arbitration proceeding, the court
shall vacate an award made in the arbitration proceeding if:
(1)	 The award was procured by corruption, fraud, or
other undue means[.]
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On February 27, 2012, Ha was issued a formal written
 
warning for violating CARE Hawaii's Rules on Conduct Rule 2
 
(Insubordination). Matsuda had been directed by Caballes to
 provide a written warning because Ha had been insubordinate in
 front of the team during a team meeting where case managers had
 been told to reduce their case load. 
In March 2012, Ha reported to Caballes regarding her
 
suspicion that team manager, Kevin Hedlund (Hedlund), was
 
approving improper billing practices by case managers. However,
 
after her initial report, Ha did not provide more specifics. 
On July 9, 2012, Ha reported to CARE Hawaii's
 
management team that Dean Wyatt (Wyatt), a case manager for CARE
 
Hawaii, had billed for a meeting with a client that never
 
happened. After an investigation, Wyatt was terminated for
 billing for services he had not performed. 
The following events were testified to during the 
arbitration proceedings:
 
On July 24, 2012, Ha reported to Caballes a billing by
 
case manager Halnette Chartrand (Chartrand) that Ha suspected of
 
being double billing. At the time, CARE Hawaii's process for
 
assigning clients to case managers made it possible for two case
 managers to be assigned the same client. Consequently, Caballes
 testified that he concluded Ha's report regarding Chartrand was
 not a situation of false double billing because two case managers
 had unknowingly been assigned the same client. 
CARE Hawaii case manager Lacy Purdy (Purdy) testified
 
during the arbitration proceedings that on July 24, 2012, Ha used
 her shoulder to shove Purdy while passing her in the hallway. 
Purdy testified that Ha then slammed the door when she walked out
 of the hallway, came back in to make a comment, walked back out
 and slammed the door again. Purdy made a verbal report of the
 incident to Hedlund, Purdy's team manager. 
Hedlund asked Purdy to report the incident to Matsuda. 
Purdy further testified that she did not believe Ha bumped into
 her accidentally, and that Ha did not have a bag at the time of
 the incident. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ha testified that at the time of the incident with
 
Purdy, she was entering the office with a heavy bag. Ha further
 
testified that Purdy had been standing in the middle of the
 hallway and that her bag bumped into Purdy as she was trying to
 get around Purdy. 
Caballes and Kuch conducted an investigation of the
 
bumping incident. Kuch testified at the arbitration hearing that
 he believed he spoke with: Maria Kinsler (Kinsler), the CEO of
 
CARE Hawaii, Purdy, Hedlund, Chartrand, and another
 
administrative staff member during his investigation of the
 bumping incident. 
As a result of the investigation, Kuch prepared a
 
Termination Report recommending Ha's termination for Kinsler's
 approval. The Termination Report noted the prior written warning
 given to Ha on February 27, 2012, and the verbal warning given to
 Ha on September 13, 2011. 
With regard to the bumping incident, Kuch found Ha
 
violated CARE Hawaii's Rules of Conduct Rule 4 (Interference with
 others in the performance of their jobs, horseplay, or disorderly
 conduct while on the job or on Company premises), Rule 24
 (Discourtesy or rudeness in any form or disrespect to clients or
 employees) and Rule 12 (Threatening, fighting or engaging in any
 act of physical aggression). 
Kuch, Kinsler, Caballes, and Matsuda all participated
 
in the decision to terminate Ha. Kuch testified the Termination
 Report was based on the general concern for health and the safety
 of employees and a concern that Ha was creating a hostile work
 environment. Caballes testified that the bumping incident was
 the "final straw" and was not the sole reason for Ha's
 termination. Kinsler testified she had not been informed about
 Ha's reports of false billings. Kinsler further testified that
 the decision to terminate Ha was based on Ha's previous actions
 and previous warnings. 
On September 17, 2012, Ha was terminated. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B.	 Procedural History 
On October 31, 2013, Ha filed her Complaint with the 
Circuit Court, alleging: (1) violation of the Hawai' i 
Whistleblowers' Protection Act (HWPA) pursuant to HRS §§ 378­
62(1)(A) and (B) (2015)4; (2) wrongful termination in violation 
of public policy; (3) a RICO claim; (4) negligent infliction of 
emotional distress; and (5) willful and wanton misconduct. 
On February 5, 2014, CARE Hawaii filed a Motion to
 
Compel Arbitration and Stay Proceedings pursuant to an
 arbitration agreement between Ha and CARE Hawaii. At the hearing
 on this motion, the parties agreed to arbitrate the claims and
 stay all proceedings in the lawsuit. On March 27, 2014, a
 Stipulation To Stay Proceedings Pending Arbitration and Order was
 filed. 
On February 17, 2015, the Arbitrator entered an
 
"Arbitration Final Award" denying all of Ha's claims against CARE
 Hawaii. The Arbitrator found "there [was] no causal connection
 between Ha's termination and her reports of suspected wrongdoings
 by co-employees and/or CARE Hawaii." The Arbitrator also found
 that "CARE Hawaii had legitimate, non-retaliatory reasons for its
 decision to terminate Ha's employment." 
4 HRS § 378-62 provides in pertinent part:
 
§378-62 Discharge of, threats to, or
discrimination against employee for reporting
violations of law.  An employer shall not
discharge, threaten, or otherwise discriminate
against an employee regarding the employee's
compensation, terms, conditions, location, or
privileges of employment because:
(1) The employee, or a person acting on
behalf of the employee, reports or is about to
report to the employer, or reports or is about
to report to a public body, verbally or in
writing, a violation or a suspected violation
of:
 
(A)	 A law, rule, ordinance, or
regulation, adopted pursuant to law
of this State, a political
subdivision of this State, or the
United States; or
(B)	 A contract executed by the State, a
political subdivision of the State,
or the United States[.]
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On March 27, 2015, Ha filed a motion to vacate the
 
arbitration award in the Circuit Court. 
On July 1, 2015, the Circuit Court denied Ha's motion
 
to vacate and confirmed the arbitration award. 
On July 30, 2015, Ha filed her timely appeal.
II. Standard of Review
 
"We review the circuit court's ruling on an arbitration
 
award de novo, but we also are mindful that the circuit court's
 
review of arbitral awards must be extremely narrow and
 exceedingly deferential." Tatibouet v. Ellsworth, 99 Hawai' i 
226, 233, 54 P.3d 397, 404 (2002) (internal brackets, quotation
 marks, and citations omitted).
 
[I]n reviewing an arbitration award, circuit courts
are powerless to correct an arbitrator's findings of fact
even if clearly erroneous, or an arbitrator's rulings on the
law, even if wrong. See, e.g., Tatibouet v. Ellsworth, 99
 
Hawai'i 226, 236, 54 P.3d 397, 407 (2002) ("It is well
settled that arbitration awards may not be vacated . . . if
the arbitrators commit a legal or factual error in reaching
its final decision."); Gadd v. Kelley, 66 Haw. 431, 443, 667
P.2d 251, 259 (1983) ("[E]ven if the arbitrators had erred
..., the court is powerless to vacate the award as long as
the arbitrators' actions did not rise to the level of the
 grounds specified in HRS § 658–9(4)[.]"); Mars Constructors,
Inc. v. Tropical Enters., Ltd., 51 Haw. 332, 336, 460 P.2d
317, 319 (1969) ("[A]ssuming that the arbitrators [ ] erred
in construing the construction contract, a mistake in the
application of law and in their findings of fact, this
mistake is not one of the three grounds specified in HRS [§]
658–10, and the circuit court correctly ruled that it was
powerless to modify or correct the award."); see also Thomas
v. Trustees of Lunalilo Estate, 5 Haw. 39, 40 (Terr.1883)
("[I]t is well settled that the award, if made in good
faith, is conclusive upon the parties, and that [they]
can[not] be permitted to prove that the arbitrators decided
wrong either as to the law or the facts of the case.")
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted); Richards
v. Ontai, 20 Haw. 198, 201 (Terr.1910) ("[N]either the
circuit court . . . nor this court on appeal can review the
findings of fact or the rulings of law made by the
arbitrator any further than may be necessary to determine
the questions specifically mentioned in the statute[.]").
 
Appellate review of a motion to vacate, however, does
not involve review of an arbitrator's findings of fact or
conclusions of law. Rather, it involves review of a circuit
court's factual findings and conclusions of law as to
whether the statutorily outlined grounds for vacatur exist.
 
Nordic PCL Const., Inc. v. LPIHGC, LLC, 136 Hawai' i 29, 42, 358 
P.3d 1, 14 (2015).
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. Discussion
 
A.	 No Basis to Vacate Arbitration Award as Procured by
Fraud
 
Ha contends that the arbitration award denying her
 
claims was procured by fraud because witnesses for CARE Hawaii
 
committed perjury during their respective testimonies at the
 arbitration hearing. 
In Low v. Minichino, 126 Hawai' i 99, 108, 267 P.3d 683, 
692 (App. 2011), this court held that perjury can constitute a basis for vacating an arbitration award, but only in limited circumstances. In this regard, this court adopted a three-prong test set out in Bonar v. Dean Witter Reynolds, Inc., 835 F.2d 1378 (11th Cir. 1988) for determining when fraud constitutes a basis for vacating an arbitration award. 
First, the movant must establish the fraud by clear and
convincing evidence. Second, the fraud must not have been
discoverable, upon the exercise of due diligence, prior to
or during arbitration. Third, the movant must demonstrate
that the fraud had a material effect on a dispositive issue
in the arbitration. 
. . . .
 
These elements ensure that the various policies underlying
finality of arbitration awards and limited judicial review
will not be eroded. By requiring clear and convincing
evidence, the Bonar test places a high burden upon the
movant to establish fraud. Courts may not vacate an award
for mere inconsistencies in testimony. Where the alleged
fraud is based on perjured testimony, the movant must
establish that the witness "wilfully, knowingly, and
falsely" stated some material fact under oath. Testimony
that reflects an opinion or approximation as well as
testimony that is not willfully false will not give rise to
a potential ground for vacatur. 
Low, 126 Hawai' i at 107, 267 P.3d at 691 (citations omitted) 
(emphasis in original). 
Ha asserts fraud by pointing to testimony in the
 
arbitration proceeding by witnesses for CARE Hawaii which she
 
contends was perjury. In particular, she quotes testimony by
 certain witnesses during the arbitration and asserts that the
 Arbitrator and the Circuit Court "inexplicably ignored or
 underplayed" certain aspects of the testimony and "disregarded
 and completely ignored the perjury." 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Notwithstanding Ha's assertions to the contrary, she 
fails to establish the second prong of the Bonar test, that "the 
fraud must not have been discoverable, upon the exercise of due diligence, prior to or during arbitration." Low, 126 Hawai' i at 
107, 267 P.3d at 691. "The second element prevents the movant from taking a 'second bite at the apple' if the fraud could have been discovered at arbitration. If the movant could have rebutted the adversary's claims or evidence at arbitration, the scales will tip in favor of preserving the award's finality." Id. (citation omitted). Ha's argument is essentially that it was clear from the testimony of the witnesses themselves at the arbitration that they were lying, and the Arbitrator ignored or underplayed that they were lying. Given Ha's argument, the alleged fraud, i.e., perjury, was not only discoverable during the arbitration, but was allegedly obvious. Given these circumstances, Ha was fully capable of asserting the alleged fraud during the arbitration and arguing it to the Arbitrator. 
Because Ha has failed to satisfy the second part of the
 
Bonar test, we need not address the other two prongs of the test.
B. Final Arbitration Award Did Not Violate Public Policy
 
Ha argues the final arbitration award violated public
 
policy and should be vacated based on Parnar v. Americana Hotels,
 
Inc., 65 Haw. 370, 652 P.2d 625 (1982), because the Circuit Court
 and the Arbitrator were wrong as a matter of law for denying Ha's
 public policy claim. For the following reasons, this argument is
 without merit.
 
In Parnar, the Hawai' i Supreme Court held there is a 
public policy exception to an employer's generally unlimited right to terminate an at-will employee. Parnar, 65 Haw. at 379, 
652 P.2d at 631. In a subsequent case citing Parnar, the supreme court explained that: 
[a]bsent a clear expression of legislative intent to the
contrary, we think it is both unnecessary and unwise to
permit a judicially created cause of action, which is
designed to promote a specific public policy in a "narrow
class of cases," Parnar, 65 Haw. at 379, 652 P.2d at 631, to
be maintained where the policy sought to be vindicated is
already embodied in a statute providing its own remedy for
its violation. 
8
  
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ross v. Stouffer Hotel Co., 76 Hawai' i 454, 464, 879 P.2d 1037, 
1047 (1994) (footnote omitted). In Ross, the supreme court 
recognized that the HWPA embodied a clear legislative intent to allow whistleblowers to bring a Parnar claim even though the statute provided its own remedy.
5 Id. at 464 n.11, 879 P.2d at 
1047 n.11. However, even if the plaintiff brings a Parnar claim, "the plaintiff alleging a retaliatory discharge bears the burden of proving that the discharge violates a clear mandate of public policy." Parnar, 65 Haw. at 380, 652 P.2d at 631. Here, the Arbitrator found "there [was] no causal
 
connection between Ha's termination and her reports of suspected
 wrongdoing by co-employees and/or CARE Hawaii." The Arbitrator
 determined that Ha was not a whistleblower and "CARE Hawaii had
 legitimate, non-retaliatory reasons for its decision to terminate
 Ha's employment." The Arbitrator subsequently concluded that
 Ha's termination was not in violation of public policy because Ha
 
was not a whistleblower. 
The Arbitrator explained, citing Ross, 76 Hawai' i at 
464, 879 P.2d at 1047, that "[m]ore importantly, Ha's claim for 
wrongful termination in violation of public policy fails because her remedy is found in HRS Chapter 378." The Arbitrator found "Ha's Parnar cause of action [was] duplicative of her claim and remedy under HRS Chapter 378 and therefore cannot be sustained under Hawai' i law as defined by Ross." 
Although Ha asserts the Arbitrator was wrong as a 
matter of law for dismissing her Parnar claim, Hawai' i case law 
does not recognize misapplication of law as grounds for vacating 
5 HRS § 378–69 (2015) provides:
 
§378–69 Conflict with common law, precedence.
The rights created herein shall not be construed
to limit the development of the common law nor
to preempt the common law rights and remedies on
the subject matter of discharges which are
contrary to public policy. In the event of a
 conflict between the terms and provisions of
this part and any other law on the subject the
more beneficial provisions favoring the employee
shall prevail.
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
an arbitration award. See Matter of Hawai' i State Teachers 
Ass'n, 140 Hawai' i 381, 391-92, 400 P.3d 582, 592-93 (2017) 
("where the parties agree to arbitrate, they thereby assume all 
the hazards of the arbitration process, including the risk that the arbitrators may make mistakes in the application of law and in their findings of fact.") (citations omitted). 
Ha presents circular reasoning by asserting that the
 
dismissal of her public policy claim is itself a violation of
 public policy. We conclude the Circuit Court properly declined
 to vacate the arbitration award on this ground.
C.	 The Arbitrator Did Not Exceed Her Authority by
Dismissing Ha's RICO Claim
 
1.	 Arbitrability of RICO Claim
 
Ha contends that the final arbitration award should be
 
vacated pursuant to HRS § 658A-23(a)(4)
6 because the Arbitrator
 
exceeded her authority by ruling on Ha's RICO claim.7 We
 
disagree.
 
First, Ha incorrectly suggests that the U.S. Supreme
 
Court's holding in Alexander v. Gardner-Denver Co., 415 U.S. 36
 
(1974) precludes statutory claims from being arbitrated. See 14
 
Penn Plaza LLC v. Pyett, 556 U.S. 247, 264 (2009) (holding that
 Gardner-Denver did not preclude enforcement of an arbitration
 agreement that required arbitration of claims under the Age
 Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967).
 
Second, Ha argues that the plain language of HRS § 842­
8(a) (2014), part of Hawai' i's RICO statute, grants the courts 
exclusive jurisdiction over a RICO claim. 
6 HRS § 658A-23 provides, in pertinent part:
 
[§658A-23] Vacating award. (a) Upon motion to the court by
a party to an arbitration proceeding, the court shall vacate an
award made in the arbitration proceeding if:
 
. . . 
(4) An arbitrator exceeded the arbitrator's powers[.]
 
7
 Ha does not argue that an arbitration agreement did not exist between
the parties, nor that the RICO claim was not included in the scope of the
arbitration agreement. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
HRS § 842-8(a) provides:
§842-8 Civil remedies.  (a) The circuit courts of the
State shall have jurisdiction to prevent and restrain
violations of this chapter by issuing appropriate orders,
including, but not limited to: ordering any person to divest
oneself of any interest, direct or indirect, in any
enterprise; imposing reasonable restrictions on the future
activities or investments of any person, including, but not
limited to, prohibiting any person from engaging in the same
type of endeavor as the enterprise engaged in, or ordering
dissolution or reorganization of any enterprise, making due
provision for the rights of innocent persons.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
However, the Hawai' i Supreme Court has previously held 
that where the Hawai' i RICO statute, HRS Chapter 842, is similar 
to the federal RICO statute, Hawai' i courts may look to the 
federal courts for guidance. State v. Bates, 84 Hawai' i 211, 
222, 933 P.2d 48, 59 (1997) (citing the legislative history of
 
HRS Chapter 842); see also, Price v. Obayashi, 81 Hawai' i 171, 
181, 914 P.2d 1364, 1374 (1996) ("[I]n instances where Hawai' i 
case law and statutes are silent, this court can look to parallel
 federal law for guidance."). 
18 U.S.C. § 1964, part of the federal RICO statute,
 
provides in pertinent part:
§1964. Civil remedies (a) The district courts of the United
States shall have jurisdiction to prevent and restrain
violations of section 1962 of this chapter by issuing
appropriate orders, including, but not limited to: ordering
any person to divest himself of any interest, direct or
indirect, in any enterprise; imposing reasonable
restrictions on the future activities or investments of any
person, including, but not limited to, prohibiting any
person from engaging in the same type of endeavor as the
enterprise engaged in, the activities of which affect
interstate or foreign commerce; or ordering dissolution or
reorganization of any enterprise, making due provision for
the rights of innocent persons.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Given the similarities between the Hawai' i and federal 
RICO statutes and a lack of Hawai' i case law regarding the 
arbitrability of RICO claims, we consider federal case law for
 
guidance as to whether RICO claims can be arbitrated, or whether
 the language of HRS § 842-8(a) precludes arbitration of RICO
 claims. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The U.S. Supreme Court has previously held that RICO
 
claims under 18 U.S.C. § 1964 are arbitrable. Shearson/American
 
Exp., Inc. v. McMahon, 482 U.S. 220, 242 (1987). The court in
 
McMahon concluded there was no legislative intent to prevent
 enforcement of agreements to arbitrate RICO claims. Id.
 
(concluding further that there was nothing in the federal RICO
 statute's text or legislative history which demonstrated
 legislative intent to make an exception to the Federal
 Arbitration Act for RICO claims). McMahon further states that
 
"[plaintiffs] may effectively vindicate their RICO claim in an
 arbitral forum, and therefore there is no inherent conflict
 between arbitration and the purposes underlying § 1964(c)." Id. 
Accordingly, RICO claims could be subject to arbitration, and
 plaintiffs, "having made the bargain to arbitrate, will be held
 to their bargain." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). 
Additionally, the U.S. Supreme Court has stated that
 
"[b]y agreeing to arbitrate a statutory claim, a party does not
 forgo the substantive rights afforded by the statute; it only
 submits to their resolution in an arbitral, rather than a
 judicial, forum." Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-
Plymouth, Inc., 473 U.S. 614, 628 (1985).
 
Based on the foregoing, we conclude Hawai' i RICO claims 
are arbitrable under Hawai' i law. 
We additionally note that "[u]nder Hawai' i law, any 
doubts concerning the scope of arbitrable issues should be resolved in favor of arbitration." Cty. of Hawai' i v. UNIDEV, 
LLC, 129 Hawai' i 378, 394, 301 P.3d 588, 604 (2013) (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted). Furthermore, whether an issue is beyond the scope of an agreement to arbitrate "depends on the wording of the contractual agreement to arbitrate." Id. 
(emphasis in original; citation and internal quotation marks omitted). See also Gabriel v. Island Pac. Acad., Inc., 140 
Hawai'i 325, 335-36, 400 P.3d 526, 536-37 (2017) (holding that 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the plaintiff's discriminatory retaliation claim, alleging a
 
violation of HRS § 378-2(2), was arbitrable under an employment
 contract arbitration provision requiring plaintiff to "handle out
 of court" "any dispute concerning this Agreement[,]" and noting
 the strong policy favoring arbitration and that "any doubt
 concerning whether a dispute is covered by an arbitration
 agreement should be resolved in favor of arbitrability."). 
The arbitration agreement between Ha and CARE Hawaii
 
states, in pertinent part: 
I understand and agree that any claim or dispute arising out
of or relating to my recruitment, hiring, employment,
employment benefits, or termination from employment with
CARE Hawaii shall be subject to final and binding
arbitration.
 
. . . .
 Claims which must be arbitrated under this Agreement
include, but are not limited to any and all claims based on:
. . . (13) claims for whistle-blowing or violation of public
policy; (14) any claim based on state or federal statute[.]
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Based on the language of the arbitration agreement,
 
Ha's RICO claim falls within the broad scope of the agreement
 
because it arises out of and is related to Ha's employment and
 termination.
 
2. Standing to Bring RICO Claim
 
Ha also argues the Arbitrator did not have the
 
authority to determine whether Ha had standing to raise a RICO
 claim because the issue of standing is for a court to decide. In
 our view, Ha misinterprets the Arbitrator's decision.
 
According to the Arbitration Final Award, the
 
Arbitrator granted summary judgment on Ha's RICO claim prior to
 the arbitration hearing. Footnote one of the Arbitration Final
 Award explains that "[t]he Arbitrator found that there was no
 evidence to establish that [Ha] suffered any injury from the
 alleged racketeering and therefore, Ha lacked standing to pursue
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the RICO claim against [CARE Hawaii] under HRS Chapter 842." The 
Arbitrator's decision concerned the merits of whether Ha could prevail on her RICO claim. In any event, we disagree with Ha's contention that the Arbitrator did not have authority to determine if Ha had standing to pursue her RICO claim. Given the broad language of the arbitration provision and that the RICO claim was arbitrable, addressing Ha's standing to pursue the RICO claim was within the Arbitrator's authority. See In re Grievance 
Arbitration Between State Org. of Police Officers, 135 Hawai' i 
456, 463, 353 P.3d 998, 1005 (2015) ("In determining whether an arbitrator has exceeded his or her authority under the agreement, there should be no second guessing by the court of the arbitrator's interpretation of his or her authority so long as the arbitrator's interpretation could have rested on an interpretation and application of the agreement.") (footnote, citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Given the above, the Arbitrator did not exceed her
 
authority in addressing the RICO claim.
IV. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the "Order Denying
 
[Ha]'s Motion to Vacate Arbitration Final Award dated February
 
18, 2015" entered on July 1, 2015, in the Circuit Court of the
 Third Circuit.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 31, 2018. 
Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 
14
 