NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000662
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
BMH, n.k.a. BEM, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
BTH, Defendant-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(FC-D NO. 05-1-0677)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Chan and Wadsworth, JJ.)
Plaintiffs-Appellants BMH n.k.a. BEM (Mother) and CM
(Daughter), appeal from the "Order Granting in Part First Amended
Motion and Declaration for Post-Decree Relief Filed August 25,
2016 and Motion and Declaration for Post-Decree Relief Filed
September 8, 2016" ( Order Terminating Support ), entered on
February 23, 2018, and the "Order Regarding Defendant's
Attorney's Fees and Costs" (Order Granting Fees and Costs),
entered on July 24, 2018, both entered by the Family Court of the
First Circuit ( Family Court) in favor of Defendant-Appellee BTH
(Father).1
Mother and Daughter raise two points of error on
appeal: (1) the Family Court erred in determining that Daughter
1  The Honorable Na #unanikina #u  A. Kamali #i presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
was not enrolled as a full-time student at the close of the Fall
2015 semester thereby terminating Father's support obligations
for Daughter effective January 1, 2016; and (2) the Family Court
abused its discretion in entering its Order Granting Attorney's
Fees and Costs in favor of Father.
Upon careful review of the record and briefs submitted
by the parties and having given due consideration to the
arguments and issues they raise, as well as the relevant legal
authorities, we vacate and remand.
(1)  Termination of Father's support obligations.  On
August 29, 2006, the Family Court entered in this case a "Decree
Granting Absolute Divorce and Awarding Child Custody" ( Divorce
Decree).  With regard to child support, the Divorce Decree
provides in relevant part:2
6.  CHILD SUPPORT.  Beginning with the first payment on
August 1, 2006, [Father] shall pay to [Mother] the sum of
Eight Hundred Ten Dollars ($810.00) per month per child, or
the total sum of One Thousand Six Hundred Twenty Dollars
($1,620.00) per month for the support and maintenance of the
children, . . . .  Payments of child support shall continue
for each child until each child attains age eighteen (18)
years, or graduates from high school, or discontinues high
school, whichever occurs last.  Child support for each child
shall further continue uninterrupted (including during regular
school vacation periods) for so long as the child continues
their education post high school on a full-time basis at an
accredited college or university, or in a vocational or trade
school, or until the child attains the age of twenty-three
(23) years, whichever occurs first.
(Emphasis added).  The Divorce Decree also contains a provision
for education expenses after high school, which provides in
pertinent part:
8.  POST-HIGH SCHOOL EDUCATIONAL EXPENSES. [Father]
shall pay 50% and [Mother] shall pay 50% of the educational
expenses, as defined below, incurred by each of the children
while the child is a full-time student and under the age of
twenty-three (23). . . .
For these purposes, educational expenses shall be defined to
include (a) tuition, (b) fees, and (c) the cost of necessary books
and other course materials.
In addition, while the child in question is attending school
and not living principally with one or the other of the parties,
2  The Divorce Decree was entered by the Honorable Karen M. Radius.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
educational expenses for these purposes shall also be defined to
include (a) room and board, (b) transportation to and from school,
and (c) a reasonable allowance.
(Emphasis added).
It is undisputed that, in the Fall of 2015, Daughter
enrolled at Kapi #olani Community College ( KCC) as a full-time
student, taking classes with 12 credits.   Pursuant to the
Divorce Decree, Father reimbursed Mother for one-half of the
tuition for the Fall 2015 semester.  At the end of that semester,
Daughter failed to pass one of her courses, thus only earning 9
credits.  In this regard, the Family Court determined that:3
During [Daughter's] Fall 2015 semester at KCC, [Daughter]
failed one of her 3.0 credit classes, received 0.00 credits
for that class . . . and earned only 9.0 credits of 12.0
full time credit load[].  At the close of the Fall 2015
semester, [Daughter] failed to maintain full time  enrollment
status at KCC.
(Underline added).  Thereafter, in the Spring 2016 semester,
Daughter was a full-time student at KCC and earned 12 credits.
However, Father did not reimburse Mother for one-half of the
tuition for the Spring 2016 semester. 
Subsequently, both Mother and Father filed motions for
post-decree relief with regard to Father's obligation to pay
child support and educational expenses for Daughter.  On 
February 23, 2018, the Family Court entered its Order Terminating
Support, which: (1) terminated Father's child support obligation
for Daughter as of January 1, 2016; and (2) denied Mother's
request for Father to continue to pay his share of Daughter's
educational expenses incurred after the Fall 2015 semester.   The
Family Court subsequently granted Father's motion for attorney's
fees and costs.4
3  It is also undisputed that Daughter was under the age of 23 during
the time period in question.
4  The Family Court's ruling as to educational expenses expressly
states: "Because [Daughter] failed to maintain her full time student status at
the end of her Fall 2015 semester at KCC, [Father's] obligation to pay
educational expenses terminated at the end of the Fall 2015 semester."  
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In their first point of error, Mother and Daughter
argue that the Family Court erred in terminating Father's support
obligations for Daughter on grounds that she failed one of her
courses in the Fall 2015 semester, and thus the court held she
failed to maintain full-time status at KCC.  We agree with Mother
and Daughter that the Family Court erred in its interpretation of
the Divorce Decree.
Contrary to Father's argument, we need not review the
transcripts from the evidentiary hearing to resolve this issue. 
Rather, Mother and Daughter's first point of error raises a
question that requires us to interpret the relevant provisions of
the Divorce Decree.   We are not bound by the Family Court's
interpretation of the Divorce Decree.  Jendrusch v. Jendrusch, 1
Haw. App. 605, 609, 623 P.2d 893, 897 (1981) (reviewing a family
court's interpretation of a divorce decree and noting that "[t]he
lower court's interpretation is not protected by the clearly
erroneous rule and is freely reviewable." (citation omitted)). 
The determinative factor in construing a Divorce Decree "is the
intent of the court as gathered from the decree and other
evidence."   Anderson v. Anderson, 59 Haw. 575, 584, 585 P.2d
938, 944 (1978) (citations omitted).  In addition, "[a] judgment
or decree like any other written instrument is to be construed
reasonably and as a whole, and effect must be given not only to
that which is expressed, but also to that which is unavoidably
and necessarily implied in the judgment or decree."  Id. at 584-
85, 585 P.2d at 944 (citations omitted).65
5  Mother points to Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) ยง 576E-14(f) as
providing statutory authority for her reading of the Divorce Decree in this
case.  In our view, the terms of the Divorce Decree are paramount here, and
this appeal does not arise from an administrative proceeding involving the
child support enforcement agency.  Thus, for purposes of this appeal, we need
not consider the application of HRS ยง 576E-14(f) .
6  Neither Mother nor Father point to any evidence at the time the
Divorce Decree was entered to evince the Family Court's intent when it used
the phrases "full-time basis" or "full-time student" in the Divorce Decree. 
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The Divorce Decree provides that child support for
Daughter shall continue "for so long as the child continues their
education post high school on a full-time basis at an accredited
college or university[.]"   The Divorce Decree further provides
that educational support shall continue to be paid "while the
child is a full-time student and under the age of twenty-
three[.]"  Here, it is undisputed that Daughter enrolled at KCC
as a full-time student for 12 credits in the Fall 2015 semester. 
The Family Court made the express finding that the reason
Daughter only earned 9 credits in the Fall of 2015 was because
she "failed one of her 3.0 credit classes[.]"  Moreover, the
Family Court found that in the following Spring 2016 semester,
Daughter earned 12 credits of a full-time 12 credit load.  There
is nothing in the Divorce Decree to suggest that Daughter would
become less than a full-time student due to failing a class.  
The terms of the Divorce Decree obligate Father to
provide child support and educational support so long as Daughter
continues post-high school to be a full-time student at an
accredited college, or until she reaches the age of 23.  While
Daughter did not earn all of the credits for the classes in which
she was enrolled in the Fall 2015 semester, we conclude this was
not a proper basis on which to terminate Father's obligations to
pay child support and educational support for Daughter. 
Accordingly, the Family Court erred in terminating Father's
obligation to pay child support and educational expenses in its
Order Terminating Support.
(2) Attorney's Fees and Costs.  Father recognizes in
his appellate answering brief that the Family Court awarded him
attorney's fees and costs because he was determined to be the
prevailing party with regard to the post-decree motions filed by
Mother and Father that are the subject of this appeal.  In light
of our holding that the Family Court erred in terminating
Father's support obligations, as set forth above, we conclude he
is not the prevailing party on the main issues in those post-
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
decree motions.  Thus, the award of fees and costs to Father is
vacated.
Therefore, it is hereby ordered that the "Order
Granting in Part First Amended Motion and Declaration for Post-
Decree Relief Filed August 25, 2016 and Motion and Declaration
for Post-Decree Relief Filed September 8, 2016", entered on
February 23, 2018, and the "Order Regarding Defendant's
Attorney's Fees and Costs", entered on July 24, 2018, both 
entered by the Family Court of the First Circuit, are vacated. 
This case is remanded to the Family Court for proceedings
consistent with this order.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 28, 2020.
On the briefs:
BEM, 
Plaintiff-Appellant, pro se.
Zale T. Okazaki, 
for CM, Appellant.
Blake T. Okimoto, 
for Defendant-Appellee.
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
6