NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
  The Honorable Hilary Benson Gangnes presided.1NO. CAAP-13-0005334
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI #I
SCOTT T. FUJIWARA, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
JOHN M. OHAMA, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
HONOLULU DIVISION
(CIVIL NO. 1RC-13-1-4379)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Foley, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant John M. Ohama (Ohama) appeals from
the "Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and
Denying Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment" (Summary
Judgment Order), filed on October 11, 2013 in the District Court
of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (district court).1
On appeal, Ohama contends that the district court erred
when it: (1) granted Plaintiff-Appellee Scott T. Fujiwara's
(Fujiwara) Motion for Summary Judgment; (2) entered a Judgment in
favor of Fujiwara; (3) denied Ohama's Motion for Summary
Judgment; and (4) awarded attorneys' fees and costs to Fujiwara. 
For the reasons discussed below, we resolve Ohama's
points of error as follows and reverse.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2Brief Background
Ohama and Fujiwara do not dispute the material facts of
this case.  This appeal concerns the interpretation of a
Membership Unit Transfer Agreement of Island Realtors, LLC
(Transfer Agreement) dated November 30, 2012, in which Ohama
transferred his fifty percent membership in Island Realtors, LLC,
a Hawai#i limited liability company (the Company) to Fujiwara. 
On July 3, 2013, Fujiwara filed a Second Amended
Complaint against Ohama for $12,085.08, stating, "[p]ursuant to
the [Transfer] Agreement entered into by the parties, [Ohama] is
obligated to pay one-half of the charges from RH Associates and
PACXA accrued prior to November 1, 2012."
On August 23, 2013, Fujiwara filed a Motion for Summary
Judgment.  In the Memorandum in Support of Motion, Fujiwara
argued, inter alia, that the "Transfer Agreement provides, at
Section 3.11(a) that all expenses and costs incurred by Island
Realtors prior to the October [31], [2012] closing would be
shared equally between the parties."  Fujiwara also argued that
he was entitled to judgment on his breach of contract claim
against Ohama in the amount of $11,584.43.  Fujiwara attested
that true and correct copies of the Transfer Agreement, and two
invoices from PACXA and RH Associates, CPAs, Inc. fka Lum &
Hiromoto, Certified Public Accountants, Inc. (RH Associates) were
attached to his declaration.
Also on August 23, 2013, Ohama filed a Motion for
Summary Judgment.  In the Memorandum in Support of Motion, Ohama
argued that "there is nothing in the Transfer Agreement that
expanded the liability of Defendant Ohama to include the fees for
accounting and computer services, which are ordinary business
expenses."  Ohama stated that "[i]n interpreting the terms of the
Transfer Agreement according to their plain, ordinary, and
accepted sense, it is clear that Section 3.11(a) is only
applicable to claims arising out of 'acts and omissions'
committed jointly by Island Realtors and Defendant Ohama." 
On October 11, 2013, the district court filed the
Summary Judgment Order.  The district court awarded FujiwaraNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3$11,584.42 in contract damages, $2,896.10 in attorney's fees, and
$145.00 in costs, for a total of $14,625.52. 
On October 21, 2013, Ohama filed a motion for
reconsideration, which the district court denied on October 22,
2013.
On November 18, 2013, Ohama timely filed a Notice of
Appeal from the Summary Judgment Order.
Summary Judgment Rulings
Ohama contends that the district court erred when it
granted Fujiwara's Motion for Summary Judgment, denied Ohama's
Motion for Summary Judgment, and entered judgment in favor of
Fujiwara.
"Contract terms should be interpreted according to
their plain, ordinary, and accepted sense in common speech." 
Santiago v. Tanaka, 137 Hawai #i 137, 155, 366 P.3d 612, 630
(2016) (citation omitted).  Further, "[u]nder principles of
contract interpretation, an agreement should be construed as a
whole and its meaning determined from the entire context and not
from any particular word, phrase, or clause."  Id.  (citation
omitted).
Section 3.11(a) of the Transfer Agreement provides:
3.11 Transferor’s Liability Prior to Closing:
Transferee’s Liability Post Closing.
(a) Prior to Closing. Transferor shall hold harmless
and indemnify Transferee for any costs, damages, claims,
penalties, judgments, expenses, attorneys’ fees or other
liabilities resulting from or attributable to the acts and
omissions of Transferor occurring prior to Closing Date if
Transferor acted alone or failed to act alone, but shall
specifically exclude claims where Transferor acted or failed
to act together with Transferee or Company or Company’s
agents, employees, successors or assigns (“Transferor’s Sole
Acts or Omissions”); provided, however, that, to the extent
that such costs, damages, claims, penalties, judgments,
expenses, attorneys’ fees or other liabilities resulting
from Transferor’s Sole Acts or Omissions are offset or paid
for by insurance Transferor shall not be required to
personally reimburse the Transferee or Company for same;
provided further that this provision shall not apply to
costs, damages, claims, penalties, judgments, expenses,
attorneys’ fees or other liabilities based on the Company’s
line of credit or Transferor’s Financial Guaranty which
Transferee and Company have agreed to jointly and severally
indemnify and hold harmless Transferor. With regard to any
costs, damages, claims, penalties, judgments, expenses,
attorneys’ fees or other liabilities resulting from or
attributable to the acts or omissions of Transferor togetherNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
  Based on the district court's oral ruling during the hearing on the2
summary judgment motions, it appears the district court also relied on the
second sentence of Section 3.11(a). 
4with Transferee or Company or Company’s agents, employees,
successors or assigns, occurring prior to Closing Date,
Transferor’s maximum liability shall be no more than fifty
percent (50%) of the total liability. To the extent that
third—party claims are based solely due to Transferor being
a member of Company prior to Closing Date and not due to any
act or omission of Transferor, alone or together with
Transferee or Company, Transferor’s liability shall be as
provided by law.
(Emphasis added.) 
Section 3.11(a) consists of three sentences.  In
asserting Ohama's liability, Fujiwara expressly notes that the
first and third sentences of Section 3.11(a) do not apply. 
Rather, Fujiwara relies on the second sentence of Section
3.11(a).2  The second sentence requires the existence of "any
costs, damages, claims, penalties, judgments, expenses,
attorneys' fees or other liabilities resulting from  or
attributable to the acts or omissions of [Ohama] together with
[Fujiwara] or Company or Company’s agents, employees, successors
or assigns, occurring prior to Closing Date[.]" (Emphasis added.) 
In his Memorandum in Support of Motion, Fujiwara
asserted that fifty percent of the pre-closing charges in the
PACXA and RH Associates invoices constituted Ohama's liability
under Section 3.11(a).  The PACXA invoice billed $1,535.34 in
total, of which Fujiwara marked on the invoice that the Company
incurred $1,001.31 prior to the closing date.  The items billed
in the PACXA Invoice were: "Setup Colleen's new phone"; "Users
can't login to Backscanner PC"; "HP printer will not 'start up'";
"Set up Julie Kemmis login"; "Shaila and John computer problems";
"Set up Mark Hirano's login on shared computer in back of
office"; "Set up Kaelin Oaks on Mac computer"; "Island Realtors";
"Moving"; and "Cannot log onto shared computer."  Thus, the
charges appear to be for various computer and phone related
services.  The RH Associates invoice billed $22,743.45 in total,
of which Fujiwara marked on the invoice that the Company incurred
$22,167.53 prior to closing.  The items billed in the RHNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5Associates Invoice included: year-end accounting services,
computer and handling charges for tax returns, payroll, issues
regarding an unemployment claim (not attributed to Fujiwara or
Ohama), and property management issues.
Although the relevant charges billed in the two
invoices may constitute "costs, damages, claims, penalties,
judgments, expenses, attorneys' fees or other liabilities," there
is nothing in the record indicating that the charges resulted
from, or are attributable to, acts or omissions of Ohama together
with Fujiwara or the Company.  Fujiwara asserts that the second
sentence in Section 3.11(a) covers "pre-closing liabilities due
to the acts or omissions of either (1) [Ohama] together with
[Fujiwara] or (2) the Company or Company's agents, employees,
successors or assigns." (Emphasis added.)  Thus, under Fujiwara's
interpretation, the second sentence covers indebtedness due
solely to an act of the Company.  We disagree.  Such an
interpretation is simply not consistent with a plain reading of
the second sentence.  Moreover, Fujiwara's interpretation –-
seeking to eliminate the acts or omissions of Ohama as a
condition for his responsibility under the second sentence --
would render that sentence incompatible with Section 3.11(a) as
whole, which addresses different situations based on whether or
not Ohama's acts or omissions were attributable for the alleged
liability.  In particular, the third sentence already addresses
situations where a claim is not based on an act or omission of
Ohama (and Fujiwara expressly asserts the third sentence does not
apply here).
Based on our reading of the Transfer Agreement, the
second sentence of Section 3.11(a) does not support Fujiwara's
contention that Ohama owed fifty percent of the amounts in the
subject invoices incurred prior to the closing date.  Rather,
considering the contract as a whole, we agree with Ohama that
Section 3.11(a) does not require him to pay half of the pre-
closing items on the invoices.  Further, no other provision
supports Fujiwara's claim that Ohama was liable for the contested
amounts.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6We thus conclude that the district court erred in
granting Fujiwara's Motion for Summary Judgment and in denying
Ohama's Motion for Summary Judgment.  We hold that, given the
undisputed facts in this case, summary judgment for Ohama is
warranted.
Attorney's Fees
Because we hold that summary judgment should have been
granted for Ohama, and not Fujiwara, we also vacate the district
court's award of attorney's fees and costs to Fujiwara.  The case
will be remanded to the district court for further proceedings to
allow Ohama to request attorney's fees and costs as the
prevailing party.
Conclusion
Based on the above, the Order Granting Plaintiff's
Motion for Summary Judgment and Denying Defendant's Motion for
Summary Judgment filed on October 11, 2013, in the District Court
of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division, is reversed.  Summary
judgment is hereby granted in favor of Ohama.  This case is
remanded to the district court for further proceedings consistent
with this decision.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 13, 2016.
On the briefs:
Glenn N. Taga,  
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
Patrick K. Shea,
Sara Jo Buehler,
(Shea & Kamiya, LLC)
for Plaintiff-AppelleeAssociate Judge
Associate Judge