NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NOS. CAAP-15-0000023 AND CAAP-15-0000027
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAII 
'
CAAP-15-0000023
 
CLARK REALTY CORPORATION and HENRY G. AKONA, JR., as General
Partner of the Henry F. Akona Partnership, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
HENRY F. AKONA TRUST; FRANCIS H. PANG; DIANA MAY PANG DEABLER;
HENRIETTA M.L. PANG; LELAND M.S. PANG; JERALD M.S. PANG;
and DOES 1-10, Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
FRANCIS H. PANG; DIANA MAY PANG-DEABLER; HENRIETTA M.L. PANG,;
LELAND M.S. PANG; JERALD M.S. PANG, Counterclaimants-Appellees,
v.
 
CLARK REALTY CORPORATION and HENRY G. AKONA, JR.,
Counterclaim Defendants-Appellants,
and
 
SEFTON R. CLARK, Personal Representative of
the Estate of PUTMAN DAMON CLARK, Deceased,
Additional Counterclaim Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
ROBERT TRIANTOS, SUCCESSOR TRUSTEE OF THE WARD K. KUWADA TRUST,
and DOE DEFENDANTS 1-5, Additional Counterclaim
Defendants-Appellees 
CAAP-15-0000027
 
CLARK REALTY CORPORATION and HENRY G. AKONA, JR., as General
Partner of the Henry F. Akona Partnership, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
 
HENRY F. AKONA TRUST; FRANCIS H. PANG;
and DOES 1-10, Defendants-Appellants,
and
 
FRANCIS H. PANG; DIANA MAY PANG-DEABLER; HENRIETTA M.L. PANG,;
LELAND M.S. PANG; JERALD M.S. PANG, Counterclaimants-Appellees,
v.
 
CLARK REALTY CORPORATION and HENRY G. AKONA, JR.,
Counterclaim Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
SEFTON R. CLARK, Personal Representative of
the Estate of PUTMAN DAMON CLARK, Deceased,
Additional Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee,
and
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ROBERT TRIANTOS, SUCCESSOR TRUSTEE OF THE WARD K. KUWADA TRUST,
and DOE DEFENDANTS 1-5, Additional Counterclaim
Defendants-Appellees 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-01-486K)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(
By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
This is a consolidated appeal stemming from a Master
 
Lease dated August 16, 1972, as amended (the Master Lease), for a
 
commercial and retail property in Kailua-Kona known as Emma's
 
Market Place (the property). We address herein an appeal and
 
cross-appeal from the Third Amended Final Judgment (Third Amended
 
Judgment) filed on December 16, 2014, in the Circuit Court of the
 
Third Circuit (circuit court), challenging various orders of the
 
circuit court.1
 
In CAAP-15-0000023, Plaintiffs/Counterclaim
 
Defendants/Appellants Clark Realty Corporation (Clark Realty),
 
Henry G. Akona, Jr. (Henry G. Akona), and Counterclaim
 
Defendant/Appellant Putman Damon Clark (Putman Clark)2 contest
 
the following entered in the circuit court:
 
(A) "Order Denying Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendants
 
[Clark Realty], [Henry G. Akona] and Additional Counterclaim
 
Defendant [Putman Clark]'s Motion for Directed Verdict and/or for
 Judgment as a Matter of Law" (Order Denying Directed
Verdict/JMOL) entered on July 11, 2012;
 
(B) "Order Denying Plaintiffs/Counterclaim Defendants
 
[Clark Realty], [Henry G. Akona], and Additional Counterclaim
 
Defendant [Putman Clark]'s Motion for Reconsideration of Findings
 of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Filed July 11, 2012" (Order
 
Denying Reconsideration) entered on November 15, 2012;
 
1
 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided. 
2
 Putman Clark died on June 27, 2016. Pursuant to this court's order
 
dated November 28, 2016, Sefton R. Clark, Personal Representative of the
Estate of Putman Damon Clark, was substituted into the case for Putman Clark. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(C) "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 
Defendants Henry F. Akona Trust's Motion for Amendment of the (1)
 
Amended Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order and (2)
 Amended Judgment, both Entered on November 15, 2012" (Order Re
 
Amendment of FOF/COL/Order) entered on January 24, 2013; and
 
(D) "Second Amended Findings of Fact, Conclusions of
 
Law and Order" (Second Amended FOF/COL/Order) entered on January
 24, 2013.
 
3In their appellate briefs,  Clark Realty and Putman 
Clark contend that the circuit court erred by: (1) concluding 
that Putman Clark, individually, was an indispensable party because Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 19 did not 
permit his addition as a counterclaim defendant after trial; (2) applying the tort of breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing to a commercial lease; (3) awarding attorneys' fees and costs to Defendant-Appellee Henry F. Akona Trust (theAkona Trust); and (4) incorrectly determining the calculation of 
net annual rent. 
In the cross-appeal, CAAP-15-0000027, the Akona Trust
 
and Defendant/Counterclaim-Plaintiff/Third-Party
 
Plaintiff/Appellant Francis H. Pang, individually and in his
 capacity as Successor Trustee of the Akona Trust (Francis Pang,
Individually and as Trustee) contend that in the Second Amended
 
FOF/COL/Order, the circuit court erred as to the amount of rent
 
owed by Clark Realty and Putman Clark to the Akona Trust, because
 the circuit court's interpretation of the Master Lease's
 definition of "gross receipts" was incorrect. They specifically
 challenge conclusions of law (COL) 28, 30, 35, and 50 in the
 
Second Amended FOF/COL/Order.
 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm in part and
 
vacate in part.
 
3
 Although Henry G. Akona was party to the Notice of Appeal in CAAP-15­
0000023, he is not named as a party to the opening brief or reply brief in
that appeal.
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. CAAP-15-0000023
 
A. HRCP Rule 19
 
Clark Realty and Putman Clark contend that the circuit
 
court erred in concluding that Putman Clark was an indispensable
 
party under HRCP Rule 19 after a bench trial was held and holding
 Putman Clark liable as a counterclaim defendant for claims never
 asserted against him by the Akona Trust. Clark Realty and Putman
 Clark contest the circuit court's COLs 43 and 44: 
43. At the same time, Putman Clark will remain as a
Counterclaim Defendant in this matter. The Court concludes
 that Putman Clark, as current lessee, is an indispensible
party in this action. See HRCP 19(a). While Putman Clark
 was not named in The Akona Trust's Counterclaim, no
prejudice will occur by including Clark as a remaining
party. Clark has been represented by counsel throughout
this lawsuit; indeed, by the same counsel who represents
Clark Realty and [Henry G. Akona]. Putman Clark has joined
Plaintiffs in their pleadings.
44. Thus, the Court concludes that Putman Clark's
assignments and mortgages regarding the Property and Master
Lease are valid. At the same time, Putman Clark is jointly
and severally liable for back payments to the Akona Trust,
including the increase in the base rent effective as of
September 1, 2006 and the Hawaii GET on those amounts. 
We review the circuit court's decision regarding 
indispensable parties under HRCP Rule 19 for an abuse of 
discretion. Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 Hawai' i 490, 495, 280 P.3d 
88, 93 (2012) (citation omitted). 
Clark Realty and Putman Clark argue that allowing the
 
Akona Trust to join Putman Clark post-trial as an indispensable
 party under HRCP Rule 19, for purposes of a claim by the Akona
 Trust, was prejudicial and a violation of his due process rights.
 Clark Realty and Putman Clark do not contest that Francis Pang,
 individually, asserted claims against Putman Clark that were
 addressed as part of the bench trial, but argue that Francis
 Pang, individually, did not have standing to bring those claims
 against Putman Clark and that the Akona Trust did not plead any
 claims against Putman Clark. The record demonstrates that, since
 June 2011, Putman Clark was named as a counterclaim defendant by
 parties other than the Akona Trust, and the claims asserted
 against Putman Clark included a claim for breach of the implied
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
covenant of good faith and fair dealing which was similar, if not
 
identical, to the claim under which the circuit court ultimately
 determined that Putman Clark was liable to the Akona Trust as an
 indispensable party.
 
On November 12, 2009, Clark Realty and Henry G. Akona
 
initiated this suit by filing a Complaint against Francis Pang,
 individually, Diana May Pang Deabler, Henrietta M.L. Pang, LelandM.S. Pang and Gerald M.S. Pang (collectively, the Pangs), and the
Akona Trust, asserting that the Master Lease had been properly
 
assigned to Clark Realty and seeking, inter alia, to enjoin the
 Pangs and the Akona Trust from interfering with Clark Realty's
 rights under the lease.
4
 
 

 
On January 7, 2010, the Pangs filed their answer and
 
also asserted counterclaims against Clark Realty and Henry G.
 Akona. 
On September 10, 2010, the Akona Trust, by and through
 
its trustee Francis Pang, filed a counterclaim against Clark
 Realty and Henry G. Akona, but not Putman Clark, alleging, inter
 alia, Count I: Breach of the Implied Covenant of Good Faith and
 Fair Dealing. 
On April 19, 2011, the Pangs filed a motion seeking
 
leave to file a First Amended Counterclaim that, inter alia,
 would join Putman Clark as a necessary party under HRCP Rule
 19(a) because Putman Clark was the current lessee under the
 Master Lease. The circuit court granted the motion and on June
 1, 2011, the Pangs filed a First Amended Counterclaim against
 Clark Realty, Henry G. Akona, and additional counterclaim
 defendant Putman Clark, asserting, inter alia, Breach of Contract
 (Count I) and Breach of the Implied Covenant of Good Faith and
 Fair Dealing (Count III). 
On July 26, 2011, all of the Pangs, except for Francis
 
Pang, individually, were dismissed from the lawsuit by
 
4
 Plaintiffs Clark Realty and Henry G. Akona assert that Henry G.
Akona, as managing partner for the Henry F. Akona Partnership (a partnership
among Henry G. Akona, the Pangs, and others), consented to assignments of the
Master Lease, including the assignment to Clark Realty.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stipulation. Thus, going forward, only Francis Pang,
 
individually, had asserted claims against Putman Clark. Although
 Clark Realty and Putman Clark's initial counsel withdrew and
 different counsel filed their appearance, the circuit court
 correctly found that the same counsel represented Clark Realty,
 Henry G. Akona, and Putman Clark throughout the litigation.
 
Following a bench trial in February 2012, the circuit
 
court dismissed Francis Pang's counterclaims brought in his
 individual capacity, concluding that Francis Pang, individually,
 lacked standing to bring the counterclaims. As noted, however,
 the circuit court determined that Putman Clark "will remain as a
 Counterclaim Defendant in this matter" because "as current
 lesseee, [he] is an indispensible [sic] party in this action. 
See HRCP 19(a)."
 
Importantly, the record demonstrates that Putman Clark
 
participated in all relevant aspects of the litigation to protect
 his asserted interest in the litigation. Under the doctrine of
 judicial estoppel,
 
a party will not be permitted to maintain inconsistent
positions or to take a position in regard to a matter which
is directly contrary to, or inconsistent with, one
previously assumed by him [or her], at least where he [or
she] had, or was chargeable with, full knowledge of the
facts, and another will be prejudiced by his [or her]
action.
 
Torres v. Torres, 100 Hawai' i 397, 408, 60 P.3d 798, 809 (2002) 
(citations omitted). 
In Torres, the Hawai' i Supreme Court held that the 
appellant was bound by the family court's judgment although she 
was not formally a party to the action. Id. Appellant appeared 
at a hearing, filed a motion for reconsideration of the family court's order and "fully participated in all of the relevant family court proceedings." Id. Thus, the supreme court 
determined that appellant was estopped from claiming she was not a proper party given that she "participated in all practical respects as a 'party' to protect her asserted interests throughout this litigation[,]" and it was "inconsistent for her to now claim that she is not such a 'party,' and, allowing her to 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
do so would prejudice [appellee], who has relied upon
 
[appellant's] participation in the proceedings." Id.
 
In this case, Putman Clark fully participated in the
 
relevant proceedings and is estopped from claiming that he is not
 a proper party. The Pangs named Putman Clark a counterclaim
 defendant on June 1, 2011. On September 30, 2011, Putman Clark,
 along with Clark Realty and Henry G. Akona, filed his answer to
 the Pangs' First Amended Counterclaim. Further, along with Clark
 Realty and Henry G. Akona, Putman Clark filed a partial summary
 judgment motion on December 12, 2011, and a motion for directed
 verdict and/or judgment as a matter of law on February 8, 2012.
 Putman Clark also filed, in conjunction with Clark Realty and
 Henry G. Akona, a Closing Statement related to the bench trial on
 February 22, 2012, as well as a motion for reconsideration, filed
 on July 20, 2012, seeking reconsideration of the circuit court's
 July 11, 2012 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order. In
 short, we conclude that Putman Clark was able to and did
 participate in all of the relevant circuit court proceedings. 
The circuit court ruled in relevant part that Putman
 
Clark's assignments and mortgages regarding the property and the
 Master Lease were valid, but that he was "jointly and severally
 liable for back payments to the Akona Trust[.]" The circuit
 court held Putman Clark liable for breach of the covenant of good
 faith and fair dealing for failing to make full payment owed
 under the Master Lease, which was similar to a claim that the
 Pangs alleged in the First Amended Counterclaim against Putman
 Clark, and which the Akona Trust asserted against Clark Realty
 and Henry G. Akona (but not against Putman Clark). When
 comparing the allegations in the Pangs' First Amended
 Counterclaim against Putman Clark, including the breach of the
 covenant of good faith and fair dealing claim, and the
 allegations in the Akona Trust's counterclaim against Clark
 Realty, the allegations are very similar. As such, the Akona
 Trust asserted essentially the same allegations in regard to its
 counterclaim against Clark Realty as was asserted by the Pangs
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
against Putman Clark, and Putman Clark had the opportunity and
 
defended against the allegations underlying the claim for which
 he was ultimately held liable to the Akona Trust.
 
Given the above, Putman Clark is estopped from claiming
 
that he was not an indispensable party to this case for purposes
 of liability for back payments under the Master Lease. The
 circuit court did not abuse its discretion in holding Putman
 Clark liable, as set forth in COLs 43 and 44. 
B. 	Breach of the Implied Covenant
of Good Faith and Fair Dealing
 
Clark Realty and Putman Clark contend that a claim for 
breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing is a tort claim that cannot be applied to commercial leases and contracts. Clark Realty and Putman Clark rely on Best Place, Inc. v. Penn Am. Ins. Co., in which the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
recognized a tort recovery for breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing in the insurance context. 82 Hawai' i 
120, 130-31, 920 P.2d 334, 344-45 (1996). 
However, the supreme court did not preclude the 
recognition of a contractual claim for implied covenants of good faith and fair dealing related to commercial leases and contracts. Id. at 124-25, 920 P.2d at 338-39. It is well 
established that every contract contains an implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing. Kutkowski v. Princeville Prince 
Golf Course, LLC, 129 Hawai' i 350, 359, 300 P.3d 1009, 1018 
(2013). 
Moreover, in a commercial lease dispute case, this 
court recognized a viable claim for contractual breach of good faith and fair dealing. Joy A. McElroy, M.D., Inc. v. Maryl 
Grp., Inc., 107 Hawai' i 423, 436-37, 114 P.3d 929, 942-43 (2005). 
In McElroy, we concluded that in light of the evidence presented at the summary judgment stage, there were genuine issues of material fact as to whether the defendant "was faithful to an agreed common purpose and acted consistently with the justified expectations of Plaintiffs[.]" Id. at 437, 114 P.3d at 943 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(citing Hawaii Leasing v. Klein, 5 Haw. App. 450, 698 P.2d 309
 
(1985)). In Hawai' i Leasing, this court recognized that parties 
to a contract have a duty of good faith and fair dealing for an
 alleged breach of contract of guaranty. 5 Haw. App. at 456, 698
 P.2d at 313.
 
In the instant case, the claim for breach of the
 
implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing was contractual
 in nature. With respect to its claim for breach of the implied
 covenant of good faith and fair dealing, the Akona Trust alleged
 that:
 
55. Any contracts between Counterclaim Defendants and
Counterclaimant impose upon each party a duty of good faith
and fair dealing in their performance and enforcement. 
56. Counterclaim Defendant repeatedly and materially
breached their duties of good faith and fair dealing to
Counterclaimant. 
57. As a proximate result of said breaches, Counterclaimant
has been damaged in an amount to be determined at trial.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
The circuit court recognized this contractual breach of
 
the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing in its COLs
 
46 and 47, applied it to the facts at hand, and determined the
 following:
 
46. Count I of Akona Trust's Counterclaim is a Breach of
 
the Implied Covenant of Good Faith and Fair Dealing. 
Plaintiffs Clark Realty, Henry G. Akona, Jr. and
Counterclaim Defendant Putman Clark argue that the Trust has
made no claim for damages for Breach of Contract against
either Clark Realty Corporation or Henry G. Akona, Jr. On
 the contrary, the Akona Trust has argued that Clark Realty,
Putman Clark and the Kuwada Trust have materially breached
the terms of the Master Lease by under-paying (a) percentage
rent from and after January 1, 2004, (b) fixed minimum lease
rent for the period from and after September 1, 2006 to date
and (c) Hawaii general excise taxes on those amounts, which
were due and payable under the Master Lease, as amended.
 
47. The Court has found that Clark Realty and Putman Clark
have not made full payment under the terms of the Lease. It
 
thus allows this claim to stand against Clark Realty and
Putman Clark. 
(Footnote omitted and emphasis added.)
 
Although it appears the Akona Trust did not assert a
 
claim for breach of contract against Clark Realty or Putman
 
Clark, the circuit court held Clark Realty and Putman Clark
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
liable under Count I (breach of the implied covenant of good
 
faith and fair dealing) of the Akona Trust's counterclaims. As a
 result, the circuit court determined that Clark Realty and Putman
 Clark owed a total of $174,471.28 minus Clark Realty's partial
 payment of $22,487.54. In our view, the circuit court imposed
 liability based on a contractual breach of the implied covenant
 of good faith and fair dealing. 
Clark Realty and Putman Clark asserted that they had
 
properly assigned rights under the Master Lease, which was
 disputed by, among others, the Akona Trust. This may explain why
 the Akona Trust did not assert a counterclaim for breach of
 contract, but instead chose to assert that "[a]ny contracts
 between Counterclaim Defendants and Counterclaimant impose upon
 each party a duty of good faith and fair dealing in their
 performance and enforcement." Once the circuit court ruled that
 it would uphold the assignments of the Master Lease to Clark
 Realty and Putman Clark, it properly considered what was owed by
 those parties under the Master Lease. As this court has noted,
 "[g]ood faith performance emphasizes faithfulness to an agreed
 common purpose and consistency with the justified expectations of
 the other party." Hawaii Leasing, 5 Haw. App. at 456, 698 P.2d
 
at 313 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
 
Based on the record and claims in this case, and the
 
circuit court's determination that Clark Realty and Putman Clark
 underpaid based on the Master Lease, the circuit court did not
 err in holding Clark Realty and Putman Clark liable for breach of
 the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing imposed under
 the Master Lease.
 
C. Attorneys' Fees and Costs
 
Clark Realty and Putman Clark contend that the circuit
 
court abused its discretion in awarding attorneys' fees in the
 amount of $43,617.82 and costs in the amount of $6,724.42 to the
 Akona Trust.
 
The supreme court has said that under Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 607-14 (2016), "assumpsit" is "a common law form
 
of action which allows for the recovery of damages for
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
non-performance of a contract, either express or implied, written
 
or verbal, as well as quasi contractual obligations." Blair v.
 
Ing, 96 Hawai' i 327, 332, 31 P.3d 184, 189 (2001) (citations and 
internal quotations marks omitted).
 
Further, 
in ascertaining the nature of the proceeding on appeal, this
court has looked to the essential character of the
 underlying action in the trial court. The character of the
 action should be determined from the facts and issues raised
 in the complaint, the nature of the entire grievance, and
the relief sought.
 
Id. (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). Moreover, 
"[b]ecause leases are essentially contractual in nature, attorneys' fees in lease disputes are awardable under the 'assumpsit' prong and may be awarded under the 'contract' prong of HRS § 607–14." Forbes v. Hawaii Culinary Corp., 85 Hawai' i 
501, 507, 946 P.2d 609, 615 (App. 1997). 
The Akona Trust alleged a contract-based bad faith
 
claim under the Master Lease, and the damages sought were amounts
 owed under the Master Lease if it had been properly assigned,
 i.e., if there in fact was a contract between the parties. The
 Akona Trust sought unpaid rent "including the underpayment of
 percentage rent, the increase in the base rent effective as of
 September 1, 2006 and the Hawaii GET on those amounts." Thus,
 the essential character of the underlying action, the nature of
 the grievances, and relief sought demonstrate that the claim upon
 which the Akona Trust prevailed was "in the nature of the
 assumpsit."
 
Clark Realty and Putman Clark also argue that the
 
circuit court erred in allowing attorneys' fees in excess of the
 statutory limit of 25% under HRS § 607-14. The circuit court
 awarded 25% of $174,471.28 which is the amount the circuit court
 determined that Clark Realty and Putman Clark owed. During the
 pendency of the litigation, Clark Realty remitted $22,487.54 to
 the Akona Trust, reducing the amount to $151,983.74. Clark
 Realty and Putman Clark argue that the limit of 25% should be
 based on the reduced amount of $151,983.74.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Forbes, a rent dispute case, the supreme court held
 
that the amount upon which attorneys' fees should have been
 
calculated under HRS § 607-14 should have included the rental
 payments made during the litigation. Id. at 503, 511, 946 P.2d
 
at 611, 619. Thus, the circuit court did not err in awarding
 attorneys' fees calculated at 25% of $174,471.28.
D. Net Annual Rent
 
Clark Realty and Putman Clark argue that the circuit
 
court erred because it included percentage rent in setting the
 fixed minimum rent for the period starting on September 1, 2006,
 and thus the circuit court improperly doubled the percentage
 rent. Clark Realty and Putman Clark contest COLs 35 and 50:
 
35. The parties agree on the amounts paid by Clark Realty
and [Putman] but disagree on back amounts owed. The Court
 relies on the figures set forth in the Plaintiff's expert
report. However, the Court finds an error in the
calculations from 2006 forward, where Plaintiff failed to
combine the fixed minimum rent with the percentage rent. A
recalculation of the amount due and owing, in back payments
including Hawaii general excise tax is as follows: 2003:
486.23; 2004: 2954.16; 2005: 3058.01; 2006: 13,050.90; 2007:
33,311.68; 2008: 32,932.06; 2009: 33,034.40; 2010: 28861.70;
2011: 26,782.14, for a total of $174,471.28. 
. . . .
 50. Clark Realty remitted a partial payment of $22,487.54.
The total amount due and owing through November 2011 is
$151,968.74.
 
They also contest the circuit court's ruling that "from September
1, 2006 until August 31, 2016, the monthly fixed minimum rent
 shall be $5,925.41[.]" 
 
The argument by Clark Realty and Putman Clark is
 
focused on whether the circuit court properly construed the
 Master Lease, and thus the issue is one of contract
 interpretation.
 
When reviewing the court's interpretation of a
contract, the construction and legal effect to be given a
contract is a question of law freely reviewable by an
appellate court.
 
This court has determined that it is fundamental that
 
terms of contract should be interpreted according to their
plain, ordinary and accepted use in common speech, unless
the contract indicates a different meaning. Further, in
construing a contract, a court's principal objective is to
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ascertain and effectuate the intention of the parties as
manifested by the contract in its entirety. If there is any
doubt, the interpretation which most reasonably reflects the
intent of the parties must be chosen.
 
Laeroc Waikiki Parkside, LLC v. K.S.K. (Oahu) Ltd. P'ship, 115
 
Hawai'i 201, 213, 166 P.3d 961, 973 (2007) (internal quotation 
marks, citations, and brackets omitted).
 
The Master Lease is for a term of fifty-five (55)
 
years, starting on September 1, 1972. Under the Master Lease,
 the monthly rent consists of two components, fixed minimum rent
 and percentage rent. In the "Fixed Minimum Rental" section of
 
the Master Lease, subsection (e) sets out the applicable fixed
 minimum rent for the period at issue, starting on September 1,
 2006.
5 The Fixed Minimum Rental section states in whole:
 
Fixed Minimum Rental : 
(a) During the first year up to and including August
31, 1973, the sum of ONE THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS
($1,500.00) per month;
(b) During the next thirteen (13) years hereof, the
sum of TWO THOUSAND DOLLARS ($2,000.00) per month, up to and
including August 31, 1986;
(c) During the next ten (10) years the sum of THREE
THOUSAND DOLLARS ($3,000.00) per month, up to and including
August 31, 1996;
(d) During the next ten (10) years the sum of THREE
THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS ($3,500.00) per month, up to
and including August 31, 2006;
(e) The remainder of the term shall be divided into
two periods of ten years and eleven years respectively. The
 
net annual rental
 for each of said periods (payable,
however, in equal monthly installments) shall be determined
by written agreement of Lessor and Lessee or, if they fail
to reach such agreement at least ninety (90) days before the
commencement of such period, then the respective 
net annual
rental 
shall be the product of the then prevailing rate on
land of similar type and location, which rate shall in no
event be less than eight per cent (8%) per annum times the
then market value of the demised land exclusive of
 buildings, and shall be determined by appraisal as provided
hereinbelow.  In no event shall the net annual rental  for
 
each of said periods be less than the highest net annual
rental including percentage rentals of the preceding period .
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
In turn, the section for "Percentage Rental" provides
 
as follows:
 
5 The applicable version of the "Fixed Minimum Rental" section is
contained in an "Amendment to Lease" recorded on December 10, 1973.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Percentage Rental :
Commencing with the second year of the term and
thereafter in each month, the Lessee shall, on or before the
15th day, pay to the Lessor in addition to the monthly fixed
rent ten per cent (10%) of the gross receipts of the Lessee
derived from business conducted upon or from the premises
during the prior month in excess of TWO THOUSAND FIVE
HUNDRED DOLLARS ($2,500.00). Lessee shall, concurrently
with the payment of the percentage rental, submit to Lessor
a statement of Lessee's income for the prior month. 
(Emphasis added.) 
"Net annual rental" is not defined in the Master Lease.
 
However, contract terms should be interpreted "according to their
 
plain, ordinary, and accepted sense in common speech." Koga
 
Eng'g & Constr., Inc. v. State, 122 Hawai' i 60, 72, 222 P.3d 979, 
991 (2010) (citations omitted). In the "Fixed Minimum Rental"
 section, subsection (e) uses the phrase "net annual rental"
 several times. However, it is the last sentence of subsection
 (e) that is of particular importance here.
 
Clark Realty and Putman Clark contend that the circuit
 
court erred because its calculation of a fixed minimum rent of
 $
5,925.41 per month -- from September 1, 2006 to August 31, 2016
 
-- includes percentage rent, which improperly results in a double
 percentage rent of 20%. We conclude that the circuit court
 correctly interpreted the Master Lease. In particular, the
 circuit court properly applied the last sentence of subsection
 (e) under "Fixed Minimum Rental," which provides that: "[i]n no
 event shall the net annual rental for each of said periods be
 less than the highest net annual rental including percentage
 rentals of the preceding period." (Emphasis added). 
In calculating the fixed minimum rent of $5,925.41 per
 
month, the circuit court relied on opinions rendered by Darlene
 Jo Ferrantino (Darlene Ferrantino), Clark Realty and Putman
 
Clark's expert witness. Ferrantino opined that during the
 
preceding period (i.e., the period from 1996 to 2006), the
 highest net annual rental was $71,104.89 ($5,925.41 per month),
 which apparently included percentage rental paid during that
 year. Given the terms of the Master Lease and the evidence in
 the record, the circuit court did not err in calculating the
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"fixed minimum rental" for the period between September 1, 2006
 
and August 31, 2016.
 
As set forth in the "Percentage Rental" section of the
 
Master Lease, the Lessor was entitled to the specified percentage
 rental "in addition to the monthly fixed rent[.]" Thus, based on
 a plain reading of the Master Lease, we conclude that Clark
 Realty and Putman Clark's challenge to the circuit court's
 calculation of net annual rent lacks merit.
 
II. CAAP-15-0000027 (Cross-Appeal)
 
In their cross-appeal, the Akona Trust and Francis
 
Pang, Individually and as Trustee, contend that the circuit courterred in determining the amount owed by Clark Realty and Putman
 Clark by misconstruing the definition of "gross receipts" under
 the Master Lease, and they challenge the circuit court's COLs 28,30, 35, and 50: 

 

 
28. The Court concludes that the terms of the Contract are
 
not ambiguous, and that CAM, nor the other "payments from
tenants"[
6] specified in Defendant's expert report are not
to be included in the amount of "gross receipts."
 
. . . . 
30. The annual rentals as determined by Baird Appraisals
and John Child & Company were less than the highest annual
rental including percentage rentals of the preceding period
and accordingly, the fixed minimum rental for the period
from September 1, 2006 to August 31, 2016 should be, as
stated by Plaintiff's expert, $5,925.41 per month.
 
. . . . 
35. The parties agree on the amounts paid by Clark Realty
and Putman Clark but disagree on back amounts owed. The
 Court relies on the figures set forth in the Plaintiff's
expert report. However, the Court finds an error in the
calculations from 2006 forward, where Plaintiff failed to
combine the fixed minimum rent with the percentage rent. A
 recalculation of the amount due and owing, in back payments
including Hawaii general excise tax is as follows: 2003:
486.23; 2004: 2954.16; 2005: 3058.01; 2006: 13,050.90; 2007:
33,311.68; 2008: 32,932.06; 2009: 33,034.40; 2010: 28861.70;
2011: 26,782.14, for a total of $174,471.28.
 
. . . . 
6 It appears that the other "payments from tenants" referenced by the
circuit court as being set forth in the Defendants' expert report ( Report by
Lee W. Erwin, CPA ) consists of base rent, lease rent, late fees, interest
charges, common area maintenance ( CAM), PY CAM, general excise taxes,
electricity reimbursements, and refuse reimbursements.
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
50. Clark Realty remitted a partial payment of $22,487.54. 
The total amount due and owing through November 2011 is
$151,983.74[.]
 
As discussed previously, the last sentence of
 
subsection (e) for "Fixed Minimum Rental" provides the method for
 
determining the fixed minimum rent starting on September 1, 2006.
 In that sentence, the calculation of net annual rental for the
 applicable period is not to "be less than the highest net annual
 rental including percentage rentals of the preceding period." In
 turn, as set out in the section for "Percentage Rental," a
 determination of percentage rent includes "gross receipts" as
 part of the calculation. Thus, a determination of the items
 included in "gross receipts" is relevant to calculating the
 amount of percentage rent, which in turn affects the
 determination of the fixed minimum rent starting on September 1,
 2006.
 
The Akona Trust and Francis Pang, Individually and as
 
Trustee, also argue that the circuit court's ruling as to what
 should be excluded from "gross receipts" resulted in an erroneous
 calculation of delinquent payments owed going back to November of
 2003.
 
Under the Master Lease, the section for "Percentage
 
Rental" states: 
Percentage Rental:
Commencing with the second year of the term and thereafter
in each month, the Lessee shall, on or before the 15th day, pay to
the Lessor in addition to the monthly fixed rent ten per cent
(10%) of the gross receipts  of the Lessee derived from business
 
conducted upon or from the premises during the prior month in
excess of TWO THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS ($2,500.00
). Lessee
 
shall, concurrently with the payment of the percentage rental,
submit to Lessor a statement of Lessee's income for the prior
month.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
In turn, "Gross Receipts" are defined in the Master
Lease as follows:
  
Gross Receipts.
For the purpose of computing percentage rental,
Lessee's gross receipts shall be the total aggregate money
received by the Lessee during the calendar month from the
business conducted by the Lessee in and from or on the
demised premises, including, without limiting the generality
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
thereof, all rental income from all tenants, including
rental of parking spaces, and in the event Lessee owns or
operates a commercial enterprise on a portion of the
premises, e.g., a clothing store, then all income derived
from operations, including all merchandise or services
delivered or rendered at a place other than the demised
premises on order taken at the demised premises. Gross
 
receipts shall be reduced by the amount of Lessee's gross
income tax, by all rebates made by Lessee and shall exclude
all moneys received on account of taxes, whether they be
sale taxes, real property taxes or assessments or otherwise.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
In our view, based on a plain reading of the Master
 
Lease, "gross receipts" should consist of "the total aggregate
 
money received by the Lessee during the calendar month from the
 business conducted by the Lessee in and from or on the demised
 premises," which shall be "reduced by the amount of Lessee's
 gross income tax, by all rebates made by Lessee and shall exclude
 all moneys received on account of taxes, whether they be sale
 taxes, real property taxes or assessments or otherwise." In the
 section defining gross receipts, we read the second part of the
 first sentence, which starts "including, without limiting the
 generality thereof," as providing examples of the type of items
 included within gross receipts, but not a limitation on the prior
 language defining gross receipts.
 
In the context of the "payments from tenants" described
 
in the Report by Lee W. Erwin, CPA, which appears to be
 referenced by the circuit court in COL 28, the only amounts that
 appear to fall outside of the definition of gross receipts are
 the general excise taxes. The other items referenced in the
 Report by Lee W. Erwin, CPA –- base rent, lease rent, late fees,
 interest charges, CAM, PY CAM, electricity reimbursements, and
 refuse reimbursements –- are included in the broad definition of
 "gross receipts" set forth in the Master Lease.
 
In sum, therefore, based on our reading of the Master
 
Lease, and in particular the "Gross Receipts" provision, the
 circuit court erred in its interpretation of the items included
 within gross receipts. See COL 28. We thus vacate the amounts
 
determined by the circuit court that are based on an erroneous
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
calculation of "gross receipts." On remand, the circuit court is
 
instructed to re-calculate the amounts due and owing to the Akona
 Trust and Francis Pang, as Trustee, in light of the above.
III. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the Third Amended Final
 
Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit on
 December 16, 2014, and the circuit court's underlying orders, are
 affirmed, except as to amounts determined by the circuit court
 based on an erroneous calculation of "gross receipts." The case
 is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings
 consistent with this Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 29, 2018. 
On the briefs: 
Francis L. Jung, Esq.,
Carol Monahan Jung, Esq.,for Clark Realty Corporationand Sefton R. Clark, PersonalRepresentative of the Estate ofPutman Damon Clark, Deceased. 
Kevin W. Herring,
Clara Park,for Henry F. Akona Trust andFrancis H. Pang, Individually andin his capacity as Successor Trusteeof the Henry F. Akona Trust. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
18
 