NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000762
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
BRUCE EDWARD COX, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
CARLYN DAVIDSON COX, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-DIVORCE NO. 06-1-0096)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Bruce Edward Cox (Bruce) appeals
 
from the Order re: Plaintiff's Second Motion for Attorneys' Fees
 
and Costs Pursuant to Hawaii Family Court Rule (HFCR) Rule 68
 
filed on July 15, 2011, entered on August 6, 2012 (Order re Fees)
 
by the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).1
 
Bruce contends that the Family Court erred when it
 
refused to award him the attorney's fees and the costs he
 
incurred at the appellate level.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Bruce's points of error as follows:
 
HFCR Rule 68 provides:
 
1
 The Honorable Linda S. Martell presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At any time more than 20 days before any contested
hearing held pursuant to HRS sections 571-11 to 14
(excluding law violations, criminal matters, and child
protection matters) is scheduled to begin, any party may
serve upon the adverse party an offer to allow a judgment to
be entered to the effect specified in the offer. Such offer
 may be made as to all or some of the issues, such as custody
and visitation. Such offer shall not be filed with the
 court, unless it is accepted. If within 10 days after
service of the offer the adverse party serves written notice
that the offer is accepted, any party may then file the
offer and notice of acceptance together with proof of
service thereof and thereupon the court shall treat those
issues as uncontested. An offer not accepted shall be
deemed withdrawn and evidence thereof is not admissible,
except in a proceeding to determine costs and attorney's
fees. 
If the judgment in its entirety finally obtained by
the offeree is patently not more favorable than the offer,
the offeree must pay the costs, including reasonable
attorney's fees incurred after the making of the offer,
unless the court shall specifically determine that such
would be inequitable in accordance with the provisions of
HRS section 580-47 or other applicable statutes, as amended.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
In this case, the Family Court concluded that, pursuant
 
to HFCR Rule 68, Bruce was entitled to an award of the reasonable
 
attorneys' fees and costs incurred by Bruce after his HFCR Rule
 68 offer to Defendant-Appellee Carlyn R. Davidson, fka Carlyn
 Davidson Cox (Carlyn), to the extent that those reasonable fees
 
and costs were incurred at the trial level, but not at the
 
appellate level. In the Order re Fees, the Family Court
 explained its denial of Bruce's appellate level fees and costs as
 follows:
 
The trial court will not award appellate costs to
[Bruce]. No Rule 68 offer was presented to [the] Family
Court regarding the appeal and even if [Bruce] contends the
appellate costs are automatically included in the Rule 69
[sic] offer, this Court expressly declines to do so. [Bruce]
may consider applying to the appellate court for the award
of his appellate fees and costs.
 
In its subsequent Findings of Fact and Conclusions of
 
Law, entered on November 2, 2012, the Family Court found that
 
"[t]he Family Court declined to award appellate costs to [Bruce]"
 and concluded, in relevant part, that "HFCR 68 does not state
 that the prevailing party in an appeal shall get their appellate
 fees and costs."
 
Thus, although the Family Court determined that Bruce
was entitled to HFCR Rule 68 fees and costs, it appears that it
 

 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
declined to award appellate fees and costs, at least in large
 
part, because appellate fees and costs are not specifically
 mentioned in the rule. 
However, as the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has previously 
stated: "An appeal is not a new action, but rather a continuation of an original action." Nelson v. Univ. of Haw., 99 
Hawai
'i 262, 265, 54 P.3d 433, 436 (2002) (citation omitted). 
Although HFCR Rule 68 does not specifically address appellate fees and costs, such fees and costs are necessarily incurred after the making of the Rule 68 offer and thus are included 
within the time frame set forth in the rule, i.e., "the offeree 
must pay the costs, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred after the making of the offer[.]" HFCR Rule 68. Indeed, the purpose of the HFCR Rule is to encourage settlement before the parties incur further fees and costs in contested proceedings. See Nakasone v. Nakasone, 102 Hawai
'i 177, 178, 73 P.3d 715, 716 
(2003). Parties are provided an extra incentive to make or accept a reasonable settlement offer in order to avoid incurring, or obtain reimbursement of, additional litigation expenses, including the expenses incurred by continuing the litigation at the appellate level. For these reasons, we conclude that appellate fees and costs may be awarded pursuant to HFCR Rule 68. 
Bruce asks this court to vacate the Order re Fees and
 
remand with directions to enter an order and judgment in favor of
 Bruce and against Carlyn for the full amount of his attorney's
 fees and costs incurred at the appellate level, as well as at the
 trial court level. We decline to do so. Although the Family
 Court failed to address this portion of the rule, HFCR Rule 68
 further provides that fees and costs must be awarded "unless the
 court shall specifically determine that such would be inequitable
 in accordance with the provisions of HRS section 580-47 or other
 applicable statutes, as amended."
 
Here, although the Family Court declined to make the
 
award, it did not specifically determine whether or not it would
 be inequitable to do so. While either the appellate court or the
 Family Court can assess the reasonableness of appellate
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attorney's fees and costs2
 (see, e.g., Nelson, 99 Hawai 'i at 269, 
54 P.3d at 440), the Family Court is much better positioned to 
assess whether an order requiring Carlyn to pay those additional fees would be inequitable in accordance with HRS ยง 580-47, or another applicable statute. 
Accordingly, the Family Court's August 6, 2012 Order re
 
Fees is vacated in part, with respect to the denial of appellate
 level fees and costs, and this case is remanded for further
 review of Bruce's request for attorney's fees and costs pursuant
 to HFCR Rule 68, including a specific determination as to whether
 such an award would be inequitable in accordance with the
 provisions of HRS section 580-47 or other applicable statutes, as
 amended.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
',i January 29, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
R. Steven Geshell 
for Plaintiff-Appellant
 Chief Judge
Presiding Judge
 Presiding Judge
 
2
 We note, however, that on November 9, 2010, Bruce was awarded
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 39 costs on appeal in Appeal No.
29593, and therefore no further award of such costs is warranted with respect
to that appeal. 
4
 