NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000493
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
DERA DEVELOPMENT, LLC
KENNETH KUDO, member,
Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Defendant/Appellant/Cross-Appellee
v.
 
ANITA MITCHELL and MICHAEL SAKELL,
Defendant/Counterclaim-Plaintiff/Appellee/Cross-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 3RC10-1-609)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In a case arising out of an alleged breach of a lease
 
agreement, Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Defendant/Appellant/Cross-
Appellee Kenneth Kudo (Kudo) appeals from the April 16, 2012
 
"Findings Of Facts And Conclusions Of Law; Judgment" (FOFCOL &
 
Judgment) and the July 10, 2012 order declaring Kudo a vexatious
 
litigant, both entered in the District Court of the Third 
1
Circuit  (district court).  The FOFCOL & Judgment resolved
 
several claims in favor of Defendant/Counterclaim-
Plaintiff/Appellee/Cross-Appellant Anita Mitchell (Mitchell). 
Mitchell cross-appeals.
 
1
 The Honorable Harry P. Freitas presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On January 6, 2010, Kudo and Mitchell entered into a
 
two-year rental agreement under which Kudo rented his property,
 
an unfinished agricultural structure and two acres of surrounding
 
land, to Mitchell in exchange for $1 a year and all improvements
 
made by Mitchell becoming Kudo's property at the end of the
 
rental term. On May 4, 2010, Kudo filed a complaint for summary
 
possession against Mitchell. Kudo alleged Mitchell had violated
 
their rental agreement and requested a judgment for possession
 
and damages.
 
Mitchell agreed to vacate the premises by May 31, 2010
 
and judgment of possession was granted. Mitchell accordingly
 
vacated and then filed a counterclaim against Kudo, seeking
 
quantum meruit for her labor on the property and for the cost of
 
expenditures made in renovating the property.
 
The district court conducted a bench trial then issued
 
its FOFCOL & Judgment in Mitchell's favor as to Kudo's complaint. 
The district court also awarded Mitchell $1,172.21 for building
 
materials she had purchased to improve the property, but it
 
denied any award for her leasehold interest because "the
 
property, although improved, was not being rented at the time or
 
in a condition that it could be rented."
 
After the FOFCOL & Judgment's entry, Mitchell filed a
 
motion to declare Kudo a vexatious litigant pursuant to Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 634J-7(a) (1993). The district court
 
entered an order granting Mitchell's motion on July 10, 2012. 
The district court also denied motions for reconsideration filed
 
by Kudo and by Mitchell. On May 21, 2012, the district court
 
entered a second "Judgment" which awarded $294.05 in attorney's
 
fees to Mitchell.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
"In this jurisdiction, a trial court's FOFs are subject
 
to the clearly erroneous standard of review. An FOF is clearly
 
erroneous when, despite evidence to support the finding, the
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction 
that a mistake has been committed." Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the 
Employees' Ret. Sys. of the State of Hawaif i, 106 Hawaif i 416, 
430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 (2005) (internal quotation marks, 
citations, and ellipses omitted) (quoting Allstate Ins. Co. v. 
Ponce, 105 Hawaif i 445, 453, 99 P.3d 96, 104 (2004)). "An FOF is 
also clearly erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding. [The Hawaif i Supreme Court has] defined 
'substantial evidence' as credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of 
reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Leslie v. Estate of 
Tavares, 91 Hawaif i 394, 399, 984 P.2d 1220, 1225 (1999) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted) (quoting State 
v. Kotis, 91 Hawaif i 319, 328, 984 P.2d 78, 87 (1999)). 
A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and is
freely reviewable for its correctness. [The appellate
court] ordinarily reviews COLs under the right/wrong
standard. Thus, a COL that is supported by the trial
court's FOFs and that reflects an application of the correct
rule of law will not be overturned. However, a COL that
presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under
the clearly erroneous standard because the court's
conclusions are dependent upon the facts and circumstances
of each individual case.
 
Chun, 106 Hawaif i at 430, 106 P.3d at 353 (internal quotation 
marks, citations, and brackets in original omitted) (quoting 
Ponce, 105 Hawaif i at 453, 99 P.3d at 104). 
We review a court's determination of whether a person 
is a vexatious litigant under the abuse of discretion standard. 
Ek v. Boggs, 102 Hawaif i 289, 294-95, 75 P.3d 1180, 1185-86 
(2003). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. Kudo's Appeal
 
Kudo's points on appeal claim: (1) the district court's
 
vexatious litigant determination violated his due process rights;
 (2) the district court erred in awarding $1,172.21 in
 
expenditures to Mitchell; and (3) Kudo was prejudiced by the
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
district court's entry of two judgments. We resolve Kudo's
 
appeal as follows:
 
(1) Kudo claims Mitchell's motion to declare Kudo a
 
vexatious litigant was not properly served. Kudo acknowledges he
 
was served with Mitchell's motion on May 21, 2012. However, that
 
service did not include a notice of hearing. On May 29, 2012,
 
Mitchell served Kudo with an incomplete notice of hearing which
 
set the hearing for June 4, 2012, six days later. As Kudo
 
correctly asserts, this service did not comply with the
 
requirements of District Court Rules of Civil Procedure (DCRCP)
 
Rule 6(d), which states: "A written motion . . . and notice of
 
the hearing thereof, shall be served not later than 14 days
 
before the time specified for the hearing[.]"2 Nevertheless,
 
Mitchell's noncompliance did not prejudice Kudo because the
 hearing was continued to July 2, 2012. Kudo was served with
 
notice of the rescheduled date, and he filed a written memorandum
 
in opposition to Mitchell's motion before the hearing. On appeal
 
Kudo makes no argument that he suffered prejudice from the error,
 
and we conclude there was none. 
We also reject Kudo's claim that the district court
 
deprived him of due process by basing its vexatious litigant
 
determination on grounds not raised in Mitchell's motion. Kudo's
 
argument is without merit. Mitchell's memorandum supporting her
 
motion argued Kudo had filed "baseless lawsuits" and
 
"unmeritorious motions." The district court accordingly found
 
"Kudo's actions have been done in bad faith" and that he had
 
2
 DCRCP Rule 6(d) states in full:
 
For motions; affidavits.  A written motion, other than
one which may be heard ex parte, and notice of the hearing
thereof, shall be served not later than 14 days before the
time specified for the hearing, unless a different period is
fixed by these rules or by order of the court. Such an
 order may for cause shown be made on ex parte application.
When a motion is supported by affidavit, the affidavit shall
be served with the motion; and, except as otherwise provided
in Rule 59(c), pleadings, memoranda and affidavits may be
served not later than 72 hours preceding the hearing, unless
the court permits them to be served at some other time.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"filed unmeritorious motions and other matters[.]" Kudo had the 
opportunity to respond to Mitchell's arguments in his memorandum 
in opposition and at the hearing on Mitchell's motion. 
Therefore, we conclude the district court did not abuse its 
discretion in determining Kudo is a vexatious litigant. Ek v. 
Boggs, 102 Hawaif i at 294-95, 75 P.3d at 1185-86 (applying abuse 
of discretion standard to vexatious litigant determination). 
(2) Kudo argues Mitchell is entitled to half of the
 
$1,172.21 award because half of the expenditures were
 
attributable to Mitchell's partner. The FOFCOL and the record
 
show that the district court found Mitchell paid the full amount
 
of the expenditures. Kudo fails to establish that this factual
 
finding was clearly erroneous. 
(3) Kudo argues the district court's entry of the two
 
judgments (the FOFCOL & Judgment and the May 21, 2012 Judgment
 
awarding attorney's fees) prejudicially affected the timeliness
 
of his motion for reconsideration. However, the timing did not
 
cause prejudice because the district court based its denial of
 
Kudo's motion for reconsideration on "the fact that no new
 
evidence was presented," not on timeliness. The timing of
 
Mitchell's motion for reconsideration also caused no prejudice
 
because the district court denied the motion. Lastly, Kudo's
 
claim that Mitchell's cross-appeal from the FOFCOL & Judgment is
 
untimely is without merit.
 
B. Mitchell's Cross-Appeal
 
On cross-appeal, Mitchell contends the district court
 
erred in concluding Kudo's property "was not being rented at the
 time or in a condition that it could be rented" and therefore had
 
no rental value. Mitchell argues the parties had stipulated that
 
the fair rental value of the property was $800 per month, and the
 
district court was bound by the stipulation. The record shows
 
Kudo intended the stipulated value be used as an offset against
 
any award on Mitchell's counterclaim for the value of her labor
 
while she was on the property and therefore agreed that the
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stipulation designated the property's fair rental value during
 
Mitchell's lease.
 
We agree the district court erred because "[t]he facts 
within a stipulation are taken to be conclusive and binding upon 
the parties, the trial judge and the appellate court." State v. 
Woodhall, 129 Hawaif i 397, 405, 301 P.3d 607, 615 (2013) 
(internal quotation marks, brackets, and ellipsis omitted). 
However, the district court's error was harmless in this case 
because Mitchell agreed to vacate the premises. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
We affirm the District Court of the Third Circuit's
 
April 16, 2012 "Findings Of Facts And Conclusions Of Law;
 
Judgment" and the July 10, 2012 "Order Granting Defendant Anita
 
Mitchell's Motion To Declare Kenneth Kudo A Vexatious Litigant
 
And Subject Him To A Prefiling Order."
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, September 26, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Kenneth Kudo 
Plaintiff/Counterclaim­Defendant/Appellant/Cross-Appellee pro se. 
Carl Foytik
for Defendant/Counterclaim­Plaintiff/Appellee/Cross-Appellant Anita Mitchell. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
6
 