NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000622 
  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
 
 
RODEL TOLENTINO CARZANO, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.ESTELITA DELA CERNA CARZANO, Defendant-Appellee.  
  
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-D NO. 16-1-6797) 
  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Leonard, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.)
 
 
  Plaintiff-Appellant Rodel Tolentino Carzano (Rodel)  
appeals from the Family Court of the First Circuit's July 25, 
2017 Order Re: Plaintiff's Request for Uncontested Divorce.1 
  In this case, Rodel filed a "Complaint for Divorce" form, which alleged that the parties "are lawfully married to 
each other" and requested decisions on custody of their three 
children, division of assets and debts, and spousal support.  In an "Affidavit of Plaintiff (For Uncontested Divorce)," Rodel 
                                                           
1  The Honorable Gale L.F. Ching presided. 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
2 
   stated that "parties were not legally married" and that he "had 
to file the instant case for annulment of our marriage."  In a 
supplemental affidavit, Rodel declared that he "did not marry 
Defendant, however, [he] subsequently learned that she made it appear on official document that [they] were married in the 
Philippines when in truth and in fact, [he] never married 
her[.]" 
 
 Following a hearing and further briefing by Rodel, the 
family court ruled that it "does not have jurisdiction to annul Plaintiff's and Defendant's marriage that allegedly arose in the 
Philippines and therefore denies Plaintiff's request to have 
this Court grant an annulment and/or absolute divorce."  
(Formatting altered.) 
  On appeal, Rodel challenges the family court's denial 
of his request for an annulment of his alleged marriage to 
Defendant-Appellee Estelita Dela Cerna Carzano (Estelita) based 
on lack of jurisdiction.  Specifically, he contends that the 
family court erred by denying his request for annulment based 
on:  
(1) "lack of jurisdiction to rule over annulments when 
the Court has exclusive and original jurisdiction expressly 
contained in Hawaii Revised Statutes [(HRS)] Section 580-
1"; NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
3 
 (2) "lack of jurisdiction over [Estelita] who resides 
in Cebu City, Philippines despite the fact that [Estelita] 
was properly served with the Complaint and Summons but 
failed to respond and participate in the proceedings"; and  
(3) "the allegation that the fraudulent, or simulated 
or fictitious marriage certificate was registered in the Philippines because the statute granting the Court original 
and exclusive jurisdiction does not distinguish whether the fraud was committed in or outside the State of [Hawai‘ i] for 
the court to assume jurisdiction."  
Upon careful review of the record and the brief 
submitted,
2 and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised, we resolve this appeal as discussed below, and vacate and remand. 
"The jurisdiction of the family court is 
reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard."  Hsieh v. Sun, 
137 Hawai‘ i 90, 98, 365 P.3d 1019, 1027 (App. 2016) (citing 
Puckett v. Puckett, 94 Hawai‘ i 471, 477, 16 P.3d 876, 882 
(App. 2000)). 
  
                                                           
2  Estelita did not file an answering brief.  As a result, the appellate 
clerk entered a notice of default of the answering brief on February 21, 
2018. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
4 
 "[I]t is plain that each state by virtue of its 
command over its domiciliaries and its large interest in the 
institution of marriage can alter within its own borders the 
marriage statutes of the spouse domiciled there, even though the other spouse is absent."  Williams v. North Carolina, 317 U.S. 
287, 298-99 (1942).   
In Hawai‘ i, "[e]xclusive original jurisdiction in 
matters of annulment, divorce, and separation . . . is conferred 
upon the family court of the circuit in which the applicant has 
been domiciled or has been physically present for a continuous 
period of at least three months next preceding the application 
. . . ."  HRS § 580-1(a) (Supp. 2016); Puckett, 94 Hawai‘ i at 
482, 16 P.3d at 887.  Because "an action for divorce is in the 
nature of a proceeding in rem under certain circumstances a 
court may render a valid decree of divorce although it never 
acquired actual jurisdiction of the person of the defendant."  
Peterson v. Peterson, 24 Haw. 239, 243-244 (Haw. Terr. 1918).   
As for service, "[t]he complaint for annulment, 
divorce, or separation, and the summons shall be served by an 
authorized process server on defendant personally if the 
defendant is within the State, unless the defendant enters an 
appearance in the case," and "if the defendant is without the 
State, the court may authorize the service to be made by any 
other responsible person[.]"  HRS §§ 580-3(a) and (b) (2006). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
5 
 In sum, the family court has jurisdiction over a 
complaint for annulment where the applicant has been physically 
present in Hawai‘ i three months prior to filing the complaint and 
the statutory requirements for service of process on the 
defendant have been met.  HRS 580-1(a); Peterson, 24 Haw. at 
239; see Rodrigues v. Rodrigues, 7 Haw. App. 102, 108, 747 P.2d 
1281, 1286 (1987) (explaining that, under Peterson, "the family 
court in a divorce case, by service by publication on an absent 
defendant described in HRS § 580-3(d), can acquire in rem 
jurisdiction to dissolve the marriage"). 
Here, Rodel was domiciled in Hawai‘ i since December 25, 
2010
.  He filed a complaint with the family court on May 19, 
2016, thereby commencing an action for divorce/annulment.  See 
HRS § 580-2 (2006) ("An action for annulment . . . is commenced 
by filing a complaint with the court . . . . Upon the filing of 
the complaint, the clerk shall forthwith issue a summons 
. . . .")  And, Rodel provided proof that Estelita was served 
with the complaint and summons on June 10, 2016.  Thus, the 
statutory requirements for conferring jurisdiction upon the 
family court over the divorce/annulment were met.   
Rodel's assertions that there was actually no 
marriage, he did not consent to a marriage, and Estelita filed a fraudulent document in the Philippines goes to whether Rodel 
meets his burden of establishing that an annulment should be 
granted, which is for the family court to decide.  See NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
6 
   Cvitanovich-Dubie v. Dubie, 125 Hawai‘ i  128, 143 n.16, 254 P.3d 
439, 454 n.16 (2011) (explaining that "HRS § 580-1 does not 
contain a jurisdictional requirement that the parties be 
lawfully married in order to seek a divorce.  Rather, it appears 
that a valid marriage is more properly considered a substantive 
requirement for a valid divorce"). 
But, because Estelita was not a domiciliary of Hawai‘ i 
"(1) at the time that the cause of action which is the subject 
of the proceeding arose, or (2) at the time of the commencement 
of the proceeding, or (3) at the time of service," the family 
court did not have jurisdiction to render a judgement against 
Estelita regarding custody, spousal support, or property 
division.  HRS § 580-3.5 (2006); see Rodrigues, 7 Haw. App. at 
108 (explaining that "although the family court had in rem jurisdiction to dissolve the Rodrigues' marriage, it did not 
have in personam jurisdiction over Carol with respect to 
custody, visitation, and support of their minor daughter, 
spousal support, or the division and distribution of their 
property and debts").   
  Accordingly, we hold that the family court had 
jurisdiction over the complaint for the purposes of granting or 
denying the request for an annulment.  We, thus, vacate the 
family court's July 25, 2017 Order Re: Plaintiff's Request for  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
7 
 Uncontested Divorce, and remand this case for further 
proceedings consistent with this order. 
  DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai‘ i, September 16, 2022. 
 
On the briefs: 
 
Rhoda Yabes Alvarez, for Plaintiff-Appellant. /s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
Presiding Judge 
 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
Associate Judge 
 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen Associate Judge  
 