 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0003337
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE INTEREST OF
 
CD
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 11-0001)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Appellant Father (Father) appeals from the Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights, filed on July 30, 2013 in the Family
 
Court of the Third Circuit (family court).1
 
On appeal, Father claims the family court erred by
 
terminating his parental rights because (1) there was
 insufficient evidence that Father actually committed an alleged
 sexual offense, (2) there was insufficient evidence that Father
 suffered from mental illness so as to establish that he was
 unable to provide a safe family home, and (3) there was
 insufficient evidence to support the additional bases relied upon
 to show that Father was unable to provide a safe family home.
 Father challenges the family court's findings of fact (FOF) and
 conclusions of law (COL) related to, and based upon, the issues
 raised in his points of error.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
1
 The Honorable Anthony K. Bartholomew presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Father's points of error as follows.
 
With regard to family court decisions in general, the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court has expressed that 
the family court possesses wide discretion in making its
decisions and those decision[s] will not be set aside unless
there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus, we will not
disturb the family court's decisions on appeal unless the
family court disregarded rules or principles of law or
practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant
and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of reason.
 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(quoting In re Doe, 95 Hawai 'i 183, 189, 20 P.3d 616, 622 
(2001)). Moreover, with regard to FOFs and COLs, 
[t]he family court's FOFs are reviewed on appeal under the
"clearly erroneous" standard. A FOF is clearly erroneous
when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support
the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in support
of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left with
a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made.
 "Substantial evidence" is credible evidence which is of
 sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of
reasonable caution to support a conclusion.
 
On the other hand, the family court's COLs are
reviewed on appeal de novo, under the right/wrong
standard. COLs, consequently, are "not binding upon
an appellate court and are freely reviewable for their
correctness.["]
 
....
 Moreover, the family court is given much leeway in its
examination of the reports concerning a child's care,
custody, and welfare, and its conclusions in this
regard, if supported by the record and not clearly
erroneous, must stand on appeal.
 
Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i at 47, 137 P.3d at 361 (citations omitted). 
The relevant Findings of Fact regarding Father are:
 
56. The safety concerns regarding Father
centered on his chronic mental health issues, his lack
of insight as to his impairments, his inability to be
his wife's supervisor and caretaker, his unaddressed
domestic violence issues and his lack of participation
in the Court ordered psycho-sexual examination to
address the DHS' concerns regarding Father being
confirmed as a perpetrator of sexual abuse to another
child in a different CWS case.
 
57. Throughout the case, Father continued to
behave in a manner with DHS and service providers that
did not allow for a workable situation. Father's
 behavior was viewed as violent and threatening, or
obstinate, at the very least. Father's behavior
 caused him to be discharged from the psychosexual
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
assessment with Dr. Hall and PARENTS, Inc.
Comprehensive Counseling Services, and supervised
visitation, leading to his failure to comply with the
Court ordered service plan.
 
58. Father lacks insight to address his mental
health issues. He tries, but is not capable of being
his wife's mental health worker and supervisor. 
59. Father cannot be protective of the child
because, although he is considered higher functioning
than Mother, he has severe mental health issues and
unresolved violent and threatening behavior of his
own.
 
60. Due to his lack of cooperation, there were
two failed attempts at a psychosexual examination for
Father. Thus, Father never completed this Court
ordered assessment.
 
61. Father participated in a psychological
evaluation on April 6, 2011 with Dr. John Wingert.
 
62. 
Father was diagnosed with Bipolar
Disorder, NOS by history, History of Polysubstance
Abuse, Personality Disorder, NOS with Antisocial,
Paranoid and Narcissistic traits. Dr. Wingert
formulated, inter alia,
 that Father has disregard for
social standards and values as well as marked
 rebellious and antisocial types of personality
features. Dr. Wingert also formulated that Father has
difficulty accepting responsibility for his behavior
and failures and instead, blames his difficulties on
others. Dr. Wingert also stated that it was unlikely
that Father would progress at all in services and
prognosis for change was regarded as poor. Father was
 viewed as at increased risk for child neglect and
child abuse related concerns. Dr. Wingert also listed
as one of the recommendations that Father participate
in mental health services and psychiatric treatment,
as he does not view himself as having a mental
disorder. Dr. Wingert also recommended that Father
complete anger management and domestic violence
programs and couples counseling for marital discord.
Dr. Wingerts deferred the psychosexual issues to Dr.
Hall.
 
63. Father is not presently willing and able
to provide his child with a safe family home, even
with the assistance of a service plan because of
chronic mental health issues, incomplete parenting
services, his lack of insight as to his impairment,
his unaddressed domestic violence issues and his lack
 of participation in the Court ordered psychosexual
examination to address the DHS' concern regarding
Father being confirmed as a perpetrator of sexual
abuse to another child in a different CWS case.
 
64. It is not reasonably foreseeable that
Father will become willing and able to provide the
child with a safe family home, even with the
assistance of a service plan, within a reasonable
period of time not to exceed two years from the time
foster custody was first ordered by the court.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(1) Father claims the family court erred by
 
terminating his parental rights based upon the unsubstantiated
 
contention by Appellee Department of Human Services (DHS) that
 Father is a "confirmed" perpetrator of sexual abuse to another
 child in a different child welfare services (CWS) case. Father
 contends that there was insufficient evidence to establish that
 he committed the asserted sexual abuse. 
DHS's Petition for Temporary Foster Custody contained
 
the allegation that Father was a confirmed perpetrator of sexual
 abuse to another child in a current CWS case. A DHS social
 worker also testified that Father was a confirmed perpetrator of
 sexual abuse in the other DHS case. Father has denied that he
 committed sexual abuse.
 
Contrary to Father's contention on appeal, the family
 
court did not make a finding that Father was a confirmed
 perpetrator of sexual abuse or base its decision to terminate
 Father's parental rights on such a finding. Rather, in light of
 the DHS's assertion and concern that Father was a confirmed
 perpetrator of sexual abuse, the family court ordered inter alia
 that Father participate in, and successfully complete, a
 psychosexual evaluation as part of the Family Service Plan. 
Father does not dispute that he agreed to participate in the
 psychosexual evaluation. In FOF 63, the family court pointed to
 Father's lack of participation in the court-ordered psychosexual
 examination as one of the factors supporting the finding that
 Father was not willing and able to provide a safe family home. 
Thus, the family court based its decision on Father's failure to
 participate in the court-ordered psychosexual examination, not on
 an express finding that Father committed a sexual abuse.
 
As noted by DHS, under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 587A-7(a)(5) (2013 Supp.), among the factors that the family
 court was required to consider in determining whether Father is
 willing and able to provide a safe family home are the "[r]esults
 of psychiatric, psychological, or developmental evaluations
 of . . . alleged perpetrators[.]" (Emphasis added). Moreover,
 pursuant to HRS § 587A-7(a)(12), the family court was required to
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
consider "[w]hether the child's family has demonstrated an
 
understanding of and involvement in services that have been
 recommended by the department or court-ordered as necessary to
 provide a safe family home for the child[.]"
 
In short, DHS raised a concern about Father sexually
 
abusing another child and although Father agreed to participate
 in the psychosexual evaluation ordered by the family court, he
 failed to do so.
 
(2) Contrary to Father's claim, there was sufficient
 
evidence presented that Father suffers from a mental disorder
 that affects his ability to provide a safe family home.
 
In a psychological evaluation of Father, Dr. John
 
Wingert (Dr. Wingert) diagnosed Father as having bipolar and
 personality disorders. Dr. Wingert noted that Father is aware
 of his bipolar diagnosis, but disputes the diagnosis and refuses
 to take medication. Dr. Wingert testified that the failure to
 take medication further indicates problems in day-to-day
 functioning and could be a safety concern if Father were caring
 for a child. Dr. Wingert opined that "[i]t is unlikely that
 [Father] has progressed at all in services and prognosis for
 significant positive change is regarded as poor. He is viewed as
 at increased risk for child neglect and child abuse related
 concerns." Dr. Wingert testified that Father has chronic and
 severe mental health issues that hinder his ability to safely
 parent his child, and that Father cannot provide a safe home for
 the child. 
Although Father's psychotherapist, Glenn Kondo,
 
testified that Father had made progress in his treatment and was
 stable, he confirmed that Father's diagnosis at time of trial was
 bipolar II. Likewise, Father's case manager testified that
 Father's diagnosis is bipolar, and further testified that
 although Father was prescribed medication, he eventually declined
 to continue taking the medication. 
The family court did not terminate Father's parental
 
rights based solely on the fact that Father has a bipolar
 disorder. Rather, the family court found that Father did not
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
view himself as having a medical disorder and that his mental
 
health issues were unresolved. See FOF 56, 58, 59 and 62. The
 
family court also noted Father's diagnosis of personality
 disorder, with antisocial, paranoid, and narcissistic traits,
 which made Father disregard social standards and values, have
 rebellious and antisocial behaviors, made it difficult for Father
 to accept responsibility, and resulted in a increased risk for
 child neglect and child abuse related concerns. See FOF 62. 
The record contains sufficient evidence to support the
 
family court's findings regarding Father's mental illness and
 those findings support the family court's conclusions that
 Father's mental illness affects his ability to provide a safe
 family home for the child.
 
(3) Father also contends that there was insufficient
 
evidence to support the other bases relied upon to show that
 Father was unable to provide a safe family home, which Father
 contends were: (a) Mother's mental illness combined with the fact
 that Father will not leave Mother; (b) Father's alleged
 aggression; and (c) a prior unrelated parental termination case
 in Nevada.
 
There was sufficient evidence that Mother suffers from
 
serious mental illness and that Father was unwilling to leave
 Mother. Thus, the family court focused on Father's ability to
 keep child safe in those circumstances. Given the evidence in
 the record, we cannot conclude that the family court was clearly
 erroneous in its findings that there were safety concerns
 regarding Father's "inability to be his wife's supervisor and
 caretaker" and that he "cannot be protective of the child
 because, although he is considered higher functioning than
 Mother, he has severe mental health issues and unresolved violent
 and threatening behavior of his own."
 
The family court did not base its termination ruling on
 
Father's being aggressive. Rather, the court's ruling relied on,
 inter alia, Father's unaddressed domestic violence issues. There
 is evidence in the record that Father and Mother have a history
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of domestic violence in their relationship and thus the family
 
court did not err.
 
Similarly, the family court did not base its decision
 
on Father's prior involvement with child protective services in
 Nevada. FOF 10 recites the family's involvement with child
 protective services in Nevada and notes that Mother and Father's
 parental rights were terminated as to child's sibling. However,
 the family court's ruling does not indicate that it based its
 decision in this case on what occurred in the Nevada proceedings. 
Moreover, even if the family court had considered the family's
 history in the Nevada case, it would not be erroneous. Under HRS
 § 587A-7(a)(6), safe family home factors that the family court
 must consider include "[w]hether there is a history of abusive or
 assaultive conduct by the child's family members[.]" The family
 court's ruling in this case that it would not find aggravated
 circumstances did not preclude the court from considering
 Father's history of harm to another child. See HRS § 587A­
28(e)(4) (2013 Supp.).
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order Terminating
 
Parental Rights, filed on July 30, 2013 in the Family Court of
 the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 9, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Rebecca A. Copeland
for Appellant-Father
 
Presiding Judge
Audrey L. Whitehurst
Mary Anne Magnier
Deputy Attorneys General
for Appellee
Department of Human Services 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
7
 