FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
---o0o--­
IN THE INTEREST OF PP, a Minor
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000165
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-J NO. 0093930)
 
APRIL 30, 2014
 
FOLEY and LEONARD, JJ.;
and NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, DISSENTING 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
 
Minor-Appellant PP (Minor) appeals from the Decree Re:
 
Law Violation Petition(s) (Decree), entered on January 4, 2013,
 
in the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court), wherein
 the Family Court found that Minor had violated Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 707-717(1) (1993), Terroristic Threatening in
 
the Second Degree.
1
 
1
 The Honorable William J. Nagle, III presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Minor contends that there was insufficient 
evidence to find that he violated HRS § 707-717 and that the 
Family Court erred by failing to ensure that Minor's waiver of the right to testify was made knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily, in violation of Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai
'i 226, 
900 P.2d 1293 (1995). 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On December 28, 2012, Petitioner-Appellee State of 
Hawai'i (State) filed Petition No. 12-469067 against Minor, 
alleging that Minor threatened, by word or conduct, to cause 
bodily injury to Jeffrey Kuewa (Kuewa), in reckless disregard of 
the risk of terrorizing him, thereby committing Terroristic 
Threatening in the Second Degree, in violation of HRS § 707­717(1). 
Kuewa testified he was a counselor at the Central Oahu 
Youth Services Association (COYSA or the Shelter), which is a 
youth shelter in Hale
'iwa. On December 26, 2012, he caught Minor 
smoking in his room at the Shelter and imposed an early bed time 
(EBT) of 7 p.m. on Minor for one day. Later during the same day, 
Minor failed to follow through with his chores in a timely 
manner, became upset, started screaming, and then walked out of the Shelter building to an "out of bounds" area. Kuewa imposed two more days of EBT on Minor, but did not inform Minor about the additional two days. 
December 27, 2012 was Kuewa's day off, but he came into
 
work because he forgot a personal item. While Kuewa was there, a
 van with another staff member, Frank Kimitch (Kimitch), and
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
several youths, including Minor, drove into the Shelter parking
 
area. Minor got out and walked "kind of aggressively" toward
 Kuewa until he was about four feet away from Kuewa. Minor
 questioned Kuewa about the extra EBT days. Kuewa described
 Minor's demeanor as angry because Minor approached Kuewa with
 clenched fists and frowning eyebrows. Kuewa said Minor's voice
 was not loud, but it was really stern. Kuewa explained to Minor
 that the two more EBT days was a consequence of Minor's screaming
 and walking out of bounds. Minor said, "I thought it was for
 only one day." Kuewa said that Minor was missing the point of
 what he did after he was given the one-day consequence. On
 cross-examination, Kuewa testified that, when Minor asked him
 about the two extra days of EBT, in reference to Minor's
 "screaming" the day before, Kuewa compared him to a "little
 girl." Nevertheless, Minor just stared at him and then walked to
 the Shelter. The entire interaction between Minor and Kuewa took
 about 20 seconds. Kuewa confirmed that, after they talked, Minor
 walked away, went into the house, never came back toward Kuewa,
 and stayed in the house. Upon the prosecutor asking if he had
 any concern for his safety before Minor walked away, Kuewa said
 that he was maybe expecting Minor to take a swing at him. 
After Minor walked away and into the Shelter, Kimitch
 
informed Kuewa that Minor had been "talking a lot of shit about
 you." Kuewa testified that Kimitch told him that Minor said he
 would kick his ass and was going to make him his bitch by
 sticking his dick in his mouth. Kuewa testified that he was
 concerned that when he returned to work a physical altercation
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
might happen between him and Minor. After discussing the matter
 
with other staff members, Kuewa called a supervisor, and then
 
called the police.
 
On cross-examination, Kuewa acknowledged he did not
 
know about Minor's threatening comments until Kimitch told him.
 Minor did not make any threatening comments directly to Kuewa.
 
Kimitch testified that he works full-time as a teacher
 
for the Department of Education and part-time for COYSA. At
 about 4 o'clock on December 27, 2012, Kimitch informed Minor that
 he was supposed to have EBT for three nights.  Minor got upset
 
and started punching the couch that Minor was sitting on. 
Kimitch testified that Minor stated that when Kuewa came in, he
 wanted to harm Kuewa and make him pay for the early bed time.
 Kimitch stated: 
He said things like he was going to strip Jeff, um,
make -- make Jeff his bitch. He was going to -- he
said -- he said, Jeff thinks he's big. I'm going to
show him who's big. I'm going to show him my big dick.
Um -- at -- the whole time with every breath and every
statement, he was punching the couch, getting really
aggressive. And, um, this went on for, like, five or
ten minutes. He -- he even threatened to kill Jeff,
things like that.
 
Kimitch testified that Minor said that when he saw
 
Kuewa, Minor was going to "get him." Although Minor carried on
 
for what seemed like "a long time," Kimitch also testified that
 Minor did not raise his voice; he just sat there punching the
 couch, which was next to a desk that Kimitch was apparently
 sitting at, and spewing invectives about Kuewa. Minor continued
 ranting until Kimitch told Minor that he could not go to the
 beach until he stopped his behavior for five minutes. Minor
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stopped and was allowed to go to the beach, apparently without
 
any further loss of privilege or other disciplinary action. When
 Minor returned from the beach approximately 45 minutes later,
 Kuewa was in the parking area. According to Kimitch, Minor
 walked up to Kuewa but did not get close enough to fight. Minor
 asked Kuewa about the three nights of EBT in an angry tone. 
After Minor left the area, Kimitch informed Kuewa about the
 threats and told Kuewa the reason Minor was mad at him. On
 cross-examination, Kimitch also testified that he (Kimitch)
 entered the shelter before Minor, as Minor had backed down away
 from Kuewa and was walking away, and he (Kimitch) proceeded with
 "little things, putting away the keys, [] checking the messages
 on the phone, [] the preparations for dinner." It was apparently
 not long after that that Kimitch and Kuewa discussed Minor's
 earlier rant.
 
The defense did not call any witnesses. The Family
 
Court found Minor committed Terroristic Threatening in the Second
 Degree. The Family Court stated:
 
The Court finds in this case that the prosecution has met
its burden of proof of demonstrating beyond a reasonable
doubt that the defendant did communicate threats of bodily
harm to Mr. Kimitch, which were later transmitted to the
complaining witness in this case. The Court's not going to
go through the statements that the -- the minor made.
 
Suffice to say, though, that the minor punctuated what he
said with pumping his fists, punching the couch, and did so
for a considerable period of time. That left Mr. Kimitch
with the impression that the minor was very serious when he
communicated the threat. And Mr. Kimitch testified that he
 made Mr. Kuewa aware of both what was said and the
 circumstances.
 
The complaining witness in this case, Mr. Kuewa, was
justified in fearing for a likelihood of physical harm,
because the [Minor] approached Mr. Kuewa with clenched
fists, just as he had when he made the threat in front of
Mr. Kimitch.
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
You know, the Court observed previously that words have
consequences, especially when they are accompanied by a
demonstration of an intent to make good on the threat.
 
2
On January 4, 2013, the Decree  was filed, detailing
the terms of his probation for violating HRS § 707-717.
 
On January 24, 2013, Minor filed a motion for
 
reconsideration, which the Family Court denied on February 13,
 
2013. At the February 13, 2013 hearing on the motion for
 reconsideration, the Family Court explained its ruling, in part
 as follows:
 
[I]t was undisputed at trial, that the minor made
statements to Mr. Kimitch, animated statements punctuated by
gestures of punching the couch in a highly agitated state,
that he would inflict bodily harm on Mr. Kuewa in a variety
of descriptions that we need not go into here.
The fact that Mr. Kuewa was not present at the
utterance of those statements does not mean that they cannot
be considered as terroristic threats. The communication of
 the minor's words by Mr. Kimitch to Mr. Kuewa sometime later
similarly does not impair the validity of the evidence in -­concerning the terroristic threatening.
The real question here is whether there was a sense of
-- whether the threats were unequivocal, unconditional,
immediate, and specific. Because we don't have a
 transcript, the Court's notes reflect that Mr. Kimitch
testified at trial that he communicated both the
 circumstances of the minor's statement, including his
gestures and demeanor, to Mr. Kuewa.
The Court also notes that immediately prior to Mr.
Kuewa being informed by Kimitch of the minor's statements,
Mr. Kuewa had a -- let's just call it a -- a discussion with
the minor, in which the minor approached Mr. Kuewa, stood
three feet from him with his hands balled in a fist, in an
apparently agitated state, just as had been described by Mr.
Kimitch when the threat was uttered. ...
 
The other point that was in the record at trial and
the Court also, you know, relies upon, the minor is not a
small person. The minor is roughly 5-foot-10, 5-feet-11.
He is stocky, muscular. And to the Court's observation, the
minor was capable of inflicting bodily injury.
 
At that point, defense counsel interrupted to ask
 
whether the Court was taking "judicial notice" that Minor was
 
2
 The Honorable Paul T. Murakami entered the Decree.
 
6
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"stocky, muscular" because she did not recall that being part of
 
the record.3 The Court continued:
 
It was the Court's visual observation, but [the
prosecutor] also elicited testimony from Mr. Kuewa about the
minor's size.
 
All of those circumstances have been considered by the
Court. And I would also add that those -- those facts are
 undisputed. And the Court finds that the statements of the
 minor, which were unequivocal, unconditional, and immediate,
coupled with his agitated state at the time of the
utterance, his hand gestures, his punching the couch, and
his demonstration of hostility in front of Mr. Kimitch,
which was communicated to Mr. Kuewa, coupled with the
minor's behavior immediately prior to Mr. Kimitch
communicating the minor's statements and the circumstances
to Mr. Kuewa, were sufficient to -- were sufficient for the
Court to find that the prosecution has carried its burden of
proof that the minor committed the violation of terroristic
threatening in the second degree.
 
The prosecutor then asked the Family Court to clarify
 
whether or not, without Minor's prior statements on the couch,
 
that Minor's later encounter with Kuewa constituted terroristic
 threatening. The court stated that it did not;
 
No, the Court does not -- the Court does not find that
there was the communication of a threat on the date when the
 
minor -- that -- the day after the discussion in front of
Mr. Kimitch. The minor's statements to Mr. Kimitch were
 sufficiently unequivocal, unconditional, and immediate both
as to the nature of the threat, as well as the identity of
the person to -- against whom the threat was made. Those
 qualify, under Chung, Kelner, and Valdivia. The fact that
 this was communicated to Mr. Kuewa at a later date after a
 separate encounter with the minor, the Court finds is
sufficient, and the resultant concern by Mr. Kuewa for his
own personal safety, is sufficient to complete the offense.
 
On March 12, 2013, Minor filed a notice of appeal.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
Sufficiency of the Evidence
 
The standard of review for sufficiency of the evidence
is well established; namely, whether, upon the evidence
viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution and in
full recognition of the province of the trier of fact, the
evidence is sufficient to support a prima facie case so that
a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a
 
3
 Kuewa's testimony was that he (Kuewa) was 6-foot-2-inches tall and
weighed 260 pounds and that Minor was 5-foot-9 or 5-foot-10 and 210 pounds.
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasonable doubt. Sufficient evidence to support a prima
facie case requires substantial evidence as to every
material element of the offense charged. Substantial
 evidence as to every material element of the offense charged
is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and
probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to
support a conclusion. Under such a review, we give full
play to the right of the fact finder to determine
credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw justifiable
inferences of fact. 
State v. Grace, 107 Hawai 'i 133, 139, 111 P.3d 28, 34 (App. 2005) 
(block quote format changed) (quoting State v. Ferrer, 95 Hawai 'i 
409, 422, 23 P.3d 744, 757 (App. 2001)). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
Minor contends that there is insufficient evidence to
 
find that he committed the offense of Terroristic Threatening in
 
the Second Degree. More specifically, Minor contends that, even
 when viewing the evidence adduced in the strongest light for the
 prosecution, as we must do, the evidence presented was
 insufficient (1) to support the Family Court's conclusion that
 Minor possessed the requisite state of mind sufficient to impose
 
4
penal liability,  and (2) to support the Family Court's
conclusion that Minor uttered a "true threat" that he intended to
 inflict bodily harm on Kuewa. 
HRS § 707-717 (1993) states:
 
§ 707-717 Terroristic threatening in the second
degree. (1) A person commits the offense of terroristic
threatening in the second degree if the person commits
 
4
 HRS § 571-11(1) proceedings are not criminal cases (see HRS § 571­
1 (2006)), but may be instituted when "any person who is alleged to have
committed an act prior to achieving eighteen years of age which would
constitute a violation or attempted violation of any federal, state, or local
law[.]" HRS § 571-11(1) (Supp. 2013). Thus, we review whether the evidence
adduced was sufficient to support a conviction under the applicable penal
statute.
 
8
   
    
    
    
        
    
         FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
terroristic threatening other than as provided in section
707-716.5
 
(2) Terroristic threatening in the second
degree is a misdemeanor.
 
HRS § 707-715 (Supp. 2013) states, in relevant part:
 
§ 707-715 Terroristic threatening, defined. A person
commits the offense of terroristic threatening if the person
threatens, by word or conduct, to cause bodily injury to
another person or serious damage or harm to property,
including the pets or livestock, of another or to commit a
felony:
 
5	 HRS § 707-716 (Supp. 2013) provides, in relevant part:
 
§707-716 Terroristic threatening in the first degree. 
(1) A person commits the offense of terroristic threatening
in the first degree if the person commits terroristic
threatening:
 
(a)	 By threatening another person on more than
one occasion for the same or a similar
 purpose;
 
(b)	 By threats made in a common scheme against
different persons;
 
(c)	 Against a public servant arising out of the
performance of the public servant's official
duties. ["Public servant" defined];
 
(d)	 Against any emergency medical services provider
who is engaged in the performance of duty.
["Emergency medical services provider" defined];
 
(e)	 With the use of a dangerous instrument or a
simulated firearm. ["Simulated firearm"
defined]; or
 
(f)	 By threatening a person who:
 
(i)	 The defendant has been restrained from, by
order of any court, including an ex parte
order, contacting, threatening, or
physically abusing pursuant to chapter
586; or
 
(ii)	 Is being protected by a police officer
ordering the defendant to leave the
premises of that protected person pursuant
to section 709-906(4), during the
effective period of that order.
 
(2)	 Terroristic threatening in the first degree is a
class C felony.
 
Minor's charged law violation was allegedly committed on December
27, 2012. Subsequently, HRS § 707-716 was amended in 2013. However, the
changes involved the use of "simulated firearms," which are not at issue here.
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1)	 With the intent to terrorize, or in reckless
disregard of the risk of terrorizing, another
person[.]
 
HRS § 702-206 (1993) defines the states of mind
 
recognized by the Hawaii Penal Code, including:
 
(3) "Recklessly."
 
(a)	 A person acts recklessly with respect to his conduct
when he consciously disregards a substantial and
unjustifiable risk that the person's conduct is of the
specified nature.
 
(b) 	A person acts recklessly with respect to attendant
circumstances when he consciously disregards a
substantial and unjustifiable risk that such
circumstances exist.
 
(c) 	A person acts recklessly with respect to a result of
his conduct when he consciously disregards a
substantial and unjustifiable risk that his conduct
will cause such a result.
 
(d) 	A risk is substantial and unjustifiable within the
meaning of this section if, considering the nature and
purpose of the person's conduct and the circumstances
known to him, the disregard of the risk involves a
gross deviation from the standard of conduct that a
law-abiding person would observe in the same
situation.[
6] 
Thus, to adjudicate Minor to be a law violator with
 
respect to second degree terroristic threatening, the State was
 
6 In contrast, HRS § 702-206(4) (1993) defines "Negligently":
 
(a) 	A person acts negligently with respect to his conduct
when he should be aware of a substantial and
 unjustifiable risk taken that the person's conduct is
of the specified nature.
 
(b) 	A person acts negligently with respect to attendant
circumstances when he should be aware of a substantial
 and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances exist.
(c) 	A person acts negligently with respect to a result of
his conduct when he should be aware of a substantial
 and unjustifiable risk that his conduct will cause
such a result.
 
(d) 	A risk is substantial and unjustifiable within the
meaning of this subsection if the person's failure to
perceive it, considering the nature and purpose of his
conduct and the circumstances known to him, involves a
gross deviation from the standard of care that a
law-abiding person would observe in the same
situation. 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Minor 
threatened, by word or conduct, to cause bodily injury to Kuewa in reckless disregard of the risk of terrorizing him. In other words, the State was required to prove, under the circumstances presented: Minor's rant on the couch about what he was going to do to Kuewa and other actions (the conduct element); bore the attributes of a "true threat" (the attendant circumstances element); and Minor recklessly disregarded the risk that his remarks would terrorize Kuewa (the requisite state of mind). See 
State v. Valdivia, 95 Hawai
'i 465, 474, 24 P.3d 661, 670 (2001) 
(citations omitted); see also State v. Chung, 75 Haw. 398, 410­11, 862 P.2d 1063, 1070 (1993). These prior Hawai
'i cases are 
helpful in analyzing Minor's argument. 
A. Prior Terroristic Threatening Cases
 
In Chung, the defendant was a teacher and the alleged
 
victim of the terroristic threatening was the principal at his
 
school. 75 Haw. at 402-03, 862 P.2d at 1067. Several witnesses
 gave testimony at grand jury proceedings. One teacher, who had
 been Chung's friend and colleague for over ten years, testified
 that over a course of about four months, Chung became preoccupied
 with the belief that the principal was out to get "weaker
 teachers." Id. at 403, 862 P.2d at 1067. He stated that Chung
 
once displayed a gun and approximately three times spoke in his
 presence about shooting the principal. Id. Chung's statement
 
caused him to be "very concerned, and dismayed, and frightened,
 prompting [him] to try to talk [Chung] out of it." Id. (internal
 
quotation marks omitted). Chung articulated "pretty frightening
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stuff" including: "A day doesn't pass that I don't feel like
 
killing myself. I think I'll bring a gun; I'll shoot the
 principal and shoot myself." Id. at 403-04, 862 P.2d at 1067
 
(internal quotation marks omitted; format altered). 
A second teacher testified that, on the same day, but
 
in a separate incident, Chung had entered his classroom,
 complained of having problems and taking too much medication,
 stated that he was going to shoot the principal, produced a
 loaded semiautomatic pistol and extra clips, and then declared he
 was going to kill the principal and himself. Id. at 404, 862
 
P.2d at 1067. This second teacher was so scared that he "didn't
 know what to do." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). The
 
next morning he reported the incident to the vice principal and
 they notified the police. Id.
 
Also on the same day, Chung approached a third teacher
 
in the lunchroom and said that the administration or principal
 was "out to get him again." Id. at 404, 862 P.2d at 1067-68. 
Chung said, among other things, that "they weren't going to get
 him because he was going to take care of them" and he then
 "pulled out a clip from a .22 [caliber pistol]," asked the
 teacher "if he knew what it was, and said if the principal was
 going to go and if he had to go with him, he would." Id. at 404­
05, 862 P.2d at 1068 (internal quotation marks omitted). This teacher also reported the incident to the vice principal. Id. at 
405, 862 P.2d at 1068. 
A fourth teacher was also approached by Chung that day
 
as the teacher was watching a band concert. Chung expressed a
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
desire to shoot the principal, produced two clips of bullets and
 
asked, "What are you going to do? You going to call the
 policeman?" Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). The teacher
 
reported the incident to the vice principal. Id.
 
On the same day, the principal was informed of two of
 
Chung's threats to shoot him. Id. 
The Honolulu Police Department (HPD) was called the
 
next morning and, while the responding officer was on campus, he
 was informed that Chung had just come onto school property
 despite being placed on administrative leave the day before. Id.
 
at 405-06, 862 P.2d at 1068. Officers met with Chung and
 recovered a semiautomatic pistol and ammunition from him. Id. at
 
406, 862 P.2d at 1068.
 
On the State's appeal from the dismissal of the charges 
against Chung, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that the evidence 
presented to the grand jury was sufficient to support the terroristic threatening charges.
7 Id. at 409-15, 862 P.2d at 
1070-72. In doing so, the supreme court explained: 
In the case of terroristic threatening, a threat
becomes a crime only when it is coupled, inter alia, with a
reckless disregard of the risk of terrorizing. Moreover, to
be subject to criminal prosecution for terroristic
threatening, the threat must be conveyed to either the
 person who is the object of the threat or to a third party. 
An uncommunicated threat, by definition, cannot threaten. A
 
person making threatens does not commit a crime until the
threat is heard by one other than the speaker.
 
[A]ctual terrorization is not a material element of
the offense of terroristic threatening. The question is
whether upon the evidence a reasonable trier of fact might
fairly conclude that the defendant uttered his threats in
 
7
 Chung was charged with two forms of first degree terroristic
threatening, one based on HRS § 707-716(1)(a) (more than one occasion and same
or similar purpose), the second based on HRS § 707-716(1)(c) (against a public
servant). Chung, 75 Haw. at 410, 862 P.2d at 1070.
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reckless disregard of the risk of terrorizing another
person.
 
. . . [T]he key issue is whether Chung acted in
reckless disregard of terrorizing [the principal], i.e.,
whether he consciously disregarded a substantial and
unjustifiable risk that his conduct would result in such
terrorization, when he communicated his threats to the
teachers.
 
Id. at 412-14, 862 P.2d 1071 (citations omitted; format altered).
 
The supreme court pointed to the above-referenced
 
testimony – including the declaration to four fellow teachers
 
that he was going to shoot/kill the principal, the display of the
 pistol and/or ammunition, Chung's presence on campus without
 authorization and in possession of the gun and loaded clips of
 ammunition, and "[s]ignificantly," Chung's query of "[W]hat are
 you going to do?" – in support of its conclusion that there was
 sufficient evidence that Chung consciously disregarded a
 substantial and unjustifiable risk that the principal might learn
 of the threat and be terrorized, and that his disregard of that
 risk involved a gross deviation from the standard of conduct of a
 law-abiding citizen in those circumstances. Id. at 414, 862 P.2d
 
at 1072.
 
The supreme court also rejected Chung's argument that
 
his statements were protected speech under the First Amendment to
 the United States Constitution. Id. at 415, 862 P.2d at 1072. 
The supreme court adopted the Second Circuit Court of Appeals'
 rationale in United States v. Kelner, wherein that court examined
 "whether an unequivocal threat which has not ripened by any overt
 act into conduct in the nature of an attempt is nevertheless
 punishable under the First Amendment, even though it may
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
additionally involve elements of expression." Chung, 75 Haw. at
 
415, 862 P.2d at 1072, citing United States v. Kelner, 534 F.2d
 
1020, 1026 (2d Cir. 1976) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
The courts noted the government's responsibility to ensure
 domestic tranquility, and the proper concerns raised by specific
 threats of physical injury coupled with the opportunity to carry
 out such threats, but nevertheless, stated:
 
The word "threat" excludes statements which are, when
taken in context, not "true threats" because they are
conditional and made in jest[.] Threats punishable
consistently with the First Amendment are only those which
according to their language and context conveyed a gravity
of purpose and likelihood of execution so as to constitute
speech beyond the pale of protected vehement, caustic and
unpleasantly sharp attacks.
 
Proof of a "true threat" focuses on threats which are
 
so unambiguous and have such immediacy that they
convincingly express an intention of being carried out.
 
So long as the threat on its face and in the
circumstances in which it is made is so unequivocal,
unconditional, immediate and specific as to the person
threatened, as to convey a gravity of purpose and
imminent prospect of execution, the statute may
properly be applied.
 
Id. at 417, 862 P.2d at 1072-73 (citations omitted; format
 
altered).
 
The supreme court concluded that no reasonable mind
 
could conclude that Chung's statements did not rise to the level
 of "true threat" because
 
Chung repeatedly expressed to his colleagues the intention
of shooting or killing [the principal]. He did so at the
school that [the principal] administered. He displayed a
handgun and/or ammunition when he uttered his threats.
Finally, the threats were sufficiently unequivocal,
unconditional, immediate, and specific as to convey a
gravity of purpose and an imminent prospect of execution;
that this was the case is amply demonstrated by the facts
that (1) Chung's statements were sufficiently alarming to
impel his fellow teachers to transmit them to the vice
principal (and, in one instance, obliquely to [the
principal] himself) and for the police to be notified, (2)
Chung was in possession of the concealed handgun on the
premises of [the school] at the time of his arrest, and (3)
 
15
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Chung's presence at [the school] was unauthorized at the
time.
 
Id. at 417, 862 P.2d at 1073. Accordingly, Chung's statements
 
were not protected by the First Amendment. Id. 
In Valdivia, the defendant was charged, inter alia,
 
8
with first degree terroristic threatening  stemming from thefollowing facts. A police officer, responding to an accident report, initially found Valdivia sitting on the hood of his car. 95 Hawai
'i at 469-70, 24 P.3d at 665-66. After being told to 
remain where he was, Valdivia dashed toward the open driver's­side door of the vehicle. Id. at 470, 24 P.3d at 666. A 
struggle ensued, with Valdivia striking the officer in the face with his closed fist. Id. The officer pepper sprayed Valdivia, 
to no effect, and as the struggle continued, Valdivia pinned the officer's arm against the steering wheel. Id. Believing that 
Valdivia was pulling a knife, the officer pulled his gun. Id. 
Valdivia threw the car into drive and dragged the officer about thirty yards down the street while the officer attempted to get free. Id. Two other officers chased after the car, which then 
crashed into another vehicle. Id. It took four officers to 
physically overcome and handcuff Valdivia, due to his resistance. Id. Although not charged based on these particular utterances, 
Valdivia asserted several times that he was "going to fucking kill" the police officers. Id. While being transported to the 
hospital for treatment for the pepper spray, with thirty-second 
8
 The "first degree" charge stemmed from the fact that the threats
were directed at a police officer. See HRS § 707-716(1)(c).
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to two minute pauses, Valdivia again repeatedly threatened the
 
transporting officer, Officer Kawelo, saying: "I'm gonna kill
 you, fucker," "I'm gonna kill you," and "You're dead, Officer." 
Id. at 471, 24 P.3d at 667. Because Valdivia was restrained by
 means of a bar that prevented him from moving too much, the
 officer was not worried about these threats and no charges arose
 from them. Id. After Officer Kawelo and another officer
 
escorted Valdivia inside the hospital, while Valdivia sat waiting
 for treatment, he turned to Officer Kawelo and said, "I'm gonna
 kill you and your police uniform." Id. This threat did worry
 
the officer and formed the basis of the terroristic threatening
 charge against Valdivia. Id. 
On appeal from his conviction, citing Chung, Valdivia
 
argued that the prosecution did not adduce substantial evidence
 from which a reasonable person could conclude that his remark to
 Officer Kawelo was so "unequivocal, unconditional, immediate, and
 specific as to the person threatened, as to convey a gravity of
 purpose and imminent prospect of execution, and, therefore, that
 his remark was not a true threat but, rather, constitutionally
 protected speech." Id. at 474, 24 P.3d at 670 (citations and
 
internal quotation marks omitted). Valdivia's argument was,
 essentially, that there was "no realistic prospect" that he would
 "imminently execute" his threat or that he had the ability to do
 so, in light of his being pepper-sprayed, handcuffed, and under
 armed guard. Id. 
The supreme court reviewed its decision in Chung, and
 
the Kelner case, summarizing Chung's guiding principles:
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In other words, inasmuch as a remark, such as a joke
or caustic hyperbole, is not susceptible to an
interpretation that would place an objective, reasonable
recipient, at whom the remark was directed and who was
familiar with the context in which it was uttered, in
reasonable fear for his or her personal safety, it therefore
falls within the ambit of free speech protected both by the
United States and Hawai' i Constitutions and cannot predicate
a terroristic threatening conviction.
 
Thus, we agreed in Chung with the Kelner court that a
remark threatening bodily injury ceases to be
constitutionally protected and ripens into a true threat
when it is objectively susceptible to an interpretation that
could induce fear of bodily injury in a reasonable
recipient, at whom the remark is directed and who is aware
of the circumstances under which the remark was made,
because those circumstances reflect that the threatening
remark was so unequivocal, unconditional, immediate, and
specific as to the person threatened, that it conveyed a
gravity of purpose and imminent prospect of execution.
 
. . . Chung mandates that, in a terroristic
threatening prosecution, the prosecution prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that a remark threatening bodily injury is
a true threat, such that it conveyed to the person to whom
it was directed a gravity of purpose and imminent prospect
of execution. In other words, the prosecution must prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that the alleged threat was
objectively capable of inducing a reasonable fear of bodily
injury in the person at whom the threat was directed and who
was aware of the circumstances under which the remarks were
 uttered.
 
Id. at 475-76, 24 P.3d at 671-72 (citations omitted; format
 
altered).
 
The supreme court rejected the notion that the
 
circumstances rendered Valdivia's remark equivocal, as well as
 
Valdivia's argument that the "imminency" required to establish a
 true threat required "temporal" immediacy. Id. The court looked
 
to Kelner, wherein the Second Circuit explained that it "was a
 threat's gravity of purpose and likelihood of execution that
 ultimately placed it beyond the pale of constitutionally
 protected expression," and a California Supreme Court case, which
 discussed Kelner's requirement that a defendant have the
 "apparent ability" to carry out the threat. Id. at 476-77, 24
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.3d at 672-73 (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
The supreme court opined:
 
We agree with the California Supreme Court that the
imminency required by Kelner, and hence by Chung, can be
established by means other than proof that a threatening
remark will be executed immediately, at once, and without
delay. Rather, as a general matter, the prosecution must
prove that the threat was objectively susceptible to
inducing fear of bodily injury in a reasonable person at
whom the threat was directed and who was familiar with the
 circumstances under which the threat was uttered. Of
 course, one means of proving the foregoing would be to
establish, as in Chung and Kelner, that the threat was
uttered under circumstances that rendered it so unequivocal,
unconditional, immediate, and specific as to the person
threatened, as to convey a gravity of purpose and imminent
prospect of execution. But another would be to establish
 that the defendant possessed the apparent ability to carry
out the threat, such that the threat would reasonably tend
to induce fear of bodily injury in the victim.
 
Id. at 477, 24 P.3d at 673 (citations omitted; format altered).
 
In this light, and "[g]iven the evidence that pepper
 
spray had little or no effect on Valdivia's power of resistance
 
and that it required four police officers to physically apprehend
 him," the supreme court held that the prosecution adduced
 substantial evidence that Valdivia uttered a true threat. Id.
9
 
We also take note of State v. Martins, 106 Hawai 'i 136, 
142, 102 P.3d 1034, 1040 (2004), wherein the supreme court
 confirmed that the "true threat" requirement applies to all
 terroristic threatening prosecutions, whether based on "words,
 conduct, or a combination of the two". Id. at 142, 102 P.3d at
 
1040. In Martins, the charges arose out of an incident that
 began with Martins yelling at a group of dirt bikers who had
 ridden up a hill where Martins was situated, "what are you guys
 
9
 The supreme court nevertheless vacated and remanded the case for a
new trial on the terroristic threatening offense due to errors in the trial
court's instructions to the jury. Valdivia, 95 Hawai' i at 478-79, 24 P.3d at
674-75. 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
doing? Get off of my fucking land because of the cows are
 
starving." Id. at 138, 102 P.3d at 1036. It was not, in fact,
 
Martins's land, but he had reportedly driven there and walked up
 the hill to set up some targets for shooting practice with his
 shotgun. Id. After two of the dirt bikers returned to their
 
truck at the bottom of the hill, while waiting for the third one,
 they heard six to eight gunshots and were scared. Id. When the
 
third biker heard the shots, he ran to the truck, fearing he
 "might get shot or something." Id. 
Martins was charged with various counts and, after a
 
jury trial, found guilty of, inter alia, second degree
 terroristic threatening. Id. at 139, 102 P.3d at 1037. In
 
reviewing the ICA's affirmance of his terroristic threatening
 conviction, the supreme court concluded that the "true threat"
 requirement is not limited to verbal conduct:
 
[I]n accordance with the Valdivia and Chung analyses,
we hold that the requirement of a true threat jury
instruction is not limited to terroristic threatening
prosecutions that are based solely upon verbal conduct, but
rather applies in all such prosecutions, whether the threat
is proved by evidence of verbal expression, motor behavior,
or a combination thereof.
 
It is worth noting that the application of the true
threat requirement to all terroristic threatening cases is
consonant with the constitutional principle underlying
Valdivia and Chung. . . . Inasmuch as physical conduct can
constitute "expression," a terroristic threatening charge
predicated upon physical conduct alone can run afoul of the
first amendment to the United States Constitution unless the
 true threat requirement is equally applied to all such
prosecutions. Thus, as in Chung, our holding herein
salvages the statutes defining terroristic threatening
offenses from unconstitutional overbreadth by narrowly
defining the kind of expressive physical conduct upon which
the prosecution may predicate a charge of terroristic
threatening.
FN7
 
FN7. We also note that this jurisdiction's
pattern jury instruction for terroristic
threatening in the second degree is consistent
with our holding in the present matter,
providing as it does in relevant part and
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
without limitation that "[t]he threat on its
face and in the circumstances which it is made
 must be so unequivocal, unconditional,
immediate, and specific as to the person
threatened, as to convey a gravity of purpose
and imminent prospect of execution."
 
Id. at 144, 102 P.3d at 1042-43 (citations, some
 
internal quotation marks and original brackets omitted).
 
B. The Sufficiency of the Evidence Against Minor
 
Minor's first argument10 is that there was insufficient 
evidence that Minor acted in "reckless disregard" of terrorizing anyone, i.e., that he consciously disregarded a substantial and unjustifiable risk that his words and/or conduct would terrorize Kuewa. We agree. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has stated: 
The difference between the terms 'recklessly' and
'negligent', as usually defined, is one of kind, rather than
of degree. Each actor creates a risk of harm. The reckless
 actor is aware of the risk and disregards it; the negligent
actor is not aware of the risk but should have been aware of
 
it.
 
State v. Pinero, 70 Haw. 509, 522. n.7, 778 P.2d 704, 713 n.7
 
(1989) (citations omitted).
 
There is nothing in the record that directly or
 
inferentially proves that Minor possessed the requisite culpable
 state of mind, i.e., that he was aware that his words or conduct
 created a risk that Kuewa would be terrorized. Particularly in
 light of Kuewa's testimony that he said that Minor was previously
 acting out like a "little girl," the couch-rant described by
 Kimitch might best be described as a temper tantrum by a
 
10
 Minor also posits that he was not deliberately speaking with
Kimitch and therefore he did not actually "communicate" any threat against
Kuewa to a third party. This argument is meritless. See Chung, 75 Haw. at
412, 862 P.2d at 1071 (threat must be "conveyed to either the person who is
the object of the threat or to a third party"; a crime is not committed "until
the threat is heard by one other than the speaker.") (emphasis altered). 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
frustrated and foul-mouthed kid who was reacting, albeit
 
inappropriately, to what he perceived as unjustified, unfair
 punishment. For reasons that are not of record, Minor was housed
 at a shelter for youth experiencing some sort of crisis. He was
 aware that he was not free to leave; he was just given EBT for
 going out-of-bounds. He was aware that raising his voice and
 yelling, like he had done the previous evening, was also cause
 for punishment. The evidence is that he just sat there, punching
 the couch, carrying on with curse words and adolescent taunts
 about how he would show whose dick was bigger, how he was going
 to get Kuewa for punishing him. Notwithstanding the caustic and
 hyperbolic language he used, there is simply no evidence that
 could reasonably support a conclusion that Minor was aware of
 anything but his own childish feelings about the circumstances. 
There is also no evidence in the record to support a
 
conclusion that, in light of his couch-tantrum, Minor was aware
 that his "aggressive" approach to question Kuewa about his
 additional EBTs would risk terrorizing Kuewa. As the Family
 Court clarified, that incident alone did not communicate a
 threat. As discussed above, there is no evidence that Minor was
 aware that his couch-rant created a risk that it might cause
 Kuewa to fear bodily harm. There is no evidence whatsoever that
 Kimitch expressed concern or alarm to Minor that the couch-rant
 might cause Kuewa to be fearful. Kimitch simply told Minor that
 he could not go to the beach until he stopped. Minor stopped. 
They went to the beach. When they returned, Minor angrily
 confronted Kuewa for an explanation, but without getting close
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
enough to hit him, without raising his voice, and without further
 
incident. The evidence in the record, including all reasonable
 inferences, is not sufficient to support the conclusion that
 Minor possessed the requisite reckless state of mind.
 
Nor can we conclude, in light of Chung and Valdivia,
 
that there is sufficient evidence that Minor uttered a "true
 threat" that he intended to inflict bodily harm on Kuewa. As
 explained repeatedly by the supreme court, an alleged threat,
 whether by words or conduct or both, must be a "true threat" to
 withstand constitutional scrutiny and thereby form the basis for
 penal responsibility. In Chung, in a series of at least four
 separate incidents, the defendant repeatedly expressed his
 intention of shooting or killing the principal. He did so at the
 school where they both worked. He displayed a loaded handgun
 and/or ammunition while he uttered his threats. The threats were
 viewed as "sufficiently unequivocal, unconditional, immediate,
 and specific as to convey a gravity of purpose and an imminent
 prospect of execution," as amply demonstrated by the facts that
 his fellow teachers were immediately alarmed enough to report the
 matter, Chung was in possession of a concealed handgun at school
 at the time of his arrest, and his presence at school was
 unauthorized.
 
Contrast that with the facts of this case. A
 
frustrated youth, whose childish actions have been compared to
 that of a "little girl," sits (one time) punching a couch cursing
 obscene, over-the-top, threats to an adult who is not present. 
When told he cannot go to the beach unless he stops, he stops. 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kimitch evidenced no immediate alarm and took Minor to the beach.
 
Even after viewing Minor's "aggressive" approach to Kuewa,
 Kimitch simply went inside to drop his keys, check his messages,
 and get ready for dinner, before conveying Minor's "threat" to
 Kuewa. The "aggressive" approach to Kuewa is not evidence of a
 true threat and, in fact, demonstrates a lack of "gravity of
 purpose" in the prior threat. Minor did not threaten, yell, or
 curse at Kuewa. He did not get too close to him. Minor angrily
 demanded an explanation, which is well within the bounds of free
 expression, and less than thirty seconds later, he walked away,
 into the Shelter. The contrasts with the facts and circumstances
 of Valdivia are equally stark.
 
Finally, the fact of Minor's size, in light of the
 
testimony that Kuewa was three to four inches taller and roughly
 fifty pounds heavier, does not "convey a gravity of purpose and
 an imminent prospect of execution" of Minor's alleged threat. 
Notably, although not dispositive, Kuewa primarily expressed
 concern about a possible "altercation," as opposed to fear of
 bodily injury.
 
24
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Since there was insufficient evidence of a "true
 
threat," as well as insufficient evidence that Minor possessed
 
the requisite culpable state of mind, there was insufficient
 evidence that Minor violated HRS § 707-717. 
Minor's other points on appeal are moot.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Family Court's January 4, 2013
 
Decree is reversed.
 
On the briefs:
 
James S. Tabe
 
Deputy Public Defender
for Minor-Appellant
 
Sonja P. McCullen
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
25
 