NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-13-0000404
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
SCHUYLER G. DeCAIRES, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR NO. 51238)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Schuyler DeCaires (DeCaires) 
appeals from the denial of his request for post-conviction relief 
pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40.1 We 
affirm. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
In 1980, DeCaires was convicted of first-degree rape 
and first-degree robbery. The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court) sentenced DeCaires as a persistent offender to an extended term of life imprisonment with the possibility of parole. DeCaires' convictions and sentence were affirmed by the Hawai
'i Supreme Court in 1982. 
On June 16, 2010, DeCaires filed a petition for post-
conviction relief, arguing that his extended term of imprisonment
 
1The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
violated Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466 (2000). The
 
petition was denied by the Circuit Court and affirmed on appeal. 
On December 2, 2011, almost thirty years after his 
convictions and sentence had become final, DeCaires filed a "Motion for DNA Testing" pursuant to HRS § 844D-121 (2014). In his motion, DeCaires requested DNA testing of the following evidence he claimed was in the custody of Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State): (1) a rape kit collected from the 
complaining witness (CW); (2) the CW's panties; (3) the CW's blouse and any other items used to convict him. 
II.
 
A.
 
Because of DeCaires' delay in bringing this motion,
 
there were no available pre-trial or trial transcripts of the
 underling criminal case. DeCaires testified at a hearing held on
 the motion. According to DeCaires, at his 1980 jury trial, he
 recalled that a tampon was admitted into evidence, which the CW
 testified she had removed. DeCarries asserted that the CW's
 brassiere and panties were also admitted into evidence, and he
 related that the CW said she had taken off her brassiere and
 panties and placed them on the side. He believed the CW
 testified that she put her panties back on after the attack.
 DeCaires did not recall any testimony at trial that the CW's
 attacker had made contact with the CW's brassiere or panties. 
DeCaires recalled testimony regarding a rape kit. DeCaires
 stated that according to the CW's testimony, a rape kit was
 performed on the CW, but not on the day of the attack. He did
 not remember how many days later the rape kit was obtained. 
DeCaires also stated that a medical examiner of some kind had
 testified at trial that "there was traces of male semen in the
 rape kit" and that the rape kit had been moved into evidence at
 trial.
 
On cross-examination, DeCaires agreed that Robert
 
Rapoza (Rapoza) testified at trial: (1) that Rapoza went to high
 school with DeCaires; (2) that Rapoza was at the hiking trail
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with DeCaires before the incident occurred; and (3) that after
 
DeCaires came home that night, DeCaires admitted to Rapoza that
 he "raped a chick[.]" DeCaires also acknowledged that the CW and
 Rapoza both identified him at trial.
 
B.
 
Ida Quinn (Quinn), an evidence supervisor for the
 
Honolulu Police Department (HPD) evidence room, testified that
 she was asked to search for any remaining evidence concerning
 DeCaires' case. Quinn located three evidence sheets concerning:
 (1) a shirt, brassiere, and panties; (2) a beer bottle and
 tampon; and (3) a knife. These items were submitted to the court
 in 1980. Quinn did not find any report documenting HPD's receipt
 of any rape kit or the submission of a rape kit into the HPD
 evidence room in DeCaires' case. Quinn testified that before
 evidence in a case is destroyed, HPD's standard procedure
 requires an authorization in writing from the prosecutor's office
 and a notification in writing from the detective who is handling
 the case. Quinn did not find either of these documents in her
 review of the police reports relating to DeCaires' case. To the
 best of her knowledge, no evidence was destroyed by HPD in
 DeCaires' case.
 
C.
 
Sara Jane Muldoon (Muldoon), an exhibit clerk for the 
Circuit Court Legal Documents Section, testified that she searched for exhibits that were submitted into evidence in DeCaires' case. She found exhibit lists for Decaires' case, including an exhibit list that showed all of the items submitted into evidence at trial. The documents she reviewed indicated that exhibits had been submitted to and then returned by the Hawai
'i Supreme Court as of 1983. Muldoon was unable to locate 
any of the exhibits. In her search for relevant records, Muldoon could only find exhibit disposal lists that went back to 1986; she found no documentation relating to the disposal of the exhibits from the DeCaires' trial. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D.
 
At the close of the testimony, DeCaires' counsel
 
conceded that there was no evidence in the case that could be
 
tested for DNA and therefore, there was no longer an issue under
 HRS Chapter 844D. DeCaires' counsel instead requested that the
 Circuit Court treat DeCaires' Motion for DNA Testing as an HRPP
 Rule 40 motion to dismiss based upon Arizona v. Youngblood, 488
 U.S. 51 (1988), and relevant Hawai
'i case law relating to the 
State's loss or destruction of evidence.
 
III.
 
The Circuit Court subsequently entered its "Order
 
Denying Petitioner's Motion for DNA Testing Pursuant to HRS 
§ 844D-121" (Order Denying Motion for DNA Testing) on March 12,
 2013. In support of this Order, the Circuit Court made the
 following pertinent findings of fact:
 
1. The instant motion requests that the court order
DNA analysis of items Defendant claims were introduced into
evidence at his trial, including the complainant's panties
and blouse, and a "rape kit," consisting of vaginal and anal
swabs, slides and Q-tips.
 
2. As indicated in a police laboratory report dated
February 15, 1978 and signed by Milton Hong, which report
begins at page 61 of State's Exhibit 1 entered into evidence
at the hearing held on January 17, 2013, a pair of blue
jeans, beige panties, and a tampon that were admitted into
evidence at Defendant's trial (according to State's Exhibit
2), were tested for the presence of seminal fluid with
negative results.
[2]
 
3. The only evidence of the existence of a "rape kit"
is the testimony of Defendant at the January 17, 2013
hearing. He testified that, at his trial, the prosecution
called a medical expert who testified that traces of semen
were recovered from a rape kit that was introduced into
evidence.
 
4. Honolulu Police Department evidence room
supervisor Ida Quinn, however, testified at the hearing that
there was no mention of a "rape kit" in any of the three
evidence reports documenting items submitted into evidence
in Defendant's case or any other indication of the existence
of a rape kit in the material she reviewed. She said that
 all of the items listed on the three evidence reports were
 
2The police laboratory report also indicated that the blue jeans and
panties tested positive for the presence of blood and that pubic hair of human
origin with similar physical properties was found on the panties and tampon.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
given to the court on February 19, 1980 -- apparently for
purposes of Defendant's trial.
 
5. State's Exhibit 2, the list of exhibits at Defendant's
trial, is absent any reference to a rape kit being either marked
for identification or admitted into evidence at the trial.
 
6. Having considered all of the evidence, the court
finds that Defendant's testimony concerning the existence of
a rape kit is not credible and that there was in fact no
rape kit prepared in connection with his case.
 
7. The other items Defendant seeks to analyze are not
available for testing. Searches for them were conducted at
 both the Honolulu Police Department Evidence Room and the
First Circuit Court, but none of the items could be located.
 
8. The unavailability of this evidence was not the
result of bad faith on the part of the Honolulu Police
Department, the prosecutor, or the court.
 
9. There is no evidence that the prosecution withheld
from Defendant, as a matter of pretrial discovery, any of
the material included in State's Exhibit 1, or precluded
defense access to any of the items of evidence listed on
State's Exhibit 2.
 
10. The Court finds the testimony of Ida Quinn and
Jane Muldoon credible.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Based on these findings, the Circuit Court denied
 
DeCaires' motion for DNA testing pursuant to HRS § 844D-121
 
because the evidence sought to be analyzed did not still exist in
 a condition that permits DNA analysis. The Circuit Court also
 denied DeCaires' claim under HRPP Rule 40 that the unavailability
 of evidence for DNA analysis should result in the reversal of his
 conviction and dismissal of his case. This appeal followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Citing Youngblood and State v. Matafeo, 71 Haw. 183, 
787 P.2d 671 (1990), DeCaires argues that the State's failure to preserve his trial evidence violated his due process rights and requires that his convictions be vacated. In Matafeo, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that "[i]n certain circumstances, 
regardless of good or bad faith, the State may lose or destroy material evidence which is 'so critical to the defense as to make a criminal trial fundamentally unfair' without it." Matafeo, 71 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Haw. at 187, 787 P.2d at 673 (citation omitted). We conclude
 
that DeCaires' reliance on Youngblood and Matafeo is misplaced
 and that his argument is without merit.
 
As DeCaires acknowledges, Youngblood and Matafeo dealt 
with the situation where evidence is lost or destroyed before trial. In that situation, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court in Matafeo 
concluded that dismissal of charges against a defendant may be warranted where the evidence that is lost or destroyed is so critical to the defense as to make a criminal trial fundamentally unfair without it. In this case, however, we are not dealing with the pre-trial loss of evidence; DeCaires was tried and convicted long ago. Instead, we are dealing with a situation in which DeCaires waited more than thirty years after his trial to seek DNA testing and now claims that his convictions must be overturned because the trial evidence he claims once existed and wants to test cannot be located. 
II.
 
The due process rights of a person convicted after
 
trial are not as extensive as the rights of a person pending
 trial, who is clothed with the presumption of innocence. See
 
District Attorney's Office for the Third Judicial Dist. v.
 Osborne, 557 U.S. 52, 68-69 (2009).
 
A criminal defendant proved guilty after a fair trial
does not have the same liberty interests as a free man. At
 
trial, the defendant is presumed innocent and may demand
that the government prove its case beyond reasonable doubt.
But "[o]nce a defendant has been afforded a fair trial and
convicted of the offense for which he was charged, the
presumption of innocence disappears."
 
Id. (citation omitted; brackets in original). Thus, a convicted
 
person is not entitled to assert "certain familiar preconviction
 trial rights," such as the right to disclosure of exculpatory
 evidence set forth in Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963), in
 pursuing post-conviction relief. Id.; see Bowling v.
 
Commonwealth, 357 S.W.3d 462, 466 (Ky. 2010). Youngblood and
 
Matafeo, which are based on preconviction trial rights of a 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defendant to exculpatory and potentially exculpatory evidence,
 
are inapposite. 
In Osborne, the Supreme Court held that States have
 
more flexibility in determining what procedures are needed in the
 context of postconviction relief than in the preconviction
 context. Id. at 69. A State's postconviction procedures satisfy
 
due process unless they "offend[] some principle of justice so
 rooted in the traditions and conscience of our people as to be
 ranked as fundamental, . . . transgress[] any recognized
 principle of fundamental fairness in operation[,]" or "are
 fundamentally inadequate to vindicate the substantive rights
 provided." Id. (internal quotation marks and citations omitted).
 
III. 
Hawai
'i has enacted HRS Chapter 844D to address the 
claims raised by DeCaires in his request for post-conviction relief. In particular, HRS Chapter 844D, Part XI establishes procedures for post-conviction DNA testing. DeCaires does not contend that the procedures established by Hawai
'i pursuant to 
HRS Chapter 844D, Part XI violate due process. He also conceded in the Circuit Court that the trial evidence he sought no longer existed in a condition that permitted DNA analysis and therefore, his motion for DNA testing under HRS Chapter 844D was moot.
3 
3HRS § 844D-123 (2014) provides, in relevant part:
 
(a) The court shall order testing after a hearing if it
finds that:
 
(1)	 A reasonable probability exists that the defendant
would not have been prosecuted or convicted if
exculpatory results had been obtained through DNA
analysis, even if the defendant later pled guilty or
no contest;
 
(2)	 Identity was or should have been an issue in the
proceeding that led to the verdict or sentence;
 
(3)	 The evidence sought to be analyzed has been identified
with particularity and still exists in a condition
that permits DNA analysis; provided that questions as
to the chain of custody of the evidence shall not
constitute grounds to deny the motion if the testing
itself can establish the integrity of the evidence;
 
(continued...)
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 844D-126 (2014) establishes requirements for the
 
retention of biological evidence after a judgment of conviction
 
has been entered. HRS § 844D-126 provides:
 
(a) All evidence in the custody or control of a
police department, prosecuting attorney, laboratory, or
court that is related to the investigation or prosecution of
a case in which there has been a judgment of conviction and
that may contain biological evidence that could be used for
DNA analysis shall be retained at least until the later
occurring of either:
 
(1)	 The exhaustion of all appeals of the case to
which the evidence is related; or
 
(2)	 The completion of any sentence, including any
term of probation or parole, imposed on the
defendant in the case to which the evidence
 relates.
 
(b) The attorney general shall establish procedures
and protocols, which shall be uniform throughout the State,
for the collection and preservation of evidence retained
pursuant to this section.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
However, HRS Chapter 844D, Part XI, including HRS 
§ 844D-123, was enacted in 2005, was not made retroactive, and
 
went into effect on July 1, 2005. 2005 Haw. Sess. L. Act 112, 
§§ 1, 7 at 290-94, 296. DeCaires does not contend, and there is
 no evidence indicating, that any trial evidence containing
 biological evidence that could be used for DNA analysis was lost
 or destroyed after July 1, 2005. Accordingly, there is no
 showing that the State violated the procedures for retention of
 evidence established by HRS § 844D-123, and DeCaires cannot
 assert a violation of his due process rights based on HRS § 844D­123. 
3(...continued)
(4)	 The evidence was not previously subjected to DNA
analysis or was not subjected to analysis that can now
resolve an issue not resolved by previous analysis;
and
 
(5)	 The application for testing is made for the purpose of
demonstrating innocence and not to unreasonably delay
the execution of sentence or administration of
 justice.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In any event, the Circuit Court found that the rape kit
 
that DeCaires alleged had been prepared never existed and that
 
"there was in fact no rape kit prepared in connection with his
 case." We conclude that this finding was not clearly erroneous. 
DeCaires cannot rely on the alleged loss or destruction of a non­existent rape kit as the basis for his claim for post-conviction
 relief. In addition, whether DNA analysis of the other trial
 evidence would have identified the attacker or provided evidence
 favorable to DeCaries is uncertain. The Circuit Court found that
 according to available reports, a pair of blue jeans, beige
 panties, and a tampon that were admitted into evidence at
 DeCaires' trial were tested for the presence of seminal fluid
 with negative results. DeCaires also presented no evidence that
 the CW's attacker had come into contact with such trial evidence. 
Under the circumstances of this case, we conclude that DeCaires'
 claim for post-conviction relief is without merit.
 
CONCLUSION 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Order Denying Motion for 
DNA Testing. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 30, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Randall K. Hironaka 
(Miyoshi & Hironaka)for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
James M. Anderson Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9
 