NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0004535
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE METCALFE
 
TRUST DATED FEBRUARY 19, 1992
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(TRUST NO. 10-1-0004(2))

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Respondent-Appellant Chad T. Metcalfe (Metcalfe), the
 
former trustee of the [Jerome E.] Metcalfe Trust dated February
 
19, 1992, as amended (Trust), appeals from the September 26, 2013
 
Judgment (Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court of the Second
 
Circuit (Circuit Court).1
 
Metcalfe raises three points of error on appeal,
 
contending that the Circuit Court erred: (1) when it denied
 
Metcalfe's February 15, 2013 motion to vacate arbitration award,
 which motion asserted that the arbitrator exceeded his powers in
 entering the award; (2) when it denied Metcalfe's March 28, 2013
 petition for order to prohibit further trust account
 distributions, in conjunction with its denial of Metcalfe's
 motion to vacate; and (3) when it entered its September 26, 2013
 order granting Petitioner/Trustee-Appellee Tonia M. Finbraaten's
 
1
 The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presiding.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Finbraaten's) motion to confirm arbitration decisions and award
 
and for entry of final judgment.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Metcalfe's points of error as follows:
 
It is undisputed that, after roughly nine months of
 
litigation in the proceedings below, on or about January 10,
 2012, Metcalfe, Finbraaten, and other family members, entered
 into an Agreement to Arbitrate, which stated, inter alia:
 
All issues, claims, disputes, and/or matters
pertaining to the Trust and Decedent's estate, including,
but not limited to: Chad Metcalfe's previous administration
of the Trust; the potential surcharge of Chad Metcalfe; the
transfer and operation of the Ale House Restaurant; the
amounts to be distributed to beneficiaries; issues and
claims that remain pending in the Trust Lawsuit; and/or
other issues pertaining to the Trust and/or Decedent's
estate, shall be submitted to binding arbitration under the
procedures and terms and conditions set forth under this
Agreement.
 
Metcalfe's argument that, pursuant to Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) ยง 65A-23(a)(4), the arbitration award should have 
been vacated because the arbitrator exceeded his powers in 
entering the award is without merit. The decisions and awards entered by the arbitrator fall squarely within the broad scope of the parties' Agreement to Arbitrate. The arbitrator did not manifestly disregard the Trust document and we decline to review whether, in entering decisions and awards, the arbitrator misinterpreted the Trust document and/or misapplied its terms. See Daiichi Hawai
'i Real Estate Corp. v. Lichter, 103 Hawai 'i 325, 
336, 82 P.3d 411, 422 (2004) ("[W]here the parties agree to arbitrate, they thereby assume all the hazards of the arbitration process, including the risk that the arbitrators may make mistakes in the application of law and in their findings of fact.") (citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted; format altered). 
Metcalfe's argument that the Agreement to Arbitrate is
 
unconscionable was not raised at any point in the proceedings
 below and, upon review, we decline to consider it for the first
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
time on appeal. See HRS ยง 641-2 (Supp. 2013); see also, e.g., 
Ass'n of Apt. Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100 
Hawai'i 97, 108, 58 P.3d 608, 619 (2002) ("Legal issues not 
raised in the trial court are ordinarily deemed waived on appeal.") (citations omitted). 
Metcalfe's contention that the Circuit Court erred in
 
denying his motion to prohibit further distributions from the
 Trust is dependent on his arguments concerning the confirmation
 of the arbitration award and, therefore, does not warrant relief.
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's Septemer 26,
 
2013 Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 22, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Chad T. Metcalfe 
Respondent-Appellant Pro Se
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Matthew V. Pietsch

 
for Petitioner/Trustee-Appellee 
Tonia M. Finbraaten
 
3
 