 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000128 20-DEC-2023 01:44 PM Dkt. 101 MO 
NO.  
CAAP-22-0000128  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
K.T., Petitioner-Appellant,  
v.  
K.H., Respondent-Appellee  
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO.  1DA211002876)  
 
 
 MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.) 
This matter arises from Petitioner -Appellant K.T.'s 
(mother) petition for a protective order based on allegations of 
domestic abuse. Mother appeals from the Order Dissolving 
Temporary Restraining Order ( Order), entered by the Family Court 
of the First Circuit1 (family court ) on February 15, 2022. Upon 
careful review of the record and the brief submitted by mother, 
and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and 
1 The Honorable Rebecca A. Copeland presid ed over the trial , and 
entered the Order .   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the issues raised, we vacate and remand for further proceedings 
consistent with this memorandum opinion. 
I. Background 
Mother filed a Petition for an Order for Protection 
(mother's petition ), pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) 
§ 586-3 (2018), against Respondent -Appellee K.H. ( father). In 
addition to herself, mother's petition also listed her minor son 
and minor daughter (collectively, the children ), as protected 
persons. Mother's petition listed five allegations of abuse, 
and requested a six -year protective order, temporary visitation 
and custody orders, and a temporary prohibition of visitation 
between the children and father. 
The family court approved and filed an ex parte 
Temporary Restraining Order ( TRO), which was amended to ensure 
the inclusion of the two children. The family court ordered the 
State of Hawai ʻi, Department of Human Services ( DHS) to 
investigate the matter and submit a written report to the family 
court; the family court further ordered the investigating DHS 
social worker to appear to testify at the return hearing. 
DHS, through DHS social worker Jacqueline Espinueva -
Xiong (the DHS worker ), filed its Report ( the DHS Report ) with 
the family court on January 10, 2022. The DHS Report included 
the DHS worker's findings, based inter alia , on interviews with 
the parties and the children. The DHS Report found the 
allegations of abuse in mother's petition to be "unconfirmed." 
2   
 
  
 
    
  
 
 
   
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The family court held a return hearing on mother's 
petition, in which both parties, their counsel, and the DHS 
worker were present. At the hearing, father did not agree to 
mother's request for a six -year protective order, and the family 
court set the matt er for trial. Father orally moved for 
mother's petition to be dismissed, and for mother to be taken 
into custody for violation of a prior family court order in the 
related paternity case. The family court denied father's 
motions. Mother orally moved the family court to conduct a 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence ( HRE) Rule 104 hearing,2 and requested 
that the family court permit the children to testify at trial. 
The family court denied mother's requests. 
Trial commenced in January 2022. At trial, the family 
court heard testimony from the DHS worker, mother, mother's 
boyfriend, father, and father's girlfriend. The family court 
found the DHS worker, father, and father's girlfriend to be 
credible witnesses; the family court also found the D HS Report 
to be credible. The family court found mother and mother's 
boyfriend not to be credible witnesses. 
2 HRE Rule 104 (a) provides, in relevant part, that "[p]reliminary 
questions concerning the qualification of a person to be a witness, the 
existence of a privilege, or the admissibility of evidence shall be 
determined by the court, subject to the provisions of subsection (b) ." HRE 
Rule 104(b) states that, "[w]hen the relevancy of evidence depends upon the 
fulfillment of a condition of fact, the court shall admit it upon, or subject 
to, the introduction of evidence sufficient to support a finding of the 
fulfillment of the condition." 
3   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Following the trial, the family court issued the 
Order, which dissolved and vacated with prejudice mother's TRO, 
based on insufficient evidence. The family court made the 
following unchallenged findings of fact ( FOF),  
100. The court finds that [mother] has not proven 
the material allegations of the Petition by a preponderance 
of the evidence. 
101. The court finds that [father] has shown cause 
why a protective order is not necessary. 
102. The court finds that a protective order is not 
necessary to prevent domestic abuse or the recurrence of 
abuse. 
103. Therefore, the court finds that the TRO should 
be dissolved and dismissed with prejudice for insufficient 
evidence. 
The family court also made the following conclusions 
of law (COL),  
46. [Mother] failed to meet her burden to establish 
that [father] committed domestic abuse against her or the 
parties' two minor children. 
47. [Mother] failed to meet her burden to establish 
that either of her children were subjected to imminent 
physical harm. 
48. [Mother] failed to meet her burden to establish 
that [father] committed extreme psychological abuse against 
her or the parties' two minor children. 
49. [Mother] did not establish that [father] 
committed coercive control against her or the parties' two 
minor children. 
50. "It is well -established that imposing discipline 
is part and parcel of caring for children, since a parent 
may not be able to care properly for, or exercise control 
over, an unruly child without the ability to impose 
discipline." Hamilton v. Lethem, 126 Haw. 294, 302, 270 
P.3d 1024, 1032 (2012). 
51. Although [father] did not raise the parental 
discipline defense, to the extent that this Court has found 
that none of his interactions with his children rise to the 
level of domestic abuse but to the extent that those 
actions, statements, and interactions may be construed as 
4   
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
parental discipline, his ability to discipline his children 
in such manner is constitutionally protected. Id. 
52. The Family Court does not err in determining 
that a protective order is not necessary to prevent the 
recurrence of abuse where "[t ]here is no evidence in the 
record, and no reasonable inferences could be drawn from 
the evidence, to support a conclusion that the incident was 
anything other than an isolated event." Schack v. 
Kassebeer, NO. CAAP -17-0000353, 142 Haw. 359, at *2, 418 
P.3d 1215 (App. May 31, 2018). 
53. [Mother] failed to meet her burden to establish 
that a protective order was necessary to prevent domestic 
abuse or the recurrence of abuse. 
54. [Mother] failed to prove the material 
allegations of the Petition by a preponderance of the 
credible evidence. 
55. Therefore, the TRO, filed December 29, 2021, is 
dissolved and vacated with prejudice for insufficient 
evidence. 
Mother raises five points of error on appeal. We 
consider these points in turn.  
 
 II. Discussion 
A. The Children's Testimony 
Mother first contends that "the family court erred in 
its[] [oral] ruling prohibiting the minor children from being 
allowed to testify without first holding a hearing under [Hawai ʻi 
Family Court Rule (HFCR)] Rule 45.1." Mother contends that this 
ruling was clearly erroneous, constituted an abuse of the family 
court's discretion, and violated her right to substantive and 
procedural due process of law. Mother asserts a 
constitutionally protected interest in present ing her case on 
the merits, and in the pres entation of "key eye witnesses[']" 
testimony at trial. 
5   
 
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We review the family court's rulings under the abuse 
of discretion standard. "Generally, the family court possesses 
wide discretion in making its decisions and those decisions will 
not be set aside unless there is a manifest abuse of 
discretion." In re Doe , 95 Hawaiʻi 183, 189, 20 P.3d 616, 622 
(2001) ( cleaned up ). "[W]e will not disturb the family court's 
decision s on appeal unless the family court disregarded rules or 
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a 
party litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of 
reason." Id. (cleaned up). 
HFCR Rule 45.1 requires family court approval before a 
child is summoned to appear as a witness. HFCR Rule 45.1 
("Prior approval must be obtained from the court before any 
child is summoned to appear as a witness so that the court may 
determine whether to allow the testimony of the child and the 
form and manner in which the child's testimony will be 
permitted."). "In determining whether limitations on a child 
testifying violates a parent's due process rights, the[] Family 
Court must balance competing interests, including the interest 
of the parent at stake, the parent's need for the child's 
testimony, and the best interests of the child."   In re K 
Children, No. CAAP-11-0000805, 2013 WL 6244722, at *3 (Haw. App. 
Dec. 16, 2013) (SDO)  (citing In re Doe Children, 85 Hawaiʻi 119, 
6   
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
123, 938 P.2d 178, 182 (App. 1997) ; HRS § 587A -21(d) (Supp. 
2012)). 
The record reflects that the family court denied 
mother's request that the children be permitted to testify. The 
family court stated that it was denying mother's request because 
it had admitted the children's statements into evidence via the 
DHS Report, b ut it did not provide any further explanation as to 
whether it had balanced the competing interests, i.e., mother's 
interests, mother's need for the children's testimony, and the 
best interest of the children. In the absence of such 
explanation, we cannot conclude that the family court properly 
exercised its discretion to deny mother's request. 
The DHS Report provided son's account of the alleged 
abuse, as narrated by the DHS worker, including son's 
representation that he did not want to return to father's care, 
[Son] spoke to this DHS worker privately but was brief and 
did not have much eye contact with the worker; and [DHS 
worker] noticed he was shaking his head throughout the 
interview when [DHS worker] inquired about his 
father/mother. [Son] began by saying he did not want to go 
back to his Father. He continued to say, ["]No", and shook 
his head when asked further. 
 . . . . 
When asked about an alleged incident ([father] threatened 
to strangle [daughter]) with [daughter], [son] claims they 
went out to dine with his Father, family friend, friend's 
adult daughter, and [daughter]. They were walking back to 
their car when his Fat her saw the window car down 
([daughter] had forgotten to close the car window), and he 
attested his Father said he was going to "strangle" 
[daughter] . When asked further, [son] shook his head again 
and did not answer. 
[Son] did not disclose any physical abuse by his Father and 
asked again if he was fearful of his Father, shaking his 
7   
 
  
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
head, saying that he refused to go back to his Father. It 
appeared he was in a rush to end the conversation, barely 
having any eye contact with this DHS worker. 
(Emphasis added.) 
  The DHS Report also provided daughter's account of the 
alleged abuse, as narrated by the DHS worker, including 
daughter's representation that father told her he would 
"strangle" her, and that she did not want to return to father's 
care,  
When asked about the specific allegations on 08/06/21, 
[daughter] said she approached her mother one day when 
there were people in the home. She told her mother that 
her Father told her she [sic] would "strangle" her. She 
relates that the family went out for dinner that included 
[son], a family friend, and her 20 -year-old daughter, and 
when they got into the car, [her] Father yelled at her and 
told her that if she ever left the window down again, he 
would "strangle." She later corrected herself and said, 
"choke." Worker asked if [sic] what had happened next, and 
[daughter] said nothing happened after the incident. 
[Daughter] reports she is not fearful of her Father; 
however, she does not want to return to him. 
 . . . . 
At the end of the conversation, [daughter] disclosed she 
did not want to return to her Father's house; she sounded 
conflicted, and later said she wanted a visit with her 
father "only one hour." When asked if there was anything 
else, she wanted to express to this worker, [daughter] 
repeated that she wanted to see her Father for "only for 
one hour." 
(Emphasis added.) 
The record contains no explanation by the family court 
as to why it would be in the children's best interest to rely 
solely on the DHS worker's account of their representations.  3  
3 We further note that the children's statements in the DHS Report 
were challenged below. Mother's boyfriend testified that both children wrote 
statements rebutting the DHS Report ; the family court did not admit these 
(continued . . .) 
8   
 
   
  
  
 
    
 
  
 
  
 
 
     
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
There is no explanation in the record as to why the children, 
who were 14 and 12 years old at the time, would be harmed by 
testifying. Nor is there any explanation that reflects 
consideration of whether permitting the children to testify 
might have, conve rsely, furthered their best interests in the 
context of this HRS chapter 586 protective order case. We 
observe that the DHS Report, while it found the "threat of abuse 
and threatened neglect" to be unconfirmed, did not directly 
address the definition of " domestic abuse" in HRS § 586-1 (Supp. 
2020) which includes, among other things, "extreme psychological 
abuse."4 Although it may consider the DHS Report, the family 
court must nevertheless balance competing interests when 
deciding whether children may testify . Here, there is no 
explanation as to why, on balance, the children's testimony 
should not have been admitted to address whether "a protective 
order [was] necessary to prevent domestic abuse or a recurrence 
of abuse[.]" HRS § 586-5.5(a) (2018) . 
3(. . .continued) 
statements into evidence. Further, as discussed infra, the family court 
issued a ruling that only permitted witnesses to testify if they had direct 
knowledge of the allegations in the petition, and also precluded admission of 
a video exhibit purportedly made by son on hearsay grounds; yet the court did 
not allow the children (who were present for some allegations in mother's 
petition) to testify . On remand, the family court should consider these 
circumstances as part of assessing the need for the children's testimony. 
4 HRS § 586 -1 (Supp. 2020) defines "domestic abuse" to include 
"[p]hysical harm, bodily injury, assault, or the threat of imminent physical 
harm, bodi ly injury, or assault, extreme psychological abuse, coercive 
control, or malicious property damage between family or household members [.]" 
9   
 
  
   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We conclude, on this record, that the family court 
abused its discretion by summarily denying mother's request for 
children to testify without balancing the competing interests of 
mother and the children.  
B. The DHS Worker's Testimony and Report 
Mother contends that "the family court erred by 
admitting into evidence the testimony of the DHS worker and her 
report" because the DHS worker was not qualified in court as an 
expert in domestic violence, the DHS worker's testimony was 
irrelevant, and the DHS Report contained hearsay and was not a 
final disposition. Mother specifically challenges the following conclusions of law,  
11. According to Chapter 586: "Reports by the 
department of human services; court responsibilities. In 
cases where there are allegations of domestic abuse 
involving a family or household member who is a minor or an 
incapacitated person as defined in sect ion 560:5 -102, the 
employee or appropriate nonjudicial agency designated by 
the family court to assist the petitioner shall report the 
matter to the department of human services, as required 
under chapters 350 and 587, and shall further notify the 
departme nt of the granting of the temporary restraining 
order and of the hearing date. The department of human 
services shall provide the family court with a written 
report on the disposition of the referral. The court shall 
file the report and mail it to the pe titioner and 
respondent at least two working days before the hearing 
date, if possible. If circumstances prevent the mailing of 
the report as required in this section, the court shall 
provide copies of the report to the petitioner and 
respondent at the he aring. The report shall be noted in 
the order dismissing the petition or granting the 
restraining order." HRS § 586 -10.5. 
 . . . . 
13. Pursuant to Section 586 -10.5, which requires 
this Court to "note[] [the DHS written report] in the order 
dismissing the petition or granting the restraining order," 
this court did not err or otherwise abuse its discretion in 
considering the DHS Social Worker's Report, filed on 
January 10, 2022. 
10   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
14. Because this Court was statutorily required to 
consider the DHS Social Worker's Report, this Court did not 
err or otherwise abuse its discretion in having the Social 
Worker testify at trial. 
15. Because this Court was statutorily required to 
consider the DHS Social Worker's Report, it did not err or 
otherwise abuse its discretion in entering the Report as 
the Court's Exhibit "1" at trial. 
16. The Social Worker's Report, filed on January 10, 
2022, was not inadmissible based upon hearsay. 
17. The Social Worker's Report was not inadmissible 
under HRS 587A. 
. . . . 
19. The court did not err or otherwise abuse its 
discretion in allowing the Social Worker to testify as to 
the Report, filed January 10, 2022, the contents of the 
Report or the Social Worker's investigation, or any 
information contained in the Report. 
20. Nothing in the Report filed January 10, 2022, or 
the Social Worker's testimony was otherwise impermissibly 
confidential such that it should not have been allowed at 
trial or considered by this Court. To the contrary, this 
Court is statutor y [sic] required in domestic abuse cases 
when there are allegations of domestic abuse or the threat 
of domestic abuse against a child or children to refer the 
matter to the DHS for investigation, this Court is 
statutorily mandated to require the DHS to submit a wr itten 
report to the court regarding the disposition of the 
referral, this Court is statutorily required to file the 
report in the case, and it is required to consider the 
report in making its decision to granting or dismissing the 
petition. See HRS § 586 -10.5. 
21. [Mother] did not make any legally viable 
objections that prevented this Court from considering the 
Social Worker's Report or testimony, or in admitting the 
Social Worker's Report into evidence. 
We conclude that the above conclusions of law are not 
wrong. Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawaiʻi 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 
(2006) ("the family court's COLs are reviewed on appeal de novo, 
under the right/wrong standard"). The family court did not err 
in admitting the DHS Report. The DHS Report is a "final 
disposition."   HRS § 586-10.5 (2018) requires that the 
11   
 
   
   
  
  
 
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"department of human services shall provide the family court 
with a written report on the disposition of the referral" and 
further provides that "[t]he report shall be noted in the order 
dismissing the petition or granting the restraining order." 
The family court verified at trial, on January 12 and 19, 2022, 
that the DHS Report was the DHS worker's final disposition in 
compliance with HRS § 586 -10.5. The DHS Report found the threat 
of abuse and threatened neglect to the children to be 
"unconfirmed."5 
The TRO directed that the "Dept. of Human Services is 
ordered to investigate this matter, submit a written report to 
the Court, and the investigating social worker shall appear to 
testify at the hearing." The DHS Report, which contains third -
party statements, falls within the public record hearsay 
exception. HRE Rule 803(b)(8)(C) (permitting "in civil 
proceedings" the admission of public records and reports 
containing "factual findings resulting from an investigation 
made pursuant to authority granted by law"); State v. Abrigo , 
144 Hawaiʻi 491, 493, 445 P.3d 72, 74 (2019) ("An exception to 
the evidentiary rule against hearsay typically allows public 
records to be admitted into evidence to prove the truth of their 
5 The DHS worker testified that "unconfirmed" means "that there is 
no risk of abuse to the kids or neglect." 
12   
 
  
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contents, as such documents are generally presumed to be 
accurate and reliable."). 
The family court did not err, moreover, in admitting 
the DHS worker's testimony at trial. "Whether expert testimony 
should be admitted at trial rests within the sound discretion of 
the trial court and will not be overturned unless there is a 
clear abuse o f discretion." State v. Fukagawa , 100 Hawai ʻi 498, 
503, 60 P.3d 899, 904 (2002) (citations omitted). The DHS 
worker testified as to her experience in handling investigations 
and TRO cases as an "investigator assessment worker for 20 
years" and as a DHS s ocial worker since 2012. HRS § 587A -19 
(2018) provides that "[a] person employed by the department as a 
social worker in the area of child protective services or child 
welfare services shall be presumed to be qualified to testify as 
an expert on child pro tective or child welfare services." 
Admission of the DHS worker's testimony, on this record, did not 
constitute abuse of discretion. 
C. Rulings Regarding Legal Memoranda and Witness Testimony 
Mother contends that "the family court erred in its[] 
rulings that counsel could not file memoranda and that only 
witnesses who were present at the allegations in the petition 
could testify during the hearing [.]" The family court informed 
13   
 
  
   
  
 
 
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel below that no legal memoranda would be admitted6  in the 
specific context of denying mother's request for the setting of 
an HRE Rule 104 hearing.7   We conclude, on this record, that the 
family court did not abuse its discretion by informing counsel 
6 The family court ruled as follows, 
MS. KAWAUCHI [Mother's counsel]: My motion is 
to request that this -- this case be set also for a 
104 hearing so that offers of proof can be made for 
the witnesses to testify and for evidence to be 
presented.  
 
 And the reason why I ask for that, Your Honor, 
is because of the number of witnesses I'm asking for, 
and I want the Court to have ample time to consider 
my offers of proof before I call them on Wednesday 
and have, you know, the Court's calendar there taken with so many of them.  
  But I'd like to set it for a 104 prior to the 
start of the trial so that we can clear up any -- clear up any memorandum or -- that you might want to 
consider. I am -- I can file memos -- 
 
THE COURT: There will -- 
 
MS. KAWAUCHI: -- by Friday -- 
 
THE COURT: -- be no memos in this case. This 
is a DA [domestic abuse] case. No memos will be 
permitted.  
 
MS. KAWAUCHI: Okay. All right. So offers of 
proof, then, you would like to be made orally at the 
time -- 
 
THE COURT: I'll explain -- 
 
MS. KAWAUCHI: -- (indiscern ible)?  
 THE COURT: -- when I will have those made.  
 
MS. KAWAUCHI: Okay.  
 
THE COURT: I'm not going to set it for a 104 
hearing.  
7 Mother does not appeal from the family court's decision to deny 
the HRE Rule 104 hearing. 
14   
 
  
    
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that legal memoranda would not be permitted on a matter that the 
family court had already resolved when it denied the request for 
an HRE Rule 104 hearing.  
We further conclude that the family court did not err 
in not permitting witnesses to testify "[i]f they were not 
present for and thus do not have direct knowledge of the 
allegations in the petition [.]" HRE Rule 602, which is 
instructive here, 
provides that "[a] witness may not testify to a matter 
unless evidence is introduced sufficient to support a 
finding that the witness has personal knowledge of the 
matter." The Commentary to HRE Rule 602 explains that, 
"'Personal knowledge,' for purposes of this rule, means 
that the witness perceived the event about which he testifies." In other words, witnesses may not testify 
based on "guesswork" or "speculation," such as when the 
witness concludes that a fact "must have" been true. See  
Addison M. Bowman, 
Hawaiʻi Rules of Evidence Manual § 602-
1[5] (2012).  
State v. Apollonio , 130 Hawaiʻi 353, 361, 311 P.3d 676, 684 
(2013) (cleaned up) ; see also HRE Rule 602 cmt . ("Evidence of 
personal knowledge is a general foundation requirement for 
admissibility of all evidence[.]"). The family court did not 
abuse its discretion in requiring, consistent with HRE Rule 602, 
that testifying witnesses must have direct, firsthand knowledge 
of the events that they were testifying to. 
D. Video Evidence 
Mother contends that "the family court erred in 
refusing to admit into evidence videos made by minor child on 
the ground that the videos were made in contemplation of 
15   
 
  
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
litigation where the record shows that the court failed to 
review the entire exhibit before making its ruling[.]"   Mother 8 
8 Mother contends that the family court abused its discretion in 
making this ruling, and challenges FOF 49, 50, 51, 53, and 57, and COL 30, 
31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, an d 38. These FOF and COL state, 
[FOF] 49. Over objection by [father] , the court initially 
received into evidence the videos proffered by [mother] 
during [mother's boyfriend's] testimony. 
[FOF] 50. However, upon commencement of the first such 
video, the parties' son stated that he was speaking for 
himself and his sister because his sister is nervous about 
the court thing. 
[FOF] 51. The court immediately ordered the video to cease 
being played, and reversed its prior to decision to receive 
the videos into evidence. 
. . . . 
[FOF] 53. The court further finds the statement made by the 
son at the onset of the first such video made it clear that 
the proffered videos were in fact made in contemplation of 
pending or anticipated litigation, were made at the 
instigation of [mother] , and therefore also not made in 
good faith. 
. . . . 
[FOF] 57. Rather, the court finds that the videos were not 
made until well after the alleged events, and clearly in 
contemplation of pending or anticipated litigation. 
. . . . 
[COL] 30. HRE Rule 804 governs exceptions to the hearsay 
rule where the declarant is unavailable. 
[COL] 31. Under HRE Rule 804(a), in part, the 
unavailability of a witness "includes situations in which 
the declarant: (1) Is exempted by ruling of the court on 
the ground of privilege from testi fying concerning the 
subject matter of the declarant's statement; (2) Persists 
in refusing to testify concerning the subject matter of the 
declarant's statement despite an order of the court to do 
so; (3) Testifies to a lack of memory of the subject matter 
of the declarant's statement; (4) Is unable to be present 
or to testify at the hearing because of death or then 
existing physical or mental illness or infirmity; or (5) Is 
absent from the hearing and the proponent of the 
declarant's statement has been unable to procure the 
(continued . . .) 
16   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
8(. . .continued) 
declarant's attendance by process or other reasonable 
means." (Format modified). 
[COL] 32. HRE Rule 804(b)(5) provides for an exception to 
the hearsay rule "if the declarant is unavailable as a 
witness" and the proffered statement by the declarant is 
one of recent perception, defined as "[a] statement, not in 
response to the instigation of a person engaged in 
investigating, li tigating, or settling a claim, which 
narrates, describes, or explains an event or condition 
recently perceived by the declarant, made in good faith, 
not in contemplation of pending or anticipated litigation 
in which the declarant was interested, and while the 
declarant's recollection was clear[.]" 
[COL] 33. The videos proffered by [mother] of statements by 
her son constitute inadmissible hearsay and are not 
otherwise excepted from the hearsay rule under HRE Rule 
804(b)(5). 
[COL] 34. HRE Rule 803 governs exceptions to the hearsay 
rule where the availability of the declarant is immaterial. 
[COL] 35. Under HRE Rule 803(b)(1), the present sense 
impression of a declarant is an exception to the hearsay 
rule. Present sense impression is "[a] statement 
describing or explaining an event or condition made while 
the declarant was perceiving the event or c ondition or 
immediately thereafter." 
[COL] 36. The videos were not admissible as an exception to 
the hearsay rule under HRE Rule 803(b)(1). 
[COL] 37. Under HRE Rule 803(b)(24), provides other 
instances in which statements by a declarant are excepted 
from the hearsay rule under certain circumstances: "A 
statement not specifically covered by any of the exceptions 
in this paragraph (b) but having equiv alent circumstantial 
guarantees of trustworthiness, if the court determines that 
(A) the statement is more probative on the point for which 
it is offered than any other evidence which the proponent 
can procure through reasonable efforts, and (B) the genera l 
purposes of these rules and the interests of justice will 
best be served by admission of the statement into evidence. 
However, a statement may not be admitted under th is 
exception unless the proponent of it makes known to the 
adverse party sufficiently in advance of the trial or 
hearing to provide the adverse party with a fair 
opportunity to prepare to meet it, the proponent's 
intention to offer the statement and the part iculars of it, 
including the name and address of the declarant. 
[COL] 38. The videos were not admissible as an exception to 
the hearsay rule under HRE Rule 803(b)(24). 
17   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
requested to introduce three video recordings, collectively as  
Exhibit 1,  as follows,  
THE COURT: Okay. We're back on record. . . . 
We are going to play Exhibit 1. Is it broken up into three 
different videos? 
MS. KAWAUCHI [Mother's Counsel]: Yes. 
THE COURT: Okay. So this is Exhibit 1 . . . 1A? 
. . . 
(The following video was played:) 
[Son]: Hello my name is [son]. (Inaudible.) I'm 
gonna speak on behalf of [daughter] as well 'cause kinda --
she's kinda in a bad mood and she's very nervous about this 
court thing. I am too making this video, but I'm trying my 
best to. 
Main thing is I guess --
THE COURT: Okay. Pause it. 
[Son]: --I love being with --
THE COURT: Okay. So his very first portion of his 
testimony, Ms. Kawauchi, indicates that he's going to be 
speaking on behalf of sister also because in part she's 
nervous about this court thing. What's he talking about 
when he says "court thing," Ms. Kaw auchi? 
MS. KAWAUCHI: That I don't know, Judge. 
THE COURT: Okay. [Mother's boyfriend]? 
THE WITNESS: My best guess from what I have seen, 
Your Honor, is that there was --I believe there was 
something on the 30th. There was a hearing to some extent 
on the 30th –-
THE COURT: Okay. 
THE WITNESS: --that was taking place. 
THE COURT: Ms. McGivern, do you know –-
MS. MCGIVERN [Father's Counsel] : Well, there –-
THE COURT: --what happened on the 30 --
MS. MCGIVERN: --there was an ongoing criminal case 
of Ms. Kawauchi, but I'm concerned --
18   
 
  
 
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: No, but what hearing was on the 30th? Was 
there a paternity case hearing, a TRO case hearing, or a 
criminal case hearing to your knowledge on the 30th?  
 
MS. MCGIVERN: I -- I don't believe so.  
 
THE COURT: Okay. Well, he is referring to a court 
thing. Based on that statement, the Court is going to 
retract its earlier ruling on the admissibility of 1A. And 
1A it appears has been made in contemplation of some type of litigation, even if we don't know what kind of 
litigation.  
 Let's move on to 1B, which is the second recording.  
 
MS. KAWAUCHI: Objection, Your Honor.  
 
THE COURT: Was it made on the same day?  
 
MS. MCGIVERN: Yes.  
 
THE WITNESS: Same time.  
 
THE COURT: Oh, they were consecutive?  
 
THE WITNESS: They're one –-  
 
MS. MCGIVERN: They're –- 
  
THE COURT: -- one right after another.  
 
 . . . . 
THE COURT: . . . So was it in multiple -- to your 
knowledge, [mother's boyfriend], was it multiple recordings because he just did it in snippets?  
 
THE WITNESS: As far as I know, it was -- the level -- 
the length of time that the video --  
 
THE COURT: Would record?  
 
THE WITNESS: -- would record.  
 
THE COURT: Okay. All right. Then the Court is going 
to reverse its earlier ruling. Exhibit 1 will not be 
permitted into evidence and will not be played.  
 
MS. KAWAUCHI: Okay. All right.  
We conclude that the family court did not abuse its 
discretion by denying mother's request to introduce the 
Exhibit 1 video into evidence. See State v. Ortiz , 91 Hawai‘i 
181, 189, 981 P.2d 1127, 1135 (1999) ("Evidentiary rulings are 
19   
 
  
  
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reviewed for abuse of discretion, unless application of the rule 
admits of only one correct result, in which case review is under 
the right/wrong standard.")  (citation omitted).   In reviewing 
the first video, Exhibit 1A, the family court determined that the video was made in contemplation of a separate litigation, 
and that Exhibit 1A was the first part of what was meant to be a 
single recording together with the other Exhibit 1 videos. As 
such, the family court was not wrong in concluding that 
Exhibit  1 constituted impermissible hearsay that did not fall 
within an exception contemplated by HRE Rules 803 or 804. On this record, the family court did not abuse its discretion in denying the admission of Exhibit 1.  
E. Witness Credibility 
Mother contends that "the family court erred by 
finding the testimony of [mother] and [mother's] witness 
[mother's boyfriend] not credible, as such, the ruling 
constitutes an abuse of discretion [.]"9 The family court, as the 
9 Mother's points of error contend that the following FOF of the 
family court are clearly erroneous: 46, 48, 58, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 
76, 77, 78, 79, 81, 82, 83, 87, 88, 89, and 90. These FOF state, 
46. The court did not find [ mother]'s testimony 
credible. 
. . . . 
48. The court did not find [mother's boyfriend ]'s 
testimony credible. 
. . . . 
58. The court also finds that [ mother] failed to 
establish, through [mother's boyfriend's ] testimony which 
(continued . . .) 
20   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
9(. . .continued) 
the court did not find credible , that there were any 
circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness. 
. . . . 
69. [Mother] and [mother's boyfriend ] were not 
credible witnesses. 
70. As part of her closing argument, [ mother] 
asserted that [ father]'s emotional abuse is a form of 
Munchhausen syndrome by proxy. This is not persuasive as 
there is absolutely no evidence, medical or otherwise, to 
support this claim. 
71. At trial, [ mother] did not ask this Court to take 
judicial notice of any definition – denotative, 
connotative, or otherwise from popular culture or based on 
the news – as to the meaning of "strangle" or 
"strangulation." 
72. At trial, [ mother] also did not provide any 
evidence that either of the parties' minor children were 
aware any popular culture or news references to 
"strangulation ," or that the children's reactions to the 
event alleged in the Petition was in any way impacted or 
exacerbated by any such awareness of popular culture or 
news references to "strangulation." 
73. The court does not find credible the allegations 
that [father] told son that "[h]is life would be a living 
hell if he came back to his mom and that he'd be a failure 
in life," as alleged in paragraph 5B. There is no credible 
evidence to support this allegation. The court finds 
credible [ father]'s testimony that this never occurred. 
74. The court does not find credible the allegation 
that any actions or statements by [ father] caused either of 
the children to have suicidal tendencies. 
75. The court does not find credible the allegation 
that [father] otherwise caused son to "slic[e] his skin on 
his wrist because of continuous psychological abuse" or 
"verbal threats" as alleged in paragraph 5C. 
76. The court does not find credible the allegation 
that the parties' daughter "was self -harming" as a result 
of "the stress created by [ father]'s constant verbal 
harassment of" her. 
77. Rather, the court find s credible that any 
suicidal acts, thoughts, or tendencies by one or both of 
the children occurred while they were in [ mother]'s care. 
(continued . . .) 
21   
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
9(. . .continued) 
78. The court does not find credible [ mother]'s 
allegations that [ father] made financial threats against 
her via third persons and/or that any such messages 
received by [ mother] from third persons not named as 
respondents in her Petition against [ father] in any way 
originated by or through [ father]. 
79. The court does not find credible [ mother]'s 
allegations that [ father] sought to obtain money to have 
his debts paid through third persons. 
. . . . 
81. The court does not find credible that third 
persons expected [ mother] to pay in the millions. 
82. Additionally, with regard to allegations 5A and 
5E, there is absolutely no credible testimony or evidence 
to support these two allegations in their entirety. 
83. The court does not find credible [ mother]'s 
testimony that the incident alleged in paragraph 5A rises 
to the level of extreme psychological abuse or coercive 
control. 
. . . . 
87. Neither the allegation in paragraph 5A nor 
[mother]'s related testimony and evidence establishes a 
"course of conduct" that "seriously alarm[ed] or 
disturb[ed] consistently or continually bother[ed]" 
[mother]. 
88. Neither the allegation in paragraph 5A nor 
[mother]'s related testimony and evidence establishes that 
the alleged conduct "would cause a reasonable person to 
suffer extreme emotional distress." 
89. Neither the allegation in paragraph 5A nor 
[mother]'s related testimony and evidence establishes "a 
pattern of threatening, humiliating, or intimidating 
actions," nor any pattern of behavior that constitutes 
coercive control , as that term is defined under Hawai ʻi law. 
90. In addition, with respect to allegation 5E, 
there is no credible evidence that [ father] directed anyone 
to contact the [ mother] in order to collect his debts. 
The Court finds the [ father]'s testimony credible that he 
did not do so. 
(Footnote omitted.) 
22   
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fact finder, determines witness credibility. This court will 
not disturb the family court's determination of credibility on 
appeal. In re Doe , 95 Hawaiʻi 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001)  
("It is well -settled that an appellate court will not pass upon 
issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the 
weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of 
fact.") (citations omitted ). We conclude that the family court 
did not err in finding that mother and mother's boyfriend were 
not credib le witnesses. 
III. Conclusion 
For the reasons explained in section IIA, the family 
court's February 15, 2022 Order Dissolving Temporary Restraining 
Order, and Ju ne 1, 2022 Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, 
are vacated. We remand with instructions to the family court to 
make a determination, based on a proper balancing of mother's 
interests and the best interest of the children, as to whether 
the family court s hould have granted mother's request for the 
children to testify at trial. The family court is further 
23   
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
instructed to take appropriate actions consistent with that 
determination and this memorandum opinion . 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘i, December 20 , 2023. 
24  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 On the brief: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
Jamae K.K. Kawauchi, Chief Judge 
for Petitioner-Appellant. 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge 
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
Associate Judge 