NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000692
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MANANA SUTIDZE, Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee, v.
MARIE MINICHINO, Individually and as Trustee of the Gaetano
Trust, Defendant/Counterclaimant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-0395)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
This appeal arises out of a dispute between
 
Defendant/Counterclaimant-Appellant Marie Minichino
 
("Minichino"), pro se, individually and as Trustee of the Gaetano
 Trust, and Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee Manana
 Sutidze ("Sutidze") over the ownership of two parcels of real
 property on the Island of Maui. The two properties are located
 at Lanihou Place, Kihei, Hawai
'i ("Maui Meadows Property"), and 
Luakaha Circle, Kihei, Hawai 'i ("Piilani Village Property"). 
Specifically, Minichino appeals from the Order Granting
 Plaintiff's Motion to Confirm and Enforce Settlement Agreement,
 Filed on April 14, 2011 ("Order") entered on July 31, 2012 in the
 Circuit Court of the Second Circuit ("Circuit Court").
1/2/
  
1/

 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
 
2/
 Minichino attached the Notice of Submission; Exhibits A-D;
Certificate of Service, which Sutidze filed on July 3, 2012, to her notice of
appeal. Although she described those documents as the "[f]inal judgmentapproving settlement agreement, filed 7/2/12," which they are not, Minichino'sfailure to properly identify the Order as the document appealed from isharmless under the circumstances, and we deem her appeal to stem from the
Order. See Kitaami v. Shavelson, No. CAAP-13-0001964, 2015 WL 405706, at *1
fn.1 (Hawai' i App. Jan. 30, 2015) ("[A] mistake in designating the judgment
should not result in loss of the appeal as long as the intention to appeal
from a specific judgment can be fairly inferred from the notice and the NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
The central issue on appeal is the enforceability of an
 
3/
oral settlement agreement  that the parties reached and entered
into on the record during an April 28, 2010 hearing on Sutidze's

 
motion to confirm the private sale of the Maui Meadows Property
 ("Settlement Agreement"). Minichino agreed to the terms of the
 Settlement Agreement on the record, and Sutidze's counsel was to
 prepare a written version of the agreement ("Settlement
 Stipulation") for signatures and to memorialize and confirm the
 terms of the Settlement Agreement. Although Sutidze's counsel
 prepared the Settlement Stipulation based on the Circuit Court's
 transcript and sent it to Minichino's counsel, Minichino did not
 sign the stipulation and Minichino's counsel provided no further
 comments or requests for revisions to the document. 
Subsequently, on April 14, 2011, Sutidze moved to confirm and
 enforce the Settlement Agreement ("Motion to Confirm").
 
On June 29, 2012, the Circuit Court orally granted
 
Sutidze's Motion to Confirm, and on July 31, 2012, the Circuit
 Court filed the Order which confirmed that:
 
(i)	 Defendant Marie Minichino, individually and as Trustee of
the Gaetano trust, consented to the private sale of the Maui
Meadows Property that was the subject matter of Plaintiff's
Motion for Confirmation of Private Sale of Property and
Distribution of Proceeds;
 
(ii)	 Plaintiff Manana Sutidze, individually and as trustee of the
Gaetano Trust, signed a quitclaim deed conveying any
interest she had or may have had in the Piilani Village
Property to Marie Minichino, individually and as trustee of
the Gaetano Trust with said conveyance being effective as of
March 5, 2009;
 
(iii) upon the closing of the private sale of the Maui Meadows
Property, Plaintiff and Defendant Minichino agreed to
dismiss with prejudice any and all claims alleged and
asserted against each other in the Complaint, Amended
 
appellee is not misled by the mistake." (quoting Ek v. Boggs, 102 Hawai' i 
289, 294, 75 P.3d 1180, 1185 (2003) (citation marks and ellipsis omitted))). 
3/
 The Settlement Agreement as entered on the record stated that: 1)
Minichino will consent to the sale of the Maui Meadows Property to William and
Joann Caterina (collectively, the "Caterinas") pursuant to the certified
purchase agreement and counteroffer dated April 12, 2010; 2) Sutidze, will
sign a quitclaim deed for the Piilani Village Property to Minichino, as
trustee of the Gaetano Trust, effective as of March 5, 2009; 3) Minichino will
be able to remove the washer, dryer, and refrigerator from the Maui Meadows
Property, no later than May 27, 2010; 4) Sutidze and Minichino will stipulate
to dismiss the claims as between each other with prejudice, and the Circuit
Court will retain jurisdiction in case the private sale does not go through or
to enforce the settlement; and 5) Al Imamura will be discharged as the
receiver for the Piilani Village Property.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Complaint and Counterclaim filed herein;
 
(iv)	 Defendant Marie Minichino was allowed to remove a washer-
dryer and refrigerator located in the Maui Meadows Property;
 
(v)	 Plaintiff Manana Suditze and Defendant Marie Minichino, in
her individual capacity and as Trustee for the Gaetano
Trust, for themselves and their respective heirs, personal
representatives, beneficiaries, successors and assigns,
agreed to release and discharge each other from and against
any and all claims, demands, rights of action and causes of
action of any kind or character whatsoever from the
beginning of time to the date of the dismissal with
prejudice of the claims asserted in the Lawsuit;
 
(vi)	 the parties would bear their own costs and attorney's fees
in connection with this matter;
 
(vii) the Court retained Jurisdiction of this matter to enforce
the terms of this settlement agreement; and
 
(viii)Alvin M. Imamura of Shore to Shore Realty, Inc. will be
discharged as Receiver for the Maui Meadows Property and the
Piilani Village Property and the balance of the funds in the
Shore to Shore Realty, Inc.'s trust account shall be
returned to Plaintiff and her attorney, Bendet Fidell, AAL
ALC.
 
(Formatting altered.) 
Previously, in order for Sutidze and Minichino to
 
accomplish the terms of the Settlement Agreement, the Circuit
 
Court had signed and entered the order granting Sutidze's motion
 to confirm the private sale of the Maui Meadows Property on
 April 28, 2010. Therefore, on June 21, 2010, the Maui Meadows
 Property was sold to the Caterinas, and the mortgage and debts
 connected to the Wells Fargo foreclosure action were paid off. 
Furthermore, in May 2010, Sutidze signed a quitclaim deed
 conveying any interest she had in the Piilani Village Property to
 Minichino, and Minichino removed her appliances from the Maui
 Meadows Property. 
On appeal, Minichino asserts that the Settlement
 
Agreement should be invalidated because: (1) she did not have the
 mental capacity to agree to the settlement; (2) she was the true 
owner of both properties; (3) the settlement conference was
 forced on her; (4) she was slandered in court by Sutidze and
 Sutidze's attorney; (5) Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.'s threatened
 foreclosure on the Maui Meadows Property was invalid; and (6)
 Sutidze's counsel committed fraud because she knew or should have
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
known that Wells Fargo's foreclosure was invalid.4/
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments they advance and the issues they raise, we resolve
 Minichino's points of error as follows,
5/ and affirm.
 
Our review of several of the points of error is
 
precluded by Minichino's failure to provide transcripts for any
 hearings other than the April 28, 2010 proceeding. "The burden
 is upon the appellant in an appeal to show error by reference to
 matters in the record and he or she has the responsibility of
 providing an adequate transcript." Bettencourt v. Bettencourt,
 
80 Hawai
'i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995) (brackets omitted) 
(quoting Union Bldg. Materials Corp. v. The Kakaako Corp., 5 Haw.
 App. 146, 151, 682 P.2d 82, 87 (1984)). Without additional
 transcripts, for instance, we cannot review Minichino's claims
 that she lacked the capacity to agree to the settlement because
 of various stress factors in her life, factors which she says she
 advised the court of at the June 6, 2012 hearing; or that she was
 slandered in court by Sutidze's attorney and Sutidze.
6/
 
4/

 Minichino's opening brief does not comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure ("HRAP") Rule 28(b) in numerous respects, including the
fact that it fails to include "[a] concise statement of the points of errorset forth in separately numbered paragraphs." Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(4).Nevertheless, we address her arguments on the merits to the extent that we
can. See Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 Hawai' i 490, 496, 280 P.3d 88, 94 (2012)
(declining to dismiss appeal for failure to comply with HRAP Rule 28 because
this court "has consistently adhered to the policy of affording litigants theopportunity 'to have their cases heard on the merits, where possible.'"
(quoting Morgan v. Planning Dep't, Cnty. of Kauai, 104 Hawai' i 173, 180–81, 86
P.3d 982, 989–90 (2004)). 
5/
 Sutidze argues that this court lacks jurisdiction over this appeal
"because Sutidze has ongoing claims against a second defendant and the trial
court has not entered a final judgment as to all claims and all parties norhas it certified any interlocutory order pursuant to [Hawai' i Rules of Civil 
Procedure,] Rule 54(b)." Nevertheless, the Order is an appealable
interlocutory order under the collateral order doctrine. See Siangco v. 
Kasadate, 77 Hawai' i 157, 161, 883 P.2d 78, 82 (1994) (holding that "[i]n
order to fall within the narrow ambit of the collateral order doctrine, the
order must [1] conclusively determine the disputed question, [2] resolve animportant issue completely separate from the merits of the action, and [3] be
effectively unreviewable on appeal from a final judgment."); Cook v. Surety Life Ins. Co., 79 Hawai' i 403, 408, 903 P.2d 708, 713 (App. 1995) (holding
that "an order enforcing a settlement agreement is a collateral order which is
appealable"). Therefore, we address the merits of Minichino's claims. 
6/
 Furthermore, the contention that Minichino was slandered in court
is not relevant to any claim that the Settlement Agreement was not or should
not be binding.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The bulk of Minichino's remaining points on appeal
 
address whether she should have settled the underlying case and
 
not whether the settlement is binding; therefore, those claims on
 appeal lack merit. As to whether Sutidze's counsel committed
 fraud because she allegedly knew that the Wells Fargo foreclosure
 was invalid, the record shows that Minichino's counsel knew of
 the same alleged "facts" relating to the escrow officer's
 deposition testimony; thus, Minichino has not established that
 Sutidze's counsel misled her. Finally, it is apparent from the
 one transcript included in the record that the "settlement
 conference" was not forced on Minichino, that she was represented
 at the conference, and that she informed the court in person that
 she accepted the agreement reached at that conference.
 
Therefore, the Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion to
 
Confirm and Enforce Settlement Agreement, Filed on April 14,
 2011, entered on July 31, 2012 by the Circuit Court of the Second
 Circuit, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 30, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Marie Minichino,
Pro Se Defendant-Appellant.  Chief Judge 
Yuriko J. Sugimura andGregory A. Ferren(Bendet Fidell)for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5

 