NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000580
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
DANE KAHAU, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
EWA DIVISION
(CASE NO. 1DTC-17-001274)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Dane Kahau (Kahau) appeals from the
July 19, 2017 Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
Plea/Judgment ( Judgment) entered by the District Court of the
First Circuit, Ewa Division ( District Court ).1  Kahau was
convicted of Driving Without a License in violation of Hawaii
Revised Statutes (HRS ) § 286-102 (Supp. 2017).2 
1The Honorable Blake T. Okimoto presided.
2HRS § 286-102 states, in relevant part:
§ 286-102 Licensing.   (a) No person, except one:
. . . .
(2) Who holds an instruction permit under section
286-110;
(3) Who holds a limited purpose driver's license,
limited purpose provisional driver's license, or 
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Kahau raises two points of error on appeal, arguing
that:  (1) the District Court failed to ensure that his waiver of
counsel was proper; and (2) there was insufficient evidence at
trial to support his conviction with respect to whether the road
on which he was driving was a "public road."
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the
relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Kahau's points of
error as follows: 
(1) Kahau argues that his waiver of counsel was
defective.  Plaintiff-Appellee the State of Hawai #i (State)
concedes Kahau's point.  Notwithstanding the State's concession,
"appellate courts have an independent duty 'first to ascertain
that the confession of error is supported by the record and well-
founded in law and second to determine that such error is
2(...continued)
limited purpose instruction permit under section
286-104.5;
(4) Who holds a provisional license under section
286-102.6;
. . . .
shall operate any category of motor vehicles listed in this
section without first being appropriately examined and duly
licensed as a qualified driver of that category of motor
vehicles.
(b) A person operating the following category or
combination of categories of motor vehicles shall be
examined as provided in section 286-108 and duly licensed by
the examiner of drivers:
(1) Mopeds;
(2) Motorcycles and motor scooters;
(3) Passenger cars of any gross vehicle weight
rating, buses designed to transport fifteen or
fewer occupants, and trucks and vans having a
gross vehicle weight rating of eighteen thousand
pounds or less; and
(4) All of the motor vehicles in category (3) and
any vehicle that is not a commercial motor
vehicle.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
properly preserved and prejudicial.'"  State v. Veikoso , 102
Hawai#i 219, 221-22, 74 P.3d 575, 577-78 (2003) (citation
omitted). 
Both the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Hawai #i guarantee that a person
accused of a crime has the right to be represented by counsel "at
every critical stage of the prosecution."  State v. Phua, 135
Hawai#i 504, 512, 353 P.3d 1046, 1054 (2015) (citation and
internal quotation marks omitted); see also HAW. CONST. art. I, §
14.  A "critical stage" of a prosecution includes "any stage
where potential substantial prejudice to [a] defendant's rights
inheres," and, of course, includes the trial itself.   Phua, 135
Hawai#i at 512, 353 P.3d at 1054  (citation and internal quotation
marks omitted).
Where a defendant elects to proceed pro se, "the record
must indicate that the defendant was offered counsel, but he or
she 'voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently rejected the offer
and waived that right.'"  Id.  (citation omitted).  It is the
trial court's responsibility to ensure that both (1) the waiver
of counsel is "knowingly and intelligently" made; and (2) the
record is complete with respect to the waiver of counsel so that
appellate courts may later determine from the record whether the
waiver was unequivocal and in fact voluntarily and freely made. 
Id.  Where the record is deficient and does not support a finding
that the defendant has knowingly and intelligently waived his
right to counsel, the appropriate remedy is to vacate the
judgment and remand the case to the trial court for appropriate
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
proceedings.  See, e.g., Phua, 135 Hawai #i at 517, 353 P.3d at
1059 (remanding for a new sentencing proceeding because the
record was critically deficient to support a finding that the
defendant's waiver of his right to counsel was knowingly and
intelligently made).
Here, the record is devoid of any evidence that the
District Court had any discussion with Kahau regarding his
decision to waive his right to counsel and to proceed pro se.  No
inquiries were made as to whether Kahau understood his right to
counsel or the inherent dangers and disadvantages of proceeding
to trial pro se.  Thus, we cannot conclude that Kahau's waiver of
his right to counsel was knowingly and intelligently made.
(2) Kahau contends that in order to be convicted of
Driving Without a License, a violation of HRS § 286-102, the
State is required to prove that he was operating a motor vehicle
on a "public road" and that the State failed to do so in this
case.  Kahau's argument is without merit.  
Even if we assume arguendo as Kahau contends that he
was operating a motor vehicle on private property (an issue we
need not decide), State v. Kelekolio, 94 Hawai# i 354, 14 P.3d 364
(App. 2000) is dispositive.  There, the appellant appealed from
his conviction, under HRS § 286-102, of operating a motor vehicle
without a license.  Id.  Mr. Kelekolio argued that because he was
operating a motor vehicle on private land, in the parking lot of
a private hotel, and not on a public highway, he could not be
convicted under the statute.  Id.  In resolving the question,
this court considered the statutory language of HRS chapter 286,
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the relevant portions of which remain unchanged, and the history
and public policy behind the statute.  Id. at 357, 14 P.3d at
367.  This court held that interpreting HRS § 286-102 to apply
only to those persons operating a motor vehicle on a public
highway is "contrary to the literal and unambiguous language of
the statute," which states that no person may operate a motor
vehicle without first being appropriately examined and duly
licensed as a qualified driver of that vehicle.3  Id.  This court
also found that the legislative history and policy goals of the
statute further supported this conclusion.  Id. at 357-61, 14
P.3d at 367-71.  Accordingly, we vacated the trial court's
dismissal of the charges against Kelekolio, because the State was
not required to prove that Kelekolio was operating a motor
vehicle on a public road to secure a conviction for Driving
Without a License.  Id. at 361, 14 P.3d at 371.
 Kahau presents no argument that Kelekolio should not
be followed.  Kahau cites to no statute, case, or other authority
to support his position that law enforcement could not issue him
a citation on private land for driving without a license. 
Therefore, Kahau is entitled to no further relief based on this
point of error.
3This is subject to certain exceptions enumerated in the statute
and not relevant here.  See HRS § 286-102(a)(1).
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Accordingly, the District Court's July 19, 2017
Judgment is vacated, and this case is remanded for a new trial.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 27, 2018.
On the briefs:
Walter J. Rodby,
for Defendant-Appellant.Chief Judge
Loren J. Thomas,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
6