NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000406
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
KURT BUTLER,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
CLINTON MYERS, JASON KEEFNER,
MDDR HEALTH SOLUTIONS, INC., ALPHA EXECUTIVE SECURITY,
Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-0102)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
  
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Kurt Butler (Butler), pro se,
 
appeals from the April 13, 2012 "Amended Final Judgment" entered
 
1
in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit  (circuit court) in
favor of Defendant-Appellee MDDR Health Solutions, Inc. (MDDR).
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On August 28, 2009, Butler filed a complaint in the
 
circuit court against defendants MDDR, Clinton Myers (Myers),
 
Jason Keefner (Keefner), and Alpha Executive Security, Inc.
 
(Alpha). 
The complaint alleged that Myers and Keefner assaulted
 
and battered Butler while acting within the course and scope of
 employment as security guards with MDDR and Alpha. The complaint
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
asserted claims for negligence, assault, battery, and intentional
 
infliction of emotional distress.
 
The circuit court entered default judgment against
 
Myers on October 11, 2010, and Butler voluntarily dismissed
 Keefner and Alpha. Consequently, MDDR was the sole remaining
 
defendant in the case, and the circuit court held a jury trial
 
commencing on August 29, 2011. At the conclusion of the trial,
 
the jury entered a verdict in MDDR's favor on all counts of
 
Butler's complaint. The circuit court entered an "Amended Final
 
Judgment" on April 13, 2012, from which Butler timely appealed.
 
On appeal, Butler contends the circuit court erred in
 
excluding certain testimony and exhibits denying his proposed
 
jury instructions and failing to grant his motion to recess the
 
trial until one of his witnesses could be subpoenaed.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
Different standards of review must be applied to trial
court decisions regarding the admissibility of evidence,
depending on the requirements of the particular rule of
evidence at issue. When application of a particular
evidentiary rule can yield only one correct result, the
proper standard for appellate review is the right/wrong
standard. 
Where the evidentiary ruling at issue concerns
admissibility based upon relevance, under Hawaii Rules of
Evidence (HRE) Rules 401 and 402, the proper standard of
appellate review is the right/wrong standard. 
Evidentiary decisions based on HRE Rule 403, which
require a "judgment call" on the part of the trial court,
are reviewed for an abuse of discretion. The trial court
 abuses its discretion when it clearly exceeds the bounds of
reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice
to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.
 
Tabieros v. Clark Equip. Co., 85 Hawaif i 336, 350-51, 944 P.2d 
1279, 1293-94 (1997) (internal quotation marks, citations, and 
brackets omitted; block quote format changed) (quoting State v. 
Arceo, 84 Hawaif i 1, 11, 928 P.2d 843, 853 (1996)). 
"The standard of review for a trial court's issuance or
 
refusal of a jury instruction is whether, when read and
 
considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially
 
insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." Moyle v.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Y & Y Hyup Shin, Corp., 118 Hawaif i 385, 391, 191 P.3d 1062, 1068 
(2008) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. Evidentiary Rulings
 
At trial, Butler proceeded pro se and indicated he
 
would testify in narrative form. Consequently, MDDR filed a
 motion in limine requesting that the circuit court order Butler
 
not to present any hearsay statements unless or until the court
 
ruled on the admissibility of the proffered evidence. The
 
circuit court granted MDDR's motion. The record indicates Butler
 
did not object to the in limine ruling, nor has he asserted on
 
appeal that the circuit court erred when it granted MDDR's
 
motion. 
The record establishes that Butler did not comply with
 
the circuit court's order and failed to lay sufficient foundation
 
supporting the admissibility of the hearsay statements at issue. 
Butler also did not make any offers of proof and did not provide
 
any grounds of admissibility or relevance when the circuit court
 
sustained MDDR's objections to Butler's testimony. Butler has
 
failed to provide an adequate record for appellate review. State
 
v. Kelekolio, 74 Haw. 479, 523, 849 P.2d 58, 78 (1993) (holding
 that "[i]n the absence of an offer of proof, the trial court
 
committed no reversible error"). 
Additionally, the record on appeal is incomplete and 
does not contain transcripts of the circuit court proceedings 
during which Butler offered several exhibits at issue. "The 
burden is upon appellant in an appeal to show error by reference 
to matters in the record, and he or she has the responsibility of 
providing an adequate transcript." Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 
80 Hawaif i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995) (internal quotation 
marks and brackets omitted); Hawaif i Rules of Appellate Procedure 
3
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(HRAP) Rules 10 (b)(1), 11. Therefore, this court is unable to
 
address Butler's arguments regarding the exhibits he offered.2
 
B. Jury Instructions
 Butler contends the circuit court denied his input on
 
jury instructions. However, Butler filed a motion waiving his
 right to submit proposed instructions, which the circuit court
 
granted. Therefore, the circuit court did not err when it denied
 
the proposed jury instructions that Butler subsequently
 
submitted, after the circuit court granted his motion and after
 
the submission deadline set forth in the pretrial order.
 
Furthermore, the circuit court allowed Butler to assert 
objections to MDDR's proposed instructions. Butler objected to 
four of MDDR's instructions at trial, and his only argument on 
appeal is that the circuit court failed to instruct the jury on 
the laws regarding criminal complicity. This case was a civil 
case, however, and read as a whole, the circuit court's 
instructions were not prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, 
inconsistent, or misleading. Moyle, 118 Hawaif i at 391, 191 P.3d 
at 1068. C. Motion to Recess Trial
 
Butler contends the circuit court erred in refusing to
 
adjourn the trial. The record indicates that on the second day
 of the trial, Butler filed a motion to recess the trial until he
 
could subpoena one of his witnesses. During the circuit court
 
proceedings on the same day, Butler attempted to call the
 
witness, who did not appear. Butler informed the court he had
 
not subpoenaed the witness to testify that day, and gave no
 
explanation for his failure to subpoena the witness. Butler then
 
stated he would rest his case. Butler did not mention that he
 
2
 In addition to failing to meet his duty to provide a sufficient
record, Butler's brief fails to comply with HRAP Rule 28(b).  Among other
issues, Butler's statement of the case contains no record references (Rule
28(b)(3)), and his statement of the points of error fails to point out in the
record where the alleged error occurred and where it was objected to by
Butler. (Rule 28(b)(4)). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
had filed a motion for a recess earlier that day, nor did he
 
request a recess during the proceedings. 
At the trial's conclusion, the circuit court questioned
 
Butler about several motions he had filed, including the motion
 
to recess the trial. The circuit court noted the motions were
 
untimely and that he had not requested a hearing on the motions,
 
and Butler responded that the motions were moot and that there
 
was "no point in discussing it." Based on this record, the
 
circuit court did not err when it failed to grant a recess.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The April 13, 2012 "Amended Final Judgment" entered in
 
the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, April 15, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Kurt Butler 
Plaintiff-Appellant pro se. Presiding Judge 
Jeffrey A. Griswold(Lyons, Brandt, Cook &Hiramatsu) forDefendant-Appellee MDDR HealthSolutions, Inc. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
5
 