NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000824
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
  
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CHANCE WYKES, Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
LAYTON KANE, Defendant-Appellant
 
IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 1CPC-17-0000159)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Layton Kane (Kane) appeals from the
 
Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence (Judgment) entered
 
on October 26, 2017, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
(Circuit Court).1 Following a bench trial, Kane was convicted of
 
one count of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, a
 
1
 The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statues (HRS) ยง 712-1243 (2014),2
 
and sentenced to four years of probation.
 
a violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
Kane raises two points of error on appeal, contending
 
that: 
(1) the Circuit Court erred in admitting Plaintiff-
Appellee State of Hawaii's (the State's) Exhibit 6 to establish
 
the chain of custody of the heroin that was allegedly in Kane's
 
possession when he was arrested; and (2) evidence of a prior
 custodial search by a Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Officer J.
 
De Leon (Officer De Leon) was sufficient to enable a person of
 reasonable caution to conclude that the ziplock bag containing
 
heroin was not in Kane's possession at the time of his arrest.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Kane's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Kane objected to the admission of Exhibit 6 on the
 
the grounds of authenticity because it was not the original HPD
 evidence chain of custody record.
 
Pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 
901(a), authentication or identification is a "condition precedent to admissibility" that "is satisfied by evidence sufficient to support a finding that the matter in question is 
2
 HRS ยง 712-1243 states:
 
ยง 712-1243 Promoting a dangerous drug in the third
degree.  (1) A person commits the offense of promoting a
dangerous drug in the third degree if the person knowingly
possesses any dangerous drug in any amount.
(2) Promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree is
a class C felony.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
what its proponent claims."3 "The most direct method of 
authenticating an object is through the 'testimony of a witness 
who has some basis extrinsic to the item itself for asserting its authenticity.'" Kam Fui Trust v. Brandhorst, 77 Hawai' i 320, 
326, 884 P.2d 383, 389 (App. 1994) (quoting Commentary to HRE Rule 901). "The crux of the authenticity requirement is whether there is evidence which supports the conclusion that an object is the very thing it purports to be." Id. (internal citation and 
quotation omitted). "There being no single right or wrong disposition of authentication issues," this court reviews the Circuit Court's ruling for an abuse of discretion. Id. 
In this case, HPD Officer Kevin Masuda (Officer Masuda)
 
testified that, as an HPD custodian of evidence, he is familiar
 with the electronic system by which the custody logs are created. 
He testified that Exhibit 6 appeared to be a true copy of the
 custody log for Item 5 (the heroin). Officer Masuda testified
 that the custody log as printed was correct in terms of
 appearance and that he recognized his signatures on his log
 entries. He testified that it did not appear that the document
 
3
 HRE Rule 901 states, in relevant part:
 
Rule 901 Requirement of authentication or
identification.
 
(a) General provision. The requirement of authentication or
identification as a condition precedent to admissibility is
satisfied by evidence sufficient to support a finding that
the matter in question is what its proponent claims.
(b) Illustrations. By way of illustration only, and
not by way of limitation, the following are examples
of authentication or identification conforming with
the requirements of this rule:
 
(1) Testimony of witness with knowledge.
Testimony that a matter is what it is claimed to be.
. . . . 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
had been altered or tampered with in any manner. In addition, 
both HPD Officer Ashley Hare-Schuler (Officer Hare-Schuler) and 
HPD Criminalist Dawn Nakamura (Criminalist Nakamura) testified that they also recognized their signatures on the custody log. 
We conclude that Officer Masuda's testimony, confirmed as well by Officer Hare-Schuler and Criminologist Nakamura, provides "some basis extrinsic to the item itself for asserting its authenticity." See Kam Fui Trust, 77 Hawai' i at 326, 884 P.2d at 
389. While the HPD's custody transfer documentation is
 
electronic, meaning that Officer Masuda had not seen this
 specific printout of the custody log for Item 5 prior to trial,
 that did not preclude him from providing extrinsic evidence
 supporting the Circuit Court's determination that Exhibit 6 was
 authentic. See id.; see also HRE Rules 1001(4) and 1003.
 
Accordingly, we reject Kane's first point of error.
 (2) Kane challenges the sufficiency of the evidence to
 
support his conviction in light of Defendant's Exhibit A, which
 was the HPD Arrest Report, which was admitted at trial (Arrest
 
Report). The Arrest Report includes notations that Kane was
 subjected to a custodial search by Officer De Leon some time
 
prior to 1:53 p.m. on February 14, 2017, after being arrested by
 Officer Suaesi Tuimaunei and transported by Officer B. Mamuad. 
Kane argues that the "[e]vidence of a prior custodial search by
 Officer De Leon was sufficient to enable a person of reasonable
 caution to conclude that the ziplock bag was not in [Kane's]
 possession" at the time of his arrest.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
However, Officer Hare-Schuler testified that the Arrest 
Report was incorrect. Officer Hare-Schuler testified that she 
transported Kane to the Central Receiving Division at HPD headquarters in Honolulu and that she observed that Kane's first pre-incarceration search was conducted by HPD Officer Keone Prescott, at which time Officer Prescott found in Kane's possession a substance that what was later identified as heroin. The Circuit Court found that Officer Hare-Schuler's testimony was credible. Pursuant to our standard of review in considering a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence to support a conviction, "we give full play to the right of the fact finder to determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw justifiable inferences of fact." State v. Bowman, 137 Hawai' i 398, 405, 375 
P.3d 177, 184 (2016) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted); see also Domingo v. State, 76 Hawai' i 237, 242, 873 
P.2d 775, 780 (1994) ("[A]n appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trial judge." (internal citation and quotation omitted)). 
We conclude that there was sufficient evidence to
 
support Kane's conviction.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's October 26, 2017
 
Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 31, 2018. 
On the briefs: 
Walter R. Schoettle,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Loren J. Thomas,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6
 