 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000723 05-MAY-2026 07:50 AM Dkt. 81 SO 
NO. CAAP -24-0000723  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
OF THE S TATE OF HAWAIʻ I
  
STATE OF HA
WAIʻI, Plaintiff -Appellee,  
v.  
MARCOS
 A. DE JESUS, Defendant- Appellant   
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
KĀNE‘OHE  DIVISION  
(CASE NO. 1DTA-23-012
61)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By:  Leonard, P
residing Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.) 
Defendant- Appellant  M arcos  A.  De Jesus  (De Jesus ) 
appeals from the  District  Court of the First Circuit's (district  
court)  October 1, 2024  "Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order  
and Plea/Judgment"  (Judgment ).    1
On August 10, 2023 , the State of Hawaiʻi (St ate) 
charged De Jesus  by Complaint with Reckless Driving of Vehicle 
1 The Honorable Alvin K. Nishimura presided.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
    
   
  
 
    
  
   
     
   
     
  
 
     
 
 
 
 
 in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HR S) § 291- 2 (2020) 
(Count 1), and Racing on Highways in violation of HRS § 291C -103 
(2020).  Following a jury-waived trial, the district court found 
De Jesus guilty as to Count 1, but granted De Jesus' motion for 
judgment of acquittal as to Count 2. The district court imposed 
a $1,000 fine, $29,631 in restitution, fees, and ordered De 
Jesus to take a driver's improvement course. 
On appeal, De Jesus raises two point s of error, 
contending that the district court erred: (1) "in convicting De 
Jesus of Reckless Driving . . . because the State failed to 
provide sufficient evidence to prove that De Jesus operated his 
vehicle in reckless disregard of the safety of persons or 
property"; and (2) "in convicting De Jesus of Reckless Driving 
. . . because the [d]istrict [c]ourt did not find that De Jesus 
acted with the requisite state of mind—recklessly." 
Upon careful review of the record, briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration 
to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, 
we address De Jesus' points of error on appeal as follows: 
(1) De Jesus contends that there is insufficient 
evidence to support "that De Jesus operated his vehicle in 
reckless disregard of the safety of persons or property." We 
apply the following standard in our review of De Jesus' 
contention: 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
   
  
  
 
    
 
  
     
    
 
 
  
 [E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate 
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
case was before a judge or jury. The test on appeal is not 
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact. 
State v. Kalaola , 124 Hawaiʻi  43, 49, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010) 
(ci
tations omitted).  "Substantial evidence . . . is credible 
evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to 
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." 
Id. (cle
aned up).  
De Jesus specifically argues that the district court's 
finding of guilt was premised on its erroneous factual finding 
that De Jesus was "sewing" (i.e., "darting in and out of the lanes back and forth").  De Jesus contends that there is no 
substantial evidence to support that De Jesus was "sewing," and therefore not sufficient evidence to support that De Jesus' 
driving was "reckless and contributed to this collision [of the 
complaining witnesses' (CW) vehicle with another vehicle]."  
At 
trial, the CW testified as follows: 
Well, I was driving with my wife. Was about 4 p.m., I
think. I don't remember. We're coming from church, going 
to the base. And [De Jesus, driving a blue car] passed between me and another car right -- right beside me very
fast, very (indiscernible), sewing, (gestures)[.] 
. . . . 
I'm driving with my wife. And then [De Jesus] pass between 
me and this car on the -- that was little space, to be
honest. (Gestures.) That was completely ridiculous. [De 
Jesus] pass, flying between us. Where I'm from, as we call 
that sewing, when you go -- (gestures). 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
  
 
    
  
   
 
 
  
 . . . . 
Then [De Jesus] pass, flying between us. That's when I saw 
[De Jesus]. 
[De Jesus] keep going fast. 
. . . . 
[De Jesus' car] was speeding and switching lanes 
irresponsibly way above the speed limit. 
. . . . 
Then the Honda Civic slam behind my car. (Gestures.) And 
we went out of control, spinning. 
(Emphasis added.)  2
CW testified that De Jesus was speeding, passing and 
"flying" between cars with "little space," "switching lanes 
irresponsibly," and "sewing."  We conclude that the State introduced sufficient evidence, through CW's testimony, to 
support De Jesus' conviction for Count 1.  
(2) De Jesus contends that the district court erred 
because it "did not find that De Jesus acted with the requisite state of mind —recklessly." HRS § 291- 2 provides, in relevant 
part, that "[w]hoever operates any vehicle . . . in disregard of the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving 
of vehicle." Although HRS § 291- 2 does not itself define 
"recklessly," HRS § 702 -206(3) (2014) instructs that, 
(a) A person acts recklessly with respect to his conduct 
when he consciously disregards a substantial and 
unjustifiable risk that the person's conduct is of the
specified nature. 
. . . . 
2 At trial, the CW at times referred to De Jesus' car as the "blue 
car," and the car that collided with CW's car as "the Honda Civic, white." 
4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (c) A person acts recklessly with respect to a result of 
his conduct when he consciously disregards a substantial 
and unjustifiable risk that his conduct will cause such
a result. 
(d) A risk is substantial and unjustifiable within the
meaning of this section if, considering the nature and 
purpose of the person's conduct and the circumstances known to him, the disregard of the risk involves a gross
deviation from the standard of conduct that a law-
abiding person would observe in the same situation. 
See also  State v. Agard, 113 Hawaiʻi 321, 324, 15  1 P.3d 802, 805  
(20
07) (recognizing that "the state of mind definition in HRS 
§  702-206(3) applies to HR  S § 291-2").    
Here, the d
istrict court found that, 
[T]he evidence that came out during the trial was that as
that person and other people were driving down the highway, 
you in your vehicle and another person in their vehicle
were darting in and out of traffic at a high rate of speed, 
catching up to people and darting in and out of the lanes back and forth. In fact, I think one witness described it 
as kind of like a sewing maneuver, in and out and in and 
out and in and out, between all the vehicles down the highway. 
And that dangerous, reckless type of driving at the 
high rate of speed is what caused all of this to occur. It 
caused other vehicles to be in danger and caused other 
vehicles to collide because of [De Jesus'] driving in and out of traffic at that high rate of speed. 
And although [De Jesus'] vehicle may not have made 
actual contact [with CW's vehicle], it was the actions of
[De Jesus] in [De Jesus'] vehicle going in and out and --
and essentially causing people to be in fear on the road and -- and being contacted by other vehicles because [De
Jesus'] vehicle was reckless. I mean, I don't know how to 
describe it other than the conduct was reckless. 
And this sewing maneuver in and out of traffic, I 
mean, it's almost like -- I mean -- well, I'm not going to get into comparisons, because there's many times where
people can cause things to happen even without making 
contact because their actions are so reckless. 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
    
 
 
 
 We  conclude that the district court found, based on 
the ev idence presented at tr ial,  that De Jesus acted recklessly.     
We therefore affirm the Judgment. 
DAT
ED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, May 5, 202 6. 
On the briefs:  
Henry P. Ting ,  
Deputy Public Defender,   
for Defendant -Appellant.  
 
Brian R. Vincent,   
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,  
City and County of Honolulu,  
for Plaintiff -Appellee.  /s/ Katherine G. Leonard  
Presiding Judge  
 /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth  
Associate Judge  
 /s/ Ki mberly T. Guidry  
Associate Judge 
6 