NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0001151
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
VAN LY HO, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
ABM PARKING SERVICES, INC., Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CIVIL CASE NO. 1RC12-1-6698)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Van Ly Ho (Ho) appeals pro se from
 
the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division's
 
(District Court)1 January 22, 2013 Judgment. This case arises
 
out of a dispute between Ho, a taxi driver who worked at Honolulu
 International Airport (HIA), and ABM Parking Services, Inc.
 
(ABM), which administers the taxi stands at HIA.
 
On appeal, Ho argues
2
 that the District Court erred
when it (1) did not admit Ho's exhibits into evidence; (2) failed

 
1 The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong presided.
 
2
 Ho's pro se opening brief does not comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b), which specifies the format and
requirements of an opening brief. Ho's noncompliance with HRAP Rule 28(b)includes, among other things, the failure to include record citations for eachstatement of fact and citations for where the errors complained of wereobjected to. In addition, contrary to HRAP Rule 28(b)(10), Ho attaches"Exhibits" 3-7 to his Opening Brief. As these exhibits do not appear to bepart of the record on appeal, they will not be considered. Notwithstandingsuch violations, the Hawai' i Supreme Court favors a policy of affording pro se
litigants "'the opportunity to have their cases heard on the merits, wherepossible[.]'" Housing Fin. & Dev. Corp. v. Ferguson, 91 Hawai' i 81, 85-86, 979
P.2d 1107, 1111-12 (1999) (citation omitted). 
Accordingly, pursuant to Ferguson, we address the merits of the
issues raised by Ho where possible.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to recognize ABM's fraudulent concealment of evidence; and (3)
 
admitted ABM's irrelevant and/or false evidence. Ho also argues
 
that ABM violated Ho's right to due process.
 
After a careful review of the points raised, the
 
arguments made by the parties, the applicable authority, and the
 
record, we resolve Ho's points on appeal as follows and affirm.
 1-3. Ho has failed to provide this court with the 
transcripts of proceedings below leaving this court with no basis 
upon which it can review the actions of the District Court. 
Rule 11(a), HRAP makes it the responsibility of the appellant to 
ensure that the record on appeal is complete. HRAP Rule 11(a) 
(The appellant "shall take any other action necessary to enable 
the clerk of the court to assemble and transmit the record. It 
is also the responsibility of each appellant to provide a record 
. . . that is sufficient to review the points asserted[.]"). See 
also, Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai 'i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 
553, 558 (1995). Appellant thus failed to meet his burden of 
demonstrating error by reference to matters in the record. See 
State v. Hoang, 93 Hawai 'i 333, 334, 3 P.3d 499, 500 (2000)). 
"[W]e will not presume error from a silent record." Id. at 336, 
3 P.3d at 502. Ho's first three points of error concern evidence presented to, excluded by, or concealed from, the trial court at 
trial. Therefore, we conclude that Ho has failed to support his 
first three points of error with presentation of an adequate 
record on appeal. 
4. Ho argues that ABM violated his constitutionally
 
3
protected due process rights  when it suspended his license to
3
 Section 1 of the fourteenth amendment of the United States
 
Constitution provides,
 
All persons born or naturalized in the United States,
and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the
United States and of the State wherein they reside. No
 State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the
privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States;
nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or
property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person
within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws. 
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
operate at HIA. It is well-settled that, "To state a claim under 
the fourteenth amendment, a litigant must assert that some state 
action has deprived the litigant of a constitutionally protected 
'liberty' or 'property' interest. Doe v. Doe, 116 Hawai 'i 323, 
333, 172 P.3d 1067, 1077 (2007) (emphasis added and citation omitted). Ho fails to demonstrate that his due process rights 
were violated. 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the January 22, 2013
 
Judgment entered by the District Court of the First Circuit,
 
Honolulu Division.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 8, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Van Ly Ho,
Plaintiff-Appellant, pro se.
 Chief Judge
Howard Glickstein,
for Defendant-AppelleeAssociate Judge
Associate Judge
 .
 
3(...continued)
Article 1 sec. 5 of the Hawai' i State Constitution also provides: 
No person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property
without the due process of law, nor be denied the equal
protection of the laws, nor be denied the enjoyment of the
person's civil rights or be discriminated against in the
exercise thereof because of race, religion, sex or ancestry.
 
3
 