NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000747
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STELLA H. TAVARES, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAII; ROCKNE FREITAS,
Defendants-Appellants
and
DOE PERSONS 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; ROE "NON-PROFIT" CORPORATIONS 1-10,
AND ROE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0248)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
This appeal arises out of a wrongful termination suit
by Plaintiff–Appellant Stella H. Tavares (Tavares) against her
former employer, Defendants-Appellees University of Hawaii and
Rockne Freitas (collectively, UH).  Tavares appeals from the
Final Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
(circuit court)1 on September 17, 2015, in favor of UH as to all
claims and issues between Tavares and UH in this action.
On appeal, Tavares contends that the circuit court
erred in entering summary judgment in favor of UH as to Tavares's
1  The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
discrimination and defamation claims.2  Specifically, Tavares
contends that the circuit court erred in concluding that an
arbitration award arising from an arbitration between the Hawaii
Government Employees Association, on behalf of Tavares, (Union)
and UH (Union-UH arbitration award) had a preclusive effect on
Tavares's statutory discrimination and tort claims against UH in
the instant case.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we affirm.
I. Preclusive Effect of Union-UH Arbitration Award
Tavares contends that the circuit court erred in
concluding that the Union-UH arbitration award had a preclusive
effect on Tavares's statutory discrimination and tort claims at
the hearing on UH's motion for summary judgment (MSJ).  However,
we conclude that this contention is without merit.
We first note that pursuant to Rule 10(b)(1)(A) of the
Hawai#i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP), when an appellant
raises a point of error that requires consideration of the oral
proceedings before the court appealed from, the appellant must
request transcripts of the relevant proceedings.  Here, the
record does not contain any transcripts of the MSJ hearing or a
request by Tavares for transcripts.  In addition, Tavares's
opening brief does not correctly cite to where in the record the
alleged point of error occurred.  See HRAP Rule 28(b)(4).3
We reject Tavares's point of error based on the record
before us because it does not appear that the circuit court
concluded that the Union-UH arbitration award had a preclusive
effect on Tavares's claims.  On appeal, we review de novo the
2  The "Order Granting Defendants' University of Hawaii and Rockne
Freitas' Motion for Summary Judgment Filed on April 1, 2015" (Order Granting
MSJ) also disposed of Tavares's negligent infliction of emotional distress
claim.  However, on appeal, Tavares only appears to challenge the granting of
summary judgment in favor of UH as to her discrimination and defamation
claims.
3Tavares's counsel is warned that, pursuant to HRAP Rule 51, future
non-compliance with HRAP Rule 28(b) may result in sanctions against him.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
circuit court's award of summary judgment in favor of UH.  See
Shoppe v. Gucci Am., Inc., 94 Hawai #i 368, 376, 14 P.3d 1049,
1057 (2000).
II. Discrimination
Under Section 378-2(a)(1)(A) (2015) of the Hawaii
Revised Statutes (HRS), "[i]t shall be an unlawful discriminatory
practice[,] [b]ecause of race, sex including gender identity or
expression, . . . [f]or any employer to . . . discharge from
employment . . . any individual[.]"
In Shoppe v. Gucci America, Inc., 94 Hawai #i 368, 14
P.3d 1049 (2000), the Hawai# i Supreme Court set forth a
three-step analysis for discrimination claims under HRS Chapter
378, applying the test adopted in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v.
Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973).
First, the plaintiff must establish a prima facie case of
discrimination by demonstrating, by a preponderance of
evidence, the following four elements: (1) that plaintiff is
a member of a protected class; (2) that plaintiff is
qualified for the position for which plaintiff has applied
or from which plaintiff has been discharged; (3) that
plaintiff has suffered some adverse employment action, such
as a discharge; and (4) that the position still exists.
Shoppe, 94 Hawai #i at 378, 14 P.3d at 1059.
"Once the plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of
discrimination, the burden of production shifts to the defendant
to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the
adverse employment action."  Id.  In this second step of the
Shoppe-McDonnell  test, "[t]he employer's explanation must be in
the form of admissible evidence and must clearly set forth
reasons that, if believed by the trier of fact, would support a
finding that unlawful discrimination was not the cause of the
challenged employment action."  Id.  "Although the burden of
production is shifted to the employer, the ultimate burden of
persuading the trier of fact that the employer intentionally
discriminated against the plaintiff remains at all times with the
plaintiff."  Id. at 378–79, 14 P.3d at 1059–60 (alteration,
internal quotation marks, and citations omitted).
"[I]f the employer rebuts the prima facie case, the
burden reverts to the plaintiff to demonstrate that the
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
defendant's proffered reasons were 'pretextual.'"  Id. at 379, 14
P.3d at 1060.  In this third step, a plaintiff may establish
pretext by "persuading the court that a discriminatory reason
more likely motivated the employer or ... by showing that the
employer's proffered explanation is unworthy of credence."  Id. 
"If the plaintiff establishes that defendant's proffered reasons
were pretextual, the trier of fact may, but is not required to,
find for the plaintiff. At all times, the burden of persuasion
remains on the plaintiff."  Id.  (citing Sam Teague, Ltd. v.
Hawai#i Civil Rights Comm'n, 89 Hawai #i 269, 279 n. 10, 971 P.2d
1104, 1114 n. 10 (1999).
a. Prima facie case
In the present case, UH does not argue that Tavares has
failed to establish a prima facie case of discrimination.  In
fact, in moving for summary judgment, UH conceded "that [Tavares]
can establish a prima facie [case] of discrimination[.]"  Because
establishment of the first step of the Shoppe-McDonnell  test is
uncontested, for the purposes of this appeal, we assume that the
elements of Tavares's prima facie case of discrimination have
been satisfied.
b. Legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason
UH argues that because the Union-UH arbitration award
determined that Tavares's termination was supported by proper
cause, the collateral estoppel effect of the confirmed award
establishes that the UH satisfied its burden of showing a
"legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason" for terminating Tavares.
The Hawai #i Supreme Court has held
that the doctrine of collateral estoppel bars relitigation
of an issue where: (1) the issue decided in the prior
adjudication is identical to the one presented in the action
in question; (2) there is a final judgment on the merits;
(3) the issue decided in the prior adjudication was
essential to the final judgment; and (4) the party against
whom collateral estoppel is asserted was a party or in
privity with a party to the prior adjudication [hereinafter,
the collateral estoppel test].
Dorrance v. Lee , 90 Hawai #i 143, 149, 976 P.2d 904, 910 (1999).
With respect to the first element of the collateral
estoppel test, Tavares, against whom collateral estoppel is
asserted, seeks to relitigate the issue of whether she was
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
terminated for a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason.  The
arbitrator determined that Tavares's termination was supported by
proper cause, therefore, the issue Tavares now raises was clearly
addressed in the Union-UH arbitration award.
Regarding the second element of the collateral estoppel
test that there be a final judgment on the merits, the Dorrance
court has noted that "an arbitration award that has been reduced
to a judgment is a final judgment for purposes of collateral
estoppel."  Id.  at 148, 976 P.2d at 909.
Here, the circuit court confirmed the Union-UH
arbitration award by written order.  However, there is no
indication in the record that the order confirming the Union-UH
arbitration award was ever reduced to a judgment.  See HRS §
658A-25(a) (2016) ("Upon granting an order confirming . . . an
award, the court shall enter a judgment in conformity
therewith.").
Regardless, entry of a judgment is not necessary for an
order confirming an arbitration award to have a preclusive
effect.  Pursuant to HRS § 658A-28(a)(3), an order confirming an
arbitration award is directly appealable, and entry of a judgment
is merely a ministerial act.  Furthermore, in a dissenting
opinion, Chief Justice Moon opined that even a judicially
unconfirmed arbitration award may be given preclusive effect if
it is final and not subject to change:
the purpose of collateral estoppel is to prevent
inconsistent results, prevent duplicative litigation, and
promote finality and judicial economy.  Thus, for purposes
of collateral estoppel, the requirement of a final judgment
ensures that the decision to be given preclusive effect is
not tentative or subject to change.  Therefore, to determine
whether the arbitrator's decision in this case had
preclusive effect on the trial court requires an examination
as to whether the arbitrator's decision was tentative or
subject to change.
This court has noted that:
An arbitration award is considered to be final
when consideration of the submitted issues has
been concluded and a resolution reached.
Although there is no requirement that the award
be self-executing, and although "it is not
faulty because litigation may ensue in enforcing
it," it should be "sufficiently definite that
only ministerial acts of the parties are needed
to carry it into effect," and "clear enough to
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
indicate unequivocally what each party is
required to do."
Flores v. Barretto , 99 Hawai# i 270, 279-80, 54 P.3d 441, 450-51
(2002) (citations omitted).4
Therefore, we conclude that the order confirming the
Union-UH arbitration award is a final judgment on the merits for
collateral estoppel purposes.
With respect to the third element of the collateral
estoppel test, it is clear that the issue of whether Tavares was
terminated for a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason was
essential to the arbitration award, inasmuch as it was a factor
in determining whether Tavares was terminated for proper cause.
Turning to the fourth and final element of the
collateral estoppel test, we conclude that Tavares, the party
against whom collateral estoppel is asserted, is in privity with
the Union, a party to the prior arbitration.
"Under the doctrine of res judicata, the concept of
privity is merely a word used to say that the relationship
between the one who is a party of record and another is close
enough to include that other within the res ajudicata."  Aloha
Unlimited, Inc. v. Coughlin, 79 Hawai# i 527, 537, 904 P.2d 541,
551 (App. 1995) (citation, internal quotation marks, ellipsis,
and brackets omitted).  "[I]t is not necessary that the party
asserting issue preclusion in the second suit was a party in the
first suit."  Bremer v. Weeks , 104 Hawai #i 43, 54, 85 P.3d 150,
161 (2004) (citation omitted).  Furthermore, courts have held
that "[u]nion members are considered to be in privity with their
union for purposes of collateral estoppel."  City of San Antonio
v. Cortes, 468 S.W.3d 580, 587 (Tex. Ct. App. 2015); cf. In re
the Arbitration Between United Pub. Workers, Local 646 v. Cty. of
Hawai#i-Holiday Pay (2003-022B), 125 Hawai #i 476, 485-86, 264 P.3d
655, 664-65 (App. 2011) (affirming the confirmation of an
arbitration award in which the arbitrator found, in good faith,
4  The majority decision of Flores did not conflict with Chief Justice
Moon's analysis that an unconfirmed arbitration award that is final and not
subject to change is considered a "final judgment" for collateral estoppel
purposes.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
that the County of Hawaii and State of Hawaii were in privity for
collateral estoppel purposes because of the contractual
relationship among the employee group members and the parties'
substantive legal relationship).  Thus, a union arbitration may
bar issues from being litigated by union members in subsequent
litigation.  See DaLuz v. Dep't of Correction , 746 N.E.2d 501,
505-06 (Mass. 2001) ("[U]nion members[] were in privity with
their union" and collaterally estopped from relitigating issues
decided in a union arbitration).
Here, we conclude that the relationship between Tavares
and the Union was "close enough to include that other within the
res ajudicata."  See Aloha Unlimited, Inc. , 79 Hawai #i at 537,
904 P.2d at 551.  In the Union-UH arbitration, the Union was
acting directly on behalf of Tavares in connection with her
termination by UH.  Tavares was also given an opportunity to
testify during the arbitration process.  Therefore, we reject
Tavares's argument that collateral estoppel does not bar her from
relitigating issues adjudicated by the arbitrator because she was
not a party to the Union-UH arbitration or the subsequent court
confirmation.
Accordingly, we conclude that the collateral estoppel
effect of the confirmation of the Union-UH arbitration award
satisfies UH's burden to show a legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reason for terminating Tavares.
c. Whether UH's reasons were "pre-textual"
Because UH, through the Union-UH arbitration award,
rebutted any prima facie case of discrimination by establishing
that its reason for terminating Tavares was legitimate and
nondiscriminatory, the burden reverts back to Tavares to
demonstrate that UH's reasons for terminating her were
"pretextual."  In order to establish pretext, Tavares was
required to persuade the court that either UH was more likely
motivated by a discriminatory reason or that UH's proffered
explanation is unworthy of credence.  Shoppe, 94 Hawai #i at 379,
14 P.3d at 1060.
In her opposition to UH's MSJ, Tavares did not argue
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
that a discriminatory reason more likely motivated UH to
terminate her.  Instead, she attempted to argue that UH's reasons
for terminating her were not credible, alleging that the
unauthorized materials on her computer were transferred there by
mistake and/or tampered with by UH.  However, because the
arbitrator specifically found that UH's reasons for terminating
Tavares were legitimate, we reject Tavares's allegations and
conclude that Tavares failed to meet her burden of establishing a
material factual issue regarding pretext.
Accordingly, we affirm the circuit court's granting of
summary judgment in favor of UH as to Tavares's discrimination
claim.
III. Defamation   
To prove defamation, the plaintiff must establish four
elements:
(a) a false and defamatory statement concerning another;
(b) an unprivileged publication to a third party;
(c) fault amounting at least to negligence on the part of
the publisher [actual malice where the plaintiff is a public
figure]; and
(d) either actionability of the statement irrespective of
special harm or the existence of special harm caused by the
publication.
Beamer v. Nishiki , 66 Haw. 572, 578–79, 670 P.2d 1264, 1271
(1983) (citing Restatement (Second) of Torts § 558 (1977)).  For
the purposes of this appeal, we focus on element (a).
In Gold v. Harrison , 88 Hawai #i 94, 962 P.2d 353
(1998), the Hawai# i Supreme Court adopted a three-part test set
forth by the Ninth Circuit for determining whether a statement
was false and defamatory:
(1) whether the general tenor of the entire work negates the
impression that the defendant was asserting an objective
fact[;] (2) whether the defendant used figurative or
hyperbolic language that negates that impression [;] and (3)
whether the statement in question is susceptible of being
proved true or false.
Id. at 101, 962 P.2d at 360 (quoting Fasi v. Gannett Co. , 930 F.
Supp. 1403, 1409 (D. Hawai #i 1995)).
Here, Tavares's Complaint vaguely alleges that UH had
"published, disseminated, and/or communicated and/or caused to be
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
published, disseminated and/or communicated, and/or ratified and
adopted," false and defamatory statements regarding Tavares's
employment.  However, in her opposition to UH's MSJ, Tavares
alleges only a single "defamatory act," which is a statement
contained in a petition dated March 11, 2005.  The petition,
which is signed by nine faculty members of the Business Education
Technology Division of Hawai# i Community College, states as
follows:  "We the undersigned full-time faculty members of the
Business Education and Technology Division request that,
regardless of the outcome of the current investigation, it is in
the best interest of all parties involved that Ms. Stella Tavares
NOT be reassigned to BEAT."
We conclude that this statement is not a false and
defamatory statement on the basis that it neither asserts any
objective fact, nor can be proven true or false.  See id.  The
statement was merely a request that Tavares not be reassigned to
the division she previously worked for, coupled with an opinion
that accommodating such a request would be "in the best interest"
of those involved.  The statement did not contain any objective
facts or allegations.
Because the only defamatory act alleged by Tavares is
missing essential element (a), Tavares's defamation claim fails,
entitling UH to summary judgment on this claim.
Based on the foregoing, the Final Judgment entered by
the circuit court on September 17, 2015 is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 22, 2018.
On the briefs:
Ted H.S. Hong,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Richard M. Rand,
(Marr Jones & Wang),
for Defendants-Appellees.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
9