NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000547
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
IN THE INTEREST OF SA, JA, SAA, JKH, and JKHA
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(FC-S NO. 17-00050)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Acting Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
Respondent/Father-Appellant ( Father) appeals from the
Orders Concerning Child Protective Act ( Orders) entered on June
30, 2017, by the Family Court of the First Circuit ( Family
Court).1  The Family Court awarded foster custody of five
children (collectively, Children),2 including Father's children,
JH and JH-A, to Respondent-Appellee Department of Human Services
(DHS). 
1The Honorable Jeffrey A. Hawk presided.
2 Children are SCA, JA, SAA, JH, and JH-A.  JH and JH-A
are Father's children with his girlfriend (Mother); SAA is
Mother's child with another man, SA; and SCA and JA are Mother's
children with a third man.  Father, Mother, and Children lived
together when DHS received the report of Father's sexual abuse of
SAA.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Father primarily argues that the Family Court clearly
erred by awarding DHS foster custody of JH and JH-A3 because the
evidence was insufficient to show that he sexually abused SAA. 
Related to this point, Father contends that, in the Family
Court's September 7, 2017 Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
(FOF/COL), FOFs 17,4 25, 26,5 and 28-316 are clearly erroneous. 
3 Although Father contests the Family Court's award of
foster custody of all of the children, it appears that he has
standing only to contest the award of foster custody of JH and
JH-A, his biological children.  The record on appeal appears to
be devoid of any evidence that Father was the other children's
legal or adoptive father or legal guardian or custodian.  See
Hawai#i Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 587A-4 (Supp. 2017) (defining
"parent" as the legal parent, birth or adoptive father, or legal
guardian or custodian). 
4FOF 17 provides "[Father's] sexual abuse of [SSA] and
threat of harm to [the other children] seriously impairs his
ability to parent [Children]." 
5 FOFs 25 and 26 provide:
25.  The DHS SW supervisor Hinda Diamond
[(Diamond )] was a credible witness.
26.  [SA, biological father of SAA,] was a
credible witness.
6 FOFs 28-31 provide:
28.  Dr. Kayal Natarajan was a credible
witness.
29.  [SAA's] testimony in her videotaped
December 14, 2016 forensic interview was credible.
30.  [SAA's] videotaped forensic interview
dated December 14, 2016 was admitted into evidence
as exhibit 9 and viewed in camera by the Court. 
[SAA's] statements in that interview were
consistent with her disclosure of sexual harm to
[SA] and Dr. Natarajan and indicated that she had
been sexually abused by [Father] and the Court
hereby finds that [Father] sexually abused [SAA].
31.  There was no credible and compelling
evidence presented that any coaching, leading,
non-verbal cues, or otherwise inappropriate
interview techniques were used during [SAA']s
forensic interview dated December 14, 2016. 
Likewise, [SAA's] ability to tell the truth and
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
We infer7 from Father's arguments that he also contests FOFs 238
and 339 and COLs 5 and 6.10
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Father's points of error as follows:
(1) While the instant case was pending, Father was
charged in a separate, criminal case with sexually assaulting a
minor.  The complaining witness in the criminal case ( CW) is not
one of the five children involved in the instant case.  Father
moved the Family Court to continue the trial in this case on the
ground that it could impair his defense in the criminal case. 
Father's offer of proof was that, if called to testify before the
Family Court, he would have testified that CW and SAA "talked
about coming up with some allegations against [Father]."   The
her understanding that she was to tell the truth
were sufficiently established.
7 Counsel is cautioned to identify the specific FOFs and
COLs related to each issue on appeal.  See Rule 28(b)(4)(C) of
the Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP ).  
8 FOF 23 provides, in relevant part, "None of the
underlying facts and data upon which DHS based its opinions,
assessments and recommendations were shown to be untrustworthy." 
9 FOF 33 provides, "It is contrary to the immediate
welfare of [Children] to remain in the family home."
10 COLs 5 and 6 provide:
5.  [Children's] physical or psychological
health or welfare have been harmed or are subject
to threatened harm by the acts or omissions of
[Children's] family.
6.  . . . [Father] [is] not willing and able
to provide [Children] with a safe family home even
with the assistance of a service plan.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Family Court denied the motion and held trial as scheduled. 
Father did not testify.  On appeal, Father argues that the Family
Court abused its discretion in denying his motion to continue
because, as a result of the denial of the request for a
continuance, Father was forced to assert his Fifth Amendment
privilege in this case or risk impairing his defense in the
criminal case. 
The Family Court's primary consideration was JH and JH-
A's best interests.  See HRS § 571-46 (Supp. 2017) and § 587A-2
(Supp. 2017).  The court, in finding that a year could pass
before Father went to trial in the criminal case,11 denied the
continuance because it would delay reunification with Mother12
and not be in the Children's best interest.  See HRS § 587A-2. 
This was not an abuse of discretion. 
Further, the Family Court did not abuse its discretion
in rejecting Father's argument that he had established good cause
to grant a continuance.  As DHS argues, Father could have
testified without the risk of self-incrimination by invoking HRS
§ 587A-20 (Supp. 2017), which provides:
§ 587A-20.  Inadmissibility of evidence in other state
actions or proceedings.  The court may order that testimony
or other evidence produced by a party in a proceeding under
this chapter shall be inadmissible as evidence in any other
state civil or criminal action or proceeding if the court
deems such an order to be in the best interests of the
child. 
11 Father had not been arraigned yet in the criminal case.
12 In the May 10, 2017 service plan, DHS recommended
services to Mother with the goal of reunifying her with Children. 
Reunification with Father is not a goal of the service plan. 
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Father never requested that the Family Court enter an
order allowing him to testify without his testimony being
admissible in the criminal proceedings, as permitted pursuant to
HRS § 587A-20.  No other party to this proceeding sought to call
Father as a witness.  We conclude that HRS § 587A-20 provided
adequate protection against the possible use of Father's
testimony in this case against Father in the criminal case.  See 
In re P Children , No. CAAP-16-0000696, 2017 WL 2829537140 (Haw.
App. June 29, 2017) (SDO) (rejecting an argument similar to
Father's argument here).  No other grounds for a continuance were
raised.
Given these circumstances, we cannot say the Family
Court abused its discretion in denying the motion.
(2) Father argues that the Family Court erred in
finding that he sexually abused SAA based on the testimony of
SAA's father, SA; Dr. Kayal Natarajan, who performed a medical
examination of SAA following the report of sexual abuse to DHS;
and social worker Hinda Diamond (Diamond ).  Father also asserts
error based on the Family Court finding SAA's videotaped forensic
interview credible.  Father essentially claims that the testimony
and SAA's videotaped interview were not credible or reliable, and 
without it, there was insufficient evidence that he sexually
abused SAA.  It is well-settled that this court declines to pass
upon the Family Court's determination regarding the witness
credibility and the weight of the evidence.  See Fisher v.
Fisher, 111 Hawai
#i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006).  FOFs 17,
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, and 33 are not clearly erroneous and
COLs 5 and 6 are not wrong.
For these reasons, the Family Court's June 30, 2017
Orders Concerning Child Protective Act are affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 28, 2018.
On the briefs:
Herbert Y. Hamada,
for Father-Appellant.Acting Chief Judge
Scott D. Boone,
Julio C. Herrera,
Jay K. Goss,
Deputy Attorneys General,
for Petitioner-Appellee
Department of Human Services.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Randal I. Shintani,
for Mother-Appellee.
Michele K. Moorhead,
(Legal Aid Society of Hawai# i),
Guardian Ad Litem.
6