NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0000032
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
STEVEN ALLEN SMITH, Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-1804)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) appeals 
from the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting 
Defendant's Motion to Suppress Statements (Suppression Order), 
filed on December 19, 2012, in the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit (circuit court).1 
In its Suppression Order, relying on State v. Eli, 126 
Hawai'i 510, 273 P.3d 1196 (2012), the circuit court granted 
Defendant-Appellee Steven Allen Smith's (Smith) motion to suppress a recorded statement that Smith gave to a Honolulu 
Police Department (HPD) detective (Detective) while in custody at 
the HPD main station. 
1
 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, the State challenges the circuit court's
 
conclusions of law regarding Eli and the granting of Smith's
 
Motion to Suppress Statements (motion to suppress).
 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm.
 
I. Standard of Review
 
We review the circuit court's ruling on a motion to suppress
de novo and must look to the entire record on appeal to
determine whether the ruling was right or wrong. A trial
 court's conclusions of law are reviewed under the
 right/wrong standard. A conclusion of law is not binding
upon an appellate court and is freely reviewable for its
correctness. This court examines the facts and answers the
 question without being required to give any weight to the
trial court's answer to it.
 
State v. Joseph, 109 Hawai 'i 482, 493, 128 P.3d 795, 806 (2006) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted).
 
II. Background
 
On December 5, 2011, Detective initially met with Smith
 
outside of an HPD interview room. As found by the circuit court
 
and unchallenged on appeal, at that time Smith was under arrest
 
and in custody for Attempted Murder in the Second Degree and
 
Robbery in the First Degree.
 
Without first providing a Miranda warning, Detective
 
asked Smith whether he would like to give a statement. Smith
 
acknowledged that he wanted to speak with Detective. Smith and
 
Detective then entered the nearby interview room and Detective
 
turned on the tape recorder. Detective asked multiple
 
"precursory" questions prior to administering Smith's Miranda
 
rights. Smith elected to waive his Miranda rights and to answer
 
Detective's questions. 
On December 14, 2011, the State charged Smith with
 
Robbery in the First Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 708-840(1)(b)(i) (Supp. 2012), Attempted Assault
 
in the First Degree in violation of HRS §§ 705-500, 707-710
 
(1993), and Assault in the Second Degree in violation of HRS
 
§ 707-711(1)(d) (Supp. 2012). On July 20, 2012, Smith filed a
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3motion to suppress.  On November 19, 2012, the circuit court held
a hearing on the motion to suppress. 
On December 19, 2012, the circuit court granted Smith's
motion to suppress and made the following findings of fact and
conclusions of law. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
1.On December 5, 2011, at around noon, [Detective] met
the Defendant for the first time at the HPD Main
Station, in the area near the police station's
interview area.
2.[Detective] asked the Defendant his name, introduced himself
and then asked the Defendant if he would like to make a
statement. [Detective] informed the Defendant that he could
refuse to make a statement and could speak to an attorney.
3.At the time, as suggested by State's exhibit 3, the
Defendant was under arrest and in custody for Attempted
Murder in the Second Degree and Robbery in the First Degree.
4.[Detective] said nothing to the Defendant about sharing the
Defendant's side of the story or any other allegations
relating to the case.
5.The Defendant acknowledged that he wanted to speak with
[Detective], so the two went to an interview room, where
[Detective] turned on [a] tape recorder.
6.At the start of the recording, [Detective] stated that "the
following is going to be a digitally recorded interview with
a suspect . . . I want to ask you before I turned on the
digital recorder did we discuss anything about the case?" 
The Defendant answered, "No, we didn't."
7.Subsequently, [Detective] administered to the Defendant his
Miranda rights and the Defendant elected to waive those
rights and answer [Detective's] questions.
8.If any of these findings of fact are later found to be
conclusions of law, they shall be so deemed.
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
1.On December 5, 2011, at the time of the interview in
question, the Defendant was in custody.
2.State v. Eli, 126 Haw. 510 at 522-23 (2012) suggests
at some points that merely asking a Defendant whether
he wants to give a statement, without more, and before
administering Miranda Rights, constitutes a violation
of a Defendant's constitutional rights. However, the
case also discusses its specific facts in seeking to
answer the question of whether "Interrogation" NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
occurred, to wit, whether or not the officer "should
have known that his words or actions were reasonably
likely to elicit an incriminating response from the
person in custody . . . to speak about the
circumstances of the case that had resulted from his
 arrest." As the Supreme Court stated: "Given that
 the Defendant was advised he was under arrest for
 assault, and his child was in the hospital allegedly
due to his acts, the Detective should have known that
asking him for his side of the story and indicating
that it was his chance to give that story, was
'reasonably likely' to elicit an incriminating
response; in other words, it was reasonably likely
that the Detective's question and statement solicited
the Defendant to speak about the circumstances of the
case that had resulted in his arrest. Id.
 
3.	 Here, if the test is whether under these circumstances
[Detective] should have known that his words or
actions were reasonably likely to elicit an
incriminating response from the person in custody,
then asking the question, "Would you like to make a
statement?" without more seems neutrally worded and
not necessarily reasonably likely to elicit an
incriminating response. If Eli's test dictates that
 merely asking, before an administration of Miranda
Rights, whether a custodial suspect wants to give a
statement, without anything more, is a per se
violation of Miranda, then this motion must be
granted.
 
4.	 Based upon the foregoing, the Motion is GRANTED.
 
On appeal, the State contends that the circuit court 
erred in its Conclusions of Law 2, 3, and 4 and in granting 
Defendant's motion to suppress. The circuit court's findings of 
fact are unchallenged and therefore we are bound by those 
findings. State v. Rapozo, 123 Hawai 'i 329, 334 n.4, 235 P.3d 
325, 330 n.4 (2010). 
III. Discussion
 
Miranda warnings must be provided when a defendant is 
"(1) in custody, and (2) under interrogation." State v. Eli, 126 
Hawai'i 510, 521, 273 P.3d 1196, 1207 (2012) (citing State v. Ah 
Loo, 94 Hawai 'i 207, 210, 10 P.3d 728, 731 (2000)). Here, the 
State agrees, and there is no question, that Smith was under 
arrest and in custody. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
This appeal thus initially turns on whether Smith was 
"under interrogation" before Detective provided Smith with his 
Miranda rights. In Eli, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court stated: 
As to interrogation, this court has held that it involves
any practice reasonably likely to invoke an incriminating
response without regard to objective evidence of the intent
of the police. The interrogation element depends on whether
the police officer should have known that his or her words
or actions were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating
response from the person in custody. As stated before, an
incriminating response refers to both inculpatory and
exculpatory responses.
 
Eli, 126 Hawai 'i at 522, 273 P.3d at 1208 (citations, internal 
quotation marks, and brackets omitted). In Eli, the
 
circumstances were a little different than this case. In
 
particular, in Eli, during the pre-interview before giving the
 
defendant his Miranda rights, the detective not only asked the
 
defendant if he wanted to give a statement, but also told the
 
defendant it was his "chance to give his side of the story." Id.
 
at 515, 273 P.3d at 1201. Moreover, in Eli, the detective agreed
 that he had obtained a waiver from the defendant before
 
administering the Miranda warnings. Id. at 515-16, 273 P.3d at
 
1201-02.
 
On the question of interrogation, Eli provides, in
 
pertinent part:
 
Given that Defendant was advised he was under arrest
 
for assault, and his child was in the hospital allegedly due
to his acts, Detective should have known that asking
Defendant for his side of the story and indicating that it
was his chance to give that story was "reasonably likely" to
elicit an incriminating response; in other words, it was
reasonably likely that the detective's question and
statement solicited Defendant to speak about the
circumstances of the case that had resulted in his arrest.
 Similar to 
Joseph, the detective's pre-interview invitation
to Defendant to give his "side of the story" was a "practice
reasonably likely to invoke an incriminating response [even]
without regard to ... the intent of the police[.]" Joseph,
109 Hawai' i at 495, 128 P.3d at 808. Moreover, in this case
the detective concurred that by his prior questions he had
already obtained an answer from Defendant—a "waiver" that he
was going to "give a statement," although Defendant had yet
to be informed of his Miranda rights. Hence, under the
circumstances, "it is evident that Miranda warnings, as
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
independently grounded in the Hawai' i Constitution, [were]
required prior to [this] pre-interview." Id. at 495, 128 
P.3d at 808. 
Id. at 522-23, 273 P.3d at 1208-09. The supreme court further
 
reasoned:
 
The police's custodial solicitation of Defendant's
side of the story without first informing Defendant that he
had the right to remain silent is prohibited under Miranda.
 It must be reemphasized that "Miranda recognizes a waiver of
rights only if those rights are known to the defendant[,]"
and "[n]othing but mischief would flow from a rule that
would permit a defendant to waive the right to be informed
 of the rights embodied in the Miranda warnings." [Joseph] at
497 128 P.3d at 810 (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted) (emphases added).
 
By asking Defendant if he wanted to give his side of
the story without first stating the Miranda warnings,
Detective violated Defendant's right to be informed of his
right to remain silent before making the decision and
commitment to give a statement. In inviting Defendant to
speak and in obtaining his commitment to do so before
Miranda warnings were given, the police elicited statements
without informing Defendant of the consequences of his
waiving his right to remain silent and the entire panoply of
rights such a commitment involved. In effect, in getting
Defendant to agree to give a statement before being informed
of his rights, the police invoked a practice that would
permit a defendant to waive the right to be informed of his
Miranda rights when Miranda recognizes a waiver of rights
only if those rights are known to the defendant. See id.
Accordingly, in this case there could be no valid waiver of
Defendant's right to remain silent.
 
Id. at 523, 273 P.3d at 1209 (underline emphasis added).
 
Here, at the time Detective asked Smith whether Smith
 
wanted to make a statement, Smith had been under arrest and in
 
custody for Attempted Murder in the Second Degree and Robbery in
 
the First Degree. The record reflects that two officers had
 
retrieved Smith from his cell and brought him to an area near the
 
interview rooms, where Smith met Detective for the first time. 
After asking Smith his name and introducing himself, Detective
 
asked Smith if he wanted to make a statement. Detective informed
 
Smith that he could refuse to make a statement and could speak to
 
an attorney, but Detective did not provide Smith with his full
 
Miranda rights at that time. Smith indicated he wanted to speak
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to Detective and they then entered an interview room where
 
Detective activated a tape recorder. Unlike in Eli, Detective
 
did not give Smith his Miranda rights immediately after Smith
 
indicated he wanted to give a statement. Rather, Detective asked
 
Smith more than thirty-five questions before giving Smith his
 
Miranda rights.
 
This case is not exactly like Eli. When Detective
 
asked Smith if he wanted to make a statement, Detective did not
 
also tell Smith it was Smith's chance to tell his side of the
 
story. Under the circuit court's ruling, this distinction would
 
be immaterial because the court interpreted Eli as setting forth
 
a per se rule that merely asking whether a custodial suspect
 
wants to give a statement before administering the Miranda rights
 
is prohibited. We do not agree that Eli sets out such a per se
 
rule in every circumstance. However, neither do we believe that
 
Eli is limited to situations where, in addition to inviting a
 
statement, an officer tells a person in custody that it is his or
 
her chance to tell their side of the story. Rather, we conclude
 
that this case is similar enough to Eli that admission of Smith's
 
recorded statement is precluded. That is, after being held in
 
custody, Smith was invited to make a statement by Detective and
 
appears to have made a commitment to make a statement without
 
having been given his Miranda rights. Although Detective did not
 
explicitly agree, like the detective in Eli, that he had secured
 
a waiver from Smith before providing the Miranda rights,
 
Detective did testify that he asked Smith questions before going
 
into the interview room because "[i]f he doesn't want to go and
 
provide me a statement, I'm not going to inconvenience him and
 
take him into an interview room or -– or, you know, displace him
 
if he doesn't want to make a statement."
 
Moreover, after Smith indicated that he wanted to make
 
a statement, Detective asked Smith a number of questions before
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
eventually giving Smith his Miranda rights, including questions
 
about Smith's nicknames, address, social security number, phone
 
number, employment, understanding of the English language,
 
schooling, medication, recent drug use, and his consumption of
 
alcohol prior to being arrested. Although Detective testified
 
that these were "precursory" questions just to establish that
 
Smith was in the right frame of mind and was not incompetent,
 
some of these pre-Miranda questions pertained generally to the
 
time period during which the alleged offenses had occurred the
 
previous day.
 
Under the circumstances of this case, we therefore hold
 
that Smith was "under interrogation" before he was given his
 
Miranda rights.
 
Furthermore, Smith's statements after being given his 
Miranda rights are not admissible at trial because "the fruit of 
the poisonous tree doctrine prohibits the use of a statement at 
trial which has come to light as a result of the exploitation of 
a previous illegal act of the police." Eli, 126 Hawai 'i at 523, 
273 P.3d at 1209 (quoting Joseph, 109 Hawai 'i at 498, 128 P.3d at 
811) (internal quotations marks and brackets omitted). When a 
defendant's Mirandized statement is "directly 'predicated' on his 
agreement, pre-Miranda, to make a statement[,]" then the 
"Mirandized statement was obtained by exploiting the illegality 
of the pre-interview procedure." Id. at 524, 273 P.3d at 1210. 
Here, after being given his Miranda rights, Smith
 
agreed to tell Detective "what happened." However, Smith's
 
subsequent Mirandized statements were directly predicated on his
 
telling Detective, before entering the interview room, that he
 
would give a statement. Moreover, we agree with Smith that the
 
"precursory" questions Detective asked after they entered the
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interview room and pre-Miranda, had the effect of solidifying
 
Smith's agreement to give a statement.
 
Further, there were no intervening circumstances 
between the pre- and post-Miranda interviews between Smith and 
Detective that dissipated the taint of the pre-interview 
violation. See Eli, 126 Hawai 'i at 525, 273 P.3d at 1211. The 
taint may dissipate if the pre- and post-Miranda interviews were not conducted by the same detective or if a sufficient amount of 
time passed between the two interviews. Id. at 524-25, 273 P.3d 
at 1210-11. Here, Detective conducted both interviews and the only intervening events involved entering the interview room, 
beginning the digital recording, and Detective asking the 
"precursory" questions. 
IV. Conclusion
 
Based on the above, the Findings of Fact, Conclusions
 
of Law and Order Granting Defendant's Motion to Suppress
 
Statement, filed on December 19, 2012, in the Circuit Court of
 
the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 13, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
James M. Anderson 
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Summer M.M. KupauDeputy Public DefenderOffice of the Public Defender for Defendant-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9
 