NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000709
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
GARY VAUGHAN, Defendant-Appellant
(FC-CR NO. 06-1-0456) 
AND
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
GARY VAUGHAN, Defendant-Appellant
(FC-CR NO. 09-1-0448) 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Gary Vaughan ("Vaughan") appeals
 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence in FC-CR No. 06-1­
456 ("Judgment 1") and the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence in
 
1
FC-CR No. 09-1-448 ("Judgment 2"),  both filed on August 29,
2011, in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit ("Circuit
 Court").
2 In Judgment 1, Vaughan was convicted of two counts of
 
sexual assault in the first degree pursuant to Hawaii Revised
 Statutes ("HRS") § 707-730(1)(c), eight counts of sexual assault
 in the third degree pursuant to HRS § 707-732(1)(b), and two
 counts of sexual assault in the third degree pursuant to HRS
 § 707-732(1)(c). Vaughan was sentenced to five years
 imprisonment for each count of sexual assault in the third degree
 
1
 Case numbers FC-CR 06-1-0456 and FC-CR 09-1-0448 were consolidated
 
for trial. 
2
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and twenty years for both of the first-degree-sexual-assault
 
counts, with the sentences on all counts to be served
 concurrently. In Judgment 2, Vaughan was convicted of six counts
 of sexual assault in the first degree pursuant to HRS § 707­732(1)(b) and three counts of attempted sexual assault in the
 first degree pursuant to HRS §§ 707-732(1)(b) and 705-500(1)(b). 
Vaughan was sentenced to serve twenty years in prison for each of
 the nine counts, with the sentences for Counts 1 through 4 to be
 served concurrently with each other, the sentences for Counts 5
 through 8 to be served concurrently with each other, but the
 sentences for Counts 1 through 4 to be served consecutive to the
 sentences for Counts 5 through 8, and consecutively with the
 sentence for Count 9. The sentences imposed by Judgment 1 and
 Judgment 2 run concurrently. 
On appeal, Vaughan contends that the Circuit Court
 
erred in (1) denying Vaughan's challenge of juror AH ("Juror AH")
 for cause; (2) denying Vaughan's challenge of juror PE ("Juror
 PE") for cause; (3) denying Vaughan's challenge of prospective
 juror SS ("Juror SS") for cause; (4) denying Vaughan's request
 for additional peremptory challenges; and (5) denying Vaughan's
 challenge of juror IJ ("Juror IJ") for cause.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Vaughan's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Vaughan argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
passing Juror AH for cause because "she could not commit to be
 being [sic] fair and impartial in this case." 
Appellate courts will set aside findings of
 
impartiality only where prejudice is manifest. State v. Graham,
 
70 Haw. 627, 634, 780 P.2d 1103, 1107 (1989). A person with
 "preconceived notions about a case" can serve as a juror if he or
 she "can lay aside his impression or opinion and render a verdict
 based on the evidence presented in court." Id. (quoting Irvin v.
 
Dowd, 366 U.S. 717, 723 (1961)) (citation and internal quotation
 marks omitted). A juror's inability to say with complete
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
certainty that he or she will be fair and impartial does not 
mandate removal for cause. Accord Ellis v. State, 736 S.E.2d 
412, 420 (Ga. 2013). In Graham, for instance, the trial court passed a juror despite her statement that she had "serious doubts" that she could be fair because of her exposure to pre­trial media publicity; the Supreme Court held that the defendant failed to show error as the juror also stated that she would try to base her decision on the evidence and would try to be fair to the defendant. 70 Haw. at 633–637, 780 P.2d at 1107–1109. And in State v. Cardus, 86 Hawai
'i 426, 949 P.2d 1047 (App. 1998), 
this court held that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying the defendant's request to remove two jurors for cause where one expressed concern over the length of judicial proceedings but said that he would "do his best" and "try to be as fair and as impartial as he could be" and the other said that, despite her concerns that she might not be well-rested during trial, she would "do her best" and thought she could "do the job." 86 Hawai
'i at 438, 949 P.2d at 1059 (internal brackets and 
quotation marks omitted). 
Here, the Circuit Court did not err in passing Juror AH
 
for cause. Although Juror AH stated that she was generally
 angered by the thought that any adult could hurt a child and
 generally thought of children as being "so honest and so
 trusting," Juror AH said that she "can say honestly that [she]
 would try to" not let her personal feelings interfere with her
 decision-making and "can honestly say [she] thinks [she] can try
 to" set aside her feelings and biases with respect to her belief
 that children tend to be truthful. Juror AH further stated that
 she thought that she could wait until she heard the evidence to
 decide "what is believable or not." Thus, although Juror AH
 could not guarantee that her emotions would not affect her, the
 Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in refusing to excuse
 her for cause.
 
(2) Vaughan argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
passing Juror PE for cause because Juror PE had been sexually
 assaulted. Vaughan contends that pursuant to State v. Larue, 68
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Haw. 575, 722 P.2d 1039 (1986), and examining Juror PE's
 
situation objectively, Juror PE should have been excused for
 cause. 
Larue is not on point. In Larue, the primary issue was
 
the reliability of three minor complaining witnesses who claimed
 to have been sexually molested by the defendant. 68 Haw. at 576,
 722 P.2d at 1041. During deliberations, the foreperson told the
 jury that when she was three years old, she remembered being
 touched inappropriately by her uncle, although she did not reveal
 this fact during voir dire. Id. at 576–78, 722 P.2d at 1041–42. 
The foreperson related her experience to the jury in the context
 of whether one of the complaining witnesses could remember what
 happened to her. Id. at 577, 722 P.2d at 1041–42. The Supreme
 
Court held that the foreperson was "vouching for, and attempting
 to secure the acceptance by the jury of, the reliability of the
 statements of the minor complainants as to their sexual
 molestation by appellant, based not upon evidence in the record,
 or their appearance on the stand, but upon her own similar
 personal experience and recollection thereof." Id. at 578, 722
 
P.2d at 1042. The Court stated that if the foreperson had
 revealed her experience during voir dire, "there can be no
 question that she would have been subject to a challenge for
 cause, because it is clear that, given the central issue of
 reliability of the children's statements in this case, a person
 with such an experience and recollection thereof cannot, no
 matter how hard they try, really be an impartial juror." Id.
 
Juror PE, however, was eighteen years old when she was
 
attacked, not a young child. Juror PE's ordeal – she was
 violently attacked by a stranger when she was a young adult – is
 different from that of the children in this case, who were
 sexually assaulted by their stepfather when they were still
 children. Because of this difference, Juror PE's specific
 experience would not appear to give her substantial insight into
 the memory and psychology of child victims of sexual abuse. 
Contrary to Vaughan's contention, Larue does not stand for the
 proposition that victims of sexual assault, no matter how
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
different their own experiences were from those to be revealed at
 
trial, cannot serve as fair and impartial jurors in sexual-
assault cases involving minors.
 
Vaughan fails to show that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in passing Juror PE for cause. The record shows that
 despite the horrific nature of her sexual assault, Juror PE
 handled her situation with strength and resolve. As the Circuit
 Court found, she went on to be a nurse who was capable of
 separating her emotions and feelings from what duty required of
 her. Juror PE stated that while a sexual-assault case might make
 her feel "slightly uncomfortable," she believed she could be an
 impartial juror. Vaughan fails to show an abuse of discretion.
 
(3) Vaughan argues that the Circuit Court erred in 
passing Juror SS for cause because she had a "personal relationship with deputy prosecuting attorney Kagami [("DPA Kagami")] and his wife" and because she thought DPA Kagami was a "'nice guy.'" Citing State v. Kauhi, 86 Hawai
'i 195, 948 P.2d 
1036 (1997), Vaughan argues that this relationship created an "appearance of impropriety and implied bias as a matter of law[.]" 
In Kauhi, the defendant challenged a prospective juror 
because he was then currently employed as a deputy prosecuting attorney for the City and County of Honolulu, which was prosecuting the case against the defendant. 86 Hawai
'i at 
197–98, 948 P.2d at 1038–39. The trial court denied the challenge, finding that the prospective juror's responses demonstrated that he could be impartial. Id. at 198, 948 P.2d at 
1039. The Supreme Court applied an appearance-of-impropriety standard to the case "where a prosecutor, currently in the employ of the same office of the very prosecutor who is trying the defendant, is called for jury service." Id. at 199, 948 P.2d at 
1040. The Court cited to concurring and dissenting opinions of the United States Supreme Court in Smith v. Phillips, 455 U.S. 209 (1982), which discussed the possibility of implying bias in extreme circumstances, such as where a juror is an employee of the prosecuting agency, the juror is a close relative to a 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
participant at trial or the criminal transaction, or where the
 
juror has some connection to the criminal transaction. See id.
 
at 200, 948 P.2d at 1041. The Kauhi court ultimately held that a
 trial court must "imply bias as a matter of law and dismiss the
 prospective juror for cause" when the prospective juror is a
 prosecutor employed by the same office prosecuting the case at
 hand. Id.
 
Vaughan would stretch the implied-bias standard to
 
cover prospective jurors who have had some degree of personal
 relationship with a prosecuting attorney or the attorney's
 spouse.
3 Such a situation, however, is not one where the
 
probability of bias is so high that the prospective juror should
 be deemed biased as a matter of law. Id. Thus, Kauhi does not
 
apply to bar Juror SS.
 
Vaughan fails to show that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in passing Juror SS for cause. Juror SS stated that
 she and DPA Kagami's wife were "probably little more than
 acquaintances," knowing her from work. She explained that while
 she had talked to DPA Kagami at some parties, she believed that
 an acquittal would not negatively affect her relationship with
 the Kagamis. Juror SS also stated that, in her job, she has to
 be neutral, look at all of the facts before she makes a decision,
 and that whether she knows someone personally or not does not
 influence whether she believes something is right or wrong. 
3
 At oral argument, the issue of Juror SS's professional connection
to the prosecutor's office was raised for the first time. Juror SS stated
 
that she was a probation officer and that, in that role, she had worked with
the prosecutor's office on one or two probation revocation proceedings. As
 described, that work arrangement involved the probation officer filing a
revocation report with the prosecutor's office and the prosecutor's office
proceeding to court with the request. Juror SS specifically noted that she
had never worked with DPA Kagami on a professional basis or discussed work
with him.
 
At trial, however, Vaughan only challenged Juror SS on the grounds that
she "socializes" with DPA Kagami, not on the basis that a probation officerwas tainted by her relationship with the prosecuting attorney's office. Thus,any potential bias arising as a result of her professional relationship with
the prosecutor's office was not raised below and is waived. See State v. 
Moses, 102 Hawai' i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003). Furthermore, arguments
cannot be raised for the first time at oral argument on appeal, and this issue
was not raised in Vaughan's opening brief. This also constitutes waiver of 
the argument. See Hana Ranch, Inc. v. Kaholo, 2 Haw. App. 329, 332, 632 P.2d
293, 295 (1981). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Finally, Juror SS said that she felt she could be fair and
 
impartial. Considering the context of the challenged social
 relationship, Vaughan fails to show that the Circuit Court abused
 its discretion in passing Juror SS for cause.
 
(4) Vaughan argues that he should have been granted 
additional peremptory challenges. Because Vaughan fails to show that Jurors AH, PE, or SS should have been excused for cause, Vaughan fails to show that the Circuit Court erred in granting him additional peremptory challenges. See State v. Escobido-
Ortiz, 109 Hawai
'i 359, 371, 126 P.3d 402, 414 (App. 2005) (no 
error in trial court denying additional peremptory challenge where there was no error in refusing to excuse the prospective juror for cause). 
(5) Vaughan argues that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in refusing to excuse Juror IJ for cause because Juror
 IJ knew one of the three alleged victims, CW. Vaughan also
 argues that the trial court should have implied bias as a matter
 of law. 
Vaughan fails to show that the Circuit Court abused its 
discretion in passing Juror IJ for cause because the record does not establish that Juror IJ was anything more than a casual acquaintance of CW. He did not know CW's name, only knowing him as "Red Bull." They had taken cooking classes but they had not talked about anything more than cooking and CW's participation in mixed martial arts. Juror IJ had seen CW outside of class, but CW was "just one of the people that was [sic] there." While Juror IJ's friend was friends with CW and trained with him, and Juror IJ said that CW never had given him a reason not to like him, Juror IJ said that he would be able to be fair and evaluate CW's testimony like any other witness. Furthermore, Juror IJ's relatively insignificant relationship with CW did not require the Circuit Court to imply bias. See Kauhi, 86 Hawai
'i at 200, 948 
P.2d at 1041. Therefore, Vaughan fails to establish that the Circuit Court abused its discretion or that the Circuit Court should have implied bias. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence in
 
FC-CR No. 06-1-456 and the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence in
 
FC-CR No. 09-1-448, both filed on August 29, 2011 in the Circuit
 Court of the Third Circuit, are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 17, 2013. 
Richard D. Gronna 
(Keith S. Shigetomiwith him on the briefs)for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Shannon M. Kagawa,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Hawai
'i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8
 