NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000350
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
In the Matter of the Arbitration
 
of
 
NORDIC PCL CONSTRUCTION, INC., fka NORDIC CONSTRUCTION, LTD.,
Claimant/Counterclaim Respondent-Appellant,
v.
 
LPIHGC, LLC, Respondent/Counterclaimant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P. NO. 10-1-0346)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
This case involves a dispute concerning the performance
 
of Claimant/Counterclaim Respondent-Appellant Nordic PCL
 
Construction, Inc., fka Nordic Construction, Ltd. ("Nordic"), a
 subcontractor under a subcontract ("Subcontract") with
 Respondent/Counterclaimant-Appellee LPIHGC, LLC ("General
 Contractor") for concrete work on the Honua Kai South Enclave
 condominium resort property in West Maui ("Project"). 
Pursuant
 
to the terms of the Subcontract, the parties mutually selected
 Retired Judge Patrick K.S.L. Yim ("Judge Yim") as a neutral
 arbitrator to arbitrate their dispute. Upon General Contractor's
 motion, the Circuit Court of the First Circuit ("Circuit Court")
1
 
confirmed the award issued by Judge Yim ("Award") and entered
 judgment accordingly. 
1
 The Honorable Patrick W. Border presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Nordic asserts that the Circuit Court erred
 
by not vacating the Award because (1) "[Judge Yim] did not
 
disclose his numerous financial and fiduciary relationships with
 the lawyers for one of the parties to the arbitration"; (2) the
 Award "was procured by false testimony and hidden evidence,"
 which, at a minimum, required an evidentiary hearing; and (3) the
 Award "exceeded [Judge Yim's] authority".
 
Nordic appeals from the following orders and judgment
 
entered in the Circuit Court: (1) the "Order Granting
 Respondent/Counterclaimant LPIHGC, LLC's Motion to Confirm
 Partial Final Arbitration Award of Arbitrator Filed on
 November 22, 2010 and Final Award of Arbitrator Dated
 December 15, 2010," filed on March 24, 2011; (2) the "Order
 Denying Claimant [Nordic's] Motion to Vacate Award of Arbitrator
 Filed on December 29, 2010," filed on March 24, 2011; and (3) the
 "Judgment," filed on March 24, 2011.
 
On the basis of Judge Yim's failure to disclose certain
 
financial and other relationships with counsel, we vacate the
 Circuit Court's confirmation of the Award and its resulting
 Judgment, and remand the case for further proceedings.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
In May of 2006, Nordic and General Contractor entered
 
into the Subcontract for Nordic to perform concrete-related work
 
on the Project owned by the Maui Beach Resort Limited Partnership
 ("Owner").  General Contractor was, in essence, a separately-
incorporated aspect of the Owner, although it remained a distinct
 
entity, and, functionally, was the Owner's construction entity.
 The Subcontract incorporated by reference the prime contract
 executed between the Owner and General Contractor. 
As the concrete work progressed, General Contractor
 
disputed whether much of Nordic's concrete work was adequately
 flat and level. Eventually, the parties entered into
 
2
arbitration,  which the Subcontract prescribed as the exclusive
2
 Nordic was represented by attorneys for Damon Key Leong Kupchak
Hastert ("Damon Key"), while General Contractor was represented by attorneys
for Starn O'Toole Marcus & Fisher ("Starn O'Toole") and Carlsmith Ball LLP
("Carlsmith").
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
remedy for disputes. The Subcontract specified that arbitration
 
would proceed according to Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS")
 Chapter 658A (with certain exceptions not relevant here) and the
 Arbitration Rules, Procedures & Protocols adopted by the dispute
 agency, Dispute Prevention & Resolution, Inc. ("DPR") ("DPR
 Rules"). Pursuant to the DPR Rules, the parties mutually selected
 Judge Yim to resolve their dispute. 
Consistent with HRS Chapter 658A, the DPR Rules impose
 
certain disclosure requirements upon arbitrators:
 
Neutral Arbitrators appointed pursuant to [DPR] Rules shall
disclose in writing any circumstance, situation, or event
which is likely to affect their ability to be impartial.
Arbitrators must disclose (and under the [Revised Uniform
Arbitration Act], Section 12(b), have a continuing
obligation to disclose) any past, present, or possible
future relationship with the parties, their witnesses, their
counsel or another arbitrator including any bias or any
financial or personal interest in the result of the
arbitration.
 
Prior to his confirmation, Judge Yim, through a DPR case manager,
 
provided the following disclosure to counsels for the parties by
 email dated March 17, 2009: 
1.	 While serving on the bench, counsel and members of
their law firms appeared before me;
 
2. 	 Since retirement, I have served as a neutral for
counsel and members of their law firms;
 
3. 	 To the best of my knowledge, I do not know anyone
involved with [General Contractor];
 
4. 	 I served as a neutral in a matter where Nordic was a
 
party. That matter was concluded at least five years
ago;
 
5. 	 I will provide additional disclosures as necessary
throughout this proceeding;
 
6. 	 These disclosures will in no way affect my ability to
serve as a neutral and unbiased Arbitrator.
 
Prior to the Award, at no point did either party seek additional
 
information from Judge Yim or object to having him serve, or
 continue to serve, as arbitrator.
 
The parties contested which of two concrete flatness
 
and levelness standards applied to Nordic's work. Ultimately,
 Judge Yim found that Nordic had contracted to meet the more
 exacting of the two standards, although the parties had
 subsequently agreed to an alternate remediation standard in light
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of Nordic's deficient work. 
Also at issue was whether Nordic had proven its
 
satisfaction of the applicable standard; this implicated
 
measurements taken as work was performed. In relevant part,
 Judge Yim made the following findings:
 
95. The Subcontract required that Nordic, not the
[General Contractor], measure the flatness and the levelness
of the elevated slabs before the shores were struck, and to
document that the specified standards were achieved.
 
96. The [General Contractor] was not required to do so.
 
97. Nordic was aware of the fact that Pete Allen Ardry
("Ardry"), its quality control engineer on the Project, was
inexperienced in concrete construction.
 
98. When Nordic decided to utilize the F-meter to
 
measure whether it had achieved the specified concrete
flatness and levelness, Nordic was aware, prior to assigning
Ardry as its quality control engineer on the Project, that
Ardry had no experience with an F-meter.
 
99. Nordic was also aware of the fact that Ardry did
not have any prior experience in concrete construction as
required on this Project.
 
100. By at least November 9, 2006 when the [General
Contractor] and Nordic were attempting to evaluate Nordic's
work on the placement of the ground floor slab, Nordic had
in its possession Allen Face's ("Face") October 3, 2006
letter in which he described the nine requirements for the
proper FF/FL [flatness/levelness] testing procedure. Face's
 testimony demonstrated that Ardry failed to properly use the
F meter, thereby substantially impacting the accuracy of the
measurements reported to the [General Contractor].
 
101. Considering Ardry's reports and arbitration
testimony, Nordic did not sufficiently establish that Ardry
conducted his F meter measurements in accordance with the
 proper testing procedure, and that the measurements were
accurate.
 
102. F meter measurements provided by Nordic were done
solely by Ardry.
 
103. Under the Subcontract, Nordic alone is
responsible for providing to the [General Contractor]
reports of the F meter readings for each and every elevated
slab for the Project.
 
104. The [General Contractor] did not have any
obligation to provide to Nordic any results of its own F
meter readings.
 
While not required to do so, General Contractor had
 
collected "F-meter" data. It had also contracted with Face, an
 
industry expert, to review Nordic's testing methodology and
 results. Face concluded that Nordic's test data were inadequate
 to demonstrate quality of work. Face therefore suggested that
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Nordic's and General Contractor's data might be combined to
 
produce sufficient statistically valid sampling data. Neither
 the conclusion nor the suggestion were shared with Nordic at that
 time. 
An issue arose when, during discovery, General
 
Contractor reported that it had lost most of its F-meter sampling
 data in a computer crash. Nordic sought to have the data
 construed adversely to General Contractor, but Judge Yim
 declined, finding that "Nordic failed to adequately demonstrate
 that the loss of [General Contractor's] F-meter data was as a
 result of spoliation of evidence." 
Judge Yim further found that:
 
107. The failure of the [General Contractor] to
provide said data to Nordic does not relieve Nordic of its
obligations under the Subcontract to accurately collect and
report F meter readings.
 
108. The [General Contractor's] loss of its F meter
data is superfluous to any determination of the issues in
this arbitration.
 
On October 15, 2010, after arbitration proceedings
 
which spanned eighteen months and included thirty-one days of
 
arbitration hearings, Judge Yim issued his Award in favor of
 General Contractor and against Nordic.
 
On October 29, 2010, via letter, Nordic requested that
 
DPR provide "updated disclosure details . . . including, but not
 limited to, any and all arbitration or mediation matters
 involving attorneys from the law firms of either [Carlsmith] or
 [Starn O'Toole] . . . which Judge Yim has presided over since
 January 1, 2009 . . . ." DPR indicated that it would do so. 
In the meantime, on November 2, 2010, Nordic sent
 
another letter to DPR, asserting that:
 
It has just come to our attention that [Judge] Yim has
had an undisclosed, long standing professional relationship
with opposing counsel . . . . We have reason to understand
 that [Judge] Yim was represented by the Carlsmith firm,
including an attorney working on this case, on at least
seven separate occasions over the last ten years. One of
 these cases was a matter that was ongoing . . . during the
term of the parties' recent arbitration proceedings. 
On the basis of Carlsmith's alleged representation of Judge Yim,
 
and Judge Yim's nondisclosure of that representation, Nordic
 "demand[ed Judge] Yim's immediate disqualification as arbitrator.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . ." The referenced representation related to Carlsmith's
 
representation of the Queen Lili 'okulani Trust ("QLT"), for which 
Judge Yim had served as one of three trustees since 2002. 
A flurry of letters followed. Nordic continued to
 
press DPR for additional details and Judge Yim's
 disqualification, while General Contractor urged DPR to dismiss
 Nordic's request. General Contractor demanded that Nordic
 disclose "the precise timing and circumstances surrounding [its]
 'discovery' of the facts" underlying Nordic's claim for
 disqualification. Counsel for Nordic declared that "information
 [regarding cases in which Judge Yim, in his capacity as QLT
 trustee, was represented by Carlsmith] was discovered by [Nordic]
 in late October, 2010, after which additional inquiry and
 requests for disqualification were issued."
 
On November 11, 2010, Judge Yim provided a Supplemental
 
Disclosure to DPR, which DPR shared with the parties. It stated:
 
In response to DPR's request, I hereby provide the following
supplemental disclosures. These supplemental disclosures
include my professional as well as volunteer activities.
 
As previously disclosed, I have served as a mediator and an
arbitrator in matters in which parties therein were
represented by the firms appearing in this arbitration.
Though I cannot recall any matter involving [General
Contractor or Owner], I do recall serving as an arbitrator
in a matter in which I determined that Nordic was the
 prevailing party.
 
Further, at the time when I was informed that I was selected
as an arbitrator in this matter, I was serving as a neutral
in cases in which the Damon Key firm, the Carlsmith firm,
and the Starn O'Toole firm represented certain parties
therein. During the year and a half course of this
arbitration, I served in an additional matter in which Lane
Hornfeck of the Starn O'Toole firm represented a party.
Sometime during this period, Robert Triantos of the
Carlsmith firm entered an appearance on behalf of an
additional party in an arbitration which commenced in 2008.
I also, during this period, served as a mediator in a matter
in which the Carlsmith firm was a party.
 
As one of the three Trustees for the [QLT], I hereby
disclose that the following are lawyers and law firms
retained by the Trust since 2002, when I commenced to serve
as a Trustee. The list is as follows: [lists over thirty
attorneys or law firms, including Carlsmith]. As a Trustee,
I have no persona1 role in the selection or appointment of
attorneys that perform legal services for the [QLT].
 
. . . .
 I also disclose that I believe Mr. Michael Walsh, Vice President
of the [QLT's] Endowment Group, is [one of Nordic's attorney's]
brother-in-law.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
I have been informed by management of the [QLT] that in recent
matters, members of the Carlsmith firm and [another] firm have
represented parties who have opposed the interests of the [QLT]
 
Regarding his work as a neutral on matters that
 
occurred either around the time that he was selected as an
 
arbitrator or during the pendency of the instant arbitration
 proceedings, DPR disclosed that Judge Yim:
 
served as a Mediator in a case where the Damon Key firm
represented a party. Counsel for Damon Key was Mark
Murakami, Esq. Counsel for the parties mutually selected
Judge Yim in 2008, the mediation was held in February, 2009.
DPR charged its standard hourly rate of $350/hour. This
 matter was included in the [initial] disclosure since the
final invoice was issued to counsel on March 17, 2009.
 
. . . served as an Arbitrator in a case where John Sopuch,
Esq. of the Starn O'Toole firm represented a party. Counsel
 for the parties mutually selected Judge Yim in 2008. The
 Award was issued in February, 2009, and the final invoice
was issued on March 13, 2009. DPR charged its standard
hourly rate of $350/hour.
 
. . . served as a Mediator in a matter where Lane Hornfeck
 
of the Starn O'Toole firm represented a party. Counsel for
 the parties mutually selected Judge Yim in June 2009, and
the matter closed in August 2009. DPR charged its standard
hourly rate of $350/hour.
 
. . . served as a Mediator in a matter where the Carlsmith
 
firm was a party. Counsel for the parties mutually selected
Judge Yim as Mediator in January 2009. The initial
 mediation session was held on March 6, 2009, and the matter
closed in October 2009. DPR charged its standard hourly
rate of $350/hour.
 
. . . is serving as an Arbitrator in a case where Robert
Triantos, Esq. at Carlsmith represented a party for a
portion of the arbitration proceeding. The case was opened
with DPR in 2008 and counsel participating at that time
mutually selected Judge Yim as Arbitrator. In July 2009,
Mr. Triantos' client was brought into the case via Court
Order. Mr. Triantos' client settled out of the case in
 July, 2010 (Judge Yim was not involved in the settlement
discussions). DPR is charging its standard hourly rate of
$350/hour.
 
On December 1, 2010, DPR, without addressing the merits
 
of Nordic's request, declined Nordic's request to disqualify
 
Judge Yim, stating that once the substantive claims had been
 resolved, DPR no longer had jurisdiction regarding
 disqualification.
 
In the Circuit Court, General Contractor moved to
 
confirm the Award and Nordic moved to vacate it. Nordic argued
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
for vacatur on the grounds that Judge Yim failed to disclose his
 
relationships with General Contractor's counsel, General
 Contractor concealed evidence, and the Award granted damages to
 the Owner. On March 24, 2011, the Circuit Court issued orders
 granting General Contractor's motion and denying Nordic's, and
 issued its Judgment accordingly. The Circuit Court did not issue
 any findings of fact or conclusions of law.
 
This appeal followed.
 
II.	 STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
We review the circuit court's ruling on an arbitration award
de novo, but we also are mindful that the circuit court's review
of arbitral awards must be extremely narrow and exceedingly
deferential.
 
Judicial review of an arbitration award is limited by the
following precepts:
 
First, because of the legislative policy to encourage
arbitration and thereby discourage litigation,
arbitrators have broad discretion in resolving the
dispute. Upon submission of an issue, the arbitrator
has authority to determine the entire question,
including the legal construction of terms of a
contract or lease, as well as the disputed facts. In
 fact, where the parties agree to arbitrate, they
thereby assume all the hazards of the arbitration
process, including the risk that the arbitrators may
make mistakes in the application of law and in their
findings of fact.
 
Second, correlatively, judicial review of an
arbitration award is confined to the strictest
 possible limits. An arbitration award may be vacated
only on the four grounds specified in [Hawaii Revised
Statutes ("HRS")] § 658–9 and modified and corrected
only on the three grounds specified in HRS § 658–10.
Moreover, the courts have no business weighing the
merits of the award.
 
Third, HRS §§ 658–9 and –10 also restrict the
authority of appellate courts to review judgments
entered by circuit courts confirming or vacating the
arbitration awards.
 
Kay v. Kaiser Found. Health Plan, Inc., 119 Hawai 'i 219, 224, 194 
P.3d 1181, 1186 (App. 2008) (internal quotation marks and
 
citations omitted) (quoting Schmidt v. Pac. Benefit Servs., Inc.,
 113 Hawai
'i 161, 165-66, 150 P.3d 810, 814-15 (2006)). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 Judge Yim's failure to disclose multiple relationships
with General Contractor's law firms requires vacatur.
 
8
   
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Nordic contends that Judge Yim failed to disclose
 
multiple instances where, during the pendency of the arbitration
 
proceedings, he was "hired to provide neutral services to both
 Carlsmith and [Starn O'Toole]"; and that in his capacity as a
 trustee of the QLT, he maintained an attorney-client relationship
 with Carlsmith, which represented QLT in several litigation
 matters in which he was a named party. On these grounds, Nordic
 argues that Judge Yim's nondisclosures constitute "evident
 partiality" requiring vacatur of the Award under HRS § 658A­23(a)(2).
3 We agree.
 
Hawai'i's disclosure statute requires an arbitrator, in 
relevant part, to "disclose to all parties . . . any known facts that a reasonable person would consider likely to affect the impartiality of the arbitrator . . . , including . . . [a]n existing or past relationship with any of the parties . . . , their counsel or representatives, a witness, or another arbitrator." H
AW. REV. STAT. § 658A-12(a)(2) (Supp. 2012). This 
obligation also extends to "any [such] facts that the arbitrator learns after accepting appointment. . . ." H
AW. REV. STAT. 
§ 658A-12(b). When an arbitrator fails to disclose such a fact, then "upon timely objection by a party, the court under section 658A-23(a)(2) may vacate an award." H
AW. REV. STAT. § 658A-12(d). 
Section 658A-23(a)(2) requires a court, upon a party's motion, to "vacate an award . . . if . . . [t]here was . . . [e]vident partiality by an arbitrator appointed as a neutral arbitrator[.]" 
3
 Vacating award.  (a) Upon motion to the court by a
party to an arbitration proceeding, the court shall vacate
an award made in the arbitration proceeding if:
 
. . . .
 
(2)	 There was:
 
(A)	 Evident partiality by an arbitrator
appointed as a neutral arbitrator;
(B)	 Corruption by an arbitrator; or
(C)	 Misconduct by an arbitrator prejudicing
the rights of a party to the arbitration
proceeding[.]
 
H
AW.  REV.  STAT. § 658A-23(a)(2) (Supp. 2012).
 
9
  
 
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
HAW. REV. STAT. § 658A-23(a)(2)(A).4
 
"Hawai 'i's appellate courts have previously recognized 
that '[w]hat constitutes "evident partiality" sufficient to 
vacate an arbitration award is a difficult question.'" Kay, 119 
Hawai'i at 226, 194 P.3d at 1188 (alteration omitted) (quoting 
Daiichi Haw. Real Estate Corp. v. Lichter, 103 Hawai 'i 325, 339, 
82 P.3d 411, 425 (2003)). As such, and with legislative history unavailing, "we have often turned to federal case law for guidance." Id. 
Accordingly, "the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals' 
interpretation of evident partiality . . . has been adopted and relied on by [our appellate courts]." Kay, 119 Hawai
'i at 228 
n.7, 194 P.3d at 1190 n.7 (citing Daiichi, 103 Hawai 'i at 339, 
340, 342, 82 P.3d at 425, 426, 428, and Sousaris v. Miller, 92 Hawai
'i 534, 542, 993 P.2d 568, 576 (App. 1998)). In 
nondisclosure cases, evident partiality exists where "undisclosed facts demonstrate a 'reasonable impression of partiality.'"
5 
Daiichi, 103 Hawai 'i at 340, 82 P.3d at 426 (quoting Valrose 
Maui, Inc. v. Maclyn Morris, Inc. ("VMI"), 105 F. Supp. 2d 1118, 1124 (D. Haw. 2000)); see also Woods v. Saturn Distribution Corp., 78 F.3d 424, 427 (9th Cir. 1996) ("In nondisclosure cases, vacatur is appropriate where the arbitrator's failure to disclose 
4
 The failure to make the required disclosures concerning the
arbitrator's relationship to a party presumptively establishes the
arbitrator's "evident partiality" necessary to vacate the award. See HAW. REV.
 
STAT. §§ 658A-12(e), 658A-23(a)(2)(A).  This presumption, however, does not
apply where the failure to make required disclosures concerns the arbitrator's
relationship to a party's counsel. See H
AW. REV. STAT. §§ 658A-12(d), 658A­
23(a)(2)(A).
 
5
 This court has previously observed that the "Ninth Circuit . . .
ha[s] generally employed a relatively broad interpretation of a 'reasonableimpression of partiality.'" Kay, 119 Hawai' i at 227, 194 P.3d at 1189. A 
useful point of contrast is Positive Software Solutions, Inc. v. New Century Mortg. Corp., 476 F.3d 278 (5th Cir. 2007). 
In Kay, this court, responding to appellee's argument, "decline[d]
to delve further into" Positive Software, finding it factually inapposite andnoting that Positive Software had distinguished its own analysis from that ofthe Ninth Circuit. Kay, 119 Hawai' i at 228 n.7, 194 P.3d at 1190 n.7. Kay 
"decline[d] to rely on the Positive Software decision" and its "limitinginterpretation of Commonwealth Coatings [v. Continental Cas. Co., 393 U.S. 145(1968)]." Id.; see also Positive Software, 476 F.3d at 283 (citing cases
across a majority of circuits in support of "a narrow reading of Commonwealth Coatings" and noting that "[o]nly the Ninth Circuit has interpretedCommonwealth Coatings . . . to de-emphasize Justice White's narrowing
language"). 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
information gives the impression of bias in favor of one
 
party."). Evidence of actual bias is not required. Schmitz v.
 
Zilveti, 20 F.3d 1043, 1047 (9th Cir. 1994) ("Consistent with
 Commonwealth Coatings, courts examining nondisclosure cases have
 not required proof of actual bias in showing 'evident
 partiality.'"). 
We turn first to Judge Yim's failure to disclose the 
several instances where he was engaged as an arbitrator or mediator in external matters involving General Contractor's counsel while the instant arbitration was pending. This court has established that special weight is placed on the nondisclosure of potentially conflicting activities that occur during the arbitration proceedings. Kay, 119 Hawai
'i at 229, 194 
P.3d at 1191. And of particular relevance, the United States District Court for the District of Hawai
'i held that an 
arbitrator demonstrated a "reasonable impression of partiality" where he engaged in undisclosed discussions with a party's counsel that led to his role as a mediator in an unrelated matter involving said counsel. VMI, 105 F. Supp. 2d at 1124. 
In Kay, a patient entered into arbitration proceedings 
with an HMO, pursuant to the HMO's service agreement, after the HMO had been held "actionably negligent" for failing to diagnose the patient's brain tumor. Kay, 119 Hawai
'i at 221, 194 P.3d at 
1183. A divided arbitration panel decided against the patient, and the award was confirmed by the circuit court. Id. at 221-22, 
194 P.3d at 1183-84. 
This court vacated the award because one of the 
arbitration panel members, a doctor, had "fail[ed] to disclose her direct, personal involvement in ongoing, fund-raising solicitations to [the HMO], while the arbitration [was] pending, creat[ing] an impression of partiality or possible bias[.]" Id. 
at 221, 194 P.3d at 1183. The doctor, while having originally disclosed her prior role as president of the Hawai
'i branch of a 
medical association, had failed to disclose that she had subsequently held several other positions within that organization, including outreach and fund-raising positions. Id. 
at 222-23, 194 P.3d at 1184-85. These positions, spanning a 
11
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
period of several years prior to, during, and after the
 
arbitration, entailed, in part, sending solicitation letters and
 thank you notes to various contributors, of which the HMO was
 one, with the HMO making one donation of $450 during the pendency
 of arbitration. Id. at 223, 230, 194 P.3d at 1185, 1192. These
 
positions also required "various other interactions with [the
 HMO's] doctors and personnel in conjunction with diabetes-related
 programs." Id. at 223, 225, 194 P.3d at 1185, 1187. 
The court was particularly concerned with the timing of
 
the doctor's solicitations, noting that they "continued,
 undisclosed, during the pendency of the arbitration." Id. at
 
229, 194 P.3d at 1191. As to the doctor's overall relationship
 with the HMO in her association role, the court noted that "[her]
 dealings . . . were neither isolated nor in the distant past." 
Id. at 230, 194 P.3d at 1192. The court ruled that "an
 arbitrator cannot, as part of a long-standing and on-going
 activity, ask for and receive money from a party during an
 arbitration, without disclosing that fact to the other party." 
Id.
6
 
In VMI, closely on point here, an arbitrator, while
 
proceedings were underway, was contacted by one of the parties'
 attorneys about mediating a separate, unrelated matter. 105 F.
 Supp. 2d at 1119. He was ultimately appointed as mediator in
 that unrelated matter while the arbitration proceedings were
 still pendent, but failed to disclose either that appointment or
 the earlier solicitation. Id.
 
The federal district court, applying Hawai
'i law, 
vacated the resulting arbitration award. Id. at 1124. The court 
acknowledged that the arbitrator "may have merely overlooked disclosing his conversation and appointment as [a] mediator" in the other matter. Id. It reasoned, however, that arbitrators 
6
 The court noted a distinction between consumer (as in Kay) and
commercial (as here) arbitration cases. Kay, 119 Hawai' i at 229, 194 P.3d at
1191. We do not read Kay's observation, however, as intending to diminish in
the commercial context its central emphasis on the importance of an arbitratordisclosing relevant business relations that occur while arbitrationproceedings are ongoing or pendent. No amount of initial negotiation couldcompensate for the effect of an arbitrator's subsequent failure to maintain
"fidelity to the disclosure obligation," which, as Kay reminds us, is "thesine qua non" of our review. Id. 
12
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
have an obligation to avoid potential conflicts of interest,
 
including professional or business relationships with parties'
 counsel, and that failure to disclose such potential conflicts
 may create a "reasonable impression of partiality."
7 Id. 
Accordingly, the district court held that the arbitrator's lack
 of disclosure "was clearly a serious failing that warrant[ed]
 vacat[ur]." Id.
 
These cases reflect the principle that arbitrators must 
take special care to disclose business or similar dealings with parties, or their counsel, that occur during the pendency of arbitration proceedings. See also Burlington N. R.R. Co., 960 
S.W.2d at 630-31, 637 (vacating award for evident partiality where neutral arbitrator selected by parties initially disclosed past ties to one party's law firm but failed to disclose a post-selection referral by that party's appointed arbitrator for other arbitration work); id. at 638 ("[A] person might reasonably differentiate between a past relationship and one that arises shortly before or during the arbitration proceedings."); see also Kern v. 303 E. 57th St. Corp., 204 A.D.2d 152, 152–53 (N.Y. App. Div. 1994) (vacating an award where a neutral "umpire" failed to disclose that one party's counsel had referred a third party to him for possible arbitration and appraisal work). Of course, not just any contemporaneous association necessarily mandates vacatur. See Ashley v. Hart, No. 28207, 2011 WL 682109, at *8 
(Haw. Ct. App. Feb. 25, 2011) (declining to establish a rule that "the failure to disclose ex parte communications per se constitutes evident partiality"); cf. Daiichi, 103 Hawai
'i at 
7
 In comparing that arbitrator's failure to disclose to another
case, in which an arbitrator was held to have constructive knowledge of his
law firm's representation of the parent company of a party, see Schmitz, 20
F.3d 1043, VMI emphasized the arbitrator's "actual knowledge of the conflict,"
and noted as well that the arbitrator had been apprised that he was to
disclose "any relationship aris[ing] during the course of the arbitration[.]"
VMI, 105 F. Supp. 2d at 1124. While the record does not reveal whether there
 
was a similarly specific apprisal here, Judge Yim averred that he would
"provide additional disclosures as necessary throughout th[e] proceeding[.]"
The parties were entitled to, and presumably did, rely upon this commitment.
See Burlington N. R.R. Co. v. TUCO Inc., 960 S.W.2d 629, 637 (Tex. 1997) ("In
basing their decision on [the arbitrator's disclosure], [the parties] were
entitled to assume that [the arbitrator] would not enter into any new such
relationship during the course of the arbitration proceedings without
disclosing it."). 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
341, 82 P.3d at 427, ("[N]ot all dealings rise to the level of
 
creating the impression . . . of possible bias so as to warrant
 vacating an arbitration award based on 'evident partiality.'"
 (citing cases involving nondisclosure of prior relationships)).
    
Here, Judge Yim failed to disclose his contemporaneous
 
work as a neutral in three separate matters for General
 Contractor's law firms. Such contemporaneous business
 engagements are not trivial,
8 VMI, 105 F. Supp. 2d at 1124, and
 
should have been disclosed. See also Wheeler v. St. Joseph
 
Hosp., 133 Cal. Rptr. 775, 792 (Cal. Ct. App. 1976) (vacating an
 award where an arbitration panel member was engaged as an expert
 witness in another case as a result of "one member of a large
 firm not being aware of what another member was doing").
 
Whether Judge Yim's failure to disclose the additional
 
arbitrations he took on during the pendency of the instant
 arbitration is sufficient to establish evident partiality, we
 need not decide, as these were not the only relationships
 meriting disclosure. We turn now to the fact that Judge Yim also
 
8
 A California court noted the dangers of undisclosed referrals and
engagements in the arbitration arena:
 
One of the ethical problems the [California Legislature] was
specifically concerned about was the danger that . . .
arbitrators' impartiality might be undermined by their
economic self interest. As one commentator pointed out,
"[p]ayments to free market referees raise particular
concerns insofar as referees may be influenced to decide
cases in favor of the party more likely to bring cases to
them in the future. . . . Similar parties in other contexts
have been called 'repeat players,' but under the market
conditions that prevail in reference, they might better be
termed steady customers. Steady customers represent an
important asset to any seller and a referee would find it in
his self interest to favor these parties where possible. Of
 course, any favoritism could not be overt, for then the
opponents of the steady customers would refuse to consent.
But over time, referees could safely give steady customers
the benefit of the doubt more often than not. Steady
customers would suspect that their status was giving them a
small edge, and this would bring them back into reference
for future fights. But their opponents, the one-time
customers, would not be aware of the subtle systemic bias
working against them. They could not therefore make a fully
informed choice when they consented to the reference."
 
Benjamin, Weill & Mazer v. Kors, 125 Cal. Rptr. 3d 469, 491-92 (Cal. Ct. App.
2011) (quoting Note, The California Rent–A–Judge Experiment: Constitutional
 and Policy Considerations of Pay–As–you–Go Courts, 94 Harv. L. Rev. 1592, 1608
(1981) (footnote omitted)). A mitigating factor in this case, however, is
that Nordic's counsel, Damon Key, was also a "repeat player."
 
  
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
failed to disclose that, in the course of his service as a QLT
 
trustee, the QLT was represented by Carlsmith in several
 litigation matters, including some that were contemporaneous with
 the arbitration proceedings.
 
General Contractor seeks to diminish the significance
 
of this relationship, arguing that it was attenuated and that any
 attorney-client relationship was merely nominal, not substantial. 
Nevertheless, it was incumbent upon Judge Yim to disclose this
 relationship with Carlsmith. See Beebe Med. Ctr., Inc. v.
 
InSight Health Services Corp., 751 A.2d 426, 438 (Del. Ch. 1999)
 (vacating an arbitration award where the arbitrator failed to
 disclose that he was simultaneously represented in unrelated
 litigation by one party's counsel). Only then could Nordic have
 evaluated whether Carlsmith's representation of the QLT would
 affect Nordic's decision on whether to select Judge Yim as the
 neutral arbitrator or sought further information regarding this
 representation. See Schmitz, 20 F.3d at 1047 ("The parties can
 
choose their arbitrators intelligently only when facts showing
 potential partiality are disclosed.").
 
Besides downplaying Judge Yim's alleged attorney-client
 
relationship with Carlsmith, General Contractor also contends
 that Nordic waived its right to claim evident partiality. 
General Contractor argues that Judge Yim's broad initial
 disclosure sufficiently encompassed any then-ongoing or future
 arbitral work with General Contractor's counsel in other matters. 
According to General Contractor, Nordic's failure to inquire
 further into that disclosure constituted a waiver of Nordic's
 right to claim evident partiality as to such other work. We
 disagree.
 
The well accepted rule in arbitration cases is that a 
party who fails to raise a claim of partiality against an arbitrator prior to or during the arbitration proceeding is deemed to have waived the right to challenge the decision based on 'evident partiality.'" Daiichi, 103 Hawai
'i at 345-46, 82 
P.3d at 431-32. But such waiver only occurs where the party can be held to have known, actually or constructively, of the 
15
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circumstances undergirding its claim.9 See id. at 345 n.17, 82
 
P.3d at 432 n.17 ("To constitute a waiver, . . . the waiving
 
party must have had knowledge, actual or constructive, of the
 existence of such a right at the time of the purported waiver.");
 Bossley v. Mariner Fin. Grp., Inc., 11 S.W.3d 349, 352 (Tex. Ct.
 App. 2000) ("Implicit in this rule, however, is the idea that a
 party knows or has reason to know of an arbitrator's bias but
 remains silent pending the outcome of the arbitration."). 
General Contractor's argument puts emphasis and relies
 
on Judge Yim's use of the present perfect tense in his
 disclosure, in which he stated, "Since retirement, I have served
 as a neutral for counsel and members of their law firms." 
General Contractor argues that because this tense can denote acts
 that began in the past yet may continue up until and possibly
 into the present, Nordic was placed on notice "that Judge Yim may
 have ongoing work as a neutral in other matters involving [Starn
 O'Toole] or Carlsmith." 
While there are uses of the present perfect tense that
 
might encompass presently ongoing events, it is difficult to
 interpret Judge Yim's usage as referring to anything but
 engagements completed in the past. We do not expect parties to
 engage in a linguistics analysis to discern a latent possibility.
 If only a strained reading may be said to have encompassed facts
 worthy of disclosure, then for purposes of waiver, a party has
 not been placed on notice of such facts. 
The burden of disclosure is upon the arbitrator, and
 
parties should fairly expect an arbitrator to avoid opaque or
 ambiguous disclosures. While Judge Yim's statement did not
 detail each particular past engagement with the parties'
 counsels' law firms, it did fairly put the onus on the parties to
 
9
 Absent a showing that Nordic can be held to have known, pre-award,
of Judge Yim's contemporaneous engagements with Carlsmith or Starn O'Toole,
this puts to rest General Contractor's claim that Nordic's challenge cannot
prevail simply because it is a post-award challenge. General Contractor cited
 to several cases in which courts found waiver where a party claimed evident
partiality in a post-award challenge. In each of those cases, however, the
basis for finding waiver was that the party knew or should have known of the
undisclosed circumstances prior to the award, but remained silent until after
the award was issued. As discussed infra, General Contractor fails to make
such a showing.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
inquire of those past details, if they cared to. Cf. Daiichi, 
103 Hawai 'i at 348, 82 P.3d at 434 (holding that an imperfect but 
adequate disclosure shifted the burden to the parties to object 
to avoid waiver). But it did not put them on notice to inquire as to what may yet come to pass. Cf. Bossley, 11 S.W.3d at 352 
("[T]he duty to inquire [into the potential for conflicts] is the arbitrator's burden, not the party's burden."). To the extent that there is no showing that Nordic was aware of Judge Yim's contemporaneous work as a neutral with Carlsmith and Starn O'Toole prior to issuance of the Award, Nordic has not waived its right to claim evident partiality. Daiichi, 103 Hawai
'i at 345 
n.17, 82 P.3d at 432 n.17. 
In addition, while Judge Yim's initial disclosure
 
provided some notice of his role as a neutral arbitrator in cases
 involving the parties' counsel, it failed to make any reference,
 or provide any notice, of his role as a trustee of the QLT and
 Carlsmith's representation of the QLT. Thus, unlike the issue of
 Judge Yim's work as an arbitrator in unrelated arbitrations
 involving the Carlsmith and Starn O'Toole firms, the issue of
 Judge Yim's role as a trustee of the QLT and Carlsmith's
 representation of the QLT was not raised at all in Judge Yim's
 initial disclosure.
 
Given the particular facts of this case, whether Judge
 
Yim's failure to disclose any one of the undisclosed
 relationships gives rise to a reasonable impression of partiality
 is not squarely dictated by precedent. Yet, in the end, we need
 not separately resolve the effect of the failure to disclose each
 relationship. Taken together, Judge Yim's cumulative failure to
 disclose these several relationships sufficiently establishes a
 reasonable impression of partiality. 
As we previously stated:
 
Arbitrators wield great power over the scope and nature of
the arbitration proceedings and all determinations of fact
and law, with virtually no appellate review of their
decisions. The fundamental "fairness" of these expansive
powers must be grounded in the assurance that neutral
arbitrators are indeed neutral and that the arbitrators will
 disclose any facts that might reasonably cause a party to
question the arbitrator's neutrality. The only protection
that arbitration parties have against prejudices, biases, or
the appearance thereof, is the requirement that an
arbitrator must disclose his or her past or existing
 
17
  Accordingly, we hold that Judge Yim's failure to
 
disclose the aforementioned facts and relationships "shows a
 
reasonable impression of partiality," and warrants vacatur of the
 Award. Daiichi, 103 Hawai
'i at 339, 82 P.3d at 425, NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
relationship with the parties, their counsel (or
representatives), witnesses, or another arbitrator.
 
Kay, 119 Hawai 'i at 229, 194 P.3d at 1191. 
B. Nordic's other claims.
 
Nordic contends that the Award was procured by fraud or
 
undue means, and that Judge Yim exceeded his powers in awarding
 
damages to General Contractor. Because we vacate the Award on
 the basis of Judge Yim's failure to make the aforementioned
 disclosures, we decline to address these further claims. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
For the reasons explained above, we vacate the Circuit
 
Court's confirmation of the Award and its entry of the Judgment,
 
and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 14, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Kenneth R. Kupchak,
Anna H. Oshiro,Mark M. Murakami, and
Christi-Anne H. Kudo Chock
 (Damon Key Leong Kupchak Hastert)
for Claimant/CounterclaimRespondent-Appellant.
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Terence J. O'Toole,
Judith Ann Pavey, andZachary N. Gershuni
(Starn O'Toole Marcus & Fisher)
and
 John P. Manaut
 (Carlsmith Ball LLP)
for Respondent/Counterclaimant-
Appellee. 
Associate Judge
18
 