NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000172
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
ZACHARY FRED BAILEY,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
BURRELLE DAVID DUVAUCHELLE,
Trustee under Duvauchelle Family Trust u/d/t dated
August 14, 2008; BETTY J. DUVAUCHELLE, Trustee under
Living Trust of Burrelle Duvauchelle and Betty Duvauchelle
u/d/t dated 7/1/91,
Defendant-Appellant,
 
and
 
LAURENCE H. DORCY, JR.; JOHN DOES 1-10;
JANE DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE ASSOCIATES 1-10 AND DOE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-10,
Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-0218(1))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise, and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Burrelle David Duvauchelle, Trustee
 
under Duvauchelle Family Trust u/d/t dated August 14, 2008
 
(Defendant Burrelle David Duvauchelle), appeals from the Final
 Judgment in favor Plaintiff-Appellee Zachary Fred Bailey (Bailey)
 and against Defendant Burrelle David Duvauchelle and Betty J.
 Duvauchelle, Trustee under Living Trust of Burrelle Duvauchelle
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and Betty Duvauchelle u/t/d dated 7/1/91 (Betty Duvauchelle)
 
(collectively, the "Duvauchelles"), which was filed in the
 
1
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court)  on October
25, 2010.2 The Final Judgment "fully and finally resolved the
 
Second Claim for Relief (Declaratory Relief)" in the First
 Amended Complaint, filed on February 13, 2009.
 
The Duvauchelles and Bailey own adjoining properties on 
Moloka'i. This case involves a dispute over a portion of 
property referred to as the "flag pole portion" that both sides claim to own. The Circuit Court granted motions for partial summary judgment in favor of Bailey on his claims that: (1) he had record title to Parcel 27, which included the flag pole portion; and (2) the Duvauchelles had not acquired title to the flag pole portion by adverse possession. The Circuit Court entered judgment, pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rule 54(b) (2000), declaring that Bailey is the rightful owner of Parcel 27, including the flag pole portion, and that the Duvauchelles do not own or have any legal or equitable title to any portion of Parcel 27, including the flag pole portion, by deed or adverse possession. 
On appeal, Defendant Burrelle David Duvauchelle
 
contends that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) granting Bailey's
 motion for partial summary judgment regarding Bailey's claim of
 record title to the flag pole portion; (2) granting Bailey's
 motion for partial summary judgment regarding Bailey's claim that
 the Duvauchelles did not acquire title to the flag pole portion
 by adverse possession; (3) denying the Duvauchelles' motion to
 dismiss the complaint or in the alternative for leave to file an
 amended answer and counterclaim; and (4) ordering the
 Duvauchelles to pay Bailey's attorney's fees. We affirm.
 
1
The Honorable Joel E. August presided.
 
2
 We note that Betty Duvauchelle did not file a notice of appeal. Thus,
this appeal is limited to Defendant Burrelle David Duvauchelle's appeal from
the October 25, 2010, Final Judgment.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
We resolve the issues raised by Defendant Burrelle
 
David Duvauchelle on appeal as follows:
 
1. The Circuit Court did not err in granting partial 
summary judgment in favor Bailey on his claim of record title to 
the flag pole portion. To prevail on summary judgment, Bailey was not required to establish a perfect chain of title to the flag pole portion, but only that, as a matter of law, he had a substantial interest in the property and that his record title was superior to the record title claimed by the Duvauchelles. See Maui Land & Pineapple Co. v. Infiesto, 76 Hawai' i 402, 407­
08, 879 P.2d 507, 512-13 (1994). The conveyance documents, among other things, showed that the deed by which Bailey acquired title to his property included the flag pole portion while the deed by which the Duvauchelles acquired title to their property did not. The flag pole portion is in Grant 1154, Apana 1, which is referenced in the deeds in Bailey's chain of title, but is not referenced in the deeds in the Duvauchelles' chain of title. We conclude that Bailey established that he had a substantial interest in the flag pole portion and that his record title to the flag pole portion was superior to the record title claimed by the Duvauchelles. 
2. The Circuit Court did not err in granting Bailey's 
motion for partial summary judgment regarding his claim that the Duvauchelles did not acquire title to the flag pole portion by adverse possession. To establish title by adverse possession, the Duvauchelles were required to demonstrate "by clear and positive proof each element of actual, open, notorious, hostile, continuous, and exclusive possession for the statutory period" of the flag pole portion. Morinoue v. Roy, 86 Hawai' i 76, 81, 947 
P.2d 944, 949 (1997) (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). 
Both Parcel 27, owned by Bailey, and the parcel owned
 
by the Duvauchelles were derived from property deeded to Annie
 Duvauchelle. Annie Duvauchelle conveyed Parcel 27 to her
 
3
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
daughter and son-in-law, Mary Peterson and William Peterson, and
 
Annie Duvauchelle and her husband Edward K. Duvauchelle conveyed
 the property owned by the Duvauchelles to Waldemar Duvauchelle. 
Mary Peterson is Waldemar Duvauchelle's step-sister, and the
 Duvauchelles are related to Mary Peterson. The Duvauchelles in
 the Circuit Court claimed that they acquired title to the flag
 pole portion through adverse possession against their relative
 Mary Peterson as well as her successors in interest. 
The Duvauchelles' adverse possession claim was based on
 
a stone wall on the outer edge of the flag pole portion; plants
 such as plumeria, hibiscus, kukui nut, and coconut trees that
 were planted on the flag pole portion; and their maintenance and
 use of the plants and yard within the flag pole portion. 
However, there was undisputed evidence that the stone wall was
 built and the plants were planted before Mary Peterson acquired
 Parcel 27 and before Parcel 27 had even been formed. The
 Duvauchelles also admitted that they were on friendly terms with
 Mary Peterson and were not aware of anyone telling Mary Peterson
 that the Duvauchelles were claiming ownership of the flag pole
 portion. In addition, Parcel 27 was an undeveloped lot that had
 not been occupied by its owners. 
We conclude that the Duvauchelles failed to set forth a 
prima facie case that they were in "actual, open, notorious, hostile, continuous, and exclusive possession for the statutory period" of the flag pole portion. See Morinoue, 86 Hawai' i at 
81, 947 P.2d at 949. Accordingly, the Circuit Court did not err granting summary judgment in favor of Bailey on his claim that the Duvauchelles had not acquired title by adverse possession. 
3. The Circuit Court did not err in denying the
 
Duvauchelles' motion to dismiss the complaint or in the
 alternative for leave to file an amended answer and
 counterclaim.
3 The motion to dismiss was based on the claim that
 
3
 We note that the Circuit Court denied their motion without prejudice,
and the Duvauchelles did not attempt to reassert their motion. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bailey should have filed a quiet title action and joined other
 
parties. However, Defendant Burrelle David Duvauchelle cites no
 authority for the proposition that Bailey could not limit his
 action to claims against the Duvauchelles. 
Defendant Burrelle David Duvauchelle argues that the
 
Circuit Court should have permitted the Duvauchelles to amend
 their answer and file a counterclaim to assert a claim for
 adverse possession. However, the Circuit Court considered the
 Duvauchelles' claim of adverse possession on the merits. We
 conclude that any error in the Circuit Court's denial of leave to
 file an amended answer and counterclaim is rendered moot by our
 determination that the Circuit Court properly granted summary
 judgment in favor of Bailey with respect to the Duvauchelles'
 adverse possession claim.
 
4. Defendant Burrelle David Duvauchelle argues that
 
the Circuit Court erred in ordering the Duvauchelles to pay
 Bailey's attorney's fees. In response, Bailey contends that the
 Circuit Court did not order the Duvauchelles to pay Bailey's
 attorney's fees. Defendant Burrelle David Duvauchelle does not
 cite, and we have not found in the record submitted on appeal,
 any written order awarding attorney's fees in favor of Bailey. 
Accordingly we are unable to review this claim.
 
II.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Final Judgment
 
of the Circuit Court that was filed on October 25, 2010. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 29, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Burrelle David Duvauchelle 
Defendant-Appellant Pro Se Chief Judge 
Jade Lynne ChingShellie K. Park-Hoapili(Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing)for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
J. Stephen Streetfor Defendant-AppelleeLaurence H. Dorcy, Jr. Associate Judge 
5
 