NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000505
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
BENITO MARROQUIN, III aka BENNY MARROQUIN,
Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 16-1-117K)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Hiraoka, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Benito Marroquin III (Marroquin )
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment )
entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (trial court)
on April 24, 2018.  A jury found Marroquin guilty of second
degree assault.  He contends that the trial court erred by
denying his Third Motion in Limine (3rd MIL ) and his Amended
Fourth Motion in Limine ( 4th MIL) without making specific
findings or conclusions about whether the hearsay  statements at
issue were trustworthy.  For the reasons explained below, we
affirm the Judgment.1
I.
Marroquin and James Nichols ( Nichols) were involved in
a physical altercation on January 13, 2016, while both were
1"Hearsay" is a statement, other than one made by the declarant
while testifying at the trial or hearing, offered in evidence to prove the
truth of the matter asserted.  Hawaii Rules of Evidence ( HRE), Rule 801
(Supp.  2015).NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
working on the construction of a house.  Marroquin was arrested
and charged by complaint with assaulting Nichols in violation of
Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 707-711(1)(a) and/or (b) (2014).  
Marroquin claimed that Nichols was the aggressor and that he
(Marroquin) acted in self-defense.2
Trial was set for June 14, 2016.  On June 3, 2016,
Marroquin filed the pretrial motions that are the subjects of
this appeal.  The 3rd MIL sought a ruling that Hawai# i County
Police Department officer Scott Aloy ( Officer Aloy ) would be
allowed to testify that Raeven Aquino ( Aquino) told Officer Aloy
he saw Nichols put his hands around Marroquin's neck. 
Marroquin's 4th MIL sought rulings that (1) Hawai#i County
Prosecuting Attorney's investigator Daniel Pang ( Investigator
Pang) would be allowed to testify that Tommy Hagadone ( Hagadone)
told Investigator Pang that Nichols was angry at Marroquin and
"said he wasn't going to take that from a punk like [Marroquin]
and that he was going to call him out on it[,]" (2) an email to
that effect from Hagadone to Investigator Pang would be admitted
into evidence,  and (3) witness Shelly Cunningham (Cunningham)
(who was the project manager but did not see the altercation)3
2HRS § 707-711 provided, in relevant part:
(1)A person commits the offense of assault in the
second degree if:
(a)The person intentionally or knowingly causes
substantial bodily injury to another; [or]
(b)The person recklessly causes serious or
substantial bodily injury to another[.] 
3Hagadone's email to Investigator Pang stated: 
On January 13th of this year I showed up for work at the
Douglas residence.  I was talking with Benito [Marroquin]
around 8 am and Jim [Nichols] came over to ask a question. 
Benito gave him a sarcastic answer and jim walked away
angry.  I went over to check and see if jim needed anything
10 minutes later and jim was still upset and said he wasn't
going to take that from a punk like benito.  He said he was
going to call him out on it.  I walked away and started
working on what I was supposed to be doing that day and
didn't think much of it until 20 minutes later when benito
came over to where i was working and said jim grabbed him by
the throat so he hit him.  I didn't see the altercation.
(Lower case first names in original.)
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
would be allowed to testify that Hagadone told Cunningham that
Nichols told Hagadone, "I'm going to get him[,]" referring to
Marroquin.
The motions in limine were heard on June 9, 2016.   The
trial court orally denied the 3rd MIL and entered a written order
on June 24, 2016.  The trial court also orally denied the 4th
MIL, but continued the trial date to June 28, 2016, to allow
Marroquin time to procure Hagadone's attendance at the trial.   A
written order was entered on June 27, 2016.  On June 16, 2016,
Marroquin filed a second motion to continue the trial based upon
Hagadone having obligations in North Carolina on June 28, 2016.
The motion was heard on June 20, 2016.  The State did not oppose
the requested continuance.  After conducting a colloquy to
determine that Marroquin was validly waiving his right to a
speedy trial, the trial court continued the trial to
September 20, 2016.54
Trial began on September 22, 2016.   Marroquin renewed
his 3rd MIL and 4th MIL, representing that Hagadone had been
subpoenaed for trial but did not show up and Aquino could not be
found.  The trial court denied both renewed motions.  On
September 27, 2016, the jury found Marroquin guilty as charged of
reckless second degree assault.  This appeal followed.6
II.
Before we address the trial court's rulings on the
motions in limine, we must address a preliminary issue raised by
Marroquin.  Marroquin contends that the trial court committed
reversible error by denying his motions in limine without making
findings or conclusions on the record as required by State v.
Hutch, 75 Haw. 307, 329, 861 P.2d 11, 22 (1993).  Hutch involved
a Hawai#i Rules of Penal Procedure ( HRPP) Rule 48(b)(1)
4The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided over the hearing.
5Hagadone was living in North Carolina at the time.
6The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided over the trial.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(eff. 2000) motion to dismiss.   "An HRPP 48(b) motion to
dismiss, by its very nature, involves factual issues."  Id. at
330, 861 P.2d at 23.  This case does not involve a Rule 48(b)
motion to dismiss.  Marroquin's motions in limine involved the
admissibility of evidence.  HRE Rule 104(a) (1993) provides:
"Preliminary questions concerning the . . . admissibility of
evidence shall be determined by the court[.]"  In a case
involving the admissibility of hearsay, we have stated:7
[W]hen a court relies on Rule 803(b)(24), sua sponte  or at
the urging of counsel, for admission of hearsay evidence not
coming within the other exceptions of Rule 803(b), the court
should state on the record the basis for its determination
of trustworthiness, probative value, and necessity.
State v. Durry, 4 Haw. App. 222, 235, 665 P.2d 165, 175 (1983),
overruling on other grounds recognized by State v. Garcia, 96
Hawai#i 200, 213, 29 P.3d 919, 932 (2001) (underscoring added). 
The trial court's failure to state on the record the basis for
its determination of admissibility, however, does not
automatically require remand.  In Durry we analyzed the
trustworthiness of the proffered hearsay statement and held that
it was properly admitted into evidence notwithstanding the trial
court's failure to place its findings in the record.  Id.
III.
Marroquin's motions in limine required that the trial
court rule on the admissibility of hearsay under HRE Rule
804(b)(5) and (8).  HRE Rule 804 (1993 & Supp. 2015) provides, in
relevant part:
7HRPP Rule 48 provides, in relevant part:
(b) By court.  Except in the case of traffic
offenses that are not punishable by imprisonment, the court
shall, on motion of the defendant, dismiss the charge, with
or without prejudice in its discretion, if trial is not
commenced within 6 months:
(1) from the date of arrest if bail is set or from the
filing of the charge, whichever is sooner, on any offense based on
the same conduct or arising from the same criminal episode for
which the arrest or charge was made[.]
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(b)Hearsay exceptions.  The following are not
excluded by the hearsay rule if the declarant is unavailable
as a witness:
. . . .
(5)Statement of recent perception.  A statement, not in
response to the instigation of a person engaged in
investigating, litigating, or settling a claim, which
narrates, describes, or explains an event or condition
recently perceived by the declarant, made in good
faith, not in contemplation of pending or anticipated
litigation in which the declarant was interested, and
while the declarant's recollection was clear;
. . . .
(8)Other exceptions.  A statement not specifically
covered by any of the foregoing exceptions but having
equivalent circumstantial guarantees of trustworthi-
ness, if the court determines that (A) the statement
is more probative on the point for which it is offered
than any other evidence which the proponent can
procure through reasonable efforts, and (B) the
general purposes of these rules and the interests of
justice will best be served by admission of the
statement into evidence.
(Underscoring added.)
Hearsay evidence must meet one of the following two require-
ments in order to be admissible pursuant to HRE Rule 804(b)
(declarant unavailable): (1) the statement must fall within
a firmly rooted hearsay exception; or (2) the statement must
show particularized guarantees of trustworthiness.  Whether
a statement falls within a firmly rooted hearsay exception
is a question of law reviewed de novo.  Whether a statement
has particular guarantees of trustworthiness is reviewed for
an abuse of discretion.
State v. Haili, 103 Hawai#i 89, 100, 79 P.3d 1263, 1274 (2003)
(cleaned up).8
A. 3rd MIL
The subject of the 3rd MIL was Aquino's statement to
Officer Aloy.  Officer Aloy's report stated:
Upon contacting AQUINO, I asked him if he saw what happened. 
He stated, "Yes," that he saw the two guys arguing at which point
he stated that he saw the guy dressed in the tank top swing at the
other guy.  He stated that the haole guy put his hands around the
neck of the guy with the tank top and at that time, he stated that
8"Cleaned up" is a parenthetical designed to tell readers that
extraneous material (e.g., internal brackets, ellipses, quotation marks,
citations, footnote reference numbers, and changes in capitalization) has been
removed from a quotation for readability, and that none of it matters for
understanding the quotation or evaluating its weight.  See Metzler, Jack,
Cleaning Up Quotations, 18 J. App. Prac. & Process 143, 147, 154 (2017).
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
he just saw the guy in the tank top keep punching the other guy in
the face.  He then stated that the haole guy was then stuck in the
corner and the guy in the tank top kept punching him while he was
on the ground at which point I asked him which party swung first. 
He stated that the guy in the tank top swung first and that he
seemed to be the aggressor in this situation.
Officer Aloy's report also stated that Marroquin was wearing a
tank top and that Aquino identified Marroquin "as the responsible
party involved in this incident."  Marroquin contends that
Aquino's statement to Officer Aloy was admissible as a statement
of recent perception under HRE Rule 804(b)(5) because Officer
Aloy was dispatched to the scene at 9:24 a.m. and interviewed
Aquino forty-one minutes later, at 10:05 a.m.  The trial court
ruled:
THE COURT:  Okay.  So as to defendant's third motion
in limine motion is denied.
This is a statement given to a police officer -- well,
not even a verbatim statement taken by the police officer. 
Like, uh, this scenario's more akin to State v. Jhun.  So
the motion is denied.
In State v. Jhun, 83 Hawai#i 472, 927 P.2d 1355 (1996), a police
officer ( Officer Cravalho ) investigating an assault interviewed a
witness ( Michael).  Officer Cravalho transcribed Michael's
statement by hand onto three pages of HPD–252 forms.  Michael
signed an attestation that the statement was true and correct. 
At trial, the defendant attempted to elicit testimony from
Officer Cravalho about what Michael said.  The trial court
sustained the State's objection to hearsay.  The defendant
appealed.  The supreme court held:
[T]he HPD–252 forms did not contain "factual findings" that
Officer Cravalho based on his own investigation.  Officer
Cravalho did not record any of his own independent
conclusions or opinions about his interview with Michael. 
Rather, the HPD–252 forms merely contained out-of-court
statements that Michael had made to Officer Cravalho
approximately one hour and forty-five minutes after the
events that had culminated in Jhun's arrest.  As a result,
the HPD–252 forms lacked the typical characteristics of
factual findings.  Like the police reports at issue in
Miller, the HPD–252 forms were merely a recitation of a
third-party's out-of-court statements that fell under no
other exception to the hearsay rule, and thus, the HPD–252
forms were not admissible under HRE Rule 803(b)(8)(C).
Id. at 481, 927 P.2d at 1364 (citing Miller v. Field, 35 F.3d
1088, 1091 (6th Cir. 1994)).  Had Marroquin offered Officer
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Aloy's testimony about Aquino's statement pursuant to the HRE
Rule 803(b)(8)(C) (1993) exception for public records, the trial
court would have correctly denied the motion under Jhun.  But
Marroquin's proffer was based upon HRE Rule 804(b)(5) and (8). 
We need not decide whether Officer Aloy's testimony about
Aquino's statement should have been admitted based upon HRE Rule
804(b)(5) and (8) because even if the trial court had erroneously
denied the 3rd MIL, the error would have been harmless.
"Where there is a wealth of overwhelming and compelling
evidence tending to show the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable
doubt, errors in the admission or exclusion of evidence are
deemed harmless."  State v. Toyomura, 80 Hawai#i 8, 27, 904 P.2d
893, 912 (1995) (citation omitted).  Marroquin offered Aquino's
statement that Nichols had his hands around Marroquin's neck to
support his defense of self-defense.  But Aquino also told
Officer Aloy that Marroquin took the first swing at Nichols, that
Marroquin kept punching Nichols even after Nichols was "stuck in
the corner" and "on the ground[,]" and that Marroquin seemed to
be the aggressor.
Aquino's observations were consistent with those of Job
Bennett ( Bennett), a carpenter who was also working on the house. 
At trial, Bennett testified that he heard Marroquin say "I'm
going to punch you[.]"  Bennett turned upon hearing the scuffle,
and saw Marroquin turning Nichols around against the wall.  As
the two men turned, Nichols lost his footing and Marroquin put
his left hand on Nichols's right shoulder and pushed Nichols
down.  As Nichols was falling down, he "gets a right hand to the
right eye area from [Marroquin]."  While Nichols was on the
ground, Marroquin was "[h]olding him down with his ... left hand
on [Nichols's] right shoulder."  Bennett then testified that
Marroquin
punched [Nichols] three more times with the right hand to
the right side of the face.
Q.  From your position did it look like [Marroquin]
was punching Mr. Nichols in the same place over and over?
A.  Yes, approximately.
Q.  It was –- it was sort of focused in one area?
 
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
A.  Yes.
Q.  And you said that you saw three more punches while
Mr. Nichols was on the ground?
 
A.  Yes.
Q.  Okay.  Again while Mr. Nichols is on the ground
you said he's doing nothing so is he at least blocking?
A.  No.
Q.  Is he trying to get away? 
A.  No.
Q.  Where are his hands?
 
A.  I think his left arm was trapped under his body,
and the right arm was just –- just around –- around the
chest area.
....
[DEPUTY PROSECUTING ATTORNEY]: ... About how much time is
this taking?
A.  Um, from beginning –- the beginning to?
Q.  From the falling to when it stopped.
A.  Oh, fifteen seconds about outside.
Q.  Okay.  So it's not a particularly long period of
time?
A.  No.
Q.  Okay.  So, um, while Mr. Nichols is on the ground
as you observed how responsive is he?
A.  Unresponsive.
Q.  What do you mean by "unresponsive"?
A.  I would say unconscious.
Bennett testified that Marroquin's demeanor while punching
Nichols was aggressive.  After Marroquin stopped punching
Nichols, Bennett moved towards Nichols to "make sure he was
breathing and render what aid I could until someone got there to
take better care of him."  Bennett testified that the right cheek
area of Nichols's "face was pretty caved in."  It took Nichols "a
full 40 seconds" to regain consciousness.
Officer Aloy testified that he did not see any injuries
on Marroquin, any obvious signs of pain or discomfort, or any-
thing about his movement that would indicate any impairment or
injury.  Marroquin told Officer Aloy that his neck and back by
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
his shoulder blade area were hurt, but Officer Aloy did not see
any injury, redness, abrasion, or bruising to those areas. 
Another police officer ( Officer Thompson ) testified that he had
contact with Marroquin at the scene for 25 to 30 minutes.
Marroquin did not complain of any pain or injury.  Officer
Thompson testified that he did not observe any injury on
Marroquin and that Marroquin did not seek medical attention or
treatment from the ambulance or medics on scene.  In light of all
the evidence, the trial court's exclusion of Aquino's statements
to Officer Aloy was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
B. 4th MIL
Marroquin argued in his 4th MIL that (1) Investigator
Pang should be allowed to testify that Hagadone told Investigator
Pang that Nichols "said [Nichols] wasn't going to take that from
a punk like [Marroquin] and that [Nichols] was going to call
[Marroquin] out on it[,]" (2) an email to that effect from
Hagadone to Investigator Pang would be admitted into evidence,
and (3) Cunningham should be allowed to testify that Hagadone
told Cunningham that Nichols told Hagadone, "I'm going to get
[Marroquin]."
The State argues that Marroquin failed to establish
that Hagadone was unavailable.  On the first day of trial,
Marroquin's counsel reported that Hagadone had been subpoenaed
but did not appear, and could not be located.  This was
sufficient for Marroquin as the defendant in a criminal case to
establish unavailability for purposes of HRE Rule 804(b)(5).
Marroquin argued that the first level hearsay state-
ments — Nichols's statements to Hagadone (that he wasn't going to
take that from a punk like Marroquin and that he was going to
call Marroquin out on it, and that he was "going to get"
Marroquin) — are not hearsay because they establish the state of
mind of Nichols, the complaining witness.  HRE Rule 803(b)(3). 
The trial court reserved ruling on that issue because Marroquin
was attempting to procure Hagadone's presence for trial, and
Hagadone was being cooperative and had agreed to return to
Hawai#i from North Carolina in September.
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
However, Hagadone's statement to Investigator Pang
about what Nichols said, and Hagadone's statement to Cunningham
about what Nichols said, are second-level hearsay.  The trial
court was concerned about the trustworthiness of Hagadone's
statements because Hagadone was Marroquin's co-worker:
THE COURT:  And what does -- what is Hagadone's
relationship to the defendant?
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Hagadone was a co-worker.
THE COURT:  Of the defendant?
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Yes.
THE COURT:  So there's gonna be some question of, uh,
reliability, trustworthiness?
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  There is and we're still trying to
get Hagadone here.  I -- I have been talking to him.
THE COURT:  Yeah, so -- so where's the reliability?
He's a co-worker.  He's gonna say –-
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  He's a co-worker but he's a co-
worker of the victim as well.
THE COURT:  Who was he friendlier to?
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Well, uh, the defendant had been
working there longer.
The trial court denied the 4th MIL with respect to the second-
level hearsay (Investigator Pang's testimony about Hagadone's
oral statement and email concerning Nichols's statements to
Hagadone, and Cunningham's testimony about Hagadone's oral
statement to Cunningham about Nichols's statement to Hagadone).
Marroquin's counsel represented that Hagadone had been
subpoenaed for trial but did not appear and could not be located. 
A similar situation was at issue in State v. Swier, 66 Haw. 448,
666 P.2d 169 (1983).  In that case the State sought to introduce
a statement made by a witness to a police officer two days after
an accident.  When the witness left Hawai#i after the accident,
he initially stated that he would return and testify, but later
refused to do so.  The trial court excluded the statement and the
State appealed, arguing that it should have been admitted under
the catch-all exception, then codified as HRE Rule 804(b)(6) and
currently as Rule 804(b)(8).  The supreme court held:
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The problem with the State's contention is that the trial
court was not satisfied that [the witness's] statement had
circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness equivalent to
those which have long been recognized in the case of the
exceptions set forth in Rules 804(b)(1) through (5).
In ruling on the motion, the trial court correctly pointed
out that [the witness's] demonstrated equivocation with
respect to returning to [ Hawai#i] to testify cast some doubt
on the trustworthiness of his statement.  We cannot say that
the trial court abused its discretion in rejecting the
statement.  We therefore affirm the trial court's ruling
excluding [the witness's] statement without reaching the
constitutional issue of the right to confrontation.
Id. at 450, 666 P.2d at 170.  Similarly, in this case we cannot
say that the trial court abused its discretion by not allowing
Marroquin to elicit double hearsay testimony from Investigator
Pang and from Shelly Cunningham about what Hagadone told them
Nichols told Hagadone.
For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment of Conviction
and Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit on
April 24, 2018, is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, July 15, 2019.
On the briefs:
Victor M. Cox,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Charles E. Murray, III,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
11