NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000561
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
RUDY RUDOLPHO YASAY, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-0260)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
  
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Rudy Rudolpho Yasay (Yasay) appeals
 
from the Judgment filed on June 5, 2012, in the Circuit Court of
 
the Fifth Circuit (Circuit Court).1/ A jury found Yasay guilty
 
of harassment (Count III) for an incident that took place on July
 9, 2010; the included offense of attempted second-degree assault
 (Count IV) and abuse of a family or household member (Count V)
 for an incident that took place on August 18, 2010; and resisting
 arrest (Count VI) for an incident that took place on August 21,
 2010. The complaining witness (CW) for Counts III, IV, and V was
 Yasay's girlfriend during the time of the charged offenses. The
 Circuit Court ruled that Count V merged with Count IV, and it
 sentenced Yasay to concurrent terms of 30 days of imprisonment on
 Count III, five years of imprisonment on Count IV, and one year
 of imprisonment on Count VI.
 
1/ The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Yasay only challenges his conviction on
 
Count IV for the included offense of attempted second-degree
 
assault. Yasay argues: (1) the Circuit Court erred in giving the
 jury an instruction on the included offense of attempted second-
degree assault; (2) the Circuit Court erred in failing to
 instruct the jury on the specific conduct alleged to form the
 basis for the included offense of attempted second-degree
 assault; and (3) there was insufficient evidence to support his
 conviction for attempted second-degree assault. We affirm.
 
I.
 
Yasay was charged in Count IV with committing second-
degree assault by causing substantial bodily injury to the CW
 and/or by causing bodily injury to the CW with a dangerous
 instrument, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707­711(1)(a), (1)(b), and (1)(d).
2/ At trial, the CW testified that
 
while at home, she and Yasay began arguing in the living room. 
Yasay was holding hedge clippers, which he was in the process of
 sharpening. Yasay went outside then came running back into the
 house. Yasay hit the CW on the head with the hedge clippers,
 then left the residence. The CW sustained a cut to her forehead,
 which began to bleed. A friend accompanied the CW to the
 emergency room, where the CW received ten stitches to close the
 wound. 
2/ HRS § 707-711 (Supp. 2012) provides in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of assault in the second
degree if:
 
(a)	 The person intentionally or knowingly causes
substantial bodily injury to another; 
(b)	 The person recklessly causes serious or substantial
bodily injury to another; 
. . .
 
(d) 	The person intentionally or knowingly causes bodily
injury to another with a dangerous instrument[.]
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dr. Christopher Elliot, the emergency room doctor at
 
Wilcox Hospital, testified that he treated the CW for a head
 
laceration, which was 3.5 centimeters long, as well as bruises to
 her right foot. With respect to the head laceration, Dr. Elliot
 testified that the CW reported that she had been attacked with
 hedge clippers. Dr. Elliot used ten stitches to repair the
 laceration to the CW's forehead. He testified that he might have
 used fewer stitches if the laceration had been in a less
 cosmetically sensitive area, like an arm or leg. He also noted
 that using steri strips or Dermabond, which is like Super Glue,
 were alternative ways of closing a wound, but felt that stitches
 provided a better healing outcome given the size of the wound. 
Yasay testified that the CW grabbed his shirt, when he
 
told the CW that he wanted to take his things and leave. 
According to Yasay, as he struggled with the CW to get her to let
 go of his shirt, they fell to the living room floor. They
 continued to struggle on the floor, with Yasay trying to get the
 CW off of him. There were a number of metal objects on the floor
 because the house was being painted, and Yasay surmised that the
 CW must have cut her head on one of these objects. Yasay denied
 hitting the CW and denied having anything in his hands during the
 struggle. 
II.
 
We resolve Yasay's arguments on appeal as follows:
 
A.
 
The Circuit Court did not err in giving the jury an 
instruction on the included offense of attempted second-degree assault. A trial court is required to instruct the jury "as to any included offenses when 'there is a rational basis in the evidence for a verdict acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and convicting the defendant of the included offense[.]'" State v. Haanio, 94 Hawai' i 405, 413, 16 P.3d 246, 254 (2001) 
(quoting HRS § 701-109(5) (1993)). Attempted second-degree assault is an included offense of second-degree assault. See HRS 
§ 701-109(4)(b) (1993) (stating that an offense is an included 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
offense when "[i]t consists of an attempt to commit the offense 
charged . . . [.]"); State v. Meyers, 112 Hawai' i 278, 291, 145 
P.3d 821, 834 (App. 2006) (holding that attempted first-degree assault is an included offense of first-degree assault). 
Here, there was a rational basis in the evidence for
 
the jury to have rendered a verdict acquitting Yasay of second-
degree assault, but finding him guilty of attempted second-degree
 assault. Yasay was charged in Count IV with committing second-
degree assault by causing substantial bodily injury to the CW
 and/or by causing bodily injury to the CW with a dangerous
 instrument. The jury was instructed, in relevant part, that
 "substantial bodily injury" means "a major avulsion, laceration
 or penetration of the skin[.]" They were also instructed, in
 relevant part, that "dangerous instrument" means a "weapon,
 device, instrument, material or substance, whether animate or
 inanimate, which in the manner it is used or is intended to be
 used, it is known to be capable of producing death or serious
 bodily injury." 
In this case, a rational jury could have concluded that
 
there was insufficient evidence to prove beyond a reasonable
 doubt that (1) the laceration suffered by the CW satisfied the
 definition of "substantial bodily injury" and (2) the hedge
 clippers used by Yasay satisfied the definition of dangerous
 instrument. At the same time, a rational jury could have
 concluded that although Yasay did not cause the CW to actually
 suffer substantial bodily injury, Yasay did, by striking the CW
 in the head with hedge clippers, intentionally engage in conduct
 which was a substantial step in a course of conduct intended or
 known to cause substantial bodily injury. See HRS § 705-500(2)
 
(1993). Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not
 err in instructing the jury on the included offense of attempted
 second-degree assault.
 
B.
 
Yasay argues that the Circuit Court erred in failing to
 
instruct the jury on the specific conduct alleged to form the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
basis for the included offense of attempted second-degree
 
assault. Yasay acknowledges that the Circuit Court instructed
 the jury that Count IV was based on Yasay's alleged conduct of
 hitting the CW with hedge clippers. He contends, however, that
 the instruction on the included offense was defective because the
 Circuit Court did not repeat this specified conduct in
 instructing the jury on the included offense and because under
 his version of the incident, he engaged in different conduct that
 could possibly have caused the CW's injury. Yasay's argument is
 without merit.
 
It is clear that the State's prosecution on Count IV
 
was based on the allegation that Yasay had struck the CW with
 hedge clippers causing the laceration to her head. As Yasay
 acknowledges, the Circuit Court's instructions to the jury on
 Count IV specified the conduct on which Count IV was based. The
 Circuit Court instructed the jury that "[i]n count four of the
 complaint, the Defendant Rudy Rudolpho Yasay is charged with the
 offense of assault in the second degree for allegedly hitting
 [the CW] on the head with hedge clippers." The Circuit Court's
 instructions also directly linked the charged offense in Count IV
 with the included offense of attempted second-degree assault. 
With respect to Count IV, the Circuit Court instructed the jury
 that it must consider the included offense "if and only if you
 find the Defendant not guilty of assault in the second degree or
 you are unable to reach a unanimous verdict as to this
 offense[.]" 
In reviewing alleged errors in jury instructions, "the 
standard of review is whether, when read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." State v. Metcalfe, 
129 Hawai' i 206, 222, 297 P.3d 1062, 1078 (2013). Under this 
standard, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in instructing the jury on the included offense of attempted second-degree assault. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C.
 
We reject Yasay's argument that there was insufficient
 
evidence to support his conviction for attempted second-degree
 
assault. When viewed in the light most favorable to the
 prosecution, see State v. Richie, 88 Hawai'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d
 1227, 1241 (1998), the evidence showed that Yasay intentionally
 struck the CW in the head with hedge clippers, causing a 3.5
 centimeter laceration that required ten stitches to close. There
 was substantial evidence for a reasonable jury to find that Yasay 
intentionally engaged in conduct which was a substantial step in
 a course of conduct intended or known to cause substantial bodily
 injury to the CW. 
III. 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment. DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 27, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Craig A. De Costa
(Law Office of Craig A. De Costa)for Defendant-Appellant 
Chief Judge 
Tracy MurakamiDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Kauaifor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6
 