

 

 

 

 


 

 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000336 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
 
v.
 
 
REBECCA VETTER, Defendant-Appellee
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
 
(CR. NO. 16-1-0139)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
 
(By: 
Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) appeals 
from the "Order Granting, in Part, and Denying in Part, 
Defendant's Motion to Dismiss Charge for Unconstitutionally Broad, Vague and Punitive Statute, and For Violation of Due Process" (Order Granting Motion to Dismiss), filed on March 18, 
2016, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).
1 
The State contends that the circuit court erred when it
 
dismissed with prejudice the State's Amended Felony Information,
 
which charged Defendant-Appellee Rebecca Vetter (Vetter) with 
Unauthorized Possession of Confidential Personal Information
 
(UPCPI), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708­
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
   
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 
 








 



 

 









 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
839.55 (2014).2 The circuit court dismissed the charge on the
 
basis that HRS § 708-839.55 is unconstitutionally overbroad and
 
unconstitutionally vague.
 
In light of the Hawai 'i Supreme Court's recent decision 
in State v. Pacquing, __ Hawai 'i __, __ P.3d __, No. SCAP-14­
0001205, 2016 WL 7176766 (Dec. 9, 2016), reconsideration denied, 2017 WL 235694 (Jan. 18, 2017), we vacate the Order Granting Motion to Dismiss and remand for further proceedings.
I. Background
 
On February 10, 2016, the State charged Vetter with
 
committing the offense of UPCPI via the Amended Felony
 Information. The charge states that Vetter "did intentionally or
 knowingly possess, without authorization, any confidential
 personal information of [complainant], in any form, including but
 not limited to mail, physical documents, identification cards, or
 information stored in digital form[.]"
3
 
On February 18, 2016, Vetter filed a motion to dismiss
 
the charge arguing, inter alia, that the offense of UPCPI under
 
4
HRS §§ 708-839.55 and 708-800 (2014)  (UPCPI statutes) is
 
 
2
 HRS § 708-839.55 provides in pertinent part:
 
[708-839.55] Unauthorized possession of confidential
personal information. (1) A person commits the offense of
unauthorized possession of confidential personal information
if that person intentionally or knowingly possesses, without
authorization, any confidential personal information of
another in any form, including but not limited to mail,
physical documents, identification cards, or information
stored in digital form.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
3
 The sufficiency of the charge is not before us on appeal.
 
4
 HRS § 708-800 provides in relevant part: 
"Confidential personal information" means information in
which an individual has a significant privacy interest,
including but not limited to a driver's license number, a
social security number, an identifying number of a
depository account, a bank account number, a password or
other information that is used for accessing information, or
any other name, number, or code that is used, alone or in
conjunction with other information, to confirm the identity
of a person.
 
2
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 


 

 

 


 



 

 
 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"unconstitutionally vague and overbroad under the Due Process Clauses of the Hawai
'i State and United States Constitutions." 
In a Declaration of Counsel attached to the motion, Vetter's counsel stated that the allegation against Vetter appeared to be based on complaints of missing property, including a Samsung Galaxy III electronic tablet, an expired California Driver's License, a Dutch passport and a Resident Alien Card. 
On March 8, 2016, the State filed a memorandum in
 
opposition to the motion to dismiss asserting that during an
 investigation, a complainant was "able to confirm the Samsung
 Galaxy tablet, California driver's license, and Permanent
 Residence Card as being his property that had been stolen from
 him by [Vetter][.]" The State argued, inter alia, that the
 circuit court should reject Vetter's argument that the UPCPI
 statutes were unconstitutionally overbroad and vague.
 
After a brief hearing held on March 9, 2016, the
 
circuit court filed the Order Granting Motion to Dismiss on March
 18, 2016. The circuit court's order states the basis for
 granting the motion to dismiss is the court's determination that
 HRS § 708-839.55 is unconstitutionally overbroad and
 unconstitutionally vague. 
On April 15, 2016, the State timely appealed from the
 
Order Granting Motion to Dismiss.
II. State v. Pacquing
 
The circuit court's determination that HRS § 708-839.55
 
is unconstitutionally overbroad and unconstitutionally vague is
 controlled by the supreme court's decision in Pacquing. 
In Pacquing, the supreme court concluded "the UPCPI
 
statutes are not facially and unconstitutionally overbroad." 
2016 WL 7176766, at *10. 
However, in Pacquing, the supreme court also concluded
 
that "given the uncertainty in meaning and scope of HRS § 708-800
 [defining "confidential personal information"] and the indefinite
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
3
 
 












 






 

 


 

 






 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and varying standards it provides for adjudging guilt, the UPCPI
 
 
statutes are inordinately vague." Id. at *14. The supreme court
 
 
then excised the portions of HRS § 708-800 that it determined

 
 
made the UPCPI statutes vague. The supreme court held that:
 
 
[t]o eliminate the unconstitutional aspects of the UPCPI
statutes, portions of the HRS § 708-800 definition of
"confidential personal information" must be excised:
"Confidential personal information" means "information in
which an individual has a significant privacy interest,
including but not limited to a driver's license number, a
social security number, an identifying number of a
depository account, [or] a bank account number, a password
or other information that is used for accessing information,
or any other name, number, or code that is used, alone or in
conjunction with other information, to confirm the identity
of a person."
 
Id. at *16. The supreme court further held that 
[a]fter the deletion of the unconstitutional portions of HRS
§ 708-800's definition of "confidential personal
information," its meaning would be circumscribed to the
enumerated classes of information preceded by "including"
and information similar to those already enumerated. This
 means that a non-enumerated item of "information in which an
 individual has a significant privacy interest" would qualify
as "confidential personal information" only if that
non-enumerated item is similar in nature and character to
 those already enumerated in HRS § 708-800.
 
Id. (emphasis added) (citations omitted). The supreme court also
 
 
noted that the remaining portions of the definition for

 
 
"confidential personal information" still effectuated the 
 
intent of the legislature to target and deter conduct that
precedes identity theft because intentional or knowing
possession, without authorization, of a driver's license
number, a social security number, an identifying number of a
depository account, a bank account number, or other
information similar in nature and character to those
 statutorily enumerated would still be a criminal offense.
 
Id. at *17.
 
III. Present Case
 
In the circuit court, Vetter's memorandum in support of
 
 
her motion to dismiss asserted, inter alia, that the charge
 
 
against her should be dismissed because HRS § 708-839.55 is
 
 
unconstitutionally overbroad and unconstitutionally vague on its
 
 
face. The circuit court appears to have granted the motion on
 
 
this basis.
 
 
4
 
 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A. Overbroad
 
The supreme court concluded in Pacquing that the UPCPI
 
statutes were not unconstitutionally overbroad. Id. at *10. 
Given Pacquing, the circuit court's dismissal of the charge on
 the basis that HRS § 708-839.55 is unconstitutionally overbroad
 is vacated.
 
B. Vagueness
 
In light of the holdings in Pacquing on the issue of
 
vagueness and the supreme court's excision of parts of the
 definition for "confidential personal information" in HRS § 708­
800, we also vacate the circuit court's dismissal of the charge
 on the basis that HRS § 708-839.55 is unconstitutionally vague.
 
HRS § 708-893.55 provides in pertinent part:
 
[708-839.55] Unauthorized possession of confidential
 
personal information. (1) A person commits the offense of 

unauthorized possession of confidential personal information 

if that person intentionally or knowingly possesses, without 

authorization, any confidential personal information of
 
another in any form, including but not limited to mail,
 
physical documents, identification cards, or information
 
stored in digital form.
 
 
Given Pacquing, "confidential personal information" under HRS
 § 708-800 includes "a driver's license number, a social security
 number, an identifying number of a depository account, [or] a
 bank account number," and "information similar to those already
 enumerated." Id. at *16. In determining whether the items
 
Vetter is alleged to have possessed are similar to the enumerated
 items remaining in the definition of "confidential personal
 information," it appears the items should be of the type that
 would satisfy the intent of the legislature to target and deter
 conduct that precedes identity theft. Id. at *17; see also State
 
v. Mank, No. CAAP-16-0000342, 2017 WL 432898 (Haw. App. Jan. 31,
 2017).
 
Because it appears that the circuit court based its
 
ruling on a facial challenge to the UPCPI statutes, it did not
 address the particular items alleged to have been improperly in
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5It further appears that the record is undeveloped in terms of what
information the relevant items may contain.
6Vetter's possession.5  We thus need not consider here whether the
items Vetter is alleged to have possessed constitute or contain
confidential personal information under HRS §§ 708-800 and 708-
839.55.  Rather, further proceedings in light of Pacquing are
appropriate.
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order
Granting, in Part, and Denying in Part, Defendant's Motion to
Dismiss Charge for Unconstitutionally Broad, Vague and Punitive
Statute, and For Violation of Due Process," filed on March 18,
2016, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, is vacated. 
This case is remanded to the circuit court for proceedings
consistent with Pacquing and this Summary Disposition Order.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 15, 2017.
On the briefs:
Brian R. Vincent, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.Presiding Judge
Hayley Y.C. Cheng, 
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge
Associate Judge