NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-16-0000704 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I  
JASON A. SNELLINGS, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
JAMIE L. SNELLINGS, Defendant-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-D NO. 14-1-7146) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
In this divorce case, Plaintiff-Appellant Jason A. 
Snellings (Jason)1 appeals from three post-decree orders entered 
by the Family Court of the First Circuit:2 
1. "Order Granting in Part Plaintiff's Motion for 
Summary Judgment [as to Rule 60(B)(6) Claim Only]" entered on 
September 27, 2016; 
2. "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part 
Defendant's Motion for Post-decree Relief Filed October 22, 2015" entered on September 27, 2016; and 
3. "Order Awarding Defendant Attorney's Fees and 
Costs" entered on November 7, 2016. 
For the reasons explained below, we affirm all of the 
family court's orders. 
1 The parties are referred to by their given names because they
continue to have the same surname. 
2 The Honorable Dyan M. Medeiros presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. 
Jason was married to Defendant-Appellee Jamie L. 
Snellings (Jamie). They had two children. Jason filed for 
divorce on July 18, 2014. Jamie filed an answer. Both parties 
filed the required statements disclosing their income, expenses, assets, and debts. Jamie's asset and debt statement, filed on December 19, 2014, listed two deposit accounts: a checking account at First Hawaiian Bank with a balance of $16,000, and an account at the Navy Federal Credit Union with a credit balance of $22,000. 
Jason and Jamie participated in mediation. On 
February 23, 2015, they signed a mediated agreement resolving some of the issues in the divorce case (Mediated Agreement). 
Jason conducted discovery, obtaining documents from 
First Hawaiian Bank, among others. On May 5, 2015, Jason filed a motion for pre-decree relief including a financial restraining order. Jason's motion alleged that on November 26, 2014, Jamie had withdrawn $65,000 from her First Hawaiian Bank checking account and deposited the funds into an account at Hickam Federal Credit Union — one that was not listed in her asset and debt statement. The family court set Jason's motion for a hearing on June 3, 2015. 
Jamie "wanted the court case to be done and . . . was 
scared over the threat of sanctions" because she failed to dis-close assets. On May 29, 2015, Jamie's counsel made a settlement offer to Jason's counsel. 
On June 3, 2015, when the hearing on Jason's motion for 
a financial restraining order was convened, counsel informed the family court that an agreement for a stipulated divorce decree had been reached. Jason and Jamie and their respective counsel signed a typewritten divorce decree that contained handwritten changes. The family court orally granted the divorce "[u]nder the terms as expressed in the divorce decree" and ordered that a typewritten, signed divorce decree be submitted by June 15, 2015. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The family court entered an expedited order on June 10, 2015,3 
that provided: 
1. The parties have reach [sic] a full and final settle-
ment of all issues related to the divorce. The terms of the agreement between the parties is set forth inthe divorce decree attached hereto as Exhibit "A" to this order. 
2. [Jason]'s counsel shall prepare a typed divorce decreethat includes the handwritten changes in Ex "A"verbatim. The parties and counsel shall sign andsubmit the decree to court within ten (10) days [ofthe June 3, 2015 hearing]. 
On June 12, 2015, the family court approved a request to extend 
the deadline for filing the stipulated divorce decree until June 19, 2015. By letter dated June 22, 2015, Jason's counsel submitted a proposed decree to the family court. It was signed by Jason and his counsel, but not by Jamie or her counsel. 
By letter dated June 28, 2015, Jamie's counsel objected 
to the proposed divorce decree. The letter stated that Jason failed to disclose his impending deployment to Jamie until the day after the June 3, 2015 hearing, when he also informed Jamie that their two children would live with his parents in Virginia as part of a family care plan he had submitted to his military command.
4 Jamie requested a hearing before the family court. 
The family court scheduled a Hawai# i Family Court Rules 
(
HFCR) Rule 16 status conference for July 23, 2015. On July 23, 
2015, the presiding family court judge continued the status conference to August 4, 2015, so that it could be handled by the same judge who had presided over the June 3, 2015 hearing (when the settlement was placed on the record) and who signed the June 10, 2015 expedited order concerning the stipulated divorce decree. 
3 The Honorable Paul T. Murakami presided over the June 3, 2015
hearing and signed the June 10, 2015 order. 
4 The stipulated divorce decree gave Jason sole physical custody of
the children, subject to Jamie's right of reasonable visitation. The 
February 23, 2015 Mediated Agreement had called for joint physical custody. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At the HFCR Rule 16 status conference on August 4, 
2015,5 the family court judge summarized the issues: 
[I]n this case there was a hearing on June 3rd that was
presided over by myself. It was supposed to be for purposesof an order to show cause filed by [Jason], but that changedinto ultimately a full agreement as to the divorce. And that divorce was placed on the record and there was aproposed decree that was signed by all the parties attachedto the expedited order for that day. Again that was on June3rd. 
Subsequently [Jason's counsel] had the responsibility
to submit the final decree which, as far as I can see,tracks exactly what was submitted to the court on June 3rd.Basically all the handwritten additions were typed nice andneat into the final decree. 
So it comes down to the decree 
that was placed on the record is the same decree that waspresented to the court for its signature. 
The reason we're here today is . . . [Jason], you are
currently . . . on deployment with the military pursuant toyour service and that allegedly you knew about that well inadvance of the proceedings in June, but for reasons that Ithink are manifestly obvious you decided to not reveal thatto [Jamie]. [Jamie]'s claim is that that was a materialmisrepresentation . . . and it would have affected thenegotiations between the parties and maybe come up with adifferent -- a different result. And that's what's before me. 
So the question I guess is -- there's several
questions. Number one is should this decree go through asit is. If the decree is allowed to go through, are thereany kind of sanctions that should issue. Alternatively ifthe decree is not allowed to go through, what do we do next? 
(Underscoring added.) After hearing arguments from both sides
and taking a recess to deliberate, the family court ruled:  
With regard to the issue at bar -- I'll put this as
simply as I can -- it amounts to whether or not the court
should sign the decree as presented or not. . . . I havesome real concerns with what has happened which has broughtus to this. However . . . as I've re-reviewed the decree,it was the result of extensive negotiations between theparties with the assistance of attorneys. And in anynegotiation because there were attorneys, the attorneys havea responsibility to ask the appropriate questions. 
Now arguably this one centers around a fact known but
not revealed. However, if confronted, it could have been --it could have or should have been revealed and wasn't. The question never came up as the famous saying goes. Under thecircumstances at bar, at least on the major point, the courtis going to sign the decree as presented to the court.However, I would further opine that there's significantquestions about where the children are located and whythey're located where they are even within the boundaries of 
 
5 Jason, who had already been deployed to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,
appeared by telephone. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the decree that probably give rise to a post-decree motion
or I see on [Jamie]'s behalf. I'll leave it to her to decide whether or not she's going to file one or not. 
. . . [T]he court, again while I don't believe this rises to
the level necessarily of an ODC report, the court does havesome concerns about what has transpired. . . . Attorneys[sic] fees and costs -- that's the sanction -- from June 3rdforward. I need a detailed affidavit from you, [Jamie'scounsel]. 
In response to a question from Jamie's counsel about custody of 
the children during Jason's deployment, the family court stated: 
If you want to raise a post-decree motion based on
anything else that you feel is not covered by the decree,
that's up to you and your client. That's without prejudiceto any post-decree motions. 
. . . . 
[Jason] is free to do whatever he thinks is part of
the decree. That's what he's done. I'm not ruling on that'cause that's not particularly before me. The issue before me is whether or not there was a material misrepresentationsufficient to derail the entry of the decree and that's allI'm ruling on in that. 
The family court entered an expedited order on August 5, 2015,
which stated:  
(1) The court having reviewed the facts and circumstances
finds that both parties were represented by counsel,the proposed decree accurately reflects their agree-ment, and the court will sign the proposed decreesubmitted by [Jason]'s counsel by R.58 Ltr [sic] dated6/22/15. 
(2) Either party may file a Mtn [sic] for Post-DecreeRelief if they believe the timesharing or childcareprovisions are inconsistent with the decree, or forany other reason. 
(3) [Jamie] is awarded atty's [sic] fees and costsrelating to the issue of [Jason]'s departure &deployment for the period from June 3, 2015 toAugust 4, 2015, ie [sic] [Jamie]'s objections toDecree. 
Jason was ordered to renew the registration for a car he owned 
and to then transfer title to Jamie by the end of the month. The"Stipulated Decree Granting Divorce and Awarding Child Custody" (Stipulated Decree) was filed on August 19, 2015. On 
February 29, 2016, the family court entered an order awarding 
attorney's fees and costs totaling $5,000 to Jamie, from Jason. No appeal was taken from the August 5, 2015 order, the StipulatedDecree, or the February 29, 2016 fee award order.  
 
5 . . . .  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On October 22, 2015, Jamie filed the motion at issue in 
this appeal, which sought to vacate or modify portions of the 
Stipulated Decree pursuant to HFCR Rule 60(b) (Rule 60 Motion).6 
The Rule 60 Motion also sought modification of the Stipulated Decree due to a material change of circumstances, to enforce the Stipulated Decree against Jason, and to enforce the motor vehicle registration and title transfer order. The motion was set to be heard on December 2, 2015. 
On December 2, 2015, Jason filed a motion to dismiss 
Jamie's Rule 60 Motion or to stay proceedings pursuant to the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act, 50 U.S.C. §§ 3901-4043 (Motion 
to Dismiss).
7 The motion was set to be heard on December 10, 
2015. 
During the December 2, 2015 hearing on Jamie's Rule 60 
Motion, the family court8 addressed Jason's counsel: 
[F]rankly, the Court has very little trust in terms of your
client's actions in this case thus far. 
. . . . 
What the Court is concerned about are the allegations
that a fraud was perpetrated on the Court. 
6 HFCR Rule 60, titled "Relief From Judgment or Order," provides in
relevant part: 
(b) Mistakes; inadvertence; excusable neglect; newly
discovered evidence; fraud . On motion and upon such terms
as are just, the court may relieve a party or a party'slegal representative from any or all of the provisions of afinal judgment, order, or proceeding for the followingreasons: 
. . . . 
(3) fraud (whether heretofore denominated intrinsic or
extrinsic), misrepresentation, or other misconduct of an adverseparty; [or] 
. . . . 
(6) any other reason justifying relief from the operation
of the judgment. 
7 Jason's Motion to Dismiss incorrectly cites the Servicemembers
Civil Relief Act. 
8 The Honorable Dyan M. Medeiros presided over the December 2, 2015
hearing and all further proceedings at issue in this appeal. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
That's what the Court is concerned about, that
information pertinent to settlement negotiations and
relevant to settlement negotiations was intentionallywithheld. 
The family court ultimately continued the hearing because Jamie's 
Rule 60 Motion had not been timely served on Jason's counsel, and because the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act issue had to be addressed first (Jason was still deployed). An order setting the hearing on Jason's Motion to Dismiss for December 10, 2015, and continuing the hearing on Jamie's Rule 60 Motion to December 23, 2015, was entered. 
During the December 10, 2015 hearing on Jason's Motion 
to Dismiss, the family court stated: 
[M]y understanding of the case, having reviewed the motion,
is that the essence of the fraud claim is that [Jason's]deployment was not disclosed [to Jamie] prior to the timethe agreement [for the stipulated divorce decree] wasreached. 
. . . . 
The intention was to withhold information to get the
agreement he wanted is what it's -- it sounds like you'retelling me. 
[JASON'S COUNSEL]: No, I don't believe that's the
case. 
THE COURT: It may have been because he wanted to
ensure his children were safe and protected and all of thatstuff, but at the heart of it, it sounds like he withheldinformation because he felt that would benefit his position. 
The family court denied Jason's request for a stay, granted 
Jason's request to address the requested dismissal in connection with the hearing on Jamie's Rule 60 Motion, vacated the December 23, 2015 hearing date on Jamie's Rule 60 Motion, set an extended hearing on the Rule 60 Motion for April 15, 2016, and ordered the children to be returned to Hawai# i after the start of 
their winter school break and placed into Jamie's sole custody until Jason returned from deployment, after which the parties were to resume the time-sharing schedule stated in the Stipulated Decree, pending the extended hearing. 
A written order was 
entered on December 10, 2015. 
On March 21, 2016, Jason filed a motion for summary 
judgment (Jason's MSJ
). Jason argued that the relief sought by 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Jamie's Rule 60 Motion was barred by the doctrine of res 
judicata, and that HFCR Rule 60(b) did not apply because Jason's alleged misconduct was known to Jamie and to the family court before entry of the Stipulated Decree. Jason's MSJ was also set to be heard on April 15, 2016. 
At the extended hearing on April 15, 2016, the family 
court orally denied Jason's MSJ as to Jamie's Rule 60(b)(3) (fraud) claim. A written order was entered on May 12, 2016. The family court then received testimony from Jamie. The hearing was continued to July 1, 2016. At the July 1, 2016 hearing the family court received testimony from Jamie and Jason. After hearing arguments from counsel the family court orally granted Jason's Motion to Dismiss Jamie's HFCR Rule 60(b)(6) ("any other reason") claim, partially granted Jamie's Rule 60 motion, and announced its intention to award attorney's fees and costs to Jamie. 
On September 27, 2016, the family court entered its 
"Order Granting in Part Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment [as to Rule 60(b)(6) Claim Only]." It is not clear why Jason is appealing from this order, because it grants Jason's motion for summary judgment on Jamie's HFCR Rule 60(b)(6) claim and states that the family court's ruling on Jamie's HFCR Rule 60(b)(3) claim "shall be set forth in a separate order."
9 
On September 27, 2016, the family court also entered 
its "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendant's Motion for Post-decree Relief Filed October 22, 2015." That order granted Jamie's motion based on HFCR Rule 60(b)(3) and denied Jamie's motion based on HFCR Rule 60(b)(6). The order stated: 
It is undisputed that the parties reached and signed a
mediation agreement in February 2015 addressing the issues
of legal custody, time sharing, and a visitation schedule.The terms in the mediation agreement on these specificissues were all consistent with the terms set forth in the final Divorce Decree on those same issues. The issues agreed to at mediation were made prior to [Jason] receivingdeployment orders, prior to the 6/3/15 settlement agreementbetween the parties on the divorce, and prior to any motionsbeing filed. 
9 Jamie has not cross-appealed from the denial of her requested
relief under HFCR Rule 60(b)(6). 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . 
[Jamie]'s request for relief that custody and
visitation provisions in the Divorce Decree be set aside is
GRANTED in part and DENIED in part as follows: 
The 
following provisions in the Divorce Decree shall remainunchanged: Paragraph 4A "Legal Custody", Paragraph 5"Physical Custody and Timesharing", Paragraph 5A "Mother andFather on Oahu", and Paragraph 5F "Right of First Refusal".The following provisions in the Divorce Decree related tochild custody and visitation are hereby set aside: Para-graphs 5B "Mother and Father in Different Localities", 5C"Reports and Notices", 5D "Notification of Medical Problemsand/or Emergencies", 5E "Extracurricular Activities andExpenses", 5G "Relatives Timesharing", 5H "Travel", 5I"Travel Expenses", 5J "Children's Passports", 5K "Reloca-tion", 5L "Telephone, written and electronic contact", 5M"Protection From Parental Disputes", and 6 "Family CarePlan" is specifically included in those provisions that arehereby set aside. 
On November 7, 2016, the family court entered its 
"Order Awarding Defendant Attorney's Fees and Costs." The family
court awarded attorney's fees and costs totaling $12,000 to Jamie, from Jason.  
This appeal followed.
10 
II. 
[T]he family court possesses wide discretion in making its
decisions and those decision[s] will not be set aside unlessthere is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus, we will notdisturb the family court's decisions on appeal unless thefamily court disregarded rules or principles of law orpractice to the substantial detriment of a party litigantand its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of reason. 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai# i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006)
(citation omitted).  
The family court's grant or denial of a HFCR Rule 60(b)
motion is reviewed for abuse of discretion. LaPeter v. LaPeter, 
144 
Hawai# i 295, 304, 439 P.3d 247, 256 (App. 2019).  
10 Jason filed a notice of appeal on October 22, 2016, after the
family court announced its intent to award attorney's fees to Jamie but before
entry of the written order. Rule 4(b)(4) of the Hawai #i Rules of Appellate
Procedure provides that "[a] notice of appeal filed after the announcement ofa decision, sentence or order but before entry of the judgment or order shallbe deemed to have been filed on the date such judgment or order is entered."Jason also filed an amended notice of appeal on November 23, 2016, withinthirty days after entry of the family court order awarding attorney's fees andcosts to Jamie, which was the order ending these proceedings, leaving nothingfurther to be accomplished. Familian Nw., Inc. v. Cent. Pac. Boiler & Piping,
Ltd., 68 Haw. 368, 370, 714 P.2d 936, 937 (1986) ("Final order means an orderending the proceedings, leaving nothing further to be accomplished.") (cleanedup). 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The family court's findings of fact are reviewed under 
the "clearly erroneous" standard. Fisher, 111 Hawai# i at 46, 137 
P.3d at 360. A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when the 
record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding, or despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, we are nonetheless left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. Id. "Substantial evidence" is credible 
evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion. Id. "It is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass 
upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." Id. 
The family court's conclusions of law are ordinarily 
reviewed 
de novo, under the right/wrong standard, "and are freely 
reviewable for their correctness." Fisher
, 111 Hawai# i at 46, 
137 P.3d at 360. However, when a conclusion of law presents mixed questions of fact and law, we review it under the "clearly erroneous" standard because the court's conclusions are dependent on the facts and circumstances of each individual case. Estate 
of Klink ex rel. Klink v. State
, 113 Hawai# i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 
504, 523 (2007). A conclusion of law that is supported by the trial court's findings of fact and reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be overturned. Id. 
I
II. 
Jason's opening brief raises three points of error. 
The following findings of fact were not challenged and are binding on the parties and this court, see Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai# i 43, 63, 85 P.3d 150, 170 (2004) ("Findings of fact that 
are not challenged on appeal are binding on the appellate court.") (cleaned up): 
6. In March of 2015, [Jason] received temporary
additional duty assignment orders ("TAD orders") notifying
him that he would be sent to Cuba on or about June 8, 2015with an estimated return date of March 8, 2016. . . . Inother words, [Jason] was to be on temporary additional duty("TAD") away from Hawai #i for approximately nine (9) months.
Despite the fact that the parties still had custody andtimesharing issues to resolve, [Jason] did not disclose his 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
TAD orders to [Jamie] when he received them or within a
reasonable amount of time thereafter. 
7. On June 3, 2015, while at Court for a hearing,
the parties reached an agreement settling all of the issuesin their divorce. The parties' agreement was consistentwith the February 23, 2015 agreement reached in mediationand also addressed the parties' remaining issues. Amongother things, on June 3, 2015, the parties agreed that[Jason] would be awarded sole physical custody of thechildren, to a timesharing schedule for times when one partyresided outside of O #ahu, and to [Jason]'s right to
designate who would care for the children when he deployed.At the time the parties reached these agreements, [Jason]still had not told [Jamie] that he was scheduled to leaveHawai #i pursuant to his TAD orders. 
. . . . 
9. The June 3, 2015 hearing constituted the Family
Court's adjudication of the parties' divorce case althoughthe parties were not yet divorced because a final DivorceDecree had not been entered by the Court.[
11] 
10. The next day, June 4, 2015, [Jason] notified
[Jamie] of his TAD orders, told her that he and the childrenwere leaving Hawai #i on June 6, 2015, and told her that he
was sending the children to live with his parents inVirginia for the duration of his TAD. 
11. Thereafter, [Jamie] discovered that on June 2,
2015, [Jason] had notified the children's schools that thechildren's last day of school would be June 3, 2015 and thatthey were to be permanently released as they were moving toVirginia. . . . [Jason] had not disclosed this notificationto [Jamie] prior to the parties' June 3, 2015 agreement atCourt. 
12. [Jamie] also discovered that on May 26, 2015
[Jason] had arranged for a 16 foot storage pod to bedelivered to his address on May 30, 2015. . . . 
13. On June 6, 2015, [Jason] left Hawai #i with both 
children and dropped them off at his parent's house inVirginia. 
(Footnote added.) 
A. Jamie's Rule 60 Motion was not barred by thedoctrine of res judicata. 
Jason first contends that Jamie's Rule 60 Motion was 
barred by the doctrine of res judicata, citing Bremer v. Weeks,
104 Hawai# i 43, 85 P.3d 150 (2004).  In that case the Hawai# i 
Supreme Court explained: 12 
11 Although arguably a conclusion of law, if challenged it would be
affirmed for the reasons explained below. 
12 Jason's opening brief incorrectly cites Bremer and incorrectly
describes language from that opinion. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Res judicata, or claim preclusion, and collateral estoppel,
or issue preclusion, are doctrines that limit a litigant toone opportunity to litigate aspects of the case to preventinconsistent results and multiplicity of suits and topromote finality and judicial economy. . . . 
Claim preclusion . . . prohibits a party from relitigating a
previously adjudicated cause of action. Moreover, thejudgment of a court of competent jurisdiction is a bar to anew action in any court between the same parties or theirprivies concerning the same subject matter, and precludesthe relitigation, not only of the issues which were actuallylitigated in the first action, but also of all grounds ofclaim and defense which might have been properly litigatedin the first action but were not litigated or decided. 
Id. at 53, 85 P.3d at 160 (cleaned up) (underscoring added). 
Jason argues that Jamie raised Jason's nondisclosures to the family court before entry of the Stipulated Decree, and her failure to appeal from the Stipulated Decree makes it final andbinding upon her.  
Jamie's Rule 60 Motion was not barred by res judicata. 
Jamie did not file "a new action" to relitigate the fraud issue; Jamie's motion was appropriately filed in the same action in which the Stipulated Decree was entered. Cf. Ainamalu Corp. v. Honolulu Transp. & Warehouse Corp., 56 Haw. 362, 362, 537 P.2d 17, 18 (1975) (indicating that Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure 
Rule 60(b) may be used to modify or set aside a stipulated judg-ment on the ground of fraud, mistake, or misrepresentation). 
The
Stipulated Decree in this case was, as its title implies, the result of a settlement. The Hawai# i Supreme Court has held:  
[S]ettlement agreements are simply a species of contract
and, thus, are governed by principles of contract law.Consequently, as with contracts, settlement agreementsinduced by either a fraudulent or material misrepresentationare voidable by the defrauded party because [they have] notfreely bargained but [have] been induced to settle by theother party. In other words, a plaintiff who was induced toenter into a settlement agreement by fraudulent or materialmisrepresentations may obtain a decree rescinding or cancel-ling the agreement ab initio. The result of rescission is to return both parties to the status quo ante, i.e., eachside is to be restored to the property and legal attributesthat it enjoyed before the contract was entered andperformed. 
Exotics Hawaii-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Du Pont De Nemours & Co., 116
Hawai# i 277, 288, 172 P.3d 1021, 1032 (2007) (cleaned up). 
Because the Stipulated Decree was entered pursuant to a settle- 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ment, a motion pursuant to HFCR 60(b)(3)  was an appropriate way
for Jamie to seek relief because of Jason's alleged fraud. 13 
B. June 3, 2015 was the date upon which the parties
recited, and the family court approved, thesettlement-on-the-record. 
Jason next contends that he disclosed his deployment, 
and that his command was sending their children to Virginia to 
live with Jason's parents, to Jamie on June 4, 2015. The family court was informed of Jason's omissions during the HFCR Rule 16 status conference on August 4, 2015, yet it still entered the Stipulated Decree on August 19, 2015. Jason argues that Jamie's Rule 60 Motion should have been denied because it was "based uponfacts that were known to [Jamie] and the Court prior to entry of the [divorce d]ecree." 
Jason argues that finding of fact no. 23 
is clearly erroneous:  
23. The August 5, 2015 Order clearly states that a
post-decree motion may be filed for "any other reason" which
would include a post-decree motion filed pursuant to HFCRRule 60(b). 
This finding is supported by substantial evidence because the 
August 5, 2015 order does in fact state that "Either party mayfile a mtn [sic] for Post-Decree Relief . . . for any other reason." The finding was not clearly erroneous.  
The family court also made the following conclusions of
law in connection with Jamie's Rule 60 Motion:  
6. The prior adjudication occurred on June 3, 2015
when the case was settled, the settlement terms were placed
on the record, the Court approved and adopted that agree-ment, and the parties were ordered to submit a final, typedcopy of the Divorce Decree for entry by the Court. The hearing on June 3, 2015 adjudicated the parties' divorcecase. 
7. The August 4, 2015 conference/hearing was not an
adjudication on the merits of [Jamie's] fraud claimsalthough her fraud claims and the facts that had occurredafter June 3, 2015 were discussed. No evidentiary hearingwas held, no sworn affidavits or testimony was received, andno exhibits were received. Accordingly, neither theAugust 5, 2015 Order nor the Divorce Decree (filed onAugust 19, 2015) were final judgments on the merits of thefraud claims raised in [Jamie's] Motion for Post-DecreeRelief. 
13 See note 6. 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Under the facts of this case, the family court 
correctly concluded that the relevant date is when the settlement
was placed on the record and approved by the family court, not the filing date of the Stipulated Decree. On June 3, 2015, before Jason disclosed his deployment and family care plan to Jamie: Jason and Jamie and their respective counsel informed the family court that an agreement for a stipulated divorce decree had been reached; Jason and Jamie and their respective counsel signed a typewritten divorce decree containing handwritten changes that became part of the record; and the family court orally granted the divorce "[u]nder the terms as expressed in thedivorce decree" and ordered that a typewritten, signed divorce decree be submitted by June 15, 2015. All that remained to be done was the ministerial task of re-typing the stipulated divorcedecree and presenting it to the family court for filing. The HFCR Rule 16 conference conducted on August 4, 2015, was not an adjudication of Jamie's fraud claim, but a status conference to follow up on the family court's June 3, 2015 directive that the parties "prepare a typed divorce decree that includes the hand-written changes."  
 
 
During the August 4, 2015 status conference the family 
court stated: 
[Jason's counsel] had the responsibility to submit the final
decree which, as far as I can see, tracks exactly what wassubmitted to the court on June 3rd. Basically all the hand-written additions were typed nice and neat into the finaldecree. So it comes down to the decree that was placed onthe record is the same decree that was presented to thecourt for its signature. 
The family court filed the Stipulated Decree because it accu-
rately set forth the parties' settlement agreement put on the record and approved by the court during the June 3, 2015 proceed-ing, and further documented in the family court's June 10, 2015 expedited order. 
Jason did not tell Jamie about his impending deployment 
and family care plan before June 3, 2015; accordingly, an HFCR Rule 60(b)(3) motion
14 was an appropriate way for Jamie to chal-
14 See note 6. 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
lenge the validity of the settlement based on Jason's alleged
fraud.  
C. The family court did not abuse its discretion by
awarding attorney's fees and costs to Jamie. 
Hawai# i follows the traditional American rule that 
ordinarily, attorney's fees cannot be awarded as damages or costs
where not so provided by statute, stipulation or agreement. Salvador v. Popaa, 56 Haw. 111, 111, 530 P.2d 7, 9 (1974). Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS
) § 580-47 (Supp. 2015) provides, in 
relevant part:  
(f) Attorney's fees and costs. The court hearing
any motion for orders either revising an order for the
custody, support, maintenance, and education of the childrenof the parties, or an order for the support and maintenanceof one party by the other, or a motion for an order toenforce any such order or any order made under subsection(a) of this section, may make such orders requiring eitherparty to pay or contribute to the payment of the attorney'sfees, costs, and expenses of the other party relating tosuch motion and hearing as shall appear just and equitableafter consideration of the respective merits of the parties,the relative abilities of the parties, the economiccondition of each party at the time of the hearing, theburdens imposed upon either party for the benefit of thechildren of the parties, the concealment of or failure todisclose income or an asset, or violation of a restrainingorder issued under section 580-10(a) or (b), if any, byeither party, and all other circumstances of the case. 
The family court's award of attorney's fees is reviewed for abuse
of discretion. Hamilton v. Hamilton, 138 Hawai# i 185, 210, 378 
P.3d 901, 926 (2016).  
The family court made the following findings of fact in
connection with Jamie's Rule 60 Motion:  
29. [Jason's] TAD orders and imminent departure from
Hawai #i were material facts that should have been disclosed 
to [Jamie] and her counsel prior to June 3, 2015. 
30. [Jason] did not disclose his TAD orders to
[Jamie] until June 4, 2015. 
31. [Jason] knowingly and intentionally failed to
disclose his TAD orders and his plans to send the children
to Virginia to [Jamie] until June 4, 2015 to induce her toagree to the settlement terms that he wanted. 
32. Because the Divorce Decree simply reflects the
terms of the June 3, 2015 agreement, it does not address[Jamie's] claim of fraud. 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
33. Although [Jamie's] claim of fraud was discussed
at the August 4, 2015 hearing, it was not litigated, no
evidence was taken, and therefore there was no adjudication"on the merits" of [Jamie's] fraud claim. 
These findings are supported by substantial evidence and are not 
clearly erroneous. They also form a reasonable basis for the family court's conclusion of law no. 21: 
21. It was just and equitable under HRS § 580-47 to
award [Jamie] $12,000.00 in attorney's fees and costs
incurred in connection with her Motion for Post-Decree Relief (including defending against [Jason's] numerousmotions) and the post-decree litigation in this case. This amount is not duplicative of the $5,000.00 in attorney'sfees and costs previously awarded by the Court for theperiod from June 3, 2015 through August 4, 2015. 
This conclusion of law is supported by the family court's 
findings of fact and reflects an application of the correct rule of law. Jason does not challenge the amount of the award. The attorney's fee order is affirmed. Klink, 113 Hawai# i at 351, 152 
P.3d at 523 (noting that a conclusion of law supported by trial court's findings of fact and reflecting application of correct rule of law will not be overturned). 
IV. 
Based upon the foregoing, the "Order Granting in Part 
Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment [as to Rule 60(B)(6) Claim Only]" entered on September 27, 2016, the "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendant's Motion for Post-decree Relief Filed October 22, 2015" entered on September 27, 2016, and the "Order Awarding Defendant Attorney's Fees and Costs" entered on November 7, 2016, are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 28, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
Steven J. Kim,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Dominique Tansley,
for Defendant-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
16 