NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
CAAP-12-0000794
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ZALDY SUBIA, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-1405)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Zaldy Subia (Subia) with second-degree 
methamphetamine trafficking, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1240.8 (2014).
1 Subia's prosecution stemmed 
from his engaging in a drug transaction with an undercover police officer. A jury found Subia guilty as charged. The Circuit 
2
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)  sentenced Subia to
ten years of imprisonment, with a mandatory minimum term of one
 year, to be served concurrently with any other sentence he may be
 
1HRS § 712-1240.8 provides in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of methamphetamine
trafficking in the second degree if the person knowingly
distributes methamphetamine in any amount.
 
2The Honorable Colette Y. Garibaldi presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
required to serve. The Circuit Court entered its Judgment on
 
August 22, 2012.
 
On appeal, Subia contends that: (1) the Circuit Court
 
abused its discretion in permitting an expert to testify that the
 substances she examined contained methamphetamine because an
 insufficient foundation was laid for the results of the three
 tests on which she relied; (2) without the expert's testimony,
 there was insufficient evidence to prove that the substances
 Subia provided to the undercover officer contained
 methamphetamine; and (3) the Circuit Court abused its discretion
 in permitting the State to ask Subia whether he had worked with
 the drug supplier before in cross-examining him about his
 procuring agent defense. We affirm.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
An officer of the Narcotic Vice Division of the
 
Honolulu Police Department (HPD), working in an undercover
 capacity (Undercover Officer), was assigned to a "buy-bust"
 operation in the Chinatown area. At trial the Undercover Officer
 described his encounter with Subia as follows:
 
Well, I approached him. I asked him if "You get,"
which is, through my training and appearance [sic], is
street vernacular to see if you have any illegal drugs to
sell. He said, "What you looking for?" I said "Clear." 
Which is street vernacular for crystal methamphetamine. He
 said, "How much you looking for?" I said "Forty." Forty
dollars. He said, "Okay, wait here."
 
Subia then rode away on his bicycle. A "[c]ouple
 
minutes" later, Subia returned. Subia handed the Undercover
 
Officer two small zip-lock bags that contained a white
 crystalline-like substance, which resembled crystal
 methamphetamine. After receiving the two bags, the Undercover
 Officer gave Subia forty dollars.
 
The substances in the small bags that the Undercover
 
Officer received from Subia were subsequently analyzed by
 Jeanette Ardiente (Ardiente), a criminalist with HPD. Ardiente
 was qualified as an expert in the field of drug analysis and
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
identification. Ardiente performed three tests to determine
 
whether the substance in each bag contained a controlled
 substance. These tests were: (1) a color test; (2) a crystal
 test; and (3) a Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer (FTIR) 
instrument test. The three tests all showed that both bags
 contained methamphetamine.
 
II.
 
Subia raised the procuring agent defense at trial.
3
 
Subia acknowledged that he had engaged in a drug transaction that
 involved the Undercover Officer. Subia claimed, however, that he
 was acting as the agent of the buyer (the Undercover Officer) in
 the transaction and that he was not the supplier of the drugs or
 working as an agent for the drug supplier. Based on this claim,
 Subia argued that he could not be found guilty of distributing
 methamphetamine, but could only be found guilty of possessing
 methamphetamine as the agent of the buyer.
 
Subia testified that when the Undercover Officer said
 
he wanted to buy "[c]lear," Subia understood that the Undercover
 Officer wanted to buy crystal methamphetamine. According to
 Subia, he rode his bike and got the drugs from "Tony," who Subia
 knew sold drugs. Subia testified that he got the drugs from
 Tony, rode back to where the Undercover Officer was waiting, gave
 the drugs to the Undercover Officer in exchange for forty
 dollars, then went back to Tony and gave Tony the forty dollars.
 
Subia denied working for Tony or receiving anything for
 
his participation in the transaction. Although Subia had never
 met the Undercover Officer before, Subia testified that he acted
 purely to help the Undercover Officer get the drugs. When asked
 why he did not just tell the Undercover Officer to go see Tony
 himself, Subia testified that he "wasn't thinking at that time."
 
3"[U]nder the procuring agent defense, one who acts merely as a
procuring agent for the buyer is a principal in the purchase, not the sale,
and, therefore, can be held liable only to the extent that the purchaser isheld liable." State v. Davalos, 113 Hawai' i 385, 387, 153 P.3d 456, 458
(2007) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Subia contends that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in permitting Ardiente's expert testimony that the
 
substances she examined contained methamphetamine. Subia
 contends that the State failed to lay a sufficient foundation to
 admit the results of each of the three different tests Ardiente
 performed in her analysis, and therefore, Ardiente's expert
 testimony, which was based on the test results, should not have
 been permitted. We conclude that the Circuit Court properly
 admitted Ardiente's expert testimony.
 
"Whether expert testimony should be admitted at trial 
rests within the sound discretion of the trial court and will not be overturned unless there is a clear abuse of discretion." State v. Montalbo, 73 Haw. 130, 140–41, 828 P.2d 1274, 1281 (1992). Where an expert relies on a scientific test result, a proper foundation for the introduction of the scientific test result can be established by a showing that: (1) the expert is qualified; (2) the expert employed valid techniques to obtain the test result; and (3) the measuring instrument was in proper working order. See State v. Long, 98 Hawai
'i 348, 355, 48 P.3d 
595, 602 (2002). 
A.
 
At trial, Ardiente testified that she had been a
 
criminalist with the HPD for five years and was responsible for
 analyzing evidence for the presence of controlled substances. 
The HPD laboratory where Ardiente performs drug analysis is an
 accredited laboratory. Ardiente serves as the technical
 coordinator and manages the quality assurance program for the
 drug analysis unit that is necessary to maintain the laboratory's
 accreditation. After describing her education, training, and
 experience, Ardiente was qualified without objection as an expert
 in the field of drug analysis and identification. Ardiente
 analyzed the substances in the two bags that the Undercover
 Officer had received from Subia. She used three tests in her
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
analysis: (1) a color test; (2) a crystal test; and (3) and an
 
instrument test with the FTIR.
 
For the color test, Ardiente added a marquis reagent to
 
the sample being tested. The color test is a presumptive test
 which indicates the presence of methamphetamine, but does not
 confirm the presence of methamphetamine. If the marquis reagent
 turns from orange to brown, this indicates the presence of
 methamphetamine. Ardiente performed the color test on samples
 taken from the bags recovered in this case. She testified that
 the test results indicated the presence of methamphetamine for
 the substances in both bags.
 
With respect to the crystal test, Ardiente explained
 
that gold chloride with phosphoric acid is added to the sample
 being tested. If methamphetamine is present, distinctive
 crystals will form which can be seen with the use of a
 microscope. Ardiente testified that the results of the crystal
 test she performed on samples from both bags were that "crystals
 indicative of methamphetamine were present."
 
With respect to the instrument test using the FTIR,
 
Ardiente testified that the FTIR test was confirmatory in that
 "it can identify a particular substance, to the exclusion of all
 others, within a reasonable degree of scientific certainty." 
Ardiente explained that in performing the FTIR test, "you place a
 substance on the instrument. It shines a beam of infrared light
 on the substance. The molecules vibrate. And the instrument
 reads those vibration patterns and creates a graph. And that
 graph is unique to that substance, kind of like a fingerprint." 
Ardiente compared the graphs created by running samples from the
 bags through the FTIR with a known graph of methamphetamine run
 on the same instrument. She testified that the results of her
 comparison of the graphs were that samples from both bags "were
 positive for methamphetamine."
 
Ardiente was then asked about her familiarity with the
 
use of the FTIR. She explained that she was familiar with use of
 the FTIR based on her training by the manufacturer and an in­
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
house training course. When asked whether there were procedures
 
or protocols she followed to ensure the FTIR is operating
 properly, Ardiente stated that the FTIR "has an inbuilt
 validation program" provided by the manufacturer that will
 produce a print out stating whether the instrument
 passed the performance check. The following ensued when Ardiente
 was asked if she was aware of whether the check to ensure that
 the FTIR was working properly had been performed on October 4,
 2011, the day she analyzed the substances in this case:
 
[Deputy Prosecuting Attorney (DPA)]: And are you
aware if this check was performed on the FTIR on October
4th, 2011?
 
[Ardiente:] It was performed. One of the other
 
criminalist performed it. She -­
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, I have to object then
at this point. That would be hearsay.
 
THE COURT: Sustain.
 
[DPA]: How do you know the check was performed on the
instrument that you used on October 4th, 2011?
 
[Ardiente]: The printout of the -­
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, that would be also
hearsay objection.
 
[DPA]: Your Honor, this is all foundational.
 
THE COURT:  Overruled.
 
[DPA]: 
Continue.
 
[Ardiente]: The printout of the performance check is
kept. And so that -- to confirm that the instrument is in
 proper working order, we examine that printout, that says
that the instrument -- the performance check has passed. We
 have to sign off on it to -- or initial it, to say that we
did check it and ensure that it was in proper working
condition.
 
[DPA]: And, Miss Ardiente, based on that printout,
was the instrument operating in accordance with the
manufacturer specifications?
 
[Ardiente]:  Yes.
 
[Defense Counsel]:  Objection, Your Honor. Hearsay.
No foundation.
 
THE COURT: Overruled.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[DPA]: Your answer?
 
[Ardiente]:  According to the printout provided by the
computer, it was working in proper -- it was in proper
working condition.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Thereafter, Ardiente testified that the FTIR and its
 
self-check test were commonly known throughout the scientific
 
community to be reliable and accurate in confirming the presence
 of methamphetamine; that on October 4, 2011, the FTIR was
 operating properly; and that she would not have used the FTIR if
 it was not working properly. Ardiente also testified that (1)
 the results of the FTIR analysis were that samples from both bags
 testified positive for methamphetamine; and (2) based on all the
 tests, she concluded that the substances in both bags contained
 methamphetamine. The Circuit Court then recessed the trial for
 the day.
 
When trial resumed the following day, the Deputy
 
Prosecuting Attorney (DPA) again asked Ardiente to state the
 results of the tests she had performed on the substances in the
 bags. At this point, defense counsel asked to voir dire
 Ardiente. During this voir dire, Ardiente explained that the
 marquis reagent used for the color test is checked with positive
 and negative controls by the criminalist who made up the marquis
 reagent. The laboratory had a ten-day expiration for the use of
 the marquis reagent. Ardiente did not recall who made up the
 marquis reagent used in this case, but indicated she could obtain
 that information by checking her notes.
 
With respect to the gold chloride and phosphoric acid
 
reagent used in the crystal test, Ardiente testified that as part
 of her duties as technical coordinator, she performed quarterly
 checks on the reagents, including the reagent used in the crystal
 test, using positive and negative controls, to ensure they were
 working properly. The quarterly check for the reagent used for
 the analysis in this case was done in July. Ardiente explained
 that if there is a contaminant present in the reagent for the 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
crystal test, there would be a visible reaction you can see -­
precipitate would form and the solution would be cloudy. To
 ensure that the reagent used for the analysis in this case was
 not contaminated, she looked at the eye dropper to see if any
 precipitate had formed. 
With respect to the FTIR test, Ardiente explained that
 
the performance check to ensure the FTIR was working properly was
 done each day, before the FTIR was used, by the first criminalist
 in for the day. She was not the first criminalist in on October
 4, 2011, but reviewed the results of the performance check that
 had been printed out before using the FTIR on that date.
 
After concluding his voir dire, defense counsel
 
objected to Ardiente's testimony regarding the "calibration test
 for accuracy" as to hearsay and lack of foundation, and he based
 his objections on Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts, 557 U.S. 305
 (2009). Defense counsel also moved to strike Ardiente's
 testimony and objected to her testifying about the results of the
 three tests she performed in analyzing the samples. The Circuit
 Court overruled defense counsel's objection, stating:
 
Going to overrule the objection. Miss Ardiente has
 
testified foundationally that she's been trained in and
received training from the manufacturer of the FTIR, and
that they followed the requirements to determine whether the
FTIR is working properly, and also in her capacity I guess
as quality control, quality control. She found that it was
 to be in working -- proper working order, despite the fact
that she was not the person who performed those checks.
 
Ardiente then testified that (1) she followed all the
 
procedures and protocols as she had been trained to do in
 
analyzing the evidence for this case; (2) she had no reason to
 believe that there were contaminants in the eye droppers used for
 the color and crystal tests; and (3) she had no reason to believe
 that the FTIR was not working accurately. Ardiente then repeated
 her testimony that based on the tests she performed, she
 concluded that "the substance contained methamphetamine."
 
B. 
Subia argues that because Ardiente did not personally
 
perform the daily performance check on the FTIR before she used
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
it to examine the substances in this case, an insufficient
 
foundation had been laid for the results of the FTIR test. We
 disagree.
 
Ardiente testified that the HPD laboratory followed an
 
established procedure and protocol to verify that the FTIR she
 used was in proper working condition, which incorporated the
 "performance check" and "an inbuilt validation program" provided
 by the manufacturer. As part of its established protocol, the
 first criminalist in the laboratory each day was responsible for
 running the performance check/validation program on the FTIR to
 ensure that it was in proper working order. Ardiente testified
 that before using the FTIR to perform the analysis in this case,
 she checked the print out from the performance check conducted
 that day to ensure the FTIR was in proper working order. She
 further testified that the FTIR and its performance check were
 known throughout the scientific community to be reliable and
 accurate in confirming the presence of methamphetamine; that the
 FTIR she used to examine the samples in this case was operating
 properly; and that she would not have used the FTIR if it was not
 working properly.
 
In State v. Manewa, 115 Hawai
'i 343, 167 P.3d 336 
(2007), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that virtually the same 
foundation as provided in Subia's case was sufficient to admit the results of a test using a gas chromatograph mass spectrometer (GCMS), an instrument the HPD laboratory used as an alternative to the FTIR to confirm the presence of methamphetamine. In Manewa, HPD criminalist Hassan Mohammed (Mohammed) testified on cross-examination in relevant part as follows: 
Q. So basically you can operate these machines, correct, but
you cannot maintain it; correct?
 
A. I wouldn't be able to service them but I do -- I have
 
been trained to ensure that the GCMS and FTIR are in working
condition.
 
Q. So that you can ensure that you can use them; correct?
 A. That it's in proper working condition for my purpose.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q. Proper working condition, you can start it up, take
readouts from it; correct?
 
A. Yes. We have a routine procedure for the GCMS, if I may
explain. Each and every morning before any chemist uses one
of several GCMSs, we do a routine check on them to ensure
that all the parameters are within the manufacturer
specification.
 
Q. Okay.
 A. And we record those as such and if it is not, we don't
use it.
 
Q. I'm sorry, if it is not?
 A. If it is not, if any parameter is out of spec, we do not
use it until it's rectified.
 
Manewa, 115 Hawai 'i at 348, 167 P.3d at 341 (some emphasis 
omitted).
 
Based on this testimony, the supreme court held that a
 
sufficient foundation for the admission of the results of the
 
GCMS tests had been laid:
 
Mohammed was qualified as an expert in drug analysis
and identification. According to Petitioner's application
for certiorari, Mohammed used the GCMS to identify the
crystalline substances recovered as methamphetamine.
Mohammed testified that "a routine check" was done of the
 GCMS "each and every morning" "to ensure that all the
parameters are within manufacturer specifications."
Mohammed related "if any parameter is out of spec, we do not
use it until it is rectified." Thus, the record indicates
that there was an established manufacturer's procedure that
could be conducted by the user to ensure that the GCMSs were
in working order according to the manufacturer's
specifications.
 
Because the evidence indicated the GCMSs were
 
operating "within the manufacturer specification(s)," under
this procedure Mohammed's own testimony supported the
conclusion that the GCMSs were in proper working order at
the time the evidence was tested. Therefore, Mohammed's
assertion on cross-examination that "I do have personal
knowledge because I would not have used any of the
instruments if they were not in proper working condition in
that particular days," [sic] is consistent with the
"personal knowledge" necessary to establish that the GCMSs
were in proper working condition. Based on the foregoing
analysis, a proper foundation for the identity of the
crystalline substances was laid. Consequently, the court
did not abuse its discretion in allowing Mohammed to testify
as to the identity of the crystalline substances.
 
Id. at 354, 167 P.3d at 347 (footnote and citation omitted;
 
"[sic]" in original).
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Based on Manewa, we conclude that Subia's contention
 
that the foundation for the FTIR test was deficient because
 
Ardiente did not personally perform the daily performance check
 before using the instrument is without merit. Indeed in Manewa,
 the supreme court did not cite to any testimony that Mohammed
 himself had performed the daily routine check of the GCMC before
 using it; rather it was Mohammed's knowledge that the laboratory
 followed a routine procedure to ensure that the GCMC was in
 proper working order that was important. Manewa establishes that
 
testimony showing compliance with established procedures that
 provide assurance that the instrument is in proper working order
 is sufficient to lay the foundation for admission of the results
 of the instrument's use. As in Manewa, Ardiente's testimony
 indicated that an established daily procedure, of which she had
 personal knowledge, to run a performance check provided by the
 manufacturer to ensure that the FTIR was in good working order
 had been followed. Accordingly, we conclude that the State laid
 a sufficient foundation for the admission of the FTIR results.
 
C.
 
We reject Subia's contention that his confrontation 
rights were violated by Ardiente's reference to the performance check of the FTIR, which was conducted by another person, to show that the FTIR was in proper working order. The evidence related to the performance check was not testimonial and therefore did not implicate Subia's confrontation rights. See Melendez–Diaz v. 
Massachusetts, 557 U.S. 305, 311 n. 1 (2009) ("[W]e do not hold, and it is not the case, that anyone whose testimony may be relevant in establishing the chain of custody, authenticity of the sample, or accuracy of the testing device, must appear in person as part of the prosecution's case. . . . [D]ocuments prepared in the regular course of equipment maintenance may well qualify as nontestimonial records." (emphasis added)); State v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawai
'i 354, 373–74, 227 P.3d 520, 539–40 (2010) 
(concluding that a speed check card created to verify that a police car's speedometer was in proper working order is 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
nontestimonial in nature); State v. Marshall, 114 Hawai 'i 396, 
401-02, 163 P.3d 199, 204-05 (App. 2007) (holding that an 
Intoxilyzer supervisor's sworn statements establishing that the Intoxilyzer used had been properly calibrated and tested for accuracy were not testimonial). 
Subia's reliance on Melendez–Diaz is misplaced. In
 
Melendez-Diaz, 557 U.S. at 307-11, the Court held that the
 defendant's confrontation rights were violated when affidavits
 reporting the results of forensic drug analysis were admitted in
 evidence without the analysts testifying at trial or being
 subject to cross-examination. Here, unlike in Melendez-Diaz,
 Ardiente, the criminalist who performed the drug analysis,
 testified at trial and was subject to cross-examination. Subia's
 confrontation rights were not violated.
 
D.
 
Because the FTIR "can identify a particular substance,
 
to the exclusion of all others, within a reasonable degree of
 scientific certainty[,]" our conclusion that the FTIR test
 results were properly admitted would appear to be sufficient to
 reject Subia challenge to Ardiente's testimony that the
 substances she analyzed contained methamphetamine. In any event,
 we conclude that a proper foundation was laid, and the Circuit
 Court did not abuse its discretion, in admitting the results of
 the color and crystal tests. Ardiente's testimony showed that
 the laboratory had established procedures for ensuring the purity
 of the reagents used in these tests and that those procedures had
 been followed, with no signs of contamination. The fact that all
 three tests were consistent and were positive for the presence of
 methamphetamine, as well as Subia's testimony that he had been
 involved in a methamphetamine transaction, also supports the
 reliability of the test results.
 
E.
 
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that a proper
 
foundation was laid for admission of the results of the FTIR, 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
color, and crystal tests. Accordingly, the Circuit Court did not
 
abuse its discretion in admitting the test results and Ardiente's
 expert testimony that the substances she analyzed contained
 methamphetamine. Because Ardiente's expert testimony was
 properly admitted, Subia's contention that there was insufficient
 evidence to prove that the substances Subia provided to the
 Undercover Officer contained methamphetamine necessarily fails.
 
II.
 
Subia contends that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in permitting the State, in cross-examining Subia
 about his procuring agent defense, to ask Subia whether he had
 worked with Tony (the purported drug supplier) before. We
 disagree.
 
A.
 
At trial, Subia relied on the procuring agent defense, 
which provides that "one who acts merely as a procuring agent for the buyer is a principal in the purchase, not the sale, and, therefore, can be held liable only to the extent that the purchaser is held liable." State v. Davalos, 113 Hawai
'i 385, 
387, 153 P.3d 456, 458 (2007) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). The procuring agent defense is negated if the jury finds that the defendant acted, in whole or in part, on behalf of the seller. See State v. Balanza, 93 Hawai
'i 279, 285, 
287, 1 P.3d 281, 287, 289 (2000). 
On direct examination, Subia testified that the
 
Undercover Officer approached him and asked if Subia had any
 drugs. Subia said, "no," but Subia testified that because Subia
 wanted to help the Undercover Officer, Subia told him that Subia
 could get him some drugs from someone else. According to Subia,
 he rode his bike to Tony's tent, because he knew Tony sold drugs. 
Tony gave Subia drugs. Subia then took the drugs to the
 Undercover Officer, who gave Subia $40, which Subia took back to
 Tony. Subia denied that he was working for Tony and denied that
 he received anything from Tony for his role in the transaction:
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[Defense counsel] Q . . . Were you working for Tony?
 
A No, no. I just was helping the officer to get the
drugs.

 
Q Okay. Why didn't you just tell the officer go
where Tony was?

 
A I -­Q What's that?
 
A I wasn't thinking that time, you know.
 
Q Okay.

 
A Just want to help him.
 
Q Okay. And then when you -- the forty dollars, you
gave that to Tony?
 
A Yes.
 Q Did Tony give you any?
 
A No.
 
Q Any of the forty dollars?
 
A No.
 
Q Did Tony give you any drugs for what you did?
 
A No. No.
 
On cross-examination, Subia stated that Subia did not
 
know that the Undercover Officer was a police officer and thought
 
he was just someone who wanted drugs. Subia also acknowledged
 that he knew that the Undercover Officer was asking for crystal
 methamphetamine when the Undercover Officer used the term
 "clear." The DPA cross-examined Subia about his relationship
 with Tony and his version of his interaction with Tony during the
 transaction:
 
Q Now, you said you went to see Tony.
 
A 
Yes.
 
Q 
But you didn't tell [the Undercover Officer] to go
around the corner and go see Tony for the drugs, yeah?

 
A 
Well, I told him wait, I'm gonna go get the drugs. 
Q 
But you could have just told the officer go. Go.
 
Go see Tony.
 
A I wasn't thinking at that time.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q Then you went to see Tony. And what you told Tony?
 
A Yes. Somebody want to buy forty, forty dollar
worth.
 
Q 
Of crystal meth?
 
A 
Crystal meth.
 
Q 
And he believed you?
 
A 
Yeah.
 
Q 
And then he gave you the drugs?
 
A 
Yeah.
 
Q 
He gave you the drugs. But you never give him
money.

 
A 
What he gave me the drugs for, because the officer
had forty dollars. So I wen go over there and when he
wanted forty.
 
Q 
He gave you the drugs because he believed you,
right?

 
A 
Yeah.
 
Q 
He trusts you?
 
A 
Yes.
 
Q 
You did this before?
 
A 
Yeah, some.
 
[Defense counsel]: 
Your Honor, objection. Relevance.
 
THE COURT: 
I'll allow it. Overruled.
 
BY [DPA]

 
Q 
You did this before? You was working for Tony then
before?

 
A 
No.
 
Q 
No?
 
A 
(Shakes head.)
 
Q 
Right, right. You want us to believe that you was
helping out.

 
A 
Yeah, I just was helping out the -- helping them
two guys out.
 
Q 
Complete stranger. You never met [the Undercover
Officer] before.
 
A 
No.
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q Just want to help him out. 
A Yeah. 
Q Tony never asked you for go out and look for people
who like buy?
 
A 
No. I don't do that.
 
Q 
No. So you not surprised when somebody comes up to
you and goes oh, I like buy meth. It's happened before,
that's why.
 
[Defense Counsel]:  Your Honor, again, objection.

Relevance.
 
THE COURT:  Overruled.

 
[DPA]: 
No further questions, Your Honor.
 
B.
 
We conclude that Subia's testimony on direct 
examination that he was not working for Tony, did not receive 
anything from Tony for participating in the drug transaction, and just wanted to help the Undercover Officer opened the door to the DPA's cross-examination. See State v. McElroy, 105 Hawai
'i 352, 
357, 97 P.3d 1004, 1009 (2004) (citing Bobb v. United States, 758 A.2d 958, 963 (D.C. 2000) ("When a defendant testifies to certain facts or issues during his direct examination, he opens the door to further inquiry into those matters on cross-examination." (brackets, internal quotation marks, and citation omitted)); State v. Kazanas, 134 Hawai
'i 117, 129, 336 P.3d 217, 229 (App. 
2014) (concluding that the defendant's testimony opened the door to the prosecution's introduction of conflicting evidence), cert. granted, No. SCWC-12-0001011, 2015 WL 769849 (Feb. 23, 2015). Subia's version of events, particularly Tony's providing the methamphetamine to Subia without first requiring payment and the purely altruistic motive claimed by Subia for participating in the drug transaction, opened the door to the DPA's questioning Subia about his relationship with Tony, why Tony would trust him, and whether Subia had ever "[done] this before." 
The DPA's cross-examination was clearly relevant to
 
impeaching Subia's version of events and to rebutting Subia's 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
procuring agent defense. The DPA's cross-examination offered
 
evidence for a proper purpose -- to show that Subia's intent,
 motive, and role in the transaction was to assist the seller, and
 not solely to help the buyer. See Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE)
 
Rule 404(b) (Supp. 2014). It was proper for the DPA to question
 why Tony, a drug dealer, would trust Subia with drugs without
 first requiring payment unless there was a basis for that trust,
 namely, that Subia had worked with Tony before or was receiving
 some compensation from Tony for his role in brokering the
 transaction.
 
We reject Subia's claim that the Circuit Court violated 
HRE Rule 404(b) in permitting the DPA's cross-examination. See 
McElroy, 105 Hawai
'i at 356–57, 97 P.3d at 1008–09 (holding that 
it was not prosecutorial misconduct for the prosecutor to question the defendant to develop an issue that the defendant himself broached); State v. Acker, 133 Hawai
'i 253, 276-78, 327 
P.3d 931, 954-56 (2014) (concluding that "bad act" evidence was admissible under HRE Rule 404(b) to rebut the defendant's theory of defense); State v. Culbreath, 659 S.E.2d 268, 272 (S.C. Ct. App. 2008) ("[A] defendant may open the door to what would be otherwise improper evidence through his own introduction of evidence or witness examination."). In any event, Subia did not object on HRE Rule 404(b) grounds at trial, but only objected on the grounds of relevancy. Accordingly, he did not preserve his HRE Rule 404(b) claim for appeal. See State v. Matias, 57 Haw. 
96, 101, 550 P.2d 900, 904 (1976) ("[T]here can be no doubt that the making of an objection upon a specific ground is a waiver of all other objections." (internal quotation marks and citation omitted.)); State v. Vliet, 91 Hawai
'i 288, 298-99, 983 P.2d 189, 
199-200 (1999) (concluding that the defendant's objection on a particular ground that was properly overruled at trial waived his claim of error on appeal on a different ground that was not raised at trial). 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CONCLUSION 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court's 
Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, August 17, 2015. 
On the briefs:

 
Summer M.M. Kupau
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Brandon H. Ito Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
18

 