NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000499
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
JAMES KIMO MOSES, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 11-1-0320)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Chan, JJ.)
This case arises out of a fire started with an
ignitable liquid at a two-story boarding house on Liliha Street. 
One of the residents, Clarence Isobe (Isobe), died as the result
of the fire.  Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i (State) charged
Defendant-Appellant James Kimo Moses (Moses) with numerous
counts, including: (1) attempted first-degree murder for
attempting to cause the death of more than one person in the same
or separate incident (Count 1); second-degree murder of Isobe
(Count 2); attempted second-degree murder of boarding house
residents Maurice Delima (Count 3), Opena Dominador (Count 4),
Robert Horita (Count 5), Pedro Elika (Count 6), and Marion
Manaois (Count 7); and first-degree arson (Count 8).1
1/  Moses was also charged with third-degree promoting a dangerous drug
(Counts 9, 10, and 11) and fourth-degree promoting a harmful drug (Count 12).
Moses pleaded no contest to these drug charges (Counts 9 through 12) before
trial, and they are not at issue in this appeal.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
After a trial, the jury found Moses guilty of the
lesser included offense of manslaughter of Isobe on Count 2;
guilty as charged of attempted second degree murder of Maurice
Delima (Delima) on Count 3 and Opena Dominador (Dominador) on
Count 4; guilty of the lesser included offense of attempted
third-degree assault of Robert Horita (Horita) on Count 5 and
Marion Manaois (Manaois) on Count 7; guilty of the lesser
included offense of attempted second-degree assault of Pedro
Elika (Elika) on Count 6; and guilty as charged of first-degree
arson on Count 8.  The jury did not return a verdict on the
attempted first-degree murder charged in Count 1, and the Circuit
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court) entered a judgment of
acquittal on that count.
The Circuit Court sentenced Moses to concurrent terms
of life imprisonment with the possibility of parole for Counts 3
and 4, twenty years of imprisonment for Counts 2 and 8, five
years of imprisonment for Count 6, and one year of imprisonment
for Counts 5 and 7.  The Circuit Court entered its "Judgment of
Conviction and Sentence" (Judgment) on June 3, 2015.2 
On appeal, Moses contends that: (1) there was
insufficient evidence to support his convictions on Counts 3, 4,
5, 6, and 7; and (2) the Circuit Court erred in denying his
request for post-trial relief, which was based on his claim of
inconsistent verdicts.3  We affirm.
BACKGROUND
I.
After midnight on February 2, 2011, the police
responded to a large fire at a two-story boarding house on Liliha
Street in Honolulu.  When the police arrived at about 12:38 a.m.,
there was a lot of smoke coming from the building, and the police
had to park a distance away due to the size of the fire.  The
2/ Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.  
3/ We note that on appeal, Moses does not challenge his manslaughter
conviction on Count 2 or his first-degree arson conviction on Count 8.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
fire department engines arrived at the scene minutes later, but
by that time, the bulk of the second floor and the roof of the
building were engulfed in flames.  The scene was chaotic; people
were running from the building to escape, and others were trying
to get into the building to ensure that no one had been left
behind. 
During the commotion, residents of the boarding house
realized that Isobe, one of the second-floor residents, was still
inside.  They reported this to the firemen.  The firemen found
Isobe inside the boarding house on the second floor, brought him
outside, and began giving him CPR.  Isobe was taken to Queen's
Medical Center, where he was declared dead that morning at 10:13. 
An autopsy revealed that Isobe had second and third degree burns
over 50 percent of his body.  The forensic pathologist who
performed the autopsy testified that the cause of death was the
"combined effects of thermal burns and carbon monoxide toxicity
due to a house fire." 
II. 
The second floor of the boarding house where Isobe
resided consisted of a kitchen, two bathrooms, and nine different
resident's rooms.  The second floor had two stairway exits, one
on the makai side of the building that required going through the
kitchen to access (Makai Stairwell), and other one on the Ewa
side of the building that was at the end of the hallway between
the residents' rooms (Ewa Stairwell).  
Fire Investigator Warren Iseke (Iseke) concluded that
the fire was intentionally set with an ignitable liquid on the
Makai Stairwell.  Iseke believed that at about 12:30 a.m. on
February 2, 2011, someone had poured or splashed an ignitable
liquid on the step just below the second-floor landing of the
Makai Stairwell then ignited the liquid with an open-flame source
(such as a lighter); that flames from the fire entered the second
floor through the kitchen windows and one of the resident's rooms
next to the kitchen; and that from there the fire spread to the
rest of the second floor.  Iseke believed that it probably took
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
about 30 seconds to a minute for the flames to reach the eves of
the building.  Once the fire entered a room, it would take about
three to four minutes for the room to come to full ignition,
where everything would be burning.  On the step below the second-
floor landing of the Makai Stairwell, investigators recovered
plastic debris that appeared to be the remains of a red plastic
gas container.  The plastic debris and the wooden step on which
the debris was found were tested and found to contain gasoline.  
Photographs introduced at trial indicated that the
second-floor kitchen and Makai Stairwell sustained extensive fire
damage.  Most of the second-floor rooms also had heat and flame
damage.  The fire was not extinguished until 3:30 a.m, which was
about three hours after Iseki believed the fire had been started. 
The fire resulted in over $20,000 worth of damage to the boarding
house.
III.
Moses had been a long-time resident of the boarding
house and had a room on the second floor.  However, about a month
before the fire, Moses had vacated his room after the owner of
the boarding house had filed an eviction action against him and a
court had ordered him to leave.    
Prior to being evicted, Moses had lived at the boarding
house with his father since the mid 1980s, and he continued to
live there after his father passed away.  From 2006, Moses lived
with his girlfriend, Marissa Paulino (Paulino), in a room on the
second floor.  However, on August 31, 2010, the owner of the
boarding house notified Moses that he had 45 days to vacate the
premises.  Moses did not leave, and on November 3, 2010, the
owner filed an eviction action in district court against Moses. 
The district court ordered that Moses be evicted, and it issued a
judgment for possession and a writ of possession in favor of the
owner, which required Moses to vacate the premises by December 1,
2010.  Moses, however, did not actually vacate the premises until
sometime between December 25, 2010, and January 1, 2011, which
was about a month before the fire.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Moses was upset about being evicted from his long-time
residence.  He told Cecilia Awana (Awana), a friend of Moses for
20 years, that he felt that some of the residents of the boarding
house, specifically Delima and Rose Talaban, were "backstabbers." 
Another friend, Glenn Cannalte (Cannalte), said Moses was
"pissed" when he received his eviction letter.  Cannalte later
helped Moses move out sometime in late December or January and
Moses grumbled about the "inconvenience of . . . moving." 
After being evicted, Moses moved with Paulino to the
house of Tony Taum (Taum).  However, sometime in January of 2011,
Moses and Paulino got into a physical fight.  Paulino told Moses
that their relationship was over, and she did not speak with him
for about two weeks.  Taum told Moses to leave, but allowed
Paulino to stay.  Moses moved in with his friend, Kyp Jones
(Jones).  
About a week before the fire, Moses asked Cannalte to
fill up two red plastic gasoline containers with $20 of gasoline.
Cannalte did so and dropped off the containers at Jones' house.
After the fire, Cannalte went back to Jones' house and did not
see the gas containers where he had left them.
Prior to their breakup shortly before the fire, Moses
and Paulino had been together for five years.  About two or three
days after the fire, Paulino agreed to meet with Moses.  Paulino
met Moses and rode with him on his moped to a school.  Moses was
driving faster than normal and appeared to be upset.  After
reaching the school, Moses got off the moped and told Paulino, "I
burn the house."  Moses said this with his back to Paulino.  When
Paulino said "What?", Moses did not elaborate.
Awana testified that she was near the boarding house on
the night of the fire.  She saw a lot of smoke and a crowd of
people gathered outside the boarding house.  Awana thought she
saw Moses on his moped with the engine off "rolling away" from
the fire.  This person's back was to Awana, and she was asked how
she could recognize him.  Awana replied, "Because I recognize
[Moses]. . . I know [Moses]." 
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IV.
Manaois, one of the second-floor residents, heard
someone from downstairs scream "fire, fire."  Manaois smelled
burning wood, and she followed that smell to the kitchen, where
she saw an "angry fire" on the Makai Stairwell and a lot of smoke
in the kitchen.  Manaois began knocking on all of the residents'
doors on the second floor to wake and warn them.  Delima, the
resident manager, attempted to fight the fire with a fire
extinguisher and a water hose, but was unsuccessful.  Delima and
other residents evacuated the boarding house and gathered across
the street.  The residents then realized that Isobe was missing
and notified firemen who were at the scene. 
DISCUSSION
I.
Moses contends that there was insufficient evidence to
support his convictions on Counts 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7. 
Specifically, Moses argues that the State presented insufficient
evidence that he intended to kill Delima (Count 3) and Dominador
(Count 4); that he intended to cause substantial bodily injury to
Elika (Count 6); and that he intended to cause bodily injury to
Horita (Count 5) and Manaois (Count 7).  We conclude that Moses'
argument is without merit.
A.
In reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence, we view
the evidence in the light most favorable to the State.  State v.
Ildefonso, 72 Haw. 573, 576, 827 P.2d 648, 651 (1992).  "The test
on appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable
doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact."  State v. Hoe, 122 Hawai #i 347,
349, 226 P.3d 517, 519 (App. 2010) (block quote format altered;
citation omitted).  "Matters of credibility and the weight of the
evidence and the inferences to be drawn are for the fact finder."
State v. Romano , 114 Hawai #i 1, 8, 155 P.3d 1102, 1109 (2007).
"[A]ppellate courts will give due deference to the right of the
trier of fact to determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
draw reasonable inferences from the evidence adduced."  State v.
Agard, 113 Hawai #i 321, 324, 151 P.3d 802, 805 (2007) (internal
quotation marks and citations omitted).
With respect to establishing criminal intent, "'[i]t is
an elementary principle of law that intent may be proved by
circumstantial evidence; that the element of intent can rarely be
shown by direct evidence; and it may be shown by a reasonable
inference arising from the circumstances surrounding the act.'"
State v. Hopkins, 60 Haw. 540, 544, 592 P.2d 810, 812-13 (1979)
(citation omitted).  A defendant's criminal intent "'may be read
from his acts, conduct and inferences fairly drawn from all the
circumstances.'"  State v. Stocker , 90 Hawai #i 85, 92, 976 P.2d
399, 406 (1999) (block quote format altered; citations omitted).
B.
In Counts 3 through 7, Moses was charged with attempted
second-degree murder, attempted second-degree assault, and
attempted third-degree assault.  Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 705-500 (2014), entitled "Criminal attempt," provides in
relevant part:
(1)  A person is guilty of an attempt to commit a
crime if the person:
. . .
(b) Intentionally engages in conduct which, under
the circumstances as the person believes them to
be, constitutes a substantial step in a course
of conduct intended to culminate in the person's
commission of the crime.
(2) When causing a particular result is an element
of the crime, a person is guilty of an attempt to commit the
crime if, acting with the state of mind required to
establish liability with respect to the attendant
circumstances specified in the definition of the crime, the
person intentionally engages in conduct which is a
substantial step in a course of conduct intended or known to
cause such a result.
(3) Conduct shall not be considered a substantial
step under this section unless it is strongly corroborative
of the defendant's criminal intent.
(Emphasis added).
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Moses does not challenge the sufficiency of
the evidence that he committed arson by intentionally or
knowingly setting fire to the boarding house.  He also does not
challenge any aspect of the sufficiency of the evidence on Counts
3 through 7, except for the sufficiency of the evidence that he
intended to cause the injury (death, substantial bodily injury,
or bodily injury) applicable to the attempted offenses of which
he was found guilty.
We conclude that there was substantial evidence to
prove that Moses acted with the requisite criminal intent.  The
victims in the challenged counts were all residents of the second
floor of the boarding house, had lived there with Moses, and were
living there when Moses vacated the boarding house a month before
the fire.  Moses deliberately set the fire, using gasoline as an
accelerant, late at night, when it was dark, and the residents
would be home and likely sleeping.  He set the fire at the Makai
Stairwell, one of only two exits from the second floor, rendering
that exit inaccessible.    
Viewing Moses' "acts, conduct and inferences fairly
drawn from all the circumstances" in the light most favorable to
the State, we conclude that there was sufficient evidence to show
that Moses intentionally engaged in conduct which was a
substantial step in a course of conduct intended or known to
cause death, substantial bodily injury, or bodily injury.  The
commentary to the criminal attempt statute is instructive as it
provides an example directly applicable to Moses' conduct in this
case:
In subsection (2) liability is imposed on a defendant
who has intentionally engaged in conduct which is a
substantial step in a course of conduct intended or known to
culminate in a prohibited result.  Thus, a defendant who
intends to destroy a building, and who regards the
destruction of its inhabitants as a regrettable by-product,
could be convicted of attempted murder (as well as attempted
arson) if the defendant intentionally performed a
substantial step (e.g., started a fire) which the defendant
knew (i.e., was practically certain) would result in death.
HRS § 705-500 cmt. (footnote omitted; emphasis added).
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
C. 
The jury's verdicts on the attempted offenses
corresponded with the degree of danger and risk of injury faced
by the residents based on where their rooms were located in
relation to where the fire was started.  The fire was started
near the top of the Makai Stairwell and entered the second-floor
through the kitchen.  Thus, the only available exit was the Ewa
Stairwell.  
The victims for the attempted second-degree murder
convictions, which the jury was instructed required proof that
Moses intentionally engaged in conduct which is a substantial
step in a course of conduct intended or known to case death, were 
Delima (Count 3) and Dominador (Count 4).  Their rooms were the
farthest away from the Ewa Stairwell, the only accessible
stairwell, and unlike the other rooms, were positioned such that
they could have been trapped in their rooms if the fire quickly
spread from its starting point, through the kitchen, and into the
hallway.  If this occurred, Delima and Dominador, unlike the
other residents, would have had to cross through the fire from
their rooms to get to the Ewa Stairwell.  The victims for the
attempted third-degree assault convictions, Horita (Count 5) and
Manaois (Count 7), had rooms that were the closest to the Ewa
Stairwell.  The victim for the attempted second-degree assault
conviction, Elika (Count 6), had a room that was closer to the
Ewa Stairwell than Delima's and Dominador's rooms but farther
away than Horita's and Manaois' rooms, and Elika's room was
closer to where Moses set the fire than Horita's and Manaois'
rooms.  From their rooms, Elika, Horita, and Manaois did not have
to pass by the kitchen to get to the Ewa Stairwell.      
Based on the evidence presented, the jury could
reasonably have concluded that by deliberately using gasoline to
set a fire late at night at the Makai Stairwell, Moses intended
to cause the death of Delima and Dominador, substantial injury to 
Elika, and bodily injury to Horita and Manaois.  
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Moses' claim that "he could not have known which
residents lived in any particular room at the time of the fire"
is without merit.  The trial evidence indicated that the victims
for Counts 3 through 7 lived in the same rooms at the time of the
fire that they occupied when Moses was forced to leave the
boarding house a month before the fire.  More importantly, Moses
fails to demonstrate why proof of his knowledge of the rooms that
the victims occupied at the time of the fire was necessary to
establish his guilt on the attempted offenses found by the jury. 
Moses' claim that there was no evidence that he harbored
animosity toward the victims, except Delima, is also unavailing. 
The attempted offenses do not require proof that the defendant
harbored animosity toward the victim.
II.
The jury found Moses guilty in Count 2 of the lesser
included offense of manslaughter for recklessly causing the death
of Isobe.  Citing HRS § 701-109(1)(c) (2014),4 Moses contends
that he is entitled to relief because the verdicts on Count 2 and
Counts 3 through 7 were inconsistent or mutually exclusive.  He
requests that his convictions on Counts 3 through 7 be vacated or
reduced to offenses with a reckless state of mind.  Moses'
argument is without merit.
A.
At the outset, we note that "[a]s a general
proposition, 'inconsistent verdicts are not per se grounds for
reversal.'"  Briones v. State , 74 Haw. 442, 474, 848 P.2d 966,
981 (1993) (Levinson, J., concurring) (brackets omitted) (quoting
4/ HRS § 701-109(1)(c) provides:
(1) When the same conduct of a defendant may establish an
element of more than one offense, the defendant may be prosecuted
for each offense of which such conduct is an element.  The
defendant may not, however, be convicted of more than one offense
if:
. . .
(c) Inconsistent findings of fact are required to
establish the commission of the offenses[.]
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
State v. Liuafi, 1 Haw. App. 625, 643, 623 P.2d 1271, 1282
(1981)).  
In United States v. Powell, 469 U.S. 57, 58 (1984), the
United States Supreme Court explained its long-established rule
that "a criminal defendant convicted by a jury on one count could
not attack that conviction because it was inconsistent with the
jury's verdict of acquittal on another count."  The Supreme Court
stated:
[W]here truly inconsistent verdicts have been reached, the
most that can be said is that the verdict shows that either
in the acquittal or the conviction the jury did not speak
their real conclusions, but that does not show that they
were not convinced of the defendant's guilt.  The rule that
the defendant may not upset such a verdict embodies a
prudent acknowledgment of a number of factors.  First, . . .
inconsistent verdicts . . . should not necessarily be
interpreted as a windfall to the Government at the
defendant's expense.  It is equally possible that the jury,
convinced of guilt, properly reached its conclusion on [one]
offense, and then through mistake, compromise, or lenity,
arrived at an inconsistent conclusion on the [other]
offense.  But in such situations the Government has no
recourse if it wishes to correct the jury's error; the
Government is precluded from appealing or otherwise
upsetting such an acquittal by the Constitution's Double
Jeopardy Clause.  
Inconsistent verdicts therefore present a situation where
"error," in the sense that the jury has not followed the
court's instructions, most certainly has occurred, but it is
unclear whose ox has been gored.  Given this uncertainty,
and the fact that the Government is precluded from
challenging the acquittal, it is hardly satisfactory to
allow the defendant to receive a new trial on the conviction
as a matter of course. . . . [N]othing in the Constitution
would require such a protection, and we therefore address
the problem only under our supervisory powers over the
federal criminal process.
Id. at 64-65 (internal quotation marks, citations, brackets, and
ellipsis points omitted).
In addressing the question of inconsistent verdicts
under its supervisory powers, the Supreme Court explained its
reasons for concluding that inconsistent verdicts do not provide
a criminal defendant a basis for relief:
For us, the possibility that the inconsistent verdicts may
favor the criminal defendant as well as the Government
militates against review of such convictions at the
defendant's behest.  This possibility is a premise of [the]
alternative rationale [of Dunn v. United States , 284 U.S. 
390 (1932)] -- that such inconsistencies often are a product
of jury lenity.  Thus, Dunn has been explained by both
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
courts and commentators as a recognition of the jury's
historic function, in criminal trials, as a check against
arbitrary or oppressive exercises of power by the Executive
Branch.
The burden of the exercise of lenity falls only on the
Government, and it has been suggested that such an
alternative should be available for the difficult cases
where the jury wishes to avoid an all-or-nothing verdict. 
Such an act is, as the Dunn Court recognized, an assumption
of a power which the jury has no right to exercise, but the
illegality alone does not mean that such a collective
judgment should be subject to review.  The fact that the
inconsistency may be the result of lenity, coupled with the
Government's inability to invoke review, suggests that
inconsistent verdicts should not be reviewable.
Id. at 65-66 (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets
omitted).  The Court further reasoned that inconsistent verdicts
should not provide a basis for review because: (1)
"individualized assessment of the reason for the inconsistency
would be based either on pure speculation, or would require
inquiries into the jury's deliberations that courts generally
will not undertake"; and (2) "a criminal defendant already is
afforded protection against jury irrationality or error by the
independent review of the sufficiency of the evidence undertaken
by the trial and appellate courts" -- courts must be satisfied
that based on the evidence presented, a jury could rationally
have found the defendant guilty.  Id. at 66-67. 
In the context of civil cases, the Hawai #i Supreme
Court has stated that verdicts must be "irreconcilably
inconsistent" to warrant a new trial.  Shanghai Inv. Co. v.
Alteka Co., 92 Hawai #i 482, 496, 993 P.2d 516, 530 (2000).  In
Shanghai, the supreme court stated:
a conflict in the jury's answers to questions in a special
verdict will warrant a new trial only if those answers are
irreconcilably inconsistent, and the verdict will not be
disturbed if the answers can be reconciled under any theory. 
When faced with a claim that the verdicts are inconsistent,
the court must search for a reasonable way to read the
verdicts as expressing a coherent view of the case, and must
exhaust this effort before it is free to dismiss the jury's
verdict and remand the case for a new trial.
Id. at 496-97, 993 P.2d 530-31 (block quote format altered;
citation, brackets, and ellipsis points omitted).
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B.
We need not address whether Moses is entitled to the
relief he requests based on his claim of inconsistent verdicts
because, contrary to Moses' contention, we conclude that the
jury's verdicts on Count 2 and Counts 3 through 7 were not
inconsistent, much less irreconcilably inconsistent, or mutually
exclusive.  As the State argues, in rendering its verdicts, the
jury apparently "focused on the ability of the occupants of the
various rooms to escape from the fire."  The jury's verdicts can
rationally be explained by the degree of peril each victim faced
based on the location of the victim's room in relation to where
Moses set the fire.  Moses set the fire on the Makai Stairwell
next to the kitchen, making the Makai Stairwell inaccessible, and
the fire went from the Makai Stairwell through the kitchen and
into the hallway.  Delima and Dominador, the victims of the
attempted second-degree murder convictions, occupied rooms
farthest away from the only accessible stairwell (the Ewa
Stairwell) and would have to cross through the fire, if it spread
through the kitchen, to escape from their rooms.  Horita and
Manaois, the victims of the attempted third-degree assault
convictions, occupied rooms that were the closest to the Ewa
Stairwell and would not have to pass by the kitchen to escape
from their rooms.  Elika, the victim of the second-degree assault
conviction, occupied a room that was between the rooms occupied
by Delima and Dominador and the rooms occupied by Horita and
Manaois.  Elika's room was closer to where Moses set the fire
than Horita's and Manaois' rooms, but Elika would not have to
pass by the kitchen to escape from his room.
As previously noted, there was substantial evidence to
prove that Moses acted with the requisite criminal intent to
establish each of the attempted offenses on which the jury
returned guilty verdicts in Counts 3 through 7.  These verdicts
were not inconsistent and can easily be read as expressing a
coherent view of the case.
Isobe, the victim of the manslaughter conviction in
Count 2, occupied a room that was located in a position similar
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to Elika's room.  Isobe's room was between the rooms occupied by
Delima and Dominador and the rooms occupied by Horita and
Manaois, Isobe's room was closer to where Moses started the fire
than Horita's and Manaois' rooms, and Isobe would not have to
pass by the kitchen to escape from his room.  However, unlike the
victims of the attempted offenses, Isobe was not able to escape
and he died in the fire.  It was rational and not inconsistent
for the jury to find that while Moses intended to cause
substantial bodily injury to Elika, he acted with a reckless
state of mind in actually causing Isobe's death.  In other words,
it was not inconsistent, or mutually exclusive, for the jury to
find that Moses intended to cause substantial bodily injury to
Isobe (just like Elika), but did not intend to cause and was only
reckless in causing Isobe's death, and then proceed to find Moses
guilty of manslaughter, an offense more serious than attempted
second-degree assault.
Based on our analysis, we reject Moses' contention that
the verdicts on Count 2 and Counts 3 through 7 were inconsistent
or mutually exclusive.  For the same reasons, we conclude that
inconsistent findings of fact were not required to establish the
offenses found by the jury in these counts.  See HRS 
§ 701-109(1)(c).
CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit
Court's Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 22, 2017.
On the briefs:
Phyllis J. Hironaka
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-AppellantChief Judge
Brian R. Vincent
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of HonoluluAssociate Judge
Associate Judge
14