NO. CAAP-12-0000299
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
AUSTIN ASHLEY, MARISSA ASHLEY and ACTION TEAM REALTY, INC.,
Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
 
TODD E. HART and HART OF KONA REALTY, INC.,
Defendants-Appellants
and
 
DEBRA A. HART, Defendant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.
 NO. 06-1-10K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Todd E. Hart and Hart of Kona
 
Realty, Inc. (collectively Hart Appellants) appeal from the
 
March 2, 2012 Final Judgment (Judgment) and February 28, 2012
 "Findings of Fact; Conclusions of Law; Order Confirming Final
 Arbitration Award and Final Judgment" (FOF/COL) entered by the
 
1
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit  (circuit court).  The
 
Judgment confirmed a June 5, 2006 Final Arbitration Award entered
 in favor of Plaintiffs-Appellees Austin Ashley, Marissa Ashley,
 and Action Team Realty, Inc. (collectively the Ashleys) and
 against the Hart Appellants. Judgment was entered pursuant to an
 order of remand from the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) for
 
1
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
 further consideration of two claims of prejudicial misconduct by
 
an arbitrator.
 
The parties submitted a contractual dispute to
 
arbitration before attorney Shawn M. Nakoa (Arbitrator). After
 the circuit court confirmed the Arbitration Award, the Hart
 Appellants appealed to the ICA in Case No. 28207. This court
 issued a Memorandum Opinion remanding two limited issues to the
 circuit court: (1) whether the Arbitrator's alleged ex parte
 consultation with attorney Kenneth Ross (Ross) constituted
 prejudicial misconduct under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 § 658A-23(a)(2)(C) (Supp. 2013); and (2) whether the Arbitrator's
 ex parte telephone contacts with the Ashleys' counsel constituted
 prejudicial misconduct. Ashley v. Hart, No. 28207, at *11 (App.
 
Feb. 25, 2011) (mem.). 
On November 17, 2011 the circuit court held an 
Evidentiary Hearing to determine the outstanding issues, taking 
testimony from Stephen D. Whittaker (counsel for the Ashleys), 
Usha Kilpatrick Kotner (former counsel for the Hart Appellants), 
Ross, and the Arbitrator. The circuit court then issued its
 FOF/COL, and filed its Judgment confirming the Arbitration Award. 
On March 29, 2012, the Hart Appellants filed this appeal. 
As their point of error on appeal, the Hart Appellants
 
assert that "[t]he sole issue in this appeal is whether or not
 the Third Circuit Court erred and abused its discretion in
 holding that '[the Hart Appellants] have failed to meet their
 burden of proving that [the Arbitrator] committed misconduct
 prejudicing their rights in the arbitration proceeding.'" In
 support of their point of error, the Hart Appellants argue that
 the circuit court was clearly erroneous in making certain
 Findings of Fact (FOFs) and erred in its Conclusion of Law (COLs)
 related to whether the Arbitrator committed prejudicial
 
2
  misconduct by consulting with Ross and failing to make
 
appropriate disclosures.2
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve the Hart 
Appellants' points of error as follows, and affirm.
 
The Hart Appellants challenge three of the circuit
court's FOFs and one COL. They are:
 

 
[FOF] 6. No specific agreement was reached among [the
Arbitrator] and the parties as to whether or not [the
Arbitrator] could confer with Mr. Ross about the case.
 
[FOF] 7. It was [the Arbitrator's] belief that she

disclosed to the parties at the first prehearing conference
that she intended to confer with Mr. Ross or "her partners"
about the case and that no one objected to her expressed
intent.
 
[FOF] 9. Mr. Ross did not have a conflict of interest with
any of the named parties in the case.
 
[COL] 2. On the record, [the Hart Appellants] have
failed to meet their burden of proving that [the Arbitrator]
committed misconduct prejudicing their rights in the
arbitration proceeding. Accordingly, under the standard set
forth in HRS §658A-23(a)(2)(C), the vacating of the Final
Arbitration Award is improper.
 
FOF 6
 
The Hart Appellants argue that the circuit court erred
 
in entering FOF 6 because the Arbitrator's testimony "had nothing
 
to do with the parties reaching any agreement[.]" The circuit
 court was not clearly erroneous because there is evidence in the
 record to support the finding.
 
"In this jurisdiction, a trial court's FOFs are subject 
to the clearly erroneous standard of review. An FOF is clearly
 erroneous when, despite evidence to support the finding, the
 appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction
 that a mistake has been committed." Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the
 
2
 Although the ICA also remanded the issue of whether the Arbitrator's
ex parte communications with the Ashleys' counsel constituted prejudicial
misconduct, the Hart Appellants do not challenge the circuit court's findings
and conclusions as to that issue.
 
3
 Employees' Ret. Sys. of the State of Hawai 'i, 106 Hawai 'i 416, 
430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 (2005) (citations, internal quotation 
marks, and ellipses omitted) (block quote format altered) (quoting Allstate Ins. Co. v. Ponce, 105 Hawai
'i 445, 453, 99 
P.3d 96, 104 (2004)). "An FOF is also clearly erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding. [The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has] defined 'substantial evidence' as 
credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Leslie v. Estate of Tavares, 91 Hawai
'i 394, 399, 
984 P.2d 1220, 1225 (1999) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted) (block quote format altered) (quoting State v. Kotis, 91 Hawai
'i 319, 328, 984 P.2d 78, 87 (1999)). 
The Arbitrator testified that she advised the parties
 
of her intention to consult with colleagues at the September 2005
 prehearing conference, but could not remember whether she said
 "my partners" or "Ken Ross." Whittaker, counsel for the Ashleys,
 could not recall whether the name Ross was brought up at all. 
Kotner, on the other hand, affirmatively asserted that there was
 no mention of consultants or Ross at the prehearing conference. 
Despite the conflicting testimony given at the
 
Evidentiary Hearing, because the record shows that the parties
 failed to come to an agreement, FOF 6 is not clearly erroneous.
FOF 7
 
The Hart Appellants argue that FOF 7 is clearly
 
erroneous because both parties were unaware of Ross's involvement
 until after the Arbitrator entered the award. The circuit court
 was not clearly erroneous because the finding is based on the
 Arbitrator's belief of what she had disclosed at the prehearing
 conference rather than the parties' understanding of her
 disclosures.
 
FOF 7 relates to the parties' discussion at the
 
prehearing conference about utilizing the Court Annexed
 Arbitration Program (CAAP) Rules, which allow an arbitrator to
 consult with colleagues. The Arbitrator testified as follows: 
4
 What I recall from the first prehearing conference is that
we talked about using the CAAP rules because they were more
straight forward. And that they allowed me to confer with ­– and I cannot remember whether I said my partners or Ken
Ross. I simply cannot recall one way or the other. Um, I
might have said my partners. I might have said Ken Ross.
Ken Ross is the only other partner within the Kona office.
 
The Arbitrator testified that she felt she "had disclosed in that
 
first prehearing conference that I had a practice of conferring
 with my partners" and "that was understood and no one objected to
 that."
 
Relying on her notes of the prehearing conference
 
rather than her independent recollection, Kotner testified that
 she knew that the parties did not discuss "the Arbitrator
 consulting with anyone else." Whittaker recalled that the
 parties and Arbitrator "talked about the advantages of more
 formal versus less formal type proceedings and the experience
 that Counsel had with respect to the CAAP rules." In an earlier
 declaration, Whittaker stated that the parties "agreed to apply
 the CAAP rules, to allow the Arbitrator to consult her colleagues
 . . . ." 
Because the circuit court heard the testimony and there
 
is evidence to support FOF 7, it is not clearly erroneous.
FOF 9
 
The Hart Appellants argue that FOF 9 is clearly
 
erroneous because Ross's representation of another party in an
 unrelated case, in which Kotner was adverse counsel, created a
 conflict of interest that prejudiced the outcome of the
 arbitration. Although Ross did have a potential conflict with a
 party's counsel and failed to disclose it, to be discussed
 further infra, Ross never represented or provided any legal
 services to any of the parties in the arbitration. Thus, Ross
 did not have a conflict of interest with any of the named parties
 and FOF 9 is not clearly erroneous.
COL 2
 
The Hart Appellants argue that the circuit court erred
 
in concluding that they failed to meet their burden of proving
 
5
  that the Arbitrator committed misconduct prejudicing their
 
rights.3
 
A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and is 
freely reviewable for its correctness. Chun, 106 Hawai 'i at 430, 
106 P.3d at 353. 
[The appellate court] ordinarily reviews COLs under the
right/wrong standard. Thus, a COL that is supported by the
trial court's FOFs and that reflects an application of the
correct rule of law will not be overturned. However, a COL
that presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed
under the clearly erroneous standard because the court's
conclusions are dependent upon the facts and circumstances
of each individual case.
 
Id. (citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted) 
(quoting Ponce, 105 Hawai 'i at 453, 99 P.3d at 104). 
In this appeal, the Hart Appellants assert two grounds
 
for their claim of prejudicial misconduct: the Arbitrator's
 failure to disclose her consultation with Ross; and the failure
 to disclose Ross's alleged conflict with Kotner, the Hart
 Appellants' counsel. Under HRS § 658A-23(a)(2)(C), a court shall
 vacate an arbitration award if there was "[m]isconduct by an
 arbitrator prejudicing the rights of a party to the arbitration
 proceeding."
 
Based on the record and findings by the circuit court,
 
there is a question to what extent the parties were informed that
 the Arbitrator would consult with a colleague. Even if we assume
 the Arbitrator's consultation with Ross was ex parte, guidance
 from federal case law indicates that we must consider whether the
 Hart Appellants have demonstrated prejudice by the alleged
 misconduct.
4 See United States Life Ins. Co. v. Superior Nat'l
 
3 The Hart Appellants also make some vague and passing references to
evident partiality under HRS § 658A-23(a)(2)(A) (Supp. 2013). However, we
previously resolved the Hart Appellants' claims related to evident partiality
and that issue was not part of the remand to the circuit court.
4
 Similar to the Uniform Arbitration Act adopted by Hawai' i, Section
10(a)(3) of the Federal Arbitration Act provides for an arbitration award to
be vacated because of, inter alia, "any other misbehavior by which the rights
of any party have been prejudiced[.]" 9 U.S.C. § 10(a)(3) (2012). Reliance on relevant federal case law is therefore appropriate. See Daiichi Hawai' i 
Real Estate Corp. v. Lichter, 103 Hawai' i 325, 339, 82 P.3d 411, 425 (2003). 
6
  Ins. Co., 591 F.3d 1167, 1176 (9th Cir. 2010) (recognizing that
 
"[e]x parte conduct by an arbitration panel requires vacatur of
 an award only if the ex parte contact constitutes misbehavior
 that prejudices the rights of a party"); Lefkovitz v. Wagner, 395
 F.3d 773, 780 (7th Cir. 2005) (although the arbitrator's
 consultation with an accounting firm regarding key issues could
 be construed as misconduct, the claimants were unable to show
 that their position was prejudiced); M & A Elec. Power Co-op. v.
 Local Union No. 702, Int'l Bhd. of Elec. Workers, AFL-CIO, 773
 F.Supp. 1259, 1261-63 (E.D. Mo. 1991), aff'd 977 F.2d 1235 (8th
 Cir. 1992) (claimants did not show prejudice because "the Court
 believes that the source of the arbitrator's decision is based
 upon the testimony and other evidence presented at the hearing"
 and not a post-hearing consultation with an outside expert).
 
"The burden of establishing grounds for vacating an
 
arbitration award is on the party seeking it." United States
 
Life Ins. Co., 591 F.3d at 1173. "[A]n arbitrator's conduct must
 be such that a party can say that he was deprived of a fair
 hearing by the challenged conduct, and the party seeking a
 vacation of an award on the basis of ex parte conduct must
 demonstrate that the conduct influenced the outcome of the
 arbitration." M & A Elec. Power Co-op., 977 F.2d at 1237-38
 
(internal citation omitted).
 
Similarly, with regard to the non-disclosure of Ross's
 
alleged conflict with Kotner, we must consider whether it rises
 to the level of prejudicial misconduct. That is, under
 HRS § 658A-12(a) (Supp. 2013) an arbitrator must make a
 reasonable inquiry and is required to disclose to all parties:
 
[A]ny known facts that a reasonable person would consider
likely to affect the impartiality of the arbitrator in the
arbitration proceeding, including:
(1)	 A financial or personal interest in the outcome
of the arbitration proceeding; and
(2)	 An existing or past relationship with any of the
parties to the agreement to arbitrate or the
arbitration proceeding, their counsel or
representatives, a witness, or another
arbitrator.
 
7
 (Emphasis added.) The term "knowledge" is defined in HRS § 658A­
1 (Supp. 2013) to mean "actual knowledge." The disclosure
 requirement is a continuing one and applies to conflicts that
 arise or become evident during the course of the proceedings. 
HRS § 658A-12(b) (Supp. 2013). If the arbitrator does not
 disclose a fact required by subsection (a) or (b), HRS § 658­12(d) provides that the court may vacate the award under
 HRS § 658A-23(a)(2) (Supp. 2013). 
Ross acted as opposing counsel to Kotner of the Jung &
 
Vassar firm in a civil litigation matter entitled Bowers v.
 Schooley during which time Ross also consulted with the
 Arbitrator on the present case. The Arbitrator testified that it
 was her typical practice to perform a conflict search, and that
 when she did, "[t]here were no material conflicts" with any of
 the six parties to the case. She did not, however, conduct a
 conflicts check with respect to the parties' counsel, and was
 therefore unaware of Ross's ongoing case against Kotner. At the
 time of the Arbitrator's first consultation with Ross
 (January 31, 2006), the law firm of Jung & Vassar, P.C. was not
 serving as counsel for the Hart Appellants. Jung & Vassar
 represented the Hart Appellants between approximately August 2005
 and November 2005, and did not resume representation until
 February 2006. The Arbitrator could not recall specifically
 asking Ross if he had any potential conflicts. 
Counsel to both parties testified that they were not
 
aware of this conflict until after the Arbitration Award was
 finalized. Kotner maintained that she did not know of Ross's
 participation until after she received invoices from the
 Arbitrator billing for Ross's time on the case. 
The Arbitrator should have discovered and disclosed
 
Ross's conflict with Kotner, a party's counsel. This does not,
 however, automatically require abrogation of the arbitration
 decision under HRS § 658-12(d). Rather, as noted, a court may
 vacate an award pursuant to HRS § 658A-23(a)(2). We must
 therefore ultimately consider whether the Arbitrator's failure to
 
8
   disclose rises to the level of prejudicial misconduct under
 
HRS § 658A-23(a)(2)(C).
 
In this case, therefore, the Arbitrator failed to
 
obtain clear consent from the parties to confer with Ross and
 should have disclosed his conflict with Kotner, and we do not
 condone this conduct. Indeed, in her own testimony, the
 
Arbitrator clearly acknowledged the ongoing obligations to
 
disclose under HRS Chapter 658A. However, the evidence and
 findings by the circuit court after the evidentiary hearing
 support its conclusion that the Hart Appellants did not suffer
 prejudice as a result. Billing records reflect that the
 Arbitrator conferred with Ross for a total of 1.1 hours on three
 separate occasions. Although the Arbitrator could not recall her
 first two conversations with Ross about the case, she was certain
 that she "would not have been asking him for his analysis." As
 to her third conversation with Ross, the Arbitrator testified:
 
I had spent a lot of time working on the arbitration award.
And I do remember that contact with Ken Ross. I consider
 myself a good writer, I consider Ken an excellent writer.
And I showed him my arbitration award, he suggested some
minor changes in organization of the award. Not any of the
analysis or the remedies that I had already decided. He had
 nothing to offer in that respect because he hadn't heard any
of the evidence, seen any of the witnesses, heard any of the
arguments.
 
Ross could not remember any conversations with the Arbitrator
 
about the case, and maintained that he did not act as a
 consultant. 
In addition, the circuit court made several findings on 
the extent of Ross's involvement in the arbitration. Because the Hart Appellants failed to challenge the following findings, we are bound by them. See Kawamata Farms, Inc. v. United Agri 
Prods., 86 Hawai
'i 214, 252, 948 P.2d 1055, 1093 (1997) ("If a 
finding is not properly attacked, it is binding; and any conclusion which follows from it and is a correct statement of law is valid.") (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
[FOF] 10. Mr. Ross has no recollection of what
discussions he had with [the Arbitrator] regarding the case. 
9
  [FOF] 11. [The Arbitrator] merely recalls the last
conversation she had with Mr. Ross about the case. This
 
particular conversation merely dealt with the organization
of the written arbitration award.
 
[FOF] 12. [The Arbitrator] reached her decision in
this case based upon her own analysis, and Mr. Ross'
discussions with [the Arbitrator] about the case did not
have any influence upon her analysis and decision.
 
[FOF] 13. [The Hart Appellants] failed to meet their
burden of proving that [the Arbitrator's] discussions with
Mr. Ross prejudiced [the Hart Appellants].
 
Most significantly, after hearing the testimony of the witnesses,
 
the circuit court explicitly found that the Hart Appellants had
 not established that the Arbitrator's discussions with Ross had
 prejudiced them.
 
We rely heavily in this case on the findings by the
 
circuit court after the evidentiary hearing. In considering
 whether there has been prejudicial misconduct by an arbitrator,
 "[c]onclusory statements about prejudice are not sufficient." 
Lefkovitz v. Wagner, 291 F.Supp.2d 764, 770 (N.D. Ill. 2003),
 aff'd 395 F.3d 773 (7th Cir. 2005).
 
Based on the evidentiary hearing and the circuit
 
court's findings, the circuit court did not err in confirming the
 Final Arbitration Award.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the March 2, 2012
 
Final Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, October 24, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Francis L. Jung
Carol M. Jung (Jung & Vassar, P.C.)
for Defendants-Appellants 
 Presiding Judge
Stephen D. Whittaker for Plaintiffs-Appellees
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
10

 