NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000001
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
GENBAO GAO, Appellant-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI' I, DEPARTMENT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL,
Appellee-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-1776)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Genbao Gao (Gao) appeals pro se 
from the January 24, 2011 Judgment entered by the Circuit Court 
of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 Judgment was based on the 
Circuit Court's "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting State of Hawai' i, Department of the Attorney General's 
[State] Motion to Dismiss Appeal of Arbitration Decision and Award," entered December 9, 2010; the "Order Denying Appellant's 
Motion to Strike Appellee's Motion to Dismiss Appeal for Lack of 
Jurisdiction," entered December 9, 2010; and the "Order Denying 
Appellant's Motion to Reconcile the Notice of Appeal and Opening 
Brief to Motion to Vacate and Motion to Quash," entered 
December 9, 2010. 
1
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Gao contends "the First Circuit orders,
 
decisions, and judgments ignored the violation of [Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS)] 658a and ignored the facts the arbitration
 
decision and award violates well established public policy and
 
the arbitration decision and award was issued in manifest
 
disregard of the law."
 
After careful review of the issues raised by the
 
parties, the record, and the applicable authority, we resolve
 
Gao's appeal as follows.
 
Gao brought three grievances against his employer, the
 
State, with the assistance of his union, the Hawaii Government
 
Employees Association (HGEA or Union) who, at all relevant times,
 
was an "employee organization" and the "exclusive representative"
 
of Bargaining Unit 13, of which Gao was a member. It is
 
undisputed that Gao's grievances followed the grievance
 
procedures established in the Collective Bargaining Agreement
 
(CBA) reached between the State and the HGEA for Bargaining Unit
 
13.
 
Article 11 of the CBA provided for a grievance
 
procedure in the event an employee or the Union has a complaint
 
regarding its application or interpretation and Article 8
 
provided that the same procedures were to be followed for
 
grievances regarding matters of discipline. This procedure
 
included one informal and three formal steps to be taken at the
 
option of the employee. In addition, the CBA also provided a
 
fourth step for arbitration under the following conditions:
 
H. Step 4. Arbitration. If the grievance is not
resolved at Step 3 and the Union desires to proceed with
arbitration, it shall serve written notice on the Employeror the Employer's representative of its desire to arbitratewithin ten (10) working days after receipt of the Employer'sdecision at Step 3. Representatives of the parties shallattempt to select an Arbitrator immediately thereafter. If agreement on an Arbitrator is not reached within ten (10)working days after notice for arbitration is submitted,either party may request the Hawai' i Labor Relations Board 
to submit a list of five (5) Arbitrators. Selection of an Arbitrator shall be made by each party alternately deletingone (1) name at a time from the list. The first party todelete a name shall be determined by lot. The person whosename remains on the list shall be designated the Arbitrator. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
No grievance may be arbitrated unless it involves an alleged
violation of a specific term or provision of the Agreement.
 
If the Employer disputes the arbitrability of any
grievance, the Arbitrator shall first determine whether the
Arbitrator has jurisdiction to act; and if the Arbitrator
finds that the Arbitrator has no such power, the grievance
shall be referred back to the parties without decision or
recommendation on its merits.
 
The Arbitrator shall render the Arbitrator's award in
 
writing no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the
conclusion of the hearings or if oral hearings are waived
then thirty (30) calendar days from the date statements and
proofs were submitted to the Arbitrator. The decision of
 
the Arbitrator shall be final and binding upon the Union,
its members, the Employees involved in the grievance and the
Employer. There shall be no appeal from the Arbitrator's
decision by either party, if such decision is within the
scope of the Arbitrator's authority as described below.
 
1. The Arbitrator shall not have the power to add
to, subtract from, disregard, alter, or modify any of the
terms of this Agreement.
 
2. The Arbitrator's power shall be limited to
deciding whether the Employer has violated any of the terms
of this Agreement.
 
3. The Arbitrator shall not consider any alleged
violations or charges other than those presented in Step 3.
 
(Emphasis supplied). In this case, the Union opted to take this
 
matter to arbitration and the State agreed that the grievances
 
were properly before the Arbitrator. The Arbitrator rendered his
 
decision sustaining the employer in each of the three grievances
 
on May 28, 2010.
 
On August 18, 2010, Gao pro se, filed a "Notice of
 
Appeal" "from the decision and order of the Walter Ikeda
 (arbitrator)" and on August 26, 2010 filed a document entitled
 
"Initial Motion of Genbao Gao" but captioned as "Opening Brief to
 
Vacate an Award in the Arbitration Proceeding on May 28, 2010."
 
After the State moved to dismiss Gao's appeal for lack
 
of jurisdiction and to strike Gao's opening brief, Gao filed a
 
"Motion to Reconcile the Notice of Appeal and Opening Brief to
 
Motion to Vacate," (Motion to Reconcile) explaining that, "My
 
intention was to file a motion to vacate the arbitrator's
 
decision and award on my own in accordance with HRS 658a after
 
the HGEA turned down my request." Gao stated that his motion was
 
3
   
   
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
based on a claim that there was "evident partiality" on the part
 
of the arbitrator and, acknowledging that such a motion must be
 
2
brought by a "party," relied on language in HRS § 377-9(b)  and
3
"Title 12-42-42(d)"  providing that, upon proof of interest, "an
2
 HRS § 377-9(b) (1993), part of the Employment Relations Act,
provides in part,
 
Any party in interest may file with the board a written
complaint on a form provided by the board, charging any
person with having engaged in any specified unfair labor
practice. The board shall serve a copy of the complaint
upon the person charged, hereinafter referred to as the
respondent. If the board has a reasonable cause to believe
 that the respondent is a member of or represented by a labor
union, then service upon an officer of the union shall be
deemed to be service upon the respondent. Service may be by
delivery to the person, or by mail or by telegram. Any
other person claiming interest in the dispute or
controversy, as an employer, an employee or other
representative, shall be made a party upon proof of the
interest. The board may bring in additional parties by
service of a copy of the complaint. Only one complaint
shall issue against a person with respect to a single
controversy, but any complaint may be amended in the
discretion of the board at any time prior to the issuance of
a final order based thereon. The respondent may file an
answer to the original or amended complaint but the board
may find to be true any allegation in the complaint in the
event either no answer is filed or the answer neither
 specifically denies nor explains the allegation nor states
that the respondent is without knowledge concerning the
allegation. The respondent shall have the right to appear
in person or otherwise to give testimony at the place and
time fixed in the notice of hearing. The hearing on the
complaint shall be before either the board or a hearings
officer of the board, as the board may determine.
 
We note that on August 26, 2010, Gao filed a complaint based on the ProhibitedPractices Act arising out of the same disciplinary matters involved herein.Gao v. Hawai' i Labor Relations Bd. , 129 Hawai' i 106, 294 P.3d 1092, CAAP-12­
0000424 at *1 (App. Feb. 22, 2013)(SDO).  The dismissal of this complaint wasaffirmed by this court. Id. 
3 Presumably, Gao was referring to the Hawaii Public Employment
Relations Board Rules of Practice and Procedure, Section 12-42-42, governing
Prohibited Practices Pursuant to Sections 89-13 and 89-14, HRS:
 
§12-42-42 Complaint. (a) A complaint that any public
employer, public employee, or employee organization has
engaged in any prohibited practice, pursuant to section 89­13, HRS, may be filed by a public employee, employee
organization, public employer, or any party in interest or
their representatives within ninety days of the alleged
violation.
 
(b) A prohibited practice complaint shall be prepared
on a form furnished by the board. The original and five
(continued...)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
employee . . . shall be made a party." Similarly, at the hearing
 
on the State's motions to dismiss and to strike Gao's opening
 
brief, Gao again asserted this intent.
 
Notwithstanding these requests, the Circuit Court
 
denied Gao's Motion to Reconcile, "as moot, because the appeal
 
had been dismissed pursuant to the [Circuit] Court's order
 
granting [State's] motion to dismiss appeal."4 However, we need
 
not decide whether the Circuit Court erred in this regard
 because, Gao could not seek to vacate the arbitration award under
 
HRS § 658A-23.
 
As the employee for whom the arbitration proceeding was 
brought in this matter, Gao was bound by the decision of the 
arbitrator under the plain language of the arbitration provision 
in the CBA. Gao v. Hawai' i Labor Relations Bd., 129 Hawai' i 106, 
294 P.3d 1092, CAAP-12-0000424 at *2 (App. Feb. 22, 2013) (SDO). See also Poe v. Hawai' i Labor Relations Bd., 97 Hawai' i 528, 537, 
40 P.3d 930, 939 (2002). That language explicitly provided that the arbitration was final, that it bound "the Union, its members, 
3(...continued)
copies shall be filed with the board, and the board shall
serve a copy of the complaint upon the person charged.
 
(c) If the board has reasonable cause to believe that
the employee is a member of or is represented by an employee
organization, then service upon an officer of the employee
organization shall be deemed to be service upon the
employee.
 
(d) Any other person claiming interest in the dispute
or controversy, as a public employer, public employee,
employee organization, or any party in interest may be made
a party upon proof of interest.
 
(e) The board may bring in additional parties by
service of a copy of the complaint. 
(f) Only one complaint shall issue against a party
with respect to a single controversy.
 
4
 The Circuit Court also denied Gao's motion to strike the State's 
motion to dismiss because the State's motion "was properly filed with thecourt." Although Gao apparently relied on Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rule 72 in his motion, arguing that the State's motion fell outside ofthe "10 day designation period if Rule 72 is to be followed." We fail to see why HRCP Rule 72 governed the State's motion and therefore affirm the CircuitCourt's ruling. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Employees involved in the grievance and the Employer," and
 
"no appeal" could be brought by "either party." Thus, except for
 
those limited circumstances where the arbitrator acted outside
 
his or her authority, no appeal from the award is allowed.
 
However, Gao attempted to style his review of the 
arbitration award as a motion to vacate under HRS § 658A-23, part 
of Hawai' i's version of the Uniform Arbitration Act. It 
provides, in pertinent part, 
Vacating award.  (a) Upon motion to the court by a
party to an arbitration proceeding, the court shall vacate
an award made in the arbitration proceeding if:
 
. . . .
 
(2)	 There was:
 
(A)	 Evident partiality by an arbitrator appointed as
a neutral arbitrator[.]
 
HRS § 658A-23 (Supp. 2012).
 
The language of this section plainly limits its
 
application to a "party to an arbitration proceeding." Thus, any
 
reading of this phrase must be made in the context of the
 
provisions of the arbitration agreement. As the CBA structures
 
the arbitrations to resolve grievances, only the Union, and not
 
Gao, had the ability to invoke the arbitration provision and only
 
the Union, along with the employer, were considered parties to
 
the arbitration. See, Eisen v. State, Dep’t of Public Welfare,
 
352 N.W.2d 731, 737 (Minn. 1984) (held that employee was not
 considered a "party" for the purposes of a challenge to an
 
arbitration under the Uniform Arbitration Act where the agreement
 
expressly permitted the union, not the employee, to invoke the
 
arbitration provisions of the agreement and the only parties
 
named in the agreement under the arbitration provision were the
 
union and the state negotiator, who, respectively, represent the
 
employee and the employer in the arbitration).
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As Gao was not a "party" to the arbitration, he could
 
not move to vacate the arbitration award and the Circuit Court
 
was correct in dismissing the case.
 
Therefore, the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's 
January 24, 2011 Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 22, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Genbao Gao,
Appellant-Appellant, pro se.
 
Chief Judge
 
James E. Halvorson,
Maria C. Cook,
Deputy Attorneys General,
for Appellee-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
7
 