NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 NO. CAAP-12-0001109
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
SCOTT L. ANDREWS, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
CRIME VICTIM COMPENSATION COMMISSION,
of the State of Hawai 'i, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NOS. 11-1-0299 and 11-1-300 (Consolidated))

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Scott L. Andrews (Andrews)
 
submitted two applications for compensation to Defendant-Appellee
 
Crime Victim Compensation Commission (Commission). Andrews
 sought compensation for two incidents, alleging that he was a
 crime victim, even though he was the person charged in each
 instance. The Commission denied compensation for the first
 incident on the grounds that Andrews' application was untimely
 and he did not show good cause for the late filing. The
 Commission partially granted compensation for the second
 incident. Andrews appealed the Commission's decisions to the
 
1
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court),  which 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dismissed Andrews' appeals for lack of subject matter
 
jurisdiction.2
 
In this secondary appeal, Andrews appeals from the
 
Final Judgment issued by the Circuit Court. We conclude that
 Andrews' appeal lacks merit, and we affirm the Circuit Court's
 Final Judgment.
 
I.
 A.
 
Andrews' applications to the Commission for
 
compensation involved two incidents in which he was involved in
 altercations with Alexander Lewis (Lewis). In each instance,
 Andrews and Lewis filed complaints against each other with the
 police. In each instance, Andrews and not Lewis was charged with
 a crime.
 
Nevertheless, Andrews applied for compensation with the
 
Commission based on the injuries he claimed he sustained in each
 incident. The Commission initially denied Andrews' application
 in Case No. 09-0857 (Case 857), finding that Andrews did not file
 his application within the required eighteen-month time limit and
 that he did not show good cause to justify the late filing.
3 The
 
Commission also initially denied Andrews' application in Case No.
 09-0858 (Case 858), finding that Andrews was "not a victim of a
 
2The Circuit Court consolidated the two appeals before issuing its
decision.
 
3
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 351-62(a) (1993) provides:
 
(a) No order for the payment of compensation shall be made
under this chapter unless the application has been made within
eighteen months after the date of injury, death, or property
damage; provided that upon a showing of good cause, the commission
may consider applications filed beyond this time period.
 
Hawai'i Adminstrative Rules (HAR) § 23-605-2 (2001) provides, in relevant
part: 
"Good cause" means a determination that the applicant was
unable to file an application within 18 months after the date of
the incident or report the incident to the police without undue
delay due to a mental, physical or legal impairment. Good cause
 may not be established by ignorance of the law, incarceration, or
negligent failure to ascertain the facts giving rise to a claim.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
crime for which compensation may be ordered." 
Andrews appealed the Commission's initial decisions,4
 
and the Commission held a consolidated hearing on Andrews'
 
appeals. In Case 857, the Commission again denied Andrews'
 application for compensation, finding that Andrews failed to show
 good cause for the untimely filing of his application. The
 Commission found: "After considering the evidence and the
 testimony presented, the Commission finds that there is
 insufficient evidence to establish that the Applicant was
 physically, mentally, or legally impaired and incapable of
 submitting an application to the Commission within 18 months of
 the incident."
 
In Case 858, the Commission reconsidered its initial
 
decision and partially granted Andrews' application, awarding him
 $1,738.29 in medical expenses. The Commission made the following
 findings in explaining its partial award:
 
After considering the evidence and testimony
presented, the Commission finds that the Applicant
demonstrated that he had a bruise on his chest and a bruise
 on his thigh following the December 12, 2008, incident.
 
However, the Commission is limiting the award to the
December 12, 2008 medical treatment of the two bruises
inasmuch as (1) there is insufficient evidence to determine
whether Mr. Lewis or any other individuals present caused
these bruises and (2) the Applicant bore a share of
responsibility for the December 12, 2008 incident.
 
Pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 351-13 (Supp. 2014),
 
the Commission's Decision and Order in each case was signed by
 the Commission's Chairperson, Lisa A. Dunn.
 
B.
 
Andrews appealed the Commission's Decisions and Orders
 
in Case 857 and Case 858 to the Circuit Court. The Commission
 moved to dismiss Andrews' appeals, arguing that under HRS § 351­17(b), the Circuit Court lacked jurisdiction over Andrews'
 appeals. HRS § 351-17(b) (Supp. 2014) provides, in relevant
 
4The Commission's initial decisions were issued by the Commission's
Investigator and approved by the Commission's Executive Director.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
part:
 
(b) Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of
the commission on the sole ground that the order or decision
was in excess of the commission's authority or jurisdiction,
shall have a right of appeal to the circuit court of the
circuit in which the person resides; provided the appeal is
filed within thirty days after mailing of an original or a
certified copy of the order or decision to the applicant's
last known address. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, orders and decisions of the commission shall be
conclusive and not subject to judicial review.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
The Circuit Court concluded that Andrews' appeals did
 
not involve claims that the Commission's decisions exceeded its
 
authority or jurisdiction, but instead challenged the
 Commission's findings of fact and evaluation of the sufficiency
 of the evidence. The Circuit Court therefore dismissed Andrews'
 appeals pursuant to HRS § 351-17(b) for lack of jurisdiction.
5
 
The Circuit Court entered its Final Judgment on November 4, 2012.
 
II.
 
In this appeal, Andrews alleges a myriad of errors he
 
claims were made by the Circuit Court and the Commission. We
 conclude, however, that the question of the Circuit Court's
 jurisdiction is dispositive. As explained below, we hold that
 the Circuit Court properly dismissed Andrews' appeals because the
 appeals did not challenge the Commission's decisions on the
 "ground that the order or decision was in excess of the
 commission's authority or jurisdiction." See HRS § 351-17(b). 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court lacked jurisdiction to decide
 Andrews' appeals.
 
1.
 
Under HRS § 351-17(b), judicial review is limited to
 
appeals based on the Commission's exceeding its authority or 
5The Circuit Court alternatively ruled that assuming that it had
jurisdiction to address the merits of Andrews' appeals, it would affirm the
Commission's Decisions and Orders in Case 857 and Case 858 on the merits.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
jurisdiction. Therefore, unless there is an actual or bona fide
 
claim that the Commission acted in excess of its authority or
 jurisdiction, the Circuit Court is without jurisdiction to review
 the appeal. Although Andrews asserted in his appeals to the
 Circuit Court that the Commission acted "in excess of [its]
 authority or jurisdiction," his claims in substance challenged
 the Commission's factual findings and its evaluation of the
 evidence. 
In Case 857, the Commission's decision turned on a
 
factual dispute over whether Andrews had shown that he was
 physically, mentally, or legally impaired to the extent that he
 was incapable of submitting an application, which Andrews was
 required to show to demonstrate good cause for the late filing. 
Based on the Commission's evaluation of the evidence, including
 evidence presented by its medical consultant, the Commission
 found that there was "insufficient evidence to establish that the
 Applicant was physically, mentally, or legally impaired and
 incapable of submitting an application to the Commission within
 18 months of the incident."
 
In Case 858, the Commission's decision turned on its
 
evaluation of the evidence, including the credibility of
 witnesses. The Commission based its decision to limit its award
 of compensation on its findings (1) that there was insufficient
 evidence to show that Lewis or others present had caused Andrews'
 bruises; and (2) that Andrews bore a share of responsibility for
 the incident. 
As noted, the substance of Andrews' appeals of the
 
Commissioner's final decisions challenged the Commission's
 factual findings and evaluation of the evidence and did not truly
 raise claims that the Commission had exceeded its authority or
 jurisdiction. We therefore conclude that the Circuit Court
 properly dismissed Andrews' appeals for lack of jurisdiction.
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2.
 
In support of his appeals to the Circuit Court, Andrews 
cited the Hawai 'i Supreme Court's decision in Application of 
Edmundson, 63 Haw. 254, 625 P.2d 372 (1981). In Edmundson, the 
supreme court construed the former version of HRS § 351-17, which contained language that is substantively identical to the language of HRS § 351-17(b) that is at issue in this appeal.
6 
The court held that this language permitted judicial review of 
7
Edmundson's claim that the Commission  had misinterpreted
statutory provisions governing its computation of the award of

 
compensation, which resulted in the Commission's erroneous
 determination that it was unable to award compensation to
 Edmundson.
 
The Commission had interpreted the statutory provisions

 
relating to collateral benefits and the $10,000 limit on
 compensation awards as requiring it to subtract any collateral
 benefits received by an applicant from the $10,000 statutory
 limit, with only the remainder available to award compensation
 for losses. Id. at 255, 625 P.2d at 373-74. Under this
 
interpretation, applicants who received collateral benefits
 exceeding $10,000, like Edmundson, could never receive any award
 from the Commission. Id. at 262, 625 P.2d at 378. Edmundson, on
 
the other hand, argued that the statutory provisions should be
 interpreted to require the Commission to: (1) determine the
 
6The former version of HRS § 351-17 construed in Edmundson provided, in
relevant part: 
Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the criminal
injuries compensation commission on the sole ground that the order
or decision was in excess of the commission's authority or
jurisdiction, shall have a right of appeal to the supreme
court. . . . Except as otherwise provided in this section, orders
and decisions of the commission shall be conclusive and not
 subject to judicial review.
 
Edmundson, 63 Haw. at 256, 625 P.2d at 374. 
7At the time of the Edmundson decision, the Commission was known as the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Commission, but has since been renamed the
Crime Victim Compensation Commission.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
applicant's gross economic loss plus pain and suffering, (2)
 
deduct collateral benefits (except death benefits from a victim's
 life insurance policy) from the gross figure, and (3) then award
 compensation up to the $10,000 limit based on the applicant's net
 economic loss plus pain and suffering. Id. at 258, 625 P.2d at
 
375. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court agreed with Edmundson's 
interpretation of the statutory provisions. Id. at 261-62, 625 
P.2d at 377. 
In discussing why HRS § 351-17 did not preclude
 
judicial review in Edmundson's case, the supreme court stated
 that "the Commission's decision to deny compensation was based
 not on a factual finding that the claim failed to warrant
 compensation, but on a legal conclusion." Id. at 256, 625 P.2d
 
at 374. The court concluded that "[w]here the action of an
 administrative board involves the construction of a statute under
 which it functions, a question of law is presented for our
 determination." Id. 
Edmundson is distinguishable and does not affect our
 
conclusion that the Circuit Court lacked jurisdiction over
 Andrews' appeals. Unlike in Edmundson, the Commission's
 decisions in Andrews' applications were based on the Commission's
 factual findings and evaluation of the evidence; the Commission's
 decisions did not turn on its interpretation of the applicable
 law. Thus, Edmundson is inapposite.
8
 
8
We note that in Alaka' i Na Keiki, Inc. v. Matayoshi 127 Hawai' i 263,
275, 277 P.3d 988, 1000 (2012), the Hawai' i Supreme Court stated that
"[s]eparation of powers concerns may arise when the legislature vests
administrative agencies with judicial power but precludes judicial review ofthe determinations made by the agency in exercising such power." In this case, HRS § 351-17(b) only limits, and does not preclude, judicial review, andHRS § 351-17(b) has been judicially construed to permit judicial review ofdecisions based on the Commission's interpretation of the statutes under whichit functions. See Edmundson, 63 Haw. at 256, 625 P.2d at 374. In addition,
the Commission's award of compensation involves adjudication of disputesinvolving public rights, not private rights -- a factor which may serve todiminish separation of powers concerns. See Alaka' i, 127 Hawai' i at 294-96,
277 P.3d at 1019-21 (Recktenwald, C.J., concurring and dissenting).Accordingly, HRS § 351-17(b) is not subject to invalidation on separation ofpowers grounds. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court's
 
Final Judgment.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, September 30, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Scott Andrews
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Pro Se
 Chief Judge
Associate JudgeAssociate Judge
 Richard W. Stacey
Diane K. Taira Deputy Attorneys GeneralAttorney General of Hawai
'i 
for Defendant-Appellee 
8
 