FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--–
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
vs.
 
DREW CLEMENTE, Defendant-Appellee.
 
CAAP-11-0000027
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(1DTA-10-03997 and 1DTI-10-119585)
 
NOVEMBER 30, 2012
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
Based on a mistaken belief that a critical witness 
would not be appearing, the trial court dismissed, with 
prejudice, charges against Defendant-Appellee Drew Clemente (Clemente) for operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII) and speeding. 
After the mistake was 
discovered and the witness arrived on time, Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai' i (State) orally moved that the trial court 
reconsider its dismissal of the charges. The trial court denied the State's motion and subsequently filed a written decision.  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The trial court concluded it had no power to grant the State's
 
motion for reconsideration because: (1) overturning the dismissal
 of the charges would violate the constitutional protection
 against double jeopardy and the statutory codification of that
 protection as set forth in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 701­110(1) (1993); and (2) it lacked jurisdiction to reconsider its
 dismissal with prejudice.
 
The State appeals from the Amended Judgments dismissing
 
the charges with prejudice. We hold that the trial court erred
 in dismissing the charges and in denying the State's oral motion
 for reconsideration. In particular, we hold that the trial court
 erred in concluding that: (1) granting the State's motion for
 reconsideration would violate the constitutional protection
 against double jeopardy and HRS § 701-110(1); and (2) it lacked
 jurisdiction to reconsider its dismissal with prejudice. 
Accordingly, we vacate the Amended Judgments dismissing the
 charges, and we remand the case for further proceedings.
 
BACKGROUND
 
Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Officer Jeffrey T.
 
Tallion (Officer Tallion) stopped a vehicle driven by Clemente
 for speeding and unsafe lane change. After a field sobriety
 test, Officer Tallion arrested Clemente for OVUII.
 
On November 8, 2010, a bench trial commenced on charges
 
of OVUII and speeding against Clemente in the District Court of
 the First Circuit (District Court).
1 Officer Tallion was called
 
as a witness and began, but did not complete, his testimony. 
The District Court recessed the proceedings and ordered Officer
 Tallion to return on November 17, 2010, at 10:00 a.m. for further
 trial.
 
On November 17, 2010, at about 8:15 a.m., the bailiff
 
covering Courtrooms 10C and 10D received word from the HPD Court
 Sergeant that HPD Officer Justin Sayre had called in sick. The
 
1
 The Honorable William A. Cardwell presided. The State dismissed the
 
citation for unsafe lane change before trial.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
bailiff, however, mistakenly wrote "sick" by Officer Tallion's
 
name on a list of witnesses. The bailiff then erroneously
 informed a deputy prosecuting attorney (DPA) handling matters in
 Courtroom 10D (10D DPA), who was not Clemente's trial DPA, that
 Officer Tallion would not be appearing for the 10:00 a.m. further
 trial. At about 8:25 a.m., when Clemente's attorney, R. Patrick
 McPherson (McPherson), checked in at court, the 10D DPA informed
 McPherson that Officer Tallion had called in sick and would not
 be appearing for the 10:00 a.m. trial. The 10D DPA also provided
 this same information to the DPA handling Clemente's trial, DPA
 Phillip Clark (DPA Clark).
 
At about 9:15 a.m., DPA Clark informed the District
 
Court that Officer Tallion had called in sick. In response, the
 District Court had Clemente's case called at about 9:16 a.m.,
 before its scheduled 10:00 a.m. start time. DPA Clark placed on
 the record the information he had received that Officer Tallion
 had called in sick. DPA Clark orally moved for a continuance,
 arguing that Officer Tallion was a reliable witness who rarely
 called in sick. Clemente opposed the State's motion for a
 continuance. The District Court denied the motion for a
 continuance. It then sua sponte dismissed the case with
 prejudice at about 9:22 a.m. 
The transcript of the proceeding reflects that the
 
District Court dismissed the case with prejudice as a sanction
 against the State for Officer Tallion's failure to appear. The
 District Court stated:
 
I'm going to deny the State's request for a
continuance. Frankly, it is unacceptable to this court that
without any notice an officer that is ordered back to return
to the court simply calls in sick.
 
And it is true that Officer Tallion is here a lot. It
 
is true that it is unusual for him not to appear although it
happens periodically. And frankly it typically happens
because he works at night and just gets too tired, he calls
in sick. And that's simply unacceptable when he's ordered
back.
 
Now, what I'm going to do is I'm going to grant the
defense motion and I'm going to dismiss this case. I'm
 going to dismiss it with prejudice . . . .
 
3
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
. . . . [T]he general problem has become epidemic.
And when it's a further trial and the officer is ordered by
the court to return, it's simply unacceptable. [ 2
] 
The District Court stated that it would give the State ten days
 
to file a motion to reconsider the dismissal if the State could
 provide proof that Officer Tallion was seriously ill and
 physically unable to come to court. 
At about 9:30 a.m., DPA Clark learned from the HPD
 
Court Sergeant that Officer Tallion had not called in sick and
 was in fact on his way to court. DPA Clark informed McPherson of
 this information. DPA Clark and the HPD Court Sergeant spoke
 with the courtroom bailiff and learned that the source of the
 mistake concerning Officer Tallion was the bailiff's writing
 "sick" next to the wrong name. At about 9:50 a.m. Officer
 Tallion arrived at court. At that time, DPA Clark notified the
 District Court and McPherson about the bailiff's error and
 Officer Tallion's arrival. The bailiff also explained her error
 to the District Court. 
At about 10:03 a.m., the District Court recalled
 
Clemente's case. DPA Clark orally moved that the District Court
 reconsider its earlier dismissal of the case. Clemente opposed
 the motion. After hearing argument from the parties, the
 District Court denied the State's oral motion for
 reconsideration. That same day, November 17, 2010, the District
 Court filed Amended Judgments dismissing the charges with
 prejudice and denying the State's motion for reconsideration.
 
On November 26, 2010, the State submitted a written
 
motion for reconsideration of the District Court's dismissal of
 the charges with prejudice, which was filed on November 30, 2010. 
Clemente filed a memorandum in opposition. On December 15, 2010,
 the State's motion was heard and denied. On January 6, 2011, the
 
2
 In dismissing the case with prejudice, the District Court stated that
it was granting "the defense motion[.]" However, although Clemente opposed
the State's motion for continuance, he did not move for dismissal of the case.
 
4
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
District Court filed findings of fact, conclusions of law, and
 
its order denying the State's written motion for reconsideration. 
The District Court concluded that it lacked the power to overturn
 its dismissal of the charges because: (1) granting the State's
 motion for reconsideration would violate the double jeopardy
 
3
clauses of the United States and Hawai' i Constitutions;  (2) the
statutory codification of the double jeopardy protection set 
4
forth in HRS § 701-110(1)  also barred the District Court from
granting the motion for reconsideration; and (3) the District
 Court lacked jurisdiction to reconsider its dismissal with
 prejudice. 
DISCUSSION
 
There is no dispute that the District Court erred in
 
dismissing the charges in the first instance. 
The District
 
Court's dismissal was based on its mistaken belief that Officer
 Tallion had called in sick and would not be appearing as ordered
 at 10:00 a.m. for further trial. In fact, Officer Tallion had
 not called in sick and appeared on time for trial. The question
 presented by this appeal is whether despite its clear mistake in
 dismissing the charges, the District Court lacked the authority
 to remedy its mistake by granting the State's motion for
 reconsideration. 
3 The Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment to the United States
Constitution provides in relevant part, "nor shall any person be subject for
the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb." Article I,section 10 of the Hawai' i Constitution provides, "nor shall any person be
subject for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy." 
4
 HRS § 701-110(1) provides in relevant part:
 
When a prosecution is for an offense under the same
statutory provision and is based on the same facts as a former
prosecution, it is barred by the former prosecution under any of
the following circumstances:
 
(1)	 The former prosecution resulted in an acquittal which
has not subsequently been set aside. There is an
 acquittal if the prosecution resulted in a finding of
not guilty by the trier of fact or in a determination
by the court that there was insufficient evidence to
warrant a conviction. . . . 
5
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, the State argues that the District Court
 
erred in concluding that it lacked the power to reconsider its
 
dismissal of the charges with prejudice. In particular, the
 State argues that the District Court erred in concluding that:
 (1) the granting of the State's motion for reconsideration would
 violate the protection against double jeopardy; (2) HRS § 701­110(1) barred the District Court from granting the motion for
 reconsideration; and (3) the District Court lacked jurisdiction
 to reconsidering its dismissal with prejudice. As explained
 below, we conclude that the District Court erred in concluding
 that it lacked the power to reconsider its prior dismissal of the
 charges and in denying the State's motion for reconsideration.
 
I.
 
"The constitutional guarantee against double jeopardy 
'protects against a second prosecution for the same offense after acquittal.'" State v. Dow, 72 Haw. 56, 58, 806 P.2d 402, 404 
(1991) (quoting North Carolina v. Pearce, 395 U.S. 711, 717 (1969)).
5 In applying this protection, a critical question 
becomes what constitutes an "acquittal." The Hawai' i Supreme 
Court has adopted the following test for what constitutes an acquittal: "[A] defendant is acquitted only when the ruling of the judge, whatever its label, actually represents a resolution in the defendant's favor, correct or not, of some or all of the factual elements of the offense charged." State v. Poohina 
97 Hawai' i 505, 509, 40 P.3d 907, 911 (2002) (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted). In other words, for a judge's decision to constitute an acquittal, it must be based on findings related to the factual guilt of the defendant. See State v. 
Markowski, 88 Hawai' i 477, 484, 967 P.2d 674, 681 (App. 1998). 
5
 The Double Jeopardy Clauses of the United States and Hawai' i 
Constitutions protect "individuals against: (1) a second prosecution for the
same offense after acquittal; (2) a second prosecution for the same offenseafter conviction; and (3) multiple punishments for the same offense." State 
v. Ake, 88 Hawai' i 389, 392, 967 P.2d 221, 224 (1998) (internal quotation
marks and citation omitted). Because only the first type of double jeopardyprotection is at issue in this case, we limit our discussion to that doublejeopardy protection. 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"[W]hat constitutes an acquittal is more dependent upon the 
intent of the ruling rather than the label." Poohina, 97 Hawai' i 
at 509, 40 P.3d at 911. 
In Poohina, the supreme court considered whether the
 
trial court's sua sponte dismissal of the case at the end of a
 bench trial constituted an acquittal for purpose of applying the
 protection against double jeopardy. Poohina was charged with
 criminal contempt for violating an injunction against harassment.
 Id. at 506-07, 40 P.3d at 908-09. After the evidence had been
 presented, the trial court sua sponte dismissed the charge on the
 theory that the alleged victim had become an adult and was not
 protected by the injunction at the time the charged criminal
 conduct occurred. Id. at 507-08, 40 P.3d at 909-10.
 
The State appealed from the trial court's dismissal
 
order. On appeal, the supreme court considered whether the
 dismissal order constituted a judgment of acquittal as to which 
the principles of double jeopardy would apply to bar
 reprosecution and the State's ability to appeal. Id. at 509, 40
 
P.3d at 911. The supreme court held that the trial court's sua
 sponte dismissal order was not an acquittal because the trial
 court "did not rule on the merits of the case" and "did not enter
 any decisions as to the guilt of Poohina." Id. at 510, 40 P.3d
 
at 912. Accordingly, the protection against double jeopardy did
 not apply to the dismissal order. Id. at 509-10, 40 P.3d at 911­
12. 
Consistent with Poohina, we conclude that the District
 
Court's dismissal of the charges in Clemente's case was not an
 acquittal, and, accordingly, the protection against double
 jeopardy does not apply. The District Court's dismissal of the
 charges did not satisfy the Poohina test for an acquittal. It
 was not based on a resolution in Clemente's favor of some or all
 of the factual elements of the offense charged. As in Poohina,
 the District Court's sua sponte dismissal of the charges was not
 based on a decision on the merits of the case or a decision as to
 
7
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the guilt of Clemente.6 Instead, the District Court dismissed 
the charges as a sanction against the State because the District 
Court mistakenly believed that the State's witness, Officer Tallion, would not be appearing as ordered. Because the District Court's dismissal of the charges did not constitute an acquittal, the District Court had the authority to reconsider and overturn its dismissal ruling without violating the protection against double jeopardy. See Poohina, 97 Hawai' i at 509-10, 40 P.3d at 
911-12; Commonwealth v. Adams, 502 A.2d 1345, 1347-52 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1986) (holding that the trial court's dismissal of the charges after jeopardy had attached based on the prosecution witnesses' failure to appear was not an acquittal and therefore double jeopardy did not prevent the court from reconsidering its decision and reinstating the charges); State v. Calhoun, 481 N.E.2d 624, 626-28 (Ohio 1985) (holding that a sua sponte dismissal of the charges during trial was not an acquittal that barred retrial based on double jeopardy); People v. Zagarino, 427 N.Y.S.2d 40, 42-44 (N.Y. App. Div. 1980) (same). 
II.
 
Based on the same reasoning, we conclude that HRS 
§ 701-110(1) did not bar the District Court from granting the
 State's motion for reconsideration. HRS § 701-110(1) codifies
 the constitutional protection against double jeopardy by
 precluding reprosecution on charges for which there has been an
 acquittal. It adopts a test for an acquittal that mimics the one
 set forth in Poohina for double jeopardy protection. Under HRS 
§ 701-110(1), "[t]here is an acquittal if the prosecution
 resulted in a finding of not guilty by the trier of fact or in a
 determination by the court that there was insufficient evidence
 to warrant a conviction." Because the District Court's dismissal
 of the charges did not constitute an acquittal under HRS § 701­
6
 Although Clemente did not explicitly move to dismiss the charges, he
opposed the State's motion for a continuance and did not seek to have the
charges tried to verdict.
 
8
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
110(1), there was no statutory bar to the District Court granting
 
the State's motion for reconsideration. 
III.
 
The State argues that the District Court had
 
jurisdiction to reconsider its dismissal of the charges with
 prejudice. We agree. 
HRS § 604-7(a)(3)(1993) grants district courts the
 
power to "[e]nter final judgments; and alter or set aside any
 judgment within ten days following the date of its rendition or
 as provided by the rules of court[.]" The legislative history of
 HRS § 604-7(a)(3) establishes that the purpose of providing the
 statutory ten-day period for district courts to "alter or set
 aside any judgment" was to enable the court to correct errors and
 mistakes made in the entry of judgments.
 See Shilhan v. Ho,  40
 
Haw. 302 (Haw. Terr. 1953) (discussing the legislative history of
 the enactment of the ten-day period in predecessor to HRS § 604­7).
7
 
7 In Shilhan v. Ho , 40 Haw. 302 (Haw. Terr. 1953), the court explained
the legislative history of the ten-day provision as follows:
 
In 1937 the legislature enacted a further amendment:
 
"The statute which this bill proposes to amend provides that
district magistrates may alter any judgment on the day of its
rendition. 
Under this bill, the time in which a judgment may be
altered is extended to ten days, corresponding to the time within
which an appeal may be taken from such judgment.
 
"This extension of time appears to be reasonable as ample
time should be allowed litigants to make a showing that a judgment
should be modified to correct any errors or to prevent injustice
and thereby save the expense of having to take an appeal." (Sen.
J., 19th Legis., Terr. of Haw. 218, 219 [[[1937].)
 
"The legislature at the 1935 session for the first time
provided (by Act 110 of the Session Laws of 1935) that a District
Magistrate may not change any judgment rendered by him after the
day of its rendition. This has proved a mistake as it frequently
happens that judgment is entered rather late in the day and within
a day or two facts may come to the attention of the Magistrate
which would have required him to rule differently and because of
which he has every desire to vacate the judgment he has rendered
and decide the matter differently. . . . At present there is no
remedy for this situation. If this Bill passes the Magistrate,
for good cause, and only upon notice to the other side can alter
(continued...)
 
9
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Here, the State orally moved the District Court to
 
reconsider its decision to dismiss the charges on the same day
 
and within one hour of the District Court's dismissal of the
 charges.
8 As we have already concluded, the protection against
 
double jeopardy did not apply because the District Court's
 dismissal of the charges did not constitute an acquittal. Under
 these circumstances, based on the plain language of HRS § 604­7(a)(3), the District Court had the power to grant the State's
 oral motion to reconsider the District Court's dismissal of the
 charges with prejudice.
9
 
CONCLUSION
 
The District Court dismissed the charges based on its
 
mistaken belief that Officer Tallion had called in sick and would
 not be appearing for trial. When this mistake was brought to the
 attention of the District Court and the parties, the District
 Court declined to correct the mistake because it felt it lacked
 the power to do so. As explained in this Opinion, the District
 Court was wrong, as a matter of law, in concluding that it lacked
 the power to correct its mistaken dismissal of the charges. We
 conclude that the District Court abused its discretion in denying
 the State's oral motion for reconsideration. 
7(...continued)
any judgment within ten days after its rendition." (House J., 19th
Legis., Terr. of Haw. 1247 [1937].)
 
Shilhan, 40 Haw. at 306 (brackets and ellipsis points in original). The 
statute, as amended in 1937, provided: "The district magistrates shall havethe power . . . to alter any judgment within ten days following the date ofits rendition for good cause shown by any party and after notice given to theopposing party . . ." Id.
 at 304 (ellipsis points in original) (quoting 
Revised Laws of Hawai' i § 9675 (1945). 
8
 The District Court entered Judgments dismissing the charges and
Amended Judgments dismissing the charges and denying the State's oral motion
to dismiss on November 17, 2010, the same day the District Court orally
announced its rulings. 
9
 We do not reach the question of whether the District Court had the
power to reconsider its decision to dismiss the charges beyond the ten-day
period set forth in HRS § 604-7(a)(3).
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We vacate the District Court's November 17, 2010,
 
Amended Judgments dismissing the charges with prejudice and
 
denying the State's motion for reconsideration, and we remand the
 case for further proceedings consistent with this Opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Delanie D. Prescott-Tate
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellant
 
R. Patrick McPherson
 
Earle A. Partington
for Defendant-Appellee
 
11
 