NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000606
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ALAN S. TERASAKO, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
'EWA DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-13-03174)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Alan S. Terasako (Terasako) appeals 
from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and 
Plea/Judgment, filed on February 25, 2014, in the District Court of the First Circuit, 
'Ewa Division (district court). Terasako 
was convicted of Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII) in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(4) (Supp. 2014). 
On appeal, Terasako contends that the district court
 
erred when it: (1) allowed the State to amend the complaint prior
 to trial to reflect the correct date of the offense; and
 (2) admitted into evidence his blood test results in violation of
 his Fourth and Fifth Amendment rights.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Terasako's points of error as follows and affirm.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The following facts were adduced at the February 25,
 
2014 bench trial. On July 12, 2013, after stopping Terasako for
 
speeding, Officer Ikaika Aiu detected a strong odor of alcohol
 coming from Terasako, and asked him to participate in a
 standardized field sobriety test, which Terasako failed. 
Terasako then agreed to take a preliminary alcohol screening
 test, which he also failed. Terasako was arrested and
 transported to the police station, where he was read verbatim the
 "Use of Intoxicants While Operating a Vehicle Implied Consent for
 Testing" form (Implied Consent Form). Terasako signed the form,
 and initially chose to take a breath test. When he could not
 give a sufficient breath sample, Terasako elected to do a blood
 draw. The blood test showed Terasako had a blood alcohol
 concentration of 0.12 grams ethanol per 100cc of whole blood. 
(1) Terasako contends that the district court erred by
 
allowing the State to amend the complaint to reflect the correct
 date of the offense -- July 12, 2013, instead of July 4, 2013 -­because the amendment violated notice requirements under the
 Sixth Amendment and prejudiced his substantial rights in crafting
 an adequate defense. 
Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 7(f)(1) provides 
that "[t]he court may permit a charge other than an indictment to be amended at any time before trial commences if substantial rights of the defendant are not prejudiced." Here, the date of the offense is not an essential element of the charge. See State 
v. Staley, 91 Hawai
'i 275, 284, 982 P.2d 904, 913 (1999). 
In addition, Terasako has not demonstrated any 
prejudice to his substantial rights as a result of the amendment
 to the charge. Terasako claims that his best defense under the
 original date would have been innocence whereas his defense under
 the amended date would have involved objecting to the inclusion
 of the blood test results. The district court, however,
 concluded that Terasako should have expected to defend against
 the amended offense given that the discovery packet was replete
 with the July 12, 2013 date, and Terasako admitted that no
 different witnesses or testimony would be presented because of
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the amended date. Further, the State pointed out that Terasako
 
had only one alleged OVUII offense, and he would not be confused
 that he would be defending against any other OVUII offense.
 Because the record demonstrates that Terasako knew, or should
 have known, that the wrong date was nothing more than a
 typographical error, amendment of the complaint did not cause any
 prejudice to him, and thus the district court properly exercised
 its discretion in permitting the amendment. 
(2) As to Terasako's contention that the district court
 
erred by admitting evidence of his blood test results on the
 grounds that his consent was coerced and he was not advised of
 
1
his Miranda  rights, the issues raised by Terasako were
considered and rejected by this court in State v. Won, 134 Hawai
'i 59, 332 P.3d 661 (App. 2014), cert. granted No. 
SCWC–12–0000858, 2014 WL 2881259 (June 24, 2014). Based on the decision in Won, the district court did not err in admitting the results of Terasako's blood test into evidence. 
Given that the results of Terasako's blood test
 
established that he had a blood alcohol content of 0.12, he was
 properly convicted under HRS § 291E-61(a)(4).
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of Entry of 
Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, filed on February 25, 2014, in the District Court of the First Circuit, 
'Ewa Division, 
is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 29, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Daniel Kawamoto

 
(Law Offices of Paul J. Cunney)
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 James M. Anderson

 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
1
 Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966).
 
3
 