FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
BOMBARDIER TRANSPORTATION (HOLDINGS) USA INC.,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
DIRECTOR, DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND FISCAL SERVICES,
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU; ANSALDO HONOLULU JV;
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND CONSUMER AFFAIRS, STATE OF HAWAI' I,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10,
DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-10, AND DOE ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000756
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-1778)
 
OCTOBER 17, 2012
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, FUJISE AND GINOZA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
In this secondary administrative appeal arising out of
 
a dispute under the State of Hawaii's (State) Procurement Code,
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bombardier Transportation (Holdings) USA Inc. (Bombardier)
 
appeals from the September 23, 2011 Judgment (Judgment) and
 
September 16, 2011 "Order Denying Bombardier Transportation
 
(Holdings) USA, Inc's Appeal And Affirming The August 5, 2011
 
Findings Of Fact, Conclusions Of Law, And Decision Of The
 
Department Of Commerce and Consumer Affairs Office of
 
Administrative Hearings," (Order) both entered in the Circuit
 
1
Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).  The circuit court
 entered judgment in favor of Director, Department of Budget and
 
Fiscal Services, City and County of Honolulu (the City) and
 
Ansaldo Honolulu JV (Ansaldo).
 
On appeal, Bombardier contends the circuit court erred
 
in affirming the Administrative Hearings Officer's (hearings
 
officer) determination that:
 
(1) Bombardier's protest was untimely;
 (2) Bombardier's proposal was properly rejected as
 
conditional;
 
(3) Bombardier's protest arguments would undermine the
 
integrity of the procurement process; and
 
(4) the City satisfied its duty to conduct meaningful
 
discussions.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. RFP, Addenda, Proposal and BAFO Submissions
 
The following facts are undisputed. On April 9, 2009,
 
the City issued Part 1 of its Request for Proposals (RFP) for the
 Core Systems Design-Build-Operate-Maintain Contract for the
 
Honolulu High-Capacity Transit Corridor Project. The purpose of
 
RFP Part 1 was to select priority-listed offerors deemed
 
qualified to proceed with Part 2, and the City selected three
 
priority-listed offerors: Ansaldo, Bombardier, and Sumitomo
 
Corporation of America (Sumitomo).
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On August 17, 2009, the City issued RFP Part 2,
 
including a provision addressing the City's liability under the
 
proposed contract. In the following months, the City received
 
several Requests for Information (RFIs) from Bombardier and
 
Sumitomo about this provision, and as a result of these RFIs, the
 
City issued Addendum No. 26 to the RFP on April 14, 2010.
 
Addendum No. 26 deleted the original provision and replaced it
 
with "Special and Management Provisions" (SP) Chapter 2 section
 
2.13, which read: 
(a) The City's obligations under this Contract shall be
limited to the payment for services under this Contract.
 
(b) The CSC [Core System Contractor]'s liability to the City
for damages arising out of Work performed under the
Design-build component of the Contract shall be limited to
the total Contract Value of the Design-build component of
the Contract, provided that excluded from the limitation of
liability will be any liability, including defense costs,
for any type of damage or loss to the extent it is covered
by proceeds of insurance required under this Contract.
Further, this limitation of liability shall not apply with
regard to fraud, criminal conduct, . . . [or] the CSC's
indemnities set forth in this Contract, including but not
limited to SP-2.14[.]
 
On May 6, 2010, Addendum No. 31 formally incorporated this change
 
into RFP 2, with only minor wording differences that are not
 
relevant.
 
On June 7, 2010, Bombardier submitted its RFP Part 2
 
Proposal to the City. The proposal contained the following
 
clarification: 
2. Clarification: Reference SP 2.13(b)
 
Bombardier assumes that the City has inadvertently
excluded Contractor's indemnities from the overall cap on
liability of total Contract Value set forth in SP 2.13(b).
As expressed in the RFP, such exclusion would defeat the
purpose of the provision as it would mean effectively that
there was no overall cap on liability. Bombardier is basing
its proposal on the assumption that the following language
in SP 2.13(b) is deleted: "Contractor's indemnities set
 forth in the Contract, including but not limited to SP
 
2.14", and that the balance of the language in SP 13 [sic]
remains as is.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
After submitting the initial proposal, Bombardier
 
participated in discussions with the City. During a September
 
22, 2010 meeting, Bombardier argued that the City should amend
 
the language of SP-2.13 to eliminate the exception for
 
indemnification liability and instead have a complete cap on
 
potential liability. During a teleconference on 
October 27, 2010, the City warned Bombardier that a conditional
 
proposal could be deemed non-responsive and unacceptable.
 
After evaluating the initial proposals, the City issued
 
a call for a best and final offer (BAFO) on November 4, 2010
 
(BAFO #1). The City also issued Addendum 41, which replaced
 
SP-2.13(b), making minor wording changes but retaining the
 
language excluding indemnification claims from the liability cap.
 
On November 15, 2010, Bombardier submitted confidential
 
questions concerning the indemnification terms. Bombardier asked
 
that the SP-2.13(b) language be deleted or revised because the
 
terms were "unprecedented in [Bombardier's] significant
 
experience of global contracting in the rail industry" and "not
 
reasonable." The City declined to respond, informing Bombardier
 
that no response to confidential requests for clarifications
 
would be forthcoming.
 
On December 8, 2010, the City issued Addendum No. 44 to
 
the RFP, addressing questions regarding SP sections 2.13 and
 
2.14. The questions asked the City to consider changing the
 
language, and the City responded, "[n]o change will be made."
 
On January 18, 2011, Bombardier submitted its BAFO #1.
 
The price proposal portion contained the following language: 
2. Clarification: Reference SP-2.13(b)
 
We note that the City has excluded Contractor's indemnities
from the overall cap on liability of total Contract Value
set forth in SP 2.13(b). As expressed in Addendum #44,
Question/Response #67, such exclusion would serve to defeat
the purpose of the provision as it would mean effectively
that there was no overall cap on liability. Bombardier is
basing its proposal on the assumption that the following
language in SP 13(b) is deleted: "Contractor's indemnities
set forth in the Contract, including but not limited to SP
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2.14", and that the balance of the language in SP 13 [sic]
remains as is.
 
Before reviewing the price proposal portions of the
 
responses to the call for BAFO #1, the City decided to call for
 
another BAFO, issuing the second call on February 9, 2011 (BAFO
 
#2). On February 24, 2011, Bombardier submitted its BAFO #2. 
The price proposal portion contained the same language as that
 
contained in its BAFO #1.
 
On March 14, 2011, the City's Evaluation Committee
 
recommended the award be made to Ansaldo, and on March 21, 2011,
 
the City advised Bombardier its BAFO #2 was rejected as
 
non-responsive because it was an impermissible conditional
 
proposal that did not conform in all material respects to the
 
RFP. That same day, the City awarded the contract to Ansaldo.
 
B. Protest and Administrative Hearing
 
Bombardier protested the award to Ansaldo by a letter
 
to the City dated April 11, 2011. As grounds for the protest,
 
the letter asserted, "[a]s a result of the City's failure to
 
engage in 'meaningful discussions,' the City wrongly rejected
 
Bombardier's BAFO #2 for containing an allegedly conditional
 
term." The City, through the Deputy Director for the Department
 
of Budget and Fiscal Services, denied Bombardier's protest on
 
June 23, 2011.
 
On June 29, 2011, Bombardier appealed the denial by
 
filing its Request for Hearing with the Office of Administrative
 
Hearings (OAH) of the Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs
 
(DCCA). On July 19, 2011, the hearings officer heard oral
 
arguments and, at the conclusion, orally granted the City's
 
Motion for Summary Judgment, granted Ansaldo's Motion to Dismiss
 
for Lack of Jurisdiction or, in the Alternative, Motion for
 
Summary Judgment, and denied Bombardier's Motion for Summary
 
Judgment. The hearings officer issued the "Findings of Fact,
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Conclusions of Law and Decision" (OAH Decision) against
 
Bombardier on August 5, 2011.
 
On August 15, 2011, Bombardier filed its Notice of
 
Appeal with the circuit court. On September 16, 2011, the
 
circuit court entered its Order affirming the OAH Decision "in
 
its entirety" and entered its Judgment on September 23, 2011. On
 
October 13, 2011, Bombardier filed the instant notice of appeal
 
from the circuit court's Order and Judgment.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
"Review of a decision made by the circuit court upon 
its review of an agency's decision is a secondary appeal. In an 
appeal from a circuit court's review of an administrative 
decision the appellate court will utilize identical standards 
applied by the circuit court." Hawaii Teamsters & Allied 
Workers, Local 996 v. Dep't of Labor & Indus. Relations, 110 Hawai'i 259, 265, 132 P.3d 368, 374 (2006) (internal quotation 
marks and citations omitted). 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 103D-710(e) (Supp. 
2011) governs when reviewing the decisions of a hearings officer based upon the Hawai' i Public Procurement Code. Southern Foods 
Group., L.P. v. Dep't of Educ., 89 Hawai' i 443, 452, 974 P.2d 
1033, 1042 (1999). HRS § 103D-710(e) provides that the court may 
affirm the decision of the hearings officer issued pursuant
to section 103D-709 or remand the case with instructions for
 further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the
decision and order if substantial rights may have been
prejudiced because the administrative findings, conclusions,
decisions, or orders are:
 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions;
 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the chief procurement
officer or head of the purchasing agency;
 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure;
 
(4) Affected by other error of law;
 (5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
on the whole record; or
 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of
discretion; provided that if an application for judicial
review is not resolved by the thirtieth day from the filing
of the application, the court shall lose jurisdiction and
the decision of the hearings officer shall not be disturbed.
 
"[C]onclusions of law are reviewable under subsections
 
(1), (2), and (4); questions regarding procedural defects [are
 
reviewable] under subsection (3); findings of fact [are
 
reviewable] under subsection (5); and [the Hearings Officer's]
 
exercise of discretion [is reviewable] under subsection (6)."
 
Carl Corp. v. Dep't of Educ., 93 Hawai' i 155, 162, 997 P.2d 567, 
574 (2000) (brackets in original).
 
[A]dministrative findings of fact are reviewed under the
clearly erroneous standard, which requires [the appellate]court to sustain its findings "unless the court is left witha firm and definite conviction that a mistake has been made." Bumanglag v. Oahu Sugar Co., Ltd., 78 Hawai' i 275,
279, 892 P.2d 468, 472 (1995) (block format and citationomitted). Administrative conclusions of law, however, arereviewed under the de novo standard inasmuch as they are"not binding on an appellate court." Id. (block format and 
citation omitted). "Where both mixed questions of fact andlaw are presented, deference will be given to the agency'sexpertise and experience in the particular field and thecourt should not substitute its own judgment for that of theagency." Dole Hawaii Div.-Castle & Cooke, Inc. v. Ramil, 71
Haw. 419, 424, 794 P.2d 1115, 1118 (1990). "To be granteddeference, however, the agency's decision must be consistentwith the legislative purpose." Camara v. Agsalud, 67 Haw.
212, 216, 685 P.2d 794, 797 (1984). 
Peroutka v. Cronin, 117 Hawai' i 323, 326, 179 P.3d 1050, 1053 
(2008).
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
1. 	The circuit court erred in affirming the hearings
officer's conclusion that Bombardier's protest was
untimely.
 
The City and Ansaldo contend Bombardier's protest is
 
time-barred because it is based solely on Bombardier's dispute
 
with the RFP contents. HRS § 103D-701(a) (Supp. 2011) provides
 
that a protest as to the contents of the solicitation must be
 
raised before the date set for the receipt of offers, stating: 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(a) Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror, or
contractor who is aggrieved in connection with the
solicitation or award of a contract may protest to the chief
procurement officer or a designee as specified in the
solicitation. Except as provided in sections 103D-303 and
103D-304, a protest shall be submitted in writing within
five working days after the aggrieved person knows or should
have known of the facts giving rise thereto; . . . provided
further that no protest based upon the content of the
solicitation shall be considered unless it is submitted in
 writing prior to the date set for the receipt of offers.
 
HRS § 103D-701(a).
 
The hearings officer determined that part of
 
Bombardier's protest was to the language used in SP-2.13 of the
 
RFP and concluded, "[t]o the extent that Bombardier's protest
 
concerns the language to be used to accurately reflect what
 
Bombardier asserts is, or should be, the City's actual intent, by
 
any measure Bombardier's protest submitted on April 11, 2011 was
 
untimely under HRS § 103D-701(a)."
 
Bombardier contends its protest concerned the City's
 
actions in rejecting its proposal, not the RFP contents, and we
 
agree. In its April 11, 2011 protest letter, under a section
 
titled "SUMMARY OF REASONS FOR PROTEST OF AWARD," Bombardier
 
asserted, "[a]s a result of the City's failure to engage in
 
'meaningful discussions,' the City wrongly rejected Bombardier's
 
BAFO #2 for containing an allegedly conditional term." Nowhere
 
in the letter does Bombardier seek revision of any solicitation
 
terms. Therefore, we hold that the circuit court erred in
 
affirming the hearings officer's conclusion that Bombardier's
 
protest was untimely. Because other grounds exist for affirming
 
the circuit court's Order and Judgment, the error was harmless.
 
2. 	The circuit court correctly affirmed the hearings
officer's determination that the City satisfied
its duty to conduct meaningful discussions.
 
HRS § 103D-303(f) (Supp. 2011) states, "Discussions may
 
be conducted with responsible offerors . . . for the purpose of
 
clarification to assure full understanding of, and responsiveness
 
to, the solicitation requirements." The implementing rules
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
further provide, "'[d]iscussion' means an exchange of information
 
to promote understanding of a state agency's requirements and
 
offeror's proposal and to facilitate arriving at a contract that
 
will be the best value to the State." Hawaii Administrative
 
Rules (HAR) § 3-122-1. 
Because there is no Hawai' i case law or administrative 
decision guidance specifically addressing the methods of 
conducting discussions, Bombardier relies on the federal 
government's treatment of agency obligations. Under federal 
Comptroller General decisions, once an agency elects to conduct 
discussions, the agency must ensure the discussions are 
"meaningful": "that is, an agency is required to point out 
weaknesses or deficiencies in a proposal as specifically as 
practical considerations permit so that the agency leads the 
offeror into areas of its proposal which require amplification or 
correction." Professional Services Group, Inc., B-274289, 
B-274289.2, 97-1 CPD P 54, 1996 WL 776943 (Comp. Gen.). 
Hawai'i courts have used federal precedent to guide the 
interpretation of State laws, however, such consultation is solely to aid interpretation and only makes sense where the 
statutory language is the same or similar in all relevant 
respects. Del Monte Fresh Produce (Hawaii), Inc. v. ILWU, 112 
Hawai'i 489, 507 n.33, 146 P.3d 1066, 1084 n.33 (2006). Hawaii's 
Procurement Code was based in large part not on the federal 
regulations, but rather on the American Bar Association's Model 
Procurement Code. In re Carl Corp. v. State, Dep't of Educ., 85 
Hawai'i 431, 448, 946 P.2d 1, 18 (1997) (citing S. Stand. Comm. 
Rep. No. S8-93, in 1993 Senate Journal, at 39). An evaluation of 
the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) reveals that the FAR 
provisions regarding discussions are more detailed than the 
corresponding State law provisions. FAR § 15.306(d) specifically 
requires discussions to be tailored to each offeror's proposal 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and requires, at a minimum, that the contracting officer indicate 
to or discuss with each offeror "deficiencies, weaknesses, and 
adverse past performance information." Hawaii's Procurement Code 
and the Hawai' i Administrative Rules contain no such provisions. 
HRS § 103D-303(f); HAR § 3-122-53. 
Even under the federal decisions' requirement for
 
"meaningful" discussions, the hearings officer could reasonably
 conclude that the City satisfied this requirement based on the
 
facts of this case. In the OAH Decision, the hearings officer
 
cited to Pauli & Griffin, B-234191, 89-1 CPD P 473, 1989 WL
 
240786 (Comp. Gen.), which states that an agency's duty to
 
discuss can be satisfied where it leads the offeror into the
 
areas of its proposal requiring correction. See also Violet Dock
 
Port, Inc., B-231857, B-231857.2, 89-1 CPD P 292, 1989 WL 240511
 (Comp. Gen.). In Pauli, the agency alerted the protester of a
 
deficiency by issuing an amendment to the RFP. Pauli, 1989 WL
 
240786 at 4. The case notes that while simply amending the RFP
 does not necessarily constitute meaningful discussion, the
 
discussion was found sufficient because the protester responded
 
to the amendment by revising its documents, showing that the
 
amendment had in fact led the protester to the deficiency and
 
that the agency had imparted "sufficient information to the
 
offeror to afford it a fair and reasonable opportunity" to
 
correct. Id. at 4
 
In this case, the City issued Addenda Nos. 26, 31, 41,
 
and 44 specifically addressing questions about the
 indemnification provisions and confirming that no change would be
 
made. Bombardier revised its proposal language after these
 
amendments. The initial proposal from June 7, 2010 stated,
 
"Bombardier assumes the City has inadvertently excluded
 
Contractor's indemnities," but Bombardier's BAFO #1 and #2
 
proposals stated: "We note that the City has excluded 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Contractor's indemnities[.]" The BAFOs also specifically cited
 
Addendum No. 44. These revisions, made in response to the City's
 
addenda, show that by the time Bombardier submitted its BAFOs,
 
the City had in fact made clear to Bombardier that it intended to
 
exclude indemnities from the overall cap on liabilities and would
 
not accept any change to this provision. Although Bombardier
 
alleges the City made a misleading statement during the September
 
22, 2010 discussion about its intent regarding SP-2.13,
 
Bombardier's revision shows the City's subsequent addenda cleared
 
any misunderstanding. Additionally, section 2.3(C) of the
 
Instructions to Priority-Listed Offerors (ITPLO) that was
 
incorporated into the RFP, cautioned offerors against relying on
 
any statements other than those made in the RFP or in formal
 
written Addenda.
 
The federal decisions also recognize that 
agencies are not required to notify offerors of deficiencies
remaining in their proposals, or first appearing in a BAFO,
or to conduct successive rounds of discussions until
 omissions are corrected. Consequently, an offeror should not
anticipate a further opportunity to revise it [sic] proposal
after submission of a BAFO
.
 
Violet Dock Port
, 1989 WL 240511 at 6 (citation omitted). 
Likewise, HAR § 3-122-54 is clear that "[b]est and final offers
 
shall be submitted only once," and "no discussion of or changes
 
in the best and final offers shall be allowed prior to award"
 
unless the agency "determines in writing that it is in the
 
State's best interest to conduct additional discussions or change
 
the State's requirements by an addendum distributed only to
 
priority-listed offerors and require another submission of best
 
and final offers."
 
Here, the City issued the four addenda before
 
Bombardier submitted its BAFO #1. Bombardier should not have
 
anticipated a further opportunity to revise after submitting its
 
BAFOs. To the extent that Bombardier's BAFOs #1 and #2 remained 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conditioned on deleting language from SP-2.13, even after the
 
City repeatedly reiterated its intent to make no changes to 
SP-2.13, we can only attribute it to Bombardier's unwillingness
 
to accept uncapped indemnification liability. Although it may
 
have been preferable if the City had provided Bombardier with a
 
letter demanding elimination of the unacceptable language, as
 
Bombardier suggests, nothing in the Procurement Code or the
 
implementing rules mandates issuance of such a demand, and we
 
cannot regard as unreasonable the City's apparent assessment that
 
its duty to conduct discussions was satisfied and that further
 
affirmative efforts to alert Bombardier were not required. 
Bombardier also contends the hearings officer failed to
 
satisfy the affirmative duty under HRS § 103D-709 (Supp. 2011) to
 
ensure that the City's actions conformed to the RFP solicitation.
 
Section 6.3 of the RFP states that the purpose of discussions
 
include "A) Advising the Priority-Listed Offerors of Weaknesses,
 
significant Weaknesses and/or Deficiencies in their
 
Proposals . . . [and/or] C) Resolving any suspected mistakes by
 
calling them to the attention of the Priority-Listed Offerors as
 
specifically as possible[.]" It is true that the hearings
 
officer made no mention of this RFP provision in the OAH
 
Decision. Nevertheless, RFP section 6.3 closely mirrors the
 
language of federal decisions and rules on the "meaningful
 
discussions" requirement. FAR § 15.306(d)(3) ("At a minimum, the
 
contracting officer must . . . indicate to, or discuss with, each
 
offeror still being considered for award, deficiencies,
 
significant weaknesses, and adverse past performance
 
information[.]"); Professional Services Group, 1996 WL 776943 at
 
2 ("[A]n agency is required to point out weaknesses or
 deficiencies in a proposal as specifically as practical
 
considerations permit[.]"). Not only did the City satisfy
 
standards under federal law that are more stringent than Hawaii's
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Procurement Code, the City satisfied its duty under the RFP terms
 
as well. 
3. 	The circuit court correctly affirmed the hearings
officer's determination that Bombardier's
 proposal was properly rejected as conditional.
 
HAR § 3-122-6 states, "[a]ny offer which is conditioned
 
upon receiving a contract other than as provided for in the
 
solicitation shall be deemed nonresponsive and not acceptable." 
HAR § 3-122-97 states in pertinent part: "(2) A proposal shall be
 
rejected for reasons including but not limited to: (B) The
 
proposal, after any opportunity has passed for modification or
 
clarification, fails to meet the announced requirements of the
 
agency in some material respect[.]" Section 2.5 of the ITPLO
 
states, 
Proposals may be considered non-responsive and may be
rejected for, but not limited to, any of the following
reasons: A) . . . [I]f any part thereof is deleted from the
Proposal; B) If the Proposal is illegible or contains any
omission, erasures, alterations, or items not called for in
the Call for BAFOs or contains unauthorized additions,
conditional Proposals, or other unacceptable
irregularities[.]
 
As a preliminary matter, the City and Ansaldo's 
contention that Bombardier's argument based on HAR § 3-122-97 was
 
not raised in its protest and thus should be rejected for lack of
 
jurisdiction is unavailing. In its protest letter, Bombardier
 
argued the City's discussions "must ensure competitors are
 
specifically informed of material defects in their proposals and
 
must be given an opportunity to correct the deficiency." 
Although the protest letter did not specifically cite to
 
HAR § 3-122-97, Bombardier's argument under HAR § 3-122-97
 
centers on this "opportunity to correct" concept. Therefore, the
 
protest letter gave the City and Ansaldo clear notice of
 
Bombardier's argument. "It is not necessary to plead under what
 
particular law the recovery is sought." Hall v. Kim, 53 Haw.
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
215, 221, 491 P.2d 541, 545 (1971) (internal quotation marks and
 
citations omitted).
 
The Evaluation Committee unanimously decided
 
Bombardier's BAFO #2 was non-responsive because it did not
 
conform in all material respects to the RFP and because the
 
proposal was conditional, in violation of HAR § 3-122-6 and the
 
ITPLO. The hearings officer also found Bombardier's proposal
 
non-responsive and conditional. As discussed above, the record
 
shows Bombardier's initial proposal and its BAFOs #1 and #2 were
 
conditioned on deleting language from SP-2.13, and therefore, we
 
conclude the circuit court did not err in affirming the hearing
 
officer's finding that the proposal was conditional.
 
At the DCCA hearing, Bombardier conceded the City
 
cannot accept a conditional proposal, stating, "[w]e agree no
 
Government agency may accept a conditional proposal. The
 
question is what do they do when they get a conditional
 
proposal?" Bombardier contends that even if its proposal was
 
conditional, it could be rejected only after the City has
 
conducted meaningful discussions regarding the alleged
 
conditional language and "after any opportunity has passed for
 
modification or clarification." HAR § 3-122-97(b)(2)(B). As
 
discussed above, we conclude the City satisfied its duty by
 
issuing multiple addenda before the BAFO #1 submission deadline,
 
putting Bombardier on notice that it risked rejection if it
 
insisted on deleting or changing the RFP language. Moreover, we
 
agree with the hearings officer's determination that Bombardier
 
had substantial opportunity to modify or clarify its proposal in
 
the time between submitting its initial response, participating
 
in discussions and submitting questions to the City, and
 
submitting BAFOs #1 and #2. In fact, Bombardier did modify BAFOs
 
#1 and #2 to incorporate a reference to Addendum No. 44, but it
 
chose to retain the language conditioning its proposal on the 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
City deleting language from SP-2.13. It was reasonable for the
 
City to decide not to conduct additional discussions or permit
 
revision of the indemnification provisions at that point. 
Therefore, rejecting Bombardier's proposal as a conditional
 
proposal was proper.
 
4. 	The circuit court correctly affirmed the hearings
officer's conclusion that Bombardier's
 protest arguments would undermine the integrity
of the procurement process.
 
Bombardier also challenges the hearings officer's
 
conclusion that Bombardier's protest would "undermine the
 
integrity of the procurement process" because it would allow
 
Bombardier to "submit a [lower priced] conditional proposal, find
 
out the prices of the other offerors, and then decide if it
 
wanted to waive its objection to the language in SP-2.13 or
 
negotiate a change . . . to obtain award." Bombardier argues it
 
learned of the competing prices only because the City mishandled
 
the procurement by disclosing prices with the notice of contract
 
award and on the same day the City informed Bombardier it was
 
rejecting Bombardier's BAFO #2. Bombardier contends the City
 
should have instead issued a written, time-limited demand to
 
Bombardier for correction of the alleged conditional proposal
 
before rejection and maintained confidentiality of proposal
 
pricing until the time had passed for Bombardier to take
 
corrective action.
 
As discussed above, the City had no obligation to issue
 
such a written, time-limited demand, in light of its other
 
communications with Bombardier. Furthermore, Hawaii's
 
Procurement Code generally prohibits modification of a BAFO after
 
the deadline for receipt. HAR § 3-122-54. Because Bombardier
 
was not permitted to modify its BAFO at that point, it was not
 
inappropriate for the City to release the prices at the same time
 
it released the award and the rejection to Bombardier. Allowing 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Bombardier to modify its proposal after the City had disclosed
 
the pricing information would raise risks of unfairness, as
 
Bombardier itself acknowledges.
 
As Bombardier notes, our determination in this appeal 
"must be guided by the purposes underlying the Procurement Code." 
Arakaki v. Dep't of Accounting and General Serv., 87 Hawai' i 147, 
150, 952 P.2d 1210, 1213 (1998). The Hawai' i Supreme Court 
explained the purpose of the Procurement Code is to: "(1) Provide 
for fair and equitable treatment[;] (2) [f]oster broad-based 
competition among vendors while ensuring accountability, fiscal 
responsibility, and efficiency in the procurement process; and 
(3) [i]ncrease public confidence in the integrity of the system." 
Carl Corp., 85 Hawai' i at 456, 946 P.2d at 26 (citing S. Stand. 
Comm. Rep. No. S8-93, in 1993 Senate Journal, at 39). Bombardier contends the procedure the City followed in this case fails to 
protect the public interest. 
We believe the hearings officer properly considered the 
legislative purpose in his decision. While competition is an 
important interest and may have been further promoted by allowing 
Bombardier another opportunity to withdraw its language, ensuring 
efficiency and accountability in the procurement process are 
equally important. In his decision, the hearings officer 
considered the City's efforts and determined they were more than 
sufficient to ensure competition and compliance by large 
sophisticated business entities such as Bombardier. According 
deference to the decision of an administrative body acting within 
its sphere of expertise, see Southern Foods Group, 89 Hawai' i at 
453, 974 P.2d at 1043, we conclude the circuit court did not err in affirming the OAH Decision against Bombardier. 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The September 23, 2011 Judgment and September 16, 2011 
"Order Denying Bombardier Transportation (Holdings) USA, Inc's
 
Appeal And Affirming The August 5, 2011 Findings Of Fact,
 
Conclusions Of Law, And Decision Of The Department Of Commerce
 
and Consumer Affairs Office of Administrative Hearings," both
 
entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit are affirmed.
 
On the briefs:
 
Terry E. Thomason
Corianne W. Lau
 Jessica Wong Lavarias
(Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing)
for Plaintiff-Appellant
Bombardier Transportation
(Holdings) USA, Inc.
 
David J. Minkin
 
Kenneth J. Mansfield
 Laura S. Lucas
 (McCorriston Miller
Mukai MacKinnon)
for Defendant-Appellee
Ansaldo Honolulu JV.
 
Bert T. Kobayashi, Jr.
Joseph A. Stewart
Jonathan S. Moore
 Michael F. Albanese
 (Kobayashi, Sugita & Goda)
Special Deputies Corporation Counsel
and 
Amy R. Kondo
Nicole R. Chapman
Deputies Corporation Counsel
City and County of Honolulu
for Defendant-Appellee
Director, Department of Budget and
Fiscal Services, City and
County of Honolulu.
 
17
 