NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000425 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CENTRAL PACIFIC BANK,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
WILLIAM HALEMANO FREDERICK, MARY KATHERINE FREDERICK,
Defendants-Appellants
and
 
SEA COUNTRY COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION,
Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-50, JANE DOES 1-50, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50,
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50, DOE "NON-PROFIT" CORPORATIONS 1-50,
AND DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50,
Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-2199-10)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants William Halemano Frederick and
 
Mary Katherine Frederick (together, the Fredericks) appeal from
 
the "Findings of Fact; Conclusions of Law; Order Granting
 
Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment on All Claims and Against
 Defendants (1) William Halemano Frederick, (2) Mary Katherine
 Frederick, and (3) Sea Country Community Association;
 Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure and Order of Sale Filed
 January 9, 2015" entered on April 30, 2015 in the Circuit Court
 
1
of the First Circuit  (circuit court).
 
1
 The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, the Fredericks contend the circuit court
 
erred in granting summary judgment for Plaintiff-Appellee Central
 
Pacific Bank (CPB) because there were genuine issues of material
 
fact to be resolved and the declaration submitted in support of
 
CPB was inadmissible under Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rules
 
602 (1993) and 803(b)(6) (Supp. 2015).2
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
2
 The Fredericks' opening brief fails to comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b), which provides: 
Rule 28. BRIEFS.
 
. . . .
 
(b) Opening brief. Within 40 days after the filing of
the record on appeal, the appellant shall file an opening
brief, containing the following sections in the order here
indicated:
 
. . . .
 
(3) A concise statement of the case, setting forth the
nature of the case, the course and disposition of
proceedings in the court or agency appealed from, and the
facts material to consideration of the questions and points
presented, with record references supporting each statement
of fact or mention of court or agency proceedings. In
 presenting those material facts, all supporting and
contradictory evidence shall be presented in a summary
fashion, with appropriate record references. Record
 references shall include page citations and the volume
number, if applicable. References to transcripts shall
include the date of the transcript, the specific page or
pages referred to, and the volume number, if applicable.
Lengthy quotations from the record may be reproduced in the
appendix. There shall be appended to the brief a copy of
the judgment, decree, findings of fact and conclusions of
law, order, opinion or decision relevant to any point on
appeal, unless otherwise ordered by the court.
 
(4) A concise statement of the points of error set
forth in separately numbered paragraphs. Each point shall
state: (i) the alleged error committed by the court or
agency; (ii) where in the record the alleged error occurred;
and (iii) where in the record the alleged error was objected
to or the manner in which the alleged error was brought to
the attention of the court or agency. . . .
 
. . . .
 
(7) The argument, containing the contentions of the
appellant on the points presented and the reasons therefor,
with citations to the authorities, statutes and parts of the
record relied on. The argument may be preceded by a concise
summary. Points not argued may be deemed waived. 
(Emphases added.) The Fredericks' counsel is warned that future violations of
 HRAP Rule 28 may result in sanctions.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude the
 Fredericks' appeal is without merit.

I.	 CPB's Standing to Foreclose on the Note
 
The Fredericks argue that the circuit court erred in
granting summary judgment in favor of CPB because there was
 evidence that the Note was not owned by CPB, precluding CPB from
 establishing it had standing to foreclose on the property. In
 support of their Opposition to CPB's motion for summary judgment,
 the Fredericks rely on the Affidavit submitted by Michael
 Carrigan, a "Certified Mortgage Securitization Auditor/Bloomberg
 Specialist,", which states:
 

 
7.	 The loan was not identified in any publically
reporting trust. Freddie Mac currently claims
ownership of the loan. Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation (a/k/a Freddie Mac) is stated on the
Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc. web
site as "Investor", and is an indication of past or
current purported ownership interest by Freddie Mac.
A qualifying trust formed shortly after the execution
of the loan on January 28, 2008 is the FREDDIE MAC
MULTICLASS CERTIFICATES, SERIES 3423 with a closing
date of March 28, 2008. The underwriter is Bear
 Stearns & Co. Inc. and the Sponsor and Trustee is
Freddie Mac.
 
"In order to enforce a note and mortgage under Hawaii
 
law, a creditor must be 'a person entitled to enforce' the note. 
One person entitled to enforce an instrument is a 'holder' of the
 instrument. A 'holder' is the 'person in possession of a
 negotiable instrument.'" 
U.S. Bank N.A. v. Mattos , 137 Hawai 'i 
209, 211, 367 P.3d 703, 705 (App. 2016) (quoting In re Tyrell,
 528 B.R. 790, 794 (Bankr. D. Haw. 2015) (citing Hawaii Revised
 
3
Statutes (HRS) § 490:3-301 (2008)  and HRS § 490:1-201(b)
3
 HRS § 490:3-301 provides:
 
§490:3-301 Person entitled to enforce instrument.
 
"Person entitled to enforce" an instrument means (i) the
holder of the instrument, (ii) a nonholder in possession of
the instrument who has the rights of a holder, or (iii) a
person not in possession of the instrument who is entitled
to enforce the instrument pursuant to section 490:3-309 or
490:3-418(d). A person may be a person entitled to enforce
the instrument even though the person is not the owner of
the instrument or is in wrongful possession of the
instrument.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4
(2008) )).
The Note states that the lender, Central Pacific
 
Homeloans, Inc. (Central Pacific), "may transfer this Note. The
 
Lender or anyone who takes this Note by transfer and who is
 
entitled to receive payments under this Note is called the 'Note
 Holder.'" The Note authorizes the Note Holder the same rights
 under the Mortgage. The Mortgage allows the lender, Central
 Pacific, upon a default by the borrower, the Fredericks, to
 invoke the power of sale and other remedies upon notice to the
 borrower. The affidavit of Damon Stanford (Stanford Affidavit),
 
the "Assistant Vice President and Manager of Investor Mortgage
 
Servicing of [CPB]," states, "CPB is the holder of the Note and
 is the record mortgagee of the Mortgage[.]" As the Note Holder,
 CPB is therefore authorized to invoke the power of sale under the
 terms of the Note and Mortgage.
 
The Fredericks have not pointed to evidence that calls
 
into question whether CPB was the holder of the Note. See HRS
 
§ 490:1-201 ("'Holder' means . . . [t]he person in possession of
 a negotiable instrument that is payable either to bearer or to an
 identified person that is the person in possession[.]"). The
 Fredericks have failed to demonstrate that there was a genuine
 
4
 HRS § 490:1-201 provides, in pertinent part:
 
§490:1-201 General definitions 
. . . .
 (b) Subject to definitions contained in other articles
of this chapter that apply to particular articles or parts
thereof:
 
. . . .
 
"Holder" means:
 (1)	 The person in possession of a negotiable
instrument that is payable either to bearer or
to an identified person that is the person in
possession;
 
(2)	 The person in possession of a negotiable
tangible document of title if the goods are
deliverable either to bearer or to the order of
 the person in possession; or
 
(3)	 The person in control of a negotiable electronic
document of title.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
issue of material fact warranting reversal. See Bank of America
 
N.A. v. Hill, No. CAAP-13-0000035 at *5 (App. Oct. 30, 2015)
 
(mem.) ("Hill failed to present evidence to contradict Bank of
 America's showing that it was holder of the note and, therefore,
 did not raise a genuine issue of material fact.").
II. Admissibility of Stanford Affidavit
 
The Fredericks contend the Stanford Affidavit submitted
 
in support of CPB's motion for summary judgment is based on
 
inadmissible hearsay and is not based on his personal knowledge.
 The Fredericks argue, "Everything [in the Stanford Affidavit] is
 based on a review of records, and there is no indication that
 [Stanford] had any part in the making or keeping of the records,
 knows or took part in how they are made and or knows how they are
 produced."
 
Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 56(e) states, 
"Supporting and opposing affidavits shall be made on personal knowledge, shall set forth facts as would be admissible in evidence, and shall show affirmatively that the affiant is competent to testify to the matters stated therein." The Fredericks contend the Stanford Affidavit is inadmissible under 
5 6
HRE Rule 602  and Rule 803(b)(6) .
 
5
 HRE Rule 602 provides:
 
Rule 602 Lack of personal knowledge. A witness may
not testify to a matter unless evidence is introduced
sufficient to support a finding that the witness has
personal knowledge of the matter. Evidence to prove
personal knowledge may, but need not, consist of the
witness' own testimony. This rule is subject to the
provisions of rule 703, relating to opinion testimony by
expert witnesses.
6
 HRE Rule 803 provides, in pertinent part:
 
Rule 803 Hearsay exceptions; availability of
declarant immaterial.  The following are not excluded by the
hearsay rule, even though the declarant is available as a
witness:
 
. . . .
 
(b) Other exceptions.
 . . . .
 (6) Records of regularly conducted activity. A
 
memorandum, report, record, or data compilation,
(continued...)
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In his declaration, Stanford states:
 
1. I am an Assistant Vice President and Manager of
Investor Mortgage Servicing of [CPB]; I am authorized to
make this declaration in support of [CPB's] Motion for
Summary Judgment . . . and I have personal knowledge of the
matters stated herein.
 
2. I am one of the custodians of records made and
 
kept in the normal course of the business of [CPB] regarding
[the Fredericks].
 
The Stanford Affidavit explicitly states it is based on personal
 
knowledge, and the Fredericks' argument that it lacks personal
 knowledge under HRE Rule 602 is without merit. 
We construe the Fredericks' HRE Rule 803(b)(6) argument
 
to be that the Stanford Affidavit is based on inadmissible
 
7
hearsay under HRE Rule 802 (1993),  which bars the admission of
hearsay, and that the Stanford Affidavit does not otherwise fit
 within the exception provided under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) for
 "[r]ecords of regularly conducted activity." We also presume
 that the Fredericks argue that "the sources of information or
 other circumstances indicate lack of trustworthiness" because
 they have bolded that portion of HRE Rule 803(b)(6) in their
 opening brief. The Fredericks' argument that the documents
 attached to the affidavit lack trustworthiness is not supported
 by any citation to the record that would support their claim, and
 is also without merit.
 
Therefore,

 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Findings of Fact;
 
Conclusions of Law; Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary
 Judgment on All Claims and Against Defendants (1) William
 
6(...continued)
 
in any form, of acts, events, conditions,
opinions, or diagnoses, made in the course of a
regularly conducted activity, at or near the
time of the acts, events, conditions, opinions,
or diagnoses, as shown by the testimony of the
custodian or other qualified witness, or by
certification that complies with rule 902(1) or
a statute permitting certification, unless the
sources of information or other circumstances
 indicate lack of trustworthiness.
7
 HRE Rule 802 provides:
 
Rule 802 Hearsay rule. Hearsay is not admissible except
as provided by these rules, or by other rules prescribed by
the Hawaii supreme court, or by statute.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Halemano Frederick, (2) Mary Katherine Frederick, and (3) Sea
 
Country Community Association; Interlocutory Decree of
 Foreclosure and Order of Sale Filed January 9, 2015" entered on
 April 30, 2015 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 9, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Andrea L. Heckler
 
for Defendants-Appellants.
 
Presiding Judge

Mitzi A. Lee
 for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge

 
Associate Judge
 
7
 