 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000571 22-JAN-2025 07:54 AM Dkt. 108 SO 
NO. CAAP-21-0000571  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
DUKE KAHANAMOKU PAOA, CHRISTIAN K.L. CHING, JR.,  
BRYAN JEREMIAH, MARK K. KAHAPEA, ROBERT E. LUECKE, MICHAEL AH 
WUEN LOW, JOHN DOE 1, and JOHN DOE 2, Plaintiffs-Appellees,   
v.
  
TRUSTEES OF THE ESTATE OF BERNICE PAUAHI BISHOP DBA KAMEHAMEHA 
SCHOOLS, JENNIFER NOELANI GOODYEAR-KA‘ ŌPUA, in her capacity as 
Trustee of the Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop d.b.a. Kamehameha 
Schools, ROBERT K.W.H. NOBRIGA, in his capacity as Trustee of 
the Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop d.b.a. Kamehameha Schools, 
ELLIOT KAWAIHO‘ OLANA MILLS, in his capacity as Trustee of the 
Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop d.b.a. Kamehameha Schools,  
MICHELLE KA‘ UHANE, in her capacity as Trustee of the Estate of 
Bernice Pauahi Bishop d.b.a. Kamehameha Schools, and CRYSTAL 
KAUILANI ROSE, in her capacity as Trustee of the Estate of 
Bernice Pauahi Bishop d.b.a. Kamehameha Schools,    
Defendants/Third-Party Plaintiffs-Appellants ,  
 
ESTATE OF ROBERT MCCORMICK BROWNE, Deceased, Third-Party 
Defendant/Cross-claim Defendant-Appellee,  
and  1 
1 Pursuant to Hawaii Rules of Evidence Rule 201 and Hawai‘i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure Rule 43(c)(1), we take judicial notice that Jennifer 
Noelani Goodyear -Ka‘ōpua and Michelle Ka‘uhane are current Trustees of the 
Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop and are automatically substituted as 
Defendants/ Third-Party Plaintiffs -Appellants in place of Micah A lika Kane and 
Lance Keawe Wilhelm.   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
     
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ST. FRANCIS MEDICAL CENTER f/k/a ST. FRANCIS HOSPITAL, Inc., 
Third-Party Defendant/Cross -claimant/Counterclaimant -Appellee, 
and 
ST. FRANCIS HEALTHCARE SYSTEM OF HAWAII, 
Third-Party Defendant -Appellee, 
and 
JOHN DOES 1 -10, DOE CORPORATIONS 1 -10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1 -10 and 
DOE NON-PROFIT ENTITIES 1 -10, Third -Party Defendants, DOE CROSS -
CLAIM DEFENDANTS 1 -10, Cross -claim Defendants, DOE COUNTERCLAIM 
DEFENDANTS 1 -10, Counterclaim Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 1CCV-20-0000617)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Nakasone, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.)  
This appeal arises out of a settlement between Third-
Party Defendant/Cross -claimant/Counterclaimant -Appellee St. 
Francis Medical Center , Third-Party Defendant -Appellee St. 
Francis Healthcare System of Hawaii,2 and Plaintiffs -Appellees 
Duke Kahanamoku Paoa, Christian K.L. Ching, Jr., Bryan Jeremiah, 
Mark K. Kahapea, Robert E. Luecke, Michael Ah Wuen Low, John 
Doe 1, and John Doe 2 ( Plaintiffs ). Defendant s/Third-Party 
Plaintiff s-Appellant s Trustees of the Estate of Bernice Pauahi 
Bishop, dba Kamehameha Schools ( Kamehameha Schools ) appeal from 
the "Order Granting St. Francis Medical Center's Petition for 
Determination of Good Faith Settlement and St. Francis 
Healthcare System of Hawaii's Substantive Joinder" (Order), 
2 St. Francis Medical Center and S t. Francis Healthcare System of 
Hawaii are separate entities, and are represented by separate counsel in this 
litigation. They are referenced individually as St. Francis Medical Center 
and St. Francis Healthcare System of Hawaii , and collectively as St. Francis , 
in this Summary Disposition Order. 
2   
 
 
    
    
  
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
   
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
entered on October 1 , 2021, by the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit, (circuit court).3 
I. BACKGROUND 
Plaintiffs identified Dr. Robert McCormick Browne ( Dr. 
Browne), formerly employed as Chief of Psychiatry at St. 
Francis, as having sexually abused them as children. Plaintiffs 
allege that this abuse collectively occurred between 1972 and 
1981, and that they were abused at the time they were students 
at Kamehameha Schools. In April 2020, Plaintiffs filed their 
Complaint against Kamehameha Schools, pursuant to Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 657-1.8 (2016 & Supp. 2018 ), which permits 
certain actions "for recovery of damages based on physical, 
psychological, or other injury or condition suffered by a minor 
arising from the sexual abuse of the minor by any person" that 
would otherwise be time -barred. 
Plaintiffs' Complaint, as amended in November 2020,4 
alleged the following claims against Kamehameha Schools : sexual 
assault and battery; breach of fiduciary duty; gross negligence; 
intentional infliction of emotional distress; grossly negligent 
infliction of emotional distress; grossly negligent or reckless 
3 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided. 
4 The declaration of Plaintiffs' counsel represents that Plaintiffs 
agreed not to name St. Francis in their Complaint , in exchange for a tolling 
of the applicable statute of limitations while Plaintiffs and St. Francis 
engaged in a mediated settlement process before the initiation of formal 
litigation against St. Francis . 
3   
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
referral, selection, training, retention, and/or supervision of 
Dr. Browne; and punitive damages. 
Kamehameha Schools filed a third -party complaint 
against St. Francis and the Estate of Dr. Browne5 in December 
2020. And in January 2021, St. Francis Medical Center filed a 
cross-claim against the Estate of Dr. Browne and a counterclaim 
against Kamehameha Schools . 
Plaintiffs and St. Francis began formal mediation with 
mediator Keith Hunter in January 2021. Kamehameha Schools 
declined to participate in the mediation. On January 29, 2021, 
Plaintiffs and St. Francis agreed to a settlement of Plaintiffs' 
individual and collective claims. The terms of the settlement 
are memorialized in the Confidential Release, Indemnity , and 
Settlement Agreement ( Settlement ). The Settlement set s forth 
the amount of monetary consideration to be paid by St. Francis 
Medical Center and St. Francis Healthcare System of Hawaii , and 
the specific a pportionment of that payment to each Plaintiff . 
The Settlement provided that the agreed -upon monetary payment 
constituted consideration for the release of Plaintiffs' past, 
present and future claims against St. Francis arising out of 
this litigation. 
5 Dr. Browne is deceased. His Estate is a nominal Third -Party 
Defendant /Cross-claim Defendant -Appellee in this appeal. 
4   
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
      
           
         
           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In March 2021, St. Francis  Medical Center  filed a 
Petition for Determination of Good Faith Settlement ( Petition ). 
St. Francis  Healthcare System  of Hawaii  and Plaintiffs  filed 
joinders to  the Petition. The circuit court heard the Petition 
in July 2021, and subsequently filed its Order granting the 
Petition  in part.  
Kamehameha Schools appeal ed. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Kamehameha Schools raises two points of error on 
appeal, contending that the circuit court erred by: (1) 
determining the Settlement was in good faith; and (2) concluding 
that the good faith settlement bars all of Kamehameha School s' 
third-party claims under HRS § 663 -15.5 (2016). 
Upon careful review of the record and relevant legal 
authorities , and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve 
Kamehameha Schools ' contentions as follows : 
(1) Kamehameha Schools contends that the circuit 
court's finding of a good faith settlement is contrary to each 
of the factors specifically enumerated in Troyer v. Adams, 
102 Hawaiʻi 399, 427, 77 P.3d 83, 111 (2003). 
"[T]he determination of whether a settlement is in 
good faith [is left] to the sound discretion of the trial court 
in light of the totality of the circumstances surrounding the 
5   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
settlement. . . .   On appeal, the trial court's determination 
will be reviewed for abuse of discretion." Brooks  v.  Dana  Nance  
&  Co., 113 Hawaiʻi 406, 412, 153 P.3d 1091, 1097 (2007) (citation 
omitted).  "An appellate court should consider the decision in  
light  of  all  of  the  relevant  circumstances  extant  at  the  time  of  
settlement."   Id.  (cleaned  up).  
In assessing the totality of the circumstances, 
the trial court may consider the following factors to the 
extent that they are known at the time of settlement:  
(1) the type of case and difficulty of proof at trial .  .  .; (2) the realistic approximation of total damages 
that the plaintiff seeks; (3) the strength of the 
plaintiff's claim and the realistic likelihood of his or 
her success at trial; (4) the predicted expense of 
litigation; (5) the relative degree of fault of the 
settling tortfeasors; (6) the amount of consideration paid to settle the claims; (7) the insurance policy limits and 
solvency of the joint tortfeasors; (8) the relationship 
among the parties and whether it is conducive to collusion 
or wrongful conduct; and (9) any other evidence that the 
settlement is aimed at injuring the interests of a non -
settling tortfeasor or motivated by other wrongful  purpose.  
Id.  at  413, 153 P.3d at  1098 (citing Troyer, 102 Hawaiʻi at 427, 
77 P.3d at 111). "The foregoing list is not exclusive, and the 
court may consider any other factor that is relevant to whether 
a settlement has been given in good faith." Id.  (citation 
omitted).  
In approving the Petition, the circuit court explained 
its reasoning as follows , 
 So there are a number of factors that the Court 
must consider in determining whether or not a settlement is 
or is not entered into in good faith.  
6   But what the appellate court told the trial 
courts is to look at the totality of circumstances, look at 
the big picture, and make a call whether the settlement is   
 
 
  
 
  And when this Court looks to the record, the 
Court is not able to find any fraud or collusion upon any 
other party or upon the Court.  
 
  Then the Court looks at all of the other 
factors that bear upon the question of whether or not the settlement is made in good faith. And it is the abiding finding and conclusion of this Court that the subject 
settlement is made in good faith.  
 
  So for these and any other good cause showing, 
the Court finds and concludes that the subject settlement 
is not the product of any collusion, is not the product of 
any fraud, and that is both against any party or the Court.  
 
  The Court does believe that the amount of the 
consideration being paid in this case is fair when 
considering all of the factors. That includes insurance 
coverage issues of significant magnitude as well as proof 
issues.  
 
  And the Court is not discounting the notice 
issues raised by Kamehameha Schools. In fact, the Court is 
giving that great consideration. But that is one element 
of notice. And there are other elements in order to 
establish liability.  
 
  And this Court is not making a –- a conclusion 
that St. Francis has no liability. Quite the contrary, I 
think there is exposure to liability. And the amount of 
the settlement is a fair amount when all things are 
considered as well as the potential liability as to the plaintiffs' claims against Kamehameha Schools.  
 
  So it is quite a delicate balancing test. It 
is a balance of factors that in this Court's estimation operates in favor of the petition.  
 
  This Court finds and concludes that the subject 
settlement was made in good faith, and the Court makes that 
determination after looking at the totality of 
circumstances and applying this Court's experience with 
civil matters, particularly in view of cases that involve 
alleged sexual abuse of children.  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or is not fair and made in good faith. Look for indicia of 
fraud or indicia of collusion, which would destroy the good 
faith nature of any settlement agreement. 
The record reflects that the circuit court took into 
consideration the totality of circumstances underlying the  
Settlement, including, inter alia, consideration of the monetary 
7   
 
 
          
          
            
        
           
           
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
value of the Settlement, Plaintiffs' claims of alleged child 
sexual abuse, and St. Francis' potential liability.   It is also 
clear that the Plaintiffs and St. Francis, through the assistance of a neutral mediator, entered into the Settlement in 
an effort to avoid additional litigation, such that the 
Plaintiffs could achieve resolution of their claims against St. 
Francis, and St. Francis could "buy their peace." Troyer, 
102  
Hawaiʻi at 427, 77 P.3d at 111; see also  Island Helicopters-
Kauai, Inc. v. Tesoro Haw.  Corp.,  No. 30736, 2012 WL 503799, at 
*4 (Haw. App. Feb. 13, 2012) (mem. op.).  
Thus, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion 
by determining , in its consideration of the Troyer factors "to 
the extent that they [were] known at the time of settlement" and 
the totality of circumstances, that the Settlement between 
Plaintiffs and St. Francis was entered into in good faith. 
Troyer, 102 Hawaiʻi at 427, 77 P.3d at 111. 
(2) Kamehameha Schools further contends that the 
circuit court erred in concluding that the Settlement bars all 
of Kamehameha Schools ' third-party claims6 under HRS § 663 -15.5. 
(continued . . .) 
8 6   Kamehameha Schools '  third-party complaint  asserts claims  against 
St. Francis Medical Center for:  breach of contract, negligence, 
indemnification, contribution and/or equitable subrogation, a Uyemura v. Wick  
claim for attorneys'  fees  pursuant to Uyemura v. Wick, 57 Haw. 102, 551 P.2d 
171 (1976), intentional fraudulent transfer, constructive fraudulent  
transfer, and piercing the corporate veil. The third- party complaint also 
asserts claims against St. Francis Healthcare System of Hawaii for :  
intentional fraudulent transfer, constructive fraudulent transfer, and 
piercing the corporate veil .      
 
 
  
 
  
       
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We review the circuit court's conclusions  of law de novo , under 
the right/wrong standard. State v. Hoshijo  ex rel. White, 
102  Hawaiʻi 307, 316, 76  P.3d 550, 559  (2003).  
HRS § 663 -15.5, entitled "Release; joint tortfeasors; 
co-obligors; good faith settlement" provides, in pertinent part, 
(d) A determination by the court that a settlement 
was made in good faith shall: 
(1) Bar any other joint tortfeasor . . . from any 
further claims against the settling tortfeasor 
. . . except those based on a written indemnity 
agreement; and 
(2) Result in a dismissal of all cross -claims filed 
against the settling joint tortfeasor . . . 
except those based on a written indemnity 
agreement. 
Contrary to Kamehameha Schools' contention, the 
circuit court did not authorize the blanket dismissal of all 
claims – and the barring of all future claims grounded on any 
alleged independent duties owed to Kamehameha Schools – against 
St. Francis. Rather, the circuit court ruled that it was 
dismissing Kamehameha Schools' third -party claims against St. 
Francis, and barring any further claims against St. Francis that 
are in connection with this litigation. The circuit court 's 
Order explained, 
2. The Court denies the dismissal of all claims 
against St. Francis Medical Center and St. Francis 
Healthcare System of Hawaii as HRS Section 663 -15.5 does 
not authorize the dismissal of all claims against settling 
6(. . .continued) 
On appeal, Kamehameha Schools argues that the following claims against 
St. Francis Medical Center were erroneously dismissed: breach of contract, 
negligence, indemnity, contribution and/or equitable subrogation, and the 
Uyemura v. Wick claim. 
9   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defendants. However, the Court does find that HRS Section 
663-15.5(d)(2) does authorize a dismissal of cross -claims. 
Therefore, the third -party complaint, as against St. 
Francis Medical Center and St. Francis Healthcare System of 
Hawaii [Dkt. 14 at ¶¶ 11 -29], is hereby dismissed pursuant 
to HRS Section 663 -15.5(d)(2) , since cross -claims under the 
statute are likened to the third -party claims in this case. 
3.  The Court denies the request to discharge St. 
Francis Medical Center and St. Francis Healthcare System of 
Hawaiʻi  [sic]  from all liability to any otherjoint [sic] 
tortfeasor and/or co -obligor.   That request is somewhat 
broad. Instead,  the Court will grant the discharge of St. 
Francis Medical Center and St. Francis Healthcare System of 
Hawaii from all liability for contribution to any other joint tortfeasor or co -obligor.  
4. The Court denies the request to bar any future 
claims. Instead, the Court will issue an order barring any 
other joint tortfeasor or co -obligor from bringing any 
further claims against St. Francis Medical Center and St. 
Francis Healthcare System of Hawaii in connection with this 
litigation. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Thus,  the circuit court's dismissal of Kamehameha  
Schools'  third-party complaint,  and  its  "barring. . .  any  
further  claims against [St. Francis] in connection with this 
litigation,"  is consistent with the underlying purpose of HRS 
§  663-15.5 of protecting settling tortfeasors from  contribution 
claims brought by  nonsettling alleged joint tortfeasors.     7
As this court recently recognized in Abad v. Griffith , 
Reading all parts of HRS § 663 -15.5 together, we conclude 
the trial court's approval of a good faith settlement under 
HRS § 663-15.5(d)(2) requires dismissal of only those 
crossclaims against a settling joint tortfeasor raised in 
the capacity of a joint tortfeasor, i.e., those seeking 
contribution or indemnity (directly or indirectly) for the 
7   At the hearing, counsel for St. Francis Medical Center 
represented, regarding the relief it sought, that certification of a good 
faith settlement would preclude Kamehameha Schools from "try[ing] to bring a 
future case against my client to recover a contribution."  
10   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
   
 
     
 
  
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
injury (to the complainant) that is the subject of the good 
faith settlement. 
[W]e examine, for this limited purpose, the nature of the 
[appellants'] claims against the [settling join t 
tortfeasors], i.e., to consider whether they seek 
contribution or indemnity for the original injury to 
[appellees], as opposed to relief for alleged direct 
injuries to the [ appellants]. 
Abad v. Griffith , Nos. CAAP-21-0000120, CAAP -23-0000015, 2024 WL 
5088457, at *5 (Haw. App. Dec. 12, 2024) (SDO) . 
In Abad, this court examined the nature of appellants' 
claims, including the nature of the relief requested, and 
concluded that the appellants made "separate , unqualified 
requests for attorneys' fees and costs that are not tied to the 
[appellants'] liability to the [appellees]." Id. at *5. Here, 
Kamehameha Schools' third-party claims, including its breach of 
contract and Uyemura v. Wick claims, arise out of the "original 
injury" to Plaintiffs caused by Dr. Brown e's abuse and are 
"directly or indirectly" in the nature of contribution and 
indemnity claims . 
Moreover, the specific claims that Kamehameha Schools 
asserted against St. Francis , though labeled as "third-party 
claims," were in effect cross-claims premised on the underlying 
theory that St. Francis was liable to Kamehameha Schools as a 
joint tortfeasor . 8 The circuit court therefore was not wrong in 
8   It appears that Plaintiffs' original Complaint did not name St. 
Francis  Medical Center and St. Francis Healthcare System of Hawaii  as 
defendants,  see footnote 4  supra,  and Kamehameha Schools therefore brought  
them  into this litigation as third -party defendants.  
11   
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dismissing Kamehameha Schools' third -party complaint. See 
Island Helicopt ers-Kauai, 2012 WL 503799, at *7 (affirming the 
dismissal of a third -party complaint, and acknowledging that 
"[a] determination of a good faith settlement protects the 
settling tortfeasor against claims brought by any non -settling 
tortfeasor, and thereby, encourages settlement"). 
III. CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the circuit 
court's Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, January 22, 2025. 
On the briefs:  /s/ Karen T. Nakasone,  
 Presiding Judge  
Claire Wong Black,   
Nickolas A. Kacprowski,  /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen,  
for Defendants/Third-Party  Associate Judge  
Plaintiffs-Appellants.   
 /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry,  
Jodie D. Roeca,  Associate Judge 
for Third-Party Defendant/  
Cross-claimant/  
Counterclaimant-Appellee.  
 
David J. Minkin,  
for Third-Party  Defendant-Appellee.  
12 