 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS  AND PACI FIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000548 31-MAR-2025 08:16 AM Dkt. 107 SO 
NO. CAAP-21-0000548 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAIʻI 
IN THE MATTER OF SANYA LUCAS, 
Complainant-Appellant/Appellant, v. 
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION, COUNTY OF MAUI, 
Respondent-Appellee (Agency)/Appellee, and 
COUNTY OF MAUI, DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND HUMAN CONCERNS, 
Intervenor-Appellee/Appellee. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 2CCV-21-0000041) 
  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.) 
Complainant-Appellant/Appellant Sanya Lucas appeals 
from the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit's September 8, 2021 
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Denying [her] 
Agency Appeal[,]" and September 9, 2021 Final Judgment.  The 
circuit court affirmed Respondent-Appellee/Appellee Civil 1
1 The Honorable Kelsey T. Kawano presided.   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Service Commission's determination it lacked jurisdiction over 
Lucas' claims. 
In this secondary appeal, Lucas challenges the 
Commission's determination that it lacked jurisdiction.2 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve the 
points of error as discussed below, and vacate and remand. 
Intervenor-Appellee/Appellee County of Maui posted a 
recruitment for an "Aging and Disability Services Specialist V" (Specialist V) position, on a temporary, full-time basis. The 
posting listed the position as an SR-24/Step C. Lucas applied, 
and in January 2020, was hired as an emergency hire for the 
Specialist V position. Lucas claimed that, before she was 
hired, she inquired about receiving pay at a higher step but was 
told "to request a higher rate of pay" after she was offered the 
position. 
2 Lucas also challenges numerous findings and conclusions from the 
circuit court. 
However, in a Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 91-14 appeal from an 
agency decision, the circuit court acts as an appellate court and may not 
fact-find.  
Kendrick v. Plan. Dep't of the Cnty. of Kaua‘i, 155 Hawai i ‘ 230, 
235 n.7, 561 P.3d 434, 439 n.7 (App. 2024). 
Lucas does not make individual arguments regarding 
the conclusions she 
challenges, but appears to address these conclusions in the context of her 
challenge to the circuit court's determination that it lacked jurisdiction. 
We address the challenged conclusions in the same manner. 
2   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The County then posted a recruitment for the 
Specialist V position, on a permanent, full-time basis. Lucas 
applied, and on July 2, 2020, was offered the position. That 
same day, the Executive on Aging, Deborah Stone-Walls, e-mailed 
Human Resources Specialist Shanda Abe explaining Lucas' skill 
level, requesting that Lucas start at a higher step, and noting 
Lucas received input from the union: 
Upon offering [Lucas] the position, she requested 
consideration to be started at Step G or H rather than 
Step 
C in BU13, SR24. [Lucas] severed employment with the 
State of [ Hawaiʻi] at the SR24 Step H level 18 mon ths prior 
to beginning work at Office on Aging. 
 . . . . 
She possesses expertise in geriatric mental health that 
brings a level of instruction to her subordinates that has been previously lacking from personnel in the position. 
 . . . . 
As this position is funded with grant revenue rather than County funds and is classified as Fixed Term rather than 
permanent, [Lucas] received input from HGEA that there are 
times when individuals filling such positions are offered the ability to negotiate to a higher step. . . . 
The 
contracted amount already received from the funding source 
for this position is ample enough to cover her salary 
comfortably for the foreseeable future. 
(Emphases added.) 
Four days later, on July 6, 2020, Abe denied the 
request explaining any request would need to be processed before 
recruitment: 
Unfortunately, since there was a break in service from the 
State we can't do a compensation adjustment for Ms. Lucas. 
Additionally, Recruitment Above the Minimum S tep is 
reserved for positions that we historically had 
difficulties filling and would need to be processed before 
the recruitment began. 
3   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
You may contact me for further questions or concerns. 
(Emphasis added.) 
On the same day as Abe's e-mail, Departmental 
Personnel Officer Ailina Tagupa-Laborte  noted Lucas was 
ineligible to retain her step due to a break in service: 3
"[a]s the Unit Contract 13 states, page 32, #3, 
section a, [Lucas] would not be eligible to retain her step movement 
due to her break in 
service." 
(Emphasis added.) 
The next day, July 7, 2020, Lucas began her employment 
as a Specialist V on a permanent basis at SR-24/Step C. 
On August 27, 2020, Lucas e-mailed Stone-Walls 
(copying Tagupa-Laborte, Abe, Director LoriAnn Tsuhako (
Director 
Tsuhako), and Linda Munsell) a formal compensation complaint 
noting "[t]here is a significant discrepancy in pay with the 
same level of work described in each Job description and 
classification provided between the three Counties, Honolulu, 
[Hawaiʻi], and Maui, [Kauaʻ i] does not have a comparison. The 
other jurisdictions also allow for a range of pay[.]" A 
September 11, 2020 meeting was scheduled at the Director's 
Office following Lucas' e-mail. 
3 Though the Commission's findings indicate Tagupa- Laborte was the 
Departmental Personnel Officer, her signature block in a later e- mail 
indicates she was a "Temporary Departmental Personnel Officer[.]" 
4   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In a September 16, 2020 letter on County and 
Department letterhead, Tagupa-Laborte thanked Lucas for meeting 
with Director Tsuhako and explained they "regret to inform 
[her], due to recruitment incentive policies, a request for pay 
above the minimum step would have had to have been filed and 
approved prior to recruitment." The letter then closed with: 
"[i]f you do not agree with our decision to conclude your 
compensation complaint, you may request another meeting with the Department of Housing and Human Concerns." 
On September 25, 2020, Lucas e-mailed Tagupa-Laborte 
inquiring about the appeal process. The same day, Tagupa-
Laborte responded and informed Lucas of the twenty-day deadline 
to appeal, which she indicated ran from the final notice – the 
September 16, 2020 letter: 
We call your attention to the time period in which to 
file your appeal. Please note Section 11- 102-37(a) states 
that you have 20 calendar days after final notice  has been 
sent of any adverse action by the Director of Personnel 
Services, appointing authority or chief executive. Be 
advised it is not the date you received the notice. 
(9/16/2020 - dated letter) . 
(Some emphases added.) 
Nineteen days after the September 16, 2020 letter, on 
October 5, 2020, Lucas filed a "Petition of Appeal" (
Petition) 
with the Commission. Lucas identified the adverse action being 
appealed as the "[d]ecision to deny hiring for the ADSS V above 
base pay within the SR 24 pay range" and referenced the 
5   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
  
     
   
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
September 16, 2020 letter. In the statement of issues section of the Petition, Lucas identified the "[u]nclear process to 
request hiring above base pay within the SR24 class for the 
Aging and Disability Services Specialist V position" as the 
issue. 
The County moved to dismiss the appeal as untimely, 
arguing Lucas "had to file her appeal within 20 days of the date 
that the personnel action was effective (July 7, 2020)." The County further argued Lucas' "remedy lies through the collective 
bargaining process, and not through a civil service appeal." 
During the hearing on the County's Motion to Dismiss, 
Lucas argued the September 16, 2020 letter triggered the twenty-
day deadline and the "process is unclear to higher [sic] above 
base pay within the assigned SR rating for [the] position, even 
when [she] had inquired" about it before September 2019. 
The Commission granted the County's motion to dismiss. 
The Commission found the July 6, 2020 e-mail forwarded from Stone-Walls "constitute[d] the 'aggrieved action' which form[ed] 
the basis" of Lucas' complaint and also found Lucas failed to 
file her appeal within 20 days of the July 6, 2020 e-mail. The 
Commission further found that even if Lucas' appeal was timely, 
her "requested remedy in the Petition, i.e., to re-price the 
position to a higher step, does not fall within the purview of 
the Commission's jurisdiction." 
6   
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court affirmed the Commission's decision. 
Again, in this secondary appeal, Lucas (now represented by 
counsel) challenges the Commission's determination that it 
lacked jurisdiction. 
"The standard of review is one in which this court 
must determine whether the circuit court was right or wrong in 
its decision, applying the standards set forth in [Hawai
‘i 
Revised Statutes (HRS)] § 91-14(g) . . . to the agency's decision."  Paul's Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Befitel, 104 Hawai‘ i  
4
4 HRS § 91- 14(g) (Supp. 2019) provides as follows: 
(g) Upon review of the record, the court may affirm the 
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions 
for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the decision and order if the substantial rights of the 
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the 
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders 
are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions; 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or 
jurisdiction of the agency; 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; 
(4) Affected by other error of law; 
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, 
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole 
record; or 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by 
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted 
exercise of discretion. 
(Formatting altered.) "Under HRS § 91- 14(g), conclusions of law are 
reviewable under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions regarding procedural defects under subsection (3); findings of fact under subsection 
(5); and an agency's exercise of discretion under subsection (6)." Paul's 
Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Befitel
, 104 Hawai‘i at 416, 91 P.3d at 498 (cleaned up). 
7   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
412, 416, 91 P.3d 494, 498 (2004) (citations omitted). An 
agency's determination of jurisdiction is reviewed de novo. See 
In re Kanahele, 152 Hawai‘ i 501, 509, 514, 526 P.3d 478, 486, 491 
(2023). 
(1) We first address Lucas' contention that her 
Petition was timely filed.5 
In its Motion to Dismiss, the County argued Lucas "had 
to file her appeal within 20 days of the date that the personnel 
action was effective (July 7, 2020)." The Commission agreed 
with the County, though relying on Abe's July 6, 2020 e-mail, 
and determined it lacked jurisdiction due to untimeliness. The 
County's argument was disingenuous, and the Commission's decision was wrong. 
The County of Maui Rules of the Civil Service 
Commission Rule § 11-102-37 provides in pertinent part that a 
petition of appeal must be filed "within twenty calendar days 
after final notice has been sent of any adverse action by the 
director, appointing authority or chief executive." (Emphases 
added.) 
Lucas' employment in the permanent, full-time position 
began on July 7, 2020. There is no evidence in the record indicating the director issued a final notice of an adverse 
5 Though the circuit court (correctly) determined Lucas' Petition was 
timely filed, it affirmed the Commission's Order. As such, we address Lucas' 
argument for clarity on remand. 
8   
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
action on July 7, 2020. And there is also no evidence 
indicating Abe's July 6, 2020 e-mail was a final notice by the 
director. 
A September 11, 2020 meeting was scheduled at the 
Director's Office to discuss Lucas' "salary compensation 
concerns." On September 16, 2020, using County and Department 
letterhead, Tagupa-Laborte thanked Lucas for meeting with 
Director Tsuhako and stated they "regret to inform [her], due to recruitment incentive policies, a request for pay above the 
minimum step would have had to have been filed and approved 
prior to recruitment." The letter also indicated this decision 
concluded Lucas' compensation complaint. 
Tagupa-Laborte later informed Lucas of the twenty-day 
deadline to appeal, and specifically referred to the 
September 16, 2020 letter. It is reasonable to infer that 
Tagupa-Laborte treated the September 16, 2020 letter as the 
final notice from the director. 
Lucas filed her petition within twenty calendar days 
of the September 16, 2020 letter. Lucas' appeal was therefore timely. 
(2) Next, Lucas contends she was "entitled to seek 
redress under" HRS § 76-14(a). She argues that the "entire 
point of Civil Service is to have uniformity for comparable work 
based upon fair wages without regard to any favoritism." She 
9   
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
further argues that the "initial pricing was in error because 
either [
O‘ahu] and [Hawai‘ i Island] paid too much for their 
comparable civil service position or Maui paid too little." 
As noted in her Petition, Lucas challenged the 
"[u]nclear process to request hiring above base pay within the 
SR24 class for the Aging and Disability Services Specialist V 
position." And in her response to the County's Motion to 
Dismiss, Lucas explained "[t]here has been a breakdown of the 
hiring process which needs to be addressed and corrected." 
Finally, in her formal complaint to the director, Lucas 
highlighted the "significant discrepancy in pay" between Maui 
and two other counties for the same job description. 
Nevertheless, the Commission found the "adverse action 
involves the issue of compensation adjustment[,]" which "falls within the grievance procedure under BU 13 CBA (Article 11 and 
Article 14) and is outside the Commission's jurisdiction." 
In 
particular, the Commission characterized Lucas' request as a request "to re-price the position to a higher step[.]" The 
Commission noted while it "does have jurisdiction over initial pricing of a position, it does not have jurisdiction to re-price 
a position." 
10   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 76-14 (2012)  establishes jurisdiction for the 
merit board appeal of each county, including issues related to 
initial class pricing. HRS §§ 76-11 (2012), 76-14(a)(3). As 
relied on by the Commission in its findings and conclusions 
regarding the Motion to Dismiss, under HRS § 76-14(c)(1),  it 76
6 HRS § 76-14 entitled "Merit appeals board; duties, and 
jurisdiction[,]" provides in pertinent part: 
(a) The merit appeals board of each jurisdiction shall 
decide appeals from any action under this chapter taken by 
the chief executive, the director, an appointing authority, 
or a designee acting on behalf of one of these individuals, 
relating to: 
(1) Recruitment and examination; 
(2) Classification and reclassification of a particular position, including denial or loss of promotional opportunity or demotion due to 
reclassification of positions in a 
reorganization; 
(3) Initial pricing of classes; and 
(4) Other employment actions under this chapter, including disciplinary actions and adverse 
actions for failure to meet performance 
requirements, taken against civil service employees who are excluded from collective 
bargaining coverage under section 89-6. 
(Formatting altered and emphasis added.) 
7 HRS § 76-14(c)(1) provides: 
(c) The rules adopted by the merit appeals board shall provide for the following: 
(1) The merit appeals board shall not act on an 
appeal, but shall defer to other authority, if 
the action complained of constitutes a prohibited 
act that is subject to the jurisdiction of 
another appellate body or administrative agency or the grievance procedure under a collective 
bargaining agreement[.] 
(Formatting altered.) 
11   
 
  
   
  
 
   
    
 
  
 
  
 
     
 
 
  
 
  
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
cannot review prohibited acts subject to a collective bargaining 
grievance procedure. 
However, HRS § 76-14 must "be construed liberally to 
determine whether the appeal falls within the jurisdiction of 
the merit appeals board." HRS § 76-14(e).8 
In reviewing Lucas' Petition, her opposition to the 
County's Motion to Dismiss, and her complaint (all made while 
she was self-represented), her appeal was not merely about "re-pricing"; rather her appeal was about clarifying the process for 
being hired at a pay rate not in parity with other counties for 
substantially the same work. By narrowly construing Lucas' 
Petition as concerning "re-pricing," the Commission acted 
contrary to HRS § 76-14(e)'s mandate to liberally interpret HRS 
§ 76-14's jurisdiction provision. Thus, the Commission erred in 
determining it lacked jurisdiction without considering the true 
nature of Lucas' claim. 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the Commission's 
January 8, 2021 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting Respondent's Motion to Dismiss Appeal[.]" We also 
vacate the circuit court's September 8, 2021 "Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law and Order Denying [Lucas'] Agency Appeal[,]" 
and September 9, 2021 Final Judgment. We remand this case to 
8 The parties were afforded an opportunity to submit supplemental 
briefing on HRS § 76-14(e) to this court. The County, the Commission, and 
Lucas each submitted supplemental briefs. 
12   
 
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Commission for further proceedings consistent with this 
summary disposition order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻ i, March 31, 2025. 
On the briefs:  /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka  
 Presiding Judge  
Shawn A. Luiz   
for Complainant-Appellant/  /s/ Karen T. Nakasone  
Appellant.  Associate Judge  
  
James E. Halvorson,  /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen  
Claire W.S. Chinn,  Associate Judge 
Deputy Attorneys General,   
for Respondent-Appellee 
(Agency)/Appellee  
Civil Service Commission.  
 
Thomas Kolbe,  
Kristin K. Tarnstrom,  
Deputies Corporation Counsel,   
County of Maui,  
for Intervenor-Appellee/Appellee  
County of Maui, Department of  
Housing and Human Concerns. 
13 