NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000781 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
STACY EDWARD HARDOBY aka STACY EDWARD CAUSEY,
Defendant-Appellant, 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(Case No. 2CPC-17-0000693(4)) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Stacy Edward Hardoby, also known as 
Stacy Edward Causey, (Hardoby) was convicted by a jury of first 
degree unauthorized entry into a motor vehicle and felony abuse 
of a family or household member. He appeals from the judgment (Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit
1 on 
September 14, 2018. Hardoby claims that the circuit court erred by (a) not allowing him to call the State's medical expert witness a "hired gun" during closing argument, and (b) failing to instruct the jury on merger of offenses. 
For the reasons 
explained below, we affirm the Judgment. 
I. 
Hardoby was charged by information and complaint with 
first degree unauthorized entry into a motor vehicle and felony 
1 The Honorable Richard T. Bissen, Jr. presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
abuse of family or household member because of an incident that 
happened on September 5, 2017. 
Jury trial began on June 18, 2018. The complaining 
witness (CW) testified first. She had been dating Hardoby for 
eight years. He is the father of their 3-year-old son. On the 
afternoon of September 5, 2017, CW and Hardoby were "hanging out" at the beach. They started arguing. CW thought Hardoby was agitated about something that happened while they were separated. She drove to Foodland (a supermarket) to buy cigarettes. Hardoby called and said he wanted to talk. CW saw Hardoby in the Foodland parking lot when she was coming out of the store. CW got into her car. Hardoby stayed outside the car. They talked through the open driver's door. He was asking her questions. CW closed the door because she wanted to leave. Hardoby called her a liar. He reached into the car and tried to choke her with a headlock but it was not working, so he choked her with his hands. She had difficulty breathing. She was afraid. She was strangled for ten or fifteen seconds. Hardoby punched the left side of her face. Then he left. 
CW called 911. A police officer met her in the parking 
lot. She showed him her injuries. CW identified State's exhibits 1 through 5 as being photographs showing the way she looked that evening in the Foodland parking lot. CW described a bruise on her neck and a scratch under her chin that she said happened when Hardoby strangled her. 
Police officer Murphy Aquino testified that he was 
assigned to respond to an incident in the Foodland parking lot at about 7:41 p.m. He found CW seated inside her car. She appeared to have been crying; her face was flushed and Officer Aquino saw tears. The area around CW's collar bone and the bottom of her neck were red. There were red finger marks on her neck. There was a vertical scratch under CW's chin towards her neck. CW pointed to a spot on her throat where she said she felt pain. Officer Aquino did not notice petechiae, which he described as "red dots in the white part of the eye that is caused after a person . . . has been restricted of breathing by strangulation." 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State's last witness was William Kepler, a 
physician. The circuit court qualified him as an expert in the 
fields of general medical knowledge as well as signs and symptoms of strangulation. He explained that strangulation is "impeding air flow to the lungs or impeding blood flow to the brain by external pressure on the neck." More than half of the time during strangulation no mark is left on the person being strangled, but common signs include scratch marks and bruises, and "racoon eyes," or petechiae, which are "tiny dots . . . under the skin" that "could be confused with sunburn." He did not examine CW, but was shown a photograph of CW in evidence. He testified: 
THE WITNESS: Well, ah, I think it's very likely
that there are a lot of petechaie [sic] here. In tiny
little spots here and here, here, here. 
All these tiny
little spots are very likely to be petechiae. They're notthe -- the resolution is not very good. But I actuallybelieve that that is what they are. 
Notice that there's a redness around the entire 
eyes and then there's sparing of the redness on the eyelids.Is that evidence to you folks? 
And that looks like to me, again, the same, ah,
anatomical physical process that happens when the, ah,petechaie [sic] are formed. 
I can't see inside her eyes, but often you can
see petechaie [sic] in there as well. I believe those,essentially, that is. 
Q. Thank you, Dr. Kepler. . . . And petechia [sic]
again this is correct, that's caused by, ah, lack of bloodflow? 
A. Well, it's caused by increased blood flow.
It's caused by increased pressure, cut off the flow out ofthe skull or out of the base, and increased blood pressureoccurs inside the vessels and then they leak out thecapillaries. 
On cross-examination by Hardoby's attorney, Dr. Kepler admitted 
that he was being paid by the State and had met with the prosecutor, but not with Hardoby or defense counsel. He agreed that petechiae "shows up a lot more" in the eyeballs, and did notappear to be present in the photograph of CW, but clarified that  
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"you need to pull down the lids and look at the lids themselves 
and other areas there." 
The State rested. Hardoby moved for judgment of 
acquittal. The circuit court denied the motion.2 Hardoby was 
the only witness called by the defense. He agreed that he and CW were talking in the Foodland parking lot, but he denied reaching into CW's car, laying his hands on her, or punching her. They decided to break up. He told her he was going to seek sole custody of their child. Then he left. On cross-examination he begrudgingly admitted that he thought CW had cheated on him in the past, but denied being upset, jealous, or angry about it. He eventually admitted that he and CW had an argument "about past infidelities." 
During closing, the defense argued that CW made up a 
story about Hardoby strangling her because she did not want to lose custody of their son: 
Do not underestimate the lengths a person will go to
over custody of their kid. [CW] lied to police. She got up
here and she lied to you all. How do you know that [CW]lied? 
. . . . 
Do not under estimate [sic] the lengths that a person
will go if pushed to keep custody of their child. 
That's 
what she came in here today and yesterday to do. She needed to make sure that she was going to have custody of herchild. 
. . . . 
So that's what happened that day. 
They broke up. And 
they broke up. [Hardoby] was sad. [Hardoby] told [CW] thathe was taking custody of his son. That's when [CW] had adecision to make. She's using that decision to make sureshe has custody of her child. 
. . . . 
Do not underestimate the lengths that a person will go
in order to keep custody of their child. 
The only logical
conclusion in this case is that Mr. Hardoby is not guilty. 
2 Hardoby has not appealed from the denial of his motion for
judgment of acquittal. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The jury found Hardoby guilty as charged. This appeal 
followed. 
II. 
A. The circuit court did not abuse its discretion by
precluding the defense from using the phrase"hired gun" during closing argument. 
A trial judge has broad discretion to control the scope 
of closing argument. State v. Nofoa, 135 Hawai# i 220, 227, 349 
P.3d 327, 334 (2015). An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial 
court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant. 
Id. at 228, 349 P.3d at 335. 
Before closing arguments were given, the State made an 
oral motion to preclude Hardoby from referring to Dr. Kepler as a "hired gun."  Hardoby argued: 
3
THE COURT: Were you intending to do so? 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Potentially at during closing
argument, ah, of using the term hired gun. Um, I think it's
well within the right of the -- of the defense to label aperson in this case that we think is, um, there has beenevidence shown. Ah, he was brought here by the State. He was only interviewed by the State. Only discussions haveever come with the State. 
THE COURT: Is that because the defense was not given
his name or notice --
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: That's not true. We were given --
THE COURT: -- or is that because defense chose not to 
question him? 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Fair enough. Um, does defense --THE COURT: No, I'm just saying you -- you
characterize whereas if he did not make himself available or 
refused to talk to the defense. Is that what happened? 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: No. 
THE COURT: Okay. Go ahead. 
3 Neither the State nor Hardoby defined exactly what the phrase
"hired gun" meant. The Merriam-Webster dictionary defines the noun as "an
expert hired to do a specific and often ethically dubious job." Hired gun,Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/hired%20gun  (Last
visited Nov. 19, 2019). 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: That is definitely not the case.
Ah, just with the -- the amount of cases that I have, it's
just very difficult to be able to --
THE COURT: Oh, no, I'm not blaming you. I'm just
asking if he was made available or if you were surprised byhim? 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Not at all. Um, the testimony
that I feel then came out is he was definitely, um,explaining things away in favor of the State. . . . 
. . . . 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:
 . . . Um, and then there's also,
like I said, the pronoun use of she. Maybe it's commonly
used in his, I don't know. 
But again, I felt that there is 
--  
THE COURT: But this case did involve a she. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: But he didn't know that. Unless 
he did know that. So I'm just saying I think it's well
within defense's right to use hired gun --
THE COURT:
 Yeah, I'm not allowing it. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Okay. 
THE COURT: No, you can talk about who hired him. [DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Sure. THE COURT: And, you know, who called him and all
that. But the term hired gun, yeah, I'm not going to let
you use that. 
. . . . 
THE COURT:
 And you're free to argue who called him
and however you want to characterize his testimony. Um, but
the specific term, hired gun, I am going to sustain theState's -- well, probably an objection. 
I mean grant the
State's motion in limine. 
Hardoby's closing made the following arguments about Dr. Kepler: 
So what did the State do next? They brought in
Dr. Kepler. Dr. Kepler who is the long time doctor of thecommunity around here. Many of you have known or interact.Maybe just heard of his name in the past. 
Dr. Kepler came in here to fix a weak and broken case.
What did Dr. Kepler have to say? Nothing. Nothing relatedto this case. He never examined [CW]. He doesn't know anything about her. 
We don't trust the termite report done by an expert
[who] never see [sic] the house. How were we going to trusta doctor who never sees a patient? 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Yes, he looks at [CW] and he says, oh, there might be
petechaie [sic] from a photograph. And he says that it's a
-- appears to be right over here. Petechaie [sic] or beautyspots? I mean you're looking at [CW]. This needs to be beyond a reasonable doubt. This doesn't need to be a doctor guessing at a photo. This needs to be solid evidence. 
And what did Officer Aquino tell you? I saw no 
petechaie [sic]. The officer on scene. Face to face with [CW] does not see it. Dr. Kepler even has to point that outin this case there's nothing inside of her eyes. And all the blood vessels inside of a person's eyes. None of that has anything to do with it. Petechaie [sic] or beautyspots? Petechaie [sic] or sunburn? This is clearlysunburn. 
Now, it really came to asking Dr. Kepler a very
specific question. Would you give a diagnosis to a personthat you never met? A professional diagnosis. Unequivocal-ly he said no. That is not what he would do. So, Statejust paid for him to be here to try to fix a broken case. 
Dr. Kepler's testimony was based solely on hypo-
theticals. Ladies and gentlemen, this is not a case ofhypotheticals. That is not what you are here to do. Youare here to judge facts and facts alone.  
Hardoby's defense counsel was able to make a strong argument 
about Dr. Kepler's role in the case without using the term "hired gun." The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in precluding the defense's use of the term in closing argument. 
B. The circuit court did not err in refusing to give
a merger instruction. 
The standard of review for a trial court's issuance or refusal of a jury instruction is whether, when readand considered as a whole, the instructions given areprejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent,or misleading. Erroneous instructions are presumptively harmful and are a ground for reversalunless it affirmatively appears from the record as awhole that the error was not prejudicial. In otherwords, error is not to be viewed in isolation andconsidered purely in the abstract. 
State v. Matuu, 144 Hawai# i 510, 516, 445 P.3d 91, 97 (2019) 
(citations omitted). 
Hardoby requested one jury instruction and one special 
interrogatory on the issue of merger of offenses. The requested 
jury instruction read: 
If and only if you find the Defendant, Stacy E.
Hardoby, guilty of Counts 1 and 2, then you must next 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
determine if the offenses were committed separately.
Offenses are committed separately and do not merge only ifthe prosecution has not proven beyond a reasonable doubtthat (1) the offenses were part of a continuing anduninterrupted course of conduct and 
(2) the Defendant had
one intention, one general impulse, and one plan to commitboth offenses. 
You must answer the following questions on a special
interrogatory that will [be] provided to you: 
(1) Did the prosecution prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that the Defendant did not commit the offense of Unauthorized Entry into a Motor Vehicle in the First Degreein Count 1 and Abuse of Family and Household Member inCount 2 as part of a continuing and uninterrupted course ofconduct? 
(2) Did the prosecution prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that the Defendant committed the offense of Unauthorized Entry into a Motor Vehicle in the First Degreein Count 1 and Abuse of a Family and Household Member inCount 2 with separate and distinct intents, rather thanacting with one intention, one general impulse, and one planto commit both offenses? 
The requested interrogatory read: 
You must answer the following questions if and only if
you have unanimously found the guilty [sic] of any offensein Count 1 and Count 2. Your answers to these questionsmust be unanimous. 
1. Did the prosecution prove beyond a reasonabledoubt that the Defendant did not commit anyoffense in Count 1 and Count 2 as part of acontinuing and uninterrupted course of conduct? 
Yes No 
2. Did the prosecution prove beyond a reasonabledoubt that the Defendant committed any offensein Count 1 and Count 2 with separate anddistinct intents, rather than acting with oneintention, one general impulse, and one plan tocommit both offenses? 
Yes No 
In support of the requests, Hardoby cited Hawaii Revised Statutes 
(HRS) § 701-109(1)(e) (2014), which provided: 
(1) When the same conduct of a defendant 
may establish an element of more than one
offense, the defendant may be prosecuted foreach offense of which such conduct is an element. The defendant may not, however, beconvicted of more than one offense if: 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . 
(e) The offense is defined as a continuing
course of conduct and the defendant's course of conduct was uninterrupted,unless the law provides that specificperiods of conduct constitute separateoffenses. 
In State v. Hoopii, 68 Haw. 246, 710 P.2d 1193 (1985), 
the defendant was charged with kidnapping, raping, and sodomizing 
a 6-year-old girl. 
According to the evidence adduced at trial, [Hoopii]
abducted the girl as she walked home from school. He first drove her to a beach area off of Lagoon Drive, then toanother unknown location, and then back to the originalbeach area. At some point, he tied the girl's wrists andankles with rope and covered her mouth and eyes with tape.He later untied her, removed her clothing and raped andsodomized her. 
Id. at 247, 710 P.2d at 1194. Hoopii moved to dismiss the 
kidnapping count pursuant to HRS § 701-109. The trial court denied the motion. The jury found Hoopii guilty as charged, and he appealed. The Hawai# i Supreme Court held: 
HRS § 701–109(1)(e) prohibits multiple convictions where the
defendant's actions constitute an uninterrupted, continuingcourse of conduct. This prohibition, however, does notapply where these actions constitute separate offenses underthe law. Furthermore, 
where a defendant in the context of one criminal scheme or transaction commits several acts independently violative of one or more statutes, hemay be punished for all of them if charges areproperly consolidated by the State in one trial. 
Id. at 251, 710 P.2d at 1197 (footnote and citations omitted). 
Hoopii could be convicted for kidnapping because he abducted the girl, whether or not he also raped or sodomized her. Hoopii could be convicted for rape or sodomy, even if he had not kidnapped the girl. In denying Hardoby's requested jury instruction and interrogatory in this case, the circuit court employed a similar analysis: 
THE COURT: Yeah, these are -- this has always been --
the most classic example is burglary and assault three. And 
you know what I'm talking about. Where the guy goes in thehouse, beats up somebody else. They charge him with assault 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
three for beating him up. They charge him with burglary for
entering the house. 
Merger is when you can not commit one without
committing the other. That's the simple way to understandit. 
. . . . 
THE COURT: So if there are additional elements in one 
that aren't in the other, then they're separate. So you cancommit one assault three inside or outside of a house. But you can only commit a burglary by going inside the house. 
Every burglary -- well, I shouldn't say every one, but
most every burglary comes with an underlying offense becauseit's to commit an act inside. I mean unless the actual act is the trespass. 
. . . . 
THE COURT: But, no, it makes the burglary to go and
commit a crime therein, as opposed to just trespassing insomebody's house where you do not actually take anything.You're just walking in without permission. 
. . . . 
THE COURT: [Hardoby] obviously could have committed
the UMV -- I mean the felony abuse outside the car. 
. . . . 
THE COURT: [CW] didn't have to be in the car for him
to complete the act of felony abuse. The felony abuse couldhave been done in or out of the car. 
. . . . 
THE COURT: But I don't find that these are one 
offense. I mean I definitely think they're separateoffenses. Separate elements. Distinct elements. That --that exist in one and not in the other. 
We conclude that the circuit court did not err in its 
analysis. Hardoby was charged with first degree unauthorized 
entry into a motor vehicle and with felony abuse of a family or household member. HRS § 708-836.5 (2014) provides, in relevant part: 
A person commits the offense of unauthorized entry into
motor vehicle in the first degree if the personintentionally or knowingly enters or remains unlawfully in amotor vehicle, without being invited, licensed, or otherwiseauthorized to enter or remain within the vehicle, with theintent to commit a crime against a person or againstproperty rights. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 709-906 (2014) provides, in relevant part: 
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person . . . to
physically abuse a family or household member[.] 
. . . . 
(8) Where the physical abuse consists of
intentionally or knowingly impeding the normal breathing or
circulation of the blood of the family or household memberby applying pressure on the throat or the neck, abuse of afamily or household member is a class C felony. 
Hardoby did not have to actually strangle CW to be convicted of 
unauthorized entry into her motor vehicle; the criminal act is entry with intent to commit a crime. Hardoby need not have entered CW's vehicle to be convicted of abuse of a family or household member; the criminal act is the strangulation of CW whether the act was committed in CW's vehicle, in the Foodland parking lot, at the beach park, or somewhere else. The circuit court did not err in refusing to give the requested jury instruction and interrogatory. 
III. 
For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment entered by the 
circuit court on September 14, 2018, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 22, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
Benjamin E. Lowenthal,
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge
Associate Judge Peter A. Hanano,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
11 