NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000346
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
KEVIN LEE-KWAI, Defendant-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 3DTC-16-054750)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, and Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
This appeal arises out of an Order Granting Defendant's
Motion to Suppress Evidence ("Order") entered on April 5, 2017 in
the District Court of the Third Circuit ("District Court").1  
The case revolves around a criminal complaint alleging that
Defendant-Appellee Kevin Lee-Kwai operated a vehicle after his
license had been suspended or revoked for operating a vehicle
under the influence of an intoxicant in violation of section
291E-62, Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS").
Lee-Kwai moved to suppress the statements he made to
Officer Cho at the time his citation was issued on the basis that
he had not been properly apprised of his rights under Miranda v.
Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966).  At the hearing on Lee-Kwai's
motion, Hawai #i Police Department Patrol Officer Adam Cho
testified on behalf of the State, while Lee-Kwai testified on his
own behalf.  Upon the close of the evidence, the District Court
granted Lee-Kwai's motion, stating that "based on the testimony
of the witnesses, . . . [the] Court finds defendant Kevin Lee-
Kwai a credible witness and, . . . is going to grant defendant's
motion to suppress."  The State timely filed an appeal from the
1/The Honorable Margaret Masunaga presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Order pursuant to HRS section 641-13(7).
On appeal, the State contends that the District Court
erred in (1) granting the motion to suppress where there were
insufficient facts to support a finding that Lee-Kwai was the
subject of a custodial interrogation, a criminal investigation,
and a warrantless traffic stop; and (2) considering the
suppression of statements where Lee-Kwai did not provide
sufficient notice of the intent to suppress statements in his
written motion.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
conclude that Lee-Kwai was not subject to custodial interrogation
as follows, and vacate.
Lee-Kwai challenged Officer Cho's failure to provide a
Miranda warning before asking "who was driving the vehicles that
were involved [in the alleged accident]" and thereafter asking
for Lee-Kwai's driver's license.  Lee-Kwai argued that because
Officer Cho "held onto Lee-Kwai's vehicle documentation while
subjecting [him] to questioning," he was not free to leave, and
that he therefore was "seized" in a constitutional sense while
undergoing "custodial questioning" that necessitated a Miranda
warning.2
"Central to the protection afforded by article I,
section 10 [of the Hawai #i Constitution] is the principle that a
police officer may not undermine a person's privilege against
compelled self-incrimination by subjugating his or her will to
that of [the] examining police officer."  State v. Ah Loo, 94
Hawai#i 207, 210, 10 P.3d 728, 731 (2000).  "Absent Miranda
warnings and a valid waiver of them, statements obtained from a
person subjected to uncounseled custodial interrogation are
inadmissible in a subsequent criminal proceeding brought against
that person."  Id.
2/Lee-Kwai further contends that his right to remain silent was
violated under  State v. Tsujimura , 140 Hawai #i 299, 400 P.3d 500 (2017),
irrespective of his entitlement to Miranda warnings. Tsujimura , however,
concerned the admissibility of the defendant's silence, not his statements to
the police.  140 Hawai #i at 313, 400 P.3d at 514.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
"To determine whether 'interrogation' is 'custodial,'
we look at the totality of the circumstances, focusing on 'the
place and time of the interrogation, the length of the
interrogation, the nature of the questions asked, the conduct of
the police, and any other relevant circumstances.'" Id.  (brackets
omitted) (quoting State v. Melemai , 64 Haw. 479, 481, 643 P.2d
541, 544 (1982)).
[A]n individual may very well be "seized," within the meaning
of article I, section 7 of the Hawai #i Constitution (inasmuch
as, "given the totality of the circumstances, a reasonable
person would have believed that he or she was not free to
leave," and yet not be "in custody," such that Miranda
warnings are required as a precondition to any questioning.
Thus, generally speaking, a person lawfully subjected to a
temporary investigative detention by a police officer — who
has a reasonable suspicion that is based on specific and
articulable facts that criminal activity is afoot, is not
subjected to "custodial interrogation" when the officer poses
noncoercive questions to the detained person that are designed
to confirm or dispel the officer's reasonable suspicion.
Id. at 211, 10 P.3d at 732 (citations omitted).
In the case of traffic roadblocks, for instance, where
the police direct drivers, about whom they have no probable cause
to believe may have committed any crime, violation, or
infraction, to the side of the roadway for the express purpose of
determining the state of their sobriety, the Hawai #i Supreme
Court has held that officer questioning is not custodial
interrogation, such that Miranda is triggered.  State v. Wyatt ,
67 Haw. 293, 300, 687 P.2d 544, 550 (1984) (reasoning that "[t]he
record . . . does not reflect that the officer may have been
motivated by subterfuge or trickery in putting the question [that
led to an incriminating response] to [the defendant]").  The
court explained that custodial interrogation is typically marked
by "intimidating or inherently coercive factors usually extant
when interrogation is conducted in a custodial setting."  Id. at
300, 687 P.2d at 550.  See also State v. Kuba , 68 Haw. 184, 184,
706 P.2d 1305, 1306 (1985) (investigative questioning during a
traffic stop for driving abnormally slow and straddling two lanes
is not custodial interrogation and did not require Miranda
warnings).  
Furthermore, "[f]ield interviews by the police with
suspects or witnesses are not constitutionally proscribed. 
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Police officers are not precluded from making general on-the-
scene inquiries of citizens to determine whether crime has been
committed or is in progress."  State v. Patterson, 59 Haw. 357,
362, 581 P.2d 752, 755 (1978) (citations omitted).  Such
questioning is permissible when properly confined and limited to
what is minimally necessary for an officer to decide upon a
reasonable course of investigatory action.  Id . at 364, 581 P.2d
at 756.
In Ah Loo, the police officer observed Ah Loo, along
with six or seven other people, congregated around the bed of a
pickup truck that was parked adjacent to a golf course.  Ah Loo
was holding an open beer can.  The police officer detained the
group for the purpose of obtaining each person's age.  The
officer asked Ah Loo for identification and, when he refused to
produce any, the officer asked Ah Loo his name, age, and place of
residence.  Ah Loo responded that he was eighteen and the officer
issued Ah Loo a citation for violating HRS section 281-101.5,
which prohibits any person below the age of twenty-one from
possessing liquor in a public place.  Ah Loo sought to suppress
his statement because he had not been read his Miranda rights. 
The Hawai #i Supreme Court determined that the brief information-
gathering nature of the questions did not suggest that Ah Loo was
in custody and vacated the district court's order granting Ah
Loo's motion to suppress.  Ah Loo , 94 Hawai# i at 212, 10 P.3d at
733.  
Here, Officer Cho was responding to a report of a hit
and run incident in the Target Store parking lot.  When he
arrived at the scene, he encountered three people and two
automobiles.  Officer Cho asked who had been driving the
vehicles, and then asked for drivers' licenses and insurance
information.  Lee-Kwai was asked two simple, information-
gathering questions in a neutral, non-coercive manner.  Further,
at the hearing on the motion to suppress and on appeal, Lee-Kwai
failed to allege that Officer Cho held Lee-Kwai's vehicular
information for a period of time in excess of what was necessary
to establish collateral issues such as ownership and insurance
coverage of the vehicle, or to provide any support for the
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
proposition that he was subjected to sustained or coercive
questioning that would trigger Miranda.  See State v. Kalai, 56
Haw. 366, 370, 537 P.2d 8, 12 (1975) (considering whether police
questioning was conducted in a coercive or overbearing manner);
Melemai, 64 Haw. at 481, 643 P.2d at 543 (factoring in whether a
person has been "deprived of his freedom of action in any
significant way"); Patterson, 59 Haw. at 364, 581 P.2d at 756 (no
coercive circumstances where questioning is properly confined and
limited to what is minimally necessary to decide a reasonable
course of investigatory action).  Instead, the uncontroverted
evidence establishes that Lee-Kwai was asked two questions over a
short period of time and issued a citation soon thereafter.
Therefore, Lee-Kwai was not in custody and was not entitled to
Miranda warnings.  See State v. Pahio, 58 Haw. 323, 327, 568 P.2d
1200, 1204 (1977) (noting that no Miranda  warning is necessary if
the defendant's statement was not the result of custodial
interrogation), abrogated on other grounds by State v. Cabag bag,
127 Hawai #i 302, 277 P.3d 1027 (2012).  Accordingly, the District
Court erred when it granted Lee-Kwai's motion to suppress, and we
do not reach the State's second point of error.
Therefore, the Order Granting Motion to Suppress
Evidence, entered on April 5, 2017 by the District Court of the
Third Circuit, is vacated and the case is remanded to the
District Court for further proceedings that are not inconsistent
with this order.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai #i, May 25, 2018.
On the briefs:
Kori A. Weinberger,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Hawai #i,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Taryn R. Tomasa,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
5