NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1/ HRS § 707-730(1)(a) provides:
(1) A person commits the offense of sexual assault in the
first degree if:
(a) The person knowingly subjects another person to an act
of sexual penetration by strong compulsion[.]NO. CAAP-14-0000987
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
DAVID T. FLEMING, Defendant-Appellant.
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CRIMINAL NO. 06-1-0570(1))
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By:  Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i (State) charged
Defendant-Appellant David T. Fleming (Fleming) by indictment with
first-degree sexual assault.  The indictment charged Fleming with
knowingly subjecting the complaining witness (CW) by strong
compulsion to an act of sexual penetration, namely, placing his
penis into her genital opening, in violation of Hawaii Revised
Statutes (HRS) § 707-730(1)(a) (2014).1/
Fleming was the driver of a taxicab van who transported
the CW from a nightclub back to her apartment complex.  The
alleged sexual assault took place in the parking lot of the CW's
apartment complex.  The CW's version of the charged incidentNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2contrasted sharply with Fleming's version.  According to the CW,
after she exited the van, Fleming shoved her against the van,
forced her legs apart, and subjected her to sexual penetration. 
According to Fleming, when the CW exited the van, she began
hugging and kissing him, he told her to wait so that he could
retrieve a condom, and when he returned, they went back inside
the van and engaged in consensual sexual intercourse.  The jury
found Fleming guilty as charged of first-degree sexual assault. 
The trial was significantly delayed by examinations to
determine whether Fleming was competent to proceed to trial.  The
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court) granted two
separate motions filed by Fleming's counsel for mental
examination to determine Fleming's fitness to proceed to trial. 
After each court-ordered mental examination, the three appointed
examiners all opined that Fleming was competent to proceed, and
the Circuit Court so ruled.  The case proceeded to trial.  After
the State had presented its case in chief, Fleming's counsel
informed the Circuit Court that he had concerns about Fleming's
fitness to proceed and orally moved for a third mental
examination to determine Fleming's competency.  The Circuit Court
denied the motion.  
After the jury returned its guilty verdict, Fleming
moved for a new trial.  The Circuit Court denied Fleming's new
trial motion, but suspended the proceedings because it determined
that Fleming was incompetent to proceed to sentencing. 
Eventually, the Circuit Court found that Fleming was competent to
proceed to sentencing, and it sentenced Fleming to twenty years
of imprisonment.  
On appeal, Fleming contends that: (1) the indictment
was defective; (2) the Circuit Court erred in denying his motion
to dismiss the indictment for violation of the speedy trial
requirements of Hawai #i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 48
(2000); (3) the Circuit Court erred in denying Fleming's motion
for a new trial because: (a) he was tried while incompetent, (b)
the Circuit Court should have suspended the trial to conduct aNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 The Honorable Joel E. August presided over Fleming's trial and his
new trial motion.  The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided over subsequent
proceedings at issue in this appeal.2/
3/ Fleming did not raise lack of penal responsibility as a defense at
trial.
3third competency examination, and (c) he was denied a fair trial
by prosecutorial misconduct during closing argument; (4) the
Circuit Court erred in its jury instructions; (5) Fleming's trial
counsel provided ineffective assistance; and (6) the Circuit
Court committed significant errors and Fleming was denied a fair
tribunal in the post-verdict proceedings regarding his fitness to
proceed.2/
As explained below, we remand the case for further
proceedings with respect to Fleming's motion for new trial.       
BACKGROUND
I.  Pretrial Mental Examinations
A Maui grand jury returned an indictment against
Fleming on November 3, 2006, for first-degree sexual assault.  In
October 2007, Fleming's counsel filed a motion for mental
examination pursuant to HRS § 704-404 to determine (1) penal
responsibility -- whether as a result of physical or mental
disease, disorder, or defect, Fleming lacked substantial capacity
either to appreciate the wrongfulness of his conduct or to
conform his conduct to the requirements of law at the time of the
charged offense; and (2) competency to proceed to trial --
whether as a result of a physical or mental disease, disorder, or
defect, Fleming lacked capacity to understand the proceedings
against him or to assist in his own defense.  The Circuit Court
granted the motion and appointed a panel of three examiners:
Martin Blinder, M.D. (Dr. Blinder), Tom Cunningham, Ph.D. (Dr.
Cunningham), and George Choi, Psy.D. (Dr. Choi).  After examining
Fleming, all three examiners opined that Fleming was penally
responsible at the time of the charged offense and that he was
competent to proceed to trial.3/  The Circuit Court held a NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4hearing on February 27, 2008, and it found Fleming competent to
proceed to trial.
In August 2008, Fleming's counsel filed a second motion
for mental examination pursuant to HRS § 704-404 to determine
Fleming's competency to proceed to trial.  The Circuit Court
granted the motion and appointed the same three examiners to
examine Fleming.  After conducting their examinations, the three
examiners again opined that Fleming was competent to proceed to
trial.  The Circuit Court held a hearing on December 3, 2008, and
it found Fleming competent to proceed to trial.
II.  Trial
A.
The Circuit Court conducted jury selection on January
11, 2010, and the evidentiary portion of the trial began on
January 12, 2010.  The following evidence was adduced at trial.  
On the night in question, Fleming was working as a
taxicab driver.  At about 11:30 p.m., he drove the CW from a
nightclub to her residence, which was a short distance away.  The
CW resided in an apartment complex in Lahiana.  The CW was five
feet four inches tall and weighed about 125 to 130 pounds. 
Fleming was six feet tall and weighed about 220 to 230 pounds. 
At the time of the charged incident, the CW was twenty-four years
old and Fleming was forty-six years old.
According to the CW, on the night in question, she made
plans to go to a nightclub in Lahaina to meet up with the
bartender, who had invited her to come.  The CW knew the
bartender from prior visits to the nightclub.  The CW took a taxi
from her apartment to the nightclub, which was less than a five
minute ride away, and arrived shortly after 9:00 p.m.  The
bartender was working, and the nightclub was not busy and was
"almost deserted."  Prior to leaving her apartment, the CW had
drank two beers for "[l]iquid courage" because she was "not used
to being that forward."  Upon arriving at the nightclub, the CW
greeted the bartender who made her a special drink called a
"gummy bear."  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5During the course of the evening, the CW drank a total of four
gummy bears made by the bartender.
At the nightclub, the CW played pool with the
bartender.  At some point, the CW and the bartender went to the
VIP room, a private room away from the common area of the
nightclub.  While alone in the VIP room, the CW and the bartender
became intimate and engaged in consensual sexual intercourse.
After the CW and the bartender left the VIP room, the CW asked
for a taxi and had her last gummy bear drink before leaving.  The
CW placed her sobriety level when she left the nightclub as
between a five and a six, with level one being "completely sober"
and level ten being "almost unconscious, passing out intoxicated,
very intoxicated[.]"  The CW did not drink that often, and the
drinks affected her, making her feel "giddy and tipsy."  
A nightclub employee escorted the CW up the stairs from
the nightclub and helped her get into a taxicab van.  Fleming was
the taxi driver.  The CW did not recall ever having seen Fleming
before.  The CW gave Fleming the name of her apartment complex
and her building number, but did not engage in any other
conversation with Fleming during the short drive to her home.
According to the CW, Fleming drove into the parking lot
of the CW's apartment complex and parked near the CW's building. 
As the CW was trying to get money from her purse, Fleming opened
the door and helped her out of the van.  While the CW was
standing on the ground and still reaching into her purse, Fleming
shoved the CW backwards against the van.  The CW tried to use her
hands to push Fleming away, but she was not able to do so. 
Fleming held his arm against the CW's upper chest area.  Fleming
leaned all his weight against the CW and then tried to kiss her
and to put his tongue in her mouth.  The CW shut her teeth as
hard as she could.  She did not scream.  Fleming placed his knee
between the CW's thighs and forced her legs apart.  The CW felt
Fleming doing something with his pants, and then he quickly put
his penis into her vagina.  Fleming "pushed" about four times, NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6and then stepped back.  When Fleming stepped back, the CW pushed
him away and ran as fast as she could to her apartment.
Upon entering her apartment, the CW "ran to the
bathroom and cried in the shower."  While in the shower, she had
a very severe panic attack, her heart was racing, she had trouble
breathing, and she thought she was going to faint.  The CW called
911, and a paramedic came to her apartment.  The CW did not tell
anyone that night, including her father with whom she resided,
that she had been sexually assaulted.  The following day, the CW
went to the police station, reported that she had been raped the
night before, and provided a description of the taxi driver.
The CW testified that she did not want to have sex with
Fleming and that she did not consent or agree to have sexual
relations with Fleming.  She did not believe that Fleming put on
or used a condom.  The CW said she sustained large bruises to her
elbow area as a result of Fleming's sexual assault.
After the CW reported the sexual assault to the police,
she was examined later that day by William Kepler, M.D. (Dr.
Kepler).  Dr. Kepler testified that his examination of the CW's
vaginal area did not show trauma or injury, but he noted that in
the large majority of cases, sexual intercourse, whether forced
or otherwise, does not usually result in injury.  Dr. Kepler
observed bruises on the CW's right elbow and a scratch on her
right shoulder.  Dr. Kepler testified that the bruises he
observed on the CW's elbow were consistent with someone being
pushed up against a car and striking their elbow on the vehicle.
Retired Detective Donald Simpson (Detective Simpson)
testified that prior to retiring from the Maui Police Department,
he had been assigned to investigate the CW's sexual assault
complaint.  As part of his investigation, he conducted a recorded
interview of Fleming, after Fleming waived his  Miranda rights. 
The State played the recorded interview at trial. 
Detective Simpson also prepared a six-person
photographic lineup, which included Fleming's picture, which he NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7presented to the CW.  When the CW selected a photograph, "[s]he
broke down and was crying [and] became upset."
B.
After the State rested, the Circuit Court advised
Fleming of his right to testify and his right not to testify.
Fleming informed the Circuit Court that he had decided to
testify.  Fleming's counsel then informed the Circuit Court that
counsel had concerns about Fleming's ability "to assist in his
defense to some degree" and that counsel believed "there is a
fitness to proceed issue[.]"  Without providing the specific
basis for his concern, counsel orally moved for a third mental
examination to determine Fleming's fitness to proceed.  The
Circuit Court denied counsel's motion.
In explaining its ruling, the Circuit Court stated that
it had reviewed "the reports from the prior two [mental
examinations] and all the reports have indicated that Mr. Fleming
is fit to proceed."  The Circuit Court further stated that it
"has not observed Mr. Fleming to have done or said anything in
court that would indicate that he is not competent or fit to
proceed."
C.
Fleming testified that prior to trial, he had been a
taxi driver for about fifteen years.  Fleming testified that, on
the night in question, he picked up the CW outside a nightclub on
Front Street at about 11:30 p.m.  The CW said where she wanted to
go, they exchanged names, and engaged in conversation.  Upon
arriving at the CW's apartment complex, Fleming parked, and he
walked around the van and opened the doors, which swung outward,
for the CW.  The CW paid Fleming while still sitting in the van,
and she stepped out of the van.
According to Fleming, the CW placed her arms above
Fleming's shoulders and began kissing and hugging him.  Fleming
asked the CW if she wanted to go to her apartment, but the CW did
not say anything.  Fleming asked the CW if she would like "to do
a quickie[,]" meaning have sex immediately.  The CW did not sayNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
8anything, but kept on hugging and kissing Fleming.  Fleming told
the CW to wait, and he went back to the driver's side of the van
to get condoms that were in his jacket.  By the time he returned,
the CW had gotten back into the van and was sitting on one of the
two passenger bench seats.  The CW proceeded to tell Fleming
about her activities at the nightclub.  She then came back
outside the van and they kissed some more.  Fleming took out a
condom and put it on.  But just as he was doing so, a car drove
into the parking lot and parked.  Fleming moved forward and the
CW leaned backwards.  Fleming watched someone get out of the
parked car and walk away.  When Fleming turned back, the CW was
bent over on the front back seat and "was sort of face flat on
the seat."  Fleming rubbed the CW's crotch area, and then Fleming
"got behind [the CW]" and engaged in consensual sexual
intercourse with the CW.
Fleming testified that the condom broke, and he
"stepped back a foot or so and did my fly."  The CW stood up, and
Fleming put the money the CW had given him for cab fare back in
the CW's purse.  The CW grabbed her purse and hurriedly ran off. 
The CW looked angry as she ran off, like Fleming "spoiled her
day."  Fleming testified that he did not at any time force the CW
to have sex with him.
D.
The jury returned a verdict of guilty as charged.
III. Post-trial proceedings.
After the jury returned its verdict, Fleming obtained
new counsel, who filed a motion for new trial.  Fleming argued
that he was entitled to a new trial because he was incompetent
during trial; the Circuit Court erred in denying his motion
during trial for mental examination; and the prosecutor had
engaged in misconduct during closing argument.  In support of his
incompetency claims, Fleming submitted the report of Marvin W.
Acklin, Ph.D. (Dr. Acklin), a psychologist that Fleming had 
retained after trial to examine him.  The Circuit Court ordered
another mental examination of Fleming to determine whether he hadNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4/ We note that on October 1, 2015, Fleming filed an application to
transfer this appeal to the supreme court.  On November 3, 2015, the supreme
court denied Fleming's application for transfer.  Thereafter, the merit panel
for this appeal was assigned on December 28, 2015. 
9been competent during trial, and whether he was currently
competent to proceed to sentencing.
After the court-appointed mental examiners completed
their examinations, the parties stipulated that Fleming was not
competent to proceed to sentencing, and the Circuit Court
suspended the proceedings.  The Circuit Court denied Fleming's
motion for new trial.  In doing so, the Circuit Court did not
reach the merits of whether Fleming had been competent during
trial, but determined that Fleming had failed to exercise due
diligence in obtaining the new evidence he presented in support
of his claim that he was incompetent during trial. 
While the proceedings were suspended, the Circuit Court
determined that Fleming had violated the conditions of his
release, and it revoked his conditional release and committed him
to the custody of the Director of Health for detention, care, and
treatment at the Hawai# i State Hospital.  Eventually, the Circuit
Court determined that Fleming was competent to proceed to
sentencing.  On July 18, 2014, the Circuit Court sentenced
Fleming to twenty years of imprisonment.  This appeal followed.4/
DISCUSSION
I.
Fleming contends that the indictment was defective
because it failed to allege: (1) the statutory definition of the
term "strong compulsion"; and (2) the lack of legal consent.  We
disagree.
Because Fleming challenges the sufficiency of his
indictment for the first time on appeal, we apply the liberal
construction standard.  See State v. Tominiko, 126 Hawai #i 68,
76, 266 P.3d 1122, 1130 (2011).  Under this standard, the
indictment is afforded "a presumption of validity[,]" and a
conviction will not be overturned "unless the defendant can show NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5/ HRS § 707-700 (2014) defines the term "strong compulsion" as follows:
"Strong compulsion" means the use of or attempt to use one
or more of the following to overcome a person:
(1) A threat, express or implied, that places a person in
fear of bodily injury to the individual or another
person, or in fear that the person or another person
will be kidnapped;
(2) A dangerous instrument; or
(3) Physical force.
10prejudice or that the indictment cannot within reason be
construed to charge a crime."  State v. Hitchcock, 123 Hawai #i
369, 378, 235 P.3d 365, 374 (2010).
The indictment in this case tracks the language of HRS
§ 707-730(1)(a), which defines the charged offense of first-
degree sexual assault.  Generally, a charge which tracks the
language of the statute proscribing the offense is sufficient. 
See State v. Cordeiro , 99 Hawai #i 390, 406, 56 P.3d 692, 708
(2002); State v. Silva , 67 Haw. 581, 585, 698 P.2d 293, 296
(1985).  Fleming's contention that the indictment was deficient
for failing to allege the statutory definition of "strong
compulsion" is without merit.  The statutory definition of the
term "strong compulsion"5/ is consistent with the term's commonly
understood meaning.  Therefore, the State was not required to
allege the statutory definition for the indictment to be
sufficient and to provide Fleming with fair notice of the
accusation against him.  See State v. Mita, 124 Hawai #i 385, 392,
245 P.3d 458, 465 (2010). 
We also reject Fleming's claim that the indictment was
insufficient for failing to allege lack of legal consent.  The
State charged Fleming with first-degree sexual assault by strong
compulsion.  Consent is a defense, and the State was not required
to allege lack of legal consent for the charge to be sufficient. 
See State v. Adams, 64 Haw. 568, 569-70, 645 P.2d 308, 309-10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6/ HRS § 806–29 provides:
Exceptions need not be negatived.  No indictment for any
offense created or defined by statute shall be deemed
objectionable for the reason that it fails to negative any
exception, excuse, or proviso contained in the statute creating or
defining the offense.  The fact that the charge is made shall be
considered as an allegation that no legal excuse for the doing of
the act existed in a particular case.
7/ At the hearing on Fleming's motion to dismiss, the Circuit Court
specifically found that the 62-day period from 2/10/09 to 4/13/09 was
excludable.  The Circuit Court's statements and the discussion at the hearing
also indicate that it found the 35-day period from 4/13/09 to 5/18/09 was
excludable, but that it erroneously referred to this excludable period as
"from April 4th to May 7th[,]" a period of 33 days.  Because we are convinced
that the Circuit Court intended to exclude the period from 4/13/09 to 5/18/09,
we will use this time period, which amounts to 35 days, in our analysis of the
Circuit Court's denial of Fleming's motion to dismiss.            
11(1982) (concluding that "indictments need not anticipate and
negate possible defenses"); HRS § 806-29 (2014).6/
II.
Fleming contends that the Circuit Court erred in
denying his motion to dismiss the indictment for violation of the
speedy trial requirements of HRPP Rule 48.  We disagree.
Fleming was indicted on November 3, 2006, and the
initial trial date was set for January 29, 2007.  However, the
trial was delayed numerous times, including delays resulting from 
Fleming's motions for competency and penal responsibility
examinations and continuances stipulated to by the parties.
On July 7, 2009, Fleming filed a motion to dismiss the
indictment for violation of HRPP Rule 48.  The motion to dismiss
asserted that: (1) 975 days had elapsed from the filing of the
indictment to the filing of the motion to dismiss, (2) 708 days
were excludable, (3) resulting in 267 countable speedy-trial
days, 87 days over the 180-day limit.  In denying Fleming's
motion, the Circuit Court found that an additional 97 days were
excludable: (1) the period from 2/10/09 to 4/13/09 (62 days) and
(2) the period from 4/13/09 to 5/18/09 (35 days).7/  Therefore,
the number of elapsed countable days was below the 180-day limit.
On appeal, Fleming challenges the Circuit Court's
determination that the two additional time periods wereNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
12excludable.  HRPP Rule 48(c) sets forth periods of time that
"shall be excluded in computing the time for trial
commencement[.]"  Periods of excludable time include:
(2) periods that delay the commencement of trial and
are caused by congestion of the trial docket when the
congestion is attributable to exceptional circumstances;
(3) periods that delay the commencement of trial and
are caused by a continuance granted at the request or with
the consent of the defendant or defendant's counsel;  
(4) periods that delay the commencement of trial and
are caused by a continuance granted at the request of the
prosecutor if:
(i) the continuance is granted because of the
unavailability of evidence material to the prosecution's
case, when the prosecutor has exercised due diligence to
obtain such evidence and there are reasonable grounds to
believe that such evidence will be available at a later
date; or
(ii) the continuance is granted to allow the
prosecutor additional time to prepare the prosecutor's case
and additional time is justified because of the exceptional
circumstances of the case; [and] 
. . . 
(8) other periods of delay for good cause.
With respect to the period from 2/10/09 to 4/13/09,
after Fleming was found competent to proceed for a second time on 
December 3, 2008, the Circuit Court set the trial for February 9,
2009.  On February 4, 2009, the State moved to continue the
trial, asserting that the State's primary witnesses, including
the CW, were not available for trial on February 9, 2009.  The
Circuit Court granted the State's motion and continued the trial
to April 13, 2009.  
At the hearing on Fleming's motion to dismiss, the
State represented that because of the extensive trial delays
(over 700 days), most of which were attributable to requests by
Fleming, the State was unable to find its witnesses for the
February 9, 2009, trial date despite the exercise of due
diligence.  The State asserted that one witness moved from
Hawai#i, one passed away, and another gave birth to two children. 
Fleming did not dispute the State's representations regarding theNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
8/ See footnote 7, supra.
13unavailability of its witnesses and its exercise of due diligence
after these representations were made at the hearing.  The
Circuit Court found that the State's key witnesses were
unavailable for trial on February 9, 2009, and that the State had
exercised due diligence.  Accordingly, it found that the time
period from February 10, 2009, to April 13, 2009, (62 days) was
excludable.  We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
excluding this time period.  See HRPP Rule 48(c)(4).
With respect to the period from 4/13/09 to 5/18/09, the
Circuit Court judge on April 13, 2009, was in the midst of a ten-
week civil trial, which he estimated would last for another two
to three weeks.  In addition, Fleming's counsel stated that he
was not available for trial during the weeks of May 4, 2009, and
May 11, 2009.  The Circuit Court continued the trial from April
13, 2009, to July 13, 2009.  
At the hearing on Fleming's motion to dismiss, the
Circuit Court found that the time period from April 13, 2009, to
May 18, 2009 (35 days), was excludable.8/  We conclude that the
Circuit Court did not err in this determination.  Under the
particular circumstances of this case, the time period from April
13, 2009, to May 18, 2009 (35 days), was excludable for good
cause and due to the unavailability of Fleming's counsel.  The
Circuit Court judge had presided over extensive pretrial
proceedings in Fleming's case, including two series of mental
examinations and related hearings.  In addition, on April 13,
2009, the Circuit Court judge was in the seventh week of a ten-
week trial.  Under these circumstances, it would have been
onerous and unreasonable to ask another Circuit Court judge to
substitute as the presiding judge over either Fleming's trial or
the ongoing ten-week trial.  We conclude that there was good
cause for a short trial delay to enable the Circuit Court judge
to remain as the presiding judge in Fleming's case and to
complete the ongoing civil trial.  See HRPP Rule 48(c)(8).  WeNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
9/ We note that the State argues that the period from May 18, 2009, to
July 13, 2009, should also be excluded from the speedy trial computation
because this period of delay was caused by the request for a continuance by
Fleming's counsel due to counsel's unavailability from May 4, 2009, to May 18,
2009.  We need not reach this argument because the periods excluded by the
Circuit Court, which we have affirmed, were sufficient to reduce the number of
countable days below the 180-day threshold.
14further conclude that the remaining delay from May 4, 2009, to
May 18, 2009, was required by the unavailability of Fleming's
counsel and was properly excluded.  See HRPP Rule 48(c)(3).9/ 
III.
Fleming contends that the Circuit Court erred in
denying his motion for a new trial because: (1) the Circuit Court
should have suspended the trial to conduct a third competency
examination; (2) he was tried while incompetent; and (3) he was
denied a fair trial by prosecutorial misconduct during closing
argument.  
As explained below, we conclude that the Circuit Court
did not err in denying Fleming's motion for a third competency
examination during trial based on the then-existing record. 
Fleming's motion for new trial also raised the claim that he was
incompetent during trial, which was supported by evidence that
had not previously been presented to the Circuit Court.  The
Circuit Court, however, did not render a decision on the merits
regarding Fleming's claim that he was incompetent during trial.
Instead, it denied this aspect of Fleming's motion for a new
trial based on its conclusion that Fleming's trial counsel could
have obtained the newly-proffered evidence supporting this claim
before trial through the exercise of due diligence.  Because "the
criminal trial of an incompetent defendant violates due
process[,]" Cooper v. Oklahoma , 517 U.S. 348, 354 (1996), we
conclude that the Circuit Court erred in denying Fleming's motion
for new trial without ruling on the merits regarding whether he
was incompetent during trial.  We remand for further proceedings
with respect to this determination.  Finally, we conclude that
the Circuit Court did not err in denying Fleming's motion for a NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
15new trial to the extent that the motion was based on his
allegations of prosecutorial misconduct during closing argument.
A.
1.
The background facts regarding Fleming's competency-
related claims in his new trial motion are as follows.  On two
occasions before trial, Fleming's counsel filed motions for
mental examination to determine Fleming's competency to proceed
to trial.  On both occasions, the three court-appointed examiners
unanimously opined that Fleming was competent to proceed to
trial.  Based on their opinions, the Circuit Court on February
27, 2008, and again on December 3, 2008, found Fleming competent
to proceed to trial.
Trial proceedings began with jury selection on January
11, 2010.  After the State rested its case-in-chief, Fleming
informed the Circuit Court that he had decided to testify. 
Fleming's counsel then informed the Circuit Court that based on
counsel's discussions with Fleming that day, counsel had concerns
about Fleming's fitness to proceed and ability to assist in his
defense.  Fleming's counsel did not provide specifics regarding
the basis for his concerns, but orally moved for a third
competency examination.  The Circuit Court denied the motion,
explaining as follows:
Well, the Court has reviewed the reports from the
prior two [mental examinations] and all the reports have
indicated that Mr. Fleming is fit to proceed.  That he's not
significantly impaired by some mental or physical condition
which would prevent him from understanding the proceeding
that he's participating in and working with his attorney to
present a defense.
  
The Court has not observed Mr. Fleming to have done or
said anything in court that would indicate that he is not
competent or fit to proceed.
Fleming testified on January 20, 2010, and the jury
returned its verdict of guilty as charged on January 25, 2010. 
On February 11, 2010, Fleming's trial counsel was replaced by new
counsel.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
162.  
On March 8, 2010, Fleming filed a motion for new trial. 
In his motion, Fleming argued, among other things, that he was
entitled to a new trial because (1) the Circuit Court had erred
in denying his request for a competency examination during trial
and (2) he was incompetent during trial.  
In support of his motion, Fleming presented a report
prepared by Dr. Acklin, a psychologist who had been retained by
the defense to examine Fleming.  Dr. Acklin also testified at a 
hearing on Fleming's motion for new trial.  Dr. Acklin examined
Fleming on February 12, 2010, and on March 5, 2010, and he also
considered, among other things, Fleming's medical records,
reports of Fleming's pretrial mental examinations, information
provided by members of Fleming's family, information provided by
Fleming's trial attorney, and Fleming's trial testimony.  In his
report, Dr. Acklin distinguished between Fleming's "basic
competency" (his understanding of the "role of [the] judge, jury,
defender, prosecutor, etc.") and his "decisional competency"
("ability to rationally consider, weigh, and apply relevant
information to his legal situation"), such as whether to accept a
plea offer or testify at trial.  Dr. Acklin noted that while
"[s]uperficial assessment" of Fleming's basic competency
suggested that he was fit to proceed, close assessment of his
decisional competency reflected "significant disturbance in his
reasoning to the degree that his rational capacities are
impaired."  Dr. Acklin opined that Fleming's "legal impairments
arise out of his chronic schizophrenia, which impaired his
ability to rationally understand the proceedings and assist in
his defense[.]"  Dr. Acklin opined that Fleming was not competent
to proceed at the time of his trial and that he was not currently
competent to stand trial.
3.
The Circuit Court ordered a mental examination to
determine whether Fleming had been competent during trial and
whether he was currently competent to proceed.  Dr. Blinder andNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
17Dr. Cunningham, who had conducted pretrial mental examinations of
Fleming, were appointed to conduct post-trial mental
examinations.  Duke E. Wagner, Ph.D (Dr. Wagner), was also
appointed to conduct a post-trial examination as a substitute for
Dr. Choi, one of the pretrial examiners.  The post-trial
examiners appointed by the Circuit Court prepared reports and all
testified at hearings held on Fleming's new trial motion.    
Dr. Blinder prepared a report dated May 29, 2010.  Dr.
Blinder observed that "this is a most unusual and oftentimes
perplexing case."  Dr. Blinder acknowledged that he had found
Fleming competent to proceed during his two pretrial mental
examinations.  Dr. Blinder, however, stated that after his post-
trial examination, he changed his opinion and now concluded that
Fleming had been incompetent at trial.  Dr. Blinder also believed
that Fleming was currently incompetent to proceed.  Dr. Blinder
stated that "[i]n many respects, Mr. Fleming demonstrates
competence, but in the one element somewhat outside the clinical
purview -- his relationship with defense counsel -- he has
clearly proven to be incompetent."  
Dr. Blinder asserted:
If the attorney says, Mr. Fleming, you understand you've
been charged with rape.  He'll say, yes, sir. . . . that's
the simple concrete short answer, short answers to a short
question.
But should the attorney then want to explore with him
what went on during this rape and why he's innocent and why
it never happened, then you see Mr. Fleming slowly start to
slide off into the deep end, into a pool of jello, where you
can't get his mind around the nuances that he's facing in a
charge of a sexual offense.
Dr. Blinder explained that although he found Fleming
competent before trial, with the additional data Dr. Blinder
received post-trial, Dr. Blinder now felt "on balance, [Fleming]
is incompetent.  That doesn't mean there aren't islands of
competence remaining, but they're not large enough to get him
over the hump."
Dr. Cunningham prepared a report dated August 26, 2010. 
Dr. Cunningham stated that his pretrial diagnosis of Fleming asNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
18having no mental disorder was incorrect and that he now diagnosed
Fleming as having schizophrenia, residual type.  In his post-
trial examination, Dr. Cunningham observed that Fleming's
competency "was at first mildly impaired and then deteriorated
significantly toward the end of [their] nearly two hour meeting." 
As Fleming became tired, he became more disorganized.  He did not
perform well on testing designed to assess his ability to
cooperate rationally with counsel and planning of legal strategy. 
At Dr. Cunningham's request, the Circuit Court excused him from
having to provide an after-the-fact, retrospective opinion
regarding Fleming's competency during the trial.  Dr. Cunningham
opined that Fleming was likely competent to proceed to
sentencing, since a sentencing hearing would likely be brief and
require relatively little input from Fleming.  However, Dr.
Cunningham opined that should Fleming be retried, "[t]here is
good reason to believe that . . . he would not meet the criteria
for fitness during at least some portion of his trial."  In
particular, Dr. Cunningham stated there was a question regarding
whether Fleming "will decompensate in response to the stress of
an imminent or current court appearance and/or prolonged demands
upon his concentration."  
Dr. Wagner prepared a report dated September 14, 2010. 
Dr. Wagner observed that "[t]he longer the defendant was
interviewed, the more apparent it became that some of his
thoughts were not logical, rational in nature."  With respect to
Fleming's current competency, Dr. Wagner opined that based on his
post-trial examination of Fleming, Fleming was not currently
competent to proceed.  Dr. Wagner explained:
It is important to understand that [Fleming] can present an
initial demeanor that appears appropriate with no real
indication of an obvious mental illness.  However, after
going beyond the surface, examining all of the information
available, and spending meaningful time with [Fleming], it
is apparent that due to his underlying chronic mental
illness, he is not able to truly understand the criminal
proceedings against him nor truly be able to adequately
assist in his own defense.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
19With respect to whether Fleming had been competent
during his January 2010 trial, Dr. Wagner declined to render an
opinion because he had not directly interviewed Fleming close to
that date.  Dr. Wagner stated that he was "unable to provide a
reliable opinion" concerning whether Fleming had been competent
at the time of his trial.  Dr. Wagner, however, noted that there
were "materials/documents which bring into question [Fleming's]
mental health at [the time of his trial]."
4.
The Circuit Court held hearings on Fleming's motion for
new trial on November 12, 2010, January 21, 2011, and January 24,
2011.  After the hearings, the Circuit Court issued "Findings of
Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Defendant's Motion
for New Trial" (Order Denying New Trial) on March 16, 2011.  In
its Order Denying New Trial, the Circuit Court noted that the
parties had stipulated that Fleming was not presently fit to
proceed to sentencing.  The Circuit Court found that Fleming was
not presently fit to proceed, and it suspended the proceedings.   
In denying Fleming's motion for new trial, the Circuit
Court rejected Fleming's claim that it had abused its discretion
in denying Fleming's oral motion during trial for a mental
examination.  The Circuit Court ruled that based on the evidence
and facts at its disposal, it was reasonable for the Circuit
Court to conclude that there was no rational basis to doubt
Fleming's competency.
With respect to Fleming's claim that he was entitled to
a new trial because he was incompetent during his trial, the
Circuit Court did not make a determination on the merits on
whether Fleming had been incompetent during the trial.  Instead,
the Circuit Court denied Fleming's claim on the ground that
Fleming was relying upon evidence that could have been obtained
by Fleming's counsel through the exercise of due diligence before
trial.  In particular, the Circuit Court noted that the most
critical evidence relied upon by Fleming was Dr. Acklin's
evaluation, which in turn was based on interviews with FlemingNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
20and Fleming's trial counsel and information provided by Fleming's
family.  The Circuit Court further noted that Fleming's counsel
had been concerned about Fleming's competency before trial, and
there was evidence that Fleming's medical condition had not
changed since 1985.  The Circuit Court ruled that because
substantial evidence of Fleming's alleged pretrial unfitness
could have been obtained by his trial counsel before trial, the
requirements for granting a new trial based on newly discovered
evidence had not been met.
B.
The following legal principles are relevant in
evaluating the Circuit Court's denial of Fleming's new trial
motion with respect to his competency-related claims.  The United
States Supreme Court has repeatedly recognized that
"the criminal trial of an incompetent defendant violates due
process."  Nor is the significance of this right open to
dispute.  As Justice KENNEDY recently emphasized:
"Competence to stand trial is rudimentary, for upon it
depends the main part of those rights deemed essential
to a fair trial, including the right to effective
assistance of counsel, the rights to summon, to
confront, and to cross-examine witnesses, and the
right to testify on one's own behalf or to remain
silent without penalty for doing so."  
The test for incompetence is also well settled.  A defendant
may not be put to trial unless he "'has sufficient present
ability to consult with his lawyer with a reasonable degree
of rational understanding and a rational as well as factual
understanding of the proceedings against him.'"
Cooper, 517 U.S. at 354 (citations, footnotes, brackets, and
ellipsis points omitted).  The Court has also observed:
For the defendant, the consequences of an erroneous
determination of competence are dire.  Because he lacks the
ability to communicate effectively with counsel, he may be
unable to exercise other "rights deemed essential to a fair
trial."  After making the "profound" choice whether to plead
guilty, the defendant who proceeds to trial
"will ordinarily have to decide whether to waive his
'privilege against compulsory self-incrimination' by
taking the witness stand; if the option is available,
he may have to decide whether to waive his 'right to
trial by jury'; and, in consultation with counsel, he
may have to decide whether to waive his 'right to NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
21confront his accusers' by declining to cross-examine
witnesses for the prosecution." 
With the assistance of counsel, the defendant also is called
upon to make myriad smaller decisions concerning the course
of his defense.  The importance of these rights and
decisions demonstrates that an erroneous determination of
competence threatens a "fundamental component of our
criminal justice system" -- the basic fairness of the trial
itself.
Id. at 364 (citations, footnote, and brackets omitted).
With respect to a trial court's authority to suspend
proceedings and order a mental examination, HRS § 704-404(1) and
(2) (Supp. 2009), at the time relevant to this case, provided:
(1)  Whenever . . . there is reason to doubt the
defendant's fitness to proceed, or reason to believe that
the physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect of the
defendant will or has become an issue in the case, the court
may immediately suspend all further proceedings in the
prosecution.  If a trial jury has been empanelled, it shall
be discharged or retained at the discretion of the court. .
. .
(2)  Upon suspension of further proceedings in the
prosecution, the court shall appoint three qualified
examiners in felony cases . . . to examine and report upon
the physical and mental condition of the defendant.
The Hawai #i Supreme Court has stated:
Although HRS § 704–404 provides that the court may
suspend the proceedings and appoint an examiner or panel of
examiners once one of the triggering events occurs, a trial
court "is duty bound to sua sponte
 convene a hearing if it
itself has or is presented with rational basis for believing
that the physical or mental defect of a defendant will
become an issue on the question of fitness or
responsibility."  This duty required by HRS § 704–404
satisfies the procedural due process protections of article
I, section 5 of the Hawai# i Constitution, and the fourteenth
amendment to the United States Constitution.
 
Thus, when a trial court finds that there is "reason
to doubt" a defendant's fitness or "reason to believe" that
the defendant's mental or physical state will become an
issue in the case, the court is required to suspend the
proceedings and order an examination pursuant to HRS 
§ 704–404.
State v. Harter , 134 Hawai #i 308, 330-31, 340 P.3d 440, 462-63
(2014) (citations, footnote, and ellipsis points omitted).
C.
1.
Fleming argues that the Circuit Court erred in denying
his motion during trial for a mental examination.  We disagree.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
10/ As noted, after Fleming's trial, the Circuit Court ordered a mental
examination to determine whether Fleming had been competent during trial and
whether he was currently competent to proceed. 
22We review the Circuit Court's denial of a motion for a
mental examination to determine competency for abuse of
discretion.   State v. Castro, 93 Hawai# i 424, 426, 5 P.3d 414,
416 (2000).  We conclude that based on the record before it, the
Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Fleming's
motion during trial for a mental examination pursuant to HRS 
§ 704-404.  Fleming had undergone two separate pretrial
examinations pursuant to HRS § 704-404 in which the three
appointed examiners had all concluded that Fleming was competent
to proceed to trial.  In denying Fleming's motion during trial
for a mental examination, the Circuit Court stated that it had
not observed Fleming do or say anything in court to indicate that
he was not competent or fit to proceed.  In its Order Denying New
Trial, the Circuit Court also noted that Fleming, during his
trial testimony, "responded to every question from the attorneys
and jury, and provided a detailed chronology of his encounter
with the complaining witness, from the time [s]he entered his
taxi outside the bar to the time she left the taxi at her
apartment[.]"  Moreover, although Fleming's counsel expressed his
concern during the trial about Fleming's competence, counsel did
not provide any details about the basis for his concern.  Under
these circumstances, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not
abuse its discretion in determining that based on the record
before it, there was no rational basis to doubt Fleming's fitness
to proceed and in denying Fleming's motion during trial for a
mental examination.
2.
With respect to Fleming's post-trial claim that he was
incompetent during trial, we conclude that the Circuit Court
erred in failing to render a decision on the merits regarding
this claim .10/  A defendant has a constitutional right not to be
tried while incompetent.   Cooper, 517 U.S. at 354.  It is aNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
23violation of due process to convict a defendant who was
incompetent to assist in his or her defense at trial.  See id.  
Thus, the Circuit Court could not deny Fleming's motion for a new
trial without determining whether he was competent at the time of
trial.
The Circuit Court rejected Fleming's claim on the
ground that it was based on evidence that could have been
discovered prior to trial.  However, the evidence relied upon by
Dr. Acklin and the post-trial examiners appointed by the Circuit
Court included Fleming's trial testimony and Fleming's possible
reaction to the stress placed upon him by the trial process.  In
addition, while Fleming had undergone multiple pretrial mental
examinations, the post-trial examinations resulted in assessments
of Fleming's mental condition and competency that differed from
the pretrial assessments.  Dr. Blinder, in particular, who had
found Fleming competent to proceed to trial based on his pretrial
examinations, changed his opinion based on his post-trial
examination and concluded post-trial that Fleming had not been
competent at the time of Fleming's trial.  Under these
circumstances, we conclude that it was incumbent upon the Circuit
Court to address on the merits whether Fleming had been tried
while he was incompetent.
With respect to the appropriate remedy for the Circuit
Court's error, we acknowledge that given the passage of time, it
may be difficult for the Circuit Court on remand to render a
decision on Fleming's competency at the time of his trial. 
However, given the mental examinations conducted relatively close
in time after the conclusion of the trial; the trial record and
transcripts, which includes Fleming's trial testimony; and other
evidence regarding Fleming's mental status at the time of trial
which may be available, it appears that a retrospective
determination of Fleming's competency at the time of his trial
may be possible.  
We conclude that the following approach is appropriate. 
We will remand the case to give the Circuit Court the opportunityNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
11/ Defense counsel referred to the CW wearing "her 12-year-old sister's
mini skirt with no underwear."  The CW testified that she does not normally
wear underwear, and was not doing so on the night in question. 
24to determine whether Fleming was competent at the time he was
tried.  If the Circuit Court determines that Fleming was
incompetent at the time of his trial, or if the Circuit Court
finds that it is unable to make a reliable retrospective
determination of Fleming's competency at the time of his trial,
it shall vacate Fleming's conviction and grant him a new trial. 
If the Circuit Court determines that Fleming was competent at the
time of his trial, it shall reinstate its denial of Fleming's
motion for new trial with respect to this claim.  See United
States v. Makris, 535 F.2d 899, 904–905 (5th Cir. 1976)
(upholding retrospective determination of defendant's competency
at trial on remand);  United States v. Mason, 935 F.Supp. 745, 759
(W.D. N.C. 1996) (finding that the retrospective determination of
the defendant's competency during trial was possible).
D.
We reject Fleming claim that the Circuit Court erred in
ruling that he was not entitled to a new trial based on his
claims of prosecutorial misconduct in closing argument.
Fleming argues that the prosecutor's rebuttal closing
argument was improper because it was not confined to answering
new matters or arguments presented by Fleming and contained
disparaging comments about Fleming.  We disagree.
During his closing argument, Fleming's counsel referred
to the CW's testimony as delusional and asserted that she had
lied in her testimony.  Defense counsel argued that the CW had
engaged in consensual sex with Fleming, that she had flirted with
him, and that she had dressed provocatively and had initiated the
sexual encounter.11/  We conclude that the prosecutor's rebuttal,
which included comparing Fleming to the bartender and contrasting
the CW's consensual sexual encounter with the bartender with her
encounter with Fleming, for the purpose of refuting Fleming's
claim that the CW had engaged in consensual sex with Fleming, wasNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
25permissible.  The prosecutor's arguments were in rebuttal to
arguments raised by defense counsel in his closing argument and
constituted fair comment on the evidence.  State v. Clark, 83
Hawai#i 289, 304, 926 P.2d 194, 209 (1996) (concluding that a
prosecutor in closing argument is allowed wide latitude in
discussing the evidence and is permitted to comment on and draw
reasonable inferences from the evidence).
During closing argument, the prosecutor referred to the
humiliation and difficulties the CW, as victim of sexual assault, 
had to endure in reporting and testifying at trial about the
sexual assault.  Fleming apparently contends that these
references were improper as an emotional appeal to the jury for
sympathy for the CW.  However, Fleming's counsel had attacked the
CW's credibility, and we conclude that the prosecutor's
statements were permissible in light of these attacks.
IV.
Fleming contends that the Circuit Court erred in
instructing the jury because: (1) the instructions on strong
compulsion and ineffective consent constituted a constructive 
amendment of or fatal variance from the indictment; (2) there was
insufficient evidence to instruct the jury on strong compulsion
and ineffective consent; and (3) the unanimity instruction was
insufficient.  We conclude the Fleming is not entitled to relief
on his jury instruction claims.
A.
Consistent with the statutory definition of "strong
compulsion," the Circuit Court instructed the jury that strong
compulsion "means the use or attempt to use one or more of the
following to overcome a person.  One, a threat expressed or
implied that places a person in fear of bodily injury to the
individual or, two, physical force."
Fleming apparently contends that because the CW's
description of the sexual assault to the grand jury did not
include any verbal threats, instructing the petite jury that
strong compulsion could include an express or implied threat ofNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
26bodily injury constituted a constructive amendment of or fatal
variance from the indictment.  We disagree.  Fleming was charged
with committing sexual assault by strong compulsion, and the
Circuit Court's jury instruction correctly defined that term.  In
addition, the CW's version of the incident, which included
Fleming pushing her against the van, using all his weight to keep
her confined, and forcing her legs apart with his knee, could be
viewed as involving an implied threat by Fleming of bodily
injury.  The instruction on strong compulsion did not constitute
a constructive amendment of or a fatal variance from the
indictment. 
With respect to the instruction on ineffective consent,
as previously noted, consent is a defense, and the State was not
required to allege lack of legal consent in the indictment. 
Thus, the instruction on ineffective consent was not a
constructive amendment of or fatal variance from the indictment.
B. 
Contrary to Fleming's claim, there was sufficient
evidence to support the instructions on strong compulsion and
ineffective consent.  With respect to strong compulsion, the CW's
testimony regarding Fleming's use of physical force against her
could also be viewed as an implied threat of bodily injury.  The
evidence of the CW's alcohol consumption was sufficient to
support the Circuit Court's instruction on ineffective consent
due to intoxication. 
C. 
We reject Fleming's claim that the Circuit Court's
generic unanimity instruction (requiring unanimous agreement that
the same act has been proven) was insufficient.  See State v.
Jones, 96 Hawai #i 161, 176-77, 181, 29 P.3d 351, 366-67, 371
(2001) (concluding that absence of consent and ineffective
consent are alternative means, for which unanimity is not
required, of establishing lack of legal consent).  We note that
in addition to the generic unanimity instruction challenged by
Fleming, the Circuit Court instructed the jury that it "may notNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
27convict the defendant upon any charge that may apply to this case
unless it unanimously finds beyond a reasonable doubt that [the
CW] did not expressly or impliedly consent to the sexual
penetration by the defendant[.]"  Thus, the jury was specifically
instructed that it had to unanimously find that the CW did not
consent to sexual penetration.  
Moreover, in convicting Fleming, the jury must have
found that Fleming used strong compulsion.  By their definitions,
strong compulsion and consent are mutually exclusive.  State v.
Keomany, 97 Hawai# i 140, 149, 34 P.3d 1039, 1048 (App. 2000). 
Thus, any failure of the instructions to require unanimity
regarding the theories of absence of consent and ineffective
consent was harmless.
V.
Fleming argues that his trial counsel provided
ineffective assistance.  In reviewing a claim of ineffective
assistance of counsel, we ask whether when "viewed as a whole,
the assistance provided is 'within the range of competence
demanded of attorneys in criminal cases.'"  State v. Antone , 62
Haw. 346, 348, 615 P.2d 101, 104 (1980) (citation omitted).  In
order to establish a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, 
the defendant has the burden of demonstrating: "1) that there
were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of
skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or
omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial
impairment of a potentially meritorious defense."  State v.
Richie, 88 Hawai# i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998) (block
quote format and citation omitted).
We conclude that Fleming's claims of ineffective
assistance of trial counsel include matters that involve
potential strategic decisions of trial counsel which require
further development of the record to resolve.  With respect to
Fleming's claims that trial counsel was ineffective for failing
to do more to investigate and provide evidence to demonstrate
Fleming's lack of competency at trial, we note that trial counselNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
12/ The post-trial examiners appointed by Judge August had been provided
with prior reports prepared by Dr. Acklin. 
28twice moved for mental examinations before trial and moved a
third time for a mental examination during trial.  Based on the
existing record, we conclude that Fleming has not met his burden
of establishing that his trial counsel provided ineffective
assistance.  Our decision, however, is without prejudice to
Fleming raising his claims of ineffective assistance of counsel
pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 (2006) and seeking further development
of the record.
VI.
Fleming challenges several post-trial rulings by Judge
Loo, who took over the case after the denial of Fleming's motion
for new trial by Judge August and Judge August's retirement. 
Fleming contends that Judge Loo's actions, "both individually
and/or cumulatively, reveals" the violation of "Fleming's
procedural and substantive due process rights to a fair
tribunal[.]"  Fleming argues that Judge Loo erred in: (1)
replacing the three-member panel appointed by Judge August to
evaluate Fleming's competency to proceed to sentencing with a new
three-member panel and in restricting the database available to
the panel; (2) revoking Fleming's conditional release and
committing him for an extended period to the Hawai #i State
Hospital; (3) finding Fleming fit to proceed to sentencing; and
(4) denying Fleming's motion for recusal.  We conclude that
Fleming is not entitled to relief on these claims.
A.
Fleming argues that Judge Loo erred in appointing a new
three-member panel to determine his competency to proceed to
sentencing and in preventing them from reviewing reports prepared
by Dr. Acklin, Fleming's retained expert, and the prior panel
examiners.12/  Although we may not have taken the same actions, we
cannot say that Judge Loo abused her discretion in doing so.  At
the time relevant to this case, HRS § 704-404 provided that "each
examiner shall form and render diagnoses and opinions upon theNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
29physical and mental condition of the defendant independently from
the other examiners[.]"  HRS § 704-404(3) (Supp. 2008).  In
addition, the statute provided that "[w]here more than one
examiner is appointed, [the examiner's report shall include] a
statement that the diagnosis and opinion rendered were arrived at
independently of any other examiner, unless there is a showing to
the court of a clear need for communication between or among the
examiners for clarification."  HRS § 704-404(4)(f) (Supp. 2008). 
The actions taken by Judge Loo were in furtherance of the policy
of HRS § 704-404 to secure independent assessments by the
appointed examiners, and we cannot say that Judge Loo abused her
discretion in taking such actions.    
B.
Fleming contends that Judge Loo abused her discretion
in finding Fleming competent to proceed to sentencing based on
the opinion of psychologist Alex Lichton, Ph.D. (Dr. Lichton). 
We disagree.  
Dr. Lichton, one of the newly appointed panel members,
opined that Fleming was competent to proceed to sentencing. 
Judge Loo relied on the opinion of Dr. Lichton, whose testimony
she found to be "the most logical, persuasive, and credible[,]"
in finding Fleming competent to proceed to sentencing.  Although
other doctors who examined Fleming disagreed with Dr. Lichton's
opinion, we give deference to the trial court's assessment of
credibility and the weight of the evidence.  See State v.
Eastman, 81 Hawai# i 131, 139, 913 P.2d 57, 65 (1996) ("An
appellate court will not pass upon the trial judge's decisions
with respect to the credibility of witnesses and the weight of
the evidence, because this is the province of the trial judge.") 
We conclude that Judge Loo did not abuse her discretion in
relying on Dr. Lichton's opinion in finding that Fleming was
competent to proceed to sentencing.
C.
Fleming contends that Judge Loo erred in denying his
motion that she recuse herself.  We disagree.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
30Fleming's claims of bias are based on Judge Loo's
rulings against him.  However, "[a]dverse rulings, even if
erroneous, do not establish bias."  State v. Ortiz , 91 Hawai #i
181, 196, 981 P.2d 1127, 1142 (1999) (internal quotation marks
and citation omitted).  We conclude that Judge Loo did not abuse
her discretion in denying Fleming's motion for recusal.
D.
In light of our rulings, Fleming's claims that 
Judge Loo erred in revoking Fleming's conditional release and
committing him to the Hawai# i State Hospital for an extended
period are moot.  We therefore do not address those claims.  
CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, we remand the case to the
Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent with this
Memorandum Opinion.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, August 23, 2017.
On the briefs:
Hayden Aluli
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge
Peter A. Hanano
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Maui
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge
Associate Judge