NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-16-0000410 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I,
Petitioner-Appellee,
v. 
WINDYCESLAU D. LORENZO,
Respondent-Appellant, 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(S.P. NO. 15-1-0238) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Respondent-Appellant Windyceslau D. Lorenzo (Lorenzo) 
appeals from the Final Judgment filed on April 19, 2016, by the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1  The Final 
Judgment granted Petitioner-Appellee State of Hawaii's (State) 
petition to expunge real property deeds pursuant to Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 507D,2 found the liens frivolous,3 
1 The Honorable Virginia Lee Crandall presided.  
2 HRS § 507D-1 (2018) deals with the recording of 
invalid instruments affecting property interest, and provides: 
§507D-1 Findings and purpose.   The legislature finds
that there is a problem with the recording at the land court
or the bureau of conveyances of invalid instruments whichpurport to affect the property interests of various persons,including but not limited to government officers and
(continued...) NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
awarded the State damages in the amount of $5,000, and enjoined 
Lorenzo for five years from filing further documents with the Bureau of Conveyances (Bureau) based upon a source deed, Document 
No. 98-126382. 
On appeal, Lorenzo contends that, 
(1) the Circuit Court did not have in rem subject matter
jurisdiction because the Parcels in question were notwithin the territorial jurisdiction of the State orthe Court ; 
(2) the Circuit Court should have required the State toprovide a valid and clean chain of title demonstratingan ownership or other real property interest in theParcels, because the State-Petitioner has the burdenof proving ownership; 
(3) the Circuit Court erred because the State lacks clear title or interest; 
(4) 
the Circuit Court erred in determining that Lorenzo,aka Kamehameha VI, had no valid interest in thesubject Crown lands of the Kingdom of 
Hawai i # because 
he has a substantial interest in the Parcels and title superior to the State; and 
2(...continued)
employees. These instruments, which have no basis in fact orlaw, have a seriously disruptive effect on propertyinterests and title. They appear on title searches and otherdisclosures based on public records, and are costly andtime-consuming to expunge. When they so appear, they mayobstruct a property owner's ability to transfer title orobtain title insurance and financing.
The bureau of conveyances does not have the
discretionary authority to refuse to record instruments solong as those instruments comply with certain minimal format
requirements. It would be inefficient and require
substantial governmental expenditures to have the bureau ofconveyances determine the legal sufficiency of instrumentssubmitted for recordation. The land court's registrarscreens instruments submitted for recordation, but has nomechanism to prevent the filing of frivolous lien claimsduring the pendency of litigation. Similarly, the public isin need of a mechanism to address the filing of frivolousfinancing statements.
The legislature finds that it is necessary and in the
best interests of the State and private parties tolegislatively provide a means to relieve this problem, andto limit the circumstances in which nonconsensual common law 
liens shall be recognized in this State and to remedy the
filing of frivolous financing statements. 
3  HRS § 507D-2 (2018) defines "Lien" as "a recorded instrument that
creates an encumbrance on or affects title or ownership of property." 
2  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(5) the Circuit Court erred in ruling that Lorenzo's deeds
were "frivolous."   
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties as well as the relevant statutory and case law, we affirm. 
On October 4, 2013, Lorenzo recorded three warranty 
deeds at the Bureau (
Subject Deeds).  Each of the Subject Deeds 
purported to convey a separate parcel in Waimanalo, O#ahu from 
Lorenzo to his wife, Lynn-Dunell M. Lorenzo, with the combined area of the three parcels being approximately 335 acres (Parcels).  The Subject Deeds each state that Lorenzo obtained 
title to the respective parcel through an earlier deed dated 
August 26, 1998, and recorded as Document 98-126382 (1998 Deed). 
The 1998 Deed stated the grantor, Rose P. Lukela, purported to 
convey all the lands of Hawai# i to Lorenzo. 
On May 13, 2015, the State filed a "Petition for an 
Order Expunging Instruments Creating Nonconsensual Liens [] Recorded in the [Bureau] on October 4, 2013" (
Petition).  After a 
hearing on the Petition, the Circuit Court issued an order on October 22, 2015, granting the Petition (10/22/15 Order). 
Lorenzo filed an appeal from the 10/22/15 Order, but that appeal 
was dismissed by this court for lack of appellate jurisdiction. 
On April 19, 2016, the Circuit Court entered the Final 
Judgment in favor of the State and against Lorenzo as to all claims in the Petition.  The Final Judgment ordered the three Subject Deeds to be expunged, found that the purported liens created by the Subject Deeds were frivolous, ordered damages against Lorenzo for $5,000, and enjoined for five years Lorenzo or anyone acting by or through him from filing any documents in the Bureau based on the 1998 Deed, unless Lorenzo first obtained leave of court for such a filing.  Lorenzo appeals from this Final Judgment. 
Lorenzo's points of error on appeal are all grounded on 
his assertion that the geographical boundaries of the State of 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai# i are limited to the lands acquired by the Joint Resolution
of Congress in 1898, and that "[it] is impossible, illogical, an
as a matter of fact, simply false that the Joint Resolution of 1898 acquired the Hawaiian Islands as territory of the United States".  Lorenzo contends that the 1898 Joint Resolution was ineffective in transferring the lands of Hawai# i to the United 
States because the 1898 Joint Resolution was not a treaty. Lorenzo thus argues that the United States did not acquire the islands of Hawai# i and consequently the Circuit Court did not 
have jurisdiction to decide this case, the Parcels do not belongto the State, and because Lorenzo purports to be the lineal heirof Kamehameha I the Parcels were his to convey.  
d 
 
 
Lorenzo's core argument, that the 1898 Joint Resolutio
did not actually convey the islands of Hawai# i to the United 
States, has been considered and rejected by the Hawai# i Supreme 
Court.  In its recent decision, In re Conservation Dist. Use Application HA-3568, the Hawai# i Supreme Court expressed the 
following: n 
Appellant Fergerstrom asserts that the summit of Mauna Kea,
as well as the ahupua a # of Ka #ohe in the District of H âmâkua 
are lands still held by the Hawaiian Kingdom.  He allegesthat the Hearing Officer wrongfully denied him his right topresent expert testimony from Professor Williamson Chang ofthe University of Hawai i # William S. Richardson School of 
Law.  Professor Chang proposed to testify that the State of Hawai i #does not exist as a matter of United States 
Constitutional law because annexation through a JointResolution of Congress rather than through a Treaty of
Annexation was ineffective. 
The United States Supreme Court's interpretations of the
United States Constitution are, however, binding throughoutthe United States.  As pointed out by Professor Jon M. VanDyke in his book 
WHO OWNS THE CROWN LANDS OF HAWAI I #
, at 
page 212 note 86: 
The U.S. Supreme Court gave tacit recognition to thelegitimacy of the annexations of Texas and 
Hawai #i by
joint resolution, when it said in 
De Lima v. Bidwell,
182 U.S. 1, 196, 21 S.Ct. 743, 45 L.Ed. 1041 (1901),that "territory thus acquired [by conquest or treaty]is acquired as absolutely as if the annexation weremade, as in the case of Texas and Hawaii, by an act ofCongress."  See also Texas v. White, 74 U.S. (7 Wall.)700, 19 L.Ed. 227 (1868), stating that Texas had beenproperly admitted as a state in the United States. 
4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In other words, like Hawai i #, Texas was also admitted as a
state through a joint resolution of Congress.  The United 
States Supreme Court has thus indicated that the process bywhich Hawai #i was incorporated into the United States was
lawful and binding, and we are bound by this determination.In addition, as we stated in 
State v. Kaulia
, "[W]e reaffirm
that '[w]hatever may be said regarding the lawfulness' ofits origins, 'the State of 
Hawai i # . . . is now a lawful 
government.'"  128 Hawai #i 479, 487, 291 P.3d 377 (2013)
(citing 
State v. Fergerstrom
, 106 Hawai i # 43, 55, 101 P.3d 
652, 664 (App. 2004)). 
The BLNR is bound by the United States Supreme Court's andthis court's precedents regarding the legal status of theState of 
Hawai #i.  Therefore, the Hearing Officer did not
err by excluding the proposed evidence. 
143 Hawai# i 379, 399–400, 431 P.3d 752, 772–73 (2018) (footnote 
omitted).  We are bound by the applicable precedent of the 
Hawai# i Supreme Court and thus similarly reject Lorenzo's 
argument in this case. 
The Circuit Court has jurisdiction to adjudicate the 
Petition.  Generally, the Circuit Court has jurisdiction over "civil actions and proceedings."  HRS § 603-21.5 (a)(3) (2016).
4 
Furthermore, the State filed the Petition in the Circuit Court pursuant to HRS § 507D-4 (a) (2018), which provides:
§507D-4 Contesting validity of recorded instruments;
injunctions .  (a) Any party in interest in real or personal
property which is subject to a claim of nonconsensual commonlaw lien, who believes the claim of lien is invalid, may
file a petition in the appropriate circuit court  to contest 
the validity of that purported lien and to enjoin the lien
claimant from making further filings with the registrar. Thepetition shall state the grounds upon which relief isrequested, and shall be supported by the affidavit of thepetitioner or the petitioner's attorney setting forth aconcise statement of the facts upon which the petition isbased. The procedure for obtaining injunctions and temporaryrestraining orders shall apply in cases brought under thissection or section 507D-7(b). 
(Emphasis added).   
4  HRS § 603-21.5 (a)(3) provides: 
§603-21.5 General .  (a) The several circuit courts
shall have jurisdiction, except as otherwise expresslyprovided by statute, of: 
. . . . 
(3) Civil actions and proceedings, in addition
to those listed in sections 603-21.6, 603-21.7, and 603-21.8[.] 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court's 10/22/15 Order and Final Judgment 
are consistent with HRS § 507D-7 (2018), which provides in 
relevant part: 
§507D-7 Expungement of invalid lien; penalties;
sanctions for frivolous filings .  (a) If the circuit court 
finds the purported lien invalid, it shall order the
registrar to expunge the instrument purporting to create it,and order the lien claimant to pay actual damages, costs ofsuit, and reasonable attorneys' fees.  This order shall be presented to the registrar for recordation and shall havethe effect of voiding the lien from its inception.  If the 
circuit court finds the purported lien is frivolous, the
prevailing party in any action brought under section 507D-4
shall be awarded costs of suit, reasonable attorneys' fees,and either actual damages or $5,000, whichever is greater.The foregoing award shall be made in the form of a joint andseveral judgment issued in favor of the prevailing party andagainst each lien claimant and also against each person whoowns or controls the activities of the lien claimant if the lien claimant is not a natural person.
(b) If the circuit court  finds the purported lien is
frivolous, upon application of a party in interest, theregistrar, or the government counsel representing thegovernment officer or employee affected by the purportedlien, the court may also issue appropriate injunctive reliefagainst the lien claimant to preclude further filings of anykind with the registrar for a period of five years, unlessthat person obtains leave of court to file another
instrument with the registrar.  The order shall be enforced 
in the manner for enforcement of injunctions.  This order may be presented to the registrar for recordation.Proceedings under this subsection shall not preclude aperson from proceeding under subsection (a) or section507D-4 and recovering damages, penalties, costs, andattorneys' fees. 
(Emphases added).  The Circuit Court had jurisdiction and 
authority to issue the 10/22/15 Order and the Final Judgment.  
Finally, on the issue of ownership of the Parcels, the 
affidavit of E. Mahoe Collins (Collins), the abstractor for the 
State, identified the Parcels and traced the history by which the 
Parcels came into the State's inventory of public lands upon statehood.  Collins did not find any transfers or conveyances made by the State or its predecessors to Lorenzo or Rose P. Lukela (aka Rose P. Lorenzo), from whom Lorenzo claims he received transfer of the Parcels.  Other than Lorenzo's argument that the 1898 Joint Resolution failed to transfer the lands of 
Hawai# i to the United States, which has been rejected by the 
Hawai# i Supreme Court in In re Conservation Dist. Use Application 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HA-3568, he does not assert any challenge to Collins's affidavit.
Thus, the Circuit Court did not err in expunging the Subject Deeds in which Lorenzo purported to claim title to the Parcels.  
Lorenzo does not raise any other arguments in 
challenging any other aspect of the Final Judgment. 
Based on the above, the Final Judgment of the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit filed on April 18, 2016, is affirmed. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 23, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
William B.C. Chang
       and Burton D. Gould, for Respondent-Appellant. 
Daniel A. Morris, 
Deputy Attorney General, Department of theAttorney General,for Petitioner-Appellee. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
7 