NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0001659 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
FRANCIS M. SHYANGUYA,
Appellant-Appellant,
v.
 
EMPLOYMENT SECURITY APPEALS REFEREES' OFFICE;
MR. ALAN WONG, APPEALS OFFICER,
Appellees-Appellees
and
 
THE RITZ-CARLTON HOTEL CO., LLC,
Real Party-In-Interest Employer/Appellee-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0149-01)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Pro se Appellant-Appellant Francis M. Shyanguya
 
(Shyanguya) appeals from the June 20, 2013 Final Judgment and the
 
June 20, 2013 "Order Affirming Employment Security Appeals
 
Referees' Office's Decision 1204175 Dated December 1, 2012 and
 Affirming the Appeals Office's Denial of Appellant's Application
 For Reopening Dated December 26, 2012" both entered in the
 Circuit Court of the First Circuit
1
 (circuit court).
 
Shyanguya contends the circuit court reversibly erred
 
by: 
1
 The Honorable Judge Rhonda A. Nishimura presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) not considering that the Employment Security
 
Appeals Referees' Office (ESARO) erred in setting aside the
 
initial unemployment claims determination; 
(2) not finding that ESARO erred when it failed to set
 
forth in writing the reasons for the decision to set aside the
 
initial claims determination; 
(3) not finding that the ESARO proceedings had no legal
 
basis and merit; 
(4) not finding ESARO proceedings were a "sham" because
 
ESARO had already decided to admit document evidence from
 Shyanguya's former employer; 
(5) stating that there was testimony to support
 
identification of Keith Wallace (Wallace) as a representative of
 
Appellee-Appellee Ritz-Carlton Hotel Co., LLC (Employer); 
(6) failing to specify whether Employer or Marriott
 
International, Inc. charged Wallace to investigate Shyanguya; 
(7) misdirecting the dispute towards whether Shyanguya
 
was banned from Employer's premises or not; 
(8) making factual errors concerning Employer's
 
investigation of Shyanguya; 
(9) asserting that circumstances and contents of an
 
email sent by Shyanguya were unclear as to whether Wallace was
 
the Employer's authorized representative. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Shyanguya's points of error as follows:
 
Shyanguya's nine points of error do not correlate with 
the four "arguments" in his opening brief. 
This court adheres to 
the policy of affording litigants, especially those proceeding pro se, an opportunity to "have their cases heard on the merits, where possible." O'Connor v. Diocese of Honolulu, 77 Hawai
'i 
383, 386, 885 P.2d 361, 364 (1994). However, because Shyanguya provides no discernible argument in support of five of his contentions and fails to provide arguments in regard to his 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
third, seventh, and eighth points of error, Shyanguya has waived 
those contentions. See Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 
ยง 28(b)(7) and Hong v. Estate of Graham, 101 Hawai 'i 421, 70 P.3d 
647, No. 22562, 2003 WL 21268404 (Haw. May 30, 2003) (SDO). 
Shyanguya's first discernible argument is that ESARO 
should not have been allowed to review his September 26, 2012 email (Email). Shyanguya contends that Employer alleged the 
Email constituted a resignation letter and failed to provide the 
document to the State of Hawai
'i, Department of Labor and 
Industrial Relations, Unemployment Insurance Division Claims Examiner in the initial determination of Shyanguya's qualification for unemployment benefits. 
An appeal of an initial claims determination to ESARO 
is done pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes ยง 383-38(b) (Supp. 2013), which permits ESARO "referees" to take evidence. Hawai
'i 
Administrative Rules ยง 12-5-93(e)(15) (am. 1998) further provides: 
(15)	 Oral or written evidence of any nature, whether or not
conforming to the legal rules of evidence, may be
accepted. Any official record of the department,
including reports submitted in connection with the
administration of the employment security law, may be
included in the record; provided, however, that the
parties are given an opportunity to examine and refute
the same.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
ESARO's "Unemployment Appeals Hearing Instructions"
 
informed the parties they could provide additional documents as
 
evidence. Accordingly, ESARO did not err by reviewing a copy of
 Shyanguya's Email from Employer, nor did the circuit court err by
 so concluding. 
Shyanguya's contention that Employer was judicially 
estopped from asserting that he voluntarily quit during the ESARO proceedings has no merit because Employer's position during these proceedings were consistent with Employer's position during the initial claims determination. See Roxas v. Marcos, 89 Hawai
'i 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
91, 124, 969 P.2d 1209, 1242 (1998) (judicial estoppel prohibits
 
parties from maintaining positions directly contrary to or
 inconsistent with positions previously assumed).
 
Shyanguya appears to contend that Employer invited the 
initial claims determination as "error" by initially failing to provide the Email. We find no invited error because the record discloses no evidence that Employer sought to profit from such an invitation. See State v. Jones, 124 Hawai
'i 129, 237 P.3d 1195, 
No. 29301, 2010 WL 3133549 (Haw. App. Aug. 5, 2010) (mem.) ("[A] defendant cannot by his own voluntary conduct invite error and then seek to profit thereby." (citation and internal quotation marks omitted)). 
Shyanguya also appears to contend ESARO erred by
 
failing to verify that Wallace was authorized to accept
 Shyanguya's Email as a "resignation" on behalf of Employer and
 that the circuit court thereby erred by determining the record
 supported this finding. Whether Wallace was authorized to
 forward Shyanguya's Email to Employer's human resources
 department is irrelevant to ESARO's finding that the Email was
 evidence of Shyanguya's voluntary decision to leave his
 employment. ESARO found:
 
[Shyanguya] did not state any compelling reasons to quit or
for sending his [Email]. A reasonable and prudent worker,
genuinely and sincerely desirous of maintaining employment,
would cooperate in an investigation to return to work.
However, [Shyanguya] sent an email stating to tell his
friends at work he was not returning.
 
In regard to his contention that he did not resign from
 
Employer via the Email, Shyanguya contends the circuit court
 
erred by stating, "[t]here's testimony to support that [Wallace]
 was the [E]mployer's representative." Shyanguya admitted that he
 wrote the Email. Wallace was identified as "Sr. Director of
 Investigations at Marriott International," located in Employer's
 corporate office in Bethesda, Maryland. Employer testified that
 they are affiliated with Marriott International. Shyanguya
 testified that he "guess[ed]" that Wallace was the Employer's
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appointee regarding correspondence with Shyanguya and that
 
Wallace is "in risk management, security on risk management." He
 also identified Wallace as "the General Manager at Ritz-Carlton
 Kapalua[.]" Shyanguya's contention that Wallace was not his
 Employer's representative has no merit.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the June 20, 2013 Final
 
Judgment and the June 20, 2013 "Order Affirming Employment
 Security Appeals Referees' Office's Decision 1204175 Dated
 December 1, 2012 and Affirming the Appeals Office's Denial of
 Appellant's Application For Reopening Dated December 26, 2012"
 both entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit are
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 21, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Francis M. Shyanguya
Appellant-Appellant pro se. 
Frances E.H. Lum 
Robyn M. KuwabeDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Appellees-Appellees. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
5
 