 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000075 31-MAR-2025 08:06 AM Dkt. 71 SO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000075  
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
U.S. BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION AS TRUSTEE  
FOR WAMU MORTGAGE PASS THROUGH CERTIFICATE  
FOR WMALT SERIES 2006-AR1 TRUST, Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
DONOVAN PAUL WEBB, Defendant-Appellant;  
BANK OF AMERICA, N.A.; HAWAII PLANING MILL, LTD.;  
MAUI LANI COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION; WINSTON PANG;  
STACIA PANG,  Defendants-Appellees;   
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50;  
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; DOE ENTITIES 1-50; and  
DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50, Defendants  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 2CC171000024)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION  ORDER  
(By: Nakasone, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.)  
Defendant -Appellant Donovan P aul Webb (Webb) appeals 
from the "Findings of Fact [(FOFs)]; Conclusions of Law 
[(COLs)]; and Order Granting Plaintiff[ -Appellee ] U.S. Bank 
National Association, as Trustee for WaMu Mortgage Pass Through 
Certificate for WMALT Series 2006 -AR1 Trust's [(U.S. Bank )] 
Second Motion for Summary Judgment as Against All Defendants and   
 
  
   
  
  
  
 
  
   
  
  
 
   
  
 
    
 
   
  
 
     
 
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure" (Order), and its 
"Judgment on [Order]" (Judgment ), both filed on January 21 , 
2022, by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit ( circuit 
court).1 
This appeal arises out of a January 2017 foreclosure 
action by U.S. Bank against Webb.2 U.S. Bank sought to foreclose 
on an Adjustable Rate Note ( Note), which was secured by a 
mortgage ( Mortgage ) on real property located in Kahului, Maui 
(Property ). The Note was assigned to U.S. Bank, by Washington 
Mutual Bank, in April 2009. It appears that JPMorgan Chase 
Bank, N.A. (JPMorgan Chase ) was the loan servicer at the time of 
the assignment to U.S. Bank . Select Portfolio Servicing, Inc. 
(SPS) became the loan servicer of the Note in November 2013. 
On appeal, Webb contends that the circuit court erred 
by granting summary judgment in favor of U.S. Bank . 3 Upon 
1 The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided. 
2 Bank of Americ a, N.A. ( Bank of America ) was named as a defendant 
in the underlying case , and is a nominal appellee to this appeal. In May 
2023, the parties filed a stipulation to dismiss Bank of America as a party 
to the appeal without prejudice. The parties stipulated in 201 8, prior to 
the filing of the notice of appeal, to the dismissal of Bank of America , 
without prejudice , from the underlying case. The stipulated dismissal of 
Bank of America from this appeal is therefore unnecessary. 
3 Webb raises several points of error , contending that: 
The Circuit Court Erred in Granting US Bank's Motion for 
Summary Judgment Because: (A) US Bank had no standing 
because they did not establish that the y  had "rightful 
possession" of the Note at the time the Note was lost, nor 
did they establish that they had the right to enforce the 
lost note under HRS § 490:3 -309, and the declarations 
submitted by US Bank were contradictory; (B) US Bank had no  
(continued . . .) 
2   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
careful review of the record, briefs,  and relevant legal 
authorities, and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we conclude that 
there are genuine questions of material fact as to whether U.S. 
Bank had standing to enforce the Note.   We therefore vacate the 
Order and Judgment on this basis.  
We review the circuit court's grant of summary 
judgment de novo, applying the following standard, 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the 
moving party is entitled to j udgment as a matter of law. A 
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the 
effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential 
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the 
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most 
favorable to the non -moving party. In other words, we must 
view all of the evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in 
the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion. 
Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawaiʻi  46, 55–56, 292 P.3d 1276, 1285–86 
(2013) (citation omitted).  
3(. . .continued) 
standing to bring this foreclosure action because the 
Affidavit of Lost Note was not generated until AFTER the 
Complaint was filed[;] (C) US Bank has failed to establish 
the admissibility of business records of the prior 
servicer[;] and (D) US Bank has failed to establish that it provided Mr. Webb with an adequate notice of default.  
(Emphasis omitted.) 
Webb also challenges various FOF s and COLs  in relation to the 
above listed points of error. Because we conclude that U.S. Bank has not 
demonstrated standing to enforce the Note, we decline to address Webb's 
additional points of error.    
3   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Bank of America, N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, the Hawaiʻi 
Supreme Court held that,  
A foreclosing plaintiff's burden to prove entitlement to 
enforce the note overlaps with the requirements of standing 
in foreclosure actions as standing is concerned with 
whether the parties have the right to bring suit. 
Typically, a plaintiff does not have standing to invoke the 
jurisdiction of the court unless the plaintiff has suffered 
an injury in fact. A mortgage is a conveyance of an 
interest in real property that is given as security for the 
payment of the note. A foreclosure action is a legal 
proceeding to gain title or force a sale of the property 
for satisfaction of a note that is in default and secured 
by a lien on the subject propert y. Thus, the underlying 
"injury in fact" to a foreclosing plaintiff is the 
mortgagee's failure to satisfy its obligation to pay the 
debt obligation to the note holder. Accordingly, in 
establishing standing, a foreclosing plaintiff must 
necessarily prove its entitlement to enforce the note as it 
is the default on the note that gives rise to the action . 
139 Hawaiʻi 361, 367–68, 390  P.3d 1248, 1254–55 (2017) (emphasis 
added) (cleaned up).  
Here, we conclude that U.S. Bank has  not sufficiently 
proved  its entitlement to enforce the Note. U.S. Bank 
represented, in its second motion for summary judgment, that it 
was entitled to enforce the Note pursuant to Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS)  §§  490:3-301 (2008) and 490:3-309 (2008). HRS 
§  490:3-301 states, in relevant part,  
"Person entitled to enforce" an instrument means . . . 
(iii) a person not in possession of the instrument who is 
entitled to enforce the instrument pursuant to section 
490:3-309[.]  
HRS § 490:3-309, which governs the "[e]nforcement of 
lost, destroyed, or stolen instrument[s]," states, in relevant 
part,  
4   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(a) A person not in possession of an instrument is 
entitled to enforce the instrument if (i) the person was in 
rightful possession of the instrument and entitled to 
enforce it when loss of possession occurred , (ii) the loss 
of possession was not the result of a transfer by the 
person or a lawful seizure, and (iii) the person cannot 
reasonably obtain possession of the instrument because the 
instrument was destroyed, its whereabouts cannot be 
determined, or it i s in the wrongful possession of an 
unknown person or a person that cannot be found or is not 
amenable to service of process. 
(b) A person seeking enforcement of an instrument 
under subsection (a) must prove the terms of the instrument 
and the person's right to enforce the instrument. If that 
proof is made, section 490:3 -308 applies to the case as if 
the person seeking enforcement had produced the instrument. 
(Emphasis added.) 
In his Affidavit of Lost Note, attorney Lester K.M. 
Leu (Leu), attested that,  
2. In January 2008, Leu & Okuda was retained by 
Washington Mutual Bank to complete a non -judicial 
foreclosure of the Mortgage on the [Property], which 
Mortgage secure[d] [the Loan]. Leu & Okuda caused a Notice 
of Mortgagee's Non -Judicial Foreclosure Under Power of Sale 
to be recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances of the State of 
Hawaiʻi (the "Bureau") as Document No. 2008 -058945 on April 
15, 2008. Leu & Okuda closed the matter in June 2008 and 
it did not complete the non -judicial foreclosure.  
3. In March 2009, Leu & Okuda was retained by 
[JPMorgan Chase], as servicer for [U.S. Bank], to proceed 
with a new non -judicial foreclosure of the same Mortgage. 
In connection with that retention, Leu & Okuda recorded an 
Assignment of Mortgage and Note to U.S. Bank in the Bureau 
as Document No. 2009 -060793 on April 20, 2009 . 
4. On May 11, 2009, Leu & Okuda received the 
collateral file with the original promissory note for the 
Loan from JPMorgan Chase by Federal Express . Federal 
Express's tracking number for the package with the 
collateral file was 4096 2448 4587. A true and correct 
copy of the FedEx Shipping Label is attached hereto as 
Exhibit "6." At that time, Leu & Okuda's procedure was to 
send collateral files wi th original promissory notes to the 
case managers at Leu & Okuda assigned to handle particular 
loans. 
5. Leu & Okuda closed the matter shortly after May 
19, 2009 when Leu & Okuda was instructed to close its files 
5   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for this matter because the Borrower had reinstated the 
loan by curing the defaults that then existed. 
6. Leu & Okuda's usual procedure with respect to 
matters being closed at that time was for the case managers 
to send their files for the loans assigned to them to the 
department that closed files and that department would 
shred the correspondence and plea dings files, but 
definitely not the collateral files. Leu & Okuda has 
searched its records for the collateral file multiple times 
and has been unable to locate it. Leu & Okuda therefore 
believes that the collateral file with the original note 
was inadver tently shredded when the correspondence and 
pleadings files for the matter were shredded. 
(Emphasis added.) 
In his Supplemental Affidavit of Lost Note, Leu 
attested to the following:   
2. In 2009, when Leu & Okuda received foreclosure 
referrals from [JPMorgan Chase], [JPMorgan] Chase's 
standard practice was to send to Leu & Okuda by Federal 
Express ("Fed Ex") packages with the collateral files for 
the loan being referred for foreclosure and to include 
release transmittals, which documented [JPMorgan] Chase's 
release of the collateral files. The collateral files 
contained the original notes, copies of the mortgages and 
copies of any assignments of the mortgages. Leu & Okuda's 
standard p ractice was to scan the release transmittals and 
Federal Express labels. 
3. A true and correct copy of the release 
transmittal for the collateral file for loan XXXXXX9848 
sent to Leu & Okuda by [JPMorgan] Chase on 5/08/09 via Fed 
Ex with tracking number 4096 2448 4587 is attached hereto 
as Exhibit 6. The release transmittal i dentified the 
borrower as Donovan Webb is attached hereto as Exhibit 6A. 
4. As stated in my prior affidavit, Leu & Okuda 
believes that the collateral file with the original note 
was inadvertently shredded when the correspondence and 
pleadings files for the matter were shredded after May 19, 
2009, when Leu & Okuda was instructed to close its files 
for this matter because the Borrower had reinstated the 
Loan by curing the defaults that then existed. 
5. Leu & Okuda did not know that it no longer had 
possession of the collateral file with the original note 
for the Loan until July 30, 2019 when I reviewed Leu & 
Okuda's records relating to the Loan. My review was 
therefore after this lawsuit had commenced on January 24, 
2017, after the Attorney Affirmation was filed in this 
lawsuit on January 24, 2017, and after [U.S. Bank's] first 
6   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Motion for Summary Judgment was filed in this lawsuit on 
October 5, 2017. 
6. Therefore, prior to the filing of the Complaint 
with its accompanying Attorney Affirmation and prior to the 
filing of the first Motion for Summary Judgment, Leu & 
Okuda had not informed U.S. Bank, the prior loan servicer, 
[JPMorgan Chase], or its curr ent loan servicer for the 
loan, [SPS], that the original note was lost because Leu & 
Okuda did not then realize that the original note had been 
lost. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Notwithstanding Leu's Affidavit s, it is unclear 
whether the Note was in fact lost, because it is unclear whether 
the Note was contained within the "collateral file" that w as 
transmitted by JPMorgan Chase to Leu & Okuda in May 2009. Leu 
does not represent that he inspected the collateral file, or 
that he otherwise had personal knowledge of what the collateral 
file received in May 2009 contained.4 He stated that "[JPMorgan ] 
Chase's standard practice was to send to Leu & Okuda by [Fed Ex] 
packages with the collateral files for the loan being referred 
for foreclosure," and that the "collateral files contained the 
original notes, copies of the mortgages [,] and copies of any 
assignments of the mortgages." 
Leu thus inferred, based on JPMorgan Chase's practice, 
that the Note would have been included in the collateral file 
transmitted by JPMorgan Chase in May 2009. Leu did not , 
however, explain how he was qualified to make this inference 
4 Leu represented that he "reviewed Leu & Okuda's records relating 
to the Loan" on July 30, 2019 – ten years after the "collateral file" w as 
transmitted – at which time he was "unable to locate" the Note . 
7   
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with regard to  JPMorgan Chase's "collateral file" transmittal 
practices.  See  Nationstar Mortg.  LLC v. Kanahele, 144 Hawaiʻi 
394, 401, 443 P.3d 86, 93 (2019) ("[A]ffidavits in support of a 
summary judgment motion must be scrutinized to determine whether 
the facts they aver are admissible at trial and are made on the 
personal knowledge of the affiant.") (cleaned up).  
U.S. Bank did not produce an affidavit or declaration 
by a person with knowledge of JPMorgan Chase's record  keeping 
and transmittal practices  to establish that the collateral file 
transmitted to Leu & Okuda  in May 2009 included the Note.   There 
is also no documentary evidence that would establish  the 5
5 JPMorgan Chase Authorized Signer Karla Baxter's November 8, 2021 
declaration , and SPS Document Control Officer Sherry Benight's December 19, 
2019 declaration, did not reference the transmittal of the collateral file 
from JPMorgan Chase to Leu & Okuda in May 2009. SPS Document Control Officer 
Mark Syphus' s July 7, 2020 declaration summar ily represented only that: 
7. SPS's business records reflected . . . at the 
time of the filing of the Complaint, the collateral file 
for the Loan, which included the original Adjustable Rate 
Note (the "Note") executed by the Borrower, had previously 
been delivered to the law firm of Leu & Okuda. At that 
time, SPS's business records did not reflect that Leu & 
Okuda no longer possessed the original Note or that the 
original Note had been lost. It is the regular practice of 
SPS to record any changes in the location of the collateral 
file. Therefore, because ther e were no records reflecting 
any change in the location of the collateral file or that 
the original note had been lost, SPS concluded that Leu & 
Okuda continued to maintain possession of the original 
Note. 
(Emphasis added.)   See  Deutsche Bank  Nat'l Tr. Co.  v. Bass, No. CAAP -20-
0000501, 2024 WL 4287149 ,  at *3 (Haw. App. Sept. 25, 2024)  (SDO)  (noting that 
the declarant "did not attach the [s]ervicer's  business records or otherwise 
establish the [s]ervicer's regularly -conducted business activities and 
record-keeping practices which might evidence" the servicer's business 
practice).  
8   
 
     
   
  
  
  
  
   
  
 
  
   
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contents of the Fed Ex package , which bears the return address 
for "Chase Custody Services ." Although U.S. Bank produced a 
May 8, 2009 "Release Transmittal" referencing "WEBB DONOVAN" as 
the "borrower," that document does not mention the Note. There 
thus remains a genuine question of material fact as to whether 
the Note was transmitted to Leu & Okuda, such that Leu & Okuda, 
which was "unable to locate" the Note in July 2019 , in fact had 
the Note to lose or destroy . 
Moreover, there  is no declaration, affidavit, or other 
evidence establishing  that,  upon JPMorgan Chase's transmittal of 
the collateral file to Leu & Okuda in May 2009, Leu & Okuda held 
the contents of the collateral file on behalf of U.S. Bank .   
This raises a genuine question of material fact  as to whether  
U.S. Bank was the person "in rightful possession of the 
instrument and entitled to enforce it when loss of possession 
occurred,"  pursuant to HRS § 490:3-309.   6
As explained supra, there remain genuine questions of 
material fact – questions of whether the Note was in fact 
transmitted to Leu & Okuda in May 2009 and lost or destroyed 
sometime between May 2009 and January 2017 , and of whether Leu & 
6 Leu represents that JPMorgan Chase retained Leu & Okuda's legal 
services in March 2009, a month before the Note was assigned to U.S. Bank. 
Although Leu refers to JPMorgan Chase as the "servicer" for U.S. Bank , there 
is no declaration, affidavit , or other evidence establishing that JPMorgan 
Chase had the authority to retain Leu & Okuda on U.S. Bank's behalf in March 
2009, which was prior to U.S. Bank's assignment of the Note. 
9   
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Okuda was "in rightful possession" of the Note on behalf of U.S. 
Bank at the time it was purportedly lost or destroyed . These 
questions implicate U.S. Bank's standing to enforce the Note at 
the time the complaint was filed . Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawaiʻi at 
368, 390 P.3d at 1255 ("[A] foreclosing plaintiff does not have 
standing to foreclose on mortgaged property unless the plaintiff 
was entitled to enforce the note that has been defaulted on.") 
(citation omitted) . 
We therefore conclude that the circuit court erred in 
granting summary judgment in favor of U.S. Bank . We vacate the 
Order and Judgment , and remand for further proceedings 
consistent with this summary disposition order . 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, March 31, 2025. 
Keith M. Kiuchi,  /s/ Karen T. Nakasone  
for Defendant-Appellant.  Presiding Judge  
  
Lisa K. Swartzfager,  /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen  
for Plaintiff-Appellee.  Associate Judge  
  
 /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Associate Judge 
10 