 
      NOT  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAIʻI  RE PORTS  AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals 
CAAP-22-0000691 
23-MAY-2025 
08:04 AM 
Dkt. 57 SO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000691 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
STATE OF HAWAI‘I, Plaintiff-Appellee 
v. WENDELL KEITH OLIVE, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CPC-21-0000372) 
 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Nakasone and Guidry, JJ.) 
In this appeal, Defendant-Appellant Wendell Keith 
Olive (Olive
) challenges the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit's (Circuit Court)1 approval of Plaintiff-Appellee State 
of Hawaiʻi's (State) "Motion for Nolle Prosequi Without Prejudice 
as to Defendant Olive" (Motion for Nolle Prosequi), where Hawaiʻi 
law did not permit the offense of first-degree Violation of 
1 The Honorable Clarissa Y. Malinao presided.  
           
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Privacy to be charged by Felony Information.2  Olive contends the 
nolle prosequi should have been with prejudice. We affirm. 
After criminal proceedings against Olive had been 
ongoing since April 2021, the State filed a September 22, 2022 
Motion for Nolle Prosequi, declining further prosecution and 
requesting that the nolle prosequi be entered without prejudice. 
The Circuit Court approved the motion. No reason was supplied 
for the nolle prosequi request.
3  Olive filed a motion for 
reconsideration, which requested, inter alia, that the Circuit 
Court allow Olive to be heard on whether the nolle prosequi 
should be with or without prejudice. The Circuit Court's denial 
of reconsideration of the without-prejudice dismissal is at 
issue in this appeal. 
Olive appeals from the Circuit Court's November 14, 
2022 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying 
[Olive]'s Motion to Reconsider" (Order Denying Reconsideration). 
Olive raises two points of error, contending that: "the 
prosecution failed to prosecute with due diligence"; and "this 
matter should have been dismissed with prejudice." 
2 The April 5, 2021 Felony Information charged Olive with four 
counts of Violation of Privacy in the First Degree, in violation of Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 711-1110.9(1)(a) and (b). These offenses are 
classified as Class C felonies. HRS § 711- 1110.9(2) (2014 & 2018 Supp.). 
HRS § 806-83 (2014 & 2017 Supp.) authorizes class C felonies to 
be charged by Felony Information, with exceptions; first-degree violation of 
privacy is one of the excepted offenses for which Felony Information charging 
is prohibited. 
3 HRS § 806-56 (2014), entitled "Nolle prosequi," provides:  "No 
nolle prosequi shall be entered in a criminal case . . . except by consent of 
the court upon written motion of the prosecuting attorney stating the reasons 
therefor. The court may deny the motion if it deems the reasons 
insufficient . . . ." While the nolle prosequi motion here was thus 
deficient for not "stating the reasons therefor[,]" that is not at issue in 
this appeal; and in any event, the record reflects that the reason for the 
nolle prosequi was subsequently supplied. 
2  
           
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
     
 
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Olive's 
contentions as follows. 
At the November 3, 2022 hearing on Olive's motion for 
reconsideration, the State clarified that it "intend[ed] to 
refile the charges"; it dismissed the charge because "the case 
need[ed] to be charged via grand jury rather than felony 
information"; and it "intend[ed] to set far lower bail than 
originally set" to avoid "penalizing [Olive] in this case 
because of the refiling."  The State also pointed out that Olive 
was "the one that has caused all of the delays in this case, not 
the State."  Olive argued that a dismissal without prejudice 
would result in further delay of his prosecution, that the delay 
would violate his "right to a speedy trial," and that the 
Circuit Court was required to consider the factors under State 
v. Estencion, 63 Haw. 264, 625 P.2d 1040 (1981) (Estencion 
factors) in determining whether to dismiss with or without 
prejudice.
   4
The Circuit Court orally ruled that the Estencion 
factors applied to "Speedy Trial/Rule 48 violations," and these 
issues did not apply based on the record; and "there's not been 
any indication" of "a delay of prosecution due to lack of due 
diligence on behalf of the State or lack of prosecution." The 
Circuit Court further noted that even if it were to consider the 
4 A trial court must consider the following Estencion factors in 
determining whether to dismiss a case with or without prejudice for a Hawaiʻi 
Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 48 or speedy trial violation: (1) "the 
seriousness of the offense"; (2) "the facts and the circumstances of the case 
which led to the dismissal"; and (3) "the impact of a reprosecution on the 
administration of this chapter and on the administration of justice." 
Estencion, 63 Haw. at 269, 625 P.2d at 1044 (citation omitted). 
3  
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Estencion factors, they weighed in favor of dismissal without 
prejudice, as follows: 
You know, even if this Court were to not find  
persuasive the factors relied by [sic] [defense counsel], 
the Court will point out that these are four counts of 
Violation of  Privacy in the First Degree. Each count 
carries a  maximum imprisonment as a Class C felony of five 
years in  prison, $10,000 fine. Albeit the Court recognizes 
that  the procedural history, as both counsels are very  
familiar as to the date of the alleged offenses, the 
procedural history, no one is at fault and no one will be  
at fault for the COVID jury trial postponements that  
occurred during the duration and pendency of this case  
prior to the matter being dismissed by the State without  
prejudice.  
. . . the Court does find as such that 
the charges 
are serious. And furthermore, when looking at the  
examination of the procedural history regarding the facts  
and circumstances that led to the dismissal, albeit as  
frustrating as Mr. Olive has expressed on record, the  
State has indicated that information that wasn't known at  
the time suddenly became known close in time to when the  
nolle prosequi without prejudice was filed September 22,  
2022.  
Without nothing more, the Court can't  
determine and cannot find that the State has acted in  
such a manner that would give rise to malicious  
prosecution. And that's a high standard. There needs to  
be something more in this record to point out that the  
State has acted clearly in bad faith.  
The Court understands Mr. Olive's financial  
stresses, deprivation-of-freedom stresses, appointment of  
counsel given the numerous attorneys that have been  
appointed to represent him. And frankly he does believe 
that justice too long delayed is justice denied. . . .  
But the Court also finds that the factors for  
consideration lean towards that this matter proceed on  
the merits of the case and that it's important that  
criminal prosecutions occur to be heard on merits of the  
case, and that is the overwhelming factor for this matter  
to proceed as such. The initiation of prosecution, as  
the State has discovered, must go by way of indictment.  
It's their prerogative. They still have to get the  
indictment by a grand jury. Then the case will go  
through the normal process, to which Mr. Olive has  
described is not something that he agrees with. And that  
will impact him further.  
However, in balancing all the factors, the 
Court finds that this motion for recon 
[sic] will be 
4  
           
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
    
 
   
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
respectfully denied and that the nolle prosequi for --
without prejudice shall be correctly noted as ex parte 
motion. And that shall remain standing. 
(Emphases added.) 
The Circuit Court's subsequently filed Order Denying 
Reconsideration stated: Olive "relies upon State v. Estencion 
. . . in his arguments" but "[t]he framework of Estencion and 
its progeny are directed towards speedy trial and HRPP Rule 48 
violations"; "the charges are serious"; "the procedural history 
did not involve any continuances requested by the State"; the 
State moved to nolle prosequi "close in time to becoming aware 
that the initiation of prosecution need[ed] to proceed via 
Indictment"; "[t]he Court [could not] find that the State acted 
in bad faith or a manner that would rise to malicious 
prosecution"; and "the Estencion factors weigh in favor of this 
case being heard on its merits." 
We review a court's decision to dismiss a case with or 
without prejudice for an abuse of discretion. See State v.
Moriwake, 65 Haw. 47, 57, 647 P.2d 705, 713 (1982) (reviewing 
for abuse of discretion, where the trial court dismissed the 
indictment with prejudice). 
Here, the Circuit Court also noted that it could 
analyze dismissal with or without prejudice on "other bases" 
such as "State v. Moriwaki" [sic] and "State v. Mageo," under 
which "the Court balances the interest of the State against 
fundamental fairness to the defendant with the added ingredient 
of the orderly function of the Court system."
5  It does not 
5 State v. Mageo, 78 Hawaiʻi 33, 37, 889 P.2d 1092, 1096 (App. 
1995), applied the following framework from 
Moriwake, circumscribing the 
parameters of "[a] trial court's exercise of its inherent power to dismiss a 
criminal case with prejudice" as "a balancing of the interest of the state 
against fundamental fairness to a defendant with the added ingredient of the 
orderly functioning of the court system" (Mageo/Moriwake framework). 
(Cleaned up.) 
5  
           
 
 
 
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appear that the Circuit Court applied the Mageo/Moriwake
framework, and neither party addresses whether this framework 
should have been applied here. The Circuit Court acknowledged 
that Estencion did not apply, but apparently applied those 
factors on an arguendo basis; Olive does not challenge the 
Circuit Court's arguendo application of the Estencion factors. 
While it is not clear whether the applicable law for 
dismissals with or without prejudice applies when reviewing 
whether a nolle prosequi should be with or without prejudice, 
the parties do not question its application in this case. We 
need not address this issue, as we are able to resolve this 
appeal by confining our review to the argument and authority 
Olive relies on in his Opening Brief. 
First, Olive relies on a quote from State v. Baron, 80 
Hawai‘i 107, 905 P.2d 613 (1995), that the "prosecutor has the 
responsibility" to ensure that "the defendant is accorded 
procedural justice," to argue that the State failed to exercise 
"due diligence when filing an information charge . . . that 
violated the [HRS]"; when it "had Olive incarcerated for 3 days 
before he was able to . . . secure a bail bond"; and "when it 
subjected Olive to over 16 months of criminal litigation before 
moving to dismiss without prejudice[.]" 
Olive cites Mageo
 as 
the source of the "due diligence" standard, which states that 
"[i]n criminal cases, 'the power of a court to dismiss a case on 
its own motion for failure to prosecute with due diligence is 
inherent.'" Mageo, 78 Hawai‘i at 37, 889 P.2d at 1096 (cleaned 
up) (quoting Estencion, 63 Haw. at 268, 625 P.2d at 1043). 
Second, Olive argues, again citing Mageo, that a trial court 
exercising its "inherent power to dismiss a charge with or 
without prejudice for the failure to prosecute with due 
diligence . . . must clearly articulate the reasons for its 
6  
           
 
 
 
 
  
  
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
decision" to enable appellate review for the proper exercise of 
its discretion. 
Regarding his first argument, Olive does not point to 
any authority that equates what appears to be an inadvertent 
charging error, to a lack of due diligence warranting a nolle 
prosequi with prejudice. The Circuit Court's findings that the 
State did not act in "bad faith" or in a "malicious" manner are 
not challenged on appeal. Olive's three-day incarceration prior 
to posting bond and going through "16 months of criminal 
litigation" are not atypical for a criminal felony prosecution, 
in light of the "COVID jury trial postponements" and "numerous" 
court-appointed counsels for Olive that the Circuit Court noted 
in its ruling. These circumstances argued by Olive do not 
establish a failure to prosecute with due diligence requiring a 
nolle prosequi with prejudice. 
Regarding Olive's second argument, the Circuit Court 
sufficiently articulated its reasons to reaffirm the nolle 
prosequi without prejudice, orally and in its subsequently filed 
order. The Circuit Court noted that the four Class C felony 
charges against Olive were "serious"; that "no one [was] at 
fault . . . for the COVID jury trial postponements that 
occurred" before the case was nolle prosequied; that it did not 
find there was "malicious prosecution" or that the State acted 
"in bad faith"; acknowledged Olive's "financial stresses, 
deprivation-of—freedom stresses"; and also noted that "numerous 
attorneys" had "been appointed to represent [Olive]." 
On this record, we conclude the Circuit Court did not 
abuse its discretion in granting the Motion for Nolle Prosequi 
without prejudice. See Moriwake, 65 Haw. at 57, 647 P.2d at 
713. 
7  
           
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the November 14, 
2022 Order Denying Reconsideration, filed by the Circuit Court 
of the First Circuit. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaii‘ , May 23, 2025. 
On the briefs:   
 /s/ Katherine G. LeonardWalter J. Rodby, Acting Chief Judgefor Defendant-Appellant.   /s/ Karen T. NakasoneStephen K. Tsushima, Associate JudgeDeputy Prosecuting Attorney,  City and County of Honolulu, /s/ Kimberly T. Guidryfor Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge  
8 