 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000062
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JERMAINE MADELA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-0745)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Jermaine Madela (Defendant) was
 
charged by indictment with two counts of first-degree terroristic
 
threatening, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 707-716(1)(e) (Supp. 2012).
1 The alleged victim in Count I was
 
1 HRS § 707-716(1)(e) provides:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of terroristic threatening
in the first degree if the person commits terroristic threatening:
 
. . .
 
(e)	 With the use of a dangerous instrument[.]
 
At the time relevant to this case, HRS § 707-715 (1993), in turn, defined
terroristc threatening, in pertinent part, as follows:
 
A person commits the offense of terroristic threatening if
the person threatens, by word or conduct, to cause bodily injury
to another person or serious damage to property of another or to
commit a felony:
 
(1)	 With the intent to terrorize, or in reckless disregard
of the risk of terrorizing, another person[.]
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Defendant's brother, Jasfer Madela (Jasfer), and the alleged
 
victim in Count II was Defendant's father, Felix Madela (Felix). 
After a jury trial, Defendant was found guilty of Count I and
 acquitted of Count II. He was sentenced by the Circuit Court of
 
2
the First Circuit (Circuit Court)  to imprisonment for five
years. Defendant appeals from the "Judgment of Conviction and
 Sentence" (Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court on January 24,
 2012. 
On appeal, Defendant argues: (1) there was insufficient
 
evidence to disprove his claim of self-defense; and (2) the
 prosecutor's comments during closing argument, to which he did
 not object, constituted prosecutorial misconduct that warrants a
 new trial. 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) presented 
the following evidence at trial. Defendant resided together with his father, Felix, who was seventy-six years old, and Defendant's brother, Jasfer. Jasfer testified that on the day in question, 
he heard Defendant swearing and yelling at Felix, saying "I like 
money. Fuck you." Apparently, Felix had purchased plane tickets 
for he and Defendant to travel to the Philippines that day, but 
at the last minute, Defendant refused to go, resulting in the trip being cancelled and "wasting the family's money." Defendant was yelling at Felix because Defendant wanted Felix to give him the money from the cancelled trip so that Defendant could travel to the mainland. 
Jasfer intervened and asked Defendant, "Why you yelling
 
at dad like that for?" Jasfer further told Defendant to stop
 being disrespectful to their father. Defendant responded by
 telling Jasfer, "fuck you" and to "shut up." Defendant "went
 rush [Jasfer]," grabbed Jasfer with both hands by the throat, and
 pushed Jasfer backwards, causing him to fall and cut his leg on a
 
2 The Honorable Michael D. Wilson presided.
 
2
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
table. In response, Jasfer punched Defendant twice in his left
 
arm and shoulder. 
Defendant ran into the house and grabbed two knives and
 
a machete. Defendant swung the machete at Jasfer from a few feet
 away, and Defendant threatened to kill both Jasfer and Felix. 
Meanwhile, Felix grabbed Defendant around the stomach from behind
 in an attempt to restrain Felix. While this was occurring,
 Defendant threatened to "chop" off the heads of his brother and
 father. Felix told Jasfer to go into the house and yelled for
 
the landlord, Edison Amodo (Amodo), to call the police. 
Amodo testified that he responded to Felix's calls for
 
help. Amodo saw Defendant holding a machete and pointing it at
 
Felix. Amodo heard Defendant say to Felix, "I will kill you if
 you don't give me the money." Amodo left to get his cell phone
 
and call the police. When he returned, Amodo saw Felix on the
 
ground between his two sons. Jasfer was holding a hammer, with
 
one hand on each end, in order to block the machete that
 
Defendant was holding. Defendant threatened to chop off the
 heads of both his father and brother, and it appeared to Amodo
 that Jasfer was attempting to defend his father. 
II.
 
Defendant testified in his own defense at trial.
 
According to Defendant, he was in the outside kitchen using a
 small knife to cut vegetables and spam for saimin. Defendant and
 his father were having a loud discussion about not getting a
 refund for airline tickets for a trip to the Philippines. The
 trip was cancelled when two hours before the scheduled departure,
 Defendant told Felix that Defendant refused to go. Defendant
 testified that Jasfer came out of the house and confronted
 Defendant in the mistaken belief that Defendant was asking their
 father for money. Defendant swore at Jasfer and told him to stay
 out of it. Jasfer wanted to fight and "came to throw a punch" at
 Defendant. Defendant pushed Jasfer. Jasfer then picked up a
 hammer and Defendant grabbed a knife to protect himself. Jasfer
 hit Defendant "once on the left shoulder" with the hammer. Felix
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stepped between the two brothers and told Jasfer to go into the
 
house and Defendant to put the knife down. At some point, Felix
 took the knife away from Defendant and Jasfer put the hammer
 down. However, the brothers went at it again, with Jasfer
 punching Defendant in the body and Defendant attempting to hit
 Jasfer before Felix was able to break them up.
 
Defendant asserted that Amodo was never present at the
 
scene to observe the altercation. Defendant also denied
 threatening either his father or brother with a knife, and
 Defendant testified that he only picked up the knife to defend
 himself after Jasfer picked up the hammer.
3
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Defendant argues that his conviction must be reversed
 
because there was insufficient evidence to disprove his claim of
 self-defense. We disagree. 
A.
 
In evaluating the sufficiency of the evidence, we view 
the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution. State v. Tamura, 63 Haw. 636, 637, 633 P.2d 1115, 1117 (1981). "The test on appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact." State v. Richie, 
88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) (block quote format 
and citation omitted). 
Substantial evidence is "evidence which a reasonable mind
 
might accept as adequate to support the conclusion of the
fact finder." Matters related to the credibility of
witnesses and the weight to be given to the evidence are
generally left to the factfinder. The appellate court will
neither reconcile conflicting evidence nor interfere with
the decision of the trier of fact based on the witnesses'
 credibility or the weight of the evidence.
 
State v. Mitchell, 94 Hawai' i 388, 393, 15 P.3d 314, 319 (App. 
2000) (citations omitted). We give "full play to the right of 
3
 Felix was not called as a witness at trial.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the fact finder to determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and
 
draw justifiable inferences of fact." State v. Yabusaki, 58 Haw.
 
404, 411, 570 P.2d 844, 848 (1977) (block quote format and
 citation omitted).
 
The justification defense of use of force in self-
protection (self-defense) is set forth in HRS § 703–304 (1993 &
 Supp. 2012), which provides in pertinent part:
 
(1) . . . the use of force upon or toward another
person is justifiable when the actor believes that such
force is immediately necessary for the purpose of protecting
himself against the use of unlawful force by the other
person on the present occasion.
 
. . . .
 
(3) . . . a person employing protective force may
estimate the necessity thereof under the circumstances as he
believes them to be when the force is used without
 retreating, surrendering possession, doing any other act
which he has no legal duty to do, or abstaining from any
lawful action.
 
In evaluating a defendant's claim of self-defense, "the 
evidence must be assessed from the standpoint of a reasonable 
person in the defendant's position under the circumstances as the defendant subjectively believed them to be at the time he or she tried to defend himself or herself." State v. Lubong, 77 Hawai' i 
429, 433, 886 P.2d 766, 770 (App. 1994). The test for self-defense contains both a subjective and an objective prong. "Under the subjective prong the jury is required to evaluate the use of force from the defendant's perspective. . . . [T]he focus is on the circumstances known to the defendant, thus directing the jury to consider the actions of a 'reasonable person in the defendant's position under the circumstances as he believed them to be.'" State v. Pond, 118 Hawai' i 452, 491, 193 P.3d 368, 407 
(2008) (brackets, emphasis, and citation omitted). "Under the objective prong, emphasis is placed on the reasonable person standard so the defendant's use of force must be 'determined from the point of view of a reasonable person.'" Id. (brackets and 
citation omitted. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
Defendant argues that because his version of the events
 
supported his claim of self-defense and because Jasfer's
 
testimony was not credible, there was insufficient evidence to
 disprove Defendant's claim of self-defense. Defendant's argument
 lacks merit.
 
The prosecution disproves a defendant's claim of self-
defense beyond a reasonable doubt when the trier of fact "believes the prosecution's case and disbelieves the defendant's case." State v. Jhun, 83 Hawai' i 472, 483, 927 P.2d 1355, 1366 
(1996); In re Doe, 107 Hawai' i 12, 19, 108 P.3d 966, 973 (2005); 
see State v. Pavao, 81 Hawaii 142, 146, 913 P.2d 553, 557 (App. 1996). Because "the jury must determine whether the defendant did in fact subjectively believe the use of force was necessary[,]" "[a] defendant's credibility . . . is at the crux of [the justification defense of self-defense]." State v. Lealo, 
126 Hawai' i 460, 470, 272 P.3d 1227, 1237 (2012). 
Defendant's argument on appeal overlooks the applicable
 
standard of review, which requires this court to view the
 evidence in the light most favorable to the State and give
 deference to the jury's credibility determinations. We conclude
 that there was substantial evidence to support the jury's
 rejection of Defendant's claim of self-defense. 
When viewed in the light most favorable to the State,
 
the evidence showed that Defendant attacked Jasfer by grabbing
 him by the throat and pushing him backwards into a table; that
 from a close distance, Defendant swung a machete at Jasfer and
 that Defendant threatened to kill Jasfer and Felix and chop off
 their heads, while brandishing the machete and knives; and that
 Jasfer held a hammer at both ends in a defensive position. 
Defendant's testimony -- which did not acknowledge his possession
 of a machete and asserted that he did not threaten either Jasfer
 or his father with a knife, and that he only picked up the knife
 to defend himself after Jasfer picked up a hammer -- was contrary
 to Jasfer's and Amodo's testimony. In addition, Defendant's
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testimony that Amodo could not have observed the incident was
 
contradicted by Amodo. Defendant's testimony that Jasfer hit him
 on the shoulder with a hammer conflicted with the testimony of 
Officer Thomas Lodgeman, who responded to the scene and did not
 see any visible injury to that area of Defendant's body.
 
The jury was entitled to resolve the conflicting
 
evidence by disbelieving Defendant's testimony that his actions
 against Jasfer were in self-defense. There was substantial
 evidence that Defendant did not subjectively believe that his use
 of force was necessary and also that Defendant's use of force was
 not objectively reasonable. Accordingly, we conclude that there
 was sufficient evidence to disprove the Defendant's claim of
 self-defense.
 
II.
 
Defendant argues that his conviction should be vacated
 
because comments by the prosecutor during closing argument
 constituted prosecutorial misconduct. In particular, Defendant
 contends that the prosecutor's comment that "committing a crime
 in anger is not a defense to crime" and the prosecutor's
 comparing the charged terroristic threatening offenses to other
 crimes was improper. We disagree.
 
A.
 
During his closing argument, the prosecutor discussed
 
the elements and mental state necessary to prove the charged
 offense of first-degree terroristic threatening. With respect to
 the charge involving Jasfer, the prosecutor argued that the State
 had proven the required mental state as follows:
 
Did defendant recklessly disregard the risk of
terrorizing Jasfer Madela?
 
Now, this is important here. Recklessly disregard the
risk. He didn't have to intend it. If he was just, like,
upset, grabbed this knife in the heat of passion, said, I'm
going to kill you, chop off your head, like that, did he
recklessly disregard the risk that his conduct would cause
someone fear? Yes, he recklessly did.
 
He didn't have to intend to scare the person, but did
he recklessly disregard the risk that he would do so? Yes.
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
He grabbed the knives, machete. He held the machete
 
and pointed it at Jasfer.
 
He said he was going to kill them both. He said he
 
was going to cut off their heads.
 
He was standing near him when he said it. He did not
 
accidentally terrorize him. Jasfer was actually terrorized.
 
The police who spoke to him saw this. Officer
 
Furoyama said [Jasfer] was shaken with fear.
 
You don't need this, you don't need the actual fear,
though, but in this case we actually got the fear.
 
After making a similar argument regarding proof of the
 
required mental state with respect to the charge involving Felix,
 
the prosecutor made the following comments, which include the
 comments challenged by Defendant on appeal:
 
Under the law, it does not matter that he was angry.
During jury selection, [defense counsel] started talking
about heat of passion. 
Heat of passion, heat of passion. Under the law, it
does not matter if [Defendant] was angry in the heat of
passion when he did this. Committing a crime in anger is
not a defense. 
Think about it, common sense of this here. Committing
a crime in anger is not a defense to a crime. I'm sure that
 when you get the domestic violence cases going on, and
someone's pounding on the other like that, someone's angry,
that's not a defense to domestic violence.
 
When someone kills someone, murder, kind of like that,
they might be angry at that person. That's not a defense to
 murder. 
When someone's assaulting someone like that, anger is
not a defense to a crime. It's a motivation for a crime,
but not a defense to a crime.
 
B.
 
"Prosecutorial misconduct warrants a new trial or the
 
setting aside of a guilty verdict only where the actions of the
 
prosecutor have caused prejudice to the defendant's right to a
 fair trial." 
State v. McGriff , 76 Hawai' i 148, 158, 871 P.2d 
782, 792 (1994). In determining whether the alleged
 prosecutorial misconduct warrants a new trial, the appellate
 court considers "the nature of the alleged misconduct, the
 promptness or lack of a curative instruction, and the strength or
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
weakness of the evidence against defendant." State v. Agrabante,
 
73 Haw. 179, 198, 830 P.2d 492, 502 (1992). 
In this case, Defendant did not object to the 
prosecutorial comments he now claims were improper on appeal. As 
a general rule, the failure to object at trial may be deemed to constitute a waiver of the issue on appeal. State v. Metcalfe, 
129 Hawai' i 206, 224, 297 P.3d 1062, 1080 (2013); see People v. 
Hryshko, 427 N.W.2d 572, 578 (Mich. Ct. App. 1988) ("Absent objection, appellate review [of a prosecutor's remarks during closing argument] is foreclosed unless the prejudicial effect was so great that it could not have been cured by an appropriate instruction and failure to consider the issue would result in a miscarriage of justice."); Finnegan v. State, 764 N.W.2d 856, 863 (Minn. Ct. App. 2009) ("Failure to object to [the prosecutor's comments in closing argument] or to seek a curative instruction weighs heavily against reversal, because the [trial] court might have been able to ameliorate the effect of improper prosecutorial argument." (internal quotation marks, brackets, and citation omitted)). 
However, even in the absence of an objection, 
an appellate court "may recognize plain error when the error
committed affects substantial rights of the defendant." 
The appellate court "will apply the plain error
standard of review to correct errors which seriously affect
the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial
proceedings, to serve the ends of justice, and to prevent
the denial of fundamental rights." An appellate court's
"power to deal with plain error is one to be exercised
sparingly and with caution because the plain error rule
represents a departure from a presupposition of the
adversary system -- that a party must look to his or her
counsel for protection and bear the cost of counsel's
mistakes."
 
Metcalfe, 129 Hawai' i at 222, 297 P.3d at 1978 (citations 
omitted). 
C.
 
Defendant argues that the prosecutor's statement that
 
"committing a crime in anger is not a defense" was improper. 
Defendant characterizes the prosecutor's comment as a
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
misstatement of law and contends that it may have misled the jury
 
into believing that Defendant's defense of self-defense did not
 apply if he was angry. Defendant's arguments are without merit.
 
The fact that Defendant was angry would not constitute
 
a defense to the charged first-degree terroristic threatening
 offenses, and therefore, the prosecutor's comment was not a
 misstatement of law. Moreover, the link that Defendant attempts
 to draw between the prosecutor's comment and misleading the jury
 into believing that anger precluded reliance on self-defense is
 tenuous and unconvincing. The prosecutor was not discussing
 Defendant's self-defense claim when he made the challenged
 comment. Indeed, later in his closing argument, the prosecutor
 argued that "[s]elf-defense . . . doesn't apply in this case
 because [Defendant] had the weapon first." In addition, the jury
 was instructed on the requirements for self-defense, Defendant
 does not challenge the validity of the self-defense instruction,
 and Defendant's counsel used the self-defense instruction to
 argue that the prosecution had failed to disprove the defense in
 his closing argument. We conclude that the prosecutor did not
 engage in misconduct in arguing that "committing a crime in anger
 is not a defense." 
We also reject Defendant's claim that the prosecutor's
 
reference to crimes involving domestic violence, assault, and
 murder were improper because "they were designed to inflame the
 passions of the jury by implying that [Defendant's] actions were
 comparative to domestic violence, assault or murder." Viewed in
 context, the prosecutor's reference to domestic violence,
 assault, and murder was clearly not designed to inflame the
 passions of the jury. The prosecutor was not equating
 
4
Defendant's charged conduct with these offenses,  but was simply
using them by analogy to argue that while anger often serves as a
 motivation for criminal conduct, it does not excuse criminal
 
4
 Indeed, the prosecutor told the jury, "This is not an assault crime.
You're not here for an assault. You're not here for a murder case."
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
conduct. We conclude that the prosecutor's reference to domestic
 
violence, assault, and murder did not serve to improperly inflame
 the passions of the jury and did not constitute misconduct. See
 
Commonwealth v. Silva, 447 N.E.2d 646, 655 (Mass. Sup. Jud. Ct.
 1983) ("[I]t is proper for counsel to use analogy, example and
 hypothesis as an aid to effective and aggressive argument."
 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)). 
Because we conclude that the prosecutor's comments were 
not improper, we need not consider whether they affected Defendant's substantial rights. See State v. Maluia, 107 Hawai' i 
20, 26, 108 P.3d 974, 980 (2005); State v. Valdivia, 95 Hawai' i 
465, 482-83, 24 P.3d 661, 678-69 (2001). In any event, viewing the prosecutor's comments in context, we conclude that any error in the prosecutor's comments did not affect Defendant's substantial rights or deprive him of a fair trial. See McGriff, 
76 Hawai' i 148, 158, 871 P.2d 782, 792 (1994); State v. Kupihea, 
80 Hawai' i 307, 317, 909 P.2d 1122, 1132 (1996) (concluding that 
the prosecutor's use of hypothetical examples to illustrate a legal principle was not prejudicial); State v. Ture, 353 N.W.2d 502, 516 (Minn. 1984) ("The fact that defendant failed to object to the prosecutor's statements suggests [defendant] then did not consider them prejudicial."). 
CONCLUSION
 
We affirm the Judgment of the Circuit Court.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 29, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Kevin A. Souza 
(Law Offices ofKevin A. Souza, LLLC)
for Defendant-Appellant
 Chief Judge 
Associate Judge
Brandon H. Ito
 Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City & County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge
 
11
 