NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-11-0000653
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JONATHAN McQUEEN, also known as JONATHAN NATURE,
Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NOS. 08-1-0191(2) & 08-1-0435(2))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Jonathan McQueen (McQueen), also
 
known as Jonathan Nature, was charged with various drug-related
 
offenses and permitted to participate in the Maui Drug Court
 Program. The Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit
 Court)
1
 terminated McQueen's participation in the Drug Court
Program on the ground that he purportedly was supplying drugs to
 Manuel Lopes, III (Lopes), another participant in the Program. 
Lopes had been arrested on drug charges while he and McQueen were
 both participating in the Drug Court Program. Lopes agreed to
 cooperate with the police, named McQueen as his supplier of
 methamphetamine, and made several recorded phone calls to
 McQueen. None of the recorded phone calls made any specific
 
1The Honorable Shackley F. Raffetto presided over the
proceedings relevant to this appeal.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reference to drugs. At a hearing on the motion to terminate
 
McQueen's participation in the Program, Lopes recanted his
 allegations against McQueen. Lopes testified that he had lied to
 the police in saying that McQueen was his drug supplier and that
 he and McQueen were not discussing a drug transaction in the
 recorded conversations.
 
Nevertheless, the Circuit Court granted the motion of 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) to terminate 
McQueen's participation in the Drug Court Program. After a stipulated facts trial, the Circuit Court found McQueen guilty of all the drug-related charges. It sentenced McQueen to consecutive terms of ten years of imprisonment on one count of second-degree promotion a dangerous drug and five years of imprisonment on one count of prohibited acts related to drug paraphernalia, and it ran the various terms of imprisonment on the remaining counts concurrently. 
On appeal, McQueen argues that in terminating him from
 
the Drug Court Program, the Circuit Court improperly relied on
 Lopes's hearsay statements to the police as substantive evidence,
 when they were only admitted for impeachment purposes. He also
 argues that the Circuit Court erred in basing its imposition of
 consecutive sentences on Lopes's statements to the police. 
We conclude that because the Circuit Court only
 
admitted Lopes's statements to the police identifying McQueen as
 his drug supplier to impeach Lopes's hearing testimony, the
 Circuit Court erred in relying on Lopes's statements to the
 police as substantive evidence. We further conclude that the
 remaining evidence, and in particular the recorded conversations,
 were insufficient to support the Circuit Court's decision to
 terminate McQueen from the Drug Court Program. Accordingly, we
 hold that the Circuit Court erred in terminating McQueen's
 participation in the Drug Court Program. We vacate the "Judgment
 [of] Conviction and Sentence" (Judgment) entered by the Circuit
 Court on August 9, 2011, and we remand the case for further
 proceedings.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
McQueen was charged in Cr. No. 08-1-0191(2) with
 
second-degree promoting a dangerous drug (Count 1); prohibited
 
acts related to drug paraphernalia (Count 2); and third-degree
 promoting a detrimental drug (Count 3). He was also charged in
 Cr. No. 08-1-0435(2) with second-degree promotion a dangerous
 drug (Count 5); prohibited acts related to drug paraphernalia
 (Count 6); third-degree promoting a detrimental drug (Count 7);
 fourth-degree promoting a harmful drug (Count 8); and third-
degree promoting a dangerous drug (Count 9).
 
As an alternative to standing trial, McQueen petitioned
 
in both cases for admission to the Maui Drug Court Program. As
 part of his petitions, McQueen admitted to the charged offenses
 and signed Maui Drug Court Program Admissions Agreements, in
 which he agreed to comply with the conditions of the Program if
 his petitions were approved. The Circuit Court approved
 McQueen's petitions and admitted him into the Maui Drug Court
 Program.
 
McQueen participated in the Program for about a year,
 
without any apparent problems. On October 6, 2010, McQueen
 advanced to the fourth phase of the Program, and the Circuit
 Court congratulated him on his progress. However, on October 14,
 2010, the State moved to terminate McQueen from the Program. 
After a hearing held on November 23, 2010, and December 14, 2010,
 the Circuit Court terminated McQueen from the Program. The
 Circuit Court ruled that McQueen had violated conditions A and H
 of the Drug Court Program, which respectively required: (1) that
 he "commit [himself] to full participation in the Maui Drug Court
 Program . . . toward the goal of remaining clean and sober for
 the rest of [his] life"; and (2) that he "not knowingly associate
 with any person possession or using illegal drugs."
 
II. 
The State's motion to terminate McQueen's participation
 
in the Program was based on an undercover operation involving
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lopes. At the time, Lopes was also a participant in the Drug
 
Court Program. On September 2, 2010, the police arrested Lopes
 after searching a house and finding crystal methamphetamine. 
Lopes agreed to cooperate with the police. Lopes identified
 McQueen as his drug supplier, and Lopes agreed to make recorded
 phone calls to McQueen to arrange the purchase of an ounce of
 crystal methamphetamine for $2,000. 
On September 2, 2010, Lopes made four recorded phone
 
calls to McQueen. During these phone calls, Lopes did not
 specifically refer to drugs or money. Lopes used the term
 "sandwiches," which he told the police meant $2,000. Although
 the purported plan was to have Lopes meet with McQueen and
 purchase crystal methamphetamine, McQueen did not come to meet
 with Lopes.
 
When Lopes testified at the hearing on the State's
 
motion to terminate McQueen from the Program, Lopes recanted the
 allegations he made to the police that McQueen was his drug
 supplier. Lopes testified that when he was arrested, he panicked
 and gave the police McQueen's name so he could buy time and stay
 out of jail. Lopes testified that he had never purchased crystal
 methamphetamine from McQueen and that his statements to the
 police that McQueen was his supplier were lies. 
Lopes explained the recorded phone conversations by
 
testifying that the references to "sandwiches" actually meant
 sandwiches because he often bought McQueen lunch in exchange for
 rides. Lopes also testified that McQueen was helping him
 purchase a truck from one of McQueen's friends. Lopes stated
 that although he had led the police to believe he was arranging a
 drug purchase from McQueen, his conversations with McQueen
 related to real sandwiches and the purchase of a truck. Lopes
 testified that he kept his conversation with McQueen vague so
 that the police would not realize Lopes's deceit.
 
III.
 
During the hearing, McQueen's counsel acknowledged that
 
Lopes's statements to the police that McQueen was his drug
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
supplier were admissible as prior inconsistent statements to
 
impeach Lopes's hearing testimony which exonerated McQueen. 
McQueen's counsel, however, objected to Lopes's statements to the
 police being considered for the truth of the matter asserted. 
The Circuit Court agreed that Lopes's statements were being
 admitted only to determine Lopes's credibility:
 
[McQueen's counsel]: Judge, I assume that [Lopes's
statement to the police that McQueen was his drug supplier]
is coming in as a prior inconsistent statement, I understand
that, but it doesn't come in for the truth of the matter
asserted, just to go as to his credibility?
 
THE COURT: I don't know.
 
[McQueen's counsel]: That's my objection, if it's
coming in.
 
THE COURT: He was attacking credibility.
 
[Prosecutor]: That's correct.
 
THE COURT: Okay.
 [McQueen's counsel]: I am asking that it just come in
for that limited purpose. There has been an attack on his
 
credibility.
 
THE COURT: Very well
.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Later, during the testimony of Officer Asbel Polanco,
 
the Circuit Court confirmed that Lopes's statements to the police
 
were only being admitted as prior inconsistent statements, and
 not for their truth.
 
[McQueen's counsel]: Now, I just want to clarify.
[What Lopes said to the police] is only coming in as a prior
inconsistent statement; correct?
 
THE COURT: Whatever Lopes said -­
[McQueen's counsel]: A prior inconsistent statement?
 
THE COURT: 
-- that he's already -- yeah.
 
[McQueen's counsel]: Not for the truth of the matter
 
asserted? That's all. I just want to clarify that.
 
[Prosecutor]: Right.
 
THE COURT: Right. It's only as to what Lopes said.
 [Prosecutor]: That's correct.
 [McQueen's counsel]: Right.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV.
 
Despite its rulings that Lopes's statements to the
 
police were being admitted only for impeachment as prior
 
inconsistent statements, the Circuit Court relied on those
 statements as substantive evidence in finding that McQueen had
 violated the conditions of the Drug Court Program and in
 terminating him from the Program. The Circuit Court stated, in
 relevant part:
 
I am convinced, based on the totality of the circumstances,
that when Mr. Lopes identified [McQueen] as being involved
in the drug deal [in his statements to the police], that
that was credible testimony, and his change of tune as he
progressed through his testimony was just an effort to do
nothing but that, but change his tune.
 
DISCUSSION
 
McQueen argues that the Circuit Court improperly relied
 
on Lopes's hearsay statements to the police as substantive
 
evidence, when they were only admitted for impeachment purposes. 
We agree.
 
In conducting the hearing on the State's motion to
 
terminate McQueen from the Drug Court Program, the Circuit Court
 applied the Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) regarding hearsay. At
 various points of the hearing, the Circuit Court sustained
 hearsay objections made by McQueen's counsel. 
More importantly, the Circuit Court specifically ruled
 
that Lopes's statements to the police, which implicated McQueen
 as Lopes's drug supplier, were only being admitted as prior
 inconsistent statements to impeach Lopes's hearing testimony. 
McQueen was entitled to rely upon the Circuit Court's rulings in
 defending against the State's attempt to terminate him from the
 Drug Court Program. In addition, the State did not contest the
 Circuit Court's rulings that Lopes's prior statements to the
 police were only being admitted for impeachment, and the State
 indicated its agreement with these rulings. Under these
 circumstances, we conclude that the Circuit Court was bound by
 its rulings, which admitted Lopes's statements to the police only
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for impeachment and not for their truth, in deciding the State's
 
motion to terminate McQueen from the Program.2
 
Lopes's prior statements to the police were the only
 
evidence directly linking McQueen to any involvement in illegal
 drugs. However, Lopes's prior statements to the police were not
 admitted for their truth, but only for impeachment, and did not
 constitute substantive evidence. See State v. Smith, 63 Haw. 51,
 
53 n.2, 621 P.2d 343, 345 n.2 (1980) (stating that the court was
 not considering statements admitted for impeachment purposes and
 not as substantive evidence in evaluating the sufficiency of the
 evidence on appeal); State v. Julian, 719 N.E.2d 96, 101 n.12
 (Ohio Ct. App. 1998) ("While [a witness's] prior inconsistent
 statement could be used to impeach her trial testimony and attack
 her credibility, the prior statement itself was not substantive
 evidence and could not be considered as evidence of the crime
 itself."). At the hearing, the State raised material questions
 concerning Lopes's explanation of the nature and meaning of his
 conversations with McQueen in the recorded phone calls. However,
 the phone calls themselves were insufficient to show that McQueen
 had been involved in any illegal drug activity or that he had
 knowingly associated with individuals possessing or using illegal
 drugs. 
Because the Circuit Court did not admit Lopes's
 
statements to the police for their truth, it could not consider
 such statements as substantive evidence in ruling on the
 termination motion. See Smith, 63 Haw. at 53 n.2, 621 P.2d at
 
2In light of our analysis, we need not resolve the parties'
dispute over whether the HRE apply to proceedings to terminate a
defendant's participation in a Drug Court Program. McQueen
contends that the HRE apply to such proceedings. He argues that
HRE Rule 1101 (1993) provides that the HRE "apply to all courts
of the State of Hawaii, except as otherwise provided by
statute[,]" and that HRE Rule 1101 exempts proceedings "granting
or revoking probation," but does not exempt Drug Court Program
termination proceedings. The State, on the other hand, argues
that because a Drug Court Program participant is analogous to a
probationer, the HRE should not apply. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
345 n.2. The remaining evidence was insufficient to support the
 
Circuit Court's finding that McQueen had been involved in
 attempting to arrange a drug deal with Lopes and therefore
 McQueen had violated the conditions of the Drug Court Program. 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court erred in terminating McQueen from
 the Drug Court Program, which triggered the Circuit Court's
 subsequent adjudication of McQueen as guilty on the charged
 offenses and his sentencing.
 
CONCLUSION
 
We hold that the Circuit Court erred in terminating
 
McQueen from the Drug Court Program because there was
 insufficient evidence to support the Circuit Court's decision. 
We vacate the Circuit Court's Judgment, and we remand for further
 proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 31, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Benjamin E. Lowenthal
(Law Office of Philip H.
Lowenthal)
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Cody E. Minatodani
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Plaintiff-Appellee 
8
 