         
        
          
          
         
     
      
       
        
      
       
            . . . . NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REP ORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000756 22-JAN-2026 07:48 AM Dkt. 58 SO 
NO.  CAAP-23-0000756 
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE  COURT  OF  APPEALS 
OF
  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
STATE  OF  HAWAI I,  Plaintiff-Appellee,  v. 
FORRESTE  OLSON,  Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL  FROM  THE  DISTRICT  COURT  OF  THE  FIRST  CIRCUIT 
HONOLULU  DIVISION 
(CASE  NO.  1DCC-23-0006839) 
SUMMARY  DISPOSITION  ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant  Forreste  Olson  (Olson)  appeals  from  
the  December  4,  2023  Notice  of  Entry  of  Judgment  and/or  Order 
(Judgment )  entered  by  the  District  Court  of  the  First  Circuit, 
Honolulu  Division  (District  Court).   Plaintiff-Appellee  State  of 1
Hawai i  (State)  charged  Olson  with   one  count  of  Harassment,  in 
violation  of  Hawaii  Revised  Statutes  (HRS)  §  711-1106(1)(b) 
(2014).    After  a  bench  trial,  the  District  Court  found  Olson 
guilty  as  charged  and  fined  Olson  $200  and  fees.   2
1 The Honorable David M. Hayakawa presided at trial and entered the 
Judgment. 
2 § 711-1106 Harassment. (1) A person commits the 
offense of harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy, or 
alarm any other person, that person: 
(b) Insults, taunts, or challenges another person in 
a manner likely to provoke an immediate violent 
response or that would cause the other person to 
reasonably believe that the actor intends to 
cause bodily injury to the recipient or another 
or damage to the property of the recipient or 
another[.]          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
    
    
         
         
   
         
          
        
           
       
         
         
         
           
          
     
        
          
        
       
         
          
          
         
        
             Olson  raises   a  single   point  of  error  on  appeal, 
contending   that  the  District  Court  erred  in  failing   to  grant  his 
motion  for  judgment  of  acquittal.   Olson  also  argues  that  he  was 
provided  ineffective  assistance  of  counsel. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Olson's 
appeal as follows: 
(1) Olson argues that he should have been acquitted 
because the State failed to prove all the essential elements of 
harassment. Under Hawai i law, the essential elements  of 
harassment are: (1) the actor, "with intent to harass, annoy, or 
alarm" another; (2) "[i]nsults, taunts, or challenges" the 
recipient; (3) "in a manner likely to provoke an immediate 
violent response or that would cause the other person to 
reasonably believe that the actor intends to cause bodily injury 
to the recipient or another or damage to the property of the 
recipient or another[.]" HRS § 711-1106(1)(b). The first two 
elements are not at issue. 
Rather, Olson argues that, even viewing the evidence in 
the light most favorable to the State, there was no substantial 
evidence that Olson's words to his neighbor (the complaining 
witness), David Butterfield (Butterfield ), would likely produce a 
violent response from Butterfield. We note that Olson disregards 
the alternative stated in the third element – that the conduct 
would cause the other person to reasonably believe that the actor 
intends to cause bodily injury. More importantly, the District 
Court found there was "specific evidence" that Olson "taunted 
and/or challenged another person in a manner . . . I'm going to -
2          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
             
          
          
       
       
            
      
           
             
       
        
       
        
       
         
        
         
  
      
           
         
           
           
          
          
            
         
       - I'm going to kill you, I'm going to kick your ass, which was 
likely to provoke a violent response or that would put somebody 
in reasonable belief that they were subject to bodily injury." 
This finding and conclusion was supported by Butterfield's 
testimony. The District Court credited Butterfield's testimony 
that included, inter alia, that on June 3, 2023, the date of the 
incident underlying the Harassment charge, Olson confronted 
Butterfield, challenged him to a fight, said he was going to kick 
his ass, and threatened to beat him up or kill him. We conclude 
that Olson's argument concerning insufficient evidence is without 
merit. 
(2) Olson also argues that his attorney was 
ineffective because counsel did not sufficiently cross examine 
Butterfield concerning all of the previous times that Olson 
threatened Butterfield. Olson maintains that more effective 
cross could have shown that Butterfield did not reasonably and 
objectively believe that Olson would injure him or that 
Butterfield would respond violently, resulting in the loss of a 
potentially meritorious defense. 
Under Hawai i law, "[s]pecific acts  or omissions 
alleged to be error but which had an obvious tactical basis for 
benefitting the defendant's case will not be subject to further 
scrutiny." State v. DeLeon, 131 Hawai i 463, 479, 319  P.3d 382, 
398 (2014) (quoting Dan v. State, 76 Hawai i 423, 427, 879  P.2d 
528, 532 (1994)). Here, delving more deeply into Olson's prior 
aggressive and threatening behavior would be a risky tactic for a 
defense lawyer, as it would tend to show the defendant in a very 
negative light without adding any evidence that would tend to 
show whether Butterfield reasonably believed that Olson would 
3          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
    
  carry  through   on  his  threats  and  injure  or  kill  him  this  time.  
Not  pursuing  this  line  of  testimony  had  an  obvious  tactical  basis 
and  we  cannot  conclude  that  counsel  was  ineffective  based  on  this 
argument. 
For  these   reasons,  the  District  Court's  December  4, 
2023  Judgment  is  affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu,
 Hawai i, January 22,  2026. 
On  the  briefs: 
Eric  Lee  Niemeyer, 
for  Defendant-Appellant. 
Brian  R.  Vincent, 
Deputy  Prosecuting  Attorney, 
City  &  County  of  Honolulu, 
for  Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/  Katherine  G.  Leonard 
Presiding  Judge 
/s/  Keith  K.  Hiraoka 
Associate  Judge 
/s/  Clyde  J.  Wadsworth 
Associate  Judge  
4 