NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000524 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
U.S. BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, AS TRUSTEE FOR MASTR ASSET
BACKED SECURITIES TRUST, 2006-FRE2, Plaintiff-Appellee, 
v. 
EARL KYOJI OMIZO, Defendant-Appellant,
and 
JOHN and MARY DOES 1-10, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 1CC121000219) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Earl Kyoji Omizo appeals from the
Judgment
 in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee U.S. Bank NA entered by 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit on June 18, 2019.1 For 
the reasons explained below, we affirm the Judgment. 
Bank filed an amended complaint against Omizo on 
August 26, 2016. The amended complaint alleged that Bank had 
completed a nonjudicial foreclosure on property owned by Omizo. Bank was the high bidder at the foreclosure auction. Bank recorded an affidavit of foreclosure and a deed transferring title to the property to itself. Omizo continued to remain on the property. Count I sought a writ of ejectment. Count II sought recovery of damages for Omizo's continuing occupancy of 
1 The Honorable Jeannette H. Castagnetti presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the property. Count III alleged that if the court determined the 
nonjudicial foreclosure was invalid: 
the non-judicial foreclosure may be set aside; that the
Mortgage shall be deemed to still be a valid and existinglien against the Property, with the same priority, force andaffect, as if it had not been foreclosed by the non-judicialforeclosure; and that [Bank] may be entitled to proceed witha judicial foreclosure. 
Omizo answered the amended complaint; he did not assert a 
counterclaim against Bank. 
Bank filed a motion for summary judgment on April 24, 
2018. Omizo's opposition was filed on May 22, 2018. He argued that the nonjudicial foreclosure was void because Bank failed to publish notice of rescheduling the foreclosure auction, as required by Hungate v. Law Off. of David B. Rosen, 139 Hawai# i 
394, 403-04, 391 P.3d 1, 10-11 (2017). 
He did not argue that 
Bank had lacked standing to nonjudicially foreclose his mortgage. Bank filed a reply memorandum on May 24, 2018. 
Bank's motion was heard on May 30, 2018. Bank offered 
to "stipulate to the fact that the nonjudicial foreclosure is invalid, and that the mortgage be reinstated." 
In response to 
the circuit court's questions, Bank's counsel clarified: 
But we're not asking for an adjudication ruling of the
Court. We're just saying if the Court's going to deny the
writ [of ejectment], due to the fact that the nonjudicialforeclosure was invalid under the Hungate case, then it justrevests title back into the borrowers, and put the mortgageback on title, on -- as a lien against the property. 
And at that point, Your Honor, we may or may not file
a foreclosure action. I mean, it just depends too if we'regoing to try to settle this matter. But at least everything's brought back to status quo, based on the factthat the nonjudicial foreclosure was invalid under of [sic]the Hungate case, Your Honor. 
The circuit court took the motion under advisement, pending 
settlement discussions between the parties. 
A year passed without a settlement. On June 18, 2019, 
the circuit court entered findings of fact, conclusions of law, and an order granting in part and denying in part Bank's motion. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court concluded that Bank's nonjudicial foreclosure 
was void under Kondaur Cap. Corp. v. Matsuyoshi, 136 Hawai# i 227, 
361 P.3d 454 (2015) and Hungate. The circuit court denied the motion "with respect to Counts I [ejectment] and II [damages]" of Bank's amended complaint. On Count III, the circuit court granted the following declaratory relief: 
A. The non-judicial foreclosure as evidenced by the
Mortgagee's Affidavit of Foreclosure Sale Under Powerof Sale recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances of theState of Hawaii on December 30, 2010 as DocumentNo. 2010-203923 is void; 
B. The title of the Property shall be restored in thename of EARL KYOJI OMIZO; 
C. The Mortgage dated December 30, 2005 and recorded inthe Bureau of Conveyances of the State of Hawaii asDocument No. 2005-266361 shall be reinstated under the same terms, conditions, and priority as it was priorto the non-judicial foreclosure; 
D. [Bank] may be entitled to proceed with a judicialforeclosure; and 
E. This Order is entered as a final judgment pursuant toRule 54 (b) of the Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure asthere is no reason for delay. 
Also on June 18, 2019, the circuit court entered the Judgment in 
favor of Bank as to Count III (declaratory relief), as required by Rule 58 of the Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP); the 
Judgment contained the language required by HRCP Rule 54(b). This appeal followed. 
Omizo's sole contention on appeal is that "[t]he 
Circuit Court committed reversible error in granting summary judgment, because [Bank] failed to establish its standing." Omizo's contention lacks merit. He cites Bank of Am. v. Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai# i 361, 370, 390 P.3d 1248, 1257 (2017), 
for the proposition that a plaintiff seeking summary judgment in a foreclosure action has the burden to establish standing to enforce the note and mortgage at the time the complaint was filed. 
But Count III of Bank's amended complaint did not seek 
foreclosure. It sought declaratory relief. The circuit court's HRCP Rule 54(b)-certified judgment granted declaratory relief, 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not a decree of foreclosure. A party has standing to seek 
declaratory relief: 
(1) where antagonistic claims exist between the parties
(a) that indicate imminent and inevitable litigation, or(b) where the party seeking declaratory relief has aconcrete interest in a legal relation, status, right, orprivilege that is challenged or denied by the other party,who has or asserts a concrete interest in the same legalrelation, status, right, or privilege; and (2) a declaratoryjudgment will serve to terminate the uncertainty orcontroversy giving rise to the proceeding. 
Tax Found. of Hawai# i v. State, 144 Hawai# i  175, 202, 439 P.3d 
127, 154 (2019). The record reflects that Bank had standing to 
request declaratory relief against Omizo about the legal consequences of its invalid nonjudicial foreclosure. 
For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment entered by the 
circuit court on June 18, 2019, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 24, 2021. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate JudgeGary V. Dubin, Frederick J. Arensmeyer,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Edmund K. Saffery,Deirdre Marie-Iha, Lauren K. Chun, for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
4 