NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000047
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI #I
WAIMANALO 56, LLC and SHILOAH WARREN, Plaintiffs-Appellants, v.
WAIMANALO TELEVISION PARTNERS, LLC, WAIMANALO TELEVISION
PARTNERS, HULI HULI TV, LLC, and OCEANIA CHRISTIAN CHURCH 
N.K.A. PACIFIC CHRISTIAN CHURCH, Defendants-Appellees
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 1CC111000898)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.)
Waimanalo 56 , LLC and Shiloah Warren (collectively,
Plaintiffs ) appeal from the Final Judgment for defendant Pacific
Christian Church, formerly known as Oceania Christian Church,
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit on December 27,
2017.1  We affirm.
Plaintiffs' complaint was filed on May 4, 2011.  It had
three substantive counts: (1) breach of a promissory Note;
(2) breach of a contract; and (3) unjust enrichment.  Waimanalo
Television Partners, LLC, Waimanalo Television Partners ( WTP),
and Huli Huli  TV, LLC were named as defendants, but were never
served with the complaint.  They were dismissed before trial.
A jury-waived trial was held on December 8 and 9, 2015. 
The Note, an Addendum  to Agreement, an Assignment  Agreement, and
1The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.Electronically Filed
Intermediate Court of Appeals
CAAP-18-0000047
05-APR-2024
07:49 AM
Dkt. 80 SONOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
an Asset Purchase Agreement  were stipulated into evidence. 
Stuart Mitchell  was Plaintiffs' only witness.  Church called no
witnesses.  After the close of evidence, Church moved to dismiss
Waimanalo 56's claims under Hawai #i Rules of Civil Procedure
Rule 52(c).  The circuit court granted the motion.  The circuitcourt entered findings of fact, conclusions of law, and an orderon July 1, 2016.  The Final Judgment was entered on December 27,2017.  This appeal followed.
Plaintiffs challenge many of the circuit court's
findings, conclusions, and mixed findings and conclusions.  Thedispositive issues are whether the circuit court erred by findingand concluding that (1) "[P]laintiffs failed to prove that[Church] breached a contract or any other promise, debt, orobligation [Church] owed to [P]laintiffs," and (2) Plaintiffs didnot prove that Church was unjustly enriched.
(1)Plaintiffs' Exhibit 1 is the Note.  The circuit
court found, and Plaintiffs do not challenge, that Huli Huli was
the sole maker.
2  A maker is "a person who signs or is identified
in a note as a person undertaking to pay."  Hawaii RevisedStatutes ( HRS) § 490:3-103(a)(5) (2008).  The Note does not
evidence any obligation by Church.
The Note is payable "to the order of Stuart B.
Mitchell[.]"  "A promise or order that is payable to order ispayable to the identified person."  HRS § 490:3-109(b) (2008). The Note bears no indorsement.  Mitchell was not a plaintiff. The Note bears no evidence entitling Waimanalo 56 or Warren toenforce Huli Huli's obligation to pay Mitchell.
Plaintiffs' Exhibit 2 is the Addendum.  The Addendum
does not evidence any obligation by Church.  It requires thatHuli Huli deliver to Waimanalo 56 "an Amended Promissory Note[.]" No such note is in evidence.  Waimanalo 56 conceded there was noevidence that such a promissory note was delivered to it.
2An unchallenged finding of fact is binding on the parties and the
appellate court.  Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply , 97 Hawai #i 450,
459, 40 P.3d 73, 82 (2002).
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Plaintiffs' Exhibit 3 is the Assignment.  Mitchell
assigned his interest in the Note to Warren.  But the Note bearsno indorsement.  If "the transferee does not become a holderbecause of lack of indorsement by the transferor, the transfereehas a specifically enforceable right to the unqualifiedindorsement of the transferor, but negotiation of the instrumentdoes not occur until the indorsement is made."  HRS§ 490:3-203(c) (2008).  The Assignment does not give Warren theright to enforce Huli Huli's obligation to pay Mitchell under theNote — her right is to require that Mitchell indorse the Note toher.  See
 HRS § 490:3-205(a) (2008).  But that would only enable
her to enforce Huli Huli 's obligation to pay.  Id.   The
Assignment does not create an obligation by Church to pay Warren.
Plaintiffs' Exhibit 4 is the Asset Purchase Agreement.  
Church agreed to buy WTP's Federal Communications Commissionbroadcast license and certain assets connected with its KMGT(TV)
television station.  Church agreed to assume WTP's obligations
"arising after the Closing under the . . . Contracts . . . andall obligations arising from the business or operation of [KMGT]after the Closing."
The Note states that WTP pledged "all equipment and
other assets to be utilized in connection with the operation ofStation KMGT(TV), in order to secure Huli Huli's performance"under the Note.
3  The circuit court found "there is no question
that . . . WTP granted Stuart B. Mitchell a security interest inthe equipment and other assets of Station KMGT(TV) to secure HuliHuli's performance under the Note."  Plaintiffs argue that Church"assumed the payment and security interest obligations created by
3The Addendum also contained a provision stating that WTP "hereby
give[s] the payee/holder of the note a security interest in all equipment andother assets utilized in connection with the operation of" KMGT, but there isno evidence that "the note" exists and Waimanalo 56 conceded there was noevidence that "the note" was delivered to it. 
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the Note . . . and which, as to them as purchaser, arose upon or
after the Closing."  The argument fails for several reasons.
WTP — which was dismissed from the lawsuit — has no
payment obligation under the Note.  There was no paymentobligation for Church to assume.  And, as discussed above,neither Waimanalo 56 nor Warren are entitled to enforce HuliHuli's obligation to pay Mitchell under the Note.
A "security interest" is an interest in property that
secures payment or performance of an obligation.  HRS § 490:1-201(2008).  The secured party is Mitchell, not Waimanalo 56 orWarren.  The circuit court found, and Plaintiffs do notchallenge, that there was no evidence of a financing statementbeing prepared or filed to perfect Mitchell's security interest.  See
 HRS Chapter 490, Article 9, Part 5 (2008).  Assuming a
default by Huli Huli under the Note, the remedy of obtaining ajudgment against Huli Huli and (assuming a valid securityinterest) foreclosing on KMGT's assets belongs to Mitchell, notWaimanalo 56 or Warren.  See
 HRS § 490:9-601 (2008).
The circuit court's mixed finding and conclusion that
Plaintiffs did not prove that Church breached a contract or anyother promise, debt, or obligation Church owed to Plaintiffs wassupported by substantial evidence and reflected an application ofthe correct rules of law.  It will not be overturned.  Est. of
Klink ex rel. Klink v. State , 113 Hawai #i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 504,
523 (2007).
(2)A claim for unjust enrichment arises when a
plaintiff has bestowed a benefit upon the defendant and seeks
some form of equitable relief to prevent the defendant beingunjustly enriched.  Lumford v. Ota
, 144 Hawai #i 20, 25, 434 P.3d
1215, 1220 (App. 2018).  Plaintiffs argue that Church, "by fraud,duress or taking unfair advantage, received value or benefits,the Station Assets, from [Plaintiffs] ."  (Emphasis added.)
Plaintiffs cite no evidence in the record tending to show fraud,
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
duress, or unfair advantage.  The parties to the Asset Purchase
Agreement were WTP, as seller, and Church, as buyer.  Plaintiffscite no evidence in the record showing that they bestowed a
benefit on Church, or that they are otherwise entitled to somesort of equitable relief from Church.  The circuit court's mixedfinding and conclusion that Plaintiffs did not prove that Churchwas unjustly enriched reflected that absence of evidence, andapplied the correct rule of law.
For all of these reasons, the circuit court's
December 27, 2017 Final Judgment is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai #i, April 5, 2024.
On the briefs:
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Glenn T. Honda, Presiding Judgefor Plaintiffs-Appellants.
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Thomas R. Sylvester, Associate Judgefor Defendant-AppelleeOceania Christian Church /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullenn/k/a Pacific Christian Associate JudgeChurch.
5