NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000705
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
IN THE INTEREST OF EA
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(FC-S NO. 16-00187)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
Mother-Appellant (Mother) appeals from an August 30,
2018 Order Terminating Parental Rights (TPR Order), in which the
Family Court of the First Circuit (alternatively referred to
herein as First Circuit Family Court and family court)
terminated her parental rights to her child, EA.1
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Mother's points of error as follows.
This case was initiated within the jurisdiction of the
Family Court of the Third Circuit (alternatively referred to
herein as Third Circuit Family Court and family court), when
Appellee Department of Human Services (DHS) received a report
alleging sexual abuse of EA's half-sister, TM, by TM's step-
1  The Honorable Bode A. Uale presided over the termination of parental
rights hearing and issued the TPR Order and corresponding October 4, 2018
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (FOF/COL).NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
father and EA's biological father, Father-Appellee (Father).
The family court adjudicated a Petition for Family Supervision
(Petition) filed by DHS, invoked jurisdiction over the family,
awarded Family Supervision of EA to DHS, and ordered a service
plan.  On August 23, 2016, the family court awarded DHS foster
custody of EA.2
On September 30, 2016, venue was transferred to the
First Circuit Family Court, where, on January 25, 2018, DHS filed
a Motion to Terminate Parental Rights (MTPR).  On June 14, 2018,
in a separate criminal case, Father pled no contest to sexual
assault of TM in the third degree, and on August 9, 2018, he was
sentenced to incarceration for an indeterminate period of five
years with credit for time served.  On August 30, 2018, after a
hearing on the MTPR, the family court granted the MTPR and
ordered the Permanent Plan, dated January 18, 2018, the ultimate
goal of which was adoption of EA by EA's Paternal Grandmother and
Paternal Grandmother's husband (collectively, Paternal
Grandparents).
A. Mother has not demonstrated the FOFs she contests
are clearly erroneous.
Mother contests various Findings of Fact (FOFs) 47, 53,
55, 62, 67, and 71 in the FOF/COL but provides no discernible
argument with regard to them, and the issues are waived.  See
Hawai#i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4) and (7).
Regardless, two of the FOFs Mother contests, FOFs 47  and 71,
reflect the First Circuit Family Court's credibility
determinations and FOF 47 reflects the family court's reasonable
inferences.  See In re Doe, 107 Hawai# i 12, 19, 108 P.3d 966, 973
(2005) ("The appellate courts will give due deference to the4 3
2  Father does not appeal the TPR Order.
3  FOF 47 provides:
Based on the credible testimony of the DHS social worker
Alisa Imakyure [(Imakyure)], the unauthorized contacts that
Mother allowed Father to have in this case 1) evidences
Mother's continued denial of the harm in this case; and 2)
demonstrates Mother's inability to be protective of [EA].
4  FOF 71 provides, "Mother was not a credible witness."
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
right of the trier of fact to determine credibility, weigh the
evidence, and draw reasonable inferences from the evidence
adduced." (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)).
B. Sufficient evidence supports the conclusion that
Mother was unable and unwilling to provide EA with
a safe family home.
Mother argues the First Circuit Family Court wrongly
terminated her parental rights based on a clearly erroneous
determination that she was unwilling and unable to provide EA
with a safe family home.  She asserts there was no risk that
Father would sexually harm EA at the time of the MTPR hearing
because Father had been sentenced to an open, five-year term of
imprisonment and was incarcerated, and because Mother was a non-
offending parent, her failure to complete services did not make
her non-protective of EA while Father was in prison.  Apparently
related to this argument is Mother's contention that FOFs 54  and
63 are clearly erroneous.  FOF 66  and Conclusion of Law (COL) 7
are directly related to this argument.8 7 65
At the MTPR hearing, EA's sex-abuse therapist, Dawn
Tawata (Tawata), and DHS Social Worker Imakyure testified EA
could be harmed both while Father was incarcerated and when he
was released from prison due to Parents' failure to address the
safety concerns created when Father sexually assaulted TM.  For
instance, Father could engage in "grooming" behavior if EA were
5  FOF 54 provides, "[Mother and Father, collectively, Parents] are not
presently willing and able to provide [EA] with a safe family home, even with
the assistance of a service plan."
6  FOF 63 provides:
Under the circumstances presented by the instant case, the
DHS has exerted reasonable and active efforts to reunify
[EA] with [Parents] by identifying necessary, appropriate,
and reasonable services to address the identified safety
issues, and making appropriate and timely referrals for
these services.
7  FOF 66 provides, "Each of the service plans offered by the DHS and
ordered by the [Third Circuit Family Court and First Circuit Family Court] was
fair, appropriate, and comprehensive."
8  COL 7 provides, "[Parents] are not presently willing and able to
provide [EA] with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service
plan."
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
to visit him in prison, and Father could sexually assault EA once
he was released.
Tawata testified Mother's failure to complete a
clarification session with EA (telling EA why she was removed
from Parents, addressing in an age-appropriate manner Father's
sexual abuse of TM, and explaining that Parents were responsible
for what had happened) put EA at a greater risk of harm resulting
from Father's sexual assault of TM.  The session was designed to
help EA process the trauma, not blame herself or feel guilty, and
assure her that Mother would "make things right."  Without a
completed clarification session, Tawata did not support
reunification.
Imakyure testified that, therapeutically speaking, EA
was a secondary victim of Father's sexual abuse of TM and could
be harmed by Father.  Mother's failure to recognize that Father,
an untreated sex offender, posed a risk of harm to EA, and
Mother's pattern of giving Father access to EA showed Mother was
not protective of EA.  Mother misinformed EA that EA should not
trust Imakyure and should hide from Child Protective Services,
and this caused EA to be confused and could make her afraid to
disclose any future harm to DHS.  Further, because Mother had not
completed services, once Father was released from prison, Mother
would be blind to any signs of sexual abuse by him.
Mother was clinically discharged from non-offender sex
abuse treatment for nonparticipation and had not shown an ability
to minimize her denial of Father's sex abuse of TM and the
resulting risk of harm Father posed to EA.
To demonstrate she could be a protective parent, Mother
needed to make progress in therapy, start the clarification
sessions, build a safety plan, and prohibit Father from living in
the family home with EA, none of which Mother had done.
Based on Tawata's and Imakyure's testimonies, which the
First Circuit Family Court found credible, see In re Doe, 107
Hawai#i at 19, 108 P.3d at 973 (2005), as well as the family
court's uncontested FOFs, there was sufficient evidence to
support the First Circuit Family Court's conclusion that Mother
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
was unwilling and unable to provide a safe family home.  FOFs 54,
63, and 66 are not clearly erroneous, and COL 7 is not wrong.
C. Sufficient evidence supports the conclusion that
the Permanent Plan was in EA's best interests.
Mother argues the First Circuit Family Court erred by
concluding the Permanent Plan dated January 18, 2018 was in EA's
best interest because Paternal Grandmother initially asked the
family court to close the case and allow EA to live with Parents,
Paternal Grandmother told EA Mother was a liar, EA is strongly
bonded to Mother, and Mother is a very good parent and has good
parenting skills.  FOF 60  and COL 10  are directly related to
this argument.10 9
After weighing the evidence, the First Circuit Family
Court concluded the Permanent Plan was in EA's best interests
because Mother was unable and unwilling to provide EA with a safe
family home, whereas Paternal Grandparents met "all of [EA]'s
physical, medical, emotional, and psychological needs" and had
bonded with EA, and EA was doing well in her placement with them.
We decline to pass upon the family court's weight-of-the-evidence
determinations.  See In re Doe, 107 Hawai #i at 19, 108 P.3d at
973.  FOF 60 is not clearly erroneous, and COL 10 is not wrong.
D.  Mother was not deprived of her right to counsel.
The Third Circuit Family Court did not deprive Mother 
of her right to counsel.
Mother argues the Third Circuit Family Court deprived
her of her right to counsel by granting DHS's Ex Parte Motion for
Foster Custody, filed August 17, 2016, without holding a hearing
or appointing her counsel.  We disagree.  In accordance with HRS
ยง 587A-15(a)(2) (2018) , DHS filed a Notice of Placement in11
9  FOF 60 provides, "The Permanent Plan dated January 18, 2018 is in the
best interests of [EA]."
10  COL 10 provides, "The Permanent Plan dated January 18, 2018, is in
the best interests of [EA]."
11HRS ยง587A-15(a)(2) provides, in relevant part:
[ยง587A-15] Duties, rights, and liability of authorized agencies.
(a) If an authorized agency has family supervision, it has the following
duties and rights, subject to such conditions or restrictions as the
court deems to be in the best interests of a child:
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Foster Care on August 17, 2016, indicating DHS had placed EA in
foster care on August 16, 2016.  On August 17, 2016, DHS also
filed the Ex Parte Motion for Foster Custody, but the motion
appears to have been superfluous and Mother cites to no authority
to support her contention that the family court was required to
hold a hearing on it.
In accordance with HRS ยง 587A-15(a)(2)(B) (2018), the
Third Circuit Family Court set a review hearing for August 23,
2016, within ten days after DHS filed the Notice of Placement in
Foster Care.  At the hearing, Mother requested appointment of
counsel.  After Mother submitted her income information in an
Application for Court-Appointed Counsel, dated August 24, 2016,
the family court appointed Mother counsel, in accordance with In
re T.M., 131 Hawai #i 419, 436, 319 P.3d 338, 355 (2014),
effective August 29, 2016.  At a periodic review hearing on
August 30, 2016, Mother was represented by counsel.
The First Circuit Family Court did not deprive Mother 
of her right to counsel.
Mother argues the First Circuit Family Court deprived
her of her right to counsel by refusing to continue the hearing
held on October 10, 2016, where the family court had not
appointed counsel Herbert Hamada (Hamada) to represent Mother
until less than two hours prior to the hearing, and Hamada had
not reviewed all of the documents submitted in the case.
At the October 10, 2016 hearing, Hamada moved for a
continuance on the grounds that there was no need to make any
orders that day and he required more time to review the case.
The family court denied the motion.  Counsel for DHS explained it
could not locate EA and asked the family court to order Parents
to produce her.  Hamada argued there was an inadequate basis for
removal of EA from Mother.  However, the Third Circuit Family
. . . 
(2) Placement of the child in foster care and thereby assuming
temporary foster custody or foster custody of the child.  The authorized
agency shall immediately notify the court when such placement occurs. 
Upon notification, the court shall set the case for:
. . . 
(B) If jurisdiction has been established, a periodic review
earing within ten days of the child's placement.h
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Court had ordered foster custody of EA to DHS, and Mother's
extended visitation with EA had expired on September 9, 2016.  It
appears DHS's authority to remove EA from Mother was not at
issue.
At the hearing, the First Circuit Family Court ordered
Parents to produce EA by 2 p.m. and remain in the courthouse. 
Parents left the courthouse, in violation of the order, and the
family court issued a warrant for their arrest.  Parents never
produced EA.  The police eventually located EA, who was with
Mother, and removed EA from Mother's custody.  Mother has not
demonstrated her violations of the family court's orders were the
result of any ineffective assistance by Hamada.
Mother has failed to show any inadequacy on Hamada's
part resulting from the denial of the motion for a continuance,
nor how any inadequacy prejudiced Mother to the extent that she
was denied a fair hearing.  See In re RGB, 123 Hawai#i 1, 25, 229
P.3d 1066, 1090 (2010); State v. Torres, 54 Haw. 502, 504-05, 510
P.2d 494, 496 (1973).
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order
Terminating Parental Rights, filed on August 30, 2018 in the
Family Court of the First Circuit, is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai#i, April 12, 2019.
On the briefs:
Herbert Hamada
for Mother-Appellant.
Scott D. Boone,
Julio C. Herrera
and Erin K. Torres
Deputy Attorneys General
for Appellee DHS.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
7