     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000020 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
SAMUEL J. CLOWE and MICHELE UILANI ILAE,
Defendants-Appellees 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CR. NO. 3CPC-18-0000387) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai# i (State) appeals 
from the December 18, 2018 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, 
and Order Granting Motion to Suppress Evidence" (Suppression 
Order), entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit 
(circuit court).1 Defendant-Appellee Samuel Clowe (Clowe) was 
charged with one count each of: Attempted Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the First Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes 
(HRS) §§ 705-500 (2014) and 712-1241(1)(b)(ii) (Supp. 2017); 
Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Second Degree, in violation of 
HRS § 712-1242(1)(b) (Supp. 2017); Promoting a Harmful Drug in 
the Fourth Degree, in violation of HRS § 712-1246.5(1) (2014); 
and Prohibited Acts Related to Drug Paraphernalia, in violation 
1 The Honorable Robert D.S. Kim presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of HRS § 329-43.5(a) (Supp. 2017). Clowe was alleged to have 
committed the offenses on or about March 28, 2018, along with a 
co-defendant, Michelle Ilae (Ilae). Clowe filed a pre-trial 
motion to suppress evidence obtained by a search warrant executed 
at Ilae's residence. The circuit court granted Clowe's motion to 
suppress. 
On appeal, the State argues that the circuit court 
erred in granting the motion to suppress. Specifically, the 
State challenges the circuit court's findings of fact (FOFs) C 
and H, and conclusions of law (COLs) 10, 12, 14-18 of the 
Suppression Order. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we 
resolve this appeal as follows. 
Officer John McCarron (Officer McCarron) prepared an 
affidavit in support of the search warrant, stating that he 
received information from fellow Officer Nicholas McDaniel 
(Officer McDaniel) regarding a male and female distributing 
methamphetamine in the District of Kona, Hawai# i. Officer 
McCarron was informed by Officer McDaniel that a cooperating defendant, Francis Kekona (Kekona), provided information about 
the distribution of methamphetamine and his own involvement in 
the use of methamphetamine. 
Officer McCarron received 
information from Officer McDaniel that on March 14, 2018, Officer McDaniel contacted Kekona while Kekona was leaving the subject 
residential unit. Kekona was subsequently arrested on drug and 
gun charges. The affidavit states that Kekona provided the 
following information to Officer McDaniel: (1) on March 14, 2018, 
Kekona observed, while in the presence of Ilae and Clowe, 
approximately half a pound of methamphetamine at the subject 
residential unit; (2) Kekona was told that Ilae and Clowe both 
went to Oahu two days before his contact with them on March 14, 
2018, to pick up one pound of methamphetamine and returned to 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kona with the methamphetamine; and (3) Kekona has visited Clowe 
at the subject residential unit multiple times. The affidavit 
further states that Officer Marco Segobia (Officer Segobia) spoke 
with the community manager of the residential community, Tammy 
Ichokwan (Ichokwan). Ichokwan did not know Kekona but recognized 
the moped that police contacted Kekona with on March 14, 2018, 
stated that it is frequently parked in front of the building, and 
that the moped rider frequents the subject residential unit. The 
affidavit also states that Officer McDaniel corroborated 
information received from Kekona regarding at least three 
different areas of narcotics distribution in the Kailua-Kona 
area. 
At the hearing on the motion to suppress, the parties 
stipulated to the admission of State's Exhibit 1, which was a 
copy of the subject affidavit to the search warrant, and the 
court judicially noticed Kekona's prior convictions, as requested 
by Clowe. No other exhibits were admitted and no witnesses were 
called. 
The State challenges the following FOFs of the 
Suppression Order: 
C. The search warrant at issue was issued by the
Court based on information provided to the police by a
confidential informant. 
. . . . 
H. The [confidential informant] in this case has an
extensive history of criminality. See Exhibit 2. 
The 
[confidential informant] was convicted of two (2) felonycounts of Theft in the Second Degree in 1991, and thereforethe [confidential informant]'s reliability, given hisconvictions for dishonesty, is suspect. 
The State also challenges the following COLs of the 
Suppression Order: 
10. In Franks v. Delaware, 438 U.S. 154 (1978), the
Supreme Court developed a two-prong test clarifying what acriminal defendant must show when challenging the veracityof statements made in an affidavit supporting a searchwarrant. If both prongs are met, the search warrant must bevoided and the fruits of the search excluded. Franks, 438
U.S. at 155-56. . . . 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . 
12. As a further rule, where the probable cause
determination made by a judge before the issuance of a
search warrant must rely on and take into accountinformation provided to the Court by a tipster and/or aconfidential informant ("CI"), the burden rests with thegovernment to demonstrate to the Court that the CI used inthis case has a history of providing the government withreliable tips in the past that led to arrests of persons andthe charging of these persons with crimes. 
. . . . 
14. Officer [John McCarron] did not [explain in his
affidavit to the court: (1) how he concluded Kekona wasreliable and (2) how he believed Kekona was trustworthy].
See Exhibit 1. 
Nothing in [McCarron]'s affidavit discusses
or describes what tip Kekona provided [McCarron] in the past
that led to an arrest and to the charging of persons withcrimes. The reliability prong of the Aguillar/Spinellitest, the first prong of the test, cannot be satisfied bythe state because [McCarron] excludes or omits completelyfrom his affidavit any discussions of past tips provided byKekona to the police that turned out to be true and that ledto someone being arrested and charged with a crime. 
15. [McCarron] excludes or omits completely from this
affidavit any discussion about the credibility of his CI,Kekona. The issue of the CI's credibility is alwaysrelevant to the Court's probable cause determination whenthe Court makes this kind of determination for the purposeof deciding whether or not to issue a search warrant. 
16. The CI, Kekona, has a long and extensive history
of criminality, including convictions involving crimes ofdishonesty. In 1991, Kekona was convicted of two (2) felonycounts of Theft in the Second Degree. As Kekona was convicted of crimes involving dishonesty - and a felonyconviction for a crime of dishonesty is always relevant whenassessing how much weight to give the unsworn statement of aCI - this information was material and relevant to the Court's probable cause determination, should have beenprovided to the court by [O]fficer [McCarron], was notprovided to the Court by [McCarron], and was thereforeunavailable to the court when it made its probable causedetermination in this case. Had this information been properly disclosed by the State to the judge at the time ofthe judge's probable cause determination, there is a strongprobability the judge might have concluded the CI is notcredible because CI has two (2) felony convictions forcrimes involving dishonesty. 
17. The failure of [McCarron] to disclose this highly
relevant information to the magistrate judge before thejudge signed off on the warrant prevented the judge frommaking a fully informed decision about the propriety ofissuing the search warrant at issue in this case. This error or omission on the part of [McCarron] cannot be saidto be harmless beyond a doubt because the credibility of theCI is always relevant to and material to the Court'sprobable cause determination. 
4            
               
        NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
18. [McCarron] was required to make this disclosure
to the issuing court - which he did not. For this reason 
and for the other reasons cited to above, the evidenceseized in this case is suppressed. 
In sum, the circuit court characterized Kekona as a 
confidential informant and concluded that the search warrant 
failed to establish the veracity of the information stated in the 
affidavit to the search warrant, specifically Kekona's 
credibility. The State argues that the circuit court erroneously 
evaluated Kekona's credibility under the standard applicable to 
confidential informants, which Kekona was not. In particular, 
the State argues that the circuit court erred in granting the 
motion to suppress based on its conclusions that the State did 
not meet its burden of demonstrating that Kekona had a history of 
providing the government with reliable tips in the past and that 
the State also failed to disclose Kekona's criminal history to 
the judge who approved the search warrant. 
Given the full disclosure of Kekona's identity in the 
affidavit, Kekona was not a confidential informant. The 
affidavit specifically identified Kekona by his full name and 
referred to him as a "cooperating defendant" who was arrested on 
drug and gun charges after leaving the residential unit that is 
the subject of the search warrant at issue.2 FOF C was therefore 
clearly erroneous. Clowe also concedes this point in his answering brief. 
Although Kekona was not a confidential informant, the 
information he provided served as the basis for the affidavit for 
the search warrant and constituted hearsay. We must therefore 
determine whether this hearsay information was sufficiently 
reliable to support probable cause for the issuance of the search 
warrant. 
In evaluating the validity of search warrants based on 
2 We acknowledge that the affidavit also seems to refer to Kekona as
the "CI" in one instance. As we have stated, however, Kekona was clearly not a
confidential informant, or CI, as he was fully identified. 
5     
        
        
          
         
          
         
  
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hearsay information provided by an informant, the Hawai# i Supreme 
Court uses the two-part test announced in Aguilar v. Texas, 378 
U.S. 108 (1964), and expounded upon in Spinelli v. United States, 
393 U.S. 410 (1969). 
Carlisle ex. rel. State v. Ten Thousand 
Four Hundred Forty-Seven Dollars in U.S. Currency ($10,447.00), 104 Hawai# i 323, 330, 89 P.3d 823, 830 (2004).  Under this test, 
the affidavit must set forth: (1) some of the underlying circumstances from which the informant drew the conclusion 
regarding criminal activity; and (2) some of the reasons which 
led the affiant to believe that the informant was credible or the 
informant's information was reliable. State v. Decano, 60 Haw. 
205, 210, 588 P.2d 909, 913-14 (1978). 3
Here, the affidavit states that Kekona saw 
approximately half a pound of methamphetamine at the subject 
residential unit while he was in the presence of Clowe and Ilae. 
Because the affidavit relates that Kekona provided this 
information based on his personal observations, the first prong 
of the Aguilar
 test was satisfied. See State v. Davenport, 55 
Haw. 90, 95-96, 516 P.2d 65, 69 (1973) (holding that the first prong of the Aguilar test was met where the informant's 
conclusion that illegal activity was being conducted at the 
specified location was based upon the informant's personal 
observation). 
As for Kekona's credibility or the reliability of the 
information he provided, Kekona's identification in the affidavit 
is significant. "[A]n identified informer would generally be 
entitled to greater credibility than a 'faceless' informer would 
3 The Hawai #i Supreme Court noted: 
We continue to use the two-part Aguilar test, although
we recognize that the United States Supreme Court has
abandoned the Aguilar test in favor of a totality of thecircumstances test. Illinois v. Gates , 462 U.S. 213, 238-39,
103 S.Ct. 2317, 76 L.Ed.2d 527 (1983); see also United States
v. Alvarez , 358 F.3d 1194, 1203 (9th Cir. 2004) (following
Illinois v. Gates ). 
Carlisle , 104 Hawai #i at 330 n.9, 89 P.3d at 830 n.9. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
be," State v. Joao, 55 Haw. 601, 604, 525 P.2d 580, 583 (1974), 
because an identified informer can be held accountable for his or 
her statements. See State v. Detroy, 102 Hawai# i 13, 19, 72 P.3d 
485, 491 (2003) ("[I]f the telephone call is truly anonymous, the informant has not placed his credibility at risk and can lie with 
impunity." (quoting Florida v. J.L., 529 U.S. 266 (2000) 
(Kennedy, J., concurring))). The affidavit stated that Kekona 
admitted his own involvement in and familiarity with the use of 
methamphetamine. Kekona also disclosed that he observed 
methamphetamine at a residence which he frequently visited and 
which he was leaving before he himself was arrested. Cf. United 
States v. Harris, 403 U.S. 573, 584 (1971) (plurality opinion) ("Concededly admissions of crime do not always lend credibility 
to contemporaneous or later accusations of another. But here the 
informant's admission that over a long period and currently he 
had been buying illicit liquor on certain premises, itself and 
without more, implicated that property and furnished probable 
cause to search."). Such admissions that are against one's penal 
interest are relevant indicia of the informant's credibility. 
Id. at 583-84 ("Admissions of crime, like admissions against 
proprietary interests, carry their own indicia of 
credibility-sufficient at least to support a finding of probable 
cause to search."); State v. Yaw, 58 Haw. 485, 490, 572 P.2d 856, 
860 (1977) (concluding that admissions against penal interest 
have been considered to be a relevant indicia of an informant's 
credibility). The affidavit also states that Officer Segobia 
conducted a follow-up investigation based on Kekona's information 
and confirmed that: Ilae lives at the subject residential unit, 
Clowe was her boyfriend, and that Clowe has been a guest at 
Ilae's unit. Officer Segobia also confirmed that Kekona's moped 
has been seen frequently parked in front of the subject 
residential unit. The affidavit further states that Officer 
McDaniel corroborated information that Kekona provided regarding 
three different areas of narcotics distribution in the 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kailua-Kona area. See Detroy, 102 Hawai# i at 20, 72 P.3d at 492 
(stating that corroboration by a law enforcement officer of 
various details in an informer's report could properly support a 
conclusion that the informer was truthful). 
Combined with the 
statements that Kekona personally observed the methamphetamine at a residence which he frequently visited and from which he was 
leaving when arrested himself, and that Kekona was familiar with 
Clowe and Ilae, the affidavit therefore contained sufficient 
information to support Officer McCarron's conclusion that Kekona 
was credible or that the information Kekona provided was reliable 
and the second prong of the Aguilar
 test was satisfied. COL 15, 
which contained a finding that McCarron failed to include any discussion about Kekona's credibility was clearly erroneous. 
In concluding that Kekona's reliability as an informant 
was "suspect," the circuit court relied upon a finding that he 
had an "extensive history of criminality" involving "convictions 
for dishonesty," which the State argues is an embellishment. In 
making this finding, the circuit court judicially noticed 
Kekona's convictions for two felony counts of Theft in the Second 
Degree. In the context of admissible impeachment evidence under 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 609(a), the supreme court has 
held: 
[A] theft offense is not, per se, a "crime of dishonesty"
. . . . Rather, to be admissible impeachment evidencepursuant to HRE Rule 609(a), the defendant must havecommitted the prior theft offense under circumstances that,by their very nature, render his or her prior conviction ofthe offense relevant to and probative of his or her veracityas a witness. 
State v. Pacheco, 96 Hawai# i 83, 100, 26 P.3d 572, 589 (2001) 
(citations omitted). 
We find this holding to be applicable here 
where Clowe asserted, and the circuit court adopted the 
reasoning, that Kekona's criminal history indicated a lack of 
credibility on Kekona's part. The record contains no details of 
the circumstances under which Kekona committed theft in the 
second degree, let alone any details relating to the convictions 
that would support a finding that Kekona was unreliable. There 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
being no evidence in the record to support the circuit court's 
finding that Kekona's reliability was suspect because he was 
convicted of crimes of dishonesty, that portion of FOF H was 
clearly erroneous. 
The circuit court also concluded that the affidavit's 
omission of Kekona's criminal history prevented the issuing judge 
from making a fully informed decision regarding the reliability 
of the information provided and determining probable cause. 
In Franks v. Delaware, 438 U.S. 154, 98 S. Ct. 2674, 57
L.Ed.2d 667 (1978), the Supreme Court held that a defendantseeking an evidentiary hearing to determine whether afacially valid affidavit contains false statements must makea substantial preliminary showing that: (1) the affidavitcontains intentionally or recklessly false statements and(2) the affidavit cannot support a finding of probable causewithout the allegedly false information. If a defendant prevails at a Franks evidentiary hearing, evidence obtainedon the basis of a search warrant issued on an affidavit containing material omissions or misrepresentations must beexcluded. In United States v. Stanert, 762 F.2d 775 (9thCir. 1985), amended, reh'g denied, 769 F.2d 1410 (9th Cir.1985), [the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals] extended Franksto omissions of material facts and concluded that "the Fourth Amendment mandates that a defendant be permitted tochallenge a warrant affidavit valid on its face when itcontains deliberate or reckless omissions of facts that tend to mislead." Id. at 781. 
United States v. DeLeon, 979 F.2d 761, 763 (9th Cir. 1992). On 
appeal, the State argues that the circuit court's statement of 
the law established in Franks failed to include that, in order to 
be entitled to a Franks evidentiary hearing, the defendant must 
first make a substantial preliminary showing of the two prongs. 
Despite this omission, we conclude that COL 10 was otherwise a 
correct statement of law. 
To the extent that the State also seems to vaguely 
assert that Clowe failed to make the required substantial 
preliminary showing, the State seems to argue that the circuit 
court should not have considered Kekona's criminal history as it 
was outside the scope of the four corners of the affidavit. 
However, the State also expressly states that it does not claim 
any error in the court's judicial noticing of Kekona's criminal 
history. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Regardless of whether the circuit court properly 
considered Kekona's criminal history in ruling on the motion to 
suppress, we conclude that the circuit court erred in COLs 16-18 
when it concluded that Officer McCarron was required to disclose 
information regarding Kekona's criminal history and that the 
omission of such information rendered the affidavit insufficient 
to establish probable cause. Neither the circuit court nor Clowe 
cited any authority that stands for the proposition that a 
disclosure of an informant's criminal history is required of the 
State, particularly where the informant has been identified and 
there are other indicia of the informant's credibility or the 
information's reliability. Further, as we previously stated, 
there is no evidence in the record pertaining to Kekona's 
previous convictions that supports a finding that such 
information would have had a bearing on the probable cause 
determination (i.e., that the circumstances of his past criminal 
activity were relevant to and probative of his penchant for 
honesty). The circuit court thus erroneously relied on the 
affidavit's omission of Kekona's prior convictions as a basis for 
granting the motion to suppress. 
In COL 12, the circuit court correctly stated that the 
State carries the burden of demonstrating that an informant has a 
history of providing the government with reliable tips in the 
past that led to arrests of persons and the charging of these 
persons with crimes. However, the circuit court erroneously 
concluded in COL 14 that the State's failure to meet this burden 
rendered Kekona's information unreliable. See State v. Sherlock, 
70 Haw. 271, 274, 768 P.2d 1290, 1292 (1989) ("While the history of prior dealings between an informant and the police can be an 
important element in establishing the reliability of the 
informant, the absence of such a history does not of itself prove 
the informant unreliable." (quoting United States v. Wong, 470 
F.2d 129, 131 (9th Cir. 1972)). The circuit court erroneously 
relied on these conclusions as a basis for granting the motion to 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
suppress. 
The affidavit to the search warrant satisfied the 
two-part Aguilar test and there was probable cause for the 
issuance of the search warrant. The circuit court therefore 
erred in granting the motion to suppress. 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the December 18, 2018 
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting Motion 
to Suppress Evidence," entered by the Circuit Court of the Third 
Circuit and remand this matter for further proceedings. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 30, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Derrick H. M. Chan
Associate Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
11 Kauanoe A. Jackson,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Hawai# i,
for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
John Knoebber,
for Defendant-Appellee. 