NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000093 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CHRISTOPHER E. FANELLI, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(SPECIAL PROCEEDING PRISONER NO. 11-1-0011(1)
(CRIMINAL NO. 08-1-0267))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Christopher E. Fanelli (Fanelli) 
appeals from the January 29, 2013 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions 
of Law and Order Denying Petition for Post-Conviction Relief Under HRPP Rule 40; i.e. Document Entitled 'Petition for Post-Conviction Relief to Vacate Judgment and Release Petitioner From Custody'" (Order Denying Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP)
Rule 40 Petition), entered in the Circuit Court of the Second 
Circuit1
 (circuit court).
 
Fanelli contends the circuit court reversibly erred by
 
failing to grant his HRPP Rule 40 petition and motion for an
 
evidentiary hearing on the following grounds: 
(1) he was incompetent to stand trial;
 (2) his appellate counsel provided ineffective
 
assistance;
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) his trial counsel provided ineffective assistance;
 
and
 
(4)
 prosecutorial misconduct.2
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude
 Fanelli's appeal is without merit.
  
As a general rule, a hearing should be held on a
[HRPP] Rule 40 petition for post-conviction relief where the
petition states a colorable claim. To establish a colorable
 claim, the allegations of the petition must show that if
taken as true the facts alleged would change the verdict,
however, a petitioner's conclusions need not be regarded as
true. Where examination of the record of the trial court
 proceedings indicates that the petitioner's allegations show
no colorable claim, it is not error to deny the petition
without a hearing. The question on appeal of a denial of a
 
Rule 40 petition without a hearing is whether the trial
 
record indicates that Petitioner's application for relief
 made such a showing of a colorable claim as to require a
 hearing before the lower court.
 
Barnett v. State, 91 Hawai 'i 20, 26, 979 P.2d 1046, 1052 (1999) 
(citations, brackets and ellipsis omitted).
 Fanelli first contends that his HRPP Rule 40 petition
 
alleged a "colorable claim that he was incompetent to stand
 
trial[.]"3 "To establish a colorable claim, [an HRPP Rule 40]
 
petition must show that if taken as true the facts alleged would
 change the verdict[.]" 
Dan v. State , 76 Hawai 'i 423, 427, 879 
P.2d 528, 532 (1994) (citation omitted). "Where examination of
 
2
 Fanelli's opening brief is noncompliant with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(3). His opening brief fails to support
many of its statements of fact with record references, and where referencesare provided, they fail to indicate their location in the electronic record onappeal. This was brought to our attention by Respondent-Appellee State ofHawai'i (State) in its motion to strike Fanelli's opening brief. Although
this court denied the State's motion to strike, Fanelli's counsel is warnedthat future noncompliance may result in sanctions. 
3
 In support of his contention, Fanelli cites Hawaii Revised
Statutes (HRS) § 704-403 (1993), which provides:
 
§704-403 Physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect
excluding fitness to proceed. No person who as a result of a physical
or mental disease, disorder, or defect lacks capacity to understand the
proceedings against the person or to assist in the person's own defense
shall be tried, convicted, or sentenced for the commission of an offense
so long as such incapacity endures. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the record of the trial court proceedings indicates that the
 
petitioner's allegations show no colorable claim, it is not error
 to deny the petition without a hearing." Id. Fanelli alleged
 
the following facts in support of his HRPP Rule 40 petition: (1)
 he received psychotropic medication to treat ongoing mental
 diseases or defects; (2) he was refused medication on the morning
 of his trial; (3) his mental state deteriorated and he became
 agitated and confused during the trial; and (4) he argued with
 his defense counsel.
 
Fanelli fails to establish a colorable claim that he 
was incompetent to stand trial. A criminal defendant is legally competent to proceed to trial if the defendant had: (1) sufficient present ability to consult with their lawyer with a reasonable degree of rational understanding; (2) the capacity to assist in preparing their defense; and (3) rational as well as factual understanding of the proceedings. See HRPP Rule 40(f) 
and State v. Soares, 81 Hawai
'i 332, 350-51, 916 P.2d 1233, 1251­
52 (App. 1996), overruled on other grounds by State v. Janto, 92 Hawai
'i 19, 986 P.2d 306 (1999). The circuit court found, and 
our review of the trial transcript indicates Fanelli's exchanges with the circuit court were coherent and responsive; he had a functional ability to work with his trial counsel and provide him with information that could be used to present a coherent defense; Fanelli provided coherent responses to the circuit court's inquiries into his fundamental defense decisions, such as whether to testify; and Fanelli appeared to withstand the pressures of trial. Consequently, Fanelli fails to show that his incompetency defense would change the verdict, because (1) the alleged facts do not satisfy the test for incompetency, even when taken as true; (2) the record indicates Fanelli is competant. 
Fanelli's second contention is that his alleged
 
incompetence to stand trial due to his lack of medication was an
 "appealable issue[;]" that his former appellate counsel Ben
 Herren (Herren) failed to appeal, and thereby presenting a
 
colorable claim that Herren had provided ineffective assistance
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of counsel requiring the reversal of the circuit court's Order
 
Denying HRPP Rule 40 Petition. Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 442,
 
465-66, 848 P.2d 966, 977 (1993) ("An appealable issue is an
 error or omission by counsel, judge, or jury resulting in the
 withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious
 defense.") (internal quotation marks omitted). An attorney's
 failure to file an appeal, however, does not constitute
 ineffective assistance of counsel per se. See Roe v.
 
Flores-Ortega, 528 U.S. 470, 478 (2000) abrogating Lozada v.
 Deeds, 964 F.2d 956, 958 (9th Cir. 1992).
 
Taking as true Fanelli's claim that Herren did not 
timely appeal does not itself establish that he provided ineffective counsel or that the verdict would change. See 
Flores-Ortega, 528 U.S. at 478 (where counsel consults with a defendant about the advantages and disadvantages of taking an appeal, and makes a reasonable effort to discover the defendant's wishes, counsel performs in a professionally unreasonable manner only by failing to follow the defendant's express instructions with respect to an appeal). Fanelli does not allege that he expressly instructed Herren to file a direct appeal or that he failed to consult with him on Herren's decision to not file the appeal. Fanelli submitted to the circuit court a letter written by Herren, which stated Herren did not find issues that could be appropriately raised on appeal, explained this finding to Fanelli, and Fanelli agreed to pursue the issues through further introduction of evidence by filing an HRPP Rule 40 motion. Fanelli's letters to the circuit court dated June 8, 2010, June 9, 2010, and July 7, 2010 indicated his intentions to file an HRPP Rule 40 petition and did not refer to any alleged "failure" to file a direct appeal from the circuit court's judgment and sentence. See Dan, 76 Hawai
'i at 427, 879 P.2d at 532. 
Fanelli's third contention that his HRPP Rule 40
 
petition presented colorable claims that his trial counsel was
 ineffective also lacks merit. Fanelli points to no evidence
 showing that acts or omissions by his trial counsel resulted in
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
 
meritorious defense. See Briones , 74 Haw. at 462-63, 848 P.2d at
 
976. His trial counsel's decision not to call Lieutenant Marks
 (Marks) of the Maui Police Department to testify, had the
 
tactical benefit of excluding a witness to Fanelli's purported
 
"uncharged indicia of drug use[.]" Further, Marks' potential
 testimony that a glass pipe did not have Fanelli's fingerprints
 on it would not have established a "meritorious defense" that
 Fanelli had not touched other contraband in the truck. Id.
 Fanelli's trial counsel elicited testimony from an essential
 witness (Essential Witness) that she had a history of
 
methamphetamine drug use, contrary to Fanelli's contention that
 
his trial counsel failed to effectively interrogate the Essential
 Witness as to her prior drug use. Fanelli also fails to support
 his contention that his trial counsel impaired his defense by
 failing to introduce into evidence a methamphetamine pipe and
 photographs because Fanelli was not charged with possession of
 the pipe.
 
Fanelli's fourth contention is that the circuit court 
should have granted his HRPP Rule 40 petition based on his allegations of prosecutorial misconduct. State v. Clark
, 83 
Hawai'i 289, 304, 926 P.2d 194, 209 (1996) ("Prosecutorial 
misconduct warrants a new trial or the setting aside of a guilty verdict only where the actions of the prosecutor have caused prejudice to the defendant's rights in a fair trial.") (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Fanelli contends the State misled the circuit court by stating the Essential Witness and another witness had no drug convictions, but that the "whole truth" is that their drug use was "well known despite the fact that they did not yet have drug convictions on their record." Fanelli provides no argument indicating how the State's alleged misrepresentations could form the basis for a colorable claim that would "change the verdict" and thus warrant relief under HRPP Rule 40. Barnett, 91 Hawai
'i at 26, 979 P.2d at 1052. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the January 29, 2013
 
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Denying Petition
 for Post-Conviction Relief Under HRPP Rule 40; i.e. Document
 Entitled 'Petition for Post-Conviction Relief to Vacate Judgment
 and Release Petitioner From Custody'" entered in the Circuit
 Court of the Second Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 17, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Gerald Johnson 
for Petitioner-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 Artemio C. Baxa 
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Respondent-Appellee. 
6
 