NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000644
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
SHAYNE EDRALIN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1P112-03958)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Shayne Edralin (Edralin) timely 
appeals from the final judgment and sentence convicting him of 
one count of Terroristic Threatening in the Second Degree in 
violation of Hawai 'i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-717(1) (1993), 
which was entered on June 22, 2012 in the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (District Court).
1 Edralin 
challenges the judgment and sentence, arguing that there was insufficient evidence to support the conviction because 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i failed to adduce substantial 
evidence to prove that Edralin's conduct amounted to a true threat as required by State v. Chung, 75 Haw. 398, 416–17, 862 
P.2d 1063, 1073 (1993). Specifically, Edralin contends that the 
State did not adduce evidence that his conduct, when viewed in 
the context of the circumstances, was (1) unequivocal and 
1
 The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unambiguous; (2) unconditional and specific to the complaining
 
witness (CW); and (3) conveyed that Edralin had the apparent
 
ability to carry out the alleged threat such that the threat
 
would reasonably tend to induce fear of bodily injury in CW.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the
 
relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Edralin's points of
 
error as follows:
 
2
(1) In his first argument,  in which he contends that
the State failed to adduce evidence that his conduct was
 
unequivocal and unambiguous, Edralin mischaracterizes the alleged
 
threat when he suggests that the conduct at issue was his
 
gesticulating while holding a black telephone. Instead, the
 
conduct -- as described in CW's testimony and found by the
 
District Court -- was Edralin's pretending to shoot at CW while
 
holding an object that appeared to be a gun. Edralin provides no
 
authority for the proposition that pretending to shoot another
 
with an object that appears to be a gun is too equivocal or
 
ambiguous to communicate a true threat. Cf. State v. Matyas, 10
 
Haw. App. 31, 35, 859 P.2d 1380, 1383 (1993) (explaining that
 jury convicted defendant of terroristic threatening in the second
 
degree where the evidence suggested that the defendant had a toy
 
gun); State v. Gray, No. W2002-02259-CCA-R3-CD, 2004 WL 115185,
 
at *3 (Tenn. Crim. App. Jan. 21, 2004) (holding that a
 
defendant's use of a cellular telephone to simulate a gun and
 
threatening to shoot victim justified reasonable belief that
 
defendant possessed a deadly weapon); State v. Tillman, 511
 
N.W.2d 128, 134 (Neb. Ct. App. 1993) ("Indeed, the pointing of a
 
gun by itself might constitute a terroristic threat.").
 
2
 It appears that Edralin patterns his three arguments after the two
methods of proof discussed in State v. Valdivia, 95 Hawai' i 465, 477, 24 P.3d
661, 673 (2001), either of which may be used to prove the imminency required
for a true threat. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In essence, Edralin's first argument asks the court to 
discredit CW's testimony that Edralin pretended to shoot at CW's 
car while holding an object that appeared to be gun and to make a 
new finding of fact regarding the definitive absence of a gun 
without any record evidence that conclusively demonstrates this. 
Such an approach inverts the standard of review, which requires 
the appellate court to view the evidence in the light most 
favorable to the State and does not permit a re-weighing of the 
evidence or the credibility of witnesses. See State v. Tamura, 
63 Haw. 636, 637, 633 P.2d 1115, 1117 (1981); State v. Mitchell, 94 Hawai
'i 388, 393, 15 P.3d 314, 319 (App. 2000) ("The appellate 
court will neither reconcile conflicting evidence nor interfere with the decision of the trier of fact based on the witnesses' 
credibility or the weight of the evidence."); State v. Hopkins, 
60 Haw. 540, 542, 592 P.2d 810, 812 (1979) (holding that the 
trier of fact may accept or reject any witness's testimony in 
whole or in part). 
Accordingly, when viewed in the light most favorable to
 
the State, CW's testimony that Edralin mimicked shooting at CW
 
while holding an object that appeared to be gun established that
 
Edralin's conduct communicated an unequivocal and unambiguous
 
threat.
 
(2) Edralin next argues that the State failed to adduce
 
substantial evidence that Edralin's conduct and the attendant
 
circumstances were unconditional and specific to CW.
 
Edralin first points out that CW's testimony contained 
minor inconsistencies and suggests it should not have been 
credited. However, minor inconsistencies in a witness's 
testimony do not make it incredible as a matter of law. See 
Mitchell, 94 Hawai
'i at 393, 15 P.3d at 319; Hopkins, 60 Haw. at 
542, 592 P.2d at 812. 
Edralin also argues that, even if credited, CW's
 
testimony indicated that Edralin alternated between pointing
 
between the bus and other cars, which does not demonstrate that
 
Edralin was specifically targeting CW. But, as a matter of
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
logical necessity, a reasonable trier of fact would not have to
 
conclude that Edralin's conduct, in which he pretended to shoot
 
multiple individuals while holding an object that appeared to be
 
a gun, did not constitute a threat specific to any specific
 
individual within that group. This is particularly true in this
 
case because CW testified that Edralin made eye contact with him
 
while engaging in the threatening behavior. As such, a
 
reasonable trier of fact could conclude that, in addition to
 
pointing the object that appeared to be a gun at multiple
 
individuals, Edralin also specifically targeted CW.
 
Finally, Edralin contends that any threat was not
 
unconditional because CW's testimony indicated that Edralin
 
pointed the object at CW when CW's driving brought the car closer
 
to Edralin and, thus, Edralin's pointing was for the purpose of
 
securing safe passage to the other side of the street and to
 
prevent other drivers from hitting him. Even if Edralin's threat
 
was conditional, the case law does not require the State to prove
 
that the threat was perfectly unconditional, merely that it was 
"so . . . unconditional . . . as to convey a gravity of purpose
 
and imminent prospect of execution." See, e.g., People v.
 
Brooks, 31 Cal. Rptr. 2d 283 (Cal. Ct. App. 1994) (holding that
 "[c]onditional threats are true threats if their context
 
reasonably conveys to the victim that they are intended, and the
 
First Amendment is not implicated by such threats since they do
 
not concern political or social discourse or the so-called
 
marketplace of ideas" and collecting federal cases supporting
 
this conclusion).
 
Given this analysis, again, Edralin's argument only
 
succeeds if the court inverts the appropriate standard of review,
 
which requires the appellate court to review the evidence in the
 
light most favorable to the State. See Tamura, 63 Haw. at 637­
38, 633 P.2d at 1117. The court, therefore, rejects Edralin's
 argument that the State failed to adduce substantial evidence
 
that Edralin's conduct and the attendant circumstances were
 
sufficiently unconditional and specific to CW to constitute a
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
true threat where CW testified that Edralin made eye contact with
 
him and mimicked shooting at him while holding an object that
 
appeared to be gun.
 
(3) Finally, Edralin argues that the State failed to
 
adduce substantial evidence that Edralin had the apparent ability
 
to carry out the alleged threat such that the threat would
 
reasonably tend to induce fear of bodily injury in CW because his
 
pointing a cellular telephone at another is not objectively
 
susceptible to inducing fear of bodily injury in a reasonable
 
person and a reasonable person -- particularly one with CW's Army
 
training -- could not have mistaken the telephone for a gun.
 
Here, again, Edralin's argument first assumes a fact -­
that he was holding a telephone and not a gun -- that is not
 
established in the record. Second, Edralin provides no
 
compelling logic or legal authorities for the proposition that a
 
cellular telephone could not reasonably be mistaken for a gun,
 
particularly when the holder of the object holds it in a manner
 
that is similar to how guns are held and the holder uses it to
 
mimic shooting at people. Again, to the contrary, other courts
 
have credited testimony in which the witness stated that a
 
defendant used a cellular telephone to simulate possession of a
 
gun. See, e.g., Gray, 2004 WL 115185, at *3. Additionally,
 
there is no evidence that affirmatively establishes that Edralin
 lacked the physical ability to carry out the threat communicated
 
by his conduct.
 
Given these flaws, the court rejects Edralin's argument
 
that the State failed to adduce substantial evidence that Edralin
 
had the apparent ability to carry out the alleged threat such
 
that the threat would reasonably tend to induce fear of bodily
 
injury in CW where CW testified that Edralin mimicked shooting at
 
CW while holding an object that appeared to be gun.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the District Court of the
 
First Circuit, Honolulu Division's June 22, 2012 final judgment
 and sentence convicting Edralin of one count of Terroristic
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Threatening in the Second Degree in violation of HRS
 
§ 707-717(1)is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 7, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Evan S. Tokunaga,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge
 
Loren J. Thomas,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu, Associate Judge
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
6
 