NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000306
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KATHY JO AKANA, also known as KATHY JO TAMSING, Defendant-
Appellant, and ALLISON TAKUMI KUDO, Defendant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 14-1-0790)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Kathy Jo Akana, also known as Kathy
 
Jo Tamsing (Akana), timely appeals from the March 11, 2015
 
Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence, entered by the
 
1
Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (Circuit Court), convicting
her of Assault in the Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 707-711 (2014)
2.
 
As her sole issue on appeal, Akana challenges the
 
denial of her presentence "Motion to Withdraw Plea of Guilty
 [sic] and to Reset Case for Trial" (Motion). After a careful
 review of the issue raised and the arguments made by the parties,
 the applicable authority and the record, we resolve Akana's issue
 as follows and affirm.
 
1
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 
2
 HRS ยง 707-711(1)(d) provides:
 
A person commits the offense of assault in the second degree
if: [t]he person intentionally or knowingly causes bodily
injury to another with a dangerous instrument[.]
 
(Formatting altered.)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2"A defendant does not enjoy an absolute right to
withdraw his or her guilty plea."  State v. Topasna, 94 Hawai# i
444, 451, 16 P.3d 849, 856 (App. 2000). 
[W]here, as here, the motion is made before the court passes
sentence, 
a more liberal approach is to be taken, and the motion
should be granted if the defendant has presented a
fair and just reason for his request and the
[prosecution] has not relied upon the guilty plea to
its substantial prejudice.
. . . .
Where the record pertaining to the motion to withdraw
guilty plea is complete, as it is in this case, "[t]he
defendant has the burden of establishing plausible and
legitimate grounds for the withdrawal."  . . .
If the defendant cannot carry the threshold burden of
showing a "fair and just reason" for withdrawing the plea,
the following issue of the State's detrimental reliance upon
the plea is of no consequence.
The two fundamental bases for showing a "fair and just
reason" for withdrawing a guilty plea are (1) that the
defendant did not knowingly, intelligently and voluntarily
waive the rights relinquished upon pleading guilty, or
(2) that changed circumstances or new information justify
withdrawal of the plea.
Where the first fundamental basis is concerned, as it
is in this case, the defendant is entitled to withdraw the
guilty plea if 
(1) the defendant has not entered the plea knowingly,
intelligently, and voluntarily; (2) there has been no
undue delay in moving to withdraw the plea; and
(3) the prosecution has not otherwise met its burden
of establishing that it relied on the plea to its
substantial prejudice.
In this case, [defendant] moved with celerity to withdraw
his guilty pleas.  And the State does not argue that it
detrimentally relied upon [defendant's] pleas.  Hence the
only relevant inquiry on this appeal is whether [defendant]
knowingly, intelligently and voluntarily entered his pleas
of guilty.
Generally, we review the trial court's denial of a
motion to withdraw guilty plea for abuse of discretion.
Id. at 451-52, 16 P.3d at 856-57 (citations omitted). 
Akana argues that because she "was not good at reading
or writing and had a hard time understanding," was deprived of
her anti-depressant medications and was on suicide watch while
she was in custody (prior to her arrest for the instant charge),
was concerned about her boyfriend's heart condition and wanted to
see him and her family, it "affected her understanding of herNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
plea." However, Akana herself testified that she understood the 
documents and materials provided to her prior to her plea and she presented no evidence regarding how the lack of her medication affected her at the time of her plea. See State v. Merino, 81 
Hawai
'i 198, 225, 915 P.2d 672, 699 (1996) (rejecting defendant's 
arguments that a number of medications interfered with his ability to exercise sound judgment in entering his plea). 
Moreover, the Circuit Court that accepted Akana's plea 
had before it the Change of Plea form signed by Akana, and a
 transcript of the change of plea proceedings, neither of which
 indicate confusion, hesitancy, or misunderstanding by Akana
 regarding the entry of her plea. On this record, we conclude
 that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion by denying
 Akana's Motion.
 
Therefore, the March 11, 2015 Judgment of Conviction
 
and Probation Sentence, entered by the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 13, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
Randal I. Shintani,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Sonja P. McCullen,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
3
 