SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-10-0000044
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
JULIANNE NGUYEN BERRY, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
WAYNE FOSTER BERRY, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 06-1-0211)
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Wayne Foster Berry (Wayne) appeals
 
from the Order Denying Motion to Set Aside (Order) and the Findings
 
of Fact and Conclusions of Law (FOFs/COLs), both filed on September
 
22, 2010 in the Family Court of the First Circuit (family court).1
 
The Order denied Wayne's October 9, 2009 Motion to Set Aside
 (Motion to Set Aside) the November 21, 2008 Decree Granting
 
2
Absolute Divorce and Awarding Child Custody  (Divorce Decree).  In
 
the Divorce Decree, the family court granted the request by
 
Plaintiff-Appellee Julianne Nguyen Berry (Julianne) for divorce
 
from Wayne, awarded sole legal and physical custody of two minor
 
children to Julianne, ordered Wayne to pay child support to
 
Julianne on behalf of the two children, ordered Wayne to pay
 
1
 The Honorable Linda K.C. Luke presided.
 
2
 The Honorable Linda S. Martell signed the Divorce Decree.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
alimony to Julianne, and awarded Julianne "any and all interest in
 
all of [Wayne's] rights, title and interest to any copyrights,
 
patents, or any other intellectual property that he authored or
 
acquired during the period of the parties' marriage."
 
On appeal, Wayne argues that the Divorce Decree should be
 
vacated because
 
(1) in the Divorce Decree, the family court awarded
 
Julianne relief beyond what she had asked for in her Complaint for
 
Divorce (Complaint) or her proposed decree;
 
(2) the family court failed to notify him that if he did
 
not attend the settlement conference, the court would enter a
 
default against him, thereby denying him adequate notice in
 
violation of due process; and 
(3) Julianne served the Pre-Trial Order No. 2 and the
 
Divorce Decree by mail to an address calculated not to reach him.
 
Before discussing the issues Wayne raises on appeal, we 
note Wayne and Julianne's lack of conformity with the requirements 
of Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rules 28(b) and 
32(a). 
Julianne's answering brief fails to comply with HRAP Rule
 
28(b)(3) in failing to include in her statement of the case "record
 references supporting each statement of fact or mention of court .
 
. . proceedings." (Emphasis added.) Her brief also does not
 
comply with HRAP Rule 32(a) because it does not have a three-inch
 
margin on the flyleaf.
 
Wayne's opening brief does not comply with the following
 
subsections of HRAP Rule 28(b):
 
(1) Rule 28(b)(3) in failing to include in his statement
 
of the case "record references supporting each statement of fact or
 
mention of court . . . proceedings." (Emphasis added.)
 
(2) Rule 28(b)(3), which provides in relevant part that
 
"[t]here shall be appended to the brief a copy of the judgment,
 
decree, findings of fact and conclusions of law, order, opinion or
 
decision relevant to any point on appeal, unless otherwise ordered
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
by the court." Wayne did not append a copy of any of the relevant
 
documents.
 
(3) Rule 28(b)(4) in that each point of error does not
 
state "(i) the alleged error committed by the court or agency; (ii)
 
where in the record the alleged error occurred; and (iii) where in
 
the record the alleged error was objected to or the manner in which
 
the alleged error was brought to the attention of the court or
 
agency." 
(4) Rule 28(b)(4)(C), which requires that "when the 
point [of error] involves a finding or conclusion of the court or 
agency," the appellant shall provide "either a quotation of the 
finding or conclusion urged as error or reference to appended 
findings and conclusions." The family court set out comprehensive 
FOFs/COLs. On appeal, Wayne appears to challenge certain of the 
family court's FOFs/COLs, yet fails to specifically refer to any of 
them, nor point to where in the record he argued that any of the 
FOFs were erroneous or COLs were wrong. When an appellant does not 
identify what FOFs are erroneous and no plain error appears from 
the record, the FOFs remain unchallenged and serve as the operative 
facts of the case. Crosby v. State of Hawai' i Dep't of Budget & 
Fin., 76 Hawai' i 332, 340, 876 P.2d 1300, 1308 (1994). Moreover, 
"a COL that is supported by the trial court's FOFs and that 
reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be 
overturned.” Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the Employees' Retirement Sys. 
of the State of Hawai' i, 106 Hawai' i 416, 430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 
(2005) (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). 
Such non-compliance is sufficient to affirm the judgment
 
of the family court. See HRAP 28(b)(4) ("Points not presented in
 
accordance with this section will be disregarded, except that the
 appellate court, at its option, may notice a plain error not
 
presented."). 
Wayne's opening and reply briefs fail to comply with HRAP
 
Rule 32(a) because the briefs do not have three-inch margins on the
 
flyleaves of the briefs.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Both parties' counsel are warned that, pursuant to HRAP
 
Rule 51, future non-compliance with HRAP Rules 28 and 32(a) may
 
result in sanctions against them.
 
In this case, we notice no plain error. Wayne contends 
the Divorce Decree (1) is void under Hawai' i Family Court Rules 
3
(HFCR) Rule 60(b)(4)  ; (2) violated due process because the
Complaint and Julianne's proposed decree failed to give him
 
adequate notice that he would lose his copyrights, be responsible
 
for all debts, and have no assets; and (3) is void because service
 
of the Divorce Decree and Pre-Trial Order No. 2 was inadequate.
 
"[A] judgment is void only if the court that rendered it 
lacked jurisdiction of either the subject matter or the parties or 
otherwise acted in a manner inconsistent with due process of law." 
Citicorp Mortg., Inc. v. Bartolome
, 94 Hawai' i 422, 428, 16 P.3d 
827, 833 (App. 2000) (quoting In re Hana Ranch Co., 3 Haw. App. 141, 146, 642 P.2d 938, 941 (1982)). There is nothing in the 
record to suggest that the family court lacked jurisdiction. 
Furthermore, the appellate court "will not disturb the family 
court's decisions on appeal unless the family court disregarded 
rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment 
of a party litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of 
reason." Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai' i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 
(2006) (quoting In re Doe, 95 Hawai' i 183, 189-90, 20 P.3d 616, 
622-23 (2001)). 
Via a process server, Julianne served Wayne with a
 
certified copy of the Complaint on August 14, 2007. The Complaint
 
identified the issues to be addressed, including custody, alimony,
 
and division of assets and debts.
 
3
 HFCR Rule 60(b) (Relief from Judgment or Order) provides in relevant
part:
 
(b) Mistakes; inadvertence; excusable neglect; newly
discovered evidence; fraud.  On motion and upon such terms as are
just, the court may relieve a party or a party's legal
representative from any or all of the provisions of a final
judgment, order, or proceeding for the following reasons: . . . .
(4) the judgment is void[.]
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On February 6, 2008, Julianne filed a Motion to Set for
 
trial. In her proposed divorce decree attached to the Motion to
 
Set, she indicated that she would be requesting child support and
 
alimony. Julianne also indicated that she would be asking for a
 
final settlement payment that would include her interest in any
 
copyrights/patents obtained during the marriage. Furthermore, she
 
noted that Wayne would be held liable for joint debts owed to the
 
Internal Revenue Service, as well as his sole debts. The statement
 
also noted that her position as set forth in the proposed decree
 
was "subject to amendment and/or revision."
 
In Wayne's March 10, 2008 "Motion to Strike: Cheryl
 
Brawley's [Julianne's attorney] Motion to Set and Notice of Motion
 
for a Dismissed and Expired Complaint for Divorce" (Motion to
 
Strike), Wayne acknowledged that he had received the Motion to Set
 
-- which gave him notice of the planned division of copyrights,
 
debts, and assets.
 
Even though Wayne had notice of the hearing on the Motion
 
to Set, he did not appear in person at the hearing nor did he
 
respond to the family court's attempt to reach him by phone. Wayne
 
also failed to attend the settlement conference on June 19, 2008. 
At the conclusion of the settlement conference, the family court
 
set another settlement conference for September 18, 2008 and
 
continued the trial to the week of October 27, 2008. The Pretrial
 
Order No. 2 clearly stated that "[i]n the event [Wayne] fails to
 
appear at settlement conference -- he shall be defaulted." 
Although Wayne may have preferred a different method of service,
 
the record reflects that Pretrial Order No. 2 was served upon him
 
via mailing at his Military Trail address -- his mailing address of
 
record at that point in the proceedings. 
Julianne mailed and faxed a copy of her settlement
 
conference statement to Wayne on or about September 5, 2008. In
 
her settlement statement, she sought, inter alia, legal and
 
physical custody of the children, child support and alimony, an
 
award of intellectual property as well as monies from any
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
settlements relating to infringement on a computer program
 
copyright held by Wayne, and a determination of debt
 
responsibilities. Again, her statement indicated that it was
 
"subject to amendment and/or modification" and she specifically
 
reserved "the right to amend, revise and/or otherwise modify" the
 
statement.
 
Wayne failed to appear at the September 18, 2008
 
settlement conference. The family court defaulted him, granted the
 
divorce, and determined custody, visitation, child support, and
 
property division. On November 24, 2008, a copy of the Divorce
 
Decree was mailed to Wayne at the Military Trail address via
 
certified mail. A United States Postal Service Track and Confirm
 
document verified that the document was delivered to the Military
 
Trail address on December 1, 2008.
 
In the Divorce Decree, the family court awarded Julianne 
"any and all interest in all of [Wayne's] rights, title and 
interest to any copyrights, patents, or any other intellectual 
property that [Wayne] authored or acquired during the period of the 
parties' marriage." Although this award was greater than what was 
originally proposed, "the family court has broad discretion to 
divide and distribute the estate of the parties in a just and 
equitable manner. As such, the family court assesses and weighs 
all valid and relevant considerations to exercise its equitable 
discretion in distributing marital property." Baker v. Bielski, 
124 Hawai' i 455, 463, 248 P.3d 221, 229 (App. 2011) (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted). Additionally, the family 
court has the power to divide intellectual property for purposes of 
equitable distribution. Teller v. Teller, 99 Hawai' i 101, 108, 53 
P.3d 240, 247 (2002). 
The evidence shows that Wayne received the Complaint via
 
personal service, the Motion to Set via United States mail, and
 Julianne's settlement conference statement via mail and via
 
facsimile (his requested mode of communication). The record also
 
reflects he was served with Pretrial Order No. 2 via mailing. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wayne was notified via multiple documents served on him that his
 
copyrights, debts, and assets would be considered in the divorce
 
proceedings. Wayne chose not to participate in the divorce
 
proceedings and did not file his Motion to Set Aside until October
 
9, 2009 -- nearly eleven months after the Divorce Decree had been
 
entered and two days after the family court entered a judgment in
 
the amount of $139,030 against him in response to Julianne's Motion
 
to Enforce Decree. In his Motion to Set Aside, he presented
 
arguments regarding custody, alimony, copyright, etc., the very
 
issues that were part of the proceedings in which he failed to
 
participate. 
We conclude that Wayne's contentions are without merit. 
Wayne received adequate notice regarding the impact of the proposed
 
divorce on his copyrights, assets, and debts and was sufficiently
 
served. The family court did not abuse its discretion when it
 
denied Wayne's Motion to Set Aside.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order Denying Motion to Set
 
Aside and the Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, both filed
 on September 22, 2010 in the Family Court of the First Circuit, are
 
affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 28, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Timothy J. Hogan
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
Carl H. Osaki
 for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
7
 