 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-16-0000541 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
O
F THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
WILLIAM BARNES, Defendant-Appellant 
A
PPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1DCW-13-0004900) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, C.J., and Reifurth and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant William Barnes appeals from the 
June 30, 2016 Notices of Entry of Judgment and/or Order entered 
by the District Court of the First Circuit ("District Court"). 
Barnes was charged with one count of Harassment in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") sections 711-1106(1)(a) and/or (1)(b),  and one count of Theft in the Fourth Degree ("Theft 4") 
2/1/
1/ The Honorable James Ashford presided. 
2/ The statute provides, in pertinent part, that 
(1) A person commits the offense of harassment if,
with intent to harass, annoy, or alarm any other person,
that person: 
(a) Strikes, shoves, kicks, or otherwise touchesanother person in an offensive manner orsubjects the other person to offensive physicalcontact; [or] 
(b) Insults, taunts, or challenges another person ina manner likely to provoke an immediate violentresponse or that would cause the other person toreasonably believe that the actor intends tocause bodily injury to the recipient or another
(continued...) 2/(...continued) 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
in violation of HRS sections 708-833(1)3/ and 708-833.5 . After 
a bench trial, Barnes was found guilty and sentenced to 
concurrent terms of jail: two days on the Harassment charge, and three days on the Theft 4 charge. 4/
or damage to the property of the recipient or
another[.] 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 711-1106(1)(a)-(b) (Supp. 2012). 
3/ The statute provides, in pertinent part, that "[a] person commits
the offense of theft in the fourth degree if the person commits theft ofproperty or services of any value not in excess of $100." Haw. Rev. Stat. § 708-833(1) (1993). 
HRS section 708-830 defines theft as including Shoplifting as
follows: 
A person commits theft if the person does any of the
following: 
. . . . 
(8) Shoplifting. 
(a) A person conceals or takes possession of
the goods or merchandise of any store orretail establishment, with intent todefraud. 
(b) A person alters the price tag or otherprice marking on goods or merchandise ofany store or retail establishment, withintent to defraud. 
(c) A person transfers the goods ormerchandise of any store or retailestablishment from one container to another, with intent to defraud. 
The unaltered price or name tag or other markingon goods or merchandise, duly identifiedphotographs or photocopies thereof, or printedregister receipts shall be prima facie evidenceof value and ownership of such goods ormerchandise. Photographs of the goods ormerchandise involved, duly identified in writingby the arresting police officer as accuratelyrepresenting such goods or merchandise, shall bedeemed competent evidence of the goods ormerchandise involved and shall be admissible in any proceedings, hearings, and trials forshoplifting to the same extent as the goods ormerchandise themselves. 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 708-830(8) (Supp. 2012). 
4/ The statute provides the sentencing guidelines for the offense of
Shoplifting. See Haw. Rev. Stat. § 708-833.5 (1993). 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
The charges stem from an incident that occurred on 
October 16, 2013, when Robert Rivera, an asset protection 
investigator for the Sports Authority formerly located on Ward Avenue, observed Barnes select two wrist watches from the front of the store, take them to the footwear department, take pliers out of a black bag that he had, use the pliers to cut the watches out of their casings, and conceal one in his waistband and one in the black bag. Rivera claimed that he did not see Barnes pay for the watches as he observed Barnes walk past the cash registers and through the exit. Upon exiting the store, Rivera confronted Barnes. According to Rivera, Barnes then got mad, came up close to Rivera's face, put his leg between Rivera's legs, and while making a "humping" motion, told Rivera, "You know you want me. You know you want me, Baby." Rivera stepped back and Barnes allegedly spit on him. Honolulu Police Department ("HPD") officers arrived shortly thereafter. 
Barnes testified that he and his friend Brian Yoneda 
went to Sports Authority so that Barnes could buy Yoneda items using a Visa gift card. Barnes alleged that a Sports Authority employee cut one of the watches from its casing so that Barnes could try the watch on and show it to Yoneda, but that Barnes put everything back on the box and left it in "the sitting area [] where people could sit down and try on shoes" while he left the building to use the bathroom. Barnes contends that after he exited the store, Rivera stopped him and asked him to come back in the store regarding damaged packaging. Barnes told Rivera, "No. I'm Native Hawaiian. This is my country. I want to be free to leave[,]" and that Rivera blocked him and pushed back towards him "like . . . herding [him] backwards." Barnes said that he then started "playing to the crowd because I'm thinking I'm gonna walk into my boss's office, Myles Breiner, and I'm gonna tell him they just illegally detained me, accused me of shoplifting, and it's gonna be ka-ching." At some point, Barnes claimed that Rivera inadvertently touched Barnes with his crotch. Barnes testified as follows: 
So he keeps pushing me back. At that point he's
touched me with his crotch, um, inadvertently. I use that 
as a point. I say, Excuse me. You just sexually assaulted 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
me. You are sexually assaulting me right now. You've 
touched me with your crotch. Are you gay? Are you afaggot? What is your issue? Why are you touching me withyour crotch? I do not want you touching me with your crotchanymore. 
Q [by defense counsel] 
And you're saying that really
loud so everybody can hear you? 
A 
Yes. I'm saying it extraordinarily loud. 
. . . . 
Q 
Okay. 
A 
So, I'm trying to get points I guess or whatever
in my head, you know, that this is just way over the line.
They've crossed the line and it's not supposed to happenthat way. So, as they're pushing me backwards and pushingme backwards now, now he gets very aggressive and very upsetbecause I've just made an accusation towards his manhood Iguess in public. 
Barnes stated that Rivera was about twelve inches from his face, 
but denied spitting on him. 
When HPD Officers arrived, Rivera told them what 
happened and that he had only recovered one watch from Barnes's black bag, at which point the officers told Rivera that they would only proceed with the harassment charge and not the theft charge. Rivera did not show the officers any spit on his face or preserve the spit for evidence as he had already wiped it off by the time HPD had arrived. 
Of the two watches Rivera claimed to have seen Barnes 
take, only the one concealed in Barnes's bag was recovered. Rivera testified that when he retrieved Barnes's bag, it was on top of a shopping cart, but he was not sure how it got there, that he retrieved the watch from the pocket of Barnes's bag which he observed Barnes put the watch in, that the watch was the one for which the empty casing that Rivera recovered in the footwear aisle was for, and that after recovering the watch, Rivera put the watch back in the casing and back out for sale. The parties would later stipulate that HPD "did not recover any Sports Authority property from [] Barnes' person or black bag or clothing[.]" 
On appeal, Barnes asserts that the District Court erred 
(1) in failing to dismiss the Theft 4 charge where the charge failed to identify the specific items that Barnes allegedly 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
 concealed or took possession of; (2) in denying Barnes's 
April 24, 2015 Motion to Dismiss for Destruction of Evidence ("Motion to Dismiss"); (3) in denying Barnes's oral motion to suppress evidence ("Motion to Suppress") based on the warrantless search of his bag; (4) because there was no substantial evidence to support the Theft 4 conviction; and (5) because there was no substantial evidence to support the Harassment conviction. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as well as the relevant statutory and case law, we affirm. 
(1)
 In his first point of error, Barnes argues that the 
District Court erred in failing to dismiss the Theft 4 charge because the omission of the specific items he allegedly concealed or took possession of violated his right to due process. Relying on State v. Wheeler, 121 
Hawai# i 383, 219 P.3d 1170 (2009), 
Barnes argued for dismissal based on insufficiency of the charge after the State rested its case, and the District Court did not expressly rule on the request. Specifically, Barnes contended that the complaint failed to specify whether he was being charged with concealing or possessing the watch that Rivera recovered from his bag or the watch that Rivera allegedly saw him take and conceal, but was never recovered, or both, and therefore he was not sufficiently apprised of the basis for the Theft 4 charge. 
"Whether an indictment or complaint sets forth all the 
essential elements of a charged offense is a question of law, which we review under the de novo, or right/wrong, standard." State v. Merino
, 81 Hawai# i 198, 212, 915 P.2d 672, 686 (1996) 
(internal quotation marks, brackets, and ellipses omitted) (quoting State v. Wells, 78 Hawai# i 373, 379, 894 P.2d 70, 76 
(1995)). 
In holding that an oral Operating a Vehicle Under the 
Influence of an Intoxicant charge was insufficient because it failed to allege the element of "public way, street, road, or highway," as an attendant circumstance, the supreme court in Wheeler reaffirmed the principle that 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
 the sufficiency of the charging instrument is measured,
inter alia , by "whether it contains the elements of the
offense intended to be charged, and sufficiently apprises
the defendant of what he [or she] must be prepared tomeet[.]" "A charge defective in this regard amounts to afailure to state an offense, and a conviction based upon itcannot be sustained, for that would constitute a denial ofdue process." 
Id. at 391, 219 P.3d at 1178 (footnote and internal citations 
omitted) (quoting Merino, 81 Hawai# i at 212, 915 p.2d at 686). 
Accordingly, for Barnes's Theft 4 charge to be sufficient, it would need to have contained the elements of the offense intended to be charged, and sufficiently apprise Barnes of what he must be prepared to meet. 
The statute on Theft 4 says that "[a] person commits 
the offense of theft in the fourth degree if the person commits theft of property or services of any value not in excess of $100." 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 708-833(1). "A person commits theft if 
the person does any of the following: . . . (8) Shoplifting. (a) A person conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment, with intent to defraud." Haw. Rev. Stat. § 708-830(8)(a). "Intent to defraud" is statutorily defined as either "[a]n intent to use deception to injure another's interest which has value" or "[k]nowledge by the defendant that the defendant is facilitating an injury to another's interest which has value." Haw. Rev. Stat. § 708-800. 
Here, the Theft 4 charge in the Complaint provides as 
follows: 
COUNT II: On or about the 16th day of October, 2013,
in the City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, WILLIAM
BARNES, also known as William J. Barnes did conceal and/ortake possession of goods and/or merchandise, the value ofwhich did not exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), theproperty of The Sports Authority, a store and/or retailestablishment, with intent to defraud, thereby committingthe offense of Theft in the Fourth Degree, in violation ofSection 708-833(1) of the Hawaii Revised Statutes and he is
subject to sentencing under Section 708-833.5 of the Hawaii
Revised Statutes. 
The language used in the charge tracks the language 
provided in the relevant statutes stated above. On this basis 
alone—that all the elements of Theft 4 as defined above are alleged in the Complaint—the Theft 4 charge is not defective. See State v. Treat, 67 Haw. 119, 120, 680 P.2d 250, 251 (1984) 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 (holding that a Theft in the First Degree charge was not 
defective when it tracked the statutory definition of the offense because the charge alleged all of the statutory elements of the offense); 
see also Wheeler, 121 Hawai# i at 393, 219 P.3d at 1180 
("In general, 'where the statute sets forth with reasonable clarity all essential elements of the crime intended to be punished, and fully defines the offense in unmistakable terms readily comprehensible to persons of common understanding, a charge drawn in the language of the statute is sufficient.'" (brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Jendrusch, 58 Haw. 279, 282, 567 P.2d 1242, 1245 (1977))). 
In determining whether Barnes's right to be informed of 
the nature and cause of the charge against him was violated, we must look at the information supplied to him at the time he asserted the charge was defective. See State v. Hitchcock
, 123 
Hawai# i 369, 379, 235 P.3d 365, 375 (2010). Here, Barnes did not 
claim that the Theft 4 charge was insufficient until after the State had rested its case. By that time, Barnes was fully aware of Rivera's testimony and that the theft charge was based on the watch that was recovered from his bag outside of the store. 
Therefore, the District Court did not abuse its 
discretion in failing to dismiss the Theft 4 charge because the complaint did not specify which items Barnes allegedly concealed or took possession of, and consequently did not violate Barnes's right to due process. See State v. Akau
, 118 Hawai# i 44, 51, 185 
P.3d 229, 236 (2008). 
(2)
 In his second point of error, Barnes argues that 
the District Court erred in denying his Motion to Dismiss where the State failed to preserve potentially exculpatory evidence. Barnes contends that the District Court's denial of his Motion to Dismiss where the State's and HPD's failure to preserve and/or obtain the surveillance video from Sports Authority and Victoria Ward Center, regardless of whether the State or HPD acted in bad faith, amounted to a violation of his due process rights. 
This court reviews a trial court's ruling on a motion 
to dismiss for an abuse of discretion. See 
Akau, 118 Hawai# i at 
51, 185 P.3d at 236. 
7  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
The destruction of evidence may "authorize[] dismissal 
. . . , regardless of good or bad faith, where the evidence lost 
or destroyed is 'so critical to the defense as to make a criminal trial fundamentally unfair without it.'" State v. Steger, 114 
Hawai# i 162, 170, 158 P.3d 280, 288 (App. 2006) (quoting State v. 
Matafeo, 71 Haw. 183, 187, 787 P.2d 671, 673 (1990)).  This is because in such an instance, the destruction of evidence violates a criminal defendant's due process rights as set forth in Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 87 (1963).  See Matafeo, 71 Haw. at 
185-86, 787 P.2d 672 (citing State v. Estrada, 69 Haw. 204, 208, 738 P.2d 812 (1987)). 
Barnes fails to show that the surveillance video would 
have been so critical to the defense as to make the trial fundamentally unfair without it. 
At the evidentiary hearing, the 
District Court determined, and defense counsel confirmed, that Barnes's argument essentially went to Rivera's credibility and bias regarding whether the Sports Authority cameras captured the incident and the District Court stated that Barnes's argument was too speculative.
5/ In addressing the speculativeness, the 
District Court stated that "it's abundantly clear that there is no video that's going to come into evidence. If there were video, that might be helpful to either the State or [Barnes], but 
there is none." (Emphasis added.) The District Court thereafter concluded, "I don't think that the absence of video which presumably might have corroborated one side or the other makes trial in this matter fundamentally unfair for [Barnes]." 
On appeal, Barnes again argues that the case hinged on 
the credibility of witnesses, that the basis for both charges was Rivera's testimony, and that without the surveillance video, there was no objective proof of the facts of the incident within the Sports Authority store and outside of the store. At the 
5/ The District Court also asked, "Can you be more specific? Do you
have any evidence that [Rivera's] testimony as to where cameras are or what
areas they cover or what areas they don't cover is inaccurate? . . . I'mtalking about affirmative evidence as opposed to skepticism, cynicism, doubtabout [Rivera's] credibility." Defense counsel repeated the same argumentthat there were differences of opinion between Rivera and Barnes as to whatareas the Sports Authority cameras captured. 
8  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidentiary hearing, Rivera testified that none of the Sports 
Authority store cameras recorded areas where Barnes took the watches from and the area in the footwear department where Barnes removed the watches from their casings, and that the only thing he saw on the surveillance video was Barnes exiting the store. As we discuss in more detail below, the trial court judge in a bench trial, as the fact-finder, is free to make all reasonable and rational inferences given the evidence and is tasked with making credibility determinations, which this court is precluded from reevaluating. See State v. Monteil, 134 
Hawai# i 361, 368, 
341 P.3d 567, 574 (2014). Accordingly, we decline to address issues relating to the credibility of Rivera's testimony. 
Additionally, Barnes does not explain specifically what 
about the surveillance video would have corroborated his recollection of events, or in the alternative, contradicted or disputed the State's version of events (in the form of Rivera's testimony) so that the video was "so critical . . . as to make [his] criminal trial fundamentally unfair' without it." Steger
, 
114 Hawai# i at 170, 158 P.3d at 288. Indeed, the District Court 
correctly noted at the evidentiary hearing that Yoneda would later testify for the defense at trial as to Barnes's conduct inside and outside the Sports Authority store. 
In sum, because Barnes's argument primarily attacks 
Rivera's credibility, because Yoneda testified for the defense as to the events that transpired both inside and outside of the Sports Authority store, and because Barnes's arguments are based on speculation, Barnes fails to show that the surveillance video was "so critical to the defense as to make a criminal trial fundamentally unfair without it." See State v. Diaz
, 100 Hawai# i 
210, 226, 58 P.3d 1257, 1273 (2002) ("[A]bsent a showing that evidence would 'create a reasonable doubt about the defendant's guilt that would not otherwise exist,' no Brady violation can be found." (original brackets omitted) (quoting Matafeo, 71 Haw. at 186, 787 P.2d at 673)).
6/ Therefore, the District Court did not 
6/ See also Matafeo , 71 Haw. at 187, 787 P.2d at 673 (holding that
evidence was not so crucial to the defense because the State carefully
(continued...) 
9 6/(...continued) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
abuse its discretion in denying Barnes's Motion to Dismiss. See 
Akau, 118 Hawai# i at 51, 185 P.3d at 236. 
(3)
 In his third point of error, Barnes argues that the 
District Court erred in denying his oral Motion to Suppress 
Rivera's testimony regarding the watch that Rivera found in Barnes's bag. Barnes argues that the testimony should have been suppressed as the fruit of an illegal, warrantless search because Rivera was acting as an agent of HPD, rather than as a private individual, when he conducted the search of Barnes's bag. 
The proponent of the motion to suppress has the burden of
establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that thestatements or items sought to be excluded were unlawfullysecured and that his or her right to be free from unreasonablesearches or seizures was violated under the fourth amendment to the United States Constitution and article I, section 7 ofthe 
Hawai #i Constitution. 
State v. Spillner, 116 Hawai# i 351, 357, 173 P.3d 498, 504 (2007) 
(citing State v. Wilson, 92 Hawai# i 45, 48, 987 P.2d 268, 271 
(1999)). 
The supreme court has emphasized that the fourth 
amendment to the United States Constitution and article I, 
section 7 of the Hawai# i Constitution "ensure that an 
individual's legitimate expectations of privacy will not be subjected to unreasonable governmental intrusions." State v. 
Kahoonei, 83 Hawai# i 124, 129, 925 P.2d 294, 299 (1996) (quoting 
State v. Meyer, 78 Hawai# i 308, 311-12, 893 P.2d 159, 162-63 
(1995)). Therefore, evidence obtained by private individuals may be properly admitted. See id. at 129, 925 P.2d at 299 (citing 
Coolidge v. New Hampshire, 403 U.S. 443, 487 (1971) (holding that, if private persons act wholly on their own initiative, evidence turned over to police is admissible)). However, if the private individual has an agency relationship with the 
identified and described the evidence while turning over to the defendant the
police report containing details of the evidence, and noting that bothtestimony and the report supplied no reasonable inference that the condition
of the evidence would have favored the defense); Steger , 114 
Hawai #i at 
169–71, 158 P.3d at 287–89 (ruling that lost photographs, which defendant
maintained were potentially exculpatory, were not critical to the defense tomake defendant's trial fundamentally unfair without them, because thephotographs could only have diminished the State's evidence, could not haveprovided a complete defense, did not preclude defendant from pursuing hisdefense, and because defendant's argument was too speculative). 
10  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
police—that is, if "governmental involvement is significant or 
extensive enough to objectively render an otherwise private individual a mere arm, tool, or instrumentality of the state[,]" id. at 130, 925 P.2d at 300—and in that capacity conducts the alleged search and seizure, that is not a "private search" and "the full panoply of constitutional provisions and curative measures appl[y]." Id. at 127, 925 P.2d at 297 (citing State v. 
Boynton, 58 Haw. 530, 536, 574 P.2d 1330, 1334 (1978)). 
In Kahoonei, the supreme court established that, in 
determining whether a private individual has an agency relationship with the police, the factors enunciated in Boynton remain good law—although "the subjective motivation of a private individual is irrelevant," id. at 130, 925 P.2d at 300—and that the "totality of the circumstances inquiry" is the correct test. Id.  The Boynton factors look to whether the private individual "(1) was actively recruited; (2) was directed by a government agent; (3) acted for a private purpose; and (4) received any payment for his or her services." Id. at 127, 925 P.2d at 297 
(citing Boynton, 58 Haw. at 537-38, 574 P.2d at 1335). 
Barnes does not argue, and the record does not reflect, 
that Rivera was actively recruited, was directed by a government agent, or received any payment for his services. On appeal, Barnes addresses the remaining Boynton factor. However, he failed to make the argument below. During the hearing on the Motion to Suppress, when asked why an agency relationship existed between Rivera and HPD, Barnes gave an unsupported "common sense argument" that Rivera was assisted by HPD, and that any time police officers want to get around unlawful searches and seizures, they simply have a private individual conduct the search and seizure.
7/ Even if we consider Barnes's belated 
7/ Stated in full, defense counsel responded: 
Well, because [Rivera] was assisted by [HPD]. And in 
a sense if –- just a common sense argument. Anytime police
officers wanted to get around their, um –- get around theconstitution and my client's right to unlawful search andseizure, they simply have to hand the bag over to someoneelse and let them look at it. So that creates an agencyagreement or agency relationship when [HPD] allows them to
(continued...) 
11 7/(...continued) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Boynton-factors argument, the argument is without merit. 
Barnes asserts that HPD allowed Rivera to conduct the 
search of his bag after they had taken the bag into custody, and 
at that point, Rivera's sole purpose was to gather evidence to support the theft charges against Barnes. Rivera's testimony, which the District Court accepted as true, provides otherwise. Rivera testified that when he conducted the search of Barnes's bag he thought HPD would only proceed with the Harassment charge, and not the Theft 4 charge, and that when he obtained Barnes's bag on top of a shopping cart, he did not know how it got there. More importantly, Rivera's testimony reflects that he was acting in his capacity as an asset protection investigator—which includes "apprehending shoplifters, internal thefts" and recovering stolen items—not as an arm, tool, or instrumentality of the State when he recovered the watch from Barnes's bag.
8/ 
To the contrary, Barnes asserts that Rivera's sole 
purpose in conducting the search of Barnes's bag was to gather evidence to support the criminal charges against him, evidenced by Rivera's testimony that he sought to initiate a theft charge against Barnes, and by the fact that Barnes was ultimately charged with both harassment and theft notwithstanding Rivera's claim that HPD told him that they could not proceed with the theft charge. Barnes's first rationale is without merit as Rivera's subjective motivation is irrelevant to the inquiry. See 
Kahoonei, 83 
Hawai# i at 130, 925 P.2d at 300 ("[T]he subjective 
motivation of a private individual is irrelevant[.]"). Barnes's second rationale is also without merit as he fails to explain or provide legal authority as to why the fact that the State ultimately charged him with Theft 4 in addition to Harassment necessarily meant that Rivera must have been collecting evidence of Theft 4 as well. 
look into the bag. 
8/ Rivera testified that, based on his training and experience as an
asset protection investigator, he never turns recovered items over to the
police, and that he put the watch "back into the container and then put it forsale." 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  Accordingly, Barnes fails to show, by a preponderance 
of evidence and under the totality of circumstances, that Rivera 
was acting as an agent for HPD when he searched Barnes's bag and discovered the watch. See State v. Lawson, 103 
Hawai# i 11, 17
-
18, 20, 78 P.3d 1159, 1165-66, 1168 (App. 2003) (holding that employee was not a government agent when he called the police after observing defendant lighting the contents of a glass pipe because employee's actions were for the private purpose of complying with employer's no-smoking policy and not doing anything that could harm the store). Therefore, the District Court did not err in denying Barnes's Motion to Suppress Rivera's testimony regarding the watch that Rivera found in his bag. 
(4) In his fourth point of error, Barnes argues that 
there was no substantial evidence to support his conviction for Theft 4 because the State failed to adduce substantial evidence that Rivera was the "authorized representative" of Sports Authority, and that Barnes had concealed and/or taken possession of goods and/or merchandise of Sports Authority. With regard to the latter contention, Barnes argues that there was no objective proof that the watch found in his bag was property of Sports Authority. 
"When considering the legal sufficiency of evidence to 
support a conviction, such evidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in the strongest light for the prosecution." Monteil
, 134 Hawai# i at 368, 341 P.3d at 574 (quoting State v. 
Matavale , 115 Hawai# i 149, 157, 166 P.3d 322, 330 (2007)). 
On appeal, the test for sufficiency of the evidence is
"not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt,
but whether there is 'substantial evidence' to support theconclusion of the trier of fact." "Substantial evidence" is "credible evidence which is of sufficient quality andprobative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to
support a conclusion.
" 
Monteil
, 134 Hawai# i at 368, 341 P.3d at 574 (citations omitted). 
The testimony of a single percipient witness may constitute 
substantial evidence to support a conviction. See State v. 
Eastman, 81 Hawai# i 131, 141, 913 P.2d 57, 67 (1996) (citing 
State v. Ibuos, 75 Haw. 118, 123, 857 P.2d 576, 578–79 (1993)). 
In a bench trial, "the trial judge is free to make all
reasonable and rational inferences under the facts in 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
  
 evidence, including circumstantial evidence[; which can be
used to prove the requisite state of mind.]" Further, "itis for the trial judge as fact-finder to assess thecredibility of witnesses and to resolve all questions offacts; the judge may accept or reject any witness'stestimony in whole or in part." It is not the role of the appellate court to weigh credibility or resolve conflictingevidence. 
Monteil, 134 Hawai# i at 368, 341 P.3d at 574 (internal citations 
and original brackets omitted). Put another way, "an appellate 
court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the [trier of fact].'" State v. Mattiello, 90 Hawai# i 255, 259, 
978 P.2d 693, 697 (1999) (brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Stocker, 90 Hawai# i 85, 90, 976 P.2d 399, 404 (1999)). 
For Barnes to be convicted of Theft 4, he would have 
needed to conceal or take possession of goods or merchandise of the Sports Authority store, not in excess of $100, with "intent to defraud." 
Haw. Rev. Stat. §§ 708-800, 708-830(8)(a), 708-
833(1). Here, Rivera's testimony constituted substantial evidence to support the District Court's conclusion that Barnes intentionally took the subject-watch from the Sports Authority store without permission and without paying for it. 
Rivera testified that he was employed by Sports 
Authority as an asset protection investigator when he observed Barnes use pliers to cut two watches out of their plastic casings and conceal one of the two watches in his black bag. Rivera 
further testified that Barnes did not have permission to remove 
the subject-watch from the store—which he later recovered from Barnes's bag and which he described as "brand new" and corresponding to the empty casing found in the footwear aisle —and that he did not see Barnes pay for the watch, but instead, walk past the cash registers and through the exit.  The District 
Court found Rivera's testimony to be credible, while it found 
Barnes's testimony to not be credible, which was the province of the trial court as the trier of fact. 
Accordingly, when viewed in the strongest light for the 
prosecution, substantial evidence in the form of Rivera's testimony existed to support the Theft 4 conviction. See S tate 
v. Zeffilini, No. CAAP–11–0000306, 2012 WL 676747, at *1 (Haw. 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
 Ct. App. Feb. 29, 2012) (holding that the store manager's 
testimony was more credible than the defendant's, and that it provided substantial evidence in Theft 4 case); State v. Newman, No. CAAP-10-0000203, 2011 WL 5110711, at *1 (Haw. Ct. App. Oct. 25, 2011) (same). 
(5) In his fifth point of error, Barnes argues that 
there was no substantial evidence to support his conviction for Harassment because Rivera's testimony as to the alleged harassment was not credible, and because there was no objective proof that Barnes had spit on him. 
Under HRS section 711-1106(1): 
A person commits the offense of harassment if, with
intent to harass, annoy, or alarm any other person, that
person: 
(a) Strikes, 
shoves, kicks, or otherwise touches 
another person in an offensive manner or subjectsthe other person to offensive physical contact;[or] 
(b) Insults, taunts, or challenges another person ina manner likely to provoke an immediate violentresponse or that would cause the other person toreasonably believe that the actor intends to cause bodily injury to the recipient or anotheror damage to the property of the recipient oranother[.] 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 711-1106(1)(a)-(b). 
Here, the testimony of Rivera constituted substantial 
evidence to support the District Court's conclusion that Barnes 
acted with intent to harass or annoy Rivera by touching Rivera in an offensive manner or subjecting Rivera to offensive physical contact. In addressing the lack of Barnes's preserved-spit, the District Court explained, "There might not have been physical evidence of spit on his face. But logically if somebody spit on my face, I'd probably wipe it off rather than preserve it until the cops showed up many minutes later." The District Court thereafter found that there was ample evidence of Harassment based on Rivera's testimony, which it found to be more credible than Barnes's testimony. 
According to Rivera, upon approaching Barnes outside 
the store, Barnes "immediately" got mad, came up close to Rivera's face, put his leg in between Rivera's legs, and while 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
making a "humping" motion, told Rivera, "You know you want me. 
You know you want me, Baby[,]" and spit on Rivera. Rivera testified that after Barnes spit on him, he was "[p]issed off" and would "rather get punched then get spit at." 
Accordingly, when viewed in the strongest light for the 
prosecution, substantial evidence existed to support the Harassment conviction. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the June 30, 2016 
Notices of Entry of Judgment and/or Order entered by the District Court of the First Circuit are affirmed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai# i, August 2, 2019. 
On the briefs:  
Thomas Waters 
for Defendant-Appellant.  Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Brandon H. Ito,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
16 