 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0000892
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
BROK CARLTON, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 13-1-0254(2))

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Brok Carlton (Carlton) appeals from
 
a Judgment Conviction and Sentence (Judgment), filed on June 6,
 
2014, in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (circuit
 court).
1 Judgment was entered against Carlton after a jury found
 
him guilty of Kidnapping (Count I), in violation of Hawaii
 
2
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-720(1)(d) (2014);  Robbery in the
1 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.
 
2
 HRS § 707-720 provides in pertinent part:
 
§707-720 Kidnapping. (1) A person commits the offense
of kidnapping if the person intentionally or knowingly
restrains another person with intent to:
 
. . . .
 
(d) Inflict bodily injury upon that person or subject
that person to a sexual offense[.]
 
. . . . 
(continued...)

  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
First Degree (Count II), in violation of HRS § 708-840(1)(a)
 
3
(2014);  Assault in the Second Degree (Count III), in violation
4
of HRS § 707-711(1)(d) (2014);  and Unauthorized Control of a
Propelled Vehicle (UCPV) (Count IV), in violation of HRS § 708­
836 (2014).5
 
On appeal, Carlton contends that the circuit court
 
2(...continued)
(2) Except as provided in subsection (3), kidnapping
is a class A felony.
3 HRS § 708-840(1)(a) and (3) provide:
 
§708-840 Robbery in the first degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of robbery in the first degree if, in
the course of committing theft or non-consensual taking of a
motor vehicle:
 
(a) The person attempts to kill another or
intentionally or knowingly inflicts or attempts to
inflict serious bodily injury upon another[.]
 
. . . .
 (3) Robbery in the first degree is a class A felony.
4 HRS § 707-711 provides in pertinent part:
 
§707-711 Assault in the second degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of assault in the second degree if:
 
. . . .
 (d) The person intentionally or knowingly causes
bodily injury to another with a dangerous
instrument[.]
 
. . . .
 (2) Assault in the second degree is a class C felony.
5 HRS § 708-836 provides in pertinent part:
 
§708-836 Unauthorized control of propelled vehicle.
(1) A person commits the offense of unauthorized control of
a propelled vehicle if the person intentionally or knowingly
exerts unauthorized control over another's propelled vehicle
by operating the vehicle without the owner's consent or by
changing the identity of the vehicle without the owner's
consent.
 
(2) "Propelled vehicle" means an automobile, airplane,
motorcycle, motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle.
 
. . . .
 
(5) Unauthorized control of a propelled vehicle is a
class C felony.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
erred by (1) failing to instruct the jury regarding the potential
 
merger of Count I (Kidnapping), Count II (Robbery in the First
 Degree), and Count III (Assault in the Second Degree) pursuant to
 HRS § 701-109(1)(e) (2014); and (2) denying his motion for
 judgment of acquittal on Count II (Robbery in the First Degree). 
Carlton raises no challenge on appeal that affects his conviction
 on Count IV (UCPV). 
For the reasons stated below, we vacate the Judgment
 
with respect to the counts for Kidnapping, Robbery in the First
 Degree and Assault in the Second Degree and remand to the circuit
 court for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
I. Background
 
On April 9, 2013, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i 
(State) charged Carlton via complaint with Kidnapping, Robbery in 
the First Degree, Assault in the Second Degree, and UCPV stemming from an altercation between Carlton and the complaining witness (CW) on March 21, 2013. 
Up to shortly before the March 21, 2013 incident, the
 
CW worked for and lived with Carlton. During this time, Carlton
 loaned the CW money to buy a BMW automobile. On March 15, 2013,
 Carlton called police to report that $90,000 had been stolen from
 a safe located in his home. Carlton informed the responding
 officer that he suspected that the CW and the CW's girlfriend had
 stolen the money. The CW moved out shortly after the money
 allegedly went missing due to "tension" between the parties,
 taking the BMW with him.
 
Regarding the March 21, 2013 altercation, the CW
 
testified to the following facts.
6 At around 9:30 p.m., the CW
 
left his second-floor apartment to go pick up his friend from
 work. As he reached the stairs, Carlton was coming up. There
 
6
 At trial, Carlton contended that he did not commit any of the acts
alleged, but was set up by the CW, who lured Carlton to the location of the
altercation, attacked Carlton, and staged the rest of the fight, including
having a guy emerge from his apartment holding a baseball bat and driving the
BMW away from the apartment complex himself to make it appear as if Carlton
had taken it. Carlton testified that he only went to meet the CW in order to
take possession of the BMW. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was another individual behind Carlton, Noah Thomas-Francis
 
(Thomas-Francis). Carlton attempted to grab the CW's keys and
 cell phone from out of his hand. The CW punched Carlton in the
 face and grabbed him in a choke hold. As the two quarreled, two
 people came up behind the CW and hit him with baseball bats,
 knocking the CW and Carlton to the ground. While the CW had
 Carlton in a choke hold, the other three individuals hit and
 kicked the CW, causing the CW to release Carlton. While the CW
 was being hit and kicked so that he could not get up, Carlton got
 up, the group grabbed the CW's feet and dragged him, and Carlton
 and Thomas-Francis tried to put zip ties around the CW's feet.
 Thomas-Francis poured gasoline on the CW, and said "Light this
 mother fucker on fire." As Thomas-Francis tried to light a
 match, the CW fought and kicked, but could not get up due to the
 physical attack. Thomas-Francis did not successfully ignite the
 gasoline.
 
The CW testified that he heard witnesses yelling for
 
the group to stop hitting him. Once police sirens could be
 heard, Carlton and Thomas-Francis kicked the CW in the head,
 picked up some of their supplies, grabbed the CW's phone and
 keys, and ran off down the stairs. As Thomas-Francis was
 leaving, he threatened the CW, saying that if the CW did not get
 the money, "this is what's going to keep happening . . . ."
 
Carlton and/or Thomas-Francis got into the BMW, and
 
drove off. The BMW was found the next morning parked outside a
 beach access gate and was returned to the CW. 
After the State rested, Carlton orally moved for a
 
judgment of acquittal on all four counts, but only made argument
 regarding Count II (Robbery in the First Degree). The circuit
 court denied Carlton's motion. After the defense rested, Carlton
 renewed the motion for judgment of acquittal on all four counts,
 resting on previous argument. The court again denied the motion. 
On February 13, 2014, the circuit court read the jury
 
instructions to the jury. The circuit court refused Defendant's
 Special Instruction No. 7, Defendant's Special Instruction No.
 10, and Defendant's Special Instruction No. 11, which together
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
covered potential merger of Count I (Kidnapping), Count II
 
(Robbery in the First Degree) and Count III (Assault in the
 Second Degree) pursuant to HRS § 701-109(1)(e). The jury found
 Carlton guilty as charged on all counts.
II.	 Discussion
 
A.	 Jury Instructions on Merger
 
Carlton contends that the circuit court erred by not
 
instructing the jury regarding the possible merger, pursuant to
 
HRS § 701-109(1)(e), of: Count I (Kidnapping) and Count II
 (Robbery in the First Degree); Count II (Robbery in the First
 Degree) and Count III (Assault in the Second Degree); and Count I
 (Kidnapping) and Count III (Assault in the Second Degree). The
 circuit court did not instruct the jury in any way regarding the
 potential merger of the charges. 
When jury instructions or the omission thereof are at
issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when
read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
misleading. Erroneous instructions are presumptively harmful
and are a ground for reversal unless it affirmatively
appears from the record as a whole that the error was not
prejudicial. However, error is not to be viewed in isolation
and considered purely in the abstract. It must be examined
in the light of the entire proceedings and given the effect
which the whole record shows it to be entitled. In that
 context, the real question becomes whether there is a
reasonable possibility that error might have contributed to
conviction. If there is such a reasonable possibility in a
criminal case, then the error is not harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt, and the judgment of conviction on which it
may have been based must be set aside.
 
State v. Frisbee, 114 Hawai 'i 76, 79-80, 156 P.3d 1182, 1185-86 
(2007) (quoting State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai 'i 327, 334-35, 141 
P.3d 974, 981-82 (2006))(block format and brackets omitted). 
HRS § 701-109(1)(e) provides:
 
§701-109 Method of prosecution when conduct
established an element of more than one offense. (1) When
the same conduct of a defendant may establish an element of
more than one offense, the defendant may be prosecuted for
each offense of which such conduct is an element. The
 defendant may not, however, be convicted of more than one
offense if:
 
. . . .

 
(e)	 The offense is defined as a continuing course of
conduct and the defendant's course of conduct
 was uninterrupted, unless the law provides that
specific periods of conduct constitute separate
offenses.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
As the Hawai 'i Supreme Court has expressed on several occasions: 
HRS § 701–109(1)(e) . . . interposes a constraint on
multiple convictions arising from the same criminal conduct.
The statute “reflects a policy to limit the possibility of
multiple convictions and extended sentences when the
defendant has basically engaged in only one course of
criminal conduct directed at one criminal goal[.]” See
Commentary on HRS § 701–109.
 
Whether a course of conduct gives rise to more
than one crime [within the meaning of HRS §
701–109(1)(e)] depends in part on the intent and
objective of the defendant. The test to
determine whether the defendant intended to
 commit more than one offense is whether the
 evidence discloses one general intent or
discloses separate and distinct intents. Where
there is one intention, one general impulse, and
one plan, there is but one offense. All factual
 issues involved in this determination must be
 
decided by the trier of fact.
 
... Hoey, 77 Hawai‘i [at] 27 n.[ ]9, 881 P.2d [at] 514 n.[
]9 ... (quoting ... Alston, 75 Haw. [at] 531, 865 P.2d [at]
165 ... ). HRS § 701–109(1)(e), however, does not apply
where a defendant's actions constitute separate offenses
under the law. See State v. Hoopii, 68 Haw. 246, 251, 710
P.2d 1193, 1197 (1985).
 
Frisbee, 114 Hawai 'i at 80-81, 156 P.3d at 1186-87 (quoting State 
v. Matias, 102 Hawai 'i 300, 305, 75 P.3d 1191, 1196 (2003)). 
If there is a reasonable possibility of merger under
 
HRS § 701-109(1), "the factual question of merger is one for the
 
trier of fact." Id. at 84, 156 P.3d at 1190 (internal quotation
 
marks omitted). The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has held that it is 
plain error not to give a merger instruction where there is a
 reasonable possibility that merger applies. Id. Further, if a
 
party's requested merger instruction is "inaccurately, unfairly,
 or prejudicially worded, . . . the trial court [is] nevertheless
 obligated to ensure that a correct merger instruction [is]
 submitted to the jury for its guidance." State v. Hoey, 77
 
Hawai
'i 17, 38, 881 P.2d 504, 525 (1994). 
Where the trial court fails to properly instruct the
 
jury on merger, this court has held that "HRS § 701–109(1)(e)
 only prohibits conviction for two offenses if the offenses merge;
 it specifically permits prosecution on both offenses." 
State v.
 
Padilla, 114 Hawai 'i 507, 517, 164 P.3d 765, 775 (App. 2007). 
Even if two counts might merge under HRS § 701–109(1)(e),
 
6

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
conviction on one of the two charges does not violate the
 
statute. Id. Thus, this court held that there were alternative
 
remedies, stating:
 
We fail to see any reason why the State should not be
permitted to dismiss one of the two charges and maintain the
judgment of conviction and sentence on the other.
Accordingly, on remand, we afford the State the option of:
1) dismissing either [of the two subject counts] and
retaining the judgment of conviction and sentence on the
non-dismissed count; or 2) retrying [the defendant] on both
[of the subject counts] with an appropriate merger
instruction.
 
Id.
 
1.	 Defendant's Special Instruction No. 7: Merger
of Count I (Kidnapping) and Count II (Robbery
in the First Degree)
 
Carlton contends that the record shows that Count I
 
(Kidnapping) and Count II (Robbery in the First Degree) could
 
have arisen from a continuing course of conduct, therefore, the
 circuit court should have given Defendant's Special Instruction
 No. 7. Defendant's Special Instruction No. 7 stated in pertinent
 part:
 
If and only if you find the Defendant BROK CARLTON, as
a principal and/or accomplice, guilty of Robbery in the
First Degree, as charged in Count Number Two of the
Complaint and guilty of Kidnapping as charged in Count
number One of the Complaint, then you must answer the
following question.
Is the conduct upon which you based your verdict in
Count number Two of the Complaint, the same conduct upon
which you based your verdict for Count number One of the
Complaint?
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme court has indicated that: 
It is possible for kidnapping and robbery charges against a
defendant to merge, pursuant to HRS § 701-109(1)(e), under
circumstances in which (1) there is but one intention, one
general impulse, and one plan, (2) the two offense are part
and parcel of a continuing and uninterrupted course of
conduct, and (3) the law does not provide that specific
periods of conduct constitutes separate offenses.
 
Hoey, 77 Hawai 'i at 38, 881 P.2d at 525(footnote omitted). 
Robbery in the First Degree under HRS § 708-840(1)(a)
 
(Count II) is committed when, "in the course of committing
 
theft . . . [t]he person attempts to kill another or
 intentionally or knowingly 
inflicts or attempts to inflict
 
serious bodily injury upon another[.]" (Emphasis added.) 
7

   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Depending on the record, Robbery in the First Degree under HRS 
§ 708-840(1)(a) may or may not encompass the form of Kidnapping proscribed in HRS § 707-720(1)(d) (Count I), which in pertinent part prohibits intentionally or knowingly restraining a person with intent to inflict bodily injury upon him or her. The "restraint" is the conduct element of a Kidnapping charge. See 
Frisbee, 114 Hawai
'i at 81, 156 P.3d at 1187. 
The State contends that Count I (Kidnapping) and Count
 
II (Robbery in the First Degree) do not merge because it can be
 assumed that the jury found Carlton guilty of each count based on
 different conduct. On appeal, the State contends that Count II
 (Robbery in the First Degree) was based on the group stomping and
 kicking the CW to facilitate the attempted taking of $90,000. As
 to Count I (Kidnapping), the State contends on appeal that the
 restraint occurred when Carlton and his cohorts dragged the CW by
 the feet, and attempted to inflict bodily injury by trying to
 light the CW on fire. The State argues that both separate
 courses of conduct are separate offenses under the law.
7
 
Contrary to the State's contention on appeal, there is
 
no clear delineation between the acts constituting Kidnapping and
 Robbery in the First Degree as separate and independent offenses. 
See Hoopii, 68 Haw. at 251, 710 P.2d at 1197. This is evidenced
 by the fact that the State's theory of the case at trial in terms
 of what conduct constituted Kidnapping and Robbery in the First
 Degree was the inverse of its argument on appeal. During closing
 arguments, the State contended that the "restraint" related to
 
7 The State cites to this court's holding in State v. Correa, 5 Haw. 
App. 644, 706 P.2d 1321 (1985). In Correa, this court held that "a kidnapping
that was not necessarily and incidentally committed during a robbery may becharged as a separate offense in addition to the robbery charge." Id. at 649, 
706 P.2d at 1325. First, we note that the plain language of HRS § 701-109(1)
only prohibits convictions for two offenses if the offenses merge, not theprosecution for both offenses. Padilla, 114 Hawai' i at 517, 164 P.3d at 775.
There is no question in this case that the State could charge Carlton with
both Count I and Count II. Second, Correa was decided before Hoey. In Hoey, the supreme court cited Correa. Hoey, 77 Hawai' i at 38, 881 P.2d at 525.
However, the Hoey court still held that where the record indicates that thecourse of conduct constituting the robbery may or may not encompass the formof kidnapping charged, the issue of merger is a question of fact that shouldbe submitted to the jury. Id. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Kidnapping charge was the CW's inability to stand up due to 
the physical attack and that the resulting bruises were evidence of an intent to inflict bodily injury. The State further contended that Robbery in the First Degree was committed because the attackers poured gasoline on the CW and attempted to light him on fire, therefore, taking a substantial step in a attempt to cause serious bodily injury in the course of committing a theft. The State's vacillating theories demonstrate that the record indicates that the course of conduct constituting the robbery may or may not encompass the form of Kidnapping charged. See Hoey, 
77 Hawai
'i at 38, 881 P.2d at 525. In short, there is a 
reasonable possibility that the jury could have convicted Carlton on Kidnapping and Robbery in the First Degree based on the same conduct and general intent, and that merger cannot be ruled out as a matter of law. 
Based on the record in this case, the jury, as fact 
finder, should have been instructed on the question of whether the charges of Kidnapping and Robbery in the First Degree merged. As the case law indicates, the fact finder must determine whether the evidence disclosed "one general intent or disclose[d] separate and distinct intents[,]" because "[w]here there is one intention, one general impulse, and one plan, there is but one offense." Frisbee, 114 Hawai
'i at 81, 156 P.3d at 1187; Hoey, 77 
Hawai'i at 27 n.9, 881 P.2d at 514 n.9. 
2.	 Defendant's Special Instruction No. 10:
Merger of Count II (Robbery in the First
Degree) and Count III (Assault in the Second
Degree)
 
Carlton contends that the circuit court erred in
 
refusing to give Defendant's Special Instruction No. 10 because
 
there is a factual issue whether the conduct constituting Assault
 in the Second Degree (Count III) and Robbery in the First Degree
 (Count II) was a continuing course of conduct. Defendant's
 Special Instruction No. 10 provided in pertinent part:
 
If and only if you find the Defendant BROK CARLTON
guilty of Assault in the Second Degree, as charged in Count
number Three of the Complaint and guilty of Robbery in the
First Degree, as charged in Count Number Two of the
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Complaint, then you must answer the following question.
Is the conduct upon which you based your verdict in
Count Number Three of the Complaint, the same conduct upon
which you based your verdict for Count Number Two of the
Complaint?
 
Carlton contends that the jury could have found that Carlton
 
attempted to inflict serious bodily injury on the CW by using a
 deadly instrument, the baseball bat. 
Robbery in the First Degree pursuant to HRS § 708­
840(1)(a) (Count II) is committed when, "in the course of
 committing theft or non-consensual taking of a motor
 vehicle . . . [t]he person attempts to kill another or
 intentionally or knowingly inflicts or attempts to inflict
 serious bodily injury upon another[.]" (Emphasis added.)
 Depending on the record, Robbery in the First Degree (Count II)
 under HRS § 708-840(1)(a) may or may not encompass the form of
 Assault in the Second Degree (Count III) proscribed in HRS § 707­711(1)(d). One violates section 707-711(1)(d) by intentionally
 or knowingly causing bodily injury to another with a dangerous
 instrument. The complaint and the jury instructions provided
 that Count III charged Carlton with intentionally or knowingly
 causing bodily injury to the CW with a dangerous instrument, "to
 wit, a baseball bat[.]" 
Based on the record in this case, it is reasonably
 
possible that the jury rendered convictions for Robbery in the
 First Degree (Count II) and Assault in the Second Degree (Count
 III) based on the same conduct. On appeal, the State argues that
 the underlying conduct of Count II and Count III constitute two
 separate actions because Carlton committed the offense of Robbery
 in the First Degree when he, in the course of committing a theft,
 "did inflict serious bodily injury by kicking and stomping on
 [the CW,]" however, the assault was committed through "beating
 him with a metal bat."
8 Yet, the evidence suggests that the CW
 
8
 At trial, the State argued Robbery in the First Degree, in part,
because the attackers poured gasoline on the CW and attempted to light him on
fire, therefore, taking a substantial step in an attempt to cause serious
bodily injury. The State even called an expert witness, Dr. Lindsey Harle,
(continued...)
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was struck with the baseball bat as part of a broader physical 
attack, particularly while laying prone on the ground. The jury could reasonably have viewed the physical attack, including the use of a baseball bat, as an attempt to inflict serious bodily injury. It is not clear based on the record that any acts constituting the alleged robbery were separate and independent offenses from the assault with a dangerous instrument, such that there was not "one intention, one general impulse, and one plan." Hoey, 77 Hawai
'i at 27 n.9, 38, 881 P.2d at 514 n.9, 525. 
Because it is reasonably possible that the jury
 
convicted Carlton of Robbery in the First Degree and Assault in
 the Second Degree based, in part, on the CW being struck
 repeatedly with a baseball bat, the question of merging Count II
 and Count III pursuant to HRS § 701-109(1)(e) should have been
 presented to the trier of fact.
3.	 Defendant's Special Instruction No. 11:
Merger of Count I (Kidnapping) and Count III
(Assault in the Second Degree)
 
Carlton contends that the circuit court erred by
 
refusing Defendant's Special Instruction No. 11 because there is
 
a question of fact whether the assault was part of a single
 intent or general plan that merges into the Kidnapping offense. 
Defendant's Special Instruction No. 11 covered Count I
 (Kidnapping) and Count III (Assault in the Second Degree) and
 provided in pertinent part:
9
 
If and only if you find the Defendant BROK CARLTON
guilty of Assault in the Second Degree, as charged in Count
number Three of the Complaint and guilty of Robbery in the
First Degree, as charged in Count Number One of the
Complaint, then you must answer the following question.
 
8(...continued)
who testified to the severity of the hypothetical injury that could result
from lighting gasoline that had been poured on a person. 
9
 Defendant's Special Instruction No. 11 appears to contain a
typographical error in stating "Robbery in the First Degree, as charged in
Count Number One of the Complaint[.]" Count I was the Kidnapping charge;
Robbery in the First Degree is Count II. Given that Defendant's Special
Instruction No. 10 covered merging Count III (Assault in the Second Degree)
with Count II (Robbery in the First Degree), the only logical reading of
Special Instruction No. 11 is that Carlton meant to propose instructing the
jury regarding merging Count III with the Kidnapping charge, Count I. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Is the conduct upon which you based your verdict in
Count Number Three of the Complaint, the same conduct upon
which you based your verdict for Count Number One of the
Complaint?
 
Carlton was convicted of Assault in the Second Degree
 
in violation of HRS § 707-711(1)(d) (Count III). One violates
 
section 707-711(1)(d) by intentionally or knowingly causing
 bodily injury to another with a dangerous instrument. Count III
 specifically charged Carlton with Assault in the Second Degree
 "as a principal and/or accomplice" for intentionally or knowingly
 causing bodily injury to the CW with a dangerous instrument, "to
 wit, a baseball bat[.]" In certain circumstances, like if the CW
 had only been knocked to the ground by a singular blow from the
 baseball bat, the conduct prohibited by HRS § 707-711(1)(d) is
 not a course of conduct crime because the offense is committed
 without any further action. See Hoopii, 68 Haw. at 251, 710 P.2d
 
at 1197.
 
In this vein, the State contends that Count I and Count 
III cannot merge because the use of the baseball bat occurred before any act constituting a Kidnapping occurred. However, Count I of the Complaint alleged that Carlton, "as a principal and/or accomplice," intentionally or knowingly restrained the CW with intent to inflict bodily injury, in violation of HRS § 707­720(1)(d). The "restraint" is the conduct element of a Kidnapping charge. See Frisbee, 114 Hawai
'i at 81, 156 P.3d at 
1187. The State's theory of the case at trial was that the restraint constituting the basis of the Kidnapping charge was the CW's inability to stand up due to the physical attack and that the resulting bruises were evidence of an intent to inflict bodily injury. The evidence suggests that the CW, besides being knocked to the ground by a blow delivered with a baseball bat, was repeatedly struck with the baseball bat while on the ground. Therefore, it is not clear that the acts constituting the Kidnapping were separate and independent offenses from the assault with a dangerous instrument. See Hoopii, 68 Haw. at 251, 
710 P.2d at 1197. 
12
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 It is reasonably possible that the jury convicted
 
Carlton of Kidnapping and Assault in the Second Degree based, in
 
part, on the CW being struck with a baseball bat while laying on
 the ground, and that there was one general intent. Based on this
 record, the question of merging Count I and Count III pursuant to
 HRS § 701-109(1)(e) should have been presented to the trier of
 fact. 
4. Result
 
The jury instructions as a whole did not include any 
instructions regarding potential merger of any of the counts. Instead, the circuit court gave Instruction No. 16 which encouraged the jury to consider separately "[e]ach count and the evidence that applies to that count . . . ." Therefore, the jury instructions as a whole appear to contravene HRS § 701-109(1)(e), which "reflects a policy to limit the possibility of multiple convictions and extended sentences when the defendant has basically engaged in only one course of criminal conduct directed at one criminal goal." Matias, 102 Hawai
'i at 305, 75 P.3d at 
1196 (citation and brackets omitted).10 
"[G]iven the reasonable possibility that the jury's 
verdict led to [multiple] convictions for 'the same conduct,' . . . the circuit court's failure to charge the jury with respect to merger contravened HRS § 701-109(1)(e) and was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." Frisbee, 114 Hawai
'i at 
84, 156 P.3d at 1190. Therefore, the Judgment must be vacated in part. Upon remand on Count I, Count II, and Count III, the State has the following options: (1) it may retry the case with an appropriate merger instruction, or (2) dismiss two of the three potentially merging counts (Counts I, II and III) and reinstate the conviction and sentence on the one non-dismissed count. Padilla, 114 Hawai
'i at 518, 164 P.3d at 776. 
10 Carlton's proposed jury instructions on merger were not given. We
 
do not address the propriety of those proposed instructions. 
13
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B.	 Motion for Judgment of Acquittal on Count II (Robbery
in the First Degree)
 
Carlton contends that the circuit court erred in
 
denying his motion for judgment of acquittal on Count II (Robbery
 
in the First Degree).11 Carlton contends that there is no
 
evidence that he had the intent to deprive the CW of the BMW,
 therefore he did not commit the required underlying theft. The
 State counters that evidence showing an intent to deprive the CW
 of the BMW is irrelevant because the subject of the robbery
 charge was Carlton's attempted taking of $90,000.
 
The standard to be applied by the trial court in
ruling upon a motion for a judgment of acquittal is whether,
upon the evidence viewed in the light most favorable to the
prosecution and in full recognition of the province of the
trier of fact, a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt. An appellate court employs the
same standard of review.
 
State v. Hicks, 113 Hawai 'i 60, 69, 148 P.3d 493, 502 (2006) 
(quoting State v. Maldonado, 108 Hawai 'i 436, 442, 121 P.3d 901, 
907 (2005))(block format omitted). 
We reject Carlton's effort to focus exclusively on the
 
taking of the BMW. Carlton was charged with violating HRS § 708­
840(1)(a), which provides that "[a] person commits the offense of
 robbery in the first degree if, in the course of committing theft
 or non-consensual taking of a motor vehicle . . . [t]he person
 attempts to kill another or intentionally or knowingly inflicts
 or attempts to inflict serious bodily injury upon another[.]"
 (Emphasis added.) However, the specific charge against Carlton
 states in pertinent part that he was "a principal and/or
 accomplice, in the course of committing theft[.]" Count II does
 not contain any language referencing the "non-consensual taking
 of a motor vehicle[.]" This is perhaps because, as the State
 contends, the non-consensual taking of the BMW was the subject of
 Count IV, UCPV. 
11 Carlton does not challenge the circuit court's denial of his motion
for judgment of acquittal as to the other three charged counts. 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 708-842 (2014) provides that "[a]n act shall be
 
deemed 'in the course of committing a theft . . . ' if it occurs
 
in an attempt to commit theft . . . , in the commission of
 theft . . . , or in the flight after the attempt or commission."
 Theft requires an "intent to deprive the other of" property. HRS
 § 708-830 (2014). "Deprive" means, in pertinent part, "[t]o
 withhold property or cause it to be withheld from a person
 permanently . . . ." HRS § 708-800 (2014). Therefore, Carlton
 need only have been a principal or accomplice in an attempt to
 permanently withhold property from the CW with the intent to do
 so.
 
In this case, Carlton presented evidence after the
 
circuit court denied his first motion for judgment of acquittal
 at the close of the State's case-in-chief. This court has
 previously noted that
 
[i]t is well established that when a defendant presents
evidence after the denial of his or her motion for judgment
of acquittal at the close of the government's case-in-chief,
the defendant thereby waives any error in the trial court's
denial of [that] motion. . . . When the defendant presents
evidence, the court on appeal determines the sufficiency of
the evidence based on all the evidence presented.
 
State v. Souza, 119 Hawai 'i 60, 73, 193 P.3d 1260, 1273 (App. 
2008) (citations omitted). Upon viewing the evidence in the 
light most favorable to the prosecution, a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a reasonable doubt on Count II. See 
Hicks, 113 Hawai
'i at 69, 148 P.3d at 502. 
During cross-examination, Carlton agreed that he "had
 
never been so upset" as he was after discovering $90,000 was
 missing from his safe, and that he suspected the CW and his
 girlfriend took the money. The CW testified that, as Carlton and
 Thomas-Francis were departing after the attack, they grabbed the
 CW's phone and keys, and ran off down the stairs. The CW also
 testified that Thomas-Francis threatened that if the CW did not
 get the money, "this is what's going to keep happening . . . ." 
An eye witness testified that while Carlton and Thomas-Francis
 were heading toward the BMW, one of them said "Watch out for [the
 CW]. He's a thief." "It is well settled in this jurisdiction
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that guilt may be proved beyond a reasonable doubt on the basis
 
of reasonable inferences drawn from circumstantial evidence." 
State v. Simpson, 64 Haw. 363, 373 n.7, 641 P.2d 320, 327 n.7
 (1982). This evidence, and the record, when viewed in a light
 most favorable to the prosecution, is sufficient to enable a
 reasonable mind to conclude that Carlton, as a principal or
 accomplice, did attempt to kill or intentionally or knowingly
 inflict or attempt to inflict serious bodily injury upon the CW
 in the course of committing a theft, i.e., an attempt to commit
 theft. 
III. Conclusion
 
The Judgment Conviction and Sentence, filed on June 6,
 
2014, in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit is affirmed as
 
to Count IV (UCPV), but vacated as to Count I (Kidnapping), Count
 II (Robbery in the First Degree), and Count III (Assault in the
 Second Degree). Upon remand, the State may either: (1) retry
 Count I, Count II, and Count III with appropriate merger
 instructions, or (2) dismiss two of the three counts and
 reinstate the conviction and sentence on the one non-dismissed
 count.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 27, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Benjamin E. Lowenthal,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Richard K. Minatoya,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
16
 