   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000367 28-FEB-2024 07:40 AM Dkt. 50 SO 
NO. CAAP-23-0000367 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI#I 
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
MARK ANTHONY SEINA, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CRIMINAL NO. 1CPC-21-0000330) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Mark Anthony Seina (Seina) appeals 
from the May 4, 2023 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence; Notice 
of Entry (Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit (Circuit Court).1 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai‘ i (State) charged 
Seina with two counts: (1) Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver, in 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 134-25 (2011); and 
(2) Ownership or Possession Prohibited of any Firearm or 
Ammunition by a Person Convicted of Certain Crimes, in violation of HRS §§ 134-7(b) and (h) (2011). After a jury-waived trial, Seina was found guilty on both counts. On the issue of merger, 
1 The Honorable Shirley M. Kawamura presided.   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the State elected to proceed on Count 2. Seina was sentenced to 
a ten-year term of imprisonment, to run concurrently with any other sentence, and with credit for time served. 
Seina raises a single point of error on appeal, 
contending that the Circuit Court erred in denying his June 6, 2022 Motion to Suppress Evidence and Statements (Motion to 
Suppress), and his renewed oral motion at trial. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we address Seina's point of error as follows: 
Seina argues that Honolulu Police Department (HPD) 
officers lacked probable cause to arrest him for Unauthorized Control of Propelled Vehicle (UCPV), in violation of HRS § 708-
836 (2014), because Seina was the registered owner of the subject 
motorcycle.
2 
The Hawai‘i Supreme Court has held: 
Probable cause exists when the facts and circumstances 
within one's knowledge and of which one has reasonably
trustworthy information are sufficient in themselves towarrant a person of reasonable caution to believe that an
offense has been committed. This requires more than a mere
suspicion but less than a certainty . This standard has two 
components. The first sentence describes the standard for 
2 HRS § 708-836 provides in pertinent part: 
§ 708-836 Unauthorized control of propelled vehicle.
(1) A person commits the offense of unauthorized control of
a propelled vehicle if the person intentionally or knowinglyexerts unauthorized control over another's propelled vehicleby operating propelled vehicle without the owner's consentor by changing the identity of the propelled vehicle withoutthe owner's consent. 
. . . . 
(5)
 Unauthorized control of a propelled vehicle is a
class C felony. 
2  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
determining the presence of probable cause. The second 
sentence describes the quantum of proof necessary to satisfy
the standard.
 State v. Maganis, 109 Hawai‘ i 84, 86, 123 P.3d 679, 681 (2005) 
(internal citations omitted); see also HRS § 803-5 (1993).3 
Probable cause "requires more than a mere suspicion but 
less than a certainty." Maganis, 109 Hawai# i at 86, 123 P.3d at 
681 (citations omitted). 
It is a practical concept that balances 
a citizen's rights with the needs of law enforcement. Id. at 87
-
88, 123 P.3d at 682-83. The standard for probable cause allows 
for officers to make some mistakes in determining they have probable cause to arrest a citizen, but "the mistakes must be those of reasonable [persons], acting on facts leading sensibly to their conclusions of probability." Id. 
Here, after noticing the motorcycle driven by Seina had 
an expired safety check decal, HPD Corporal Gerald Agbulos (Corporal Agbulos) ran the license plate and learned that it was 
reported as a stolen vehicle. After placing Seina in 
investigative detention, Corporal Agbulos then checked the VIN number of the motorcycle and confirmed that it matched the stolen motorcycle. Corporal Agbulos read the written police report on 
3 HRS § 803-5 provides: 
§ 803-5 By police officer without warrant. (a) A officer
or other officer of justice, may, without warrant, arrest and
detain for examination any person when the officer has probablecause to believe that such person has committed any offense,whether in the officer's presence or otherwise.
(b) For purposes of this section, a police officer has
probable cause to make an arrest when the facts and circumstanceswithin the officer's knowledge and of which the officer hasreasonably trustworthy information are sufficient in themselves towarrant a person of reasonable caution in the belief that a crimehas been or is being committed. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
his laptop, wherein another HPD officer reported that complainant 
Jonathan Cortez (Cortez) reported the theft of a motorcycle from 
the parking structure where Cortez lived, shortly after Cortez 
purchased it. HPD Officer Aubry Kaluhiokalani (Officer 
Kaluhiokalani), who made the police report, testified that he took Cortez's report. Cortez told the officer that he just 
bought the motorcycle from Seina, Seina had driven the motorcycle to the parking structure, and the motorcycle was stolen later the same day. Officer Kaluhiokalani also spoke to a security guard who told him that after Cortez reported the theft to security, the guard reviewed the surveillance video, saw a car drive into the structure, and saw a man get out of the car, approach the motorcycle and take off with it. A female in the car drove off behind the motorcycle. 
When asked by the court why he arrested Seina knowing 
that Seina was the registered owner of the motorcycle, Corporal Agbulos testified that he understood from the report that Seina sold or transferred the motorcycle to another person and then took it back without that person's permission. Based on this information, Seina was placed under arrest and patted down. 
Seina contends that the stolen vehicle report filed by 
Cortez did not provide probable cause for Seina's arrest for UCPV because the police should not have accepted Cortez's representations and handwritten bill of sale as proof of ownership because the requirements for legal transfer of title had not been met. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We conclude that the police report available to 
Corporal Agbulos on his HPD laptop – stating that a motorcycle 
was stolen of the same description as the vehicle driven by Seina including color, license plate number, and VIN – was reasonably trustworthy information sufficient to warrant a person of reasonable caution to believe that an offense involving that motorcycle had been committed. In addition, the police report noted that Seina had been identified as a suspect. The facts and circumstances within Corporal Agbulos's personal knowledge included that Seina was operating that motorcycle. Viewing as a whole all of the facts and circumstances available to Corporal Agbulos, we conclude that probable cause to arrest Seina for UCPV existed. 
As we have concluded that there was probable cause to 
arrest Seina, we conclude that Seina's argument that his post-arrest statements were fruit of the poisonous tree is without merit. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's May 4, 2023 
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 28, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Acting Chief Judge
Randall K. Hironaka,(Miyoshi & Hironaka, LLLC), /s/ Keith K. Hiraokafor Defendant-Appellant. Associate Judge 
Robert T. Nakatsuji, /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, Associate JudgeCity and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
5 