NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-19-0000350 17-MAY-2024 08:05 AM Dkt. 117 MO 
NO. CAAP-19-0000350 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI #I 
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
PATRICK DONOHUE RUDERSDORF, also known as PATRICK
DONOHUERUDERSDORF SWANK, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
LAHAINA DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 2DCW-18-0000900) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
On April 13, 2018, Patrick D. Rudersdorf  was charged by 
complaint with two counts of Assault in the Third Degree in 
violation of 
Hawai#i Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 707-712(1)(a) for 
assaulting two girls, K.W. and J.F., and one count of Harassment 
in violation of HRS § 711-1106(1)(a), of a third female namedKu#ulei. He pleaded not guilty. He was found guilty as charged 
after a jury-waived trial. 
He appeals from the " Judgment  and 
Notice of Entry of Judgment" entered by the District Court of the Second Circuit, Lahaina Division, on March 29, 2019.
1 We vacate 
and remand for a new trial. 
(1) Rudersdorf argues the complaint was defective 
because it was signed by a deputy prosecuting attorney instead of 
1 The Honorable Kirstin M. Hamman presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a complainant, and was not supported by a declaration or 
affidavit, as required by HRS § 805-1. State v. Thompson , 150 
Hawai#i 262, 269, 500 P.3d 447, 454 (2021). HRS § 805-1 did not 
apply because the complaint did not request a penal summons or an arrest warrant — Rudersdorf was arrested at the scene. State v. 
Mortensen-Young , 152 Hawai #i 385, 387, 526 P.3d 362, 364 (2023). 
The complaint was not defective.
(2) Rudersdorf argues the trial court erred by 
admitting into evidence footage from Maui Police Department ( MPD) 
officer Royce Takayama 's body-worn camera. The evidence was 
offered by the State to rebut Rudersdorf's trial testimony. Rudersdorf argued the footage contained statements by him that were inadmissible because they were made while he was in custody and interrogated without being given a Miranda  warning. We 
review de novo under the right/wrong standard. State v. Kazanas , 
138 Hawai# i 23, 33, 375 P.3d 1261, 1271 (2016). 
Trial began on July 16, 2018. K.W., J.F., and Ku #ulei 
testified they were at Kā#anapali beach on March 26, 2018. K.W. 
found a bodyboard in the bushes. No one was around and nothing else was by it, so K.W. grabbed it and took it into the water for 15-20 minutes. She was sitting on the board on the beach with J.F. and Ku #ulei. Rudersdorf came up, yelling "that's my board." 
He pushed K.W. off the board. While K.W. was on the ground, Rudersdorf picked up the board and hit her in the face with it. He walked away. He came back asking where his leash was. He spit on Ku #ulei and called her a "fat bitch." He tried to grab 
J.F.'s phone out of her hand. J.F. put the phone behind her. Rudersdorf slapped J.F. in the face three times. 
Officer Takayama testified he responded to a call about 
a male harassing three females. 
While responding he was told 
that the male was hitting the females. The male was described as wearing an orange shirt and blue hat. He saw a male matching that description walking toward him with hotel security. He identified Rudersdorf as the male. As Officer Takayama was giving Rudersdorf the Miranda  warning, Rudersdorf said he wanted 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to remain silent. Officer Takayama didn't complete the Miranda 
warnings because Rudersdorf interrupted, asking several times if he could leave. Officer Takayama "told him he wasn't free to leave because we're still investigating the case." Rudersdorf asked if the girls wanted to prosecute. Officer Takayama "told him that Officer Cleghorn was speaking to them right now." Rudersdorf "turned and took off running." Officer Takayama chased Rudersdorf for about 250 yards, handcuffed him, and placed him in the patrol car. 
MPD officer William Cleghorn  testified he was called to 
the Kā#anapali Beach Hotel with Officer Takayama. He interviewed 
three girls. He walked to where Officer Takayama was standing with Rudersdorf. He took Rudersdorf's information. He went back to the girls. As he was talking to them he heard over his radio that Rudersdorf ran away from Officer Takayama, so he gave chase. 
Rudersdorf testified that he was vacationing on Maui 
with his family. They rented two cabanas from the hotel. His wife rented a boogie board. They were going to get lunch. He noticed three local girls inside the roped-off area who had been smoking what he thought was marijuana. There was no one else in the cabanas. He put the board under everything in the cabana, folded the top down, and left. They were gone for about an hour. The girls were gone when he returned. The board was also gone. He walked around to find it. He saw the girls under a tree with the board next to them. He asked for the board back. K.W. said, "fuck you haole, this is our board now. If you want it, come and get it." He retrieved the board after a "brief struggle." He denied shoving K.W. off the board and hitting her with it. He walked about 10 yards away, then noticed the leash was missing. He went back to ask if the girls had it. The girls became very aggressive and threatened him. He went to security, pointed out the girls, and said they'd stolen his property. K.W. tackled him. He was punched and kicked. He was in the water. The "waves were crashing in on -- or the waves were coming up." The girls were scratching his back, kicking him. He started 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
backpedaling and thought he was tackled a second time. The girls 
told him they were "going to come get you and your family." K.W. said she had a machete in her backpack and was going to "get" his kids. He went back to his family and said, "let's get outta here." 
Rudersdorf testified that when he was with Officer 
Takayama, he looked down the boardwalk and saw his family go right next to the three girls. He said he was scared because the girls had threatened his family and he didn't want his family to get hurt. Officer Takayama didn't respond. Rudersdorf asked Officer Takayama if he was under arrest, and was told he was not. Rudersdorf testified that he "took off sprinting" to his wife and kids because he "was scared for 'em." He saw the girls on their phones while they were being interviewed by the police, and was afraid they were calling their friends or gang members "to come get us." 
Rudersdorf testified on cross-examination: 
I remember . . . Officer Cleghorn coming up and, ah, Officer
Takayama saying something about him not wanting to make astatement and me saying that's not true. 
And I tried to tell him what had happened and they
would not listen to it. They said you -- you can't make astatement. 
Q. Okay. And if I have both of their body cams
and the videos of everything that transpired from theirfirst intersection [sic] to when you ran, you're saying thatthose statements are going to be on these videos? 
A. Yeah, I believe so. 
Q. Okay. Um, also you said that you reported to
them that these girls had threatened your family? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And you did that while you were on the beach? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Okay. 
A. Very clearly too. 
The defense rested. The deputy prosecuting attorney 
(DPA) stated: 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Your Honor, the State does have two rebuttal
witnesses. I'm going to need to call the officers, lay the
foundation, and get both of these videos in to show that,um, the defendant lied while he was on the stand. 
Rudersdorf did not initially make a Miranda objection; 
he argued the videos could and should have been presented during 
the State's case-in-chief. 
The DPA argued: 
Your Honor, since we don't have a jury here, I'm
asking you only to view the interactions of the defendant
with both of the police officers so that you can see what hedid and did not say to the police officers. 
And I am offering that what you will see directly
contradicts his testimony on the stand today about, um,telling the police officers on the beach that they -- thatthe girls had threatened his family and saying that he
wanted to make a statement. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Then it should be limited to that 
and not Officer Takayama's interview of a witness. Okay.
That had nothing to do with his encounter with advising himof his Miranda warnings. And that's the problem. 
THE COURT: So what does Takayama's body cam have to
do with, um, the defendant's statement and contradictingthose statements? 
[DPA]: Because Officer Takayama, um, from the moment
that he interacted with the defendant on the beach,
everything is on the body cam. 
Not once did the defendant tell him that, um, the
girls had threatened his family. Not once did he say that
he wanted to make a statement. And that you seeing thatbody cam, the entire interaction between the officer and thedefendant, will show you that he was lying on the stand.That he never said those things. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Well, wait, does your body camera
only include the interaction with Officer Takayama and myclient. Or does it view -- include other aspects ofTakayama's investigation? 
[DPA]: 
Your Honor, I just said I'm offering, since we
don't have a jury --
THE COURT: Right. 
[DPA]: -- I'm offering simply for you to view it for
that purpose --
THE COURT: All right. Well, I'll allow it --[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Wait, wait, Judge --THE COURT: -- with those limitations over objection. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defense counsel argued that witness statements should 
be redacted. The DPA agreed to continue the trial to redact the 
footage. Defense counsel objected to a continuance because Rudersdorf lived in Colorado. The court stated: 
-- so I'm going to allow the evidence. I will -- if 
you want it redacted, then we can continue this, and the
State will redact it or, um, I'll allow the evidence for thelimited purpose of impeachment of the testimony and notconsider anything else that's not relevant to that on thevideo.[
2] 
Rudersdorf ultimately agreed to a continuance so the 
State could redact the body-worn camera footage. He did not 
request that his own statements be redacted. 
On August 27, 2018, Rudersdorf moved "To Strike 
Prosecution Rebuttal Case" because what he "did and did not say to the police officers" was "inadmissible absent a valid advisement and waiver of his" Miranda  rights. 
The motion to strike was heard on August 30, 2018. The 
State argued that Rudersdorf wasn't in custody — "I liken the interaction between the police and the defendant more to a traffic stop, where a person is temporarily detained, the police officer is trying to determine if -- if anything has gone on." The State also argued "that a lack of Mirandizing him in this situation does not protect the spontaneous -- spontaneous utterances that he made, it doesn't protect the visual observations that you will be able to see as to what happened that day on the video, and it also doesn't protect his lack of speaking, which is one of the reasons I'm introducing the video, is to show that he did not say the things that he represented on the stand, at least in part." 
The trial court ruled: 
Well, having reviewed it, and I looked back at the
testimony, you know, I guess the thing that the Court isconcerned with -- well, number one, I don't know that these 
2 This would have been permissible because in a bench trial "a judge
is presumed not to be influenced by incompetent evidence." State v. Vliet , 91
Hawai#i 288, 298, 983 P.2d 189, 199 (1999) (cleaned up). 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statements were made under interrogation and -- the officers
were investigating, and I think the case law is clear that aseizure does not always mean that the person is in custody. 
But nevertheless, these -- the defendant testified
that he told the officers that he wanted to make a statement, and then the other statement at issue was that hehad reported to the officers that his family was threatenedand that he very clearly told that to the officers. This was his testimony. He testified to this. In fact -- and,[defense counsel], I think you questioned the officer aboutwhether or not the defendant had told the officer that his 
family had been threatened by some people. 
So I don't -- and there were no objections when the
defendant was under cross-examination by the prosecution
about the statements being improper because there was noMiranda warnings. 
So I'm going to allow the rebuttal testimony. I'm 
going to deny the motion. 
. . . . 
THE COURT: All right. And -- and just to be clear,
my understanding is what's at issue was that the defendant
testified that he indicated to the officers that he wanted 
to make a statement at the beach, he also reported to themthat his family was threatened, that those are thestatements that were -- that are at issue. That's what he testified to, but the allegation is those are not -- that'snot contained within the body cam video. 
The State clarified: 
Your Honor, I would like to explain a little bit more
about -- I think what I said before and -- about part ofwhat I believe he misrepresented on the stand, it wasn'tjust that he said, my family was threatened, but duringdirect and cross, he said that's the reason that he ran off,is because his family had been threatened, he was concernedabout their safety, and that's the reason he ran from thepolice when they had told him three, four times that hewasn't allowed to leave. 
When you see that video in its entirety, you'll see
that during the first interaction with the police, he didsay, they're down there somewhere; they -- they threatenedmy family. He did say that. And then he continues to interact with the police, where they're having many otherconversations. He's asking about, are they going to presscharges? There's a lot of other interaction before he says,are they pressing charges, and then he sprints off away fromthe police. 
I think the value of seeing that -- him saying on the
stand, I ran away because I was scared for my family, youwill see that that is not true when you watch this video,
that there were many minutes and lots of interaction that
went on between his initial ["]they threatened my family,they're down there somewhere, I'm going to be upset if theyget close to my family,["] and then all the interaction that 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
led toward eventually him sprinting away from the police and
them having to chase him across the property. 
So I think all of that is valuable for you to see that
he misrepresented on the stand. 
The trial court denied Rudersdorf's motion. 
On March 21, 2019, Rudersdorf moved in limine to strike 
the State's rebuttal case. The motion was again based on Rudersdorf not being given a Miranda warning. The motion in limine was heard on March 22, 2019, the continued trial date. The DPA argued: 
And I'm offering this DVD also for -- to look at --
make visual observations as to what occurred. That is not 
protected by Miranda. There was -- you know, Miranda wasdesigned to keep out a statement by the defense I'm offeringthe DVD so that you can see what happened. 
. . . . 
Well, you seeing what happened is what will impeach
the defendant's testimony when he was on the stand. He got
on the stand and he said that he was running because he wasscared for his family's safety and running towards hisfamily, as far as he knew was further down the beach. He ran mauka side, not along the beach towards his family,around the mauka side through the hotel grounds and towardthe parking lot. 
So you making a visual observation of him running
opposite the beach toward the parking garage across theentire hotel grounds is going to be a visual observation youcan make that's directly in contradiction to what hetestified to on the stand and told you that he was -- when
he got on the stand and told you that he was running -- he
ran because he was scared for his family's safety and theywere down at the beach. 
The court denied the motion in limine, stating: 
I don't believe , although he was not free to leave,
that there was custodial interrogation , and the Court is
going to allow the rebuttal and deny the motion. So we can proceed. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The State recalled Officer Takayama to authenticate the 
redacted video footage, then offered the footage into evidence as 
State's Exhibit 1. The court admitted Exhibit 1 into evidence over Rudersdorf's objection. It was played in open court. The 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
audio included this exchange between Officer Takayama and 
Rudersdorf: 
[Officer Takayama]: So standard procedure before we
ask anybody questions, we advise them of their rights, yeah,
so just so you know what your rights are. So you have theright to remain silent. Anything you say can be heldagainst you (inaudible). You have the right to talk to alawyer for advice before asking you any questions. 
[Rudersdorf]: Okay. Am I under arrest? 
[Officer Takayama]: No, but it's standard --[Rudersdorf]: I just want to leave. [Officer Takayama]: Yeah (inaudible) because we're
investigating your theft and assault on another girl over
there, so I can't just let you leave. 
[Rudersdorf]: Okay. 
[Officer Takayama]: So are you going to let me finish
or -- yeah, so I got to advise you of your rights first.
You have the right to remain silent. Anything you say canbe used against you in court -- let's go over here so we'renot in the walkway. That's fine. But you're still not freeto go so if you don't --
[Rudersdorf]: (Inaudible). 
[Officer Takayama]: That's fine, but you're still not
free to go. So if you don't want to give us a statement, we
have to (inaudible) what they're saying and it's not --
[Rudersdorf]: Okay. I rented --
[Officer Takayama]: You can't talk to me because you
wanted to stay silent, yeah. So we're going to stand by for
them to get their statement and then we'll go from there. I told you I have to advise you of your rights. 
[Rudersdorf]: (Inaudible) my mom and son going down
there. If they touch them, I'm going to be very upset.(Inaudible) down here. 
[Officer Takayama]: Like I said, I can't ask you any
questions if you want to remain silent (inaudible). 
[Rudersdorf]: Okay. But I [sic] what I want to do --
I'm here on vacation (inaudible). 
[Officer Takayama]: When we're done with our 
investigation, you have -- until we're done with ourinvestigation, you have to stay here. (Inaudible).
[Officer Cleghorn arrives. Officer Takayama speaks to
Officer Cleghorn:]  I've advised him of his rights. He 
doesn't want to talk. 
[Rudersdorf]: No, I -- I didn't say that. I said 
(inaudible). 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Officer Takayama]: He wants to remain silent. 
[Rudersdorf]: I just want to leave. I just want to
leave. 
[Officer Takayama]: That's not how it works. You 
can't just leave. 
The video shows Officer Cleghorn obtaining Rudersdorf's 
information. Rudersdorf says he doesn't have identification on 
him. He tells Officer Cleghorn his last name is "Swank" (Swank is his wife's surname). Officer Cleghorn leaves after obtaining Rudersdorf's information. Rudersdorf then asks Officer Takayama: 
[Rudersdorf]: (Inaudible). What are they saying? 
[Officer Takayama]: Uh, you walked up, pushed a girl
off the board (inaudible). You walked up, pushed her over,
hit her with it. 
[Rudersdorf]: 
(Inaudible) Do you have any witnesses? 
[Officer Takayama]: Yeah, they -- somebody -- you
left, came back, spit in one girl's face. Then you kind ofleft again, came back, tried taking the phone out of anothergirl's hand and then you slapped her in the face. 
[Rudersdorf]: They still have my leash. You have to 
understand, I'm over here with my family. They come in --we leave for a little bit. They steal my board, take my
leash, you know what I'm saying. 
[Officer Takayama]: 
So you automatically assumed that
it was three of them who did it? 
[Rudersdorf]: I saw them. They were sitting right
next to us. 
[Officer Takayama]: So because they were sitting next
to you, you're going to walk up and do that to the other
two? 
[Rudersdorf]: 
(Inaudible). 
[Officer Takayama]: Huh? 
[Rudersdorf]: I did assume that, yes. 
[Officer Takayama]: Just because they're sitting
together, yeah, that's where you screwed up. I mean, going
back and grabbing your board, that's one thing, but goingback, spitting in another girl's face and then trying totake the other girl's phone is where you went wrong. 
[Rudersdorf]: 
Well, that's not assault. 
[Officer Takayama]: Slapping somebody in the face --
that's not assault? You're not leaving. Yeah, exactly. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Rudersdorf]: Are they going to press charges? 
[Officer Takayama]: He's finding out. [Rudersdorf]: Because if they are, I'm going to press
charges. 
[Officer Takayama]: For stealing, petty misdemeanor,
a surfboard that you had no proof they stole it? 
[Rudersdorf]: They had it, though. [Officer Takayama]: They had it but if I walk on the
beach, there's a lot of stuff on the beach. [At this point,
Rudersdorf flees.]  Hey, get over here. Get over here. Get 
over here. I'm going to Tase you. Get over here. Hey,
stop him. Stop him. Get over here. Get over here. Put your hands behind your back. Now you made it worse. 
[Rudersdorf]: What did I do? (Inaudible) guys
fucking stole our stuff. 
[Officer Takayama]: Why would you run? 
[Rudersdorf]: Because I'm scared. You guys are
telling me you're going to charge me with assault. 
[Officer Takayama]: I told you we had to find out if
you --
[Rudersdorf]: No, you're being mean and you said I'm
charging you with assault. This is so ridiculous. 
[Officer Takayama]: So you're going to run? 
State's Exhibit 1 shows Rudersdorf running mauka, away 
from the beach where he indicated his family was. 
A person in police custody may not be interrogated 
without first being given Miranda  warnings. State v. Green, 51 
Haw. 260, 263, 457 P.2d 505, 507 (1969) (citing Miranda v. 
Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966)). 
The suspect must be told they 
have a right to remain silent, that anything said could be used against them, that they have a right to the presence of an attorney, and that if they cannot afford an attorney one would be appointed for them. Kazanas, 138 
Hawai#i at 34, 375 P.3d at 
1272. Those warnings inform the suspect that the police are not acting solely in the suspect's interest. 
Id. at 40, 375 P.3d at 
1278. 
Police officers do not have to give 
Miranda warnings 
"simply because . . . the questioned person is one whom the 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
police suspect" of having committed a crime. State v. Patterson , 
59 Haw. 357, 360, 581 P.2d 752, 754 (1978). A suspect must be 
advised of their Miranda  rights once police have probable cause 
to arrest. State v. Hewitt, 153 Hawai #i 33, 36, 526 P.3d 558, 
561 (2023). 
That is a bright line. Id. But even if police 
don't have probable cause to arrest, whether a suspect is "in custody or otherwise deprived of their freedom of action for Miranda purposes is to be determined from the totality of the 
circumstances, objectively appraised." Id. at 36-37, 526 P.3d at 
561-62 (brackets omitted). Relevant circumstances include "the place and time of interrogation, the length of the interrogation, the nature of the questions asked, the conduct of the police, and all other relevant circumstances." 
Id. at 37, 526 P.3d at 562. 
"[W]hether the investigation has focused on the 
suspect" is also a relevant consideration in determining whether a person is in custody for Miranda  purposes. State v. Loo
, 94 
Hawai#i 207, 210, 10 P.3d 728, 731 (2000). Under the 
circumstances of this case, we conclude that Rudersdorf was in police custody when he spoke with Officer Takayama. He was wearing an orange shirt and blue hat, matching a witness description, carrying a bodyboard, and was walking toward Officer Takayama with hotel security.
3 Officer Takayama had focused on 
Rudersdorf as the suspect in his investigation of the alleged harassment and had begun the Miranda  warnings, but was 
interrupted by Rudersdorf and did not advise Rudersdorf that an attorney would be appointed for him if he could not afford one. A suspect who is not told that an attorney would be appointed for them if they could not afford one has not received an adequate Miranda warning. State v. Valera, 74 Haw. 424, 428 & n.1, 848 
P.2d 376, 378 & n.1 (1993). 
Whether interrogation has taken place is not measured 
by the totality of the circumstances; interrogation happens when 
3 The record does not reflect whether hotel security was
accompanying Rudersdorf because he reported the theft of his boogie board to
them, or because K.W., J.F., and Ku #ulei reported to hotel security that
Rudersdorf had assaulted and harassed them. 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
police know or should know that their words or actions are 
reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the suspect. Kazanas, 138 Hawai #i at 35, 375 P.3d at 1273. 
"Incriminating response" means "any response — whether inculpatory or exculpatory — that the prosecution may seek to introduce at trial." State v. Skapinok , 151 Hawai #i 170, 180, 
510 P.3d 599, 609 (2022) (citation and underscoring omitted). Officer Takayama should have know that his conversation with Rudersdorf was reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response — and it did. 
See Kazanas, 138 Hawai #i at 40, 375 P.3d 
at 1278 (noting that although police officer intended to calm Kazanas down by making "small talk," "it was 'reasonably likely' that Kazanas would answer the question about how his Halloween went with an incriminating statement about the events leading to Kazanas's arrest.") We conclude that Officer Takayama's dialog with Rudersdorf was "interrogation." Although State's Exhibit 1 had been redacted, it contained incriminating statements made by Rudersdorf after he was subject to custodial interrogation before being given a complete Miranda warning. 
The trial court erred by 
admitting the statements into evidence. 
The State argues that its Exhibit 1 was admissible as 
rebuttal evidence because Rudersdorf falsely testified about un-Mirandized statements he said he made to Officer Takayama. 
But 
statements made by an un-Mirandized defendant during custodial interrogation "may not be used either as direct evidence or to impeach the defendant's credibility." Kazanas, 138 
Hawai#i at 
34, 375 P.3d at 1272 (citation omitted). 
The trial court erred by admitting incriminating 
statements Rudersdorf made during custodial interrogation before he was given a complete 
Miranda warning. That is not to say that 
State's Exhibit 1 was entirely inadmissible. Officer Cleghorn's routine booking questions were not reasonably likely to elicit incriminating responses under the circumstances of this case. Rudersdorf's untruthful response about his last name was not 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
inadmissible for failure to complete the Miranda warnings.  The 
footage showing the direction in which Rudersdorf's family left 
the area of his seizure, and of Rudersdorf running away from Officer Takayama in a different direction, is not "testimonial" and is not barred by the incomplete Miranda warnings.  Cf. State 
v. Manion, 151 
54
Hawai#i 267, 273-74, 511 P.3d 766, 772-73 (2022) 
(holding that evidence of defendant's performance on standardized field sobriety test is not testimonial and was admissible despite failure to give Miranda warning before administering test). 
We vacate the March 29, 2019 "Judgment and Notice of 
Entry of Judgment" and remand for a new trial. 
We need not 
address Rudersdorf's other points of error. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai #i, May 17, 2024. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Hayden Aluli, Acting Chief Judge
for Defendant-Appellant. 
              /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Richard B. Rost, Associate Judge
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui, /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
4 We express no opinion about whether that statement is otherwise
admissible. 
5 We express no opinion about whether that footage may be subject to
other objections. 
14 