NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000138
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
CRISTOPHER J.A. RAMOS, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTC-11-020533)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.,
with Nakamura, C.J. concurring separately)
 
Defendant-Appellant Cristopher J.A. Ramos (Ramos)
 
appeals from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and

 
Plea/Judgment, entered on February 17, 2012, in the District
 
Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (district court).1
  
Ramos was convicted of Excessive Speeding, in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291C-105(a)(1) (2007).
2
  
In his opening brief, Ramos contends that the district
 
court abused its discretion in admitting evidence of a laser gun
 speed reading because the State failed to provide sufficient
 
1
 The Honorable Clarence Pacarro presided.
 
2
 HRS § 291C-105(a)(1) provides, in relevant part, that:
 
§291C-105 Excessive speeding.  (a) No person shall
drive a motor vehicle at a speed exceeding:
(1)	 The applicable state or county speed limit by
thirty miles per hour or more[.]
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
foundation for its admission into evidence. Ramos claims that
 
without evidence of the laser gun reading, his conviction must be
 reversed for insufficient evidence. 
In its answering brief, Appellee State of Hawai
'i 
(State) argues that the testimony of Honolulu Police Department police officer Russell Maeshiro (Officer Maeshiro) provided the requisite foundation for the laser gun reading to be admitted into evidence. The State's argument included the assertion that 
Officer Maeshiro's testimony revealed he had personal
knowledge of the manufacturer's recommendations regardingthe testing and operation of the laser gun. Officer Maeshiro's testimony also provided the requisite evidencethat "the nature and extent of [his] training in theoperation of a laser gun [met] the requirements indicated by
the manufacturer." Assaye, 121 Hawai' i at 215, 216 P.3d at
1238. 
(Brackets in original and emphasis added).
 
After initial briefing by the parties was completed,
 
this court issued an order on February 24, 2014, that set the
 
case for oral argument and ordered that the parties be prepared
 at oral argument to discuss:
 
1. The impact on this appeal of the Hawai' i Supreme
Court's opinions in State v. Nesmith, 127 Hawai' i 48, 276
P.3d 617 (2012); State v. Gonzalez, 128 Hawai' i 314, 288
P.3d 788 (2012); State v. Apollonio, 130 Hawai' i 353, 311
P.3d 676 (2013); and State v. Armitage, [132 Hawai' i 36, 319
P.3d 1044 (2014)]. 
2. Whether Defendant-Appellant Christopher [sic]
J. A. Ramos (Ramos) has made a deliberate choice not to

challenge the sufficiency of the excessive speeding charge
on appeal, and if so, the implications of that choice.
 
3. Whether the manufacturer of the laser gun used in
Ramos's case has set forth specific training requirements

for the operation of the laser gun.
 
Subsequently, Ramos requested a continuance of oral 
argument and to allow for supplemental briefing. In an order 
issued on March 3, 2014, this court granted Ramos's request to continue the oral argument and ordered supplemental briefing on the issues set forth in the February 24, 2014 order, as well as the impact on this appeal of the Hawai
'i Supreme Court's recent 
decisions in State v. Amiral, 132 Hawai 'i 170, 319 P.3d 1178 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2014), and State v. Davis, No. SCWC-12-0000074, --- P.3d ---,
 
2014 WL 747422 (Haw. Feb. 26, 2014).
 
In his supplemental brief, inter alia, Ramos raised for
 
the first time a challenge to the charge in this case. He
 asserts that he had not made a deliberate choice not to challenge
 the sufficiency of the charge on appeal and that the supreme
 court's decisions in Nesmith, Apollonio, Gonzalez and Armitage
 establish that the failure to allege mens rea in the charge
 renders it deficient.
 
In its supplemental brief, the State essentially 
conceded that Ramos's conviction should be reversed, stating that Officer Maeshiro's testimony in this case "seems to suffer from the same deficiencies" that the Hawai
'i Supreme Court noted as to 
the officer's testimony in Amiral. The State thus summed up its position as follows: 
Relying in substantial part on Assaye, supra, Defendant
requests that his conviction be reversed should this
Honorable Court conclude, "the State failed to lay a
sufficient foundation for [Officer] Maeshiro's testimony
regarding the speed reading given by the laser gun." OB at
 page 16. As noted hereinabove, the deficiencies in the
officer's testimony regarding his training to operate the
laser speed gun seem to have rendered inadmissible his
testimony of the reading from the device. Without such
 testimony, there was no evidence of the speed at which
Defendant was traveling. Therefore, under the particular
circumstances of this case, Appellee cannot in good faith
contest Defendant's request.
 
Oral argument was held on April 9, 2014. At oral
 
argument, the State expressly conceded the district court erred
 
in holding that there was sufficient foundation to admit the
 laser gun reading in this case. The State also attempted,
 however, to present a User's Manual to the court that day, which
 the State represented to be the User's Manual for the laser gun
 at issue in this case, and requested the court take judicial
 notice that the manual did not contain any operator training
 requirements. The court advised the State that it would be given
 three weeks to file a motion as to its request for judicial
 notice, which the State subsequently filed. We address the
 State's motion infra.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For the reasons discussed below, we reverse Ramos's 
conviction.
 
I. Sufficiency of the Charge
 
In Apollonio, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court recently 
established that a defendant may successfully challenge the 
sufficiency of a charge for failure to allege mens rea even when the challenge to the charge is raised for the first time on appeal. 130 Hawai
'i at 358, 311 P.3d at 681. 
Under the Motta/Wells liberal construction standard, 
where an appellant alleges a charge is defective for the first time on appeal, an appellate court must "liberally construe the indictment in favor of validity[.]" State v. Motta, 66 Haw. 89, 
93, 657 P.2d 1019, 1021 (1983); see also State v. Wells, 78 Hawai
'i 373, 381, 894 P.2d 70, 78 (1995). In such circumstances, 
a conviction will not be vacated "unless the defendant can show prejudice or that the indictment cannot within reason be construed to charge a crime." Motta, 66 Haw. at 91, 657 P.2d at 
1020 (emphasis added). 
In Apollonio, the supreme court held that even under 
the liberal construction standard, when the charge failed to allege the required mens rea, the "charge cannot be reasonably construed to state an offense." 130 Hawai
'i at 358, 311 P.3d at 
681 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted); see also State v. Akitake, 131 Hawai
'i 166, 316 P.3d 1277, No. SCWC-29934 
(Haw. Jan. 10, 2014) (SDO). The conviction in Apollonio was thus vacated and the case remanded with instructions for the district court to dismiss the case without prejudice. 130 Hawai
'i at 363, 
311 P.3d at 686. 
In this case, Ramos is charged with Excessive Speeding 
in violation of HRS § 291C-105(a)(1). Excessive Speeding "is not a strict liability offense and requires proof that the defendant acted intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly. Thus, the requisite states of mind must be alleged in a charge of this offense." Gonzalez, 128 Hawai
'i at 315, 288 P.3d at 789. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Because the charge against Ramos did not allege the requisite
 
mens rea, the charge was deficient.
 
If we were to decide this case solely on the deficiency
 
in the charge, we would vacate Ramos's conviction and remand the
 case to the district court with instructions to dismiss the
 charge without prejudice. See id. However, in this appeal,
 
Ramos has challenged the foundation for the laser gun reading and
 contends that without the laser gun reading there is insufficient
 evidence to support his conviction. Unlike in Gonzalez, we must
 further address Ramos's argument as to sufficiency of the
 evidence. See Davis, 2014 WL 747422, at *20.
 
II. Foundation for Laser Gun Reading and
Sufficiency of the Evidence
 
Officer Maeshiro, the only trial witness, testified
 
that on January 17, 2011, he utilized a laser gun on Ramos's
 vehicle, which was traveling on Nimitz Highway. According to
 Officer Maeshiro, the laser gun he operated that day was
 manufactured by Laser Technologies, Inc. (LTI) and was a 20-20
 
3
Ultralite  model.  Officer Maeshiro testified that the reading
 
from the laser gun indicated Ramos's vehicle was traveling at
 seventy-six miles per hour, and that the speed limit in the area
 was thirty-five miles per hour.
 
In 
State v. Assaye, 121 Hawai 'i 204, 216 P.3d 1227 
(2009), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court addressed the necessary 
foundation for admission of a laser gun speed reading and held, first, that "the prosecution must prove that the laser gun's accuracy was tested according to procedures recommended by the manufacturer." Id. at 215, 216 P.3d at 1238. Second, the court 
held that the prosecution must demonstrate that the officer using 
3
 The spelling of "Ultralite" here and within this decision is based on
the transcripts from the trial in this case. Officer Maeshiro does not
 
provide the spelling in his testimony and thus the source of this spelling is
unclear. We note that in Section III infra, we refer to a User's Manual,
which the State attached to its Motion Requesting Mandatory Judicial Notice of
Adjudicative Fact, in which the name of an LTI laser gun is referenced as
"UltraLyte."
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the laser gun was qualified by training and experience to operate
 
a particular laser gun, namely "whether the nature and extent of
 an officer’s training in the operation of a laser gun meets the
 requirements indicated by the manufacturer." Id. (emphasis
 
added).
 
Officer Maeshiro testified that he was originally 
trained in 1994, in a four-hour course, to operate the Marksman laser gun, and that in 1998 he had a one-hour "familiarization course" when the Ultralite model came out. Officer Maeshiro testified that both the Marksman and Ultralite laser guns were manufactured by LTI, and that he had reviewed the LTI manual with respect to the operation and testing of both types of laser guns. According to Officer Maeshiro, the manuals were from LTI and he knows they were LTI manuals because they "had the Laser Technologies logo and the copyright and registered trademark insignias on it." Assuming arguendo that this testimony provides sufficient evidence that the manuals reviewed by Officer Maeshiro were "provided by" LTI, see Gonzalez, 128 Hawai
'i at 325-26, 288 
P.3d at 799-800, the evidence did not demonstrate that the nature and extent of Officer Maeshiro's training in the operation of the subject laser gun met the requirements indicated by LTI. 
During his testimony, Officer Maeshiro never testified
 
as to what the manufacturer required in terms of the nature and
 extent of training for officers to use the LTI 20-20 Ultralite. 
At most, he testified in a conclusory fashion that the training
 and instruction he received for the LTI 20-20 Ultralite was
 "consistent" with the manufacturer's requirements in the manual
 that he had received.
 
In Gonzalez, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court clarified the 
evidentiary requirements under Assaye, to "demonstrate that an officer is qualified by training to operate the laser gun in order to lay an adequate foundation for the readings taken from the gun." 128 Hawai
'i at 326, 288 P.3d at 800. The court 
stated: 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The record indicates the court abused its discretion
 
by ruling that the State introduced evidence sufficient to
establish that Officer Franks' training met the requirements
set by the manufacturer. The State introduced no evidence
 
regarding the manufacturer's requirements, and therefore,regardless of the extent of Officer Franks' training, the

court could not have properly concluded that the
manufacturer's requirements were met.
 
To lay a sound foundation for the introduction of a
reading from a laser gun, Assaye requires the prosecution to
demonstrate that "the nature and extent of an officer's 

 
training in the operation of the laser gun meets the
requirements indicated by the manufacturer." Assaye, 121
 
Hawai'i at 215, 216 P.3d at 1238. Logically, to meet this
burden the prosecution must establish both (1) the
requirements indicated by the manufacturer, and (2) the
training actually received by the operator of the laser gun.
 
Here, at trial the State only provided evidence of the
extent of Officer Franks' training. Although the State
explained that Officer Franks received four hours of
training in 2003, and further training in 2009 and 2010, the
record is silent as to what type of training is recommended
by the manufacturer. Without a showing as to the
manufacturer's recommendations, the court could not possibly
have determined whether the training received by Officer
Franks met "the requirements indicated by the manufacturer."
Id.
 
Id. at 327, 288 P.3d at 801 (emphasis added); see also Apollonio,
 
130 Hawai 'i at 362-363, 311 P.3d at 685-86. 
Recently, in Amiral, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held 
that a police officer's testimony "that the training he received
 was consistent with what he read in the manual regarding the
 manufacturer's recommended procedures is insufficient under the
 standard established by Gonzalez[.]" 132 Hawai
'i at 178, 319 P.3d 
at 1186. The court explained:
 
First, no evidence was presented showing that the
manual relied upon by Officer Ondayog to perform the four
tests actually set forth the manufacturer's recommended
training requirements.
 
Although Officer Ondayog testified that his training
conformed with the manufacturer's requirements because his
training conformed with the manual, the contents of the
manual as to those requirements were not established by the
State. Thus, it is not possible to determine whether the
manufacturer's recommendations were actually described in
the manual, so that conformance with the manual would be
equivalent to conformance with the manufacturer's
recommendations.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Second, assuming that the manufacturer's
recommendations were contained in the manual relied upon by
Officer Ondayog, his conclusory statement that the manual
conformed to the training he received did not describe the
type of training stated in the manual.
 
Third, there was no other evidence to demonstrate that
an officer learning to perform the four tests described by
Officer Ondayog satisfies the manufacturer's training
requirements. Consequently, the officer's description of
the four tests did not identify the type of training
recommended by the manufacturer.
Fourth, there is no indication in the record that the
instructors of the training courses Officer Ondayog attended
were actually certified by the manufacturer or had been
trained by the manufacturer. Additionally, there was no
evidence that the training course itself was approved by the
manufacturer or was consistent with the manufacturer's
 requirements. Such evidence together with the Officer's
learning to perform the four tests could have established
the type of training the manufacturer recommended.
 
Id. at 178-79, 319 P.3d at 1186-87 (footnotes omitted).
 
In this case, like Gonzalez and Amiral, there is no
 
evidence establishing "the requirements indicated by the
 
manufacturer" as to the nature and extent of training for the LTI
 20-20 Ultralite, including for instance, whether LTI required
 only a one-hour familiarization course for those already
 certified to operate the LTI Marksman. Because Gonzalez,
 Apollonio, and Amiral expressly require that the prosecution
 establish both the manufacturer's requirements for training and
 the training actually received by the operator, the conclusory
 and limited testimony by Officer Maeshiro that his training was
 "consistent" with the manufacturer's requirements in "the manual"
 does not meet the prosecution's evidentiary burden. As
 previously noted, the State concedes in its supplemental brief
 that Officer Maeshiro's testimony "seems to suffer from the same
 deficiencies the court noted in Amiral."
 
Without demonstrating that the nature and extent of
 
Officer Maeshiro's training on the LTI 20-20 Ultralite met the
 requirements indicated by LTI, there was insufficient foundation
 to admit into evidence the laser gun reading in this case under
 the rulings in Gonzalez, Apollonio and Amiral. Additionally,
 even if we read Gonzalez, Apollonio and Amiral to allow evidence
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
other than training "indicated by the manufacturer" to establish 
that the officer using the laser gun was "qualified by training and experience to operate [a] particular laser gun," Assaye, 121 Hawai
'i at 215, 216 P.3d at 1238, the record reflects, and the 
State conceded at oral argument, that no such evidence was presented in this case. Thus, given the record in this case and the applicable case law, the State's dispositive concession is correct that the district court erred in ruling there was proper foundation to establish Officer Maeshiro's qualification to operate the laser gun and thus it was error to admit into evidence the laser speed gun reading of Ramos's vehicle. 
In turn, absent Officer Maeshiro's testimony regarding 
the laser gun reading, there was no evidence to indicate that Ramos's vehicle was traveling at a speed exceeding the speed limit by thirty miles per hour or more, in violation of HRS § 291C-105(a)(1). Thus, Ramos's conviction must be reversed for insufficient evidence to support his conviction. Assaye, 121 
Hawai
'i at 216, 216 P.3d at 1239. 
III. The State's Motion Requesting Judicial Notice
 
Although the State has conceded that foundation was
 
lacking to admit the speed gun reading in this case, and that 
Assaye indicates Ramos's conviction should therefore be reversed,
 the State nonetheless also sought at oral argument to provide the
 court with an LTI User's Manual and argued that this court was
 mandated to take judicial notice of the adjudicative fact that
 "the User's Manual for the LTI 20/20 laser speed gun that was
 used in this specific case contains no specific training
 requirements at all."
4 The court declined to accept the manual
 
4
 The State asserts that its request for judicial notice is related to
this court's February 24, 2014 order that the parties be prepared to address
"[w]hether the manufacturer of the laser gun used in Ramos's case has set
forth specific training requirements for the operation of the laser gun."
However, prior to oral argument, the parties were ordered to provide
supplemental briefing on the issues identified in the February 24, 2014 order
and, with regard to manufacturer training requirements, the State's
supplemental brief simply made a passing comment that "Appellee has reason to
doubt LTI has promulgated such requirements[.]"
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
at oral argument or to rule on the State's oral request for
 
judicial notice, advising the State that it could file a motion
 within three weeks of oral argument, and allowing Ramos an
 opportunity to respond. 
On April 28, 2014, the State filed a Motion Requesting 
Mandatory Judicial Notice of Adjudicative Fact (Motion). The State submitted an LTI "UltraLyte User's Manual," Seventh Edition, June 1998 (User's Manual), as an exhibit to its Motion and requests, pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 
201 (1993), that this court take judicial notice of the adjudicative fact that "specific training requirements for the operation of the UltraLyte laser speed gun are not set forth in the UltraLyte User's Manual." (Emphasis omitted.) On May 12, 2014, Ramos filed a memorandum in response opposing the State's Motion. 
The commentary to HRE Rule 201 provides that 
"[a]djudicative facts are those relevant to the issues before the court . . . and which serve to 'explain who did what, when, where, how, and with what motive and intent[.]'" HRE Rule 201 cmt. subsection (a) (citation omitted); see also State v. Edwards, 96 Hawai
'i 224, 232 n.8, 30 P.3d 238, 246 n.8 (2001) 
(denying a request from the prosecution to take judicial notice of an asserted fact because the asserted fact was not relevant to the appeal). 
Officer Maeshiro's testimony is less than clear as to
 
the number of manuals he reviewed as part of his training on
 laser guns and he does not specifically identify the
 manufacturer's manual he reviewed with regard to the laser gun
 operated in this case. Thus, the record does not establish that
 the User's Manual submitted by the State is the same manual
 reviewed by Officer Maeshiro. Moreover, given that the record in
 
We further note that the State's request for judicial notice is
inconsistent with the assertion in its Answering Brief that Officer Maeshiro's
testimony showed his training met requirements "indicated by the
manufacturer."
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
this case clearly fails to meet the requirements under Gonzalez,
 
Apollonio and Amiral, and the State correctly concedes that it
 was error to admit the laser gun reading, the purported fact of
 which the State requests we take judicial notice is not relevant,
 at least in the context of this case. In short, the asserted
 fact that the State seeks to establish via judicial notice would
 have no bearing on the determination of this appeal.
 
Therefore, the State's Motion is denied. 
IV. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the Notice of Entry of Judgment
 
and/or Order and Plea/Judgment entered on February 17, 2012, in
 the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division, is
 reversed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 13, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Jon N. Ikenaga
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Associate Judge 
Donn Fudo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
11

 