NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
NO. CAAP-18-0000254 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
 
 
IN THE MATTER OF CATHERINE ELABAN, Complainant-Appellant/Appellant v. 
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION, STATE OF HAWAI‘ I; AND 
UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS, AFSCME, LOCAL 646, AFLCIO, 
Respondents-Appellees/Appellees. 
  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 1CC17-1-001420) 
  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Leonard, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.)
 
 
  Complainant-Appellant/Appellant Catherine Elaban 
(Elaban) appeals from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's 
February 28, 2018 "Decision and Order Affirming [State of 
Hawai
i‘] Labor Relations Board [(Labor Board )] Order No. 3280" 
and judgment.1  The Labor Board's Order No. 3280 granted 
 
1  The Honorable Keith K. Hiraoka presided. 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
2 
 Respondents-Appellees/Appellees United Public Workers, AFSCME, 
Local 646, AFL-CIO's (UPW) and the State of Hawai‘ i, Department 
of Transportation's (DOT) motions to dismiss Elaban's prohibited 
practice complaint for failure to exhaust the available contractual remedies. 
  On appeal, Elaban raises a single point of error 
challenging the Labor Board's determination that she failed to exhaust the remedies provided in the collective bargaining 
agreement.  We review appeals from administrative decisions 
under Hawaii Revised Statutes (
HRS) § 91-14(g) (Supp. 2016).2 
 
2  HRS § 91-14(g) provides: 
 
Upon review of the record, the court may affirm the 
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions 
for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the 
decision and order if the substantial rights of the 
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the 
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders are: 
 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory 
provisions; 
 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction of the agency; 
 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; 
 
(4) Affected by other error of law; 
 
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, 
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole 
record; or  
 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted 
exercise of discretion. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
3 
 Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve 
Elaban's point of error as discussed below, and affirm. 
(1) Elaban first argues that making her "exhaust the 
grievance procedure a second [time] for the same offense 
resulting in termination approximately three years after the 
initial proposed discharge [is] unconscionable." 
"In labor relations law, the general rule is that an 
employee is required to exhaust contractual remedies before 
bringing suit."  Poe v. Hawai‘ i Lab. Rels. Bd. (Poe I), 97 Hawai‘ i 
528, 536, 40 P.3d 930, 938 (2002).  Section 15.11 of the 
collective bargaining agreement provided in relevant part as 
follows: 
15.11  STEP 1 GRIEVANCE 
The grievance shall be filed with the 
department head or the department head' s 
designee in writing as follows:  
 
15.11 a. Within eighteen (18) calendar days after the 
occurrence of the alleged violation.  The term "after the occurrence of the alleged violation" as provided in Section 15.11 a. shall mean: 
 15.11 a.1. Discharge:  Eighteen (18) calendar days after 
the effective date of the discharge. 
 . . . . 
 
15.11 a.4.   
Other Alleged Violation(s):  Eighteen (18) 
calendar days after the alleged violation(s) 
occurred . . . . 
 
In January 2015, DOT sent Elaban a letter discharging 
her, effective February 20, 2015 (February 20, 2015 Discharge), NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
4 
 for failure to comply with the recommended rehabilitation 
treatment after testing positive for a controlled substance.  In 
the same letter, DOT offered Elaban an opportunity to 
participate in a pre-discharge hearing, but Elaban failed to 
timely respond. 
In March 2015, UPW filed a Step 1 grievance on 
Elaban's behalf challenging the February 20, 2015 Discharge, 
claiming she was denied "her due process by arbitrarily imposing a deadline to confirm her attendance at a pre-discharge meeting, 
by denying [her] the opportunity to respond to the allegations 
against her, and by discharging her without just and proper 
cause."  DOT denied the Step 1 grievance, determining that 
(1) it did not arbitrarily impose a deadline, (2) Elaban called 
two days after the deadline, and (3) it did not violate the 
terms of the collective bargaining agreement. 
In August 2016, UPW filed a Step 2 grievance.  
Although DOT again denied violating the collective bargaining agreement, it informed UPW that it would rescind Elaban's 
February 20, 2015 Discharge and conduct a pre-discharge hearing. 
In February 2017, DOT sent Elaban a letter informing 
her that she was being discharged, effective March 10, 2017 
(March 10, 2017 Discharge), and offering her an opportunity to 
participate in a pre-discharge hearing.  On March 3, 2017, DOT 
held a pre-discharge hearing, which Elaban and a UPW agent NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
5 
 attended.  DOT then notified Elaban that after hearing her 
testimony and the arguments made by her UPW agent, the March 10, 
2017 Discharge would stand. 
Again, Sections 15.11 and 15.11 a.1 of the collective 
bargaining agreement provided "[t]he grievance shall be filed 
with the department head or the department head's designee in 
writing as follows: . . . Discharge:  Eighteen (18) calendar 
days after the effective date of the discharge."  Elaban, through UPW, filed a timely grievance from the February 20, 2015 
Discharge, and succeeded in having that discharge rescinded so a 
pre-discharge hearing could be conducted.  Elaban, however, did 
not file a grievance challenging the March 10, 2017 Discharge.  
Findings of Fact (
FOF) e and i; Poe I, 97 Hawai‘ i at 536, 40 P.3d 
at 938 (explaining that "[u]nchallenged findings are binding on 
appeal"). 
Thus, as to the March 10, 2017 Discharge, the Labor 
Board's decision that Elaban failed to exhaust her contractual 
remedies does not require reversal under HRS § 91-14(g). 
(2)
 Next, Elaban explains that "when the union 
wrongfully refuses to pursue an individual grievance, the employee is not left without recourse.  Exceptions to the 
exhaustion requirement exist, such as when pursuing the 
contractual remedy would be futile."  Elaban then argues an   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
6 
 exception is UPW['s] wrongful refusal to process a 
grievance when [she] asked [ Business Agent Amie Miranda-
Pesquira] of UPW to file a grievance on her behalf and 
[Miranda- Pesquira] (or anyone else on behalf of UPW) failed 
to communicate (1) that UPW was not going to file a 
grievance [on her] behalf, and/or (2) that [she] should 
file a grievance on her own behalf. 
   
Although exhaustion of administrative remedies is the 
general rule, "exceptions to this doctrine exist, such as when 
pursuing the contractual remedy would be futile."  Poe I, 97 
Hawai‘i at 536, 40 P.3d at 938.  A "wrongfully discharged 
employee may bring an action against his employer in the face of a defense based upon the failure to exhaust contractual 
remedies, provided the employee can prove that the union as 
bargaining agent breached its duty of fair representation[.]"  
Vaca v. Sipes, 386 U.S. 171, 186 (1967).  "A union breaches its 
duty of [fair representation] when its conduct towards a member 
of a collective bargaining unit is arbitrary, discriminatory, or 
in bad faith."  Poe v. Hawai‘ i Lab. Rels. Bd. (Poe II), 105 
Hawai‘i 97, 104, 94 P.3d 652, 659 (2004). 
The Labor Board found that "Miranda-Pesquira testified 
under oath that . . . [Elaban] never responded to her question 
concerning whether [Elaban] wanted UPW to file a grievance on 
her behalf, nor did [Elaban] request that the union UPW file a 
grievance on her behalf."  FOF f.  And "at no time after her 
conversation with [Miranda-Pesquira] on March 21, 2017 did 
[Elaban] ever contact the Respondent UPW to inquire as to NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
7 
 whether a grievance was filed on her behalf."  FOF k.  Elaban 
does not challenge these findings in her point of error, and 
"[u]nchallenged findings are binding on appeal."  Poe I, 97 
Hawai‘i at 536, 40 P.3d at 938.   
Moreover, while Elaban argues on appeal that it was 
illogical for the board to conclude she "never asked for a 
grievance to be initiated despite faxing a copy of the March 9, 
2017 discharge" letter, this argument goes to witness 
credibility and weight of the evidence.  See Sierra Club v. D.R. 
Horton-Schuler Homes, LLC, 136 Hawai‘ i 505, 522, 364 P.3d 213, 
230 (2015) ("A court reviewing an agency's decision cannot 
consider the weight of the evidence to ascertain whether it 
weighs in favor of the administrative findings, or review the 
agency's findings of fact by passing upon the credibility of 
witnesses or conflicts in testimony, especially the finding of an expert agency in dealing with a specialized field.") (cleaned 
up). 
Finally, section 15.03 a. of the collective bargaining 
agreement provided that "[a]n [e]mployee may process a grievance 
and have the grievance heard without representation by the 
Union[.]"  The Labor Board found that Elaban testified under 
oath that "she was aware that the [collective bargaining agreement] . . . required that a grievance be filed within 
eighteen (18) days from the date of an alleged violation of the NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
8 /s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
 [collective bargaining agreement,]" "she received the Notice of 
Discharge on March 10, 2017[,]" and "she did not file a 
grievance after receiving the Notice of Discharge[.]"  FOF g, i, 
and j.  Elaban does not challenge these findings. 
Given these unchallenged findings, the Labor Board's 
conclusion that "[t]here has been no showing of an exception to 
the doctrine of exhaustion of contractual remedies, such as when 
exhaustion would be futile[,]" does not require reversal under  HRS § 91-14(g).  In sum, the circuit court did not err in 
affirming the Labor Board's Decision Order No. 3280. 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the circuit court's 
February 28, 2018 decision and order and judgment. 
  DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai‘ i, August 16, 2023. 
 
On the briefs: 
 Shawn A. Luiz, 
for Complainant-
Appellant/Appellant.
 
 Herbert R. Takahashi, 
Rebecca L. Covert, 
for Respondent-Appellee/Appellee, 
United Public Workers, 
AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO.  James E. Halvorson, 
William M. Levins, 
Deputy Attorneys General, for Respondent-Appellee/Appellee, 
Department of Transportation,
State of Hawai‘ i.  Presiding Judge 
 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
Associate Judge  /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge 