 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000537 and NO. CAAP-17-0000578 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAI# I  
JEFFREY S. LINDNER, Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellant,
v. 
JOHN A. DURKEE, Individually and as Trustee of the Revocable
Living Trust of John A. Durkee dated April 30, 2003, as amended
RICHARD WANEK, Defendants/Counterclaimants-Appellees,
and 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE ALIOMANU ESTATES COMMUNITY 
ASSOCIATION, Defendant-Appellee,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; AND DOE
PARTNERSHIPS 1-10, Defendants ;
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 5CC141000158)  
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By:  Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.)
 
Aliomanu Estates is a planned community on the island 
of Kaua# i.  Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellant Jeffrey S. 
Lindner  and Defendants/Counterclaimants-Appellees John A. 
Durkee 
and Richard Wanek each owned lots in Aliomanu Estates.  Lindner 1
1 Durkee died on November 6, 2019; Sher L. Kirkpatrick , the
successor trustee of the Revocable Living Trust of John A. Durkee and the
personal representative of Durkee's estate, was substituted for Durkee in thisappeal by order entered on April 16, 2021. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
owned Lot 6C,  Durkee owned Lot 6D, and Wanek owned Lot 6E.  
Lindner complained that the ocean view from his lot was being 
blocked by vegetation growing on Durkee's and Wanek's lots.  He sued Durkee, Wanek, and Defendant-Appellee Board  of Directors of 
the Aliomanu Estates Community Association.  He appealed from various orders  and the "Final Judgment in Favor of Defendants 
and Against Plaintiff" entered by the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit on July 21, 2017.   We consolidated Lindner's appeals. 
After briefing was completed Lindner, Durkee, Wanek, 
and the Board filed various motions.  For the reasons explained below, we: 
432
• grant the Board's April 8, 2019 motion to
dismiss, grant Durkee and Wanek's April 12,2019 joinder, and dismiss Lindner's appealfrom the disposition of counts 1 and 2 of thecomplaint; 
• grant the Board's April 13, 2022 renewedmotion to dismiss, grant Kirkpatrick'sApril 20, 2022 joinder, and dismiss Lindner'sappeal from the disposition of counts 1 and 2of the complaint; 
• deny Lindner's July 30, 2020 motion tosubstitute or join parties; and 
2 Lindner did not live on Lot 6C.  He also owned Lot 5, which was
part of Aliomanu Estates, and another lot that was makai of, but not part of,Aliomanu Estates.  Neither of those lots was a subject of Lindner's complaint. 
3 The "various orders" from which Lindner appealed include: 
1. "Order Granting Defendant Board of Directors of the Aliomanu
Estates Community Association's Motion for Award of
Attorneys' Fees and Costs Filed 4/18/17[,]" entered by thecircuit court on June 28, 2017; 
2. "Order Granting Defendants John A. Durkee and Richard
Wanek's Joint Motion for An Award of Attorneys' Fees and
Costs Filed April 24, 2017[,]" entered by the circuit court
on June 22, 2017; and 
3. "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Judgment in Favor
of Defendants and Against Plaintiff[,]" entered by thecircuit court on April 10, 2017; 
4 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided. 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
• vacate in part the Final Judgment and remand
to the circuit court for further proceedings. 
BACKGROUND 
Procedural History 
Lindner filed the lawsuit below on July 28, 2014.  His 
complaint alleged that he, Durkee, and Wanek each owned lots in 
Aliomanu Estates and were members of the Aliomanu Estates Community Association.  Each of the lots was subject to the 
"Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions for 
Aliomanu Estates" (C
C&R) recorded in the Hawai# i Bureau of 
Conveyances. 
Lindner complained that the view from his lot was being 
blocked by vegetation growing on Durkee's and Wanek's lots. Lindner sought: 
(1) a declaration that (a) Durkee and Wanek were 
violating Lindner's "view plane rights" under the CC&R and the Community Association's Design Committee Rules, and (b) the Board 
would be bound by the circuit court's determination of whether 
and to what extent Durkee and Wanek have violated the CC&R and Design Committee Rules; (2) mandatory injunctive relief to 
restore Lindner's "view plane rights" and protect them from 
future encroachment; and (3) an award of damages and costs 
(against Durkee and Wanek only) for alleged violations of the 
CC&R and Design Committee Rules. 
The Board answered Lindner's complaint.  It did not 
assert a counterclaim or cross-claims. 
Durkee and Wanek answered Lindner's complaint and 
asserted a counterclaim.  The counterclaim alleged claims for breach of contract, trespass, nuisance, and waste.  Durkee and Wanek did not assert a cross-claim against the Board. 
A jury-waived trial was conducted over 9 days between 
October 2016 and January 2017.  The circuit court entered its "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Judgment in Favor of Defendants and Against Plaintiff" (Findings & Conclusions) on 
April 10, 2017.  In June 2017 the circuit court entered orders 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
awarding attorneys' fees and costs to the Board, Durkee, and 
Wanek. 
On July 21, 2017, the Final Judgment was entered: 
(1) against Lindner on his claims for a declaration that 
(a) Durkee and Wanek were violating his view plane rights and 
(b) the Board would be bound by the declaration; (2) against 
Lindner on his claim for mandatory injunctive relief on his view 
plane rights; (3) against Lindner on his claim for damages and 
costs against Durkee and Wanek; (4) against Lindner and in favor 
of Durkee ($1,000) and Wanek ($5,000) on the counterclaim for 
damages; and (5) against Lindner and in favor of the Board 
($188,440.62) and Durkee and Wanek ($159,295.35) on their 
respective claims for attorneys' fees and costs. 
These appeals followed. 
Post-Appeal Motions 
In February 2019 Lindner conveyed Lot 6C to Fred 
Blakeslee Conant, III and Kathleen Warner Conant (collectively, the Conants).
5  In April 2019 the Board moved to partially 
dismiss this appeal as moot because Lindner no longer owned Lot 6C.
6  Durkee and Wanek filed a joinder to the Board's motion, 
also seeking partial dismissal of the appeal based on mootness. 
In July 2020 Lindner filed a motion to substitute or 
join parties.  In October 2017 Durkee conveyed Lot 6D to Sunita Cummings, subject to retention of a life estate.
7  In 
5 We take judicial notice under Rule 201 of the Hawaii Rules of
Evidence of the Apartment Deed recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances, a copy
of which was filed in support of the Board's motion to dismiss.  We may consider this new evidence because it relates to mootness.  Queen Emma Found. v. Tatibouet, 123 
Hawai #i 500, 507 n.8, 236 P.3d 1236, 1243 n.8 (App. 2010). 
6 The Board's motion pertains only to Lindner's appeal from the
disposition of counts 1 (declaratory relief) and 2 (injunctive relief) of hiscomplaint; the Board does not seek dismissal of Lindner's appeal from thedisposition of count 3 (damages against Durkee and Wanek only), the ordergranting attorneys fees and costs to Durkee and Wanek, or the order grantingattorneys fees and costs to the Board. 
7 Durkee died on November 6, 2019, terminating his life estate in 
Lot 6D. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
January 2018 Cummings conveyed Lot 6D to herself, as trustee of 
the Sunita Cummings Revocable Living Trust.8  Lindner sought to 
substitute Cummings for Durkee, or to join Cummings as a defendant-appellee, "because Durkee has passed away and has transferred his interest in his property that was a subject of this appeal to Cummings." 
In February 2022 the Conants conveyed Lot 6C to Benny 
Abruzzo and Sandra Rae Abruzzo (collectively, the Abruzzos).
9  In 
April 2022 the Board filed a renewed motion for partial dismissal of this appeal.  Kirkpatrick (as successor trustee of the Revocable Living Trust of John A. Durkee and personal representative of Durkee's estate) filed a joinder to the Board's renewed motion, also seeking partial dismissal of the appeal based on mootness. 
STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
The statement of the points of error in Lindner's 
amended opening brief does not contain quotations of any findings of fact or conclusions of law Lindner contends were clearly erroneous or wrong.  A copy of the circuit court's Findings & Conclusions was appended to the amended opening brief, but the statement of points does not reference specific findings or conclusions being challenged.  See
 Hawai# i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure Rule 28(b)(4)(C). 
"[U]nchallenged factual findings are deemed to be 
binding on appeal, which is to say no more than that an appellate court cannot, under the auspices of plain error, 
sua sponte 
revisit a finding of fact that neither party has challenged on appeal."  Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply
, 97 Hawai# i 
450, 459, 40 P.3d 73, 82 (2002). 
8 We take judicial notice of the conveyance documents recorded in
the Bureau of Conveyances, copies of which were attached to Lindner's motion. 
9 We take judicial notice of the "Apartment Deed" recorded in the
Bureau of Conveyances, a copy of which was attached to the Board's renewed
motion to dismiss. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Conclusions of law are reviewed de novo under the 
"right/wrong" standard.  Est. of Klink ex rel. Klink v. State
, 
113 Hawai# i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 504, 523 (2007).  A conclusion of 
law that is supported by the trial court's findings of fact and 
reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be overturned.  
Id. When a conclusion of law presents mixed 
questions of fact and law, we review it under the "clearly erroneous" standard because the court's conclusions are dependent on the facts and circumstances of each individual case.  Id. 
We review "the denial and granting of attorney's fees 
under the abuse of discretion standard."  Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the Emps. Ret. Sys. of Haw.
, 106 Hawai# i 416, 431, 106 P.3d 339, 
354 (2005) (cleaned up).  "An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or has disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant."  
Id. (citation 
omitted). 
DISCUSSION 
Lindner's amended opening brief asserts five points of 
error: 
A. "The Circuit Court erred in failing to
enforce Lindner's view plane rights that were
blocked by vegetation on the Durkee and Waneklots as determined by the [CommunityAssociation's] Design Committee in its solebut reasonable discretion"; 
B. "The Circuit Court erred in failing to rule
that the [Board] abused its authority by
overriding the decision of the . . . DesignCommittee and is estopped to deny enforcementof the Design Committee's decision"; 
C. "The Circuit Court erred in awarding Durkee
or Wanek damages for their Counterclaims"; 
D. "The Circuit Court erred in awarding the[Board] attorneys' fees and costs in the
amount of $188,440.62"; and 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
E. "The Circuit Court erred in jointly awarding 
Durkee and Wanek attorneys' fees and costs in 
the amount of $159,295.35." 
I. Appellate Jurisdiction 
The Board, Durkee, and Wanek contend that Lindner's 
appeal from the disposition of counts 1 (declaratory relief) and 2 (injunctive relief) of his complaint are moot because Lindner no longer owns Lot 6C, and thus lacks standing to maintain claims for equitable relief concerning the property's view plane rights.  We must decide this issue first because "mootness is an issue of subject matter jurisdiction."  Hamilton, 119 Hawai# i 1, 4, 193 P.3d 839, 842 (2008). 
In Hamilton the supreme court characterized as "well-
settled" the principle that: 
The mootness doctrine is said to encompass the circumstances
that destroy the justiciability of a suit previouslysuitable for determination.  Put another way, the suit mustremain alive throughout the course of litigation to the 
moment of final appellate disposition .  Its chief purpose is
to assure that the adversary system, once set in operation,remains properly fueled.  The doctrine seems appropriatewhere events subsequent to the judgment of the trial courthave so affected the relations between the parties that thetwo conditions for justiciability relevant on appeal —adverse interest and effective remedy  — have been 
compromised. 
119 Hawai# i at 5, 193 P.3d at 843 (emphasis added) (citations 
omitted). 
We conclude that Lindner's conveyance of Lot 6C renders 
moot his claims for declaratory and injunctive relief concerning 
Lot 6C's alleged view plane rights.  See Lathrop v. Sakatani
, 111 
Hawai# i 307, 313, 141 P.3d 480, 486 (2006) (holding that appeal 
from order expunging lis pendens became moot when the property at issue was sold by the defendants, because "the sale of the property prevents the appellate court from granting any effective relief") (citation omitted).  The record confirms that neither the Conants nor the Abruzzos sought to intervene or become substituted for Lindner.  Therefore, a declaratory judgment or 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
injunction in Lindner's favor would not provide him with an 
effective remedy because he no longer owns the property benefitted by the alleged view plane rights.  See Queen Emma Found. v. Tatibouet, 123 Hawai# i 500, 508, 236 P.3d 1236, 1244 
(App. 2010) (commercial lessee's appeal from declaratory judgment in favor of lessor became moot when lessee assigned his interest in the lease to third party who did not seek to intervene or to substitute for lessee as defendant). 
None of the recognized exceptions to the mootness 
doctrine apply to Lindner's claims for equitable relief.  The "capable of repetition, yet evading review" exception does not apply because Lindner is not challenging a government action. Hamilton, 119 Hawai# i at 5, 193 P.3d at 843 (noting the "capable 
of repetition, yet evading review" exception means that "a court will not dismiss a case on the grounds of mootness where a challenged governmental action would evade full review because 
the passage of time would prevent any single plaintiff from 
remaining subject to the restriction complained of for the period necessary to complete the lawsuit.") (emphasis added).  The "public interest" exception does not apply because the question presented is of a private nature, 
id. at 7, 193 P.3d at 845 
(holding that father's appeal failed to meet the first prong of the public interest exception because his appeal from a temporary restraining order was of purely personal nature), and does not require "an authoritative determination for future guidance of public officers," id.
 at 6-7, 193 P.3d at 844-45; see also Carl 
Corp. v. State, Dept. of Educ., 93 Hawai# i 155, 165, 997 P.2d 
567, 577 (2000) (holding that the subject controversy did not qualify under the public interest exception because no additional authoritative determination was needed regarding the terminated public procurement contract).  And the "collateral consequences" exception does not apply because Lindner has not established "a reasonable possibility that prejudicial collateral consequences will occur" if the circuit court's denial of his equitable claims is not vacated.  Hamilton, 119 Hawai# i at 8, 193 P.3d at 846. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In opposition to the Board's first motion to dismiss, 
Lindner submitted a copy of an addendum to the agreement for the 
Conants' purchase of Lot 6C (Conant Addendum).  The addendum 
states (among other things) that the Conants appointed Lindner as 
their representative to maintain this appeal and the underlying lawsuit. 
In opposition to the Board's renewed motion to dismiss, 
Lindner submitted a copy of the "Agreement Between Benny and Sandra Rae Abruzzo and Jeffrey S. Lindern [sic]" (Abruzzo 
Agreement).  The Abruzzos signed the document on April 19, 2022, 
more than a month after they purchased Lot 6C from the Conants. 
The record contains no agreement between the Conants, as sellers, and the Abruzzos, as buyers, concerning view plane rights from Lot 6C.  The Abruzzos purported to "appoint Lindner as their representative to maintain [this appeal] and underlying Lawsuit[.]" 
Neither the Conant Addendum nor the Abruzzo Agreement 
are binding on this Court for purposes of determining subject matter jurisdiction.  Cvitanovich-Dubie v. Dubie, 125 Hawai# i 
128, 141, 254 P.3d 439, 452 (2011) ("It is well-settled that subject-matter jurisdiction cannot be conferred upon a court by agreement, stipulation, or consent of the parties.") (cleaned up) (quoting Gilmartin v. Abastillas, 10 Haw. App. 283, 292, 869 P.2d 1346, 1351 (1994)). 
Our ruling on mootness applies to points A. and B. of 
Lindner's statement of the points of error, which pertain to counts 1 and 2 of Lindner's complaint.  Lindner did not appeal from the disposition of count 3 of his complaint — which claimed damages from Durkee and Wanek because of their alleged violations of the CC&R and the Community Association's Design Committee Rules. 
Accordingly: (1) the Board's motion to dismiss filed on 
April 8, 2019, and Durkee and Wanek's joinder filed on April 12, 2019, are granted; (2) the Board's renewed motion to dismiss 
filed on April 13, 2022, and Kirkpatrick's April 20, 2022 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
joinder, are granted; and (3) Lindner's motion to substitute or 
join parties filed on July 30, 2020, is denied because Lindner 
has no viable claims against Cummings (who acquired Lot 6D from Durkee after entry of the Final Judgment). 
We continue to have jurisdiction over Lindner's appeal 
from the circuit court's award of damages, attorneys' fees, and costs to Durkee and Wanek, and the award of attorneys' fees and costs to the Board (points C., D., and E. of the statement of the points of error).  Tatibouet
, 123 Hawai# i at 510, 236 P.3d at 
1246 ("[A]lthough a claim for attorney's fees does not preserve a case which has otherwise become moot on appeal, the question of attorney's fees is ancillary to the underlying action and survives independently under the Court's equitable jurisdiction.") (cleaned up). 
II. Counterclaim Damages 
Lindner contends that the circuit court erred in 
awarding Durkee and Wanek damages on their counterclaims.  The circuit court entered conclusion of law (
COL) no. 52, which was 
actually a combined finding of fact and conclusion of law: 
52. As to the Counterclaim, the Court concludes that
Durkee and Wanek have sustained their evidentiary burden by
a preponderance of the evidence.  This Court holds that Lindner is responsible for his share of the road maintenancecosts of $1,000 and awards $1,000 to Durkee.  The Court further concludes and thereby holds that Lindner failed toproperly maintain the vegetation on his property inviolation of CC&R Article VII, [§ ]13.  The Court herebyawards Mr. Wanek $5,000 in damages caused by the intrusionof tree roots and vegetation and/or green rubbish fromLindner's lot into his property. 
(COL 52)  We review this combined finding and conclusion under 
the "clearly erroneous" standard because the circuit court's 
conclusions are dependent on the facts and circumstances of the case.  Est. of Klink
, 113 Hawai# i at 351, 152 P.3d at 523.  We 
conclude COL 52 was clearly erroneous. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A. Durkee 
Lindner argues that the circuit court made no findings 
of fact to support or explain COL 52, and that there is no 
authority in the CC&R for Durkee to seek contribution from Lindner for the cost to maintain their shared driveway. 
At trial Durkee testified: 
Q. And what is your claim about what Mr. Lindner
owes you regarding the driveway or culvert? 
A. Well, actually, the driveway was totally gravel
from the front entrance to my lot, and I mathematically
figured what each section was worth and sent him an invoice,and they all paid except Mr. Lindner, which I don't knowwhat that piece is but it fronts his lot, and from the frontentrance to his driveway was a certain distance, so that wasjust a calculation -- maybe a thousand or two. 
. . . . 
Q. To be clear on the gravel driveway issue, all of
the neighboring unit owners in your Lot 6 [condominiumproperty regime] have reimbursed you for that gravel work? 
A. Oh, yes, right away. 
Q. With one exception? 
A. Yes, with one exception. 
Q. And that's Mr. Lindner? 
A. Jeff Lindner.  And he argued that I hadn't
calculated the distance properly or whatever it was.  It was garbage. 
The circuit court found, and Lindner does not 
challenge: 
58. Lindner and Durkee initially had a friendly
relationship.  Their relationship also soured over time. Lindner did not like the fact that Durkee made improvementsto the driveway without first asking for Lindner's input andthen sent him a bill for his share of the expenses. 
The CC&R was in evidence as Joint Exhibit J-11.  The 
CC&R does not require that any owner improve a driveway.  The 
only provision concerning driveways appears in Article IV, governing "Design Standards and Control[.]"  That provision does not mention allocation of costs for maintaining or improving 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
shared driveways.  Durkee does not cite, nor do we find, any 
provision in the CC&R that obligates Lindner to reimburse Durkee for unilaterally improving their shared driveway.  The circuit court made no findings of fact which could support any other potential theory of recovery for Durkee's claimed damages, nor did Durkee's counterclaim plead any such theories.  Because the circuit court made no findings of fact to support any legal basis for awarding damages to Durkee, COL 52 was clearly erroneous as to Durkee.  The circuit court's award of damages to Durkee from Lindner is vacated. 
B. Wanek 
The circuit court concluded (in COL 52) that Lindner 
failed to properly maintain the vegetation on Lot 6C, in violation of Article VII, Section 13 of the CC&R.  The provision states: 
Landscape Maintenance and Repair.  Each Owner shall, at his
sole cost and expense, landscape his Lot and mow the areasof the Lot which have not been landscaped at least once eachthree months in order to control the growth of the naturalvegetation.  All landscaping and other crops or vegetationplanted by any Owner on his Lot shall be subject to DesignCommittee review and approval.  In the event any Owner failsto maintain his landscaping or to mow the areas of his Lotwhich have not been landscaped, the Board and its authorizedagents shall have the right to enter such Lot and performsuch mowing and landscape work upon the Lot, and the Ownershall reimburse the Association for the cost thereof promptly upon demand together with interest thereon at therate of twelve percent (12%) per annum.  In the event of the Owner's default in the payment of same, the amount thereofshall be and become a lien upon the Lot in the mannerdescribed in Article VI [Assessments]. 
The CC&R provide the Community Association with a remedy against 
an owner who fails to maintain their landscaping or control the growth of natural vegetation.  The CC&R does not create a right of action for damages in favor of other owners; it was error for the circuit court to award damages to Wanek based on Lindner's violation of the CC&R. 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
However, at trial Wanek testified: 
A. Well, Mr. Lindner had planted some milo on the
property line and it grew -- milo is a plant that will grow
to 30 to 40 feet high with a spread of 30 to 40 feet and heplanted it seven feet away from the property line, and so itstarted encroaching on my property. 
Q. What was encroaching on yours? 
A. The milo branches as well as seeds and leaves 
and droppings and stuff and plus, it's right next to wheremy leach field is and my leach field is seven feet from theproperty line, and according to everybody who installsseptic systems, they want trees a minimum 25 feet away fromyour leach field, and the milo is noted for its massive rootsystem. . . . 
. . . . 
Q. You started [sic] a counterclaim in this case; 
correct? 
A. Yes, I did. 
Q. Would you tell the Court what the nature of the
counterclaim is. 
A. Well, the nature of the counterclaim is for the
last ten years, I've been maintaining this whole propertyline as well as the milo, the coconuts and all the propertyline down here that's between my property and Mr. Lindner'sproperty which is out of the subdivision.  So there's about a hundred 50 -- maybe 200 yards of contiguous property linethat he refuses to do anything on that I have to maintain. 
Q. When you say you maintain it, what does that
mean in terms of efforts hours? 
A. Well, it's probably -- you know, it's not a 
major thing.  It's probably only an hour to two hours,maybe, per week.  It's cutting the tall Guinea grass.  It's chopping back milo branches, probably in the range of 25 to30 hours a year, but over ten years, it builds up. 
Q. Is that the basis of your counterclaim for 
$5,000? 
A. Yes, it is.  I believe I put in probably 200,
250 hours of work over the last ten years, me or one of myfriends helping me out, just, you know, chopping stuff up,hauling it away from the green waste.  I think I'm being very reasonable.  Most landscapers are at 40 to 50 bucks an hour these days. 
The circuit court found: 
57. Lindner and Wanek initially had a friendly
relationship.  However, by 2008, their relationship hadsoured; Wanek repeatedly complained about Lindner's refusalto maintain the milo trees and coconut palms that Lindner 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
had planted on Lot 6C along the boundary with Wanek's
Lot 6E.  The milo trees are currently encroaching on Wanek's
property and their roots are threatening the leach field forhis septic system .  In response, Lindner told Wanek that he
would make him cut down his orchard. 
(emphasis added).  Lindner does not challenge these findings. 
The circuit court concluded (in COL 52) that Wanek was 
entitled to recover "damages caused by the intrusion of tree 
roots and vegetation and/or green rubbish from Lindner's lot into [Wanek's] property."  Wanek's counterclaim alleged (among other things) nuisance.  We have held: 
Plants whose overhanging branches cast shade or drop leaves,
flowers, or fruit, or whose roots interfere only with otherplant life, are not nuisances. 
Overhanging branches or protruding roots constitute a
nuisance when they actually cause, or there is imminentdanger of them causing, material harm to a person or to
property other than plant life . 
When overhanging branches or protruding roots actuallycause, or there is imminent danger  of them causing, harm to
a person or to property other than plant life, the damagedor imminently endangered neighbor may require the tree'sowner to pay for the damage and to cut back the endangeringbranches or roots and, if that is not done within areasonable time, the damaged or imminently endangeredneighbor may cause the cutback to be done at the tree 
owner's expense . 
Spittler v. Charbonneau, 145 Hawai# i 204, 210, 449 P.3d 1202, 
1208 (App. 2019) (reformatted) (emphasis added). 
Wanek's testimony about "[t]he milo branches as well as 
seeds and leaves and droppings and stuff[,]" without more, did 
not establish a nuisance; Wanek was not entitled to an award of damages based on the time he spent "cutting the tall Guinea grass" or "chopping back milo branches[.]"  While Wanek would be 
entitled to recover the expense of cutting back the milo tree 
roots that imminently threatened harm to the leach field of his 
septic system, he failed to establish this item of damage with 
reasonable certainty.  See Ferreira v. Honolulu Star-Bulletin, Ltd., 44 Haw. 567, 576, 356 P.2d 651, 656 (1960) (holding that "[t]he extent of plaintiff's loss must be shown with reasonable certainty and that excludes any showing or conclusion founded 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
upon mere speculation or guess").  The record contains no 
reasonable basis for apportioning the "200, 250 hours of work over the last ten years" Wanek said he spent dealing with Lindner's vegetation between compensable and noncompensable time.The circuit court's award of damages to Wanek from Lindner is vacated.  
III. Attorneys' Fee Awards 
Generally, under the "American Rule," each party is
responsible for paying for [their] own litigation expenses. 
A notable exception to the "American Rule," however, is therule that attorneys' fees may be awarded to the prevailingparty where such an award is provided for by statute,stipulation, or agreement. 
TSA Int'l Ltd. v. Shimizu Corp., 92 Hawai# i 243, 263, 990 P.2d 
713, 733 (1999) (cleaned up). 
A. The Board 
The circuit court's Findings & Conclusions stated: the 
Board "is the prevailing party as to Lindner's claims against 
[the Board], and may seek an award of its reasonable attorneys' fees and costs against Lindner pursuant to [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)] [§ ]421J-10."  HRS § 421J-10 (2004) provides, in 
relevant part: 
Attorneys' fees and expenses of enforcement. 
. . . . 
(b) . . . .  If a member is not the prevailing party
in any court action against an association, . . . or its
board of directors, to enforce any provision of theassociation documents or this chapter, then all reasonableand necessary expenses, costs, and attorneys' fees incurredby the association shall be awarded to the association[.] 
We held that Lindner's claims against the Board are 
moot. 
Where the underlying controversy has become moot, there isno right to review or redetermine any of the issues in theunderlying action solely for the purpose of deciding theattorney's fees question.  Instead, the question ofattorney's fees and costs must be decided based on whether 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the recipient of the attorney's fees and costs award can be
considered to be the prevailing party in the underlyingaction, without regard to whether we think the trial court'sdecision on the underlying merits is correct. 
Tatibouet , 123 Hawai# i at 510, 236 P.3d at 1246 (cleaned up). 
Lindner's complaint sought (among other things) to enforce the 
CC&R.  The Board was the prevailing party before the circuit court.  The circuit court did not err by awarding the Board its attorneys' fees under HRS § 421J-10. 
Lindner does not contend that HRS § 421J-10 does not 
apply.  Instead he argues that the Board was a necessary party under Rule 19 of the 
Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 
("Joinder of Persons Needed for Just Adjudication"), such that it "should not recover fees for amounts that it would have had to incur in any event due to its status as a necessary party to this dispute."
10  He contends that the circuit court erred by denying 
his request that the Board's attorneys' fee request "be reduced by at least 50%."  Lindner's argument is without merit because HRS § 421J-10 applies to "any court action against an 
association, . . . or its board of directors, to enforce any 
provision of the association documents[.]"  (Emphasis added.)  It does not matter whether the Board was sued under HRCP Rule 19 or HRCP Rule 20 ("Permissive Joinder of Parties"). 
Lindner also argues that the circuit court erred by 
rejecting his objections to certain attorneys' fees and costs. The Board requested a total of $221,253.55 in attorneys' fees and taxable costs.  The circuit court awarded the Board a total of $188,440.62 in fees and costs, a reduction of $32,812.93. Lindner argues that the circuit court abused its discretion by not reducing the award by an additional $19,545.41, but his amended opening brief does not explain which additional fee or cost items should have been disallowed, or why; he even argues for a $378.02 reduction for the cost of meals that the circuit 
10 Lindner cites Norris v. Phillips, 626 P.2d 717 (Colo. App. 1980),
Cohen v. Kite Hill Cmty. Ass'n, 191 Cal. Rptr. 209 (Ct. App. 1983), and McCraw
v. Aux, 696 S.E.2d 739 (N.C. Ct. App. 2010) for this proposition. 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court in fact disallowed.  We decline to search the record to 
attempt to discern the factual and legal bases for Lindner's arguments on appeal.  See Haw. Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, Inc., 114 Hawai# i 438, 480, 164 P.3d 696, 738 (2007) ("[T]his court is not 
obligated to sift through the voluminous record to verify an appellant's inadequately documented contentions.") (citations omitted).  The award of attorneys' fees and costs to the Board is affirmed. 
B. Durkee and Wanek 
The circuit court's Findings & Conclusions stated that 
"Durkee and Wanek are the prevailing parties as to Lindner's 
claims against them, and may seek an award of their reasonable 
attorneys' fees and costs against Lindner pursuant to CC&R 
Article X, [§ ]4."  (Emphasis added.)  This provision of the CC&states, in relevant part: 
R 
Section 4.  Remedy for Violation.  In addition to the 
other remedies provided herein, if the Owner of any Lot in
Aliomanu Estates or any part thereof or interest thereinviolates any provisions hereof, Declarant, the Associationor the Owner of any Lot or part thereof or interest thereinmay bring an appropriate civil action against the defaultingparty to enforce specific compliance with this Declaration,or to recover damages for such violation, plus costs and areasonable attorney's fee as may be incurred by said
prosecuting party in such proceedings or action ; provided,
however, that Declarant or the Association shall have noduty under any circumstances to enforce compliance with thisDeclaration. 
(emphasis added).  The circuit court's "Order Granting Defendants
John A. Durkee and Richard Wanek's Joint Motion for an Award of Attorneys' Fees and Costs" cites no other authority for the fee award.
11  
11 The circuit court's Findings & Conclusions also cited DFS Group
L.P. v. Paiea Props, 110 Hawai #i 217, 131 P.3d 500 (2006), Piedvache v. 
Knabusch, 88 Hawai #i 115, 962 P.2d 374 (1998), and Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki
Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 839 P.2d 10 (1992).  The issue in those 
cases was whether the statutory cap on attorneys' fee awards applied todeclaratory judgments.  The attorneys' fee statutes applicable to those caseswere either HRS § 607-14 or former HRS § 607-17, neither of which applies tothis case. 
17 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Article X, Section 4 of the CC&R applies only to a 
"prosecuting party" who sues an owner "to enforce specific 
compliance with" the CC&R.  The CC&R does not provide for an award of attorneys' fees to a defendant who prevails in a 
prosecuting owner's unsuccessful civil action "to enforce 
specific compliance with" the CC&R.  The circuit court abused its discretion by awarding attorneys' fees to Durkee and Wanek. 
Durkee and Wanek's joint motion for attorneys' fees was 
also based upon them being "the prevailing parties on their claims that they asserted in the Counterclaim as against [Lindner]."  As we explained above, the circuit court erred by awarding damages to Durkee and Wanek on their counterclaim. Accordingly, the circuit court also abused its discretion by awarding attorneys' fees to Durkee and Wanek. 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, (1) the "Order Granting 
Defendant Board of Directors of the Aliomanu Estates Community Association's Motion for Award of Attorneys' Fees and Costs Filed 4/18/17" entered by the circuit court on June 28, 2017, is affirmed; (2) the "Order Granting Defendants John A. Durkee and 
Richard Wanek's Joint Motion for An Award of Attorneys' Fees and 
Costs Filed April 24, 2017" entered by the circuit court on June 22, 2017, is vacated; and (3) the Final Judgment entered by 
the circuit court on July 21, 2017, is vacated in part, and this 
case is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this memorandum opinion. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 14, 2022. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
Paul Alston, Presiding Judge 
Thomas E. Bush,
for Plaintiff/Counterclaim 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
Defendant-Appellant. Associate Judge 
John D. Zalewski, /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Michelle J. Chapman, Associate Judge 
for Defendant-Appellee 
18 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Board of Directors of the 
Aliomanu Estates CommunityAssociation. 
David J. Minkin,
Miyoko T. Pettit-Toledo,Laurel K. S. Loo,for Defendant/Counterclaimant-Appellee John A. Durkee. 
Richard E. Wilson,
for Defendant/Counterclaimant-Appellee Richard Wanek. 
19 