 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000407 17-JUL-2025 07:46 AM Dkt. 179 MO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000407  
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS   
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
LISE AND JOHN BOHM KAUAI GREEN HOUSE LLC,  
a Hawaii limited liability company,  
Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,  
v.  
OCEANAIRE PROPERTIES, LLC, a Nevada limited liability company, 
Defendant/Counterclaimant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,  
JOHN DOES 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50, CORPORATIONS 1-50, DOE 
ENTITIES 1-50, and  DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50, 
Defendants/Counterclaim Defendants,  
MARY DOES 1-50, Defendants,  
and  
DOE TRUSTS 1-10  AND JANE DOES 1-10,  Counterclaim Defendants  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 5CCV-19-0000001)  
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION  
(By:  Leonard, Presiding  Judge, McCullen  and Guidry, JJ.)  
Defendant/Counterclaimant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee 
Oceanaire Properties, LLC ( Oceanaire ) appeals, inter alia, from 
the May  24, 2022 Final Judgment,  and the May 24, 2022 1
1   The Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit  (circuit court )  entered an 
Amended Final Judgment  on May 2, 2023, in compliance with this court's April 
19, 2023 Order f or Temporary Remand  for entry of a final judgment that 
complied with Hawaiʻ i Rules of Civil Procedure  (HRCP)  Rule 58, and Jenkins v. 
Cades Schutte  Fleming & Wright, 76 Hawaiʻ i 115, 869 P.2d 1334 (1994).    
    
     
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
  
 
 
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Plaintiff's Findings of Fact [(FOFs)] and Conclusions of Law 
[(COLs)] and Order " (Order),2 entered by the circuit court.3 
Plaintiff /Counterclaim Defendant -Appellee/Cross -Appellant Lise 
and John Bohm Kauai Green House LLC ( Bohm) cross-appeals from 
the Final Judgment and Order. 
The parties raise several points of error on appeal. 
Oceanaire contends that the circuit court erred by: (1) 
concluding that Easement B on the 1989 Subdivision Map was 
"[c]ancelled, [a]bandoned [,] or [o]therwise [t]erminated" ; (2) 
failing to join necessary parties pursuant to HRCP Rule 19; (3) 
granting Bohm 's April 27, 2021 motion for partial summary 
judgment and "[g]ranting [m]andatory [i]njunctive [r]elief 
[o]rdering Oceanaire to [i]mplement a [s]pecific [d]esign for 
[r]econfiguring the [a]ccess to Kuleana Lots 1 through 5 and Lot 
10, [i]ncluding [u]se of [s]o-[c]alled 'Easement D'" ; (4) 
entering certain FOFs and COLs; (5) concluding that Bohm was the 
prevailing party; and (6) awarding attorneys' fees to Bohm. 
Bohm contends , on cross -appeal, that the circuit court 
erroneously denied Bohm damages. Bohm c ontends that it should 
be compensated for Oceanaire's unpermitted use of the road that 
2 In addition to the Final Judgment and Order, Oceanaire appealed 
from various orders entered by the circuit court , some of which have been 
incorporated into the Amended Final Judgment. 
3 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided. 
2   
    
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
crosses its property ( Illegal Access ), and that it is entitled 
to punitive damages because the Illegal Access amounted to "an 
intentional, knowing, and continuous trespass over three and a 
half years with the wanton disregard for Bohm's property and 
privacy rights." 
I. Background 
This case involves a dispute over an access easement 
on the Hanalei Garden Farms Estates (HGFE) Subdivision 
(Subdivision or HGFE subdivision ) in Princeville, Kauai. The 
Subdivision consists of Kuleana Lots 1 t hrough 5, and Lots 1 
through 14 . Oceanaire is the current owner of Kuleana Lot 5 ; 
Bohm is the current owner of Lot 7 . 
Kuleana Lot 5 is part of the Subdivision's Kuleana 
Lots, which were created pursuant to a 1989 "consolidation and 
re-subdivision" as reflected on the 1989 Subdivision Map and the 
Affidavit by William F. Mowry ( Affidavit ). Kuleana Lot 5 was 
first conveyed by the developer in 2005. Oceanaire purchased 
Kuleana Lot 5 in 2019 from Haumea Properties, LLC ( Haumea). The 
property descriptions attached to the Affidavit provide that 
each Kuleana Lot is accompanied by Easements A, B, and C for 
"access and utility purposes." 
Lot 7 was created as part of a second subdivision, t he 
2002 Subdivision . The 2002 Subdivision created Lots 1 through 
14, along with various easements. Lot 7 was first conveyed from 
3   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the developer to Susan Dawn Hanson ( Hanson) and Ch ristopher 
Michael Hoy in 2004. Bohm purchased Lot 7 in 201 7. 
In August 2002, the "Declaration of Grant and 
Reservation of Easements for the [Subdivision ]" (2002 
Declaration ) was recorded. The 2002 Declaration provided, inter 
alia, that Lot 7 is subject to Easement B, "being an easement 
for underground water and electrical utility purposes in favor 
of Parcels 10 and 36 through 40, and the Declarant ," and "that 
upon construction of water and electrical utility facilities 
servicing Parcels 10 and 36 through 40 within Easements C -1 and 
D, then Easement B shall automatic ally terminate and be 
cancelled." Lot 7 is also subject to Easements C -1 and D. 
These easements are, in relevant part, for underground utility 
and drainage purposes for Lots 1 through 14. Lot 7 is further 
subject to Easement E, which, relevant here, is a "perpetual, 
non-exclusive easement" to Lots 1 through 14 for "pedestrian, 
equestrian [,] and vehicular access." The 2002 Declaration does 
not reference the Kuleana Lots. 
In September 200 3, the "First Restated Declaration of 
Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions for the [HGFE]" (2003 
Covenants ) was recorded. The circuit court made the following 
unchallenged FOFs with regard to the 2003 Covenant s: 
[FOF] 28. The following provisions of Article VIII, 
Enforcement of This Declaration, of the [2003 Covenants] 
(Ex J-32 pp. 40 and 41) empower members of the [HGFE 
4   
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Community Association (HOA)] (e.g., HGFE lot owners) to 
enforce the provisions of the [2003 Covenants]: 
Article VIII, Section 1. Persons Entitled to Enforce 
this Declaration . The following persons (the 
"Enforcing Persons") shall have the right to exercise 
any remedy at law or in equity for the enforcement of 
this Declaration: . [.] . b) Any Owner or any person 
to whom the Owner's rights of membership have been 
assigned. 
Article VIII Section 2. Breach.   If any Owner or 
other person subject to this Declaration shall breach 
or fail to comply with any provision of this 
Declaration . . . then each Enforcing Person (except 
as otherwise stated) shall have the following rights 
and remedies: c) To commence and maintain actions and 
suits to require  the  Owner to remedy such breach or 
non-compliance or for specific performance, or to 
enforce by mandatory injunction or otherwise all of 
the provisions of this Declaration, or to restrain or enjoin any breach or threatened breach of this 
Declaration, or to recover damages and/or d) to 
pursue all other rights and remedies available at law 
or in equity[.]  
1. In any action for the enforcement of the 
provisions of this Declaration or for damages or 
any other form of relief, the prevailing party in 
such action shall be entitled to recover from the 
losing party all of the prevailing party's costs, 
expenses and rea sonable attorneys' fees. 
[FOF] 29.  The [2003 Covenants] ; prohibit construction 
without appropriate permits and consents, Ex. J -32, page 
27; require the restoration of ground after the destruction 
of improvements (here the wall), Id., page 29; require the 
owners to use only designated access ways , Id., page 35; 
and prohibit the blocking or redirecting of drainage, Id., page 40.  
(Underscoring in original ) (bold emphasis added.) 
In 2011, Hanson and Haumea sued the developer for its 
failure to "relocate the then existing vehicular access easement 
to . . .  Kuleana Lot 5 from . . .  Lot 7 to Lot 3."   The circuit 
court found that Kuleana Lot 5 was burdened by Easement A, which 4
4 This related case was docketed as Case No. 5CC111000075 , and is 
herein referenced as the Haumea Lawsuit. 
5   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was a "20 foot wide easement for access and utility purposes in 
favor of Parcel 10 and the other Kuleana Lots." Moreover, the 
circuit court found that Lot 7 was "subject to" Easement B, an 
"access easement." 
The circuit court found , in the Haumea Lawsuit, that 
Haumea had "installed or constructed above -ground structures and 
objects" on Easement A, for which Haumea did not have consent , 
approval , a permit, or a license to install or construct on 
Easement A. These structures and objects prevented portions of 
Easement A from being accessed, to the point that it blocked the 
connection of Easement B with Easement A, "and [had] the 
practical effect of forcing the actual driveway on Lot 7 to the 
west of where it should be, to the advantage of Haumea and the 
disadvantage of Hanson." 
The circuit court entered judgment in favor of the 
developer, ordered Haumea to remove obstructions on Easement A , 
and declared that Haumea's "failure to remove the same 
constitute[d] a continuing interference with rights of [the 
developer] and others to the full use and enjoyment of Easement 
A." The circuit court ordered Haumea to "[r]estore Easement A 
to the condition it was in prior to installation o r 
construction" of the obstructions within forty-five days after 
entry of judgment. A "Partial Satisfaction of Final Judgment " 
(Partial Satisfaction ) was filed in February 2019 stating that 
6   
  
 
  
 
 
  
     
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the removal of the obstructions installed on Kuleana Lot 5 had 
been "complied with and satisfied." The Partial Satisfaction 
did not state that Easement A had been restored to its prior 
condition. 
Bohm filed its Complaint in the underlying case in 
October 2019 . Bohm contended that the unrestored "grading and 
structures" within Easement A "had the practical effect of 
forcing Kuleana Lot owners to use a portion of Lot 7 to the west 
of Easement A, where there is no designated legal access, all to 
the advantage of Kuleana Lot 5 and disadvantage of Lot 7 ." Bohm 
sought injunctive relief, and compensatory and punitive damages, 
as a remedy for the trespass and "Illegal Access" caused by 
Oceanaire to Bohm's property. 
Oceanaire filed a Counterclaim in which it sought 
"[r]eformation of [e]asement [a]reas," on the basis that "[t]he 
existing topography within the boundaries of the Easement 'B' 
area does not allow for construction of a roadway that can be 
used for access by Oceanaire as originally intended by the 1989 
[Subdivision] Map and the Affidavit." 
Following a bench trial, the circuit court concluded, 
inter alia, that Easement B was "automatically terminated, " and 
that Oceanaire was illegally using an unpermitted access route 
on Bohm's property. The circuit court found that the 1989 
Subdivision Map depicted Easement B as a "distinctive dog leg 
7   
   
  
  
    
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that jogged to the east" running from the northern boundary of 
Kuleana Lot 5 to Hanalei Plantation Road. It found that an 
aerial photo from 2002 depicted that "the dog leg was gone," and 
that the dirt access road ran closer to the common boundary of 
Lots 7 and 8. The circuit court concluded that Easements C -1 
and D were the proper access easements for Kuleana Lot 5. 
The circuit court entered the Final Judgment in Bohm's 
favor. The circuit court enjoined Oceanaire "from continuing to 
[t]respass on [Bohm's] Lot 7," and "to remove the Illegal Access 
way." The circuit court awarded Bohm "no damages beyond the 
removal and restoration of the Illegal Access [way] on Lot 7." 
The circuit court awarded Bohm attorneys ' fees in the amount of 
$678,826.91. 
Oceanaire appealed, and Bohm cross -appealed . 
II. Discussion 
A. Oceanaire's Points of Error 
We address Oceanaire's points of error as follows5: 
(1) Oceanaire contends that the circuit court erred in 
finding and concluding that Easement B was terminated , such that 
Oceanaire was using an "Illegal Access " way on Lot 7 . Oceanaire 
specifically challenges FOFs 24, 35, and 62, and COLs 7, 8, 11, 
and 29-31. These FOFs and COLs state, 
5 We consolidate and renumber Oceanaire's points of error herein, 
to the extent it makes sense to do so for purposes of our analysis. 
8   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[FOF] 24. The Easement B referred to in the [2002] 
Declaration is shown on Exhibit "2" to the [2002] 
Declaration, which is a portion of the 2002 subdivision map 
(Ex. J-21), and which depicts Easement B as the "Existing 
Easement." This is the same Easement B shown on the 1989 
subdivision map. There is only one Easement B in the HGFE 
subdivision. 
 . . . . 
[FOF] 35. There is no evidence to support 
[Oceanaire's] claims for Declaratory Relief and Injunction. 
(Counts II and IV of the Counterclaim) 
 . . . . 
[FOF] 62. As a result, Kathryn Mosely and her counsel 
agreed that Easement B had been terminated and that 
Easements D and C -1 were the pro per access to the Kuleana 
Lots and that "Mr. Bohm's claims were in fact valid." 
 
 . . . . 
[COL] 7. When the utilities to the Kuleana lots were 
removed from Easement B and placed on Easements D and C -1, 
among others, Easement B, as shown on the 1989 subdivision 
map and as described and depicted in the [2002] Declaration 
was automatically terminated. 
[COL] 8. By virtue of long use of the accessway along 
the East boundary of Lot 7 (including a large portion of 
Easement C -1) and the Blockage Easement B by Lot 5, since 
at least 2008, Easement B had not been and could not be 
used for access to the Kuleana lots for many years and was 
legally abandoned. 
 . . . . 
[COL] 11. Pursuant to the [2002] Declaration, 
Easements C -1 and D are the proper access easements for 
Kuleana Lots. [Bohm] has no access rights across Lot 7 
other than Easement C -1. 
 . . . . 
[COL] 29. Pursuant to unambiguous terms of the [2002] 
Declaration, Easement B automatically terminated when the 
utilities were removed and relocated from Easement B. 
[COL] 30. By the time that the Complaint was filed 
herein, Easement B had been abandoned by long non -use and 
blockage by [Oceanaire]. 
[COL] 31. [Oceanaire] is estopped to deny the 
abandonment because [Oceanaire] never used Easement B and 
it caused the Blockage. 
9   
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We review the circuit court's FOFs under the clearly 
erroneous standard, and COLs de novo under the right/wrong 
standard. Schmidt v. HSC, Inc. , 145 Hawaiʻi 351, 360, 452 P.3d 
348, 357 (2019). "A[n FOF] is clearly erroneous when, despite 
evidence to support the finding, the appellate court is left 
with the definite and firm conviction in reviewing the entire 
evidence that a mistake has been committed." Id. (citation s 
omitted). "[A] COL that presents [a] mixed question [] of fact 
and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard because 
the court's conclusions are dependent upon the facts and 
circumstances of each individual case." Chun v. Bd. of Trs . of 
the Emps.' Ret. Sys. of the State, 106 Hawaiʻi 416, 430, 106 P.3d 
339, 353 (2005) (citations omitted). 
We determine that the above FOFs are not clearly 
erroneous; they are supported by the record evidence, which 
includes Oceanaire's own admissions and the seller's 
disclosures. We note that it is within the province of the 
circuit court to weigh the evidence, and to assess the 
credibility of witnesses. Fisher v. Fisher , 111 Hawaiʻi 41, 46, 
137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006). 
The evidence , as weighed by the circuit court, 
supports the circuit court's finding that Easement B is not the 
only remaining access easement, and that Oceanaire has never 
used Easement B as it is designated on the 1989 Subdivision Map 
10   
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and referenced in the 2002 Declaration. Oceanaire also made 
binding judicial admissions, in its Counterclaim and First 
Amended Counterclaim, regarding the "impracticab[ility]" of 
"legal access solely within the Easement 'B' area ," and the 
failure of Easement B to "satisfy the requirements of the County 
with respect to roadway safety standards." See Ching v. Dung , 
148 Hawaiʻi 416, 427, 477 P.3d 856, 867 (2020) ("[A] party's 
factual allegation in a complaint or other pleading is a 
judicial admission which b inds the party.") (citation s omitted). 
Oceanaire did not, moreover,  challenge many FOFs that 
support the circuit court's ultimate conclusion  that Easement B 
was terminated.   These FOFs are therefore binding.   See  Okada 
Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawaiʻi 450, 458, 40 P.3d 
73, 81 (2002).   Relevant here:  
[FOF] 15. Originally, before the Kuleana lots were 
relocated, Developer's Parcel 10 [Kuleana Lot 5] was 
accessed from Hanalei Plantation Road via a dirt road. 
This road ran north -south from Hanalei Plantation Road with 
a distinctive dog leg that jogged to the east. A waterline was in place under this dirt road.  
[FOF] 16. In the 1989 consolidation -resubdivision, 
the dirt road was "designated" Easement "B" for access and 
utility purposes. HGFE Lot 7 was not yet in existence.  
[FOF] 17. However, by 2002 an aerial photo shows that 
the dirt access road no longer followed Easement "B,"  the 
dog leg was gone and the road was located closer to the common boundary of HGFE lots 7 and 8. (Ex. J -30)  
[FOF] 18. There is no evidence that Easement B was 
used for access after 2002.  
[FOF] 19. There is no evidence that the Illegal 
Access was used continuously for more than 20 years.  
11   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[FOF] 20. By the time this suit was filed, the 
internal road from Hanalei Plantation Road to Lot 5 used 
most of Easement C -1, except where it turned onto and 
crossed over [Bohm's] Lot 7 (the "Illegal Access"). (Ex. 
J-26 Hennessy Map) 
. . . . 
[FOF] 23. The [2002] Declaration reserves Easement B 
"for underground water and electrical utility purposes" in 
favor of the Developer's Parcel 10 and the kuleana parcels 
(¶11a, p.5) and grants Easement B for the same purposes in 
favor of the same parcels (¶2, p.9) . 
 
 . . . . 
[FOF] 25. Paragraphs 11a and 2 of the [2002] 
Declaration, mentioned above, state : "Provided, however, 
that upon construction of water and electrical facilities 
servicing Parcels 10 and 36 through 40 within Easements C -1 
and D[,] Easement B shall automatically terminate and be 
cancelled ."  
[FOF] 26. The [2002] Declaration reserves and grants 
Easements E through G, shown on the 2002 subdivision map, 
for access, underground utility, and drainage purposes, in favor of the kuleana lots and other lots, utility companies 
and the  [HOA]. These are the only designated and granted  
access easements in favor of [Oceanaire's] Lot 5 prior to the sale of the kuleana lots. By subsequent conveyance, 
Easement AU -1 was granted to kuleana lots for access.  
[FOF] 27. The [2002] Declaration reserves Easements 
C-1 (on the East boundary of Lot 7) and D (on the West 
boundary of lot 8) for underground utility, drainage and access purposes in favor of the Kuleana lots and others . 
(¶¶11e and 12d, p. 6).  
(Underscoring in original) (bold emphasis added.) 
Contrary to Oceanaire's contentions, the circuit court  
was  not  collaterally estopped from finding that Easement B was 
terminated because "[w]hether Lot 7 was burdened by Easement 'B' 
was a fact decided in  the Haumea Lawsuit." The party asserting 
collateral estoppel has the burden of proving the following 
elements,  
(1) [T]he issue decided in the prior adjudication is 
identical to the one presented in the action in question; 
12   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) there is a final judgment on the merits; (3) the issue 
decided in the prior adjudication was essential to the 
final judgment; and (4) the party against whom collateral 
estoppel is asserted was a party or in privity with a party 
to the prior adjudicatio n[.] 
Omerod v. Heirs of Kaheananui , 116 Hawaiʻi 239, 264, 172 P.3d 
983, 1008 (2007) (citation omitted). 
Oceanaire did not establish that the issue litigated 
here is identical to the issue presented in the Haumea Lawsuit. 
The Haumea Lawsuit did not concern the termination of Easement 
B, which is the primary focus of this litigation.6 We therefore 
determine that the first element of the collateral estoppel test 
was not met. 
For the foregoing reasons, the circuit court did not 
err in finding that Easement B was terminated. 
(2) Oceanaire contends that the circuit court erred by 
failing to join the owners of Kuleana Lots 1 -4 and Parcel 10 as 
necessary parties to the litigation. Oceanaire specifically 
challenges COL 4, which states that " [a]ll necessary and 
conditionally necessary parties have been joined in this 
action." We review a circuit court's decision regarding the 
joinder of parties under HRCP Rule 19 for abuse of discretion. 
6 Oceanaire conceded as much below. In its "Position Statement as 
to [Bohm's] Motion to Reassign Case," Oceanaire argued that "[t]he [Haumea 
Lawsuit] involved claims, brought by both [Bohm's] and Ocean [a]ire's 
predecessors in interest . . . for [the Subdivision developer's] purported 
failure to provide access to certain lots within the subdivision as 
promised." Oceanaire distinguished this case as "involv[ing] Ocean [a]ire's 
right of access over [Bohm's] property arising from a separate easement." 
13   
   
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
UFJ Bank Ltd. v. Ieda, 109  Hawaiʻi 137, 142, 123 P.3d 1232, 1237  
(2005).  
In Marvin v. Pflueger,  127 Hawaiʻi 490, 280 P.3d 88 
(2012),  the Hawaiʻ i Supreme Court drew a distinction between 
indispensable parties and necessary parties. Marvin  held that 
"only the defense of failure to join an indispensable party 
under [HRCP]  Rule 19(b) is preserved from waiver by [HRCP] Rule 
12(h)(2)."   Id.  at 502, 280 P.3d at 100.   "[T]he defense of 
failure to join a necessary  party under [HRCP] Rule 19(a) must 
be raised by the defendant in its answer or by motion" or it is 
waived.   Kellberg v. Yuen, 135 Hawai ʻi 236, 251 n.12, 349 P.3d 
343, 358 n.12 (2015)  (emphasis added)  (citation omitted).  
Here, Oceanaire did not file a motion pursuant to HRCP 
Rule 12(h), and Oceanaire's Answer only included the defense of 
failure to join indispensable parties – it did not include a 
defense for failure to join necessary parties. Oceanaire thus 
waived its defense of failure to join, as necessary parties, the 
owners of Kuleana Lots 1 -4 and Parcel 10. 
(3) Oceanaire contends that the circuit court erred in 
granting Bohm's motion for partial summary judgment, and 
"[g]ranting [m]andatory [i]njunctive [r]elief [o]rdering 
Oceanaire to [i]mplement a [s]pecific [d]esign for 
[r]econfiguring the [a]ccess to Kuleana Lots 1 through 5 and Lot 
10, [i]ncluding [u]se of [s]o-[c]alled 'Easement D.'" Oceanaire 
14   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
specifically challenges FOFs 36 -39, 42, 44, and 50, and COL 14, 
which state: 
[FOF] 36. In or about 2005, [Haumea], the owner of 
Kule[a]na  Lot 5, constructed a house and improvements on 
the Lot 5, including a retaining wall along the boundary of 
Lot 5 and HGFE Lot 8. Later, this wall was extended by the 
owner of Kuleana Lot 5 further West along the boundary of 
HGFE Lot 7, resulting in a sheer four -foot drop in 
elevation from Lot 7 to Kuleana Lot 5.  
[FOF] 37. As a result of the grading and improvements 
on Kuleana Lot 5, the transition from the access way over HGFE Lot 7 onto Easement A was blocked by a four -foot cut, 
a wall, vegetation, and above -ground impediments.  
[FOF] 38. The grading on Lot 5 was not permitted by 
the County of Kauai or HGFE HOA. (Ex. J -37) 
[FOF] 39. Rather than use the access Easements 
designated by the [2002] Declaration, [Haumea], without 
permission, appropriated an access way across Lot 7, 
parallel to the common boundary of Kuleana Lot 5 and Lot 7 
("Illegal Access"). This, in turn, rendered the land below 
the appropriated access way unusable by [Bohm].  
 . . . . 
[FOF] 42. The blockage is entirely on Kuleana Lot 5 
and was created by Kuleana Lot 5. 
 . . . . 
[FOF] 44. Because of this blockage, Kuleana Lot 5 was 
able to appropriate the east end of Easement A and 
incorporate it into Kuleana Lot 5 for [Oceanaire's] exclusive use.  
 . . . . 
[FOF] 50. Four years later, when Defendant Oceanaire 
was purchasing Kuleana Lot 5, the above -reference[d]  order 
and judgment had not been complied with. Although the wall was subsequently removed the other element [sic] so the 
order and judgment still  have  not  been complied with.  
 . . . . 
[COL] 14. The [circuit court] adopts the Palesh 
Solution[7] as the proper access to the Kuleana Lots on the 
7 The circuit court made the following unchallenged FOFs regarding 
the "Palesh Solution": 
(continued . . .) 
15   
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
condition that Lot 7 sell and grant to the Kuleana  lot 
owners an easement over the 102 square foot portion of Lot 
7. [Bohm] indicated its acceptance of this condition at no 
additional cost to the Kuleana Lot owners if they accept 
access over Easements D and C -1.  
The following test governs permanent injunctive 
relief: 
[T]he appropriate test in this jurisdiction for determining 
whether a permanent injunction is proper is: (1) whether 
the plaintiff has prevailed on the merits; (2) whether the 
balance of irreparable damage favors the issuance of a 
permanent injunction; and (3) whether the public interest 
supports granting such an injunction. 
Pofolk Aviation Haw., Inc. v. Dep't of Transp.  for the State, 
134 Hawaiʻi 255, 261, 339 P.3d 1056, 1062 (App. 2014)  (cleaned 
up). A mandatory  injunction is generally disfavored by courts 
due to its severity, and "courts should deny [a mandatory 
injunction] unless the facts and law clearly favor the injured 
party." Stop Rail Now v. DeCosta, 120 Hawai ʻi 238, 244, 203 P.3d 
658, 664 (App. 2008)  (cleaned up).  
7(. . . continued) 
[FOF] 63. Kathryn Moseley retained Cheryl Pal esh  of 
Belt Collins & Associates to design a road using Easements 
C-1 and D and to estimate the cost of construction of the 
road. This  design and estimate are part of Exs. J -14 and 
P-11a (the "Pal esh Solution").  
[FOF] 64. The Palesh Solution utilizes a 102 square 
foot portion of Lot 7 to soften the curve of the access road off of Easement C -1 onto Easement A. The use of this 
small section had been agreed to by [Bohm] prior to the sale of Kuleana Lot 5 to [Oceanaire] as part of a tentative 
understanding with Kuleana Lot 5 and other Kuleana lot 
owners.  
[FOF] 65. The [circuit court] finds that the Palesh 
Solution complies with applicable County standards and is 
reasonable.  
16   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, the circuit court found that Oceanaire's illegal 
access caused Bohm irreparable harm. The relative hardship 
test, which is also called "balancing the  equities,"  applies 
where, as here,  a "prior landowner has affirmatively violated a 
restrictive covenant and a subsequent purchaser is asked to bear 
the burden of a mandatory injunction to remove the violation." 
Pelosi  v. Wailea Ranch Ests., 91  Hawaiʻi 478, 488, 985 P.2d 1045, 
1055 (1999)  (citations omitted).  
The  relative hardship test need not be applied, 
however,  "where  a property owner deliberately and intentionally 
violates a valid express restriction running with the land [o]r 
intentionally takes a chance." Sandstrom  v. Larsen, 59 Haw. 
491, 500, 583 P.2d 971, 978 (1978)  (cleaned up). A mandatory 
injunction is "appropriate without considering the relative hardships to the parties" where a property owner affirmatively 
acts "in violation of a covenant of which they had actual and 
constructive notice." Royal  Kunia Cmty.  Ass'n ex rel. Bd. of 
Dirs.  v. Nemoto, 119 
Hawaiʻi 437, 451, 198 P.3d 700, 714 (App. 
2008)  (citation omitted). In such cases, mandatory injunctive 
relief is proper to "eradicate the violation" of a restrictive covenant. Id.  at 450-51, 198 P.3d at 713-14 (citations 
omitted).   
Pursuant to unchallenged FOFs 28 and 29, and COL 5, 
the 2003 Covenants "require the [Subdivision] owners to use only 
17   
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
designated access ways," and the provisions of the 2003 
Covenants and 2002 Declaration are "binding upon the parties and 
Kuleana Lot 5 and Lot 7." Oceanaire continued to use the 
Illegal Access, in violation of Article VII, Section 2(b)(14) of 
the 2003 Covenants. And despite notice via the disclosures from 
Haumea, Oceanaire "t [ook] a chance" in failing to relocate 
access as ordered in the Haumea Lawsuit, and as it was advised 
to do by Haumea at the time it purchased Lot 5. See Sandstrom , 
59 Haw. at 500, 5 83 P.2d at 978 (citation omitted) . 
We conclude that the circuit court did not err in 
finding that permanent injunctive relief was proper. 
(4) Oceanaire contends that the circuit court erred in 
concluding that Bohm was the prevailing party, and on that 
basis, in awarding attorneys' fees to Bohm.   Oceanaire 
specifically challenges COLs 20-23, which state:  
[COL] 20. [Bohm] is the prevailing party in this 
action. 
[COL] 21. The [2002] Declaration and [2003 Covenants] 
both provide for attorneys' fees and costs to the 
prevailing party regardless of the nature of the action. 
[COL] 22. In addition, this action involves the 
enforcement of the provisions of the HGFE subdivision's 
governing documents and HGFE is a planned community 
association within the meaning of HRS § []607-14. Therefore 
[Bohm], as a member of the association, is entitled to 
reasonable attorney's [fees] and costs without regard to 
the 25% limit of HRS []§ 607-14. 
[COL] 23. Further [Bohm] is entitled to costs as a 
matter of course under HRCP Rule 54(d)(1). 
18   
   
   
 
 
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We review the circuit court's award of attorneys ' fees 
and costs under the abuse of discretion standard. Gailliard v. 
Rawsthorne , 150 Hawaiʻi 169, 175, 498 P.3d 700, 706 (2021) . 
"For the purposes of awarding costs and attorney fees, 
a party need not sustain his entire claim in order to be a 
prevailing party." Rapozo v. Better Hearing of Haw., LLC, 
120  Hawaiʻi 257, 261, 204 P.3d 476, 480 (2009)  (cleaned up). In 
determining which party prevailed, the court must "first 
identify the princip[al]  issues raised by the pleadings and 
proof in a particular case, and then determine, on balance, which party prevailed on the issues." Deutsche Bank Nat'l Tr. 
Co. v. Kozma, 140 Hawai ʻi 494, 498, 403 P.3d 271, 275 (2017) 
(citation omitted).  
Bohm is the prevailing party. Bohm sought to enjoin 
Oceanaire from illegally accessing Bohm's property, and the 
circuit court to order Oceanaire to "immediately remove any 
impediment within Easement A," restore Easement A so that it may 
be used as an access road for the Kuleana Lots , and "repair and 
restore the Illegal Access area on Lot 7." Final Judgment was 
entered in favor of Bohm and against Oceanaire on all counts of 
the Amended Counterclaim, and entered in favor of Bohm and 
against Oceanaire on Counts I and II of the Complaint. Although 
19   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the  circuit court did not award monetary damages,  it did  award  
Bohm  relief  "in the form of removing and restoring the Illegal 
Access."  8
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS )  § 607-14 (2016), which 
allows for attorneys' fees in actions in the nature of 
assumpsit, provides, in relevant part:  
In all the courts, in all actions in the nature of 
assumpsit and in all actions on a promissory note or other 
contract in writing that provides for an attorney's fee, 
there shall be taxed as attorneys' fees, to be paid by the 
losing party and to be include d in the sum for which 
execution may issue, a fee that the court determines to be 
reasonable [.] 
. . . . 
The above fees provided for by this section shall be 
assessed on the amount of the judgment exclusive of costs 
and all attorneys' fees obtained by the plaintiff, and upon 
the amount sued for if the defendant obtains judgment.  
Nothing in this section shall limit the recovery of 
reasonable attorneys' fees and costs by a planned community 
association and its members  in actions for the collection 
of delinquent assessments, the foreclosure of any lien, or 
the enforcement of any provision of the association's governing documents , or affect any right of a prevailing 
party to recover attorneys' fees in excess of twenty -five 
per cent of the judgment pursuant to any statute that 
specifically provides that a prevailing party may recover 
all of it s reasonable attorneys' fees. "Planned community 
association" for the purposes of this section means a 
nonprofit homeowners or community association existing pursuant to covenants running  with the land.  
(Emphasis added .) 
8   It is immaterial that the circuit court did not award  monetary  
damages to Bohm, or that "neither party . . . completely prevailed as to the 
location of the driveway." Nelson v. Hawaiian Homes Comm'n, 130 Hawai ʻi 162, 
165, 307 P.3d 142, 145 (2013) ("The  prevailing party is the one who prevails 
on the disputed main issue" even though "the party [did] not prevail to the 
extent of his original contention.") (cleaned up).  
20   
   
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court did not err in concluding that the 
"planned community association" exception under HRS § 607 -14 
applies, and that Bohm could therefore recover attorneys' fees 
"in excess of twenty -five per cent of the judgment ." The HGFE 
Community Association is a planned community association. Its 
2003 Covenants state that all of the HGFE lots, inclusive of the 
Kuleana Lots, are "subject to the covenants, conditions, 
restrictions [,] and limitations set forth" in the 2003 
Covenants , and all "covenants, conditions, restrictions [,] and 
limitations shall constitute covenants running with the land."9 
Oceanaire does not challenge the circuit court's FOF that the 
2003 Covenants "empower members of the HOA (e.g. , HGFE lot 
owners) to enforce the provisions of the [ 2003 Covenants]." 
9 Article VIII, Section 2(c) of the 2003 Covenants authorizes any 
Subdivision owner to, 
commence and maintain actions and suits to require the 
[breaching] Owner to remedy such breach or non -compliance 
or for specific performance, or to enforce by mandatory 
injunction or otherwise all of the provisions of [the 2003 
Covenants], or to restrain or enjoin any breach or 
threatened breach of [the 2003 Covenants], or to recover 
damages[.] 
The 2003 Covenants also permit the prevailing party " [i]n any 
action for the enforcement of the [ 2003 Covenants'] provisions," or "for 
damages or any other form of relief," to recover "costs, expenses [,] and 
reasonable attorneys' fees." 
The 2002 Declaration also establishes that the HGFE Lots are 
subject to enumerated "limitations, restrictions, covenants, conditions, 
reservations [,] and easements, which shall run with the land and shall be 
binding upon all persons." 
21   
   
 
  
  
  
   
  
    
   
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court therefore did not abuse its 
discretion in awarding attorneys' fees to the prevailing party 
Bohm.  
B. Bohm's Points of Error 
Bohm contends that the circuit court erroneously 
denied Bohm damages, and challenges COL 15 and section F of the 
circuit court's Order . COL 15 states: "Trespass on Lot 7 and 
blockage of Easement A should be enjoined and removed and the 
ground restored. [Bohm] failed to carry its burden of proof by 
a preponderance of evidence as to damages and [the circuit 
court] awards none." Section F provides, "[Bohm] is awarded no 
damages beyond the removal and restoration of the Illegal Access 
on Lot 7." We address Bohm's specific contentions as follows: 
(1) Bohm contends that the circuit court erred by not 
awarding monetary damages to Bohm and that such damages should 
have been calculated "in the form of reasonable rent for the use 
of Bohm's property ," so "the rent for the use of that portion of 
land is owed to Bohm." In support of this contention, Bohm 
points to the trial testimony of Steven Moody (Moody) and John 
Bohm. Moody testified, as a real estate broker,10 that he was 
listing Lot 7 for $4,000,000, but that he would have listed the 
10 The circuit court's unchallenged FOF 82 states, "Steven Moody's 
testimony as to value was limited to his opinion as a real estate broker." 
The circuit court ruled that Moody was not allowed to testify as a real 
estate appraiser. 
22   
       
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
property for $4,500,000 had there been no dispute regarding the 
access easement. Moody further testified that John Bohm 
purchased Lot 7 for $1,000,400 , and that Lot 7 was presently 
being rented to a tenant, for a monthly rent of $3,000, pursuant 
to a December 1, 2017 rental agreement. 
John Bohm testified regarding damages for the 
interference with and loss of use of the property, which he 
represented to be $348,000 for the prior three years in total 
for an annual rate of $116,000. John Bohm stated the following 
to explain why he was owed this "rent" as damages : 
So this is my lot and there's the ability to CPR.[11] Well, 
I can't use that part of the lot because there's --as 
we've established, [Oceanaire's] guests, his employees, 
contractors, and everybody else are driving across it and 
so that keeps me from using the second CPR lot of the 
property. And because --so basically taken over for his 
purposes the second half of my CPR on the bottom half. So 
I believe that the property is in value of 4 million or 
more, so half of it --even though it's the more important 
and more valuable half, is at least $2 million. And then 
the rate that a property like that or the cap ra te 
published that's available publicly is 5.8 percent times 
three years is 348,000, so it's basically the rent rate. 
"[T]he measure of damages in trespass actions is such 
sum as will compensate the person injured for the loss 
sustained, or for damages that have occurred or can with 
certainty be expected to occur." Krog v. Koahou , No. SCWC -12-
0000315, 2014 WL 813038, at *3 (Haw. Feb. 28, 2014) (mem. op.) 
(citation omitted ). "Damages are calculated as the sum 
11 With regard to a CPR, John Bohm testified that he did not hire 
anyone to do a CPR. 
23   
  
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
necessary to make the victim whole, including damages for loss 
of use of the property." Id.  (cleaned up). "Generally, we do 
not disturb the [FOFs]  of the [circuit]  court on the issue of 
damages absent a clearly erroneous measure of damages." Ching, 
148 Hawaiʻi at 427, 477 P.3d at  867 (citation omitted).  
The circuit court, in declining to award damages, 
explained, 
As far as value of the property and the use of the 
easement, this was a difficult calculation to try and 
accomplish mainly because if the [c]ourt is correct, the 
property was bought for 1.4 million and right now it's being listed at 4.5 million. I believe it was Mr. Moody's, 
Steve Mood y, he testified that there might be a $500,000 
discount because of the litigation or the lawsuit. The [c]ourt finds that that was speculative . If anything, the 
delay has led to the increase in value and that is a 
windfall or profit for [Bohm].  
So the delay in whatever litigation has created –- 
and right now I'm not even clear that the delay in the sale was created by the litigation . The delay in the sale could 
have been the 4.5 million price tag that is on the 
property. There's no clarity on that. And so regarding 
the damage for use of the property, the [c]ourt finds no 
damage because [Bohm] hasn't been able to prove that 
damage.  
(Emphasis added.) 
In considering whether to award damages, the circuit 
court thus considered evidence, including the testimony of 
Moody, which it found to be speculative.   We will not second 
guess the circuit court's weighing of the evidence  presented at 
trial, and its determinations with regard to the credibility of 
witnesses. Porter v. Hu, 116 Hawaiʻi 42, 59-60, 169 P.3d 994, 
1011-12 (App. 2007) ("An appellate court will not pass upon the 
24   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial judge's decisions with respect to the credibility of 
witnesses and the weight of the evidence, because this is the 
province of the trial judge.") (citation omitted) . We determine 
that the circuit court did not err by not awarding monetary 
damages. 
(2) Bohm contends that the circuit court "erroneously 
refused to award [monetary] damages because it presumed that (a) 
others were also wrongfully trespassing, (b) an allocation or 
apportionment among al l trespassers was necessary, and (c) it 
could not determine how to apportion the damages among Oceanaire 
and the neighbors that might also be trespassing." 
As the circuit court explained, 
[O]ne of the things that the [c]ourt  couldn't calculate and 
there was no testimony was how much use each kuleana lot 
used that easement . And what I mean by that is they 
couldn't say a certain percentage was for [Kuleana]  Lot 5, 
a certain percent was for Lot 4, and a certain percentage 
was for the other lots. There's no calculation on that. 
It's unclear.   And because of that, the [c]ourt is not able 
to allocate -- first of all, the [c]ourt cannot determine 
what the damages for the so -called trespass or use of the 
curve is. It's unclear.  
And even if there was some kind of damage, the 
[c]ourt would have to allocate that between the kuleana lot 
owners  and other than just dividing it a certain way -- 
that would be, you know, doing the 20 percent -- that would 
be speculative because I don't know how many cars each property has and how many times the people at the kuleana a 
[sic] lots drive up and down .  
(Emphasis added.) 
Here, the circuit court found that  whether or not Bohm 
was entitled to damages was  "speculative" because there was no 
evidence as to Oceanaire's use of  the Illegal Access on Bohm's 
25   
  
    
  
  
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
property vis-à-vis the other Kuleana Lot owners . Bohm sought 
damages based on Moody and John Bohm's testimony, which did not 
address the other lot owners ' use of the Illegal Access, and how 
a damages award could be apportioned to account for those lot 
owners' contribution to the harms . The circuit court thus 
determined that Bohm did not introduce sufficient evidence to 
establish its entitlement to damages. We determine that the 
circuit court did not err in reaching this conclusion. 
(3) Bohm contends that the circuit court erred by not 
awarding punitive damages. "Award or denial of punitive damages 
is within the sound discretion of the trier of fact. The trier 
of fact's decision to grant or deny punitive damages will be 
reversed only for a clear abuse of discretion." Kekona v. 
Bornemann, 135 Hawaiʻi 254, 262-63, 349 P.3d 361, 369-70 (2015) 
(citation omitted).  
It is axiomatic that "[s]omething more than the mere 
commission of a tort is always required for punitive damages
."   
Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Newtown Meadows ex rel. Bd. of 
Dirs.  v. Venture 15, Inc., 115 Hawaiʻi 232, 297, 167 P.3d 225, 
290 (2007)  (cleaned up).  
In determining whether an award of punitive damages is 
appropriate, the inquiry focuses primarily upon the 
defendant's mental state, and to a lesser degree, the 
nature of his conduct. In the case of most torts, ill 
will, evil motive, or consciousness of w rongdoing on the 
part of the tortfeasor are not necessary to render his 
conduct actionable. In a negligence action, for example, 
the defendant may be required to make compensation if it is 
26   
  
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
   
     
  
 
  
  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
shown that he failed to comply with the standard of care 
which would be exercised by an ordinary prudent person, no 
matter how innocent of desire to harm. In contrast, to 
justify an award of punitive damages, a positive element of 
conscious wrongdoing is always required . Thus, punitive 
damages are not awarded for mere inadvertence, mistake, or 
errors of judgment. 
Id. (emphasis added) (cleaned up) (quoting Masaki v. Gen. Motors 
Corp., 71 Haw. 1, 7, 780 P.2d 566, 570 -71 (1989)). 
In order to recover punitive damages, the plaintiff must 
prove by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant 
has acted wantonly or oppressively or with such malic e  as 
implies a spirit of mischief or criminal indifference to civil obligations , or where there has been some wil[l]ful 
misconduct  or that entire want of care which would raise 
the presumption of a conscious indifference to consequences.  
Id. (emphasis added) (cleaned up) . 
The circuit court made no findings that Bohm proved, 
by clear and convincing evidence, that Oceanaire acted 
"wantonly [,] . . . oppressively, or with such malice as implies 
a spirit of mischief or criminal indifference to civil 
obligations," or engaged in "wil[l]ful misconduct." See id. 
(citation omitted). Nor does the record evidence , as weighed by 
the circuit court, show that Oceanaire's actions here 
constituted "a positive element of conscious wrongdoing." See 
id. (cleaned up). We determine that the circuit court did not 
abuse its discretion by not awarding punitive damages. 
27   
   
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the circuit 
court's Amended Final Judgment and Order.  
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, July 17, 2025. 
On the briefs:  /s/ Katherine G. Leonard  
 Presiding  Judge  
Leroy E. Colombe,   
for Defendant/  /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen  
Counterclaimant-Appellant/  Associate Judge  
Cross-Appellee.   
 /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Wayne Nasser,  Associate Judge 
Kevin W. Herring,  
for Plaintiff/Counterclaim 
Defendant-Appellee/  
Cross-Appellant.  
28 