NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000975
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
DAMIAN-RAY E. GILCREASE, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 12-1-102K)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Damian-Ray E. Gilcrease (Gilcrease)
 
appeals from the Judgment Guilty Conviction and Sentence, entered
 
on October 12, 2012 in the Family Court of the Third Circuit
 
(Family Court).1
 
Gilcrease was convicted of Abuse of Family or Household
 
Member, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 709-906(1)
 
(Supp. 2013) and Criminal Property Damage in the Fourth Degree,
 
in violation of HRS § 708-823(1) (Supp. 2013).
 
On appeal, Gilcrease contends there was insufficient
 
evidence to convict him of the charges because the State failed
 
to adduce substantial evidence that Gilcrease acted with the
 
requisite state of mind for each offense.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
1
 The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Gilcrease's points of error as follows and affirm:
 
There was sufficient evidence that Gilcrease acted with
 
the requisite intent to commit Abuse of Family or Household
 Member and Criminal Property Damage in the Fourth Degree.
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has 
held that evidence adduced in the trial court must be
 
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution when
the appellate court passes on the legal sufficiency of such
evidence to support a conviction; the same standard applies
whether the case was before a judge or a jury. The test on
appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a
reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence
to support the conclusion of the trier of fact[.]
 
State v. Fields, 115 Hawai 'i 503, 511-12, 168 P.3d 955, 963-64 
(2007) (internal citations omitted). 
HRS § 709-906(1) states: 
§709-906 Abuse of family or household members;
penalty. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person,
singly or in concert, to physically abuse a family or
household member or to refuse compliance with the
lawful order of a police officer under subsection (4).
The police, in investigating any complaint of abuse of
a family or household member, upon request, may
transport the abused person to a hospital or safe
shelter.
 For the purposes of this section, "family or
household member" means spouses or reciprocal
beneficiaries, former spouses or reciprocal
beneficiaries, persons in a dating relationship as
defined under section 586-1, persons who have a child
in common, parents, children, persons related by
consanguinity, and persons jointly residing or
formerly residing in the same dwelling unit.
 
Inflicting scratches on a neck and arms constitutes physical 
abuse within the meaning of HRS § 709-906. State v. Cordero, 106 
Hawai'i 381, 386 n.5, 105 P.3d 258, 263 n.5 (App. 2004) . "Except 
as provided in section 702-212, a person is not guilty of an 
offense unless the person acted intentionally, knowingly, 
recklessly, or negligently, as the law specifies, with respect to 
each element of the offense. When the state of mind required to 
establish an element of an offense is not specified by the law, 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that element is established if, with respect thereto, a person 
acts intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly." HRS § 702-204 
(1993). "[T]he mind of an alleged offender may be read from his 
acts, conduct and inferences fairly drawn from all the 
circumstances." State v. Stocker, 90 Hawai 'i 85, 92, 976 P.2d 
399, 406 (1999) (citations and block formatting omitted). 
The prosecution presented the testimony of the
 
complaining witness who testified as follows: Gilcrease had a
 child with the complaining witness. On the evening in question,
 
Gilcrease became upset with the complaining witness when she
 
would not show him her phone. When the complaining witness
 
attempted to hide the phone in a different place, Gilcrease saw
 
this and attempted to, and eventually did, remove it from her
 
hands during a struggle for the phone. In the process, Gilcrease
 
scratched the hands of the complaining witness as depicted in
 
State's Exhibits 1 and 2. From the acts, conduct, and inferences
 
fairly drawn from all the circumstances, Gilcrease did
 
intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly scratch the complaining
 
witness in an attempt to forcibly remove her phone from her
 
hands. Therefore, there was sufficient evidence that Gilcrease
 
acted with the requisite intent to commit Abuse of Family or
 
Household Member. 
HRS § 708-823(1) states:
 
§708-823 Criminal property damage in the fourth
degree. (1) A person commits the offense of criminal
property damage in the fourth degree if by means other
than fire, the person intentionally or knowingly
damages the property of another without the other's
consent.
 
The complaining witness testified that, after Gilcrease took the
 
complaining witness's phone, he exited her vehicle and kicked the
 
car door to close it, causing a dent. Gilcrease appeared to be
 
walking away. However, Gilcrease ran back to the vehicle, yelled
 
at the complaining witness, hit her in the face, and punched the
 
vehicle's compact disc (CD) player which broke it. From the
 
acts, conduct, and inferences fairly drawn from all the
 
circumstances, the evidence supported the conclusion that
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Gilcrease did intentionally or knowingly damage the complaining
 
witness's car door and/or CD player. Therefore, there was
 
sufficient evidence that Gilcrease acted with the requisite
 
intent to commit Criminal Property Damage in the Fourth Degree.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment Guilty
 
Conviction and Sentence, entered on October 12, 2012 in the
 Family Court of the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 16, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Lianne M. Aoki,

Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Terri L. Fujioka-Lilley,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Hawai 'i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
4
 