NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) and (3) provide:1
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle
under the influence of an intoxicant if the person operates or
assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount
sufficient to impair the person's normal mental
faculties or ability to care for the person and guard
against casualty;
(continued...)NO. CAAP-13-0002997
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI #I
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
CORINNE KING, Defendant-Appellee.
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 5DTA-13-00062)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
INTRODUCTION
I.
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai #i (State) charged
Defendant-Appellee Corinne King (King) with operating a vehicle
under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1) and/or (a)(3)
(2007).1  King moved to suppress evidence obtained after theNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(...continued)1
. . . [or]
(3) With .08 or more grams of alcohol per two hundred ten
liters of breath[.]
The State also charged King with inattention to driving.
 The Honorable Trudy K. Senda presided.2
2police effected a traffic stop of her SUV.  
At a hearing on the suppression motion, Officer
MacKenzie Metcalfe (Officer Metcalfe) testified that in the
evening, while off-duty, he was a passenger in a friend's
vehicle.  It was already dark.  According to Officer Metcalfe, he
observed a white Ford SUV directly in front of him, weaving and
being driven erratically.  Officer Metcalfe was not able to
identify the driver and believed there could be two or three
people in the SUV.  Officer Metcalfe called the Kaua# i Police
Department (KPD) dispatch on a cell phone to report his
observation of the SUV's being driven erratically.  Officer
Metcalfe notified dispatch that there were several people in the
SUV, provided a description of the SUV and its license plate
number, and directed his friend to follow the SUV.  Officer
Metcalfe testified that he believed he stayed on the phone with
dispatch and believed he never lost visual observation of the SUV
until it was pulled over by an on-duty police officer.  Although
Officer Metcalfe testified that he notified dispatch that there
were several people in the SUV, he believed there could be two or
three people in the SUV, and that he believed he had maintained
constant surveillance of the SUV, when Officer Matthew Beadle
(Officer Beadle) approached the SUV after effecting a traffic
stop, Officer Beadle discovered that the only person in the SUV
was King, who was in the driver's seat. 
II.
After hearing the evidence, the District Court of the
Fifth Circuit (District Court)2 found that "[a]though officerNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3Metcalf[e] testified he had continual surveillance of the white
SUV, it appears officer Metcalf[e] did not have continual
surveillance of the vehicle, and at some point the vehicle
stopped, and one or two people exited the vehicle."  The District
Court concluded that Officer Beadle's stop of King's vehicle,
which was based on Officer Metcalfe's observations, was
justified.  It further concluded, however, that "much of the
justification for the stop dissipated when officer Beadle found
[King] was the sole occupant of the vehicle."  The District Court
ruled that because "Officer Beadle lacked probable cause or an
articulable basis to believe that a crime had been committed [by
King] before ordering [King] out of her vehicle," all evidence
obtained after King exited her vehicle was ordered suppressed. 
It further ruled that even if Officer Beadle was justified in
ordering King out of her vehicle, he lacked probable cause to
arrest her, and therefore, all evidence obtained after her arrest
was ordered suppressed.
III.
The State appeals from the District Court's "Findings
of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting Defendant's
Motion to Suppress Evidence and Statements" (Suppression Order). 
The State contends: (1) the District Court clearly erred in
finding that Officer Metcalfe did not have continual surveillance
of the SUV and at some point the vehicle stopped and one or two
persons exited; (2) the District Court erred in permitting King
to question Officer Beadle about the activities of the SUV before
Officer Beadle first saw it; (3) the District Court erred in
concluding that much of the justification for Officer Beadle's
stop of the vehicle dissipated when he discovered that King was
the SUV's sole occupant; (4) the District Court erred in
concluding that Officer Beadle's request/command to King to exit
her vehicle was not supported by reasonable suspicion; and (5)
the District Court erred in concluding that Officer Beadle's
arrest of King was not supported by probable cause.
At the outset, we note that with very limited NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4exceptions, the District Court's purported factual findings were
not actual findings of fact, but simply recitations of the
witnesses' testimony.  The District Court's failure, in large
part, to make actual findings of fact severely impairs our
ability to review the District Court's rulings.  With respect to
one factual finding that the District Court did make, namely,
that it appears that Officer Metcalfe did not have continual
surveillance of the SUV and at some point the vehicle stopped and
one or two persons exited, we conclude that this finding was
based on permissible inferences from the evidence and therefore
was not clearly erroneous.  We further conclude, however, that
the presumed departure of other occupants of the SUV did not
preclude the existence of reasonable suspicion to stop the SUV or
to request that King undergo field sobriety tests.  We therefore
vacate the District Court's decision to suppress evidence
relating to the field sobriety tests, which was apparently based
on its conclusion that the evidence presented by the State was
insufficient as a matter of law to establish reasonable suspicion
for Officer Beadle to have King undergo the tests.
Excluding Officer Metcalfe's testimony that he
maintained continual surveillance of the SUV, which the District
Court determined was not credible, we conclude that the remaining
testimony of Officers Metcalfe and Beadle was sufficient, if
believed, to establish reasonable suspicion to have King exit the
vehicle for field sobriety tests and to establish probable cause
for King's arrest.  However, because the District Court failed to
make findings of fact that would show whether and to what extent
it believed significant portions of the officers' remaining
testimony, we are unable to complete an effective review of the
District Court's rulings regarding the lack of reasonable
suspicion to have King exit the vehicle to perform field sobriety
tests and the lack of probable cause for King's arrest.  We
therefore vacate the District Court's Suppression Order and
remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this
Memorandum Opinion.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5BACKGROUND
I.
At the hearings on King's motion to suppress evidence,
the State called Officers Metcalfe and Beadle as witnesses.  King
did not call any witnesses.  The following evidence was presented
at the hearings.
A.
Officer Metcalfe testified that at about 7:00 p.m., he
was a passenger in car driven by a friend traveling south on
KãhiÇ Highway near the Kaua# i Community Correctional Center
(KCCC) in Wailua, Kaua #i.  Directly in front of his car, Officer
Metcalfe saw a white Ford SUV swerving in its lane and crossing
the solid double yellow lines in the middle of the highway and
the white fog line at the side of the highway.  Officer Metcalfe
called KPD dispatch on his cellular phone, reported that the SUV
was being driven erratically along with a description of the SUV
and is license plate number, and directed the driver of his car
to follow the SUV.  Officer Metcalfe's car followed the SUV from
near the KCCC in Waialua, through Hanam ~#ulu, down and up Kapaia
Hill, past Wilcox Hospital, past Ahukini junction, down the Mill
Bridge area, past Kukui Grove, and until the SUV was pulled over
by an on-duty police officer on Nuhou Road in L§ hu#e fronting the
Chiefess Kamakahelei Middle School.  While following the SUV,
Officer Metcalfe observed the SUV crossing the yellow lines and
fog line several times, make "a really wide turn" at the junction
of Kapule and K ãhiÇ, nearly hit a stop sign at Kapaia Road, drive
in the center of two lanes, and stop at a red light thirty yards
away from the stop line.
As he followed the SUV, Officer Metcalfe stayed on the
phone and contemporaneously reported his observations to the
police dispatcher.  Officer Metcalfe was concerned that the SUV
driver would lose control of the vehicle and become involved in a
traffic collision resulting in injury or death.  Officer Metcalfe
indicated that he followed the SUV for a long distance due to the
delay in an on-duty officer responding to his call to dispatch. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 Officer Metcalfe testified on cross-examination as follows:3
Q.  Now, somewhere during the following [of] the [SUV], you
notified dispatch that several subjects were inside the vehicle as
you were approaching Ahukini and Kuhio?
A.  I did.
Q.  So, from what you could see, how many people were in the
vehicle?
A.  At the time, I believe there could be two to three.
Q.  You weren't able to identify the driver of the vehicle
at that point, right?
A.  No, no I was not.
Q.  And, in fact, you weren't able to identify the vehicle
at all during your time following the vehicle, correct?
A.  Identify the vehicle itself?
Q.  The driver of the vehicle.
A.  Oh, no, sir.
6When Officer Metcalfe first observed the SUV, it was already dark
outside.  Officer Metcalfe testified that while following the
SUV, he was not able to identify the driver of the SUV.  He
testified that he notified dispatch that there were several
people inside the SUV and that from what he could see, he
"believe[d] there could be two to three" people in the SUV.3 
According to Officer Metcalfe, he was directly behind the SUV
"the whole time" and believed he "never lost visual observation
of it" from the time he first observed it until the SUV was
pulled over by a patrol officer. 
B.
Officer Beadle testified that while on duty in his
patrol car, at about 7:40 p.m., he saw an SUV that matched the
description and license plate number of the SUV that Officer
Metcalfe had reported to dispatch was swerving all over the 
road.  Approximately 20 to 30 seconds after he first observed the
SUV, Officer Beadle activated his emergency blue lights and gave
a short siren blast to signal to the SUV to pull over.  The SUV
did not pull over immediately but took some time to get to theNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 Officer Beadle first detected an odor of alcohol emanating from King4
after she was arrested and was being placed in a vehicle . 
7side of the road and stop, which indicated to Officer Beadle that
the operator of the SUV might be impaired.  The SUV traveled
about a tenth of a mile from the time Officer Beadle first
observed it until the SUV pulled over.  Officer Beadle effected
the traffic stop based on the information that had been relayed
to him; he did not personally observe the SUV being driven
erratically or violate any traffic laws. 
Upon approaching the SUV, Officer Beadle found King
"behind the wheel" and that there was no one else in the vehicle.
King said she had come from a birthday party at Aloha Beach. 
Officer Beadle noticed that King's speech was slurred and that
her eyes were glassy and watery.  King had a "hard time
retrieving her driver's license[,]" fumbled through her wallet
and credit cards to locate it, "seemed a little disoriented," and
had trouble pulling the license out of its slot in the wallet. 
At that point, Officer Beadle had not detected the smell of
alcohol.4 
Officer Beadle asked King "if she would be willing to
submit to a standardized field sobriety test," and "[King] said
she would."  Officer Beadle instructed King to stay by his side
and follow him to the parking lot area of Chiefess Kamakahelei
School.  King stumbled as she was walking and had to be
redirected towards the parking lot area, as she would veer away
from where Officer Beadle wanted her to go.  King exhibited very
poor coordination, and it appeared to Officer Beadle that she wa
under the influence of some sort of intoxicant.  Before
conducting the field sobriety tests, Officer Beadle asked King i
she had any physical impairments or was taking medication.  King
stated that she had a metal plate in her neck, had three rods in
her back, had undergone hip replacement surgery, and was taking
certain medications; she did not say that her physical ailments
or medications would affect her ability to perform the fields
fNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
8sobriety tests. 
With respect to the walk-and-turn test, Officer Beadle
instructed King on how to perform the test and demonstrated it
for her.  King stated that she understood Officer Beadle's
instructions.  Officer Beadle started the test but had to stop it
because King lost her balance and stepped off the line several
times.  This indicated to Officer Beadle that King was under the
influence of an intoxicant.  Because King was not able to safely
complete the walk-and-turn test -- she kept losing her balance --
Officer Beadle, at the direction of his supervisor, who was
present at the scene, terminated the walk-and-turn test and did
not ask King to perform the one-leg stand test.  Officer Beadle
opined that he had reason to believe that King was under the
influence of an intoxicant and that she did not appear to be able
to safely operate her vehicle.  Officer Beadle placed King under
arrest. 
II.
After the evidence had been presented, the District
Court orally ruled:
The Court finds that there was -- that the stop
of the vehicle, the traffic stop of Ms. King's vehicle
was lawful.  There wasn't any problem with that.  But
based on the testimony and the totality of evidence
what was presented to the Court, the Court doesn't
find that the officer was lawfully justified in
seizing the Defendant and having her removed from the
vehicle and then engaging in the [Standardized Field
Sobriety Tests].
And that resulted in the arrest.  So, the Court
doesn't find that the officer had specific articulable facts
to base an arrest of the Defendant.  So, again, I'm finding
that the stop was justified and he was entitled to rely on
what would normally be hearsay, which was information coming
from dispatch.  But there was nothing that occurred -- or
there was insufficient evidence, insufficient facts that you
could specify that pointed to an indication that Ms. King
had committed a crime.
And so he wasn't entitled to order her out of the
vehicle and effect an arrest.  And based on that, the Court
is going to grant the motion to suppress.
The District Court asked defense counsel to draft
findings and an order granting the motion to suppress.  TheNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
9District Court clarified that everything after King stepped out
of her vehicle was being suppressed.  The District Court
indicated that evidence obtained before that point, including
what Officer Beadle observed while King remained in the SUV, such
as the manner in which she retrieved her driver's license, was
not being suppressed. 
The District Court issued its written Suppression Order
on August 13, 2013.  In its Suppression Order, the District Court
concluded:
1.The stop of Defendant's vehicle by officer
Beadle was justified.  Justification for the stop was based
primarily on the observations of officer Metcalf[e] as they
were relayed to him by KPD dispatch.  Terry v. Ohio, 392
U.S. 1, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 20 L.Ed.2d 889 (1968).  However, much
of the justification for the stop dissipated when officer
Beadle found Defendant was the sole occupant of the vehicle. 
Based on the information provided by officer Metcalf[e],
officer Beadle did not have any evidence that Defendant was
operating the vehicle at the time officer Metcalf[e]
observed the erratic operation of the white SUV.
2.Officer Beadle lacked probable cause or an
articulable basis to believe a crime had been committed
before ordering Defendant out of her vehicle.  Accordingly,
any and all evidence observed or recovered after Defendant
exited her vehicle is suppressed and precluded from use at
trial.  State v. Kim, 68 Haw. 268, 711 P.2d 1291 (Hawaii
1985). 
3.Assuming arguendo , that officer Beadle had
justification to order Defendant out of her vehicle, this Court
concludes that officer Beadle lacked probable cause, at the time
he placed Defendant under arrest, for the offense of Operating a
Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant.  Accordingly, any
and all evidence recovered subsequent to the arrest of Defendant
is suppressed and precluded from use at trial.  State v. Ito, 90
Hawaii 225, 978 P.2d 191, (Hawaii App. 1999).
DISCUSSION
I.
The Suppression Order lists twenty-nine "findings of
fact."  However, as previously noted, the vast majority of the
District Court's purported factual findings were not actual
findings of fact, but simply recitations of the witnesses'
testimony.  As an example, Finding of Fact (FOF) 3 states:
"Officer Metcalf[e] testified  that he observed a white SUV
vehicle directly in front of the vehicle he was in.  OfficerNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 In Richardson, we proceeded on appeal with the assumption that the5
family court had decided that the testimony cited in its findings was
credible.  Richardson,  8 Haw. App. at 454, 808 P.2d at 1284.  It is not clear
that such an assumption would be correct in this case, and we decline to treat
the District Court's references to witnesses' testimony as findings of fact.  
10Metcalf[e] testified that he saw the white SUV driving
erratically and notified KPD dispatch via his cellular
telephone."  (Emphasis added.)  Simply recounting what a witness
has testified to is not a finding of fact.  See Richardson v.
Richardson, 8 Haw. App. 446, 454, 808 P.2d 1279, 1284 (1991)
("[A] trial court's statement of a party's or a witness's
testimony is not a finding of fact because it does not say it is
a fact nor does it in any other way decide the crucial question
of credibility.").5   
The questions of whether reasonable suspicion for an
investigative stop or probable cause for an arrest exists depend
upon the evaluation of the totality of the circumstances.  See
State v. Prendergast , 103 Hawai #i 451, 455, 83 P.3d 714, 717
(2004); State v. Ferrer, 95 Hawai# i 409, 431, 23 P.3d 744, 766
(App. 2001).  The District Court's failure to make actual
findings of fact that explain the circumstances it found were
present in ruling on these questions severely impairs our ability
to review the District Court's suppression rulings.  
II.
We first address one the few actual findings of fact
that the District Court did make.  In FOF 16, the District Court
found: "Although officer Metcalf[e] testified he had continual
surveillance of the white SUV, it appears officer Metcalf[e] did
not have continual surveillance of the vehicle, and at some point
the vehicle stopped, and one or two persons exited the vehicle."
The State argues that FOF 16 was clearly erroneous.  We disagree. 
At the suppression hearing, Officer Metcalfe testified
that he believed he had maintained continual surveillance of the
SUV, that he notified dispatch that there were several people in
the SUV, and that he believed there could be two or three peopleNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
11in the SUV.  However, Officer Beadle testified that when he
pulled the SUV over, King was the only person in the SUV.  As the
State acknowledges, the evidence presented raises two possible
explanations: (1) Officer Metcalfe was mistaken about the number
of people in the SUV; or (2) between the time that Officer
Metcalfe reported seeing two or three occupants in the SUV and
when Officer Beadle pulled it over, the SUV stopped and one or
two occupants got out -- that is, Officer Metcalfe was wrong
about having maintained continual surveillance of the SUV.
The State argues that given the evidence that it was
dark, the indications that Officer Metcalfe did not have a clear
view of the interior of the SUV, and Officer Metcalfe's testimony
that he believed he maintained continual surveillance of the SUV
from the time he first saw it until it was pulled over, "the only
reasonable inference" from the evidence presented was that
Officer Metcalfe was "simply wrong about the precise number of
occupants in the white SUV."  We are not persuaded by this
argument.
Although the inference that Officer Metcalfe was
mistaken about the number of occupants he believed he saw is a
reasonable inference that can be drawn from the evidence, it is
not the only reasonable inference that can be drawn.  And while
we may not have drawn the same inference as the District Court,
we cannot say that the inference that it drew -- that "it appears
officer Metcalf[e] did not have continual surveillance of the
vehicle, and at some point the vehicle stopped, and one or two
persons exited the vehicle" -- was impermissible.  Accordingly,
we conclude that FOF 16 was not clearly erroneous.  
III.
The State argues that the District Court erred in
permitting King, over the State's objection, to cross-examine
Officer Beadle about the activities of the SUV before Officer
Beadle first saw it.  In particular, the District Court permitted
King to cross-examine Officer Beadle about Officer Metcalfe's
observations, such as asking Officer Beadle to explain why onlyNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
12King was found in the SUV after it was pulled over, when Officer
Beadle had received reports from dispatch that were based on
Officer Metcalfe's observations which indicated that Officer
Metcalfe had maintained constant surveillance of the SUV and had
seen two or three people inside the SUV.  
The State argues that the District Court erred in
overruling its objections to such questioning -- objections it
made on the grounds of lack of personal knowledge and calling for
speculation.  King contends that any error was harmless because
it did not affect the District Court's ultimate decision to grant
King's suppression motion.  We agree that any error in permitting
King's questioning was harmless.  King's line of questioning
simply highlighted the discrepancy between Officer Metcalfe's
testimony regarding his maintaining continual surveillance of the
SUV and observing two or three occupants and the evidence that
only King was found in the SUV when it was pulled over.  This
discrepancy, however, existed and was apparent based on evidence
that was independent of King's challenged cross-examination of
Officer Beadle.  Accordingly, we conclude that any error in
permitting King's cross-examination did not affect the District
Court's ultimate decision to grant the suppression motion.
IV.
Absent findings of fact that explain the circumstances
relied upon by the District Court in its suppression rulings, we
cannot completely review whether the District Court erred in its
suppression rulings.  Despite this inability, we could affirm the
District Court if, as a matter of law, the evidence presented by
the State, when combined and considered with the findings
actually made by the District Court, was insufficient to
establish reasonable suspicion to further the investigative stop
of King by having her exit the SUV to perform field sobriety
tests or to establish probable cause for her arrest.  See State
v. Ross, 89 Hawai# i 371, 378 n.4, 974 P.2d 11, 18 n.4 (1998) ("An
appellate court may affirm a judgment of the lower court on any
ground in the record that supports affirmance." (internal NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
13quotation marks and citation omitted)).  We therefore consider
whether the State presented sufficient evidence on these points.
A.
The State argues that the District Court erred in
concluding that much of the justification for Officer Beadle's
stop of the SUV dissipated when he discovered that King was the
SUV's sole occupant.  The District Court relied on this
conclusion in suppressing evidence obtained after King exited the
SUV, including her performance on the field sobriety tests.  The
thrust of the State's argument is that the District Court was
wrong in concluding that the discovery of King as the sole
occupant of the SUV meant that the State lacked reasonable
suspicion to further its investigation by having King exit her
vehicle and perform the field sobriety tests. 
The District Court's analysis in reaching its
suppression rulings is not a model of clarity.  The District
Court concluded that Officer Beadle's stop of King's vehicle was
justified.  The District Court, therefore, must have determined
that there was reasonable suspicion to stop the SUV to conduct a
brief investigation to confirm or dispel the suspicion of
criminal conduct.  The District Court also apparently determined 
that the investigative stop remained valid until King exited the
SUV, as it orally stated that observations made by Officer Beadle
while King remained in the SUV were not being suppressed and its
Suppression Order only suppressed evidence obtained after King
exited the SUV.  The District Court, however, concluded that much
of the justification for the stop dissipated when Officer Beadle
found that King was the sole occupant of the vehicle.  The
District Court relied on this conclusion to suppress evidence
obtained after King exited the vehicle.
B. 
In conducting our sufficiency of the evidence analysis,
we accept any factual findings actually made by the District
Court and assume that except for FOF 16, the District Court
believed the remaining testimony of Officers Metcalfe and Beadle. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
14We apply these ground rules in our analysis of the sufficiency of
the evidence in Sections IV.B.1. and B.2.  We do not decide what
the result would be if the District Court did not believe aspects
of the officers' remaining testimony.
1.
We conclude that the State presented sufficient
evidence to establish reasonable suspicion to have King exit her
vehicle to perform field sobriety tests.  At the suppression
hearing, the State presented evidence that Officer Beadle pulled
over an SUV that matched the description and license plate number
of an SUV that Officer Metcalfe had been following and which he
observed being driven in an erratic and dangerous manner.  When
Officer Beadle stopped the SUV, King was the driver and sole
occupant of the vehicle.  During the stop of the vehicle, and
before King exited the vehicle, Officer Beadle obtained evidence
that served to corroborate the view that King had been the person
driving the SUV in the erratic and dangerous manner described by
Officer Metcalfe.  King was the person who was driving the SUV
when Officer Beadle stopped it, and she said she had come from a
birthday party at Aloha Beach.  Officer Beadle observed clear
signs that King's ability to drive was impaired due to an
intoxicant, including that King's speech was slurred, her eyes
were glassy and watery, and she exhibited diminished motor skills
and seemed disoriented in retrieving her driver's license, as she
fumbled through her wallet and had difficulty locating and
removing her license.  The slow manner in which King reacted to
Officer Beadle's signals to pull over also indicated to Officer
Beadle that King may be driving while impaired.  
In concluding that Officer Beadle lacked reasonable
suspicion to justify furthering the investigation by having King
exit her vehicle to perform field sobriety tests, the District
Court relied on Officer Beadle's discovery of King as the
vehicle's sole occupant when Officer Metcalfe had reported his
belief that two or three people were in the vehicle.  From this
evidence, the District Court inferred and found in FOF 16 thatNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 It is not clear on what basis the District Court concluded that6
Officer Beadle ordered King out of her vehicle.  Officer Beadle testified that
he asked King "if she would be willing to submit to a standardized field
sobriety test," and "[King] said she would." 
15Officer Metcalfe had apparently not maintained continual
surveillance of the SUV and that the SUV had stopped and one or
two people had exited before Officer Beadle effected his traffic
stop.  However, the purported exiting of one or two people from
the SUV does not negate a reasonable suspicion that King, the
person who was found in the SUV, had been responsible for the
erratic and dangerous driving which Officer Metcalfe had
observed.  Moreover, the observations made by Officer Beadle in
effecting the traffic stop and while King remained in the SUV not
only corroborated the view that King was responsible for the
prior erratic driving observed by Officer Metcalfe, but also
provided specific and articulable facts that King was impaired
due to an intoxicant.  We conclude, under the totality of
circumstances, and notwithstanding the District Court's FOF 16,
that the State presented sufficient evidence to establish
reasonable suspicion that King had committed the crime of OVUII
and for the police to further its investigation by having King
exit the SUV and perform field sobriety tests.  
It appears that the District Court concluded that its
FOF 16 meant that other evidence presented by the State, as a
matter of law, was insufficient to establish reasonable suspicion
to have King proceed with the field sobriety tests.  The District
Court erred to the extent that it based its suppression ruling on
this reasoning.  
The State challenges the District Court's Conclusion of
Law (COL) 2, which states, in relevant part, that "Officer Beadle
lacked probable cause or an articulable basis to believe a crime
had been committed before ordering Defendant out of her
vehicle."6  The reasonable suspicion standard is the standard
that applies in deciding whether Officer Beadle could lawfully
order King out of her car. 
 See Kernan v. Tanaka , 75 Haw. 1, 37-NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1640, 856 P.2d 1207, 1225-26 (1993); State v. Silva , 91 Hawai #i
111, 115-17, 979 P.2d 1137, 1141-43 (App. 1999).  As we have
concluded, the State presented sufficient evidence to show that
the police had reasonable suspicion to believe that King had
committed the crime of OVUII before having King exit her vehicle
to perform field sobriety tests.
2.
We conclude that the State presented sufficient
evidence to show that Officer Beadle had probable cause to
believe that King had committed the offense of OVUII when he
placed her under arrest.  King was driving the SUV when it was
pulled over by Officer Beadle.  Officer Beadle observed that
King's speech was slurred, her eyes were glassy and watery, and
she had a "hard time" producing her driver's license.  In walking
with Officer Beadle to a parking lot to undergo field sobriety
tests, King stumbled as she was walking, veered away from Officer
Beadle, and had to be redirected toward the parking lot.  Officer
Beadle had to terminate the walk-and-turn test because King kept
losing her balance and stepping off the line.  We conclude that
the State presented sufficient evidence to warrant a person of
reasonable caution to believe that King had committed the offense
of OVUII at the time she was arrested.  See State v. Maganis , 109
Hawai#i 84, 86, 123 P.3d 679, 681 (2005).
V.
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that excluding
Officer Metcalfe's testimony that he maintained continual
surveillance of the SUV, which the District Court determined was
not credible, and taking into account the actual findings of fact
made by the District Court, the State presented sufficient
evidence that, if believed, would establish reasonable suspicion
to have King exit her vehicle to perform field sobriety tests and
to establish probable cause for King's arrest.  However, because
the District Court largely failed to make actual findings of fact
that would show what testimony it believed and would explain what
circumstances it found were present in ruling on King'sNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
17suppression motion, we are unable to completely and effectively 
review the Suppression Order.  We vacate the Suppression Order
and remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this
Memorandum Opinion.
Dated:  Honolulu, Hawaii, December 12, 2016. #
On the briefs:
Tracy Murakami
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Kauai
for Plaintiff-AppellantChief Judge
Daniel G. Hempey 
(Hempey & Meyers LLP)
for Defendant-AppelleeAssociate Judge
Associate Judge