 
 
    
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS  AND PACI FIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-25-0000334 31-AUG-2026 08:46 AM Dkt. 58 SO 
NO. CAAP-25-0000334  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I  
STATE OF HAWAIʻ I,  Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
RICKY BALAJADIA, JR.,  
also known as Ricky Brycen Balajadia, Jr.,  
Defendant-Appellant.  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT    
(CASE NO. 1CPC-23-0001184)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: 
Nakasone, Chief Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Ricky B.   Balajadia,  Jr. appeals   
from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's  February 27, 2025  
Judgment and Conviction of Sentence, convicting him of Attempted  1
1 The Honorable Kevin A. Souza presided.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
      
   
    
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
 Escape in the Second Degree, in violation of Hawaiʻ i Revised 
Statutes (HRS
) § 705-500 (2014)2 and HRS § 710-1021 (2014).3 
On appeal, Balajadia asserts five points of error 
(POE) challenging the circuit court's (1) admission of evidence 
that he was in a fight prior to his attempted escape (POE A and 
C); (2) limiting instruction as to the fight evidence (POE B); 
2 HRS § 705-500, "Criminal attempt," provides: 
(1) A person is guilty of an attempt to commit a 
crime if the person: 
(a) Intentionally engages in conduct which would 
constitute the crime if the attendant 
circumstances were as the person believes them 
to be; or 
(b) Intentionally engages in conduct which, under 
the circumstances as the person believes them 
to be, constitutes a substantial step in a 
course of conduct intended to culminate in the 
person's commission of the crime. 
(2) When causing a particular result is an element 
of the crime, a person is guilty of an attempt to commit the crime if, acting with the state of mind required to 
establish liability with respect to the attendant 
circumstances specified in the definition of the crime, the person intentionally engages in conduct which is a 
substantial step in a course of conduct intended or known 
to cause such a result. 
(3) Conduct shall not be considered a substantial 
step under this section unless it is strongly corroborative 
of the defendant's criminal intent. 
3 HRS § 710-1021, "Escape in the second degree," provides:  
(1) A person commits the offense of escape in the 
second degree if the person intentionally escapes from a correctional or detention facility or from custody. 
(2) Escape in the second degree is a class C felony. 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 and (3) imposition of consecutive terms of imprisonment (POE D 
and E).4 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve this 
appeal as discussed below and affirm. 
While serving time in Hālawa Correctional Facility 
(Hālawa), Balajadia was involved in a fight with another inmate. 
He sustained a cut above his left eye for which he required stitches, and arrangements were made for two Adult Corrections 
Officers (the Escorting Officers) to transport Balajadia that 
day to Pali Momi Medical Center (
Pali Momi or the Hospital). 
4 Balajadia's five POE are presented as follows: 
A. "The Trial Court erred by allowing the prosecutor to 
introduce evidence regarding allegations that Balajadia 
was involved in a fight because that alleged ' fight' was 
irrelevant." 
B. "The Trial Court's recitation of a stipulation and it's 
[sic] 'fight' liminting [sic] instruction merged and 
allowed for the conclusion that Balajadia stipulated that he was in a ' fight' when in fact he objected to 
evidence at evidence [sic] regarding the alleged 
'fight'." 
C. "Assuming relevance, allegations that Balajadia was in a 
fight created unfair prejudice that substantially 
outweighed any probative value." 
D. "The Trial Court erred in failing to articulate a basis 
and justification for its consecutive sentences." 
E. "The Trial Court erred in basing its sentence on 
uncharged and unadjudicated conduct." 
(Formatting altered.) 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    After the emergency room physician saw Balajadia and 
was exiting the treatment room, Balajadia leapt off the patient 
bed and attempted to follow her, saying he had a question. 
One 
of the Escorting Officers stood between Balajadia and the physician and instructed him to return to the patient bed. 
Balajadia refused and continued forward. He attempted to lunge 
past the physician, and the Escorting Officers tackled him to 
the floor and returned him to the patient bed. 
To further restrict Balajadia's mobility, the 
Escorting Officers attempted to move his hand restraints behind his back. In the process, Balajadia, still in leg restraints, 
tore away from the Escorting Officers' grip and ran out of the 
room. One of the Escorting Officers chased after Balajadia and 
tackled him in the hallway, and the other assisted in again 
restraining Balajadia. 
After returning Balajadia to the patient bed, the 
physician stitched up his injury. He was subsequently returned to Hālawa without further incident. 
Balajadia was charged by felony information with 
Attempted Escape in the Second Degree. 
The State filed a notice of intent to adduce evidence 
that Balajadia "went into another inmate's cell and was involved 
in a fight with another inmate," and, "[a]s a result of the 
fight, [Balajadia] was taken to [Pali Momi]." The State argued 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
   
 
 that the fight "was the means by which [Balajadia] made his way 
to the [H]ospital which allowed for the opportunity to attempt 
to escape." The State also argued that the fight "provide[d] a 
motive for escape," reasoning that "if you just lost a fight, 
you don't want to go back." 
During a hearing on the matter, the circuit court made 
clear it was not going to allow evidence regarding Balajadia   
going into another inmate's cell or whether the fight was lost. The circuit court then ruled that the fight was "highly 
relevant" under Hawaiʻ i  Rules of E
 vidence ( HRE) Rule 401, because   
(1)  "it explain[ed] why Mr. Balajadia had to be transported to  
Pali Momi and why it is that he sustained injuries," and 
(2)  without the explanation that the fight was with another 
inmate, the jury might speculate that Balajadia's injuries were  
caused by a correction officer or other staff  at Hālawa.  
The circuit court next determined that the probative 
value of the evidence was high for the reasons it previously 
stated, "and also given the State's theory of the case and a 
reasonable inference regarding motive for escape, although the 
State [was] not required to prove motive." The circuit court additionally addressed "the degree to which the evidence [would] 
rouse the jury to overmaster hostility towards" Balajadia, as 
argued by the defense. 
To that, the circuit court explained 
that it did not "believe that this particular evidence [would] 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
   
   
 
 
 cause the jury to overmaster hostility toward" Balajadia. The 
circuit court then indicated it would give a cautionary 
instruction. 
During closing arguments, the State mentioned the 
fight once, arguing "[Balajadia] was involved in a fight with 
another inmate. 
As a result, he received a cut above his left 
eye. The facility arranged for him to be transported" to Pali Momi. 
After a one-day trial, the jury returned its verdict 
of guilty as charged. The circuit court sentenced Balajadia to a five-year indeterminate term of imprisonment, to be served 
consecutively to the sentences he was already serving. 
Balajadia timely appealed. (1) First, Balajadia challenges the admission of the 
fight evidence as irrelevant (POE A), and as inadmissible character evidence and unfairly prejudicial (POE C). 
(a) Relevance (POE A) 
Balajadia contends that his being in a fight was 
irrelevant to his escape charge and, thus, evidence of the fight 
was inadmissible under HRE Rule 401. 
"All relevant evidence is admissible." HRE Rule 402. 
Evidence is relevant if it has "any tendency to make the 
existence of any fact that is of consequence to the 
determination of the action more probable or less probable than 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
  
  
  
  it would be without the evidence."  HRE Rule 401. "The evidence 
need only be a building block of a 
prima facie case. It does 
not have to prove the case on its own." State v. Silva, 67 Haw. 
581, 586, 698 P.2d 293, 297 (1985). 
We review a trial court's relevance determination 
pursuant to HRE Rule 401 under the right/wrong standard.    
State 
v. Pulse, 83 Hawaiʻ i 229, 247, 925 P.2d 797, 815 (1996).   
As previously stated, the circuit court ruled that 
evidence of the fight was "highly relevant" under HRE Rule 401, because (1) "it explain[ed] why Mr. Balajadia had to be 
transported to Pali Momi and why it is that he sustained injuries," and (2) without the explanation that the fight was 
with another inmate, the jury might speculate that Balajadia's 
injuries were caused by a correction officer or other staff at 
Hālawa. 
In other words, the fight evidence provided relevant 
context for why Balajadia was transported away from 
Hālawa and 
to Pali Momi, the place that set the stage for his escape attempt. 
Thus, the circuit court did not err by determining the 
fight evidence was relevant. See Pulse
, 83 Hawaiʻi at 247, 925 
P.2d at 815; 
Silva, 67 Haw. at 586, 698 P.2d at 297. 
7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
      
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 (b) Character Evidence and Prejudice (POE C) 
Balajadia further contends that, even if relevant, the 
fight evidence was inadmissible character evidence under HRE 
Rule 404 and more prejudicial than probative under HRE Rule 403. 
"Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not 
admissible to prove the character of a person in order to show 
action in conformity therewith." HRE Rule 404(b). However, 
prior acts may "be admissible where such evidence is probative 
of another fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, 
preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or 
absence of mistake or accident."  
Id. This list is not 
exhaustive. State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawaiʻ i 390, 414, 56 P.3d 692, 
716 (2002). 
"Prior bad act evidence under HRE Rule 404(b) is 
admissible when it is (1) relevant and (2) more probative than 
prejudicial." State v. Behrendt , 124 Hawaiʻi 90, 102, 237 P.3d 
1156, 1168 (2010) (citation modified).  Under HRE Rule 403, 
"[a]lthough relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative 
value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair 
prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or 
by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence." 
8   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 "Evidentiary decisions based on HRE [Rule] 403, which 
require a 'judgment call' by the trial court, are reviewed for 
an abuse of discretion." Pulse, 83 Hawaiʻ i at 247, 925 P.2d at 
815.   
And because HRE Rule 404 requires application of HRE 
Rule 403, we also review those decisions for an abuse of    
discretion. State v. Richie, 88 Hawaiʻ i 19, 37, 960 P.2d 1227, 
1245 (1998) ("HRE 404 represents a particularized application of  
the principle of HRE 403, and we will employ the same abuse of 
discretion standard of review." (citation modified)).   
At the hearing on the motion, the State argued that 
the fight "was the means by which [Balajadia] made his way to 
the [H]ospital which allowed for the opportunity to attempt to 
escape." The circuit court determined the probative value of 
the fight evidence was high, in part, "given the State's theory 
of the case and the reasonable inference regarding motive for escape, although the State [was] not required to prove motive." 
The circuit court then explained that it did not "believe that 
this particular evidence [would] cause the jury to overmaster 
hostility toward" Balajadia. 
And to guard against any 
prejudice, the circuit court indicated it would give a cautionary instruction. 
The fight evidence was not admitted to show    
Balajadia's character as violent and that he acted in conformity   
therewith when he attempted to escape while at the hospital.   
9
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
  
 
  
     
 
   
    
  
 
  
  
 Instead, the fight was probative of affording Balajadia an 
opportunity to leave 
Hālawa and later attempt an escape. See 
HRE Rule 404(b) ("Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts . . . may, however, be admissible where such evidence is 
probative of another fact that is of consequence to the 
determination of the action, such as proof of motive[ or] 
opportunity[.]"). The fight's probative value of showing how 
Balajadia came to be transported from Hālawa to the Hospital was 
not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. 
See HRE Rule 403. Nothing about the fight between Balajadia and 
another inmate was so inflammatory that it would cause a jury to 
be hostile towards Balajadia or cause unfair prejudice. 
Furthermore, the circuit court gave a limiting 
instruction regarding the fight evidence.  As set forth in more 
detail below, the circuit court instructed the jury to consider 
the fight evidence "for the limited purpose of providing . . . a reason why [Balajadia] was transported to [Pali Momi] on the 
date in question, to receive medical treatment" and "not [to] 
consider this evidence for any other purpose." The jury is 
presumed to follow the court's instruction. Francis v. 
Franklin, 471 U.S. 307, 324 n.9 (1985); State v. Austin, 70 Haw. 300, 308, 769 P.2d 1098, 1102 (1989) ("A jury is presumed to 
follow a trial court's directive."). And the State mentioned 
the fight evidence only once in its closing argument to provide 
10
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  context for why Balajadia was transported from Hālawa to Pali 
Momi. 
Under these circumstances, the circuit court did not 
disregard rules or principles of law to Balajadia's substantial 
detriment and, thus, did not abuse its discretion. See Pulse, 
83 
Hawaiʻi at 247, 925 P.2d at 815. 
(2) Next, Balajadia appears to argue that by 
providing a limiting instruction regarding a specific piece of admitted evidence (Balajadia was involved in a fight at 
Hālawa) 
shortly after reciting a stipulated fact (Balajadia was incarcerated at Hālawa
 on the date of the offense), the circuit 
court failed to adequately distinguish between the facts 
Balajadia stipulated to and the fight evidence (POE B). 
"The circuit court has the duty and ultimate 
responsibility to instruct the jury on the proper and relevant 
law." State v. Lavoie, 145 Hawaiʻ i 409, 433, 453 P.3d 229, 253 
(2019); accord State v. Nichols, 111 Hawaiʻ i 327, 336-37, 141 
P.3d 974, 983-84 (2006). 
We note that Balajadia did not object 
to the circuit court's instruction and, thus, Balajadia's contention may be deemed waived. See Hawaiʻ i Rules of Penal 
Procedure Rule 30(f) ("No party may assign as error the giving 
or the refusal to give, or the modification of, an instruction 
. . . unless the party objects thereto before the jury retires 
to consider its verdict, stating distinctly the matter to which 
11   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
 the party objects and the grounds of the objection."); Nichols, 
111 Hawaiʻ i at 337 n.6, 141 P.3d at 984 n.6 ("[T]here was and  
remains a presumption that unobjected-to jury instructions are 
correct; hence, the appellate court is under no duty to scour the record for error sua sponte.").   Nonetheless, a review of 
the record shows that the circuit court did not err in its instruction to the jury.  
The circuit court instructed the jury as to the  
stipulation  that Balajadia was imprisoned at Hālawa:  
All right, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, before 
we start the State's case there is a stipulation  that I am 
going to be giving to you along with an instruction. All 
right. So please listen carefully.  
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, the parties have 
stipulated  to the following facts and you must accept these 
following facts as having been conclusively proven for the 
purposes of this trial.  All right.  
And the facts are as follows: On October 21, 2022, 
the defendant, Ricky Balajadia, Jr., by order of a court of 
the State of [Hawaiʻ i] was serving a sentence of 
imprisonment  at [Hālawa]  under the control of the 
Department of Public Safety. 
All right.  
So you must accept those facts as having been 
conclusively proven for the purposes of this trial. 
These 
facts are being presented to -- stipulated  to and being 
admitted into evidence only for the limited purpose of 
deciding whether or not the defendant committed the offense 
-- the charged offense of Attempted Escape in the Second 
Degree. Do not consider this evidence for any other 
purpose.  
In particular, you shall not speculate or concern 
yourself at all with the reason why the defendant was in a 
correctional or detention facility at the time he allegedly committed this offense. Furthermore, you must not use this 
evidence to conclude that because the defendant was 
incarcerated, that he is therefore a person of bad 
character and therefore he must have committed the offense 
charged in this case. You cannot make those assumptions.  
12   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
 And in considering this evidence that has been 
stipulated  to for the limited purpose for which it is 
offered, you must weigh it in the same manner you would all 
other evidence in this case and you must consider it along 
with all other evidence in this case. All right.  
(Emphases added.) 
The circuit court then indicated it was admitting 
evidence that Balajadia was transported to the hospital  
following a fight  at Hālawa
 and instructed the jury to consider 
that evidence "only for the limited purpose of providing . . . a   
reason why [Balajadia] was transported to Pali Momi":   
Additionally, you are about to hear evidence that the 
defendant was incarcerated, was in a fight  or an 
altercation  at [Hālawa].  Again, this evidence is being 
admitted only for the limited purpose of providing you with 
a reason why the defendant was transported to 
[Pali Momi]  
on the date in question, to receive medical treatment. Do 
not consider this evidence for any other purpose.  
Again, you shall not speculate or concern yourself 
with what the fight or altercation  was about, who started 
it, or what transpired. You must also not use this evidence to conclude that because the defendant was in a fight or altercation, that he is, again, a person of bad 
character and therefore must have committed the [offense] 
charged in this case. You cannot engage in that kind of 
thinking. All right.  
In considering this evidence, again, of the fight or 
altercation, you must consider it along with all the other evidence presented and weigh it in the same manner you 
would all other items of evidence in this case. All right.  
(Emphases added.) 
While discussing the fight evidence, the circuit court   
stated, "you are about to hear evidence that the defendant was  
incarcerated," but then appeared to immediately correct itself  
by stating, "was in a fight or an altercation."    The remaining 
instruction to the jury concerned the fight evidence. The 
13   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  circuit court's instruction on the stipulated fact of 
Balajadia's imprisonment was sufficiently separate from its  
instruction on the fight evidence. Thus, there was no error  
here.  
Balajadia also appears to argue that the limiting 
instruction regarding the fight should have been given to the 
jury prior to each witness's testimony. Balajadia does not 
provide any legal authority for this proposition, and this 
contention may be deemed waived.  See Hawaiʻ i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (
HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7) (requiring opening briefs to 
include an argument section "containing the contentions of the 
appellant on the points presented and the reasons therefor, with 
citations to the authorities, statutes, and parts of the record 
relied on" and cautioning that "[p]oints not argued may be 
deemed waived" (emphasis added)). 
Notwithstanding Balajadia's unsupported contention, 
the circuit court gave the limiting instruction on the fight 
evidence twice: once before the first witness testified and 
again repeating it before the jury entered its deliberations. 
We see no error in the timing of the circuit court's limiting instruction on the fight evidence. 
(3) Finally, Balajadia contends the circuit court 
"erred in issuing consecutive sentences because it failed to 
provide an adequate basis for the consecutive sentence" (POE D) 
14
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
    
 
   
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
    
  
  
 and punished him for an uncharged crime — fighting in prison 
(POE E). 
(a) Consecutive Sentence (POE D) 
Balajadia's contention is unsupported by specific 
reasons or citations to the parts of the record he relies on, and this argument may be deemed waived. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). 
Moreover, a review of the record shows the circuit court articulated its reasons and provided a meaningful rationale for 
imposing a consecutive sentence. 
The sentencing court "must state on the record at the 
time of sentencing the reasons for imposing a consecutive 
sentence." State v. Hussein, 122 Hawaiʻ i 495, 510, 229 P.3d 313, 
328 (2010). 
Here, the circuit court pointed to Balajadia's 
criminal history, namely that, at twenty-nine years old, 
Balajadia had "six total convictions," three of which are "prior 
felony convictions for which he is currently serving 
indeterminate prison sentences after failing on probation." 
See HRS § 706-606(1) (2014) ("The court, in determining the 
particular sentence to be imposed shall consider . . . [t]he nature and circumstances of the offense and the history and 
characteristics of the defendant[.]"). 
The circuit court also 
acknowledged Balajadia's "long history of noncompliance with community supervision"; lack of "insight into [his] mental 
15
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
  health and substance abuse history"; denial of "any prior drug 
use in the pre-sentence report when prior pre-sentence reports 
tell a very different story"; and "tangential incoherent 
responses during his pre-sentence interview." 
The circuit court explained that a concurrent sentence 
"would be little incentive for him and others similarly situated 
to not repeat the same conduct of attempting to escape from 
custody." 
The circuit court then explained that a consecutive 
sentence, on the other hand, "would send a clear message that 
attempting to escape [would] result in [Balajadia] being fully 
held accountable and would make [Balajadia] and others think 
twice before trying to escape." 
After considering "the need for a sentence imposed to 
reflect the seriousness of the offense, to promote respect for 
the law, to provide a just punishment, to afford adequate 
deterrents to further criminal conduct, and to protect the public," see HRS § 706-606(2), the circuit court concluded that 
"[t]hese factors also mitigate in favor of a consecutive 
sentence." 
Contrary to Balajadia's contention, the circuit court 
provided an adequate basis for running the Attempted-Escape 
sentence consecutively to the sentences Balajadia was already 
serving. See Hussein
, 122 Hawaiʻi at 509-10, 229 P.3d at 327-28. 
16   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
    
 (b) Uncharged Crime (POE E) 
"[A] judge cannot punish a defendant for an uncharged 
crime in the belief that it too deserves punishment," 
notwithstanding the judge's otherwise "broad discretion in 
imposing a sentence, and [ability to] consider the candor, 
conduct, remorse and background of the defendant as well as the 
circumstances of the crime and many other factors." State v. 
Nunes, 72 Haw. 521, 525, 824 P.2d 837, 840 (1992).  
Here, Balajadia points to the following underlined 
statement from the circuit court during sentencing:  
In looking at the nature and circumstances of this 
offense, at the time of the incident offense, which is 
Attempted Escape in the Second Degree, Mr. Balajadia was serving a concurrent five- year prison term for unauthorized 
control of a propelled vehicle in  the first degree in 1CPC-
21-0001258.  
He was also serving a concurrent ten- year and five-
year prison sentence for Burglary in the First Degree and Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree under 5CPC- 19-
0000199.  
Additionally, at the time of the [instant] offense, 
the defendant had recently arrived at [Hālawa]. He did get 
into a fight with another inmate. 
And he needed to be 
treated for his injuries. And so he was transported to the 
[Pali Momi]  in the Pearl Ridge area where he initially 
tried to follow a female doctor out of the emergency room bay. And according to the jury's verdict,  [Balajadia]  did 
attempt to escape. 
  
(Emphasis added.) 
Taken in context, the circuit court was reciting the 
facts surrounding the offense while considering the nature and  
circumstances of the offense.  We do not construe the circuit 
17   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  court's statement as punishing Balajadia for an uncharged crime.  
See Nunes , 72 Haw. at 525, 824 P.2d at 840.   
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the circuit court's 
February 27, 2025 Judgment and Conviction of Sentence.    
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻ i, August 31, 2026.  
On the briefs:  
 
Walter J. Rodby,  
for Defendant-Appellant.  
 Elyse C.N. Oyama,  
Deputy Attorney General,  
 
for Plaintiff-Appellee.  /s/ Karen T. Nakasone  
Chief Judge  
 
 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth  
Associate Judge  
 /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen  
Associate Judge  
18 