NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000583
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
TYRONE SMITH, JR., Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-1569)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Tyrone Smith, Jr. (Smith) appeals
 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) filed on
 
October 10, 2011, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1
 
(circuit court). After a jury trial, judgment was entered
 against Smith for (1) Sexual Assault in the First Degree in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-730(1)(a) (Supp.
 2013)
2
 (Count 1); (2) Robbery in the Second Degree in violation
of HRS § 708-841(1)(b) (Supp. 2013)3
 (Count II); and
1
 The Honorable Richard W. Pollack presided.
 
2
 HRS § 707-730(1)(a) provides:
§707-730 Sexual assault in the first degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of sexual assault in the first degree if:
(a)	 The person knowingly subjects another person to an act
of sexual penetration by strong compulsion[.]
3
 HRS § 708-841(1)(b) provides:
§708-841 Robbery in the second degree.  (1) A person commits
the offense of robbery in the second degree if, in the course of
committing theft or non-consensual taking of a motor vehicle:
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(3) Kidnapping in violation of HRS § 707-720(1)(d) (Supp. 2013)4
 
(Count III). 
On appeal, Smith contends that (1) it was plain error
 
for the circuit court to admit as evidence a credit card found in
 
a garbage can, as well as evidence from a bedroom in which Smith
 was staying, all obtained without a search warrant; (2) it was
 plain error for the circuit court to admit the complaining
 witness's (CW) identification of Smith; (3) the counts charged
 are subject to merger; and (4) Smith received ineffective
 assistance of counsel. 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm the
 
Judgment.
 I.	 Background and Evidence
 
The charges in this case arise from an incident that
 
occurred around 8 p.m. on September 15, 2010, at the Wahiaw
a
 
Shopping Center. After leaving work, the CW was attacked from
 behind as she reached the bottom of a stairwell by a Goodwill
 store. She was physically restrained, assaulted, threatened,
 sexually assaulted by digital penetration, and robbed. The CW
 was eventually able to run to safety. 
According to the CW, her assailant took, among other
 
things, around $20, credit cards, and a pack of Pall Mall
 cigarettes. The CW testified that she was able to get a good
 look at the assailant at certain points because there were lights
 from a nearby door and the stairwell. 
3
 (...continued)
. . . .
 
(b)	 The person threatens the imminent use of force against
the person of anyone who is present with intent to
compel acquiescence to the taking of or escaping with
the property[.]
4
 HRS § 707-720(1)(d) provides:
§707-720 Kidnapping.  (1) A person commits the offense of
kidnapping if the person intentionally or knowingly restrains
another person with intent to:
. . . .
 (d)	 Inflict bodily injury upon that person or subject that
person to a sexual offense[.]
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Smith did not testify at trial, but testimony by others 
established that he had moved to Hawai 'i with his girlfriend, 
Carol Ortiz (Carol), about a week before the subject incident. 
Smith and Carol were staying with Alexis Pusi (Alexis) and Yolanda Pusi (Yolanda), and their family members, in an apartment (the Apartment) in Wahiaw
a.5 
On the evening of September 15, 2010, the date of the
 
incident, Yolanda dropped Smith off at around 7 p.m. near Wahiaw a
 
District Park and Smith indicated he planned to play basketball. 
Smith later called Alexis' phone and asked to be picked up. 
Alexis, Yolanda, and Carol went to pick him up. According to
 Alexis, when Smith got into the car, Carol asked him in a
 whispered voice "how much did you get" and Smith responded "24
 dollars." According to Yolanda's testimony, Carol said something
 to Smith when he got into the car and he responded "[a]bout 25
 dollars." Carol, however, denied asking Smith "how much did you
 get" or that Smith showed her money when he got into the car.
 
Alexis also testified that Smith had a pack of Pall
 
Mall cigarettes when they picked him up. Carol, however,
 testified that he had USA Golds cigarettes.
 
The next day, on September 16, 2010, Alexis and Carol
 
found a credit card with the CW's name on it; the credit card was
 in a garbage can next to a house that fronted the building where
 the Apartment was located. The house was being fixed up so that
 Alexis and Yolanda could move into it. At the time Alexis and
 Carol found the credit card, they were working on the house and
 had gone to the garbage can to look for some window screen wire. 
Yolanda also testified that, at some point, Carol showed her the
 credit card. There is a dispute in the evidence whether Alexis
 or Carol took the credit card. As noted infra, the credit card
 was found the next day by police back in the garbage can.
 
5
 The record indicates there were at least six apartment units in the
building where the Apartment was located. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
According to Yolanda, at some point on September 16,
 
2010, she heard about a robbery and a rape that had been
 
committed near the Goodwill store. She confronted Smith about
 whether he had raped a girl and he denied committing any rape but
 demonstrated how he had thrown a girl to the ground, put his knee
 on her head, demanded money, and got certain items from the girl. 
Later that night, Alexis, Yolanda, Carol and Smith watched the
 television news, which had a report about the incident and showed
 a sketch of the assailant based on a description by the CW. 
Alexis and Yolanda testified that after the report aired, they
 confronted Smith and he admitted to robbing a woman and he
 disclosed details of the incident, including how he had thrown
 the woman down and she had given him certain items. Carol, to
 the contrary, testified that Smith never said anything about
 committing a robbery or other crime. 
The next day, September 17, 2010, Alexis went to the
 
police. Yolanda also later gave a statement to the police. 
Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Detective Randal Platt
 (Detective Platt) testified that after Alexis and Yolanda gave
 their statements to the police, Smith became the primary suspect. 
Detective Platt explained that, based on what Smith had told
 them, Alexis and Yolanda knew more details about the incident
 than had been released to the media. Detective Platt also
 testified that the following other factors made Smith the
 suspect: Smith's resemblance to the sketch; Smith's physical
 characteristics fit that of the assailant; Smith was picked up
 the evening of the incident by Alexis, Yolanda and Carol in an
 area near to the location of the incident; Smith had called to be
 picked up not long after the incident had occurred; the CW's
 credit card was found near to where Smith was staying, which is
 miles away from the incident location and thus someone had to
 have carried the credit card to where it was found; and details
 of the incident that Alexis and Yolanda said were relayed to them
 by Smith matched the CW's statements about the incident. 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Smith was arrested on September 17, 2010, two days
 
after the incident. On that date, HPD Officer Kendrick Tahara
 
(Officer Tahara) searched the garbage can by the front house
 without a warrant and found the CW's credit card, which had
 apparently been returned to the garbage can at some point. Also
 on this date, various items including two black carry-on pieces
 of luggage and a brown women's purse (bedroom evidence) were
 recovered from the bedroom in the Apartment in which Smith and
 Carol were staying. Although the police obtained Alexis' written
 consent to search the bedroom where Smith and Carol were staying,
 the search was done without Smith's consent and without a
 warrant. The day after being removed from the Apartment, the
 bedroom evidence was searched on September 18, 2010 pursuant to a
 search warrant. A pack of Pall Mall cigarettes was recovered
 from one of the bags seized from the bedroom.
 
Following the incident, the CW was shown two
 
photographic lineups. The first, which took place on
 September 16, 2010, apparently did not include Smith's photograph
 and the CW did not identify anyone as the suspect. In the second
 photographic lineup, which the record indicates took place on
 either September 17 or 18, 2010, and which included a photograph
 of Smith taken upon his arrest, the CW identified a different
 person
6
 as the assailant.  The CW was not told that the man she
 
identified was not the suspect. At trial, the CW testified that
 she had identified Smith in the second photographic lineup,
 apparently still unaware that she had identified another person. 
Smith did not object to the introduction of CW's testimony about
 the two photographic lineups or her identification of him as her
 assailant at trial. 
During Detective Platt's testimony, he stated that he
 
had administered the two photographic lineups presented to the
 CW. 
As to the second lineup, Detective Platt testified that the
 
6
 Testimony at trial indicated that the person the CW identified in the
second photographic lineup had been incarcerated continuously in Tennessee
since 1999. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
CW had identified someone other than Smith. Detective Platt
 
further testified that he did not inform the CW of the results of
 the lineup, including that she did not identify the suspect. He
 noted that, as a rule, they do not say whether the suspect was
 identified or not.
 
At trial, in addition to the testimony of the
 
witnesses, the State sought to link Smith to the offenses by
 admitting into evidence the credit card with the CW's name that
 had been recovered from the garbage can, as well as a photograph
 of the Pall Mall cigarettes recovered from the bedroom evidence. 
There was no DNA test ordered in this case and no finger prints
 recovered from the CW's items.
 II. Discussion
 A. Admission of the CW's Credit Card
 
Smith contends the circuit court plainly erred in
 
admitting the CW's credit card as evidence in the case. Smith
 
fails, however, to demonstrate that he had a subjective
 expectation of privacy in the garbage can in which the credit
 card was found by Officer Tahara.
 
Because Smith did not challenge admission of the credit
 
card at trial, we review for plain error. As stated by the
 Hawai
'i Supreme Court, 
[t]he appellate court will apply the plain error standard of
review to correct errors which seriously affect the
fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial
proceedings, to serve the ends of justice, and to prevent
the denial of fundamental rights. An appellate court's
power to deal with plain error is one to be exercised
sparingly and with caution because the plain error rule
represents a departure from a presupposition of the
adversary system--that a party must look to his or her
counsel for protection and bear the cost of counsel's
mistakes.
 
State v. Metcalfe, 129 Hawai 'i 206, 222, 297 P.3d 1062, 1078 
(2013) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted); see 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 52(b) ("Plain errors 
or defects affecting substantial rights may be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the court."). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Not every error at the trial court, even though of constitutional
proportions, requires the appellate court to reverse the judgment
below. Some constitutional errors may be deemed harmless where
they are unimportant and insignificant in the total setting of a
particular case. The test in these instances is whether the
 
reviewing court is able to conclude, from the record as a whole,
that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
State v. Corpuz, 3 Haw. App. 206, 211-12, 646 P.2d 976, 980
 
(1982) (citations omitted) (emphasis added); see also State v.
 Pokini, 57 Haw. 26, 29-30, 548 P.2d 1402, 1405 (1976); HRPP Rule
 52(a) ("Any error, defect, irregularity or variance which does
 not affect substantial rights shall be disregarded.").
 
Smith contends that he had "an expectation of privacy 
in the trash cans outside of his residence," and thus the police should have obtained a warrant to search the garbage can. "A defendant's ability to invoke the constitutional protections against unreasonable search and seizure depends upon whether he had a legitimate expectation of privacy in the invaded space." State v. Kolia, 116 Hawai
'i 29, 34, 169 P.3d 981, 986 (App. 2007) 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). In turn, when determining whether a defendant had a reasonable expectation of privacy in an area, we apply the following two-part test derived from Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347 (1967): 
First, the defendant must exhibit an actual subjective
expectation of privacy, and second, that expectation must be
one that society would recognize as objectively reasonable.
Furthermore, the defendant's claim to privacy can only be
sustained if it is reasonable in light of all the
surrounding circumstances[.]
 
Kolia, 116 Hawai 'i at 34, 169 P.3d at 986 (internal quotation 
marks and citations omitted); see State v. Ching, 67 Haw. 107, 
110, 678 P.2d 1088, 1091-92 (1984) (stating the same two-part test). In this case, Smith fails to meet the first part of the Katz test. 
Smith relies on State v. Tanaka, 67 Haw. 658, 701 P.2d 
1274 (1985), where the Hawai
'i Supreme Court held in three 
consolidated cases that the defendants had a reasonable expectation of privacy in the contents of opaque, closed trash bags or trash bins in which evidence had been obtained by police 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
without a warrant. Id. at 660-62, 701 P.2d at 1275-77. In each
 
of the Tanaka cases, the evidence in question was found in an
 
"opaque, closed container." Id. at 661, 701 P.2d at 1276. In
 
two of the cases, the police had searched trash located on
 business premises and the defendants testified in those cases
 that they had an expectation of privacy in their trash bags. Id.
 
at 660-61, 701 P.2d at 1275-76. In the other case, the
 defendants' trash was located on "the curbside portion of their
 property" and "[t]he police officer entered defendants' property
 and seized the trash without a warrant." Id. at 660, 701 P.2d at
 
1276.
 
Unlike in Tanaka, Smith has not demonstrated an actual
 
subjective expectation of privacy in the garbage can where
 Officer Tahara found the CW's credit card. Smith did not take
 the witness stand and there is no testimony by him, or anyone
 else, that he had an actual subjective expectation of privacy in
 the garbage can. Moreover, as argued by the State, the evidence
 does not establish that the garbage can in which the credit card
 was found was for the use of the Apartment residents. Instead,
 the evidence clearly shows that the garbage can was located on
 the side of the front house that Alexis and Yolanda were moving
 into, and that there was at least one other garbage can next to
 the apartment building where the Apartment was located. Smith
 asserts that the garbage can in question was used by the
 residents of the Apartment, apparently referring to when Alexis
 and Carol found the credit card. However, Alexis and Carol were
 working to fix the front house when they went to the garbage can. 
There is no evidence in this case that Smith had an actual
 subjective expectation of privacy in the contents of the garbage
 can and thus he cannot meet the first part of the Katz test. 
Thus, admission of the credit card was not plain error.
 
Even if Officer Tahara's search of the garbage can was
 
deemed unreasonable, there would be no plain error in admitting
 the credit card because Alexis and Carol both testified about
 finding a credit card which bore the CW's name in the garbage can
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
next to the front house. Yolanda also testified that Carol 
showed her a credit card with the CW's name on it. Given the record, admission of the actual credit card did not add anything substantially different than the testimony provided by Alexis, Carol and Yolanda. In light of the entire record, the admission of the credit card would be harmless. See State v. Mundon, 121 
Hawai
'i 339, 368, 219 P.3d 1126, 1155 (2009). 
B. Admission of Photograph of Pall Mall Cigarettes
 Smith contends that the circuit court plainly erred in 
admitting a photograph of the Pall Mall cigarettes. The cigarettes had been obtained from the bedroom in the Apartment where Smith was staying with Carol.
7 Smith contends the 
cigarettes "were referred to many times as the type taken from the CW the night of the incident." Smith did not move to suppress or object to admission of this evidence during trial and thus we review for plain error. See Kossman, 101 Hawai
'i at 122, 
63 P.3d at 430. 
Testimony at trial established that Smith had been 
staying in the bedroom at the Apartment for a little over a week. The police obtained consent from Alexis to search the bedroom, but there is no evidence that she was authorized by Smith to waive his rights. The police did not receive consent from Smith or have a search warrant prior to entering the bedroom and removing the bedroom evidence.
8 Thus, the search of the bedroom 
and the seizure of items therein were unreasonable. State v. 
Cuntapay, 104 Hawai 'i 109, 116, 85 P.3d 634, 641 (2004) 
("Petitioner was entitled to share in his host's security against unreasonable searches and seizures of the dwelling he was visiting."); State v. Mahone, 67 Haw. 644, 647, 701 P.2d 171, 173 (1985) ("A third party cannot waive another's constitutional 
7
 The actual cigarettes had been returned to Carol because the CW had
not initially stated that Pall Mall cigarettes were among the items taken from
her during the incident.
8
 The items were apparently recovered, but unopened, until a warrant
was executed the following day.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
right to privacy unless authorized to do so."); State v. Matias,
 
51 Haw. 62, 66-67, 451 P.2d 257, 260-61 (1969) (holding that the
 defendant had a right to privacy in the premises of an apartment
 where he was an overnight guest, and that such a right could not
 be waived by another unless the defendant authorized another to
 do so). The State does not argue that any warrant exception
 applies to justify the warrantless search of the bedroom. 
As noted earlier, constitutional errors may be deemed 
harmless if the reviewing court is able to conclude from the record as a whole that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Mundon, 121 Hawai
'i at 368, 219 P.3d at 1155; Corpuz, 3 
Haw. App. at 211-12, 646 P.2d at 980. Viewing the record as a whole, the circuit court's admission of the photograph of the Pall Mall cigarettes was not plain error because it was harmless given the evidence in this case. 
First, there was other more direct evidence about Smith
 
possessing Pall Mall cigarettes after the incident. That is,
 Alexis testified that Smith had a pack of Pall Mall cigarettes
 when they picked him up on the evening of the incident. Although
 Carol testified to the contrary, that Smith had USA Golds when he
 was picked up, the picture of the Pall Mall cigarettes was not
 the only evidence about such cigarettes.
 
Second, and more importantly, regardless of the photo
 
of the Pall Mall cigarettes, there was substantial other evidence
 in the record linking Smith to the offenses in this case. The
 testimony by Alexis and Yolanda (and to some extent even Carol)
 established, inter alia: Smith's location near to the incident at
 around the time it had occurred; his statements in the car when
 he was picked up that he had gotten $24 or $25; his admissions to
 Alexis and Yolanda about committing the robbery and the details
 of the incident he relayed to them that had not been made public;
 that Alexis and Carol found the CW's credit card the day after
 the incident in the garbage can, which was in the vicinity to
 where Smith was staying. In light of the overall record in this
 case, the photo of the Pall Mall cigarettes was not significant.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, because it was harmless, the circuit court
 
did not plainly err in admitting the photograph of the Pall Mall
 
cigarettes.
 
C. CW's Identification of Smith
 Smith did not object to the CW's in-court
 
identification of him as the person who attacked her. Reviewed
 for plain error, we determine that Smith's substantial rights
 were not affected and thus the circuit court did not err.
 
The jury heard contradictory testimony that could have
 
affected the CW's credibility in identifying Smith as her
 attacker. The CW testified that the man who attacked her was
 sitting in the courtroom, i.e. Smith, and that she had previously
 identified Smith as her attacker in a photographic lineup. 
However, testimony from Detective Platt directly contradicted the
 CW's assertion that she had identified Smith in a photographic
 line up. Detective Platt testified that, in the second
 photographic lineup, the CW failed to identify Smith and actually
 identified someone else as the attacker. This type of testimony
 may have resulted in some question about the CW's ability to
 identify her attacker. However, the jury also heard the CW
 testify in detail about her opportunity to view her attacker. In
 this case, the jury was properly afforded the opportunity to
 judge the CW's credibility and the weight of the evidence. See
 
State v. Tamura, 63 Haw. 636, 637-38, 633 P.2d 1115, 1117 (1981)
 ("The jury, as the trier of fact, is the sole judge of the
 credibility of witnesses or the weight of the evidence."); State
 v. Masaniai, 63 Haw. 354, 365, 628 P.2d 1018, 1026 (1981) ("[t]he
 weight of the identification testimony and the credibility of the
 witnesses were for the jury to determine. The defense counsel
 could cross-examine the witnesses, [and] point out any
 suggestibility in the identification procedure[.]") (citation
 omitted). Therefore, Smith's substantial rights were not
 violated.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
D. The Counts Do Not Merge 
Smith contends that the Robbery and Kidnapping charges
 
should merge, and that the Kidnapping and Sexual Assault charges
 should merge. He argues that "[s]ince the maximum that can be
 imposed for the Robbery charge is 10 years, Defendant would argue
 that should be the proper merged sentence." 
In his opening brief, Smith does not point to anywhere 
in the record that the circuit court committed error as to merger, or where in the record he objected or brought an alleged error as to merger to the attention of the circuit court. See 
Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 28(b)(4). Thus, 
Smith's arguments will be disregarded except that we may notice plain error not presented below. See HRAP 28(b)(4). Even if we 
consider Smith's arguments for plain error, we conclude there was none. 
Smith's sentence in this case was as follows: for the
 
Sexual Assault in the First Degree and Kidnapping convictions
 (Counts 1 and 3), Smith was sentenced to twenty years of
 incarceration for each count, the terms to run consecutively with
 each other; for the Robbery in the Second Degree conviction
 (Count 2), Smith was sentenced to ten years, to run concurrently
 with the sentences for Counts 1 and 3. 
In State v. Hoey, 77 Hawai
'i 17, 881 P.2d 504 (1994), 
the Hawai 'i Supreme Court construed the merger statute, HRS 
§ 701-109(1)(e) (1993),9
 and stated that
9
 HRS § 701-109(1)(e) provides:
 
§701-109 Method of prosecution when conduct
establishes an element of more than one offense.  (1) When
the same conduct of a defendant may establish an element of
more than one offense, the defendant may be prosecuted for
each offense of which such conduct is an element. The
 defendant may not, however, be convicted of more than one
offense if:
 
. . . .
 
(e) The offense is defined as a continuing course of
conduct and the defendant's course of conduct was
 
(continued...)
 
12
  In this case, special interrogatories related to merger
 
were submitted to the jury. Special Interrogatory No. 2
 
addressed the charges of Sexual Assault in the First Degree and
 Kidnapping, and the jury answered "yes" to both of the following
 questions:
 
   
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
[i]t is possible for kidnaping and robbery charges against a
defendant to merge, pursuant to HRS § 701-109(1)(e), under
circumstances in which (1) there is but one intention, one
general impulse, and one plan, (2) the two offenses are part
and parcel of a continuing and uninterrupted course of
conduct, and (3) the law does not provide that specific
periods of conduct constitute separate offenses.
 
Hoey, 77 Hawai 'i at 38, 881 P.2d at 525 (emphasis added). Hoey 
relied in part on State v. Schroeder, 76 Hawai 'i 517, 529–30, 880 
P.2d 192, 204–05 (1994), State v. Hoopii, 68 Haw. 246, 251, 710
 
P.2d 1193, 1197 (1985), and State v. Correa, 5 Haw. App. 644,
 649, 706 P.2d 1321, 1325 (1985). As indicated by the use of the
 word "and" in the Hoey test, it appears the prosecution can
 disprove merger if it can disprove any part of the test. Hoey
 
further noted that the question whether the offenses in that case
 merged were questions of fact that should have been submitted to
 the jury. 77 Hawai
'i at 38, 881 P.2d at 525. 
Question 1. Did the prosecution prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that the Defendant did not commit Sexual
 
Assault in the First Degree in Count I and
Kidnapping in Count III, as part of a continuing
and uninterrupted course of conduct?
 
_ Yes  No 
Question 2. Did the prosecution prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that the Defendant committed Sexual
 Assault in the First Degree in Count I and
Kidnapping in Count III, with separate and
distinct intents, rather than acting with one
intention, one general impulse, and one plan to
commit both offenses?
 
_ Yes  No 
9
 (...continued)
 
uninterrupted, unless the law provides that specific
periods of conduct constitute separate offenses.
 
13
    
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Special Interrogatory No. 3, in turn, addressed the charges of
 
Robbery in the Second Degree and Kidnapping. The questions and
 the responses by the jury were as follows:
 
Question 1. Did the prosecution prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that the Defendant did not commit Robbery
in the Second Degree in Count II and Kidnapping
in Count III, as part of a continuing and
uninterrupted course of conduct?
 
_ Yes  No 
Question 2. Did the prosecution prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that the Defendant committed Robbery in
the Second Degree in Count II and Kidnapping in
Count III, with separate and distinct intents,
rather than acting with one intention, one
general impulse, and one plan to commit both
offenses?
 Yes _ No 
In both instances, therefore, the prosecution disproved at least 
one part of the  Hoey test. Thus, based on these findings by the 
jury, we conclude that Smith's contentions as to merger do not have merit. 
We further note that even if the Kidnapping and Robbery 
charges 
did merge because the jury did not answer affirmatively 
as to both questions in Special Interrogatory No. 3 related to these charges, case law indicates and Smith conceded at oral argument, that the charges would merge upward. In other words, the Kidnapping charge, a class A felony, would remain, not the Robbery charge, a class B felony. HRS § 707-720(2); HRS § 708­841(2); cf. Tomomitsu v. State, 93 Hawai
'i 22, 27, 995 P.2d 323, 
328 (App. 2000) (stating that when a defendant is convicted of an offense and a lesser included offense, the conviction for the lesser included offense should be reversed, and the court selected the option that least disrupted the lower court's judgment). Under the sentence imposed by the circuit court, Smith would still be subject to twenty years of incarceration for each count of Sexual Assault in the First Degree and Kidnapping. 
E. Smith Did Not Establish His Ineffective Assistance of
 
Counsel Claim
 
When raising an ineffective assistance of counsel
 
claim,
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[t]he defendant has the burden of establishing ineffective
assistance of counsel and must meet the following two-part
test: 1) that there were specific errors or omissions
reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence;
and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted in either the
withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
meritorious defense. To satisfy this second prong, the
defendant needs to show a possible impairment, rather than a
probable impairment, of a potentially meritorious defense.
A defendant need not prove actual prejudice. 
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai 'i 504, 514, 78 P.3d 317, 327 (2003) 
(internal quotation marks, citations, and footnote omitted). 
In his opening brief, Smith asserts his trial counsel
 
"1) gave faulty advice as to the possible results of trial;
 
2) failed to interview witnesses; 3) did not challenge bias of
 Detective; [and] 4) did not investigate possible exculpatory
 witnesses for Defendant." 
Smith fails to meet his burden to show ineffective 
assistance of counsel. His general assertions lack specificity, and he fails to show any possible impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. See id. Further, two of Smith's points 
concern alleged failures to obtain unidentified witnesses, yet, Smith fails to support his assertions with "affidavits or sworn statements describing the testimony of the proffered witnesses[,]" as required under State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 
39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998). III. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence filed on October 10, 2011, in the Circuit Court of the
 First Circuit, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 8, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Lars Robert Isaacson 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Donn Fudo 
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
15
 