 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
   
 
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000010 30-MAY-2025 07:56 AM Dkt. 108 SO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000010  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
STATE OF HAWAI‘I, Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
LUAVALU SAGAPOLUTELE, Defendant-Appellant,
and DANE T. MIZUSAWA, Defendant-Appellee   
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 1CPC-22-0000399)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.)  
Defendant -Appellant Luavalu Sagapolutele 
(Sagapolutele ) appeals from the "Judgment of Conviction and 
Sentence " (Judgment ) filed on November 6, 2023 by the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit ( circuit court).1 
1 The Honorable Catherine H. Remigio presided .   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Sagapolutele was indicted on April 1, 2022, on charges 
of Robbery in the First Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised 
Statutes ( HRS) § 708-840(1)(b)(i) ( 2014) and/or § 708 -
840(1)(b)(ii) (2014) , and Burglary in the First Degree, in 
violation of HRS § 708 -810(1)(c) (2014). Following a jury 
trial, Sagapolutele was found guilty as charged, and was 
sentenced to concurrent twenty-year and ten-year terms of 
imprisonment. 
On appeal, Sagapolutele raises several points of 
error, contending the circuit court erred in: (1) denying his 
requests for new court -appointed counsel, and his counsel 's 
(defense counsel ) requests to withdraw as counsel ; (2) denying 
defense counsel's request for "a continuance to investigate the 
witnesses that [Sagapolutele] wanted [ defense counsel] to bring 
to trial"; (3) finding "that [Sagapolutele's] absence from his 
own trial was voluntary"; (4) allowing police testimony that 
identified Sagapolutele as "the person seen in [video footage] 
committing the crime in question," thereby "allow[i ng] police 
testimony t o invade the province of the jury"; and (5) 
sentencing Sagapolutele "without considering the letter from the 
complaining witness which recanted his entire testimony ." 
Sagapolutele further contends that defense counsel was 
ineffective, and that there is insufficient evidence to support 
his conviction. 
2   
 
  
  
   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon careful review of the record, briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration 
to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, 
we determine that Sagapolutele's first point of error is 
dispositive of this appeal.  2 
Sagapolutele contends that the circuit court erred in 
denying his requests for new court-appointed counsel, and 
defense counsel's requests to withdraw, on the basis that there 
had been a "complete breakdown of communication" and that 
Sagapolutele "had irreconcilable difference s" and "could not 
work professionally" with defense counsel. We review the 
circuit court 's denial of these requests under the abuse of 
discretion standard. State v. Plichta , 116 Hawaiʻi 200, 214, 172 
P.3d 512, 526 (2007) ; see also Hawaiʻi Rules of Penal Procedure 
Rule 57 (" Withdrawal of counsel shall require the approval of 
the court [.]"). 
2   Sagapolutele also a rgues, for the first time on appeal, that the 
evidence adduced was insufficient to support his conviction "given that the 
complaining witness recanted [in a letter submitted before the sentencing  
hearing], and given that the testimony of the officers was improper and 
should have been stricken."   We ordinarily review " challenges to the 
sufficiency of the evidence . . . on appeal, . . . because the Double 
Jeopardy clause bars retrial of a defendant once a reviewing court has found the evidence at trial to be legally insufficient to support the conviction."   
See  State v. Davis, 133 Hawai ʻi 102, 115, 324 P.3d 912, 925 (2014) (cleaned 
up). Sagapolutele fails, however,  to explain how  these alleged errors 
resulted in insufficient evidence to support his conviction, and "[p]oints 
not argued may be deemed waived."   Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 
28(b)(7).  
3   
 
     
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The record reflects that defense counsel made multiple 
requests to withdraw . Defense counsel first orally requested to 
withdraw during jury selection, on the basis that Sagapolutele 
did not think defense counsel had done her "due diligence," and 
that her legal advice was "not in his best interests ." Defense 
counsel explained to the circuit court that, 
I do understand we are in the process of picking a jury. 
This issue has come up and I have tried to resolve it 
several times. 
And I would just say, without going into the 
specifics of our attorney -client privilege conversations, 
that Mr. Sagapolutele believes at this time I have not done 
my due diligence in calling certain witnesses, and, uh, he 
believes my advice is --has been not in his best 
interests. So given that, he's asked for myself to be 
removed at this time. 
(Emphasis added.) 
After asking the deputy prosecuting attorney to leave 
the courtroom, the circuit court questioned defense counsel and 
Sagapolutele. When asked whether he agreed with what defense 
counsel said, Sagapolutele replied " [y]es," and that he 
"[thought] that [it was] in [his] best interest to file that 
motion." Sagapolutele declined to speak more about the conflict 
on the basis of attorney -client privilege. 
The circuit court stated that " [they] haven't even 
started the trial portion so who knows if [they] are [going to ] 
call the witnesses or not." Defense counsel replied that she 
was "not prepared to call any witnesses." She also explained 
that she and Sagapolutele disagreed as to whether witnesses 
4   
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
should be called, and that she "[thought] [the witnesses 
Sagapolutele wanted to call] may open the door  . . . to things 
that aren't relevant."  
The circuit court denied defense counsel's request to 
withdraw , 3 stating, 
I haven't been given too many specifics . The issue 
of witnesses, uh, the court indicates that we haven't even 
gotten to the point of the trial where witnesses are being 
called. [Defense counsel] is an experienced attorney. She 
has the ability to give Mr. Sagapolutele her advice. And 
whether he wants to take it or not, obviously I've already 
told him it's his decision if he wants to testify  even if 
it's against your advice, and that's all going to be the case.  
But when it comes to the rest of it, witnesses and 
all of that other stuff, the court's not going to get involved in that. From what I've heard already, we are not 
there at this point.   And I don 't know if we'll get there. 
In the end maybe the appellate courts will have to make 
this decision once more is know n  about who these witnesses 
are and if they actually do or do not testify. But at this point in the proceedings, no witnesses have been not called 
and therefore the court's [going to]  deny the request to 
withdraw as counsel.  
(Emphasis added.) 
Defense counsel orally renewed her request to withdraw 
at the close of the first day of trial, explaining that, 
[R]ight before we started trial or started the afternoon 
session, that is when Mr. Sagapolutele refused to come to 
the court to his trial. I did have an opportunity to go 
back there to see if I could resolve the situation. At 
that point it was made clear to me that the communication 
had stopped . 
His refusal to -- well, his refusal to participate in 
the defense renders me pretty much useless . And I get that 
the State is -- is going to great lengths to finish this 
trial, but the fact remains is that I have a breakdown of 
3   After the circuit court denied the motion to withdraw, defense 
counsel moved for a continuance, on the ground that "at [that] point [she]  
need[ed]  to explore Mr. Sagapolutele's wishes to possibly call a witness ."   
The circuit court denied defense counsel's request for a continuance  without 
prejudice to the filing of a written motion .  
5   
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
communication when my client refuses to work with me . I 
think at that point representation [has] to cease. 
I -- these are very rare circumstances. I -- I have 
not been in this position before. I am uncomfortable 
proceeding given what the State has put on the record as 
allegations which have not been proven. On the one hand I 
cannot break the confidence s  of my client and I have to 
protect his interests, but I think there is a competing interest here. My own I guess I'll label it.  
Um, so I --I can only think of the course of action 
of asking to --to withdraw. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The circuit court  declined to rule on the renewed oral 
request to withdraw until defense counsel could submit a written 
motion, and the motion was heard. The circuit court explained,  
[I]t's hard because there's not a lot --there's a lot --
there's a lot underneath that's being said, and it's 
difficult to make decisions based on things that are not 
being said. So I think we need a couple of days to reflect 
on this and for me to make a decision based on what I 
believe to be [defense counsel' s] ability or inability to 
continue in this case. It's something that I'm very much 
considering. 
On February 28, 2023, defense counsel  filed a  written  
motion to withdraw as Sagapolutele's counsel.   Defense counsel 
represented that the motion was brought "based on 
[Sagapolutele's] right to the effective assistance of counsel, 
and his right to appointed counsel,"  pursuant to article I, 
section 14 of the  Hawaiʻi  State Constitution, and the Sixth and 
Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. 
Defense counsel's declaration represented that "[t]he breakdown 
in communication between [defense counsel] and [Sagapolutele was]  irreparable,"  and that "[defense counsel] cannot continue 
6   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to conduct [Sagapolutele 's] trial without communicating with 
[Sagapolutele]. " 
Sagapolutele refused to appear at the March 1, 2023  
hearing on defense counsel's motion  to withdraw. At the 
hearing, defense counsel raised conflict of interest concerns. 
As she explained,  
The first oral motion to withdraw as counsel was coming 
from my client. And this motion --and for his reasons of 
my representation. 
This motion that was filed yesterday is not based off 
of Mr. Sagapolutele's desires. I have never in all my 
years of practice filed a motion to withdraw in the middle 
of trial, and I think that should say a lot. I'm not -- 
I'm not bootstrapping as it's characterized as by the 
State.  
Given my last interaction with Mr. Sagapolutele, I 
believe now, despite whatever he says, there is a divergence of interest here, and I am with this motion 
protecting my own interests. And I don't think that can be 
done with my continued representation because if I continue 
to represent him, his interests, I need to represent his interests. And I -- I simply do not think I'm in a 
position to do so.  
So I understand the court's inclination. I'm putting 
that on the record. And I have a strong suspicion that he's not [going to]  show up. So if that is the case and 
with the court's inclination, I'm going to go through this 
trial. And not only is my own well -being at jeopardy. I 
will face, you know, an ineffective claim. And I'm just -- I don't think that at this point that it's fair to myself.  
(Emphasis added.) 
The circuit court expressed its inclination to deny 
defense counsel's motion to withdraw, explaining, 
I've made my position clear. Um, I understand everyone's 
constraints. I have the same concerns that everyone has, 
but I have to go by what is filed in the motion and I have 
to follow the law which requires me to give [Sagapolutele] 
an opportunity to speak with me about this motion so I can 
have a full discussion about it with him. 
I don't know if he'll come. I don't know what he'll 
say. I don't know if he'll say anything that will convince 
me to grant the motion. But I still have to go that route.  
7   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Defense counsel] has not said anything about 
anything else except physically being unable to communicate 
with [Sagapolutele] , but I believe that [defense counsel] 
has done what she needs to do to protect herself as far as 
any future motions that come up. And that's all --that's 
all we can do at this point. 
(Emphasis added.) The circuit court later denied the motion 
stating that "situations where counsel is hampered either by a 
difference in opinion on who to call as witnesses or an 
allegation that suddenly the defendant is no longer satisfied 
with counsel's representation" ar e insufficient reasons to allow 
withdrawal of counsel. 
Defense counsel again renewed her request to withdraw 
after the prosecution rested. Sagapolutele was still refusing 
to appear at tr ial. Defense counsel represented that, 
[A]t this point I'm renewing my request to withdraw as 
counsel. It is my intention to call Mr. Sagapolutele as 
that is what the plan was. And I don't have his permission 
to not call him and he has a right to testify. If I don't 
call him, that makes me inef fective. 
Defense counsel expressed several times that her "license [was] 
on the line," and that she was "trying to protect [her] own 
license" by requesting to withdraw. She stated that, " [she] 
still believe[d] that without [Sagapolutele's] testimony [she] 
[could not ] do [her] job."4 
4 Defense counsel also asked for a continuance "to see if [she 
could] visit [Sagapolutele] at O -Triple-C"; defense counsel's request was 
denied. 
8   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defense counsel further expressed concern that she was 
not able to advise Sagapolutele of his right to testify or not 
testify. As she explained to the circuit court,  
[M]y issue is  he is without counsel at this -- at this 
moment, and so the ramifications of him testifying or not 
testifying, those I think have to be disclosed to him. Um, 
I -- and I -- I recognize the court can do whatever it 
wants. I just don't think at this point he's represented. 
Or he refuses to speak with me so I can't give that advice.   
Uh, I'm not comfortable giving that advice in cellblock. . 
 
 
 
 . . 
. . . . 
. . . My objection is at this point he's without 
counsel. Normally before Tachibana occurs I have an 
opportunity to explain the pros and cons. And the court is right, it's his decision. Even if I want him to testify, 
he can make that decision. My objection is that he's not 
had that counsel.   Um, so any inquiry by the court I don't 
think would be -- what's the word? -- under counsel.  
(Emphasis added.) 
The circuit court did not allow counsel to withdraw  
until after the conclusion of trial and the jury had returned 
its verdict.  
In State v. Harter, the Hawaiʻi Supreme Court explained 
that, 
Before ruling on a motion to substitute counsel based upon 
a breakdown in communication or an irreconcilable 
difference, a trial court must conduct a "penetrating and 
comprehensive inquiry " into the nature of the relationship 
between the defendant and counsel. This inquiry is not 
only required for the trial court to make an informed 
decision, but it also should seek to "ease the defendant's 
dissatisfaction, distrust , and concern. " 
Thus, when a motion to substitute counsel is based upon a 
breakdown in communication or an irreconcilable difference 
between counsel and client, the trial court "may need to 
evaluate the depth of any conflict between defendant and 
counsel, the extent of any breakdown in communication, how 
much time may be necessary for a new attorney to prepare, 
9   
 
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and any delay or inconvenience that may result from the 
substitution. " 
 . . . . 
Once the court has gained information regarding the 
breakdown in the attorney -client relationship through such 
questioning, the court may then more accurately evaluate the extent of the conflict and determine whether there is 
any action that may be taken in an effort to repair the 
attorney- client relationship. Depending on the extent of 
the breakdown, the trial court, for example, may continue 
the motion for substitution of counsel to give the defense 
counsel and the defendant an opportunity to resolve their 
differences.  
134 Hawaiʻ i 308, 328-29, 340 P.3d 440, 460-61  (2014)  (emphasis 
added)  (citations omitted).    
Here, the record reflects defense counsel's repeated 
representation that there was "a complete breakdown in [her]  
communication"  with Sagapolutele,  as well as "irreconcilable 
differences" with regard to defense strategy. Given these 
representations, we conclude that the circuit court acted beyond  
its discretion in denying  defense counsel and  Sagapolutele's 
requests for new appointed counsel  without conducting  a 
"penetrating and comprehensive inquiry" of the sort  necessary to 
discern "the nature of the relationship between [Sagapolutele] 
and [defense] counsel,"  and that Sagapolutele's right to 
effective assistance of counsel  was therefore not adequately 
protected.   See  id.  at 329, 340 P.3d at 461 (citation omitted).  
Defense counsel, moreover, represented that the 
circumstances giving rise to Sagapolutele's complete rejection 
of her legal assistance had created a conflict of interest. 
10   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A trial judge is required to conduct a "penetrating and 
comprehensive " inquiry when he or she "reasonably should 
know" that a conflict of interest exists . Once this duty 
to inquire is triggered, "it cannot be discharged by a 
perfunctory inquiry, " but rather , the duty is only met with 
"probing and specific questions " about the potential 
conflict. 
The strict requirement imposed upon trial courts to inquire 
into a potential conflict of interest is consistent with 
the long recognized principle "that the Sixth Amendment 
right to counsel contains a correlative right to 
representation that is unimpaired by conflicts of interest 
or divided loyalties. " Generally, "a conflict exists when 
an attorney is placed in a situation conducive to divided 
loyalties, and can include situations in which the caliber 
of an attorney's services may be substantially diluted. " 
 . . . . 
Therefore, a circuit court's "good cause " inquiry, when 
there is a potential conflict between the defendant and 
defense counsel's personal interests, should address 
whether the representation would be "conducive to divided 
loyalties." In light of the Hawai ʻi Rules of Professional 
Conduct's guidance on conflicts of interest, the court 
should consider asking questions regarding the following: 
-the basis for the conflict of interest; 
-the potential that the conflict would materially 
interfere with defense counsel's independent 
professional judgment in considering what actions to 
pursue on behalf of the client; 
-the possibility that the conflict might foreclose 
defense counsel from taking courses of action that 
reasonably should be pursued on behalf of a client; and 
-defense counsel's opinion on whether his or her 
representation would be adversely affected. 
Id. at 324-25, 340 P.3d at 4 56-57 (emphasis added) (citations 
omitted) . 
As in Harter, defense counsel represented on the 
record that she had a "personal interest [in] protecting herself 
professionally" and that this interest "would jeopardize 
[Sagapolutele's] right to the effective assistance of counsel." 
11   
 
  
  
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
See  id.  at 325, 340 P.3d at 457. And as in Harter, the  record 
demonstrates a conflict of interest due to defense counsel's 
personal interest, and that the  circuit court should have  asked  
the "probing and specific questions"  necessary to elicit any 
information to the contrary.   See  id.  at 324, 340 P.3d at 456 
(citation omitted).  
Defense  counsel clearly  asserted  that defense counsel 
could not, under the circumstances, continue to effectively 
represent Sagapolutele.   Sagapolutele represented that he 
thought it would be in his best interest for defense counsel to withdraw.   The  circuit court should have conducted  inquiries 
necessary to determine whether withdrawal of counsel was necessary to protect Sagapolutele's constitutional rights.   On 
this record, we conclude that the circuit court erred by not permitting defense counsel to withdraw, and by not appointing a 
new court-appointed counsel to represent Sagapolutele  without 
first conducting the Harter  inquiries.
     5
5 We are mindful that defendants in criminal cases do not have a 
right to pick and choose their court -appointed counsel, and we clarify that 
our ruling is not based on Sagapolutele's decision to voluntarily absent 
himself from his own trial in protest of appointed counsel. See State v. 
Torres, 54 Haw. 502, 504, 510 P.2d 494, 49 6 (1973) ("[T]here is no absolute 
right, constitutional or otherwise, for an indigent to have the court order a 
change in court -appointed counsel."); State v. Vaimili , 135 Hawaiʻi 492, 501, 
353 P.3d 1034, 1043 (2015) ("Trial may continue . . . in certain 
circumstances when a defendant is voluntarily absent."). Our disposition is 
based on the record before us, which exhibits a clear and complete breakdown 
of communications between defense counsel and Sagapolutele. On this record, 
defense couns el's withdrawal was necessary to protect Sagapolutele's 
constitutional rights and to address defense counsel's conflict of interest. 
12   
 
    
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the circuit 
court's Judgment, and remand for a new trial . 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, May 30, 2025. 
On the briefs:  /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka  
 Presiding Judge  
Kai Lawrence,   
for Defendant-Appellant.  /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth  
 Associate Judge  
Stephen K. Tsushima,   
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,  /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
City and County of Honolulu,  Associate Judge 
for Plaintiff-Appellee.  
13 