NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000826 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
JL, Petitioner-Appellee,
v. 
MV, Respondent-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-P NO. 13-1-6287) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
This case involves a dispute between Petitioner-
Appellee JL (
Mother)
 and Respondent-Appellant MV (Father) over 
which school their minor child (Child) should attend. Father 
appeals from the "Order for Relief After Judgment or Order" 
entered by the Family Court of the First Circuit on November 18, 
2019 (November 2019 Order).1 For the reasons explained below, we 
affirm the November 2019 Order. 
BACKGROUND 
Mother and Father were never married. On August 1, 
2013, Mother filed a "Petition for Paternity or for Custody, 
Visitation and Support Orders After Voluntary Establishment of 
Paternity" (Petition). On October 3, 2013, the family court 
1 The Honorable Natasha R. Shaw signed the November 2019 Order. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
entered a stipulated order2 that awarded joint legal custody of 
Child to Mother and Father and sole physical custody to Mother. 
The order also set a temporary visitation schedule for Father 
pending trial, and ordered Father to pay temporary child support. 
A trial was held on February 20, 2014. On April 4, 
2014, the family court entered a "Decision & Order" that 
addressed Father's visitation rights and payment of child 
support, medical insurance, and uninsured medical costs.3 
On September 21, 2018, Mother filed a motion seeking 
modification of Father's visitation rights and child support 
obligations. On November 9, 2018, Father filed his own motion 
seeking joint physical custody of Child and modification of child 
support. A trial on both motions was held on April 29, 2019. On 
May 31, 2019, the family court entered its "Decision and Order 
Following Trial" (May 2019 Order).4 That order addressed, among 
other things, joint legal and physical custody of Child, subject 
to a time-sharing schedule. Of relevance to this appeal, the May 
2019 Order provided: 
1. Legal Custody. The parties shall maintain joint
legal custody of the child. The parties shall confer on all
major legal decisions regarding the child, includingdecisions regarding those affecting education . . . . 
Major legal decisions shall include . . . major
decisions regarding the child's education, such as choice ofschool [and] change in school . . . . 
Each party shall notify the other in writing of
any major decision that needs to be made for a child as soonas possible after learning of the issue that needs to bedecided. Parties are to respond to the other parent'srequest for a decision or any other request within 24-hours.The parties shall communicate with each other in an effortto reach an agreement regarding the decision. If the parties are unable to agree on the issue, they shall discuss 
2 The Honorable Linda S. Martell signed the stipulated order. 
3 The Honorable Linda S. Martell presided over the trial and signed
the April 4, 2014 Decision & Order. 
4 The Honorable Kristine Y. Yoo presided over the trial and signed
the May 2019 Order. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
it with their parenting counselor before either party files
a motion with the Court. 
. . . . 
3. Timesharing
. The Court finds the following
timesharing schedule to be in the child's best interest. 
a. Regular Timesharing Schedule. The parties' regular timesharing scheduleshall be as follows: FATHER shall have the child every Friday from afterschool [sic]until Sunday evening at 6:00 p.m. on thefirst (1st), second (2nd), and fourth(4th) weekends of each month. Regular
Pick-up/Drop-off Arrangement: FATHER shallpick up the child immediately afterschool[sic] on Fridays. MOTHER shall pick upthe child at 6:00 p.m. from FATHER'sresidence on Sundays. 
. . . . 
19. Mediation
. The parties are hereby ordered to
participate in mediation with the Mediation Center of thePacific, or with some other professional mediator, prior tofiling any additional motions before this Court, and/or ifthe parties have any dispute regarding a legal custody issuein the future. Failure to participate in mediation prior tofiling a motion, absent exigent circumstances, may result insanctions being imposed by this Court, which could includedismissal of any motion, an order to pay reasonableattorneys' fees and costs, or any other appropriate sanctionthe Court deems just and equitable under the circumstances. 
On August 15, 2019, Father filed the motion that gave 
rise to this appeal. He claimed that the May 2019 Order required 
Father and Mother to agree before changing Child's school, but 
Mother changed Child's school on August 5, 2019, without Father's 
agreement. He also claimed that Mother did not list him as the 
first emergency contact for Child's new school. Father's motion 
was heard on September 4, 2019.  The November 2019 Order granted 
Father's request to be named as the first emergency contact for Child, and also ordered Mother to list Father as an authorized 
person to pick Child up from Child's after-school programs. Of 
relevance to this appeal, the November 2019 Order provided: 5
5 The Honorable Natasha R. Shaw presided. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1. [Father]'s request for an order directing re-
enrollment of the subject child in [Child's former school]
is denied. Considering the best interests of the child,[Mother]'s residence and place of employment, and the timeschedule in effect, it is not in [Child's] best interests toreturn to [Child's former school] and [Child] shall remainenrolled in [Child's new school]. 
The family court entered findings of fact and conclusions of law 
on January 8, 2020, after Father filed his notice of appeal, 
pursuant to Rule 52(a) of the Hawai# i Family Court Rules. 
DISCUSSION 
Father's opening brief contains five separately 
numbered points of error, but argues only two: (1) the family 
court's November 2019 Order violated the doctrines of res 
judicata (claim preclusion) and collateral estoppel (issue 
preclusion); and (2) the November 2019 Order violated the law of 
the case established by the May 2019 Order. The applicability of 
preclusive doctrines such as res judicata, collateral estoppel, 
or law of the case present questions of law that we review de 
novo. In re Thomas H. Gentry Revocable Tr., 138 Hawai# i 158, 
168, 378 P.3d 874, 884 (2016). 
Res Judicata/Claim Preclusion and
Collateral Estoppel/Issue Preclusion 
Father argues that the May 2019 Order had preclusive 
effect over the November 2019 Order because: (a) the May 2019 
Order required the parties to mediate disputed issues and to see 
a family counselor before filing a post-decree motion; and 
(b) the issue of whether Child should change schools was raised 
during the April 29, 2019 evidentiary hearing, but the family 
court did not authorize a change. We disagree. 
Res judicata (claim preclusion) and collateral estoppel 
(issue preclusion) are legal doctrines that limit a party to one 
opportunity to litigate a case to prevent inconsistent results 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
among multiple suits, and to promote finality and judicial 
economy. Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai# i 43, 53, 85 P.3d 150, 160 
(2004). They are, however, separate doctrines that involve distinct questions of law. Id. 
Claim preclusion "prohibits a party from relitigating a 
previously adjudicated cause of action." Bremer, 104 Hawai# i at 
53, 85 P.3d at 160 (citation omitted). 
The party asserting claim 
preclusion has the burden of establishing that (1) there was a 
final judgment on the merits, (2) both parties are the same or in 
privity with the parties in the original suit, and (3) the claim 
decided in the original suit is identical with the one presented 
in the action in question. Id. at 54, 85 P.3d at 161. 
Issue preclusion "applies to a subsequent suit between 
the parties or their privies on a 
different cause of action and 
prevents the parties or their privies from relitigating any issue that was actually litigated and finally decided in the earlier 
action." Bremer, 104 Hawai# i at 54, 85 P.3d at 161 (citation 
omitted). 
The party asserting issue preclusion must establish 
that (1) the issue decided in the prior suit is identical to the 
one presented in the action in question, (2) there is a final 
judgment on the merits, (3) the issue decided in the prior suit 
was essential to the final judgment, and (4) the party against 
whom issue preclusion is asserted was a party, or is in privity 
with a party, to the prior suit. Id. It is not necessary that 
the party asserting issue preclusion in the second suit was a party in the first suit. Id. 
Neither doctrine applies in this case, which involves a 
child custody dispute to which Hawaii Revised Statute (HRS
) 
§ 571-46 (2018) applies. The statute, titled "Criteria and 
procedure in awarding custody and visitation; best interest of 
the child[,]" provides, in relevant part: 
(a) In . . . any . . . proceeding where there is at issue
a dispute as to the custody of a minor child, the [family] 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court, during the pendency of the action . . . or any time
during the minority of the child, may make an order for thecustody of the minor child as may seem necessary or proper.In awarding the custody, the court shall be guided by thefollowing standards, considerations, and procedures: 
. . . . 
(6) Any custody award shall be subject tomodification or change 
whenever the best
interests of the child require or justify themodification or change[.] 
(Underscoring added). 
Waldecker v. O'Scanlon, 137 Hawai# i 460, 375 P.3d 239 
(2016) is instructive. 
In that case, mother and father were 
married and had a child. In anticipation of their divorce, they 
entered into a settlement agreement that was incorporated into a 
divorce decree. The agreement provided, and the decree stated, 
that mother and father would have joint physical custody of their 
child, but if either moved more than 200 miles away from O# ahu, 
sole physical custody would automatically revert to the remaining parent. Four years later, mother anticipated moving to Florida 
with her new husband. She petitioned the family court to change 
the child custody arrangement, contending that there had been a 
material change in circumstances that required the family court 
to examine whether a change in custody would be in the child's 
best interests. Father argued that the divorce decree 
specifically provided for the child's custody if a parent 
relocated, and that the family court should enforce the divorce 
decree without performing a "best interests of the child" 
analysis. 
The family court agreed with father and awarded sole 
physical custody of child to father, as provided for by the 
divorce decree. Mother appealed. 
Even though the divorce decree 
specifically provided that father would gain sole physical custody if mother relocated more than 200 miles away from O# ahu, 
the supreme court held that "the family court erred by not 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
considering the best interests of the child as required by HRS 
§ 571–46." Waldecker, 137 Hawai# i at 466, 375 P.3d at 245. 
After discussing the existing case law on the issue, the supremecourt concluded:  
that the requirement of a material change in circumstances
is inconsistent with HRS § 571–46. Accordingly, we overruleNadeau[
6] and Hollaway[7] to the extent they suggest that a
material change in circumstances is required before thecourt can consider the best interests of the child in modifying a custody order. Rather than that two-stepanalysis, there is a single inquiry which focuses on thebest interests of the child. As this court held in Dela Cruz,[
8] the question is "whether or not there has been such
a change of circumstances that the modification will be forthe [best interest] of the child." 35 Haw. Terr. at 98. 
We acknowledge that there are legitimate interests in
preventing continued relitigation of issues and reducingrepetitive motions. However, the family courts have varioustools at their disposal to address such situations,including the power to impose sanctions, as appropriate. 
In short, jurisprudential concerns regarding
repetitive motions cannot be addressed in a manner thatconflicts with the requirements of HRS [§] 571–46 that"custody should be awarded . . . according to the bestinterests of the child" and "any custody award shall besubject to modification or change whenever the bestinterests of the child require or justify the modificationor change." HRS § 571–46(a)(1) and (6) (emphasis added). 
Id. at 470, 375 P.3d at 249 (footnotes and first emphasis added). 
In this case the May 2019 Order required that if the 
parties did not agree about a change in Child's school, "they 
shall discuss it with their parenting counselor before either 
party files a motion with the Court." Father testified, during 
the September 4, 2019 evidentiary hearing, that Mother raised the 
change of schools issue during a mediation in July 2019, but no 
agreement was reached. Father also testified that he met with a 
counselor recommended by his attorney, and with a counselor 
6 Nadeau v. Nadeau, 10 Haw. App. 111, 861 P.2d 754 (1993). 
7 Hollaway v. Hollaway, 133 Hawai #i  415, 329 P.3d 320 (App. 2014). 
8 Dela Cruz v. Dela Cruz, 35 Haw. Terr. 95 (1939). 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
selected by Mother, on the choice-of-school issue before filing 
his August 15, 2019 motion. 
Although Mother did not file a motion before changing 
Child's school, Father's August 15, 2019 motion brought the issue 
before the family court after the parties could not resolve it 
through mediation or counseling. The record indicates that 
Mother had custody of Child during the week. Mother's place of 
residence changed, resulting in a change in Child's public school 
district. Child's old school was located across the island from 
Child's new school. The family court found that if Child was 
returned to the old school, the lengthy commute would not have 
been in Child's best interest. Although Father's opening brief 
cites the family court's finding of Child's best interest as 
error, Father presents no argument about why the family court 
abused its discretion in making the finding. The point is 
waived. See Hawai# i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(7) 
("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). 
Law of the Case Doctrine 
The law of the case doctrine has been applied under two 
circumstances. First, if an appeal is taken, "a determination of 
a question of law made by an appellate court in the course of an 
action becomes the law of the case and may not be disputed by a 
reopening of the question at a later stage of the litigation." 
Fought & Co. v. Steel Eng'g & Erection, Inc., 87 Hawai# i 37, 48-
49, 951 P.2d 487, 498-99 (1998) (citation omitted). The family court's November 2019 Order at issue in this case was not entered 
after a remand. The appellate law of the case doctrine has no 
application in this case. 
Second, in cases upon which more than one judge has 
presided, "the usual practice of courts to refuse to disturb all 
prior rulings in a particular case" is referred to as the "law of 
the case" doctrine. Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of Emps.' Ret. Sys. of 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State of Hawai# i, 92 Hawai# i 432, 441, 992 P.2d 127, 136 (2000) 
(citation omitted). 
"Unless cogent reasons support the second 
court's action, any modification of a prior ruling of another 
court of equal and concurrent jurisdiction will be deemed an 
abuse of discretion." Wong v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 66 Haw. 
389, 396, 665 P.2d 157, 162 (1983) (emphasis and citations omitted). 
The law of the case doctrine was not violated here 
because the November 2019 Order did not modify the terms of the 
May 2019 Order. 
The May 2019 Order did not contain any provision 
about which school Child would attend. The May 2019 Order actually anticipated potential future disagreements on "major 
decisions regarding the child's education, such as choice of 
school [and] change in school," and incorporated alternative 
dispute resolution provisions for mediation and counseling before 
any party could file a motion for relief. We hold that the 
family court's decision to allow Child to remain enrolled in 
Child's new school did not violate the law of the case doctrine. 
CONCLUSION 
Based upon the foregoing, the order entered by the 
Family Court of the First Circuit on November 18, 2019, is 
affirmed. 
Dated: Honolulu, Hawai# i, September 9, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
Associate Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
9 Thomas D. Farrell, for Petitioner-Appellee. 
Samuel P. King, Jr., for Respondent-Appellant. 