NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000762
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
SUSHIL BASNET, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CRIMINAL NO. 11-1-1675)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
  
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Sushil Basnet (Basnet) appeals from
 
the September 23, 2011 Judgment entered in the Family Court of
 
1
the First Circuit  (circuit family court) convicting Basnet on
one count of Abuse of Family or Household Members in violation of
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 709-906(1) (Supp. 2012).
 
On appeal, Basnet contends the circuit family court 
erred in denying his motion to dismiss the complaint because (1) 
his arraignment proceeding failed to comply with the requirements 
of the Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP), and (2) the 
complaint insufficiently alleged the essential elements of the offense. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On June 9, 2011, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i 
(State) charged Basnet with "intentionally, knowingly, or 
1
 The Honorable Darryl Y.C. Choy presided over the arraignment and
plea proceedings; the Honorable Jeannette H. Castagnetti presided thereafter.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
recklessly physically abus[ing the complaining witness (Wife)], a
 
family or household member," in violation of HRS § 709-906(1). 
The complaint's caption stated: "IN THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE
 
FIRST CIRCUIT[,] HONOLULU DIVISION[,] STATE OF HAWAII."
 
On June 21, 2011, Basnet appeared before the Honorable
 
Darryl Y.C. Choy for an arraignment and plea hearing. The pre­
trial order from that hearing indicates Basnet waived reading of
 
the charge and entered a plea of not guilty. The pre-trial order
 
also stated: "Jury trial demanded, case committed to [c]ircuit
 
[family] [c]ourt." The record indicates this was the only
 
arraignment proceeding conducted in this case.
 
The circuit family court held a calendar call on
 
September 20, 2011, during which the State made an oral motion to
 
amend the complaint's caption to state that the complaint was
 
filed in the circuit family court. Basnet objected, and two days
 
later, the circuit family court heard argument on the State's
 
motion. The State argued the complaint's heading reflected a
 
typographical error. Basnet responded by orally moving to
 
dismiss the case. Basnet first argued the circuit family court
 
lacked jurisdiction because his arraignment failed to comply with
 
the HRPP's requirements.2 Basnet also argued the complaint was
 
deficient because it failed to define the terms "physical abuse"
 and "family or household member." The circuit family court
 
concluded it had jurisdiction, and it granted the State's oral
 
motion to amend the complaint's caption.
 
At the conclusion of the trial, a jury found Basnet
 
guilty as charged. The circuit family court entered its judgment
 
2
 Hawai'i Family Court Rule 81(c) states: " Criminal cases. Cases for 
adults charged with the commission of a crime coming within the jurisdiction
of the family courts shall be governed by the Hawai' i Rules of Penal 
Procedure. " 
Basnet first claimed he had been arraigned in the circuit family
court and argued that, pursuant to the HRPP 5(b)(1) and HRS § 706-663 (1993), he
should have been arraigned in the district family court. However, because the
circuit family court and the parties raised uncertainties about where the
arraignment took place, Basnet then argued in the alternative that even if the
arraignment had taken place in the district family court, the procedure was still
erroneous.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3of conviction against Basnet on September 23, 2011.  Basnet filed
a timely notice of appeal on October 18, 2011.
II.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW
A. Interpretation Of Court Rules
The interpretation of a court rule is reviewed de novo. 
Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp. , 120 Hawai #i 181, 197, 202 P.3d
1226, 1242 (2009).
B. Harmless Error
Hawai#i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 52(a)
provides, in relevant part, that "[a]ny error, defect,
irregularity or variance which does not affect substantial rights
shall be disregarded."  The Hawai# i Supreme Court has stated that
"[s]uch error, however, should not be viewed in isolation and
considered purely in the abstract.  It must be examined in light
of the entire proceedings and given the effect to which the whole
record shows it is entitled."  State v. Sprattling,  99 Hawai #i
312, 320, 55 P.3d 276, 284 (2002) (internal quotation marks and
brackets in original omitted).  Under the harmless error
standard, the appellate court "must determine whether there is a
reasonable possibility that the error complained of might have
contributed to the conviction."  State v. Pauline,  100 Hawai #i
356, 378, 60 P.3d 306, 328 (2002) (internal quotation marks
omitted).  "If there is such a reasonable possibility in a
criminal case, then the error is not harmless beyond a reasonable
doubt, and the judgment of conviction on which it may have been
based must be set aside."  State v. Gano,  92 Hawai #i 161, 176,
988 P.2d 1153, 1168 (1999) (internal quotation marks omitted).
C. Sufficiency Of Charge
"Whether a charge sets forth all the essential elements
of a charged offense is a question of law, which we review under
the de novo, or right/wrong, standard."  State v. Mita , 124
Hawai#i 385, 389, 245 P.3d 458, 462 (2010) (internal quotation
marks, citation, brackets, and ellipsis omitted).   
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
Basnet contends the circuit family court lacked subject
 
matter jurisdiction because his arraignment did not comply with
 
the requirements of the HRPP. He alleges he was arraigned only
 
in the district family court without a second arraignment in the
 
circuit family court, in violation of HRPP Rule 10(a).3 He
 
further alleges the district family court committed him to the
 circuit family court without an order of commitment, in violation
 
of HRPP Rule 5(b)(3).
4
 
Although the State argues otherwise, Basnet correctly
 
asserts he was arraigned in the district family court, not the 
3
 HRPP Rule 10(a) states:
 
Rule 10. ARRAIGNMENT IN CIRCUIT COURT.
 
(a) A defendant who has been held by district court to
answer in circuit court shall be arraigned in circuit court
within 14 days after the district court's oral order of
commitment following (i) arraignment and plea, where the
defendant elected jury trial or did not waive the right to
jury trial or (ii) initial appearance or preliminary
hearing, whichever occurs last.
 
4
 HRPP Rule 5(b)(3) states:
 
Rule 5. PROCEEDINGS FOLLOWING ARREST.
 . . . 
(3) JURY TRIAL ELECTION. In appropriate cases, the
defendant shall be tried by jury in the circuit court unless
the defendant waives in writing or orally in open court the
right to trial by jury. If the defendant does not waive the
right to a trial by jury at or before the time of entry of a
plea of not guilty, the court shall commit the defendant to
the circuit court for trial by jury. Within 7 days after the
district court's oral order of commitment
 (i) the district court shall sign its written order of
commitment,
 (ii) the clerk shall enter the district court's written
order, and
 (iii) the clerk shall transmit to the circuit court all
documents in the proceeding and any bail deposited with the
district court; provided, however, that if trial by jury is
waived in the circuit court, the proceedings may be remanded
to the district court for disposition.
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circuit family court. The presiding judge at the arraignment
 
5
hearing was a per diem judge,  and per diem judges serve as
district judges only. See HRS §§ 604-2 (Supp. 2012) 
("Appointment and tenure of district judges; per diem district
 judges[]"), 571-8 (2006 Repl.) ("District family courts; district
 
family judges; appointment; sessions."). 
However, we conclude any impropriety constituted
 
harmless error and did not warrant dismissal. The purpose of
 
arraignment is to inform the defendant of the charges and of
 
their rights and to give the opportunity to plead. See HRPP Rule
 
10(d)(e).
6 Here, Basnet waived reading of the charge, entered a 
5
 The Judiciary State of Hawai' i's 2011 Annual Report listed Darryl
Y.C. Choy as a per diem judge. Haw. State Judiciary, 2011 Annual Report at 27,
 
(2011) available at
http://www.courts.state.hi.us/docs/news_and_reports_docs/annual_reports/Jud_Annua
l_Report_2011.pdf
 
6
HRPP Rule 10 states, in pertinent part:
. . .
 (d) Arraignment in the circuit court shall be conducted in
open court or by video conference when permitted by Rule 43.
The arraignment shall consist of reading the charge to the
defendant or stating to the defendant the substance of the
charge and calling on the defendant to plead thereto. The
defendant shall be given a copy of the charge before the
defendant is called upon to plead. In felony cases charged by
written information, the defendant shall be furnished with a
copy of the information and all attached exhibits at the
initial court appearance and the custody of the materials
shall be governed by Rule 16.
 
(e) Upon the initial appearance of the defendant before
the court, the court shall:
 (1) be satisfied that the defendant is informed of the
charge;
 (2) inform the defendant that there is no requirement to
make a statement and that any statement made may be used
against the defendant;
 (3) advise the defendant of the right to counsel;
 (4) allow the defendant reasonable time and opportunity to
consult counsel; and
 (5) admit the defendant to bail as provided by law or in
these rules.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
plea of not guilty, and elected jury trial during his arraignment
 
in the district family court. Upon commitment to the circuit
 
family court, the complaint was amended in form only, and the
 
charge was not amended. Moreover, although the district family
 
court did not enter a separate commitment order, the pre-trial
 
order it entered specifically noted the case was committed to the
 
circuit family court for jury trial. Because Basnet has not
 
plausibly shown the above alleged irregularities affected his
 
substantial rights, the circuit family court did not err in
 
denying his motion to dismiss. See HRPP Rule 52(a) ("Any error,
 
defect, irregularity or variance which does not affect
 substantial rights shall be disregarded.").
 
Basnet's second point of error challenges the 
sufficiency of the charges. Relying on State v. Wheeler, 121 
Hawai'i 383, 219 P.3d 1170 (2009), Basnet claims the complaint 
charging him under HRS § 709-906(1) was deficient because it failed to define the terms "physical abuse" and "family or 
household member." 
In Mita, the Hawai' i Supreme Court held the oral charge 
against Mita was sufficient based on two factors distinguishing 
that case from the insufficient charge in Wheeler. First, the 
definition of "animal nuisance" at issue in Mita "[did] not 
create an additional essential element of the offense[.]" Mita, 
124 Hawai' i at 391, 245 P.3d at 464. Second, "in any event, the 
definition of 'animal nuisance' [was] consistent with its 
commonly understood meaning and therefore Mita had fair notice of 
the offense charged." Id. In other words, "the State need only 
allege the statutory definition of a term when it creates an additional essential element of the offense, and the term itself 
does not provide a person of common understanding with fair 
notice of that element." Id. at 392, 246 P.3d at 465. 
Here, the complaint specified:
 
On or about the 7th day of June, 2011, in the City and
County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, SUSHIL BASNET did
intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly physically abuse
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[Wife], a family or household member, thereby committing the
offense of Abuse of Family or Household Members, in
violation of Section 709-906(1) of the Hawaii Revised
Statutes. SUSHIL BASNET is subject to sentencing in
accordance with Section 709-906(5)(a) of the Hawaii Revised
Statutes.
 
Basnet does not contend that either of the terms created an
 
additional essential element of the offense. Rather, he argues
 
the complaint's failure to define the terms deprived him of fair
 
notice of the offense. We disagree and conclude the charge was
 
sufficient because both "physical abuse" and "family or household
 
member" were sufficiently consistent with their commonly
 
understood meanings to provide fair notice. 
Although HRS § 709-906(1) does not define the term 
"physical abuse," the Hawai' i Supreme Court has held the term's 
ordinary reading gives sufficient notice of the prohibited conduct. See State v. Kameenui, 69 Haw. 620, 623, 753 P.2d 1250, 
1252 (1988) (holding HRS § 709-906(1) is not void for vagueness despite the lack of a statutory definition of "physical abuse"). 
The complaint's use of "family or household member" was likewise 
consistent with the term's ordinary meaning, and it adequately 
informed Basnet of the nature and cause of the accusation against 
him. The complaint did not need to set forth the full statutory 
7
definition of "family or household member"  to alert Basnet of
what he needed to defend against to avoid conviction. Under the
 
circumstances of this case, we conclude the charge against Basnet
 
was sufficient. 
7
 HRS § 709-906(1) states, in pertinent part:
. . .
 
For the purposes of this section, "family or household
member" means spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, former
spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, persons who have a
child in common, parents, children, persons related by
consanguinity, and persons jointly residing or formerly
residing in the same dwelling unit.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The September 23, 2011 Judgment entered in the Family 
Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 19, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Steven T. Barta 
for Defendant-Appellant. 
James M. Anderson Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
8
 