NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-18-0000539
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
VIOLETA YLAITE RUSSELL, Plaintiff/Counterclaim
Defendant/Appellant, 
v.
STAN SOLOMONSON, Defendant/Counterclaimant/Cross-
Claimant/Appellee,
and
SOLOMONSON MAPU, LLC, Defendant/Counterclaimant/Cross-
Claimant/Appellee,
and
DARREN RUSSELL, Defendant/Cross-Claimant/Appellee,
and
PREDRAG MIRKOVIC, Defendant-Appellee,
and
YNES MIRKOVIC, Defendant-Appellee,
and
OLD REPUBLIC TITLE & ESCROW OF HAWAII, Defendant-Appellee,
and
WELLS FARGO HOME LOANS, Defendant-Appellee,
and
U.S. BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, AS TRUSTEE FOR MASTR ADJUSTABLE
RATE MORTGAGE TRUST 2004-13, Defendant-Appellee,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50; DOE
CORPORATIONS 1-50, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 17-1-0503(1))
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellant Violeta Ylaite Russell ( Violeta)
and Defendant-Counterclaimant-Appellee Stan Solomonson1
1Plaintiff-Appellant is referred to by her given name to
distinguish her from Defendant-Appellee Darren Russell, her estranged husband.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(Solomonson ) asserted competing claims for the same real
property.  The Circuit Court of the Second Circuit  entered an
order granting a motion for partial summary judgment filed by
Solomonson and Defendant-Counterclaimant-Appellee Solomonson
Mapu, LLC ( LLC) (collectively, Solomonson Defendants ), a writ of
possession, and a judgment for possession.  Violeta appealed.  
We affirm.32
I.
On December 5, 2017, a self-represented Violeta filed a
complaint against the Solomonson Defendants, among others, and a
lis pendens affecting real property located in Kî hei on the
island of Maui (the Property).  The complaint alleged that
Violeta — who was living on the Property with her estranged
husband, Defendant-Appellee Darren Russell ( Darren) and their two
children — was entitled to a transfer of the Property, free and
clear of all liens, from the Solomonson Defendants and Darren to
Violeta and the children.  The Solomonson Defendants answered
Violeta's complaint and asserted a counterclaim against Violeta
and a cross-claim against Darren.
On March 14, 2018, the Solomonson Defendants filed a
motion for partial summary judgment (MPSJ ) that requested
(1) expungement of Violeta's lis pendens and (2) issuance of a
writ of possession and judgment for possession in favor of
Solomonson and against Violeta and Darren.  On April 30, 2018,
Darren (who was self-represented) filed a memorandum that
partially joined in, and partially opposed, the MPSJ.  Violeta
filed two memoranda in opposition to the MPSJ.  The Solomonson
Defendants filed a reply memorandum.  The MPSJ was heard on
2The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.
3We have appellate jurisdiction based upon Knauer v. Foote, 101
Hawai#i 81, 85, 63 P.3d 389, 393 (2003) (holding that an order expunging a lis
pendens is independently appealable) and Ciesla v. Reddish, 78 Hawai #i 18, 20,
889 P.2d 702, 704 (1995) (recognizing jurisdiction to consider appeals from
judgments which (1) require immediate execution of a command that property be
delivered to the appellant's adversary, and (2) the losing party would be
subjected to irreparable injury if appellate review had to wait the final
outcome of the litigation under the Forgay doctrine (Forgay v. Conrad, 47 U.S.
201 (1848))).
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
May 17, 2018.  On June 8, 2018, the circuit court entered an
order granting the MPSJ and expunging Violeta's lis pendens.  The
circuit court also entered a writ of possession and a judgment
for possession in favor of Solomonson and against Violeta and
Darren.  This appeal by Violeta followed.4
II.
An appellate court reviews a trial court's grant or
denial of summary judgment de novo using the same standard
applied by the trial court.  Nozawa v. Operating Engineers Local
Union No. 3, 142 Hawai# i 331, 338, 418 P.3d 1187, 1194 (2018). 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, depositions,
answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with
the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to
any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a
judgment as a matter of law.  Id. at 342, 418 P.3d at 1198.  A
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a cause
of action or defense asserted by the parties.  Id.
The moving party has the burden to establish that
summary judgment is proper.  Nozawa, 142 Hawai#i at 342, 418 P.3d
at 1198.  The movant may satisfy its initial burden of production
by either (1) presenting evidence negating an element of the non-
movant's claim, or (2) demonstrating that the non-movant will be
unable to carry its burden of proof at trial.  Ralston v. Yim,
129 Hawai#i 46, 60, 292 P.3d 1276, 1290 (2013).  Where the movant
attempts to meet its burden through the latter means, the movant
must show not only that the non-movant has not placed proof in
the record, but also that the non-movant will be unable to offer
proof at trial.  Ralston, 129 Hawai#i at 60-61, 292 P.3d at 1290-
91.
"Once a summary judgment movant has satisfied its
initial burden of producing support for its claim that there is
4Darren has not appealed from the order granting the MPSJ, the
judgment for possession, or the writ of possession.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
no genuine issue of material fact, the party opposing summary
judgment must demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general
allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial." 
Nozawa, 142 Hawai# i at 342, 418 P.3d at 1198 (citations omitted). 
The evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party.  Id.; Ralston, 129 Hawai# i at 56, 292 P.3d at
1286.
An appellate court "may affirm a grant of summary
judgment on any ground appearing in the record, even if the
circuit court did not rely on it."  Reyes v. Kuboyama, 76 Hawai# i
137, 140, 870 P.2d 1281, 1284 (1994) (citations omitted).
III.
The MPSJ was supported by Solomonson's declaration and
nine exhibits.  The evidence, viewed in the light most favorable
to Violeta, showed that on some unspecified date, Solomonson
purchased the Property subject to a mortgage from Defendant-
Appellee Wells Fargo Home Loans.  Solomonson transferred title to
the Property to the LLC.  Solomonson was the sole member of the
LLC.
At some point in time, Solomonson sold his interest in
the LLC to Defendants-Appellees Predrag Mirkovic and Ynes
Mirkovic (the Mirkovics), subject to a Security and Pledge
Agreement.  The Mirkovics breached the Security and Pledge Agree-
ment.  On April 11, 2011, Solomonson and Darren entered into a
contract (the Prime Agreement ) under which Darren (who is a
lawyer) agreed to provide legal services to repossess the
Property from the Mirkovics, improve the Property, and make
mortgage payments to Wells Fargo.  Solomonson was to transfer his
interest in the LLC to Darren and, upon Darren's satisfaction of
the Wells Fargo mortgage, "do all those things necessary to
ensure the clear title of [the LLC] as Owner of the Property." 
If the Property was sold within five years (i.e., before
April 11, 2016), the net proceeds were to be equally distributed
between Darren and Solomonson.  Also on April 11, 2011,
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Solomonson and Darren entered into a contract (the LLC Transfer
Agreement) that transferred Solomonson's membership interest in
the LLC to Darren.  Violeta was not a party to the Prime
Agreement or the LLC Transfer Agreement.
On December 12, 2012, the LLC (through Darren) conveyed
the Property to Darren and Violeta.  Darren (by declaration) and
Violeta (in her memorandum) claim that this was done so a
homeowner's exemption could be claimed against the real property
tax on the Property.5
By letter dated September 23, 2015, Wells Fargo
informed Solomonson that title to the Property was conveyed with-
out Wells Fargo's consent, in violation of the mortgage.  Wells
Fargo required that Solomonson take immediate action to either
pay off the mortgage or transfer title back to himself.
By letter dated August 5, 2016, Wells Fargo informed
Solomonson that the mortgage payment that was due in May 2016 had
not been received, and that Wells Fargo had initiated foreclosure
proceedings on June 23, 2016, because title to the Property had
not been transferred back to Solomonson.  The letter stated that
to avoid foreclosure, "[a] Quit Claim Deed needs to be completed
transferring property from Darren G Russell and Violeta Ylaite
Russell back to Stan Solomon [sic]."  On May 24, 2017, Violeta
and Darren conveyed the Property to Solomonson by quitclaim deed. 
Solomonson listed the Property for sale, but the pendency of
Violeta's lawsuit and her filing of the lis pendens is preventing
the sale of the property.  The MPSJ sought possession of the
property and expungement of Violeta's lis pendens.
Darren's response to the MPSJ attached his declaration
and eight exhibits.  Darren conceded that he "agreed to transfer
the Property back to Solomonson[.]"  Darren also conceded that he
signed the May 24, 2017 quitclaim deed to Solomonson, and that
"Solomonson thus has title to the Property[.]"  He argued,
5There is no indication in the record what consideration, if any,
Darren and Violeta gave in exchange for what appears to be divestiture of the
LLC's sole asset.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
though, that the quitclaim deed was subject to Solomonson's
alleged agreement to convey the Property back to Darren and
Violeta.  An unsigned copy of an agreement of sale was attached
as an exhibit.  Darren's declaration acknowledges that the
agreement of sale was never recorded in the Bureau of
Conveyances.
Violeta's first opposition to the MPSJ purported to
include a declaration and exhibits; there was a declaration, but
it did not authenticate any of the exhibits.   Violeta's second
opposition to the MPSJ also purported to attach a declaration and
exhibits, but contained no declaration and the exhibits were
unauthenticated.  Violeta's failure to comply with the "necessary
prerequisite to admissibility and consideration by the circuit
court" prohibited the circuit court from considering the
factually unsubstantiated arguments made in Violeta's memoranda. 
Fuller v. Pac. Med. Collections, Inc., 78 Hawai# i 213, 224, 891
P.2d 300, 311 (App. 1995).6
The circuit court stated, during the hearing on the
MPSJ:
The parties agree that the [May 24, 2017] quitclaim
deed was recorded June 1st, 2017, conveying all rights,
title, and interest to Mr. Solomonson, and no subsequent
agreements relating to interest in the property have since
been signed.
The Court, therefore, finds there remains no genuine
issues of material fact that interest in the property lies
solely with Mr. Solomonson, and Defendant [Darren] Russell
and Plaintiff [Violeta] relinquished their interest via
quitclaim deed pursuant to the 2011 [Prime A]greement.
Mr. Russell argues that he only transferred the
property back to Mr. Solomonson via quitclaim deed due to
pressure by the mortgagee, Wells Fargo.  But the Court finds
that Mr. Russell's motivation for signing the quitclaim deed
is immaterial, and he does not contest the validity of the
deed, and the deed unequivocably [sic] quitclaims all
property interest to Mr. Solomonson.  Therefore, the Court
finds that the summary judgment is -- in favor of
Mr. Solomonson is appropriate.
6One of the unauthenticated documents attached to Violeta's first
memorandum appears to be an email from the escrow officer who recorded the
May 24, 2017 quitclaim deed from Violeta and Darren to Solomonson indicating
that the agreement of sale was not recorded because Solomonson did not sign
it.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Lastly, as Plaintiff [Violeta] has no property
interest that would entitle her to be placed on title to the
property or invalidate the recorded deed, her allegations
fail to meet the requirements of HRS 634-51 and do not
support a lis pendens which must be expunged.  Accordingly,
the Court will grant Defendant's motion for partial summary
judgment.
A. The circuit court did not err in granting the
MPSJ.
The quitclaim deed from Violeta and Darren to
Solomonson was properly authenticated and established that title
to the Property was vested in Solomonson.  Neither Violeta nor
Darren introduced any evidence tending to show that either of
them had, or had retained, any legal interest in the Property.
On appeal, Violeta contends there were two issues of
fact that made summary judgment inappropriate.  The first issue
"is whether Defendants Solomonson agreed to the proposed
Agreement of Sale as asserted by [Violeta and Darren]."  This is
not a material fact because no party established the existence of
an executed agreement of sale; the document contained in the
record is not even signed by Violeta or Darren.  The Hawai# i
statute of frauds, Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 656-1(4)
(2016), states in relevant part:
No action shall be brought and maintained in any of
the following cases:
. . . .
(4)Upon any contract for the sale of lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, or of any interest in or
concerning them; 
. . . .
unless the promise, contract, or agreement, upon which the
action is brought, or some memorandum or note thereof, is in
writing, and is signed by the party to be charged there-
with[.]
(Underscoring added.)  Even if Solomonson had orally agreed to
convey the Property back to Violeta and Darren, the agreement
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
would not have been enforceable because of the statute of
frauds.7
Violeta argues that the second issue of fact is
"whether Defendants Solomonson’s [sic] failure to concurrently
record the Agreement of Sale with the Quitclaim Deed effectively
placed a constructive trust on the K îhei property."  Violeta did
not present this argument to the circuit court; Darren argued
that an equitable trust would be a reasonable remedy — but
because of a breach of fiduciary duty by Defendant-Appellee Old
Republic Title & Escrow of Hawaii, not by Solomonson.  Neither
Violeta nor Darren asserted in the circuit court the existence of
a confidential relationship between them and Solomonson, which
would have been required for imposition of a constructive trust
on the Property.  In re Ishida-Waiakamilo Legacy Tr., 138 Hawai#i
98, 105, 377 P.3d 39, 46 (App. 2016) ("A constructive trust will
be imposed if a transfer of land was obtained in an abuse of a
confidential relationship.").  Nor did Violeta or Darren assert
in the circuit court that Solomonson — as opposed to Old Republic
— had a duty to record documents at the Bureau of Conveyances, or
that the escrow instructions directed Old Republic not to record
the quitclaim deed without also recording the agreement of sale.
Violeta also argues on appeal that the circuit court
erred in finding that the Prime Agreement expired on April 11,
2016.  Whether viewed as an issue of fact or one of law, it is
not material to this appeal because Violeta was not a party to,
nor a beneficiary of, the Prime Agreement or the related LLC
Transfer Agreement.
7Violeta argues — for the first time in her reply brief — that her
execution of the quitclaim deed constituted part performance that takes the
proposed agreement of sale out of the statute of frauds.  "It is axiomatic
that where a party fails to raise an argument before the courts below, that
argument may be deemed waived for purposes of appeal."  County of Hawai #i v.
UNIDEV, LLC, 129 Hawai #i 378, 387, 301 P.3d 588, 597 (2013) (citing State v.
Moses, 102 Hawai #i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003)).
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B. Violeta has waived any challenge to the circuit
court's expungement of her lis pendens.
Violeta's briefs make no discernable argument regarding
the circuit court's expungement of her lis pendens.  "Hence, this
issue has been waived."  Lambert v. Waha, 137 Hawai#i 423, 436
n.14, 375 P.3d 202, 215 n.14 (2016) (citations omitted).
IV.
For the foregoing reasons, the order granting the
Solomonson Defendants' motion for partial summary judgment, the
writ of possession, and the judgment for possession, all entered
by the circuit court on June 8, 2018, are affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 21, 2020.
On the briefs:
Hayden Aluli,
for Plaintiff/Counterclaim 
Defendant/AppellantChief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate JudgeMatson Kelley,
Alex Wilkins,
for Defendants/Counterclaimants/
Cross-Claimants/Appellees Stan 
Solomonson and Solomonson Mapu, LLC
9