NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000417
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
DUANE KAAPEA KAAIALII, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 15-1-1713)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Duane Kaapea Kaaialii (Kaaialii) and Jade 
Rose Lam (Lam) with two counts of second-degree theft, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 708-831(1)(b) (2014).
1 The charges were based on allegations that Kaaialii and 
Lam shoplifted cosmetic products from two different ABC Stores. A jury found Kaaialii guilty as charged on both counts. The 
1At the time relevant to this case, HRS ยง 708-831(1)(b) provided:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of theft in the second
degree if the person commits theft:
 
. . . 
(b)	 Of property or services the value of which exceeds
$300[.]
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)  sentenced
Kaaialii to concurrent terms of four years of probation subject
 to the special condition that he serve one year of imprisonment. 

The Circuit Court entered its Judgment on May 18, 2016. 
On appeal, Kaaialii contends that: (1) there was
 
insufficient evidence to support his convictions; (2) the Circuit

 
Court committed plain error in responding to a question from the
 jury; and (3) the Circuit Court erred in denying his request for
 a new trial. We affirm.
 
I.
 A.
 
The State adduced the following evidence a trial. On
 
June 10, 2015, Catherine Wall (Wall), a sales associate at ABC
 Stores (Store 37), stocked Maybelline merchandise, including
 items of Maybelline Magnum Waterproof Mascara multi-pack (Magnum
 multi-pack), in the cosmetics department until the shelves were
 full. Each Magnum multi-pack was priced at $39.99. On June 12,
 
2015, Wall noticed that the shelves she had fully stocked were
 
missing a lot of Magnum multi-packs as well as another product. 
Wall notified Chase Weber (Weber), ABC Store 37's assistant
 manager, of her observation. Weber, in turn, viewed the store's
 
surveillance video recording for June 11, 2015, and focused on a
 
period where he observed Maybelline products being taken from the
 shelf. 
At trial, the State introduced the surveillance video
 
and a series of photographs taken from the surveillance video. 
Weber testified that the photographs showed the "perpetrator" and
 the "accomplice" entering the store; the perpetrator and
 accomplice standing next to the display from which the items were
 missing; the perpetrator repeatedly taking items from the display
 and placing them in an ABC shopping bag held by the accomplice;
 and the perpetrator and accomplice leaving the store. 
2The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Weber testified that he watched the surveillance video
 
of the June 11, 2015, incident in the afternoon on June 12, 2015.
 
Later in the evening on June 12, 2015, Weber recognized the
 "perpetrator" re-entering the store. Weber recognized this
 person as the perpetrator because he was wearing "the same boonie
 hat" and because of the person's similarity in body size and
 lower jaw facial structure as the perpetrator in the surveillance
 video. In addition, the person Weber identified as the
 perpetrator re-entered the store with the "accomplice" from the
 surveillance video, who was wearing "pretty much the exact same
 clothes" as she was wearing the previous day. Weber walked up to
 the perpetrator and engaged him in conversation, in order to
 stall him until the police arrived. However, the perpetrator
 left before the police appeared.
 
At trial, Weber identified Kaaialii as the
 
"perpetrator" in the June 11, 2015, surveillance video and the
 person he encountered in the store the following day. Weber also
 
testified that in September 2015, he was shown a six-person
 
photographic lineup by the police, and he selected photograph
 number 3 as the person he recognized from the surveillance video
 and their in-person encounter. At trial, Weber identified
 Kaaialii as the person he had selected in photograph number 3. 
The State introduced the six photographs shown to Weber by the
 police as Exhibits 11D thorough 11I. The third photograph in
 that series of exhibits, Exhibit 11F, is apparently a photograph
 of Kaaialii. However, at trial, the State did not elicit
 specific testimony that photograph number 3 selected by Weber was
 Exhibit 11F. Weber testified that based on the store's inventory
 and sales records for June 7 through 14, 2015, 25 Magnum multi-
packs, valued at $999.75, were unaccounted for and missing.
 
B.
 
Mary Fe Myla V. Castro (Castro), a cashier/stocker for
 
ABC Stores (Store 31), testified that on August 6, 2015, she fuly
 stocked the cosmetics section with twelve Magnum multi-packs. On
 August 7, 2015, Marivic Mabuti (Mabuti), an assistant manager for
 
3
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ABC Store 31, was notified that items from the cosmetics section
 
were missing. Mabuti reviewed the store's surveillance video
 recording for August 7, 2015. The State introduced the
 surveillance video and photographs taken from the surveillance
 video. Mabuti testified that the photographs show a "male" and
 "female" entering the store; the male and female in the
 Maybelline section; the male putting Maybelline merchandise into
 the female's bag; Mabuti crossing paths with the male; and the
 male and female leaving the store. Mabuti stated that when she
 crossed paths with the male as shown in the surveillance video,
 she almost bumped into him, at which point she was able to look
 at his face.
 
In September 2015, the police showed Mabuti a six-
person photographic lineup. Mabuti picked a photograph, which
 she signed, of the person she almost bumped into on August 7,
 2015. Mabuti stated that she was able to identify this person
 because she "looked at his face when I almost bump into him."
 Mabuti identified Kaaialii at trial as the person she almost
 bumped into and the person depicted in the photograph she
 selected from the photographic lineup. The six photographs shown
 to Mabuti by the police were admitted in evidence as Exhibits 17D
 thorough 17I. Exhibit 17E, the second photograph in the series,
 contains a signature that appears to be that of Mabuti's name. 
Detective Elizabeth Merrill, who showed the photographic lineup 
to Mabuti, testified that Mabuti picked photograph number 2,
 which Detective Merrill stated was a photograph of Kaaialii.
 
Detective Merrill also testified that Mabuti's signature appears
 
on photograph 2.
 
Mabuti stated that inventory and sales records for
 
August 6-7, 2015, show that 12 Magnum multi-packs valued at
 $479.88 were missing.
 
II.
 
During its deliberations, the jury submitted Jury
 
Communication No. 3, which asked: "Is the photo of state's
 exhibit 11F, and state[']s exhibit 17e the defendant Duane Kaapea
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kaaialii?" Without objection from Kaaialii, the Circuit Court
 
answered the jury's question as follows: "It is the jury's duty
 to determine the facts in this case. Please refer to the Court's
 instructions." A short time after the Circuit Court provided
 this response, the jury informed the Circuit Court that it had
 reached a verdict.
 
III.
 
We resolve the issues raised by Kaaialii on appeal as
 
follows:
 
A.
 
Kaaialii argues that there was insufficient evidence to
 
support his conviction on Count 1 because "there was no evidence
 that the photograph which Weber identified as the perpetrator was
 the Defendant" and because "Weber never identified Defendant as
 the perpetrator, but merely as the person in Exhibit 11F."
3 We
 
disagree.
 
At trial, Weber made an in-court identification of
 
Kaaialii as the "perpetrator" he had seen taking merchandise and
 putting it into a bag held by an accomplice. Weber identified
 Kaaialii as the perpetrator based on Weber's review of the June
 11, 2015, surveillance video and Weber's in-person encounter with
 Kaaialii on June 12, 2015. The State introduced the June 11,
 2015, surveillance video, photographs taken from the surveillance
 video, and photographs from the six-person photographic lineup
 the police had shown to Weber, from which Weber had selected
 photograph 3 as the person he recognized from the surveillance
 video and their in-person encounter. When viewed in the light
 most favorable to the State, see State v. Ildefonso, 72 Haw. 573,
 576, 827 P.2d 648, 651 (1992), we conclude that there was
 sufficient evidence to support Kaaialii's conviction on Count 1.
 
3Weber's testimony only related to the theft charged in Count 1 of
merchandise from ABC Stores (Store 37). Kaaialii does not raise any argument
as to the sufficiency of the evidence for Count 2, which charged the theft of
merchandise from ABC Stores (Store 31).
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
Kaaialii argues that the Circuit Court committed plain
 
error in responding to Jury Communication No. 3. Kaaialii
 
contends that the Circuit Court erred because it should have sua
 sponte included in its answer to the jury's question a reminder
 that "each juror must determine the facts for him/herself and
 that guilt must be established beyond a reasonable doubt." We
 disagree. 
In responding the jury's question, the Circuit Court
 
advised the jury that "[i]t is the jury's duty to determine the
 facts in this case." This is a correct statement of the law. In
 its answer, the Circuit Court also directed the jury to refer to
 the Circuit Court's instructions. Kaaialii does not contend that
 the Circuit Court's jury instructions failed to properly advise
 the jury on the standards the jury was required to apply in
 evaluating the evidence or determining whether Kaaialii was
 guilty or not guilty. Kaaialii cites no authority to support his
 claim that the Circuit Court's answer was deficient because it
 failed to include a reminder that "each juror must determine the
 facts for him/herself and that guilt must be established beyond a
 reasonable doubt." We conclude that the Circuit Court did not
 err in responding to the jury's question. 
C.
 
Kaaialii claims that in light of the Circuit Court's
 
erroneous reply to the jury's question, the Circuit Court abused
 its discretion in denying his motion for a new trial. Kaaialii's
 claim is without merit. As we have concluded, the Circuit
 Court's reply to the jury's question was not erroneous, and
 therefore, the Circuit Court's reply does not provide a basis for
 a new trial. Furthermore, we reject as without merit Kaaialii's
 contention that the jury's return of guilty verdicts, after the
 jury's question and the Circuit Court's response, shows that the
 jury failed to follow the instruction that the verdict must be
 unanimous. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 19, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Walter R. Schoettle 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Jonathan K.D. Tungpalanfor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
7
 