 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000026 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
TAD MASON, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
HAWAII PAROLING AUTHORITY and STATE OF HAWAI# I,
Respondents-Appellees 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(S.P.P. NO. 18-1-001; CR. NO. 93-349) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Tad Mason (
Mason), self-
represented, appeals from the Order Denying Petition to Vacate 
Illegal Sentence, Set Aside Minimum Term Order or to Release 
Petitioner from Custody (
Order Denying Petition), entered on 
December 19, 2018, by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).
1/ The Circuit Court denied Mason's April 9, 2018 
Petition to Vacate Illegal Sentence, Set Aside Minimum Term Order or to Release Petitioner from Custody (Rule 40 Petition). In the 
1/ The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.            NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rule 40 Petition, pursuant to Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure 
(HRPP
) Rule 40, Mason challenged, inter alia, the July 1, 1996 
Notice and Order Fixing Minimum Term(s) of Imprisonment (Minimum
Term Order) issued by the Hawai# i Paroling Authority (HPA).  2/ 
I. BACKGROUND 
On September 16, 1993, pursuant to a grand jury 
indictment, Mason was charged with the Murder and Kidnapping of 
Juliana Laysa (Laysa
) on August 27, 1991, in violation of Hawai# i 
Revised Statutes (HRS
) § 707-701.5 (1993)  (Count I; Murder in 
the Second Degree) and HRS § 707-720(1)(d) and/or (e) (1993)3/
 
(Count II; Kidnapping). According to police reports that were 
referenced in Mason's Presentence Diagnosis and Report, after 
initially denying involvement, John Perez (Perez) gave the police 
several statements about the incident. Perez reported that he 
and Mason were cruising in downtown Hilo when they saw Laysa. Perez said that Mason dropped off Perez at a cemetery and Mason 4/
2/ On November 1, 2012, a substantively identical Notice and Order of
Fixing Minimum Term(s) of Imprisonment was issued by HPA to correct a typo in
an identifying number. 
3/ HRS § 707-701.5 provides, in relevant part: "a person commits the
offense of murder in the second degree if the person intentionally orknowingly causes the death of another person." 
4/ HRS § 707-720 provides, in relevant part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of kidnapping if
the person intentionally or knowingly restrains anotherperson with intent to:
. . . . 
(c)
 Facilitate the commission of a felony or
flight thereafter;
(d) Inflict bodily injury upon that person or
subject that person to a sexual offense; [or]
(e) Terrorize that person or a third person[.] 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
went back and picked her up and took her back to the cemetery, 
where they both had sex with her, and Mason paid her $50. According to Perez, Mason then punched Laysa, slammed her on the ground, and told Perez to open the trunk of the car; Mason put Laysa in the trunk. After getting in the car, Mason reportedly told Perez he was going to kill Laysa. They drove to a cane field. Perez stated that as Mason was trying to pull Laysa from the trunk, she was kicking and punching; Mason got upset and struck her head on the bumper of the car. As she was crawling away, Mason took off her clothes and struck her on the head and body with a tire iron. Perez and Mason then grabbed rocks and threw them at Laysa; Mason choked her, but she was still not dead. Mason then grabbed her arms and placed his foot on her throat. Perez reported that Mason used the tire iron and "poked" it through her naval; both men put a screwdriver in her vagina. Mason denied any knowledge of the victim or her death; he told police that Perez arranged for him to have sex with women, but he did not pay for sex. In a separate case, Perez pled no contest to Murder in the Second Degree and was sentenced to Life in Prison with the Possibility of Parole. Mason pled not guilty to both charges. Perez gave testimony at Mason's trial that was consistent with his report to the police. 
Pursuant to a jury verdict, Mason was convicted and 
found guilty of both charges. On January 12, 1996, the Circuit Court entered a Judgment Guilty Conviction and Sentence 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Judgment), in which the court sentenced Mason to Life 
Imprisonment with Possibility of Parole as to Count I and twenty 
years of imprisonment for Count II, with the terms to run concurrently. Mason filed an appeal from the Judgment. On March 11, 1997, the Hawai# i Supreme Court summarily affirmed the 
Judgment. 
While the direct appeal was pending, HPA issued the 
July 1, 1996 Minimum Term Order, setting Mason's minimum terms of imprisonment at thirty years for the murder charge and six years for the kidnapping charge. 
On June 27, 2000, Mason filed his first petition 
pursuant to HRPP Rule 40, alleging that his conviction was unconstitutional on various grounds, and that due to newly discovered evidence, his conviction should be vacated, and his 
case should be remanded for a new trial (First Rule 40 Petition). 
After various (eleven) hearings at which, inter alia, additional 
evidence was adduced, on April 26, 2010, the Circuit Court 
entered Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying 
Petitioner's Petition for Post Conviction Relief (Order Denying 
First Rule 40 Petition).
5/ As Mason later described in his appeal 
from the Order Denying First Rule 40 Petition, the claims made in 
the First Rule 40 Petition fell into five broad categories: ineffective assistance of trial counsel; mistakes made by the 
5/ The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial court that denied Mason a fair trial; ineffective 
assistance of appellate counsel; newly discovered evidence; and application of an improper standard of review by the first Rule 40 court and denial of a request to postpone a decision and set the matter for further hearing. On November 4, 2011, this court entered a Summary Disposition Order affirming the Order Denying First Rule 40 Petition. 
It appears that, at some point, Mason submitted a 
request to HPA requesting a reduction of Mason's minimum term of imprisonment. This request is not included in the record on appeal in this case. On October 4, 2017, the HPA issued a decision denying Mason's request for a reduction of his minimum term on the grounds that "Your [Mason's] Minimum remains appropriate." 
On April 9, 2018, Mason filed the Rule 40 Petition, 
which is at issue in this appeal. Mason raised the following grounds for relief: (1) the Legislature cannot delegate its authority to the HPA to prescribe a range of minimum terms of imprisonment, make its own findings, and set a particular minimum punishment range; (2) even assuming that HPA can prescribe a range for minimum term sentence, HPA's setting of a minimum term based on variable minimum term ranges increases the penalty for the crime; (3) HPA ignored and violated its guidelines and rules in setting Mason's minimum term, acting arbitrarily and capriciously, by: (a) failing to state the Level of Punishment 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and Significant Criteria in the Minimum Term Order, as required 
by Section III of HPA's July 1989 Guidelines for Establishing 
Minimum Terms of Imprisonment (HPA Guidelines), and (b) failing 
to follow rules in setting of minimum terms that were established 
and applied in other cases, in particular the case of Raita Fukusaku; (4) HRS § 706-669(8) (2014), delegating authority to HPA to prescribe the minimum period of incarceration, is unconstitutionally vague, as HPA is left to its own devices, setting minimum terms in an arbitrary and capricious manner, and HPA Guidelines are procedurally inadequate to provide a uniform sentence, because: (a) there are no sentencing factors for setting minimum terms within each level of punishment; (b) there is no rational basis for a uniform minimum term, when the "Back-Door" is open allowing an arbitrary and capricious granting or denial of the reduction of the minimum; and (c) HPA's setting a minimum term is based on criteria of "Nature of Offense" and "Degree of Injury/Loss to Person or Property.". 
In his prayer for relief, Mason requested that: (1) 
the Minimum Term Order be vacated; (2) HRS § 706-669(8) be declared unconstitutionally vague and that it be ordered and declared that adding a prescribed range for a minimum term constitutes elements of a separate aggravated offense and thereby increased Mason's penalty for the offense; (3) it be ordered and declared that HPA's use of aggravated ranges or levels of punishment constitutes elements of a separate aggravated offense 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and thereby increased Mason's penalty for the offense; (4) it be 
ordered and declared that HPA's setting of the minimum term length was arbitrary and capricious, and that the HPA Guidelines are procedurally inadequate to provide uniform minimum terms, violating Mason's constitutional rights in the parole context and statutory right to a uniform sentence pursuant to HRS § 706-669(8); and (5) an order that HPA assess Mason for parole, pursuant to HRS § 706-670 (2014 & Supp. 2019). 
On July 19, 2019, the State filed an answer to the Rule 
40 Petition (Answer to Petition), requesting that the first two 
grounds in the petition be dismissed on the basis that they are 
patently frivolous or without merit, and that the third and fourth grounds be dismissed as moot because Mason was receiving a new hearing to set his minimum term. The Answer to Petition was 
supported by, inter alia, the Declaration of HPA Administrator 
Tommy Johnson (Johnson). Johnson averred, based on his personal 
knowledge and his review of HPA records regarding Mason, that the 
Minimum Term Order did not list the level of punishment and significant criteria on which the decision was based, and that to remedy this, Mason was granted a new minimum term hearing for Count I, to be held on July 30, 2018. 
In reply to the Answer to Petition, Mason argued that 
the arguments made in the first two grounds for granting the Rule 40 Petition were meritorious and that grounds three and four are not moot because the HPA Guidelines are procedurally inadequate 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to provide for a "uniform" determination of a minimum term, and 
therefore, it would be pointless to have a new minimum term hearing. 
On December 19, 2018, without a hearing, the Circuit 
Court entered the Order Denying Petition, stating: 
[T]he Court finds that in regard to [Mason's]
arguments as to the [HPA's] setting the minimum terms in
regard to his case, the Petition is moot because the HPA hasagreed to set a new minimum hearing. The Court finds [Mason's] remaining arguments to be without merit, patentlyfrivolous, and without a trace of support either in therecord or from anything submitted by [Mason]. 
On January 7, 2019, Mason timely filed this appeal. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Mason raises eleven points of error on appeal, echoing 
the grounds stated in the Rule 40 Petition, and contending that: 
(1) the Legislature cannot delegate its authority to the HPA to prescribe a range of minimum terms of imprisonment, make its own findings, and set a particular minimum punishment range; (2) even assuming that HPA can prescribe a range for minimum term sentence, HPA's setting of a minimum term based on variable minimum term ranges increases the penalty for the crime; (3) HPA ignored and violated its guidelines and rules in setting Mason's minimum term, acting arbitrarily and capriciously; (4) HPA failed to follow the HPA Guidelines; (5) HPA failed to follow rules in setting of minimum term(s) that were established and applied in other cases; (6) HRS § 706-669(8), delegating authority to HPA to prescribe the minimum period of incarceration, is unconstitutionally vague, as HPA is left to its own devices, 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
setting minimum terms in an arbitrary and capricious manner, and 
the HPA Guidelines are procedurally inadequate to provide a uniform sentence; (7) the HPA Guidelines are procedurally inadequate; (8) there is no rational basis for a uniform minimum term, when the "Back-Door" is open allowing an arbitrary and capricious granting or denial of the reduction of the minimum; (9) HPA's setting a minimum term is based on criteria of "Nature of Offense" and "Degree of Injury/Loss to Person or Property;" (10) the Circuit Court erred in denying the Rule 40 Petition;
 
and (11) the Circuit Court erred in denying the Rule 40 Petition without a hearing. 6/
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
In Coulter v. State, 116 Hawai# i 181, 184, 172 P.3d 
493, 496 (2007), the supreme court stated: 
An HRPP Rule 40 petition is an appropriate means to
challenge a minimum term of imprisonment set by the HPA.
Williamson v. Hawai #i Paroling Auth., 97 Hawai #i  156, 34 P.3d
1055 (App. 2000), rev'd on other grounds, 97 Hawai #i 183, 35
P.3d 210 (2001). 
"The disposition of an HRPP Rule 40 petition is based
on FOF [findings of fact] and COL [conclusions of law]."Raines v. State, 79 Hawai #i 219, 222, 900 P.2d 1286, 1289
(1995). 
Accordingly, we review the circuit court's
conclusions of law de novo  and findings of fact for clear
error. See id. (citing Dan v. State, 76 Hawai #i 423, 428,
879 P.2d 528, 533 (1994)). 
With respect to HPA decisions establishing a minimum
term, this court has stated that "judicial intervention isappropriate where the HPA has failed to exercise anydiscretion at all, acted arbitrarily and capriciously so asto give rise to a due process violation, or otherwiseviolated the prisoner's constitutional rights." Williamson,97 Hawai #i at 195, 35 P.3d at 222. 
6/ In this point of error, Mason simply identifies and quotes the
substance of the Order Denying Petition. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
With respect to claims of procedural violations, the
court will assess whether the HPA conformed with the 
procedural protections of HRS § 706–669 and complied withits own guidelines, which the HPA was required to establishby statute. HRS § 706–669(8) (1993). 
IV. DISCUSSION 
Mason argues that the manner in which HPA set his 
minimum term(s) of imprisonment was in violation of his 
constitutional rights, the applicable statute, and HPA's own guidelines. He urges this court to reject the State's argument that he is entitled to no relief based on mootness. 
A. The Minimum Term Order Violated the HPA Guidelines HPA adopted the HPA Guidelines pursuant to HRS 
§ 706–669(8), which states: 
The authority shall establish guidelines for the uniform
determination of minimum sentences which shall take into account both the nature and degree of the offense of theprisoner and the prisoner's criminal history and character.The guidelines shall be public records and shall be madeavailable to the prisoner and to the prosecuting attorneyand other interested government agencies. 
Section III of the HPA Guidelines, entitled "Issuance 
of Decision," states that "[t]he Order Establishing Minimum Terms 
of Imprisonment [ ] will include the specific minimum terms(s) . . ., the level of punishment . . ., and the significant 
criteria upon which the decision was based." Mason argues, inter 
alia, that HPA violated its guidelines because the Minimum Term 
Order failed to specify either the level of punishment or the 
significant criteria upon which the decision was based, as required by the HPA Guidelines. Mason argues that the failure to include this information was arbitrary and capricious. The merit 
10   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of this argument has been acknowledged by the HPA's 
administrator, Johnson, and the State, and was explained by the supreme court in Coulter, 116 Hawai# i at 185-86, 172 P.3d at 497-
98 (holding that an HPA minimum term order that failed to specify either the level of punishment or the significant criteria upon which the decision was based violated the HPA Guidelines and failed to comply with the Legislature's directive of "uniform determination" of minimum sentences).
7/ 
Because we, too, conclude that the Minimum Term Order 
was in violation of the HPA Guidelines, we do not reach the question whether the HPA violated Mason's constitutional due 
process rights. See id.   at 184-85, 172 P.3d at 496-97. Mason's 
arguments that the HPA Guidelines are insufficient to safeguard 
prisoner's rights and ensure that the HPA does not arbitrarily set minimum terms of imprisonment is without merit. See Williamson, 97 Hawai# i at 194, 35 P.3d at 221 (explaining that 
the HPA Guidelines serve as an adequate procedural protection for prisoner's rights). 
7/ As the supreme court explained: 
Even though these guidelines do not have the force of
statutory law, compliance with such rules is required toserve the legislature's goal of "uniform determination" ofminimum sentences. HRS § 706–669(8). Indeed, this courthas described the availability of such guidelines as one ofthe procedural protections afforded to prisoners by statute.Deviating from such rules, without explanation, constitutesarbitrary or capricious action that violates a prisoner'sright to uniform determination of his or her minimumsentence. 
Coulter
, 116 Hawai #i at 185, 172 P.3d at 497 (citing 
Williamson
, 97 Hawai #i at 
194-95, 35 P.3d at 221-22) (footnote omitted). 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B. Mootness 
In its Answer to Petition, the State argued that, 
because the HPA had set a new minimum term hearing for July 30, 2018, any issue raised in the petition related to Mason's minimum term setting should be dismissed as moot. On appeal, the State represents that HPA held Mason's new minimum term hearing on April 26, 2019, and that a new order has been issued, but acknowledges that the April 26, 2019 hearing is not part of the record on appeal. The new order is not part of the record on appeal. 
On the record before us, we cannot determine whether 
the new minimum term hearing and decision provided an adequate explanation pursuant to Coulter for the setting of Mason's new minimum term of imprisonment, and therefore, cannot determine whether the issue is moot. For that reason, as well as the following reason, we conclude that this case should be remanded for a hearing to permit Mason to challenge the HPA's new minimum term order. 
Further, as brought to our attention by the State in a 
post-briefing submission, since the April 26, 2019 hearing in this case, the supreme court ruled that HPA must set forth a written justification or explanation, beyond simply enumerating the broad criteria considered by HPA, when HPA determines that the minimum term of a felony offender is to be set at a Level II or Level III punishment. See Lewi v. State, 145 Hawai# i 333, 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
348-49, 452 P.3d 330, 345-46 (2019). In a lengthy footnote, the 
supreme court acknowledged that it was announcing a new rule, which might or might not be applied retroactively. Id. at 349 
n.21, 452 P.3d at 346 n.21. The court declined to select either a purely prospective or a fully retrospective application of the new rule and instead chose a middle ground or "pipeline" retroactive effect. Id. The supreme court applied it to the 
petitioner in that case and "to all cases that are on direct review or not yet final as of the date of this decision." Id.
As the initial Minimum Term Order was clearly arbitrary and capricious, and the record before us is inadequate to determine whether a colorable claim for relief might yet exist concerning the new minimum term order, we conclude that questions remain as to whether HPA adequately justified its minimum term determination, and Mason should not be required to initiate a new HRPP Rule 40 proceeding to raise any outstanding issues concerning HPA's new determination of his minimum term. Although these circumstances were not specifically before the supreme court in Lewi, we conclude that they properly fall within the middle ground adopted by the court, and the new rule set forth in Lewi should be applied in this case. On remand, if applicable, Mason may amend his Rule 40 Petition to include a challenge to the new minimum term order based on Lewi. 
As set forth above, the Circuit Court's December 19, 
2018 Order Denying Petition is affirmed in part and vacated in 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
part, and this case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further 
proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 5, 2021. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate JudgeTad Mason, 
Petitioner-Appellant, Pro Se
. 
Craig Y. Iha, 
Laura K. Maeshiro,Deputy Attorneys General, for Respondent-Appellee 
STATE OF HAWAI# I. 
14 