NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000061 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
MAC NGUYEN, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-18-01758) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Ginoza, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Mac Nguyen (Nguyen)
 appeals from 
the (1) October 31, 2018 "Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or 
Order and Plea/Judgment," and (2) January 3, 2019 "Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment," both filed and entered by the District Court of the First Circuit (District 
Court).
1 After a consolidated bench trial and hearing, the 
District Court convicted Nguyen of Operating A Vehicle Under The 
Influence Of An Intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1). 
1 The Honorable Alvin K. Nishimura presided over the suppression
hearing and trial. The Honorable Sherri-Ann L. Iha entered the final 
judgment.  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Nguyen raises three points of error,2 
contending that: (1) the District Court "erred in denying 
Nguyen's motion to suppress his 'statements,'" which included Nguyen's admission of drinking, "his responses to medical rule-out [(MRO)] questions," and "his performance [on] the 
[standardized field sobriety test (SFST)]"; (2) the dismissal of 
the case is required "pursuant to State v. Thompson where the 
complaint did not meet the requirements of HRS § 805-1"; and (3) the "arraignment on the fatally defective Complaint was a nullity and violated [Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP)] Rules 5(b) 
and 10(a)." 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Nguyen's points of error as follows, and affirm. 
The pertinent background is as follows. On May 8, 
2018, Nguyen was stopped by Honolulu Police Department (HPD) 
Officer Jared Spiker (Officer Spiker) after the officer observed 
Nguyen driving "at a high rate of speed" and fail to stop at two 
stop signs. Upon approach of Nguyen's vehicle, Officer Spiker noticed a "strong odor of an alcoholic type beverage coming from [Nguyen's] breath and red, watery, glassy eyes." Nguyen's face was flushed and he had "slurred speech."  Officer Spiker informed 
Nguyen that he planned to ask Nguyen to participate in a SFST, to 
which Nguyen responded that "he just drank 30 minutes ago." Officer Spiker asked Nguyen to exit his vehicle. HPD Officer Richard Townsend (Officer Townsend) arrived to cover Officer 
2 Nguyen filed a Supplemental Brief on May 12, 2022, raising the
second and third points of error. The State also filed a Supplemental Brief
on May 16, 2022. 
Nguyen was allowed to file the Supplemental Brief to address the
Complaint in this case in light of State v. Thompson, 150 Hawai #i 262, 267-68,
500 P.3d 447, 452-53 (2021), in which the Hawai #i
 Supreme Court held that
failure to comply with HRS § 805-1 renders a complaint "fatally defective,"and that such a complaint cannot be used to support the issuance of an arrestwarrant or penal summons. 
2  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Spiker and administer the SFST. When asked by Officer Townsend, 
Nguyen assented to submitting to the SFST. 
Prior to the SFST, Officer Townsend asked Nguyen MRO 
questions, including whether Nguyen was "on any kind of medication"; "under the care of a doctor or dentist"; "under the care of an eye doctor"; "epileptic or diabetic"; "wearing contacts"; "blind in any of his eyes, or ha[d] an artificial or glass eye"; and whether he "ha[d] any physical defects or speech impediments[.]" Nguyen answered "no" to the medical rule-out questions, and, based on Nguyen's responses, Officer Townsend believed that there was nothing that would physically affect Nguyen's ability to perform the SFST. 
Officer Townsend administered the SFST and determined 
that Nguyen was unable to safely operate his vehicle.  Nguyen was 
placed under arrest and charged with OVUII, in violation of HRS § 
291E-61(a)(1) and/or (a)(3). 
Nguyen filed a Motion to Suppress Statements (Motion to 
Suppress), specifically requesting suppression of the following: 
1. Any statements made by [Nguyen] to [HPD] Officers
or other governmental personnel. 
2. Any and all evidence seized or information gained
by the [HPD] after [Nguyen] was placed under
arrest, was not read his/her Miranda rights or wasinstructed that he/she did not have a right tohave an attorney. 
Nguyen principally argued what is the subject matter of the 
instant appeal -- that he was in custody and subject to interrogation in violation of his Miranda rights when he was stopped by Officer Spiker. 
A consolidated hearing on the Motion to Suppress and a 
bench trial on the OVUII charge was held on October 31, 2018. The State confirmed that it would proceed under HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) and not subsection (a)(3).  The District Court denied 
Nguyen's motion as to his statement that he "just drank thirty 
minutes ago" because, 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[I]t does appear that that [sic] was a spontaneous
utterance. It was not in response to any particularquestion. It was something that was said by thedefendant as the officer was conducting his furtherinvestigation, you know, in this matter. 
As to the SFST, the court denied suppression because "[t]here's 
nothing to indicate that -- that the field sobriety test was in any way a result of any custodial interrogation under the facts of this case." 
At the conclusion of trial on October 31, 2018, the 
District Court found Nguyen guilty of OVUII, citing Nguyen's speeding, disregard of two stop signs, and performance on the SFST, as evidence that Nguyen "was impaired."   Nguyen timely 
appealed. 
3
(1) Nguyen argues that because he was never advised of 
his Miranda4 rights when he was pulled over, his "statements," 
including his admission that he had been drinking, his responses to the MRO questions, and his performance on the SFST, were the product of a custodial interrogation and should all be suppressed.  
3 The District Court stated the following when finding Nguyen
guilty: 
So there's no doubt that defendant had been consuming
alcohol. The facts -- the driving I think in and of itself
is sufficient to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that thedefendant was impaired, had been -- consumed alcohol in anamount sufficient to impair his normal mental faculties orability to care for himself and guard against casualty as heran through one stop sign and, you know, without slowingdown and the other one he slowed but didn't stop. 
I think the field sobriety test just confirms --
confirms what occurred in the driving that the defendant wasimpaired. As indicated, defendant appeared to not be ableto follow the instructions. On the walk-and-turn the gapsbetween his feet was 7 to 8 inches, that he walked with armsout like a T throughout the entire test. 
And I think all of 
that just confirms what is already indicated by the driving,is that defendant was impaired. 
So for those reasons, the Court does find that the
State has met its burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubtas to every element of the offense and finds the defendantguily of -- of the charge 291E-61. 
4 See Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966). 
4   
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Questions of constitutional law, such as the District 
Court's ruling on the motion to suppress, are reviewed "de novo 
to determine whether the ruling was 'right' or 'wrong.'" State 
v. Manion, 151 Hawai# i 267, 271-72, 511 P.3d 766, 770-71 (2022) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted) (quoting State v. Lee, 149 Hawai# i 45, 49, 481 P.3d 52, 56 (2021)).
Denial of suppression of Nguyen's admission of drinking
was correct. 
Nguyen argues that under State v. Tsujimura, 
140 Hawai# i 299, 400 P.3d 500 (2017), Nguyen was "seized at the 
moment that Officer Spiker detained him for the alleged traffic 
violations" because Nguyen was not free to leave; Nguyen's "pre-arrest" right to remain silent under the Hawai# i Constitution had 
attached; and "any post-seizure verbal or non-verbal communicative acts" including the "spontaneous utterance" and SFST performance — — should be suppressed. 
In State v. Uchima, 147 Hawai# i 64, 83, 464 P.3d 852, 
871 (2020), the Hawai
#i Supreme Court rejected this same 
argument, where Uchima contended that "he had a pre-arrest right to remain silent pursuant to Tsujimura, [and] that his verbal and non-verbal responses should therefore have been suppressed." 
The 
Uchima court explained that Tsujimura applies to cases involving a defendant's pre-arrest right to remain silent after being detained, where the State seeks to introduce and use evidence of the defendant's silence against him. Id.Here, as in Uchima, 
the State did not seek to use evidence of Nguyen's pre-arrest silence against Nguyen; thus, Tsujimura is inapposite. 
Nguyen does not present any argument challenging the 
District Court's finding in its oral ruling that Nguyen's statement that he "just drank thirty minutes ago" was a "spontaneous utterance" that "was not in response to any particular question." An unchallenged finding of fact is 
binding. State v. Rodrigues, 145 Hawai# i 487, 494, 454 P.3d 428, 
435 (citation omitted). 
As Nguyen's spontaneous admission was 
not made in response to any express questioning by the officer, 
and there is no argument that the officer's words or actions 
5  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
otherwise constituted illegal interrogation, there was no Miranda 
violation. See Uchima, 147 Hawai# i at 84, 464 P.3d at 872 
("[I]nterrogation encompasses not only express questioning, but also any words or actions . . . that the police should know are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the suspect.") (citations omitted). 
Thus, the District Court was 
correct in denying the suppression of Nguyen's admission of drinking. See Manion, 151 Hawai# i at 271-72, 511 P.3d at 770-71. 
Denial of suppression of Nguyen's responses to the MRO
questions was wrong. 
Nguyen argues that the MRO questions constituted 
"interrogation" because they "were specifically designed to rule 
out any possible causes for irregularities on the SFST other than intoxication."  The District Court made no specific findings as 
to the MRO questions and ruled only that Nguyen was not subject 
to custodial interrogation. In its Answering Brief, the State did not provide any counter-argument specifically addressing whether the MRO questions constituted interrogation or not.
 The 
State did not dispute that Nguyen was in custody or subjected to interrogation, and only raised arguments regarding the admission of Nguyen's SFST performance, which we discuss infra. 
"[T]he requirement of Miranda warnings is triggered by 
two criteria: (1) the defendant must be under interrogation; and (2) the defendant must be in custody." State v. Ah Loo, 94 
Hawai#i 207, 210, 10 P.3d 728, 731 (2000) (citation, internal 
quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
The State does not 
challenge Nguyen's contention on appeal that Nguyen was in "custody." In State v. Skapinok, 151 Hawai# i 170, 185, 510 P.3d 
599, 614 (2022), the 
Hawai#i Supreme Court held that "all of the 
[MRO] questions are interrogation" because "[a]lthough the 'incriminating inference' may be indirect, the questions nevertheless adduce evidence to establish that intoxication caused any poor performance on the SFST."
5 Thus, Miranda 
5 In Skapinok, the officer asked the following MRO questions: 
(continued...) 
6 5(...continued) 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
warnings were required prior to the officer asking these 
questions. See id. Here, no Miranda questions were given, and 
Nguyen's responses to the MRO questions should have been suppressed; and the District Court was wrong in this regard. See 
Manion, 151 Hawai# i at 271-72, 511 P.3d at 770-71. 
Denial of suppression of Nguyen's SFST-related
responses and SFST performance was correct. 
Nguyen argues that his "verbal responses during the 
SFST and his non-verbal communicative responses (i.e. Nguyen's 
performance on the SFST) to Officer Spiker's and Officer Townsend's 'interrogation,' must be suppressed," as they violated 
Nguyen's right to remain silent and Miranda rights. Nguyen also 
argues that the SFST should be suppressed as "fruit of the 
poisonous tree," based on the "illegally obtained verbal statements" consisting of Nguyen's responses to the MRO questions, and Nguyen's statement that he understood the SFST instructions. 
The "verbal responses during the SFST" that Nguyen 
argues must be suppressed are the responses to the MRO questions discussed supra at section (2), and Nguyen's response that he understood the SFST instructions.  In Skapinok, 151 Hawai# i at 
186, 510 P.3d at 615, the supreme court reaffirmed Uchima, holding that neither asking if a defendant would participate in 
i.
 Do you have any physical defects or speech impediments? 
ii. Are you taking any medications? 
iii. Are you under the care of a doctor or dentist for
anything? 
iv. Are you under the care of an eye doctor? iv. Do you have an artificial or glass eye? v. Are you epileptic or diabetic? vi. Are you blind in either eye? 
151 Hawai #i at 173-74, 510 P.3d at 602-03. These questions are identical to
the MRO questions that Officer Townsend asked Nguyen in this case. 
7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the SFST nor asking if the defendant understood the instructions 
constituted "interrogation": 
Here, the officer administering the SFST asked the defendant
whether he would participate in an SFST, whether heunderstood the instructions of the individual tests, andwhether he had any questions. These preliminary questionswere not reasonably likely to lead to incriminatingresponses because neither an affirmative or negativeresponse to these questions is incriminating. Rather, thequestions allow the officer to determine whether thedefendant was willing to undergo the SFST and whether heunderstood the officer's instructions prior to performingthe three tests comprising the SFST. Thus, these questionswere not of such nature that the officer should have known that they were likely to elicit an incriminating response. 
(quoting Uchima, 147 Hawai# i at 84, 464 P.3d at 872) (brackets 
omitted). Thus, Nguyen's verbal response that he understood the 
SFST instructions was not interrogation, and not subject to suppression. The District Court did not err in this regard. 
As to whether the SFST performance should be 
suppressed, the State argues that the SFST performance was admissible because it was not "communication" or "testimony" subject to the right against self-incrimination. 
In Manion
, the 
supreme court explained that: 
The defendant's performance on the SFST does not constitute
incriminating statements. In Wyatt, this court held thatwhen conducting an SFST the State does not seek"communications" or "testimony," but rather, "an exhibitionof 'physical characteristics of coordination.'" Here, theofficer administering the SFST did not seek "communications"or "testimony" from the defendant. Rather, in conducting theSFST, the officer sought "an exhibition of 'physicalcharacteristics of coordination.'" "Consequently, the fieldsobriety test was not rendered infirm by theconstitutionally guaranteed privilege against compulsoryself-incrimination." 
151 Hawai# i at 274, 511 P.3d at 773 (emphases added) (brackets 
and ellipses omitted) (quoting Uchima, 147 Hawai# i at 84-85, 464 
P.3d at 872-73). Because Nguyen's performance on the SFST was
not "testimonial, like the answers to the [MRO] questions," it  
was not adduced in violation of Miranda. Id. at 273-74, 511 P.3d 
at 772-73. The District Court did not err in denying suppressionof the SFST performance in this regard.  
8   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As to whether the SFST performance should be suppressed 
under the "fruit of the poisonous tree" doctrine, the Hawai# i 
Supreme Court held that performance on the SFST is not "fruit" of 
the MRO questions because 
[a]lthough they immediately preceded the SFST in time, the
medical rule-out questions did not give the officersinformation that led them to search for evidence of intoxication, nor did the medical rule-out questions piquetheir suspicions such that their investigation was directedtowards discovering evidence of intoxication. 
Manion, 151 Hawai# i at 273, 511 P.3d at 772 (internal quotation 
marks, brackets, and citation omitted). 
Because the record in 
Manion reflected that the officer asked Manion to participate in 
the SFST, and Manion agreed to the SFST prior to any interrogation through the MRO questions, the officers "did not exploit the illegality by continuing to gather evidence that they had already set out to gather." Id. 
Here, Officer Spiker had already set out to administer 
the SFST before Officer Townsend asked the MRO questions, and the officer had already asked for, and received, Nguyen's consent for the test. 
The officers did not "exploit the illegality by 
continuing to gather evidence that they had already set out to gather." Id.The SFST performance was not the fruit of the 
illegal MRO questions and responses. See id. Thus, the District 
Court did not err in denying suppression in this regard. 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm in part and reverse 
in part the District Court's ruling denying Nguyen's motion to suppress. Nguyen's admission that he had been drinking and his SFST performance were admissible and not subject to suppression. However, Nguyen's responses to the MRO questions were not admissible and should have been suppressed. Although the District Court erred in denying suppression of the responses to the MRO questions, we nevertheless conclude that this error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, where the District Court did 
9  
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not rely on this evidence in finding Nguyen guilty of OVUII.6 
See Tsujimura, 140 Hawai# i at 318-19, 400 P.3d at 519-20 ("When 
an error amounts to a violation of the privilege against 
compelled self-incrimination under article I, section 10 [of the Hawai#i
 Constitution], the analysis proceeds to whether the error 
was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.") (citation omitted). Nguyen does not argue that the District Court relied on his MRO responses in finding guilt.
7 We conclude the error was harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt.
(2) Nguyen argues that the Complaint was defective 
under HRS § 805-18 because no witness with direct observations of 
Nguyen's misconduct "subscribed to" or "submitted a declaration in support of the [C]omplaint." Rather, the Complaint was signed 
by the prosecutor. 
Whether a complaint complied with applicable statute 
and/or rule is a question of law we review de novo. State v. 
Thompson, 150 Hawai# i 262, 266, 500 P.3d 447, 451 (2021). 
In State v. Mortensen-Young, SCAP-22-0000045, 2023 WL 
2519396, at *15 (Mar. 15, 2023), the Hawai# i Supreme Court held 
that HRS § 805-1 applies only to criminal complaints used to 
obtain a penal summons or arrest warrant. In other cases, such as the OVUII prosecutions at issue in 
Mortensen-Young, HRPP Rule 
6 As noted supra in note 3, the District Court relied on Nguyen's
drinking and SFST Performance as evidence of impairment for an OVUII
conviction. 
7 Nguyen argues that: "The District Court cited Nguyen's
performance on the SFST as confirming the impairment suggested by his trafficviolations and physical indicia, and the court's reliance on Nguyen's SFSTperformance evidences that the error in admitting this evidence could not havebeen harmless." 
8 HRS § 805-1 (2014) provides: 
§805-1. Complaint; form of warrant. When a complaint
is made to any prosecuting officer of the commission of anyoffense, the prosecuting officer shall examine thecomplainant, shall reduce the substance of the complaint towriting, and shall cause the complaint to be subscribed bythe complainant under oath, which the prosecuting officer ishereby authorized to administer, or the complaint shall bemade by declaration in accordance with the rules ofcourt. . . . 
10  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
79 provides the proper framework to analyze the sufficiency of 
complaints. Id. at *14-15. In Mortensen-Young, the supreme 
court held that each of the appellees was properly charged with 
the offense of OVUII by a complaint signed by the prosecutor, pursuant to HRPP Rule 7(d), which does not require that a "'charging instrument in a misdemeanor case be signed by anyone other than a prosecutor'" or be "'subscribed under oath or made by declaration in lieu of an affidavit by anyone.'" Id. at *14. 
Here, as in Mortenson-Young, HRS § 805-1 is 
inapplicable because the Complaint was not used to obtain a penal summons or arrest warrant.  The Complaint set forth a concise and 
definite statement of the essential facts, was signed by the 
prosecutor, and referenced the statute that Nguyen allegedly violated, as required by HRPP Rule 7(d). Thus, the Complaint was sufficient to initiate the subject prosecution, and Nguyen's contention is without merit. See Mortensen-Young, 2023 WL 
2519396, at *14-15. 
(3) In light of our resolution, we need not address 
Nguyen's remaining point of error. 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the October 31, 
2018 "Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment" and January 3, 2019 "Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and 
9 HRPP Rule 7 states, in pertinent part: 
Rule 7. INDICTMENT, INFORMATION, OR COMPLAINT . 
. . . . 
(d) Nature and contents. The charge shall be a plain,
concise and definite statement of the essential facts 
constituting the offense charged. . . . 
A complaint shall
be signed by the prosecutor. The charge need not contain aformal conclusion or any other matter not necessary to suchstatement. . . . The charge shall state for each count theofficial or customary citation of the statute, rule,regulation or other provision of law which the defendant isalleged therein to have violated. . . . 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plea/Judgment," both filed and entered by the District Court of 
the First Circuit. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 28, 2023. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge Alen M. Kaneshiro for Defendant-Appellant 
Stephen K. Tsushima Deputy Prosecuting Attorneyfor Plaintiff-Appellee 
12 