NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000153
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE INTEREST OF M. CHILDREN: BM
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 08-11988)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Mother-Appellant appeals from the Decision Re: Trial,
 
filed on February 23, 2011, and the Order Terminating Parental
 
Rights, filed on March 8, 2011, terminating her parental and
 
custodial rights over B.M., both of which were entered by the
 
Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).1
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Initial contact in this case commenced with the
 
Department of Human Services (DHS) petitioning for foster custody
 
of B.M. and her younger brother (Brother) on October 1, 2008,
 
based on an unjustifiably explained fracture of two-month-old
 
Brother's right humerous, and noting a 2006 Navy Family Advocacy
 
Program intervention substantiating neglect based upon Mother's
 
methadone abuse. On December 18, 2008, DHS was awarded foster
 
custody over the children. After services and reviews, effective
 
February 25, 2009, the DHS foster custody was revoked, and DHS
 
family supervision was implemented, with Father being found to be
 
1
 The Honorable Linda K.C. Luke presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
willing and able to provide a safe family home with a service
 
plan, and where mother, at that time, was not in the home, but
 
was in the Big Island Recovery program. On April 20, 2009,
 
Mother was permitted to return to the family home under DHS
 
family supervision, but not permitted to be alone with the
 
children. 
On September 18, 2009, Father took B.M. to school, with
 
Mother at home, and later admitted that he left Brother at home
 
sleeping. After Father returned home because he had forgotten
 
B.M.'s shoes, he then took Brother with him. Father returned
 
home and placed Brother in bed, and went to sleep; then Father
 
awoke 15-25 minutes later and found Brother to be unresponsive. 
It was later determined that Brother suffered a subarachnoid
 
hemorrhage and subdural hemorrhage and brain swelling. Injuries
 
were due to "severe accelerative/decelerative rotational forces
 
applied to the child's head, as a forceful shaking and impact." 
Brother died on September 20, 2009. The September 21, 2009
 
autopsy report concluded that Brother's death was "as a result of
 
intracranial injury due to abusive head trauma[,]" and injury
 
"could have been caused by shaking and/or impact." Foster
 
custody was assumed by DHS on September 18, 2009 and ultimately
 
the November 24, 2009 Family Service Plan was ordered.
 
The permanency trial was conducted on January 25-26,
 
2011. On February 23, 2011, the Family Court issued the Decision
 
Re: Trial, which granted DHS's motion for permanent custody, and
 
on March 8, 2011, the Family Court issued the Order Terminating
 
Parental Rights. The Family Court issued Findings of Fact and
 
Conclusions of Law on April 12, 2011 and Amended Findings of Fact
 
and Conclusions of Law on April 15, 2012.
 
On appeal, Mother asserts that clear and convincing
 
evidence did not exist that Mother was unable and unwilling to
 
provide a safe home for B.M., considering: (1) violation of her
 
right of due process where Mother was misled into believing that
 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the trial would not include allegations that she caused the death
 
of Brother and the Family Court's erroneous determination that
 
the Navy Criminal Investigative Services' (NCIS) documents were
 
admissible for the truth of the matters reflected therein;
 
(2) failure of DHS to provide Mother a reasonable opportunity to
 
reunite with B.M. by failing to provide Mother with services in
 
Texas and that the Family Court erroneously found that Mother
 
failed to comply with the service plan; and (3) the Family
 
Court's erroneous findings of fact (FOFs) that Mother abused
 
methadone while pregnant with B.M. and that Mother admitted to
 
recreational use of methadone in Texas.
 
II. DISCUSSION
 
Mother asserts that her due process rights were
 
violated where she was misled by DHS's pretrial statement into
 
believing that the trial would not include allegations that she
 
caused the death of Brother, that no opportunity to continue the
 
trial existed to prepare for DHS's change in position, and that
 
the Family Court erroneously ruled that the NCIS documents, which
 
related to the investigation of Brother’s death, could be
 
utilized for the truth of the matters asserted therein.
 
Review of the pretrial proceedings reflect that
 
Mother's belief that the issue of the perpetrator of harm to
 
Brother would not be raised during trial was without basis. 
DHS's first pretrial statement on October 4, 2010 [DHS's First
 
Pretrial Statement] included the following statement.
 
. . . . DHS position is [Brother's] death was due to
physical abuse by his Father; that Mother failed to adequately
care for her children and/or supervise or monitor [Brother]
 
. . . .
 
DHS's First Pretrial Statement also noted that discovery was
 
needed of the "military investigation into [Brother's] death[,]"
 
and requested a stipulation that Brother "died while in the care
 
and custody of parents."  DHS's supplemental pretrial statement
 
filed on December 14, 2010, listed witnesses from NCIS regarding
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testimony as to "knowledge of the family and their investigation
 
into the death of [Brother]."
 
At a pretrial hearing on December 14, 2010, after
 
discussion regarding information contained in the NCIS reports
 
and mother's concerns about use of NCIS records focusing on the
 
criminal aspect of Brother's death, the court stated, in
 
pertinent part, as follows:
 
The indication I'm giving now is that the perpetrator -- the
determination of the perpetrator of harm is relevant to whether or
not the services were appropriate, whether or not progress has
been made, and whether or not parents can provide a safe family
home.
 
DHS's second supplemental pretrial statement filed on
 
January 10, 2011 reflected, in relevant part as follows.
 
[T]he number of witnesses may be reduced depending upon 1)
parents request for report writers, 2) if parents will be
testifying and if they do, if they will be invoking their fifth
amendment rights as to questions related to the death of
[Brother], and depending upon their testimony, 3) whether any
stipulations can be entered into including but not limited to the
facts and circumstances of the: bruises and injuries to [Brother]
in 2009, days prior to and after 9/17/09 to 9/19/10[.]
 
At the January 12, 2011 pretrial hearing, Father's
 
counsel stated, in part:
 
I wanna make certain that everyone, including the
court, understands that this is a motion to terminate parental
rights. The issue is not finding out who harmed a child, but
finding out whether or not the parents can provide a safe home for
the child.
 
At trial, when the issue again arose, the Family Court
 
stated, in pertinent part, as follows.
 
. . . in reviewing page 2 of the Department's October 4th
pretrial statement, it also indicates the allegation that mother
failed to adequately care for her children and supervise or
monitor [Brother] and that she cannot be protective of [B.M.]. 
So given that, [Mother's Counsel], I cannot excerpt or
exorcise [
sic] from the scope of this court's fact finding the
circumstances of [Brother]'s demise. So I think if you need to
talk to your client, we can take a ten-minute recess, because the
choice is yours.
 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The record also reflects that Mother declined to take
 
advantage of a continuance of trial offered by the Family Court
 
in order to review the transcripts to support her argument
 
although, as demonstrated above, such a review would not have
 
yielded the information she desired.
 
Relatedly, Mother takes issue with the Family Court's
 
evidentiary determination that certain documents were admissible
 
and could be considered for the truth of the matter reflected
 
therein. Mother stipulated to the admission of all of DHS's
 
trial exhibits, which included the NCIS documents, and no
 
limitation was placed on the stipulation. Consequently, the
 
Family Court's determination that exhibits in evidence could be
 
considered for the truth of the matter asserted was not error.
 
Mother contends that DHS failed to provide Mother a
 
reasonable opportunity to reunite with B.M. by failing to provide
 
Mother with services in Texas, and that the Family Court
 
erroneously found that Mother failed to comply with the service
 
plan (citing FOF 62).2
 
The record reflects that Mother was provided numerous 
services in Hawai' i, moved to Texas in contravention of the order 
of the Family Court, failed to maintain contact with DHS, and did not attempt to participate in the family plan while in Texas. 
Moreover, Mother does not point to anywhere in the record where 
she objected to the November 24, 2009 service plan or, prior to 
trial, brought attention to a lack of services while in Texas. 
Consequently, Mother was not deprived of due process
 
where no substantial prejudice accrued to Mother in light of
 
2
 FOF 62 states:
 
Mother failed to comply with her service plan dated November
24, 2009 as Mother failed to complete a domestic violence
program. There was domestic violence throughout parents'
marriage which continued up and to the time of [Brother's]
death. Parents also had a history of marital discord from
the time of their involvement with CWS in Texas, culminating
in their divorce.
 
5  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sufficient evidence that DHS made reasonable efforts to reunify, 
consistent with In re Doe, 100 Hawai' i 335, 343-44, 60 P.3d 285, 
293-94 (2002). 
Mother contests the Family Court's FOFs that Mother
 
3
abused methadone while pregnant with B.M. (citing FOF 18)  and
that Mother admitted to recreational use of methadone in Texas
 
(citing FOF 19).4 DHS's Exhibit 17, which was stipulated into
 
evidence without reservation, provides evidence to the contrary. 
Thus, the Family Court's findings were not clearly erroneous.
 
3
 FOF 18 states:
 
Parents had a case with the Navy Family Advocacy
Program in Texas from October 2006 which closed in
August 2007 due to allegations of physical abuse to
the child. The child was 3 months old at the time.
 Neglect of the child was substantiated in January
2007. Substance abuse is a factor in the case as
 Mother was abusing Methadone while she was pregnant
with the child.
 
4
 FOF 19 states:
 
Parents had a child welfare case in Texas in 2006 ­
2007 which started when Mother was found asleep in her
car in a Walmart parking lot with the child. Mother
admitted to daily recreational use of methadone. The
child was exposed to methadone as Mother admitted
using methadone while pregnant with the child. Mother
admitted she was addicted to methadone. The child
 welfare authorities in Texas found that there was a
 substantial risk of further neglectful supervision of
the child due to Mother's drug use. Child welfare
services in Texas found that the actions of Mother
 constituted a continuing danger to the child and it
was not in the best interest of the child to remain
 with Mother. The child was removed from Mother's care
 and placed with relatives. During the course of the
Texas child welfare case, Mother refused to
participate in a residential substance abuse program.
 
6                                                        NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Family Court's
 
Decision Re: Trial, filed on February 23, 2011, and Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights, filed on March 8, 2011.
 
DATED: Honlulu, Hawai' i, January 20, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Herbert Y. Hamada 
for Mother-Appellant Chief Judge 
Robert T. NakatsujiDeputy Solicitor GeneralDepartment of the Attorney Generalfor Petitioner-AppelleeDepartment of Human Services Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7 