NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000475
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
CYNTHIA MARCUS, Individually and as
Trustee of the Marcus Family Trust,
under trust indenture dated November 30, 1992,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
CENTEX HOMES dba CENTEX DESTINATION PROPERTIES,
TONY PINKERT, JES FOSTER,
Defendants-Appellees
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0865)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Cynthia Marcus (Marcus) appeals
 
from the (1) January 19, 2011 "Order Granting Defendant Centex
 
Homes dba Centex Destination Properties' Motion for Summary
 
Judgment," (2) January 19, 2011 Judgment, (3) May 10, 2011 "Order
 
Denying Plaintiff's Motion for Reconsideration filed February 1,
 
2011," (4) May 10, 2011 "Order Granting Defendant Centex Homes
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dba Centex Destination Properties' Motion for Attorneys' Fees and
 
Costs filed February 2, 2011," and (5) May 10, 2011 First Amended
 
Judgment, all entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1
 
(circuit court). The circuit court entered judgment in favor of
 Defendant-Appellee Centex Homes dba Centex Destination Properties
 
(Centex) and against Marcus.
 
On appeal, Marcus contends the circuit court erred when
 
it:
 
(1) granted Centex's motion for summary judgment
 
despite the existence of a genuine issue of material fact;
 
(2) failed to consider the new evidence Marcus
 
presented and denied her motion for reconsideration; and
 
(3) awarded Centex attorney's fees despite the
 
equitable nature of the action.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude this
 
appeal is without merit.
 
(1) Marcus contends the circuit court erred in granting
 
summary judgment despite the "undisputed" fact that Marcus's
 
condominium is 100 square feet smaller than represented by Centex
 
in their Sales Contract (Contract).
 
Granting or denying of a motion for summary judgment is
 
pursuant to the following standard: 
1
 The Honorable Sabrina S. McKenna presided over the initial
proceedings before the case was transferred to the Honorable R. Mark Browning
on May 3, 2010. The Honorable R. Mark Browning presided over the motion for
summary judgement and entered the subsequent Order and Judgment. The
 Honorable Edwin C. Nacino presided over the motion for reconsideration and
entered the subsequent order.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, . . . show that there is
no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving
party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A fact is
 material if proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a
cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The
 evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 Querubin v. Thomas, 107 Hawai' i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005) 
(citations omitted). 
Centex based its motion for summary judgment on two
 
points: Marcus obtained erroneous measurements of her
 
condominium; and, when measured correctly, the condominium meets
 
the specifications of the Contract. In support of its point that
 
Marcus obtained erroneous measurements, Centex produced the
 
following evidence. In his deposition, Marcus's inspector
 
testified that Marcus requested a measurement of her living space
 
to ensure adequate space for her furniture. In compliance with
 
her request, the inspector provided a "rough measurement" of the
 
living space by calculating the area of each room and adding the
 
figures for a total. The inspector testified he was
 
inexperienced with measuring square footage and had a lack of
 
familiarity with the norms and procedures for calculating square
 
footage.
 
Centex produced evidence to show that the condominium
 
met the specifications provided in the Contract. Centex
 
presented a "Condominium Public Report" (Report), checked off as
 
"Final", for Kolea Condominium Building No. 14. The Report was
 
dated July 1, 2005 and a receipt showed Marcus received a copy on
 
July 19, 2005. The Report specified the method used in
 
calculating the square footage for apartments in the Kolea
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
complex as "measured from the interior surface of the apartment
 
perimeter walls." Centex produced a survey map prepared by a
 
licensed professional land surveyor showing the condominium at
 
1264.1 square feet of net living space. The survey map depicted
 
the "overall interior dimensions" measured from the interior
 
surface of the perimeter walls as prescribed by the Report. The
 
Contract listed the square footage of the net living area as
 
"1270 sq. ft., approximately."
 
When a party opposes a motion for summary judgment, the 
non-moving party "cannot discharge his or her burden by alleging 
conclusions, nor is he or she entitled to a trial on the basis of 
a hope that he can produce some evidence at that time." Exotics 
Hawaii-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Du Pont De Nemours & Co., 116 Hawai' i 
277, 301, 172 P.3d 1021, 1045 (citation and emphasis omitted). Marcus failed to adduce evidence that any genuine issues of 
material fact remain to be resolved in this dispute. To support 
her contention that a genuine issue of material fact remains 
unresolved, Marcus provided her own declaration and a report from 
the same home inspector, whose own deposition testimony 
established that he provided only a rough estimate and his 
methods of measuring the square footage of the unit was not 
subject to any recognized standards and did not conform to the 
method of measurement set out in the Report. 
Though Marcus contends the discrepancy in square
 
footage calculations presents an unresolved issue of material
 
fact, Centex established that the condominium met the
 
specifications provided in the Contract and that any alleged
 
discrepancy is due to the unreliability of the measurement by
 
Marcus's expert. Therefore, the circuit court did not err in
 
4
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
granting Centex's motion for summary judgment where Marcus failed
 
to show any unresolved genuine issue of material fact.
 
(2) Marcus contends the circuit court abused its 
discretion in denying her motion for reconsideration. 
"The purpose of a motion for reconsideration is to allow the 
parties to present new evidence and/or arguments that could not 
have been presented during the earlier adjudicated motion." 
Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 
P.2d 10, 27 (1992). A motion for reconsideration is not an 
opportunity to relitigate adjudicated issues with evidence that 
could have been presented during prior proceedings. Cho v. 
State, 115 Hawai' i 373, 384, 168 P.3d 17, 28 (2007) (citing 
Sousaris v. Miller, 92 Hawai' i 505, 513, 993 P.2d 539, 547 
(2000)). 
Marcus did not present any new evidence or new
 
arguments that could not have been presented in the earlier
 proceedings. Therefore, the circuit court did not abuse its
 
discretion in denying Marcus's motion for reconsideration.
 
(3) Marcus contends the circuit court improperly 
awarded attorney's fees based on assumpsit. Actions based on 
assumpsit allow for the recovery of damages arising from contract 
claims. Leslie v. Estate of Tavares, 93 Hawai' i 1, 5, 994 P.2d 
1047, 1051 (2000). The nature of the action is ascertained through factual allegations in the complaint and the relief 
sought. Id. In her complaint, Marcus alleged Centex breached 
the Contract and sought an award of damages, in the nature of assumpsit. Therefore, the circuit court did not abuse its 
discretion in awarding attorney's fees based on assumpsit. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the (1) January 19, 2011
 
"Order Granting Defendant Centex Homes dba Centex Destination
 Properties' Motion for Summary Judgment," (2) January 19, 2011
 
Judgment, (3) May 10, 2011 "Order Denying Plaintiff's Motion for
 
Reconsideration filed February 1, 2011," (4) May 10, 2011 "Order
 
Granting Defendant Centex Homes dba Centex Destination
 
Properties' Motion for Attorneys' Fees and Costs filed February
 
2, 2011," and (5) May 10, 2011 First Amended Judgment, all
 
entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, December 31, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Carl H. Osaki 
for Plaintiff-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Kenneth K. FukunagaSheree Kon-Herrera (Fukunaga Matayoshi Hershey &Ching)for Defendant-Appellee CentexHomes dba Centex Destination Properties. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6
 