NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
NO. CAAP-22-0000499 
  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
‘I 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI‘ I, Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v. 
ALEXANDER AQUINO, Defendant-Appellant 
  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 3CPC-21-0000757)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Guidry, JJ.)
 
 
Defendant-Appellant Alexander Aquino (Aquino) appeals 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment
), for 
Unlawful Imprisonment in the First Degree (Unlawful 
Imprisonment) in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 707-721 (2014), entered by the Circuit Court of the Third 
Circuit1 on July 22, 2022.2  Aquino asserts two points of error 
 
1  The Honorable Wendy M. DeWeese presided. 
 
2  Aquino was charged by Information and Non- Felony Complaint 
(Information) with Unlawful Imprisonment (Count 1), and Persistent Nonsupport  
 
(continued . . .) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2 
 on appeal: (1) the circuit court erred in denying his motion to 
dismiss Count 1 with prejudice (Motion to Dismiss), for failure to sufficiently charge the offense of Unlawful Imprisonment; and 
(2) the circuit court erred in finding him guilty of Unlawful 
Imprisonment because the State failed to present sufficient 
evidence at trial to establish that he knowingly restrained his 
stepson, L.R., under circumstances that exposed L.R. to the risk 
of serious bodily injury. 
Upon careful review of the record, the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we vacate the Judgment and remand for dismissal with prejudice. 
(1) We first review Aquino's contention that the 
circuit court erred in denying his Motion to Dismiss for failure
to sufficiently charge all of the elements of Count 1, Unlawful 
Imprisonment.  "Whether a charge sets forth all the essential 
elements of a charged offense is a question of law, which we 
review under the de novo, or right/wrong, standard."  State v. 
 
(cleaned up).  When a criminal defendant challenges the 
sufficiency of a charge in a timely manner, an appellate court Wheeler, 121 Hawaiʻ i 383, 390, 219 P.3d 1170, 1177 (2009) 
 
(. . . continued)  
under HRS § 709
-903(1) (2014) ( Count 2).  A two- day jury- waived trial was 
held in April 2022.  After the conclusion of trial, the circuit court issued 
its verdict, finding Aquino guilty of Count 1 and not guilty of Count 2.  The circuit court subsequently issued Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law 
Following Bench Trial, issued its Judgment, and sentenced Aquino to a term of 
imprisonment. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3 
   will uphold that charge if: (1) it contains the elements of the 
offense; and (2) it sufficiently apprises the defendant of what the defendant must be prepared to meet.  State v. Mita, 124 
Hawaiʻi 385, 390, 245 P.3d 458, 463 (2010).  "The relevant 
inquiry, therefore, is whether or not the charge [has] provided 
the accused with fair notice of the [offense's] essential elements."  Id. (citation omitted).  "In general, where the 
statute sets forth with reasonable clarity all essential 
elements of the crime intended to be punished, and fully defines
the offense in unmistakable terms readily comprehensible to 
persons of common understanding, a charge drawn in the language 
of the statute is sufficient."  Wheeler, 121 Hawai
ʻi at 393, 219
P.3d at 1180 (cleaned up).  However, "where the definition of an
offense ... includes generic terms, it is not sufficient that 
the indictment shall charge the offense in the same generic 
terms as in the definition; but it must state the species ... 
and descend to particulars."  Id. (cleaned up).  
 
 
  HRS § 707-721 (2014) provides, in relevant part: 
 
(1)  A person commits the offense of unlawful imprisonment 
in the first degree if the person knowingly restrains 
another person under circumstances which expose the person to the risk of serious bodily injury. 
 
  "Restrain" means to restrict a person's movement in 
such a manner as to interfere substantially with the person's liberty: NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4 
  
(1) By means of force, threat, or deception; or 
 
(2)  If the person is under the age of eighteen or 
incompetent, without the consent of the relative, person, or institution having lawful custody of the 
person. 
 
HRS § 707-700 (2014). 
 
  The Unlawful Imprisonment charge against Aquino 
stated: 
On or about the August 1, 2020 through August 21, 2021, in 
Kona, County and State of Hawai ʻi, ALEXANDER AQUINO, as a 
principle or accomplice, knowingly restrained another 
person, L.R., a minor born in June of 2007, under 
circumstances which exposed L.R. to the risk of serious 
bodily injury, thereby committing the offense of Unlawful 
Imprisonment in the First Degree, in violation of Section 
707-721(1)(a) [sic], Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes, as amended. 
 
  The essential elements of an offense are "conduct," 
"attendant circumstances," and "results of conduct," specified 
by the definition of the offense, and that negative a defense 
(other than the statute of limitations, lack of venue, or lack 
of jurisdiction).  HRS § 702-205 (2014).  "Restraint" is the conduct element of Unlawful Imprisonment.  State v. Sheffield, 
146 Hawaiʻ i 49, 56, 456 P.3d 122, 129 (2020). 
  "[A]n attendant circumstance is essentially a 
circumstance that exists independently of the actor's conduct."
 the subject of the restraint is under the age of eighteen (as 
was L.R. in this case), the statutory definition of "restrain"
potentially adds an attendant circumstances element to the 
offense: "without the consent of the relative, person, or Wheeler, 121 Hawaiʻ i at 392, 219 P.3d at 1179 (cleaned up).  If   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5 
  institution having lawful custody of the person."   This 
attendant circumstances element was not set forth in Aquino's 
charge.   Accordingly, the charge was insufficient, and should
have been dismissed. 43
 
(2) Aquino challenges the sufficiency of the evidence 
supporting his conviction for Unlawful Imprisonment.  Notwithstanding our conclusion that the charge was defective, it 
is necessary to address the sufficiency of the evidence in order 
 
3  HRS § 707-700 (2014) defines "restrain" by setting forth two 
separate means "to restrict a person's movement in such a manner as to 
interfere substantially with the person's liberty."  The first is to restrict 
"[b]y means of force, threat, or deception[.] "  The second, alternative 
definition of restrain "if the person [restrained] is under the age of 
eighteen or incompetent," is to restrict "without the consent of the 
relative, person, or institution having lawful custody of the person."  Where the subject of the alleged restraint is a minor or incompetent, the State can 
potentially charge the defendant pursuant to either or both definitions of 
restrain. 
 
4  The declaration of HCPD [Hawai ʻi County Police Department] police 
detective Brandon Mansur filed (under seal) along with, but not attached to, 
the information and non- felony complaint, appears to indicate that L.R.'s 
mother, Amy Aquino, consented to Alexander Aquino's restraint of L.R.  This 
does not cure the insufficiency of the charging document because it was possible that the State, which had charged Aquino with "knowingly restrain[ing]" "a minor," could nevertheless have attempted to set forth a 
theory at trial that restraint of L.R. was without mother's consent. 
Charging documents must sufficiently allege all of the 
essential elements of the offense charged.  If a charging 
document omits an essential element of an offense, it fails 
to state an offense, and a conviction based upon it cannot be sustained no matter what other information the defendant 
may have received from the State. 
Given that the ICA treated the Traffic Proviso as an 
attendant circumstances element of HRS § 291C-12(a), it 
should not have looked beyond the four corners of the indictment in evaluating Van Blyenburg's arguments as to Count 1. 
State v. Van Blyenburg, 152 Hawaiʻ i 66, 70 n.3, 520 P.3d 264, 268 n.3 (2022) 
(cleaned up). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
6 to determine whether Aquino may be recharged and retried.  
State v. Davis, 133 Hawaiʻi 102, 104, 324 P.3d 912, 914 (2014) 
(
"a reviewing court is required to address an express claim of 
insufficiency of the evidence prior to remanding for a new trial 
based on a defective charge").  Under HRS § 707-721(1) (2014), 
the State had the burden of proving at trial that Aquino "knowingly restrain[ed] [L.R.] under circumstances which 
expose[d] [L.R.] to the risk of serious bodily injury."  Aquino 
specifically challenges findings of fact (FOF) 15, 16, 17, 26, 
and 27, which find that, 
15.The Defendant clearly knew of [ L.R.'s] fall and that
an injury had resulted.  And, while L.R. testified he
does not know why he decided to climb off the porch
and that it was a random impulse, the fact remains theescape attempt and fall resulting in injury occurred 
while L.R. was being chained up by both parents in the 
same manner as he was between August 1, 2020 and August 21, 2021.
16.Also, L.R.
 testified that he repeatedly told both
Defendant and his mother he did not like being chained
up.  Yet despite this Defendant and [mother] continued
to chain up L.R., even after his fall in 2020.
17.Thus, the evidence shows Defendant knew the risk of
harm associated with continuing to chain up L.R.
 after
the 2020 escape and fall, namely that L.R. might attempt to escape again by climbing off the lanai and 
hurt himself.
. . . 
26.Further, the Court finds beyond a reasonable doubt
that Defendant knew 
L.R.was exposed to the risk of 
another fall off ofthe lanai as had happened in 2020.
The circumstances that existed at the time of the 2020
fall continued to exist between August 1, 2020 and
August 21, 2021.  Defendant was still requiring L.R.
to be chained.  L.R. was still prohibited from being
in the house without Defendant[']s permission.  L.R.
was still subjected to yelling and discipline by
Defendant.  The only exit off the lanai still was only
through the house, where L.R. was not allowed to be
without Defendant[']s permission.  L.R. had repeatedlyNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
7 
 told Defendant he did not like being chained up.  And, 
L.R. had in fact fallen off the lanai while trying to  
escape once before, resulting in serious bodily injury. 
 
27.  The credible evidence shows beyond a reasonable [sic] 
Defendant knew that he was exposing L.R. to the risk 
of serious bodily injury when he continued to restrain 
L.R. on the lanai between August 1, 2020 and 
August 21, 2021. 
 
(Emphasis added.) 
 
We review Aquino's contention of error under the 
following standard of review, 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in 
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to 
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the 
case was before a judge or jury.  The test on appeal is not 
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but 
whether there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact. 
 
State v. Kalaola, 124 Hawaiʻ i 43, 49, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010) 
(citations omitted).   
"Substantial evidence" is "credible evidence which is 
of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of 
reasonable caution to support a conclusion."  Id. at 49, 237 
P.3d at 1115 (citation omitted).  In a bench trial, the trial judge, as the trier of fact, "is free to make all reasonable and 
rational inferences under the facts in evidence, including 
circumstantial evidence."  State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 249, 
831 P.2d 924, 931 (1992) (citation omitted).   
We conclude that the record does not contain 
sufficient evidence to support Aquino's Unlawful Imprisonment 
conviction.  L.R. testified at trial that, from the time he was  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
8 
   "[t]en, eleven, or twelve," Aquino and L.R.'s mother would chain 
him to the porch by wrapping and padlocking one end of a metal chain around his neck, and padlocking the other end of the chain 
to the porch.  When wrapped around L.R.'s neck, L.R. testified 
that "[the chain] would be about 6 or 7 inches long so I would 
still have a good amount of move space for my head to get into 
comfort."  L.R. would be chained at night, and "let loose during 
the day."  L.R. "didn't like having to be chained up," and told 
this to Aquino "[a] [c]ouple times." 
The porch was situated approximately 17 feet above the 
ground.  L.R. fell from the porch and injured his back in 2020.  He had been, at the time, released from the chain for dinner.  
L.R. explained that, "I don't know what came over me, but I 
decided to try to jump off the porch so tried that[,]" and "[I] 
kind of tried to climb down but I slipped and fell off."  When 
questioned further as to why he tried to "jump down or get down" 
from the porch, L.R. testified that, "I forget, to be honest.  I 
don't even think I knew why.  Just a random impulse."   
L.R. sustained an injury to his back as a result of 
the fall.  The record shows that Aquino was aware of L.R.'s injury, and allowed him to remain unchained for a period of 
time, after which Aquino resumed chaining L.R. at night.  L.R. 
again climbed down from the porch in August 2021, this time NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
9 
 without injury, and subsequently "ran away" and hitchhiked.  
L.R. testified that he ran away because he "was tired of being chained up." 
The record evidence set forth above shows that L.R. 
injured himself in 2020 jumping down from the porch, on "a 
random impulse," while unchained.  L.R. did not, indeed could 
not (because of the length of the chain and its location on the 
porch), have climbed down from the porch while chained.  The 
finding that "the [2020] escape attempt and fall resulting in 
injury occurred while L.R. was being chained up" (FOF 15) 
(emphasis added), is thus clearly erroneous and not supported by sufficient evidence.  The record evidence does not support a 
reasonable and rational inference that Aquino's act of chaining 
L.R. was "under circumstances" that "exposed" L.R. to "the risk 
of serious bodily injury."
5   
We conclude that FOFs 15, 16, 17, 26, and 27, and 
Aquino's conviction for Unlawful Imprisonment, are not supported    
 
5  "Serious bodily injury" is defined as "bodily injury which 
creates a substantial risk of death or which causes serious, permanent 
disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily 
member or organ."  HRS § 707- 700 (2014).  Although L.R. testified that he 
"didn't like having to be chained up[,] " he also testified that the chain did 
not hurt him.  He testified that nothing had happened to him while he was 
chained, aside from "a slap" and being "whacked . . . on my legs if something 
got broken, but that was before I was almost always chained up."   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
10 
 by sufficient evidence.  We therefore vacate the Judgment and 
remand for dismissal with prejudice.   
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawaiʻ i, October 6, 2023.  
On the briefs: 
 R. Hermann Heimgartner, 
For Defendant-Appellant.  
 Charles E. Murray, III, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Hawai‘ i,  
for Plaintiff-Appellee.   
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
Presiding Judge 
 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka Associate Judge 
 
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry Associate Judge  
  