 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001032
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
PFLUEGER, INC., Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
NOGUCHI & ASSOCIATES, INC., Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
AIU HOLDINGS, INC., NATIONAL UNION FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY
OF PITTSBURGH, PENNSYLVANIA, Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10,
and DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-1326)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION

 
(By: Foley, Presiding J. and Fujise, J.,
with Reifurth, J. dissenting)
 
Defendant-Appellant Noguchi & Associates, Inc.
 
(Noguchi) appeals from the "Amended Final Judgment as to All
 
Claims and All Parties," entered July 11, 2014 in the Circuit
 
1
Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).
 
On appeal, Noguchi contends the circuit court erred in:
 
(1) excluding deposition testimony of out-of-state witnesses as
 
hearsay; (2) denying its "Motion for a New Trial" filed December
 13, 2013; (3) granting the "Motion to Preclude Application of the
 Good Faith Settlement Credit" filed by Plaintiff-Appellee
 Pfleuger, Inc. (Pfleuger) under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
1
 The Honorable Jeannette H. Castagnetti presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 663-15.5 (Supp. 2014); and (4) granting Pfleuger's Judgment as
 
a Matter of Law.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Pfleuger is an automotive retailer and employed Noguchi
 
as its insurance broker for over twenty years. In the event of
 an incident, Pfleuger would inform Noguchi according to an oral
 understanding between the two parties. Pfleuger communicated
 with Noguchi and did not have any direct communication with its
 insurance carriers.
 
In 2005, Pfleuger received notice that it was being
 
audited by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Pfleuger informed
 
Noguchi of the audit.
 
On May 22, 2008, Pfleuger received Grand Jury subpoenas 
for the production of documents in the United States District 
Court for the District of Hawai
'i. Upon receiving the subpoenas, 
Pfleuger's Chief Financial Officer, Randall Kurata (Kurata), 
contacted Noguchi. Glenn Maruyama, an agent at Noguchi, told 
Kurata that there were no claims under Pfleuger's insurance policies until the Grand Jury issued an indictment. During the relevant time, Pfleuger was insured by Defendant-Appellee National Union Fire Insurance Company of Pittsburgh, PA (National 
Union). 
On February 11, 2009, Pfleuger notified Defendant-
Appellee AIU Holdings, Inc. (AIU) and National Union of the
 proceedings before the Grand Jury. Dennis Van Dina (Van Dina), a
 
claims analyst for AIU, denied coverage because the "materials
 
submitted . . . would not constitute a Claim."
 
On June 10, 2009, Pfleuger filed a "Complaint for
 
Declaratory Relief, Negeligence, Negligent Misrepresentation and
 Breach of the Duty of Good Faith And Fair Dealing" against AIU,
 National Union, and Noguchi alleging that it was entitled to
 coverage under its insurance policies. Pfleuger brought
 negligence and negligent misrepresentation claims against
 Noguchi, and a breach of the duty of good faith and fair dealing
 against AIU and National Union. In its claim for negligence
 against Noguchi, Pfleuger alleged the following:
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
20. Noguchi owed a duty to Pfleuger to tender
the Grand Jury proceeding to Pfleuger's insurer.
 
21. Noguchi breached its duty to Pfleuger.
 
22. As a direct and proximate result of
Noguchi's negligence, Pfleuger has been denied
coverage for the Grand Jury matter and has suffered
and continues to suffer financial damage, and other
general and special damages in an amount to be proven
at trial, and for which Noguchi is liable.
 
Regarding its claim for negligent misrepresentation, Pfleuger
 
alleged:
 
24. Noguchi represented to Pfleuger that the
Grand Jury Proceeding was not covered under the
aforementioned insurance policies.
 
25. Noguchi's representations were untrue and
were made to Pfleuger without reasonable
investigation, and with the intent to induce Pfleuger
to rely thereon.
 
26. Pfleuger was unaware that Noguchi's
representations on this point were untrue, and
reasonably relied on them in declining, for a time, to
further tender the Grand Jury matter directly to its
insurer under the aforementioned insurance policies.
 
27. But for Noguchi's representations, Pfleuger
would have immediately tendered the May 22, 2008 Grand
Jury Subpoena to [AIU] and National Union.
 
28. As a proximate result of Noguchi's
representations, [AIU] and National Union have denied
Pfleuger's tender of the Grand Jury proceedings as
untimely, and denied Pfleuger coverage under the
aforementioned insurance policies. 
29. As a proximate result of Noguchi's actions,
Pfleuger has suffered and continues to suffer
financial damage, and other general and special
damages in an amount to be proven at trial, and for
which Noguchi is liable.
 
AIU and National Union entered into a confidential
 
settlement with Pfleuger. The circuit court found that the
 
settlement was in good faith pursuant to HRS § 663-15.5.
 
On June 28, 2013, Noguchi filed its designation of
 
excerpts from the depositions of Van Dina and Tiffany Ngeo
 (Ngeo), a senior complex claims director for AIU, pursuant to
 
Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 32. 
The jury trial began on July 22, 2013. On July 26,
 
2013, the jury returned a special verdict for Pfleuger, assigning
 
30% of fault to Pfleuger and 70% fault to Noguchi.
 
3

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
A. Admission of Depositions
 
"The admissibility of depositions at trial is 
reviewable under the abuse of discretion standard. A trial 
court's exercise of discretion in ruling on the admissibility of depositions will be upheld unless an abuse of discretion is manifest." Aga v. Hundahl, 78 Hawai
'i 230, 241, 891 P.2d 1022, 
1033 (1995) (quoting Wilart Assocs. v. Kapiolani Plaza, Ltd., 7 Haw. App. 354, 362, 766 P.2d 1207, 1212 (1988)). 
An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has
 
"clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or
 principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a
 party litigant." Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74
 
Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26 (1992).
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. Exclusion of Deposition Testimony
 
Noguchi contends the circuit court abused its
 
discretion by excluding deposition testimony of out-of-state
 witnesses as hearsay. Noguchi argues that the testimony was
 admissible under HRCP Rule 32(a), to which the hearsay rule does
 not apply. At trial, Pfleuger objected to the introduction of
 deposition testimony evidence of two witnesses who were out-of­state based on Noguchi's failure to establish that the witnesses
 were unavailable for purposes of HRCP Rule 32 and because the
 deposition testimony was hearsay under Hawaii Rules of Evidence
 (HRE) Rule 802 (1993).
2
 
The circuit court sustained Pfleuger's request to
 
exclude the testimony on the basis that such testimony was
 hearsay. Hearsay "is a statement, other than one made by the
 declarant while testifying at the trial or hearing, offered in
 evidence to prove the truth of the matter asserted." HRE Rule
 
2
 Although Pfleuger initially objected to the admission of the
testimony based on Noguchi's failure to establish that the witnesses were
"unavailable" under HRCP Rule 32, the circuit court's decision to exclude the
testimony was based solely on HRE Rule 802, HRE Rule 803 (1993 and Supp.
2014), and HRE Rule 804 (1993 and Supp. 2014). Pfleuger clarified that its
objection to the testimony was based on hearsay.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
801 (Supp 2014.). "Hearsay is not admissible except as provided 
by [the HRE], or by other rules prescribed by the [Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court], or by statute." HRE 802. 
HRCP Rule 32(a) permits a party to use "any part or all
 
of a deposition, so far as admissible under the rules of evidence
 applied as though the witness were then present and testifying"
 where "the witness resides on an island other than that of the
 place of trial or hearing, or is out of State, unless it appears
 that the absence of the witness was procured by the party
 offering the deposition[.]" A party who wishes to admit such
 testimony must "provide to other parties and promptly file with
 the court . . . information regarding the evidence that it may
 present at trial . . . at least 30 days before trial." HRCP Rule 
32(b). The opposing party may object at the trial or hearing
 "for any reason which would require the exclusion of evidence if
 the witness were then present and testifying." HRCP Rule 32(c). 
Under HRCP Rule 32(a), evidentiary rules are to be 
applied "as though the witness were then present and testifying[.]" Thus, the conclusion that the entire deposition testimony was hearsay because it was out-of-court testimony is erroneous. Additionally, HRCP Rule 32(a) is an "other rule" prescribed by the Hawai
'i Supreme Court, falling within the 
explicit definitional exception in HRE Rule 802. See Nationwide 
Life Ins. Co. v. Richards, 541 F.3d 903, 914-15 (9th Cir. 2008) (concluding that Federal Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 32(a)(3)(B) is an "other rule" prescribed by the United States Supreme Court). 
Pfleuger argued at trial that Noguchi was required to
 
provide a subpoena or letter establishing that Van Dina and Ngeo
 were unavailable to testify at trial. HRCP Rule 32(a)(3) allows
 a party to use a deposition "if the court finds . . . that the
 witness resides . . . out of the state." HRCP Rule 32 does not
 require a party to provide a subpoena or letter evidencing the
 deponent's place of residence. 
There was sufficient evidence before the circuit court
 
to find that Van Dina and Ngeo resided out of state for the
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
purposes of HRCP Rule 32(a)(3). Noguchi's designation of Van
 
Dina's deposition excerpts includes Van Dina's testimony that he
 resides in New York, New York. Pfleuger's subpoena was addressed
 to Van Dina in New York, New York and the deposition was taken in
 New York, New York. Similarly, Ngeo's deposition was also taken
 in New York, New York.
 
In addition to the evidence establishing that the
 
deponents resided out of state, Pfleuger waived its objection to
 the admissibility of Van Dina and Ngeo's deposition testimony
 because Pfleuger delayed its unavailability objection until after
 the commencement of trial. In preparation for trial, Pfleuger
 submitted its objections to Noguchi's designation of excerpts
 from Van Dina's testimony, which listed specific objections to
 portions of Van Dina's testimony, but did not include the HRCP
 Rule 32 objection to Van Dina's unavailability. Pfleuger also
 submitted objections to Noguchi's designation of excerpts from
 Ngeo's testimony, but again did not raise a HRCP Rule 32
 objection to Ngeo's unavailability. At the hearing on motions in
 limine, the parties had an opportunity to address the
 designations of excerpts from deposition testimony. The circuit
 court allowed the deposition testimony to be used at trial with
 specific limitations. Pfleuger raised the unavailability
 objection only after trial had already begun (though Pfleuger's
 unavailability objection was based ultimately in hearsay rules). 
Pfleuger's delay in bringing its unavailability objection left
 Noguchi no opportunity to respond to the objection with
 documentary evidence. The delay amounted to a waiver of
 Pfleuger's right to object to the admission of the deposition
 testimonies of Van Dina and Ngeo at trial.
 
Pfleuger argues that even if the trial court erred in
 
sustaining its objection, the error was not prejudicial because
 evidence that the insurance carrier would have denied coverage
 was in evidence through cross-examination of Pfleuger's expert
 witness. Van Dina and Ngeo's testimonies directly contradict
 Pfleuger's claims.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Van Dina testified in his deposition that AIU had
 
received notice of the IRS subpoena in May 2008 instead of
 
February 2009, AIU would still not have covered Pfleuger because
 a Grand Jury subpoena is not a "claim" within the meaning of the
 AIU policy. Ngeo, a senior complex claims director within AIU,
 testified that after reviewing the subpoena, she agreed with Van
 Dina's finding that the subpoena did not fit within the
 definition of a "claim" under Pfleuger's policy with AIU.
 Regarding its negligence claim, Pfleuger alleged, "As
 
a direct and proximate result of Noguchi's negligence, Pfleuger
 has been denied coverage for the Grand Jury matter . . . ." Van
 Dina and Ngeo's testimonies suggest that had Noguchi acted in
 accordance with the applicable standard of care, Pfleuger would
 have suffered the same harm, negating Pfleuger's causation
 argument. On its negligent misrepresentation claim, Pfleuger
 alleged, "As a proximate result of Noguchi's representations,
 [AIU] and National Union have denied Pfleuger's tender of the
 Grand Jury proceedings as untimely, and denied Pfleuger coverage
 under the aforementioned insurance policies." Again, Van Dina
 and Ngeo's testimonies undermine the causation element of
 negligent misrepresentation because even had Pfleuger submitted
 the information to AIU in a timely manner, AIU would still have
 denied coverage.
 
At trial, Pfleuger's expert Jim Schratz (Schratz)
 
testified that based on his review of Van Dina and Ngeo's
 depositions, the decision to deny coverage would have been the
 same regardless of when it was reported to the insurer. Schratz
 was questioned:
 
Q:	 Is it your opinion, that based upon your review
of Mr. Van Dina's tesimony, that [AIU] would
have denied this claim regardless of when it was
reported by Noguchi or anyone else?
 
[Schratz]: The best way I can answer that question is
that Mr. Van Dina, incorrectly, was pretty
stubborn in his coverage opinion, saying
he would deny it, but that's the best way
I can answer that question.
 
Q:	 Okay. Can you turn to page 100 of your
deposition.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
Regardless of whether or not a Court determines
there's coverage in this case, if, in fact, that
is an issue that's presented to the Court, you
would agree with me, that based on your review
of the deposition testimony of Mr. Van Dina and
the deposition testimony of Tiffany Ngeo that it
is the position of [AIU] that regardless of when
Noguchi or any other entity had reported this
claim to [AIU], [AIU's] coverage denial decision
would have been the same? And what was your
answer?
 
[Schratz]:	 Yes, based on Van Dina's deposition
testimony, yes. 
Q: 	And Mr. Van Dina was, in fact, your
understanding, the claims representative at
[AIU] who made the coverage decision regarding
this matter? And your answer?
 
[Schratz]:	 Poorly trained and very inexperienced
claims adjuster, but, yes. And then I
 issued my own motion to strike.
 
Pflueger argues that this testimony was sufficient to mitigate
 
the prejudice done by excluding the testimony of Van Dina and
 Ngeo. However, this testimony suggests that Van Dina improperly
 denied coverage for Pfleuger's claim, and would have improperly
 denied coverage even if the claim had been submitted in a timely
 manner. Schratz's testimony on cross-examination does not
 adequately substitute the testimony likely to have been provided
 by Van Dina and Ngeo. As such, Schratz's testimony is
 insufficient to render the exclusion of Van Dina's and Ngeo's
 testimonies as non-prejudicial. 
The testimonies of Van Dina and Ngeo were essential to
 
Noguchi's defense against Pfleuger's accusations of negligence
 and negligent misrepresentation. By excluding their testimony,
 the circuit court disregarded rules or principles of law to
 Noguchi's substantial detriment. Amfac, 74 Haw. at 114, 839 P.2d
 
at 26.
 
B. Remaining Points of Error
 
Because we have held that the circuit court's decision
 
to exclude the testimony of Van Dina and Ngeo was reversible
 
error which warrants a new trial, we need not address Noguchi's
 remaining points of error.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The "Amended Final Judgment as to All Claims and All
 
Parties," entered July 11, 2014 in the Circuit Court of the First
 
Circuit is vacated and this case is remanded for further
 proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 23, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Richard B. Miller
 
Patricia Kehau Wall (Tom Petrus & Miller)
and
 Christopher Shea Goodwin
Thomas D. Sands (with them on
the opening brief)for Defendant-Appellant.
 Presiding Judge

Associate Judge
Lyle S. Hosoda
Raina P.B. Gushiken
 (Hosoda & Morikone)
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
9

 