NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0002570
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CHRISTOPHER C. MUNDON, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-12-04988)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Christopher C. Mundon (Mundon)
 
appeals from the "Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
 
Plea/Judgment," (Judgment) entered June 6, 2013 in the District
 
1
Court of the First Circuit  (district court). The district
 
court's Judgment found Mundon guilty of operating a vehicle after
 
license and privilege have been suspended or revoked for
 operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (OVLPSR­
OVUII) in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E­
62(a)(1) and/or (a)(2) (Supp. 2013).
2
 
1
 The Honorable Linda K.C. Luke presided.
 
2
 HRS § 291E-62 provides, in relevant part:
 
§291E-62 Operating a vehicle after license and privilege
have been suspended or revoked for operating a vehicle under the
influence of an intoxicant; penalties. (a) No person whose
license and privilege to operate a vehicle have been revoked,
suspended, or otherwise restricted . . . shall operate or assume
actual physical control of any vehicle:
 
(1)	 In violation of any restrictions placed on the
person's license;
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mundon contends the district court erred when it denied 
his oral motion to suppress Honolulu Police Department Officer 
Adam Roberg's (Officer Roberg) September 9, 2011 investigative 
stop of Mundon because the State failed to produce sufficient 
evidence that the stop was warranted. Mundon also contends the district court erred when it found him guilty of OVLPSR-OVUII because Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) failed to 
produce sufficient evidence that he knew or should have known that his license was revoked. 
The State concedes that it did not produce sufficient
 
evidence to establish that the stop was warranted and therefore
 makes no argument against reversal on that ground. The State
 argues, however, that the conviction is supported by sufficient
 evidence that Mundon possessed the requisite mens rea.
I. BACKGROUND
 
On September 9, 2011, Officer Roberg initiated a
 
traffic stop on Mundon near the intersection of Merchant and
 Mililani Streets. When Officer Roberg asked Mundon for his
 license, registration, and insurance, Mundon replied that he had
 a temporary license but did not have it with him. Officer Roberg
 collected Mundon's personal information orally, and cited Mundon
 for OVLPSR-OVUII.
 
Arraignment, plea, and trial were held on June 6, 2013.
 
During trial, Officer Roberg testified as a witness for the State
 and the following exchange occurred during direct examination
 with regard to Officer Roberg's recollection of why he stopped
 Mundon:
 
Q. [Prosecutor] Officer, on September 9th, 2011, what
did you initially stop [Mundon] for?
 
A. [Officer Roberg] I was at Mililani/Merchant Street
enforcing a stop sign violation. I do have to say, however,
I -- the citation that I'm here to talk about is the
 criminal tag. I also would have given him an infraction
tag, which I don't have. And being honest, I don't exactly
remember which infraction I would have given him in that
other tag; and since I don't have it, I apologize, I can't
tell you exactly. If I could assume, which I know doesn't
 
2(...continued)
(2)	 While the person's license or privilege to operate a
vehicle remains suspended or revoked[.]
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
mean a whole lot, it was there for the stop sign violation
that I would have stopped him originally and found that he
didn't have a license; however, I don't have that citation,
ma'am. I just want to go ahead and say that.
 
Q. All right. And, in fact, Officer [Roberg], on that
date, did you write anything down on the citation that you
do have and that's a part of this -- this action today that
would give you a clue as to why you stopped him?
 
A. Of course. And like I said, the -- not only the
location that's -- where we were sent in that normal time -­or on that date and time to address an ongoing OIC where
people were running the stop sign there.
 
Q. Yeah.
 
A. I also indicated on this citation that there was a
 
stop sign, and in the -- I believe in the beginning verbiage
of what I actually wrote on my citation it said at the time
of the stop. So there was an infraction at that time, but I
don't –
 
[Defense Counsel]: Objection.
 
[Officer Roberg]: -- I don't have the citation.
 [Defense Counsel]: Calls for speculation as –
 THE COURT: Thank you. Sustained.
 Q. BY [Prosecutor]: Is there anything that would
refresh your memory more specifically?
 
A. [Officer Roberg] I -- I am aware of the criminal
 
tag. If I had the infraction tag –
 
Q. All right.
 A. -- I -- I'd -- it would –
 Q. May I show you a copy –
 A. -- refresh my memory.
 Q. -- of your -- your criminal tag?
 A. Sure.
 [Prosecutor]: Your Honor, if I could show it to
[Mundon]?

 
THE COURT: The record shall so reflect. You may
approach.
 
[Defense Counsel]: No objection, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: Thank you.

Q. BY [Prosecutor]: Officer Roberg, I'm handing you

this copy –
 
A. Okay.
 Q. -- of your... Take a look at it.
 A. Yes.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q. May I have it back?
 
A. Sure.
 Q. Officer Roberg, did you mark anywhere on this
that -- in parentheses, "stop"?
 
A. Yes.
 Q. Okay. And what does that mean?
 A. That there was a stop sign in the area.
 Q. Okay. Would you have written that on this tag if
it didn't have any bearing on the case?
 
A. No. However, I -- I would -- again, like I say -­
now, I'm trying to be as honest as possible. I know I'm
 
under oath and I want to be fair to everybody. I -- without
 that citation in front of me, I don't remember which block I
would have checked on the infraction.
 
Q. All right.
 
A. I can assume that it is for –
 Q. So we're not –
 A. -- for that.
 Q. -- asking you what's on the other infraction.
 A. Okay. I understand. But I can't tell you that
that's–
 
Q. But right now –
 A. -- what he was stopped for.
 Q. -- we're asking you that you -- that -- if you, in
fact, had that in parentheses, the word "stop."
 
A. Yes, I did.
 Q. Okay. On this infraction?
 A. Yes, ma'am.
 Q.
 Presumably that you referred -- you -- you're
telling us now that it referred to the stop sign?
 
[Defense Counsel]:  Objection. Leading -- or –
 
THE COURT: Thank you.
 [Defense Counsel]: -- speculative.
 THE COURT: Sustained.
 
[Defense Counsel]:  Calls for speculation, as well.

[Prosecutor]: Okay. Your Honor, this is foundational, but
the State would -- okay.
 
THE COURT: I've sustained – Is there a separate

objection?
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[Prosecutor]: We -- I will -- okay.
 
Q. So, Officer [Roberg], what is this citation -- what
are you citing –
 
A. When you –
 Q. -- the defendant for?
 A. In -- procedural-wise you would make a traffic stop
for an infraction or -- or something that you would have
seen, which is the part that I, unfortunately, don't have
today. After the fact, after I get to know whoever's -­whoever's driving, I would make checks via Police Dispatch
or on my computer, and then I –
 
Q. I -- I –
 
A. -- would have learned further if he didn't have a
 
license; and that's where the criminal citation would have
come into play.
 
Q. Okay. I'm sorry. Perhaps I wasn't clear. I was
 
asking you what did you cite Defendant for here.
 
A. I cited him for a revoked license.
 
Q. And how did you ascertain that his license was
re -- how did you ascertain who the defendant was, first of all?
 
A. I asked him verbally.
 Q. And let me ask you -- let me go back to ask you.
Where was the location of the violation?
 
A. Merchant Street, the right-hand turn onto Mililani
Street.
 
Q. And what were you there for?
 A. The stop sign violations.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
During the cross, redirect, and recross examinations,
Officer Roberg reiterated that he could not remember why he
 
stopped Mundon. After Officer Roberg stepped down, defense
 counsel orally moved to suppress Officer Roberg's stop of Mundon
 from the evidence:
 
 
[Defense Counsel]: Your -- Your Honor, at this time I
do want to place on the record that the Defense will be

objecting and moving to suppress the stop as there's no
evidence as to what the stop is, only evidence to what the
officer normally does or probably did or speculates as to
what he did. There's no evidence as to what he – the reason
 for -­
THE COURT: You are stating that is your position at
present?
 
[Defense Counsel]: At present time we -- we will -­
we will need to suppress the stop.

 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: And was this information heretofore
 
available to you had you done due diligence?
 
[Defense Counsel]: No, as -- as far -- I mean,
Counsel wasn't aware that there was a criminal -­
THE COURT: 
Is there -­
[Defense Counsel]: -- citation.
 
THE COURT: -- anything in the police reports to suggest
that?

 
[Defense Counsel]: No. As far as -- no. The only
evidence of the -- of the stop and whatever flowed from it

is the citation that was discussed earlier.
 
THE COURT: Thank you.
 
I'll note your position on record; but I also note that
there was no prior pretrial motion.

 
Without ruling on Mundon's oral motion to suppress,3
 
the district court found Mundon guilty of OVLPSR-OVUII, and filed
 
its Judgment on June 6, 2013. On June 24, 2013, the district
 court filed its "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law," which
 found and concluded, in relevant part:
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
1.	 Honolulu Police Department ("HPD") Officer Adam Roberg
testified that on September 9, 2011, he was monitoring
the intersection at Merchant and Mililani Streets, as
it was a well know-spot [sic] to intercept violators
that regularly disregarded the stop sign at the
intersection.
 
2.	 At approximately 7:40 A.M., Officer Roberg initiated a
traffic stop on [Mundon's] vehicle.
 
3.	 Officer Roberg's citation noted 'Merch past to Mil
South" and further noted "STOP" in the section of the
 citation labeled "sign(s) posted."
 
4.	 At trial Officer Roberg was unable to remember exactly
why he had stopped [Mundon's] vehicle, but testified
that his regular activity was to stop vehicles at that
location for a violation of the stop sign.
 
5.	 [Mundon] could not provide a license at the time of
the stop, stating that he had a temporary license, but
did not have it with him.
 
6.	 Officer Roberg cited [Mundon] for Driving Motor
Vehicle While License Revoked, subsequently, it was
discovered that [Mundon's] license had been revoked by
the ADLRO administratively for Driving Under the
 
3
 The State does not raise the timing of Mundon's motion to suppress
as an issue in this appeal.
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Influence of an Intoxicant from 5/29/2011 through May
28, 2012.
 
. . . .
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
1.	 There was reasonable suspicion for the traffic stop.
Although, the citation was for the offense of Driving
Motor Vehicle While License Revoked, Officer Roberg
testified that he routinely monitored the intersection
at Merchant and Mililani Streets for stop sign
violations and had written "STOP" in [Mundon's]
citation section labeled "sign(s) posted." Officer
 Roberg's testimony constituted specific and
articulable facts which taken together with rational
inferences from those facts, reasonably warranted an
investigatory stop. State v. Barnes, 58 [Haw.] 333,
338, 568 P.2d 1207, 1211 (1977).
 
Mundon filed his notice of appeal on August 5, 2013.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
The appellate court reviews the sufficiency of evidence
 
on appeal as follows:
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
case was before a judge or jury. The test on appeal is not
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai 'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) 
(quoting State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai 'i 128, 145, 938 P.2d 559, 576 
(1997)). 
"'Substantial evidence' as to every material element of
 
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient

 
quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable
 
caution to support a conclusion." Richie, 88 Hawai 'i at 33, 960 
P.2d at 1241 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
III. DISCUSSION
 
In Barnes, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held: 
To justify an investigative stop, short of an arrest
based on probable cause, "the police officer must be able to
point to specific and articulable facts which, taken
together with rational inferences from those facts,
reasonably warrant that intrusion." 
Terry v. Ohio , [392
U.S. 1, 21 (1968)]. The ultimate test in these situations
 must be whether from these facts, measured by an objective
standard, a man of reasonable caution would be warranted in
believing that criminal activity was afoot and that the
action taken was appropriate.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Barnes, 58 Hawai 'i at 338, 568 P.2d at 1211 (quoting State v. 
Joao, 56 Haw. 216, 533 P.2d 270 (1975)). 
Officer Roberg was not "able to point to specific and
 
articulable facts" from which a reasonable person could
 
objectively conclude that the investigative stop of Mundon was
 warranted. Id. The district court abused its discretion in
 
denying Mundon's oral motion to suppress based solely on Officer
 Roberg's testimony "that he routinely monitored the
 intersection . . . for stop sign violations and had written
 'STOP' in [Mundon's] citation section labeled 'sign(s) posted.'"
 
Because the State relied on evidence derived from 
Officer Roberg's unwarranted stop to obtain Mundon's OVLPSR-OVUII conviction, namely the evidence that Mundon assumed "actual physical control of any vehicle" while his license was revoked, Mundon's conviction must be reversed. HRS § 291E-62(a); See also State v. Maldonado, 108 Hawai
'i 436, 445, 121 P.3d 901, 910 
(2005) ("'Assuming an unreasonable search or seizure, any evidence derived therefrom is inadmissible in a criminal prosecution, and a conviction obtained thereby must be reversed.'" (brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Wallace, 80 Hawai
'i 382, 393, 910 P.2d 695, 706 (1996))).
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The "Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
 
Plea/Judgment," entered June 6, 2013 in the District Court of the
 First Circuit is reversed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 29, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Tyler I. Gomes
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Donn Fudo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
8
 