NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1The Honorable Karen S. S. Ahn presided.
2At the time of the alleged offense in this case, HRS § 708-831
stated, in relevant part:
§ 708-831  Theft in the second degree.  (1)  A person
commits the offense of theft in the second degree if the
person commits theft:
. . . .
(b) Of property or services the value of which
exceeds $300;
. . . .
(2)  Theft in the second degree is a class C felony.NO. CAAP-16-0000404
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
GIANG PHAM, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 15-1-0808)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By:  Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Giang Pham (Pham ) appeals from the
April 22, 2016 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence ( Judgment)
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
Court).1  After a jury trial, Pham was convicted of one count of
Theft in the Second Degree under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS )
§ 708-831(1)(b) (2014).2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2I.BACKGROUND
On May 20, 2015, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai #i
(the State) filed a Felony Information charging Pham with one
count of Theft in the Second Degree under HRS § 708-831(1)(b).  
The State alleged that on May 17, 2015, Pham concealed or took
possession of property of DFS Group L.P. doing business as T
Galleria-Waikiki (T Galleria), a retail establishment.
The case proceeded to trial on December 10 and 11,
2015.  The State called William Bridges ( Bridges), Marcus Dunlap
(Dunlap), and Orren Balonso (Balonso ) as witnesses.  Pham called
Que Nguyen ( Nguyen) and Honolulu Police Department ( HPD) Officer
Samuel Menchaca (Officer Menchaca ) as witnesses. 
Bridges testified that he is a Loss Prevention
Supervisor for T Galleria, a retail establishment that carries
high-end luxury goods.  Bridges supervises the investigations
that take place at T Galleria and reviews the reports that are
submitted as part of the investigations.  
Bridges recalled an incident on May 17, 2015, involving
Pham.  On that day, Bridges was on his way home when he received
a call from Balonso.  Balonso briefed Bridges about the incident,
and Bridges told Balonso "to go ahead and start the process." 
Bridges testified that, pursuant to his review, three pairs of
sunglasses - two Prada sunglasses and one Maui Jims sunglasses -
were taken from T Galleria.  Bridges testified that on May 17,
2015, Pham did not have permission from T Galleria to take the
sunglasses without paying for them.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Dunlap testified that he is a Loss Prevention Officer
(LPO) at T Galleria and was working on May 17, 2015.  His duties
were "monitoring the floors, protecting the company from loss." 
Dunlap first encountered Pham outside of the store.  Dunlap
identified Pham because LPO "Orren informed us through the radio. 
He gave us a basic description of the guy."  Dunlap testified
that Pham had a black satchel type of bag and an ABC store bag. 
Dunlap and LPO "RJ or Richmond Rasada" approached Pham, presented
themselves as LPOs, and escorted Pham to the office.  Dunlap
testified that "we recovered three sunglasses" from Pham's bags
and that no receipt or proof of ownership was recovered. 
As part of Dunlap's normal practice, he speaks with
police officers and usually gives a verbal statement as to what
happened.  Dunlap also prepares a written or typed statement that
is already prepared by the time police officers arrive.  
The State next called Balonso to the stand.  Balonso is
also an LPO at T Galleria.  Balonso was on duty on May 17, 2015.  
Balonso's assignment was to "pretty much watch the store," which
entails "like shoplifting, anybody that comes into our store that
causes a problem, respond to it, respond to medical –- any
medical attention, like if our customer gets hurt, we respond."
Balonso testified that at about 5:10 p.m., he "was
roaming the third floor," he observed Pham "approach the first
Prada fixture," and that Pham then "selected the sunglasses,
looked at it and then folded the sunglasses and concealed it into
his black messenger bag."  Balonso further testified:  "Then he
went over to Maui Jims, the Maui Jims sunglasses and did the same
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3The "252" is a form that HPD uses for witnesses to write
statements. 
4thing, select, fold the frame and concealed it into his black
messenger bag."  Balonso testified that he observed Pham go to
another Prada fixture, select Prada sunglasses and conceal the
sunglasses in his ABC bag. 
Balonso testified that on May 17, 2015, there were two
registers and a sales associate behind a register in the sunglass
boutique.  Balonso testified that after Pham concealed the
sunglasses in his bags, Pham entered the elevators.  Balonso
testified that Pham made no attempt to stop by the registers or
talk to any of the sales associates.  Balonso "notified all the
other LPO officers" that Pham "was exiting the third floor using
the elevators going down to the lobby."
Balonso testified that after the merchandise was
recovered, as part of his investigation before police arrived, he
"did my 252,3 took pictures of the floor, and that's pretty much
it and the still photos."  Balonso handed over his reports to the
police.  Balonso testified that he talked to a detective in this
case and his statement to the detective was consistent with what
he wrote in his HPD 252 form. 
On cross-examination, Balonso testified that Officer
Menchaca responded to the scene.  Balonso met with Officer
Menchaca and gave him a verbal statement.  Balonso testified that
he told Officer Menchaca that he saw Pham pass ten registers.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5On redirect examination, Balonso testified that he saw
Pham pass only two registers.  The Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
(DPA) further questioned Balonso as follows:
Q. In your 252 do you recall about what you said about how
many registers he had past? 
A. Yeah. 
Q. You recall what you said? What did you say in your 252? 
A. I said approximately 10, maybe 10 registers.
. . . . 
Q. (By [the DPA]) So you're saying that as you sit there on
the stand you recall that you might have written 10 manned
registers in your 255 [sic]? 
A. Yes. 
. . . .
[The DPA]: Your Honor, let the record reflect that I'm
showing to defense counsel a copy of Mr. Balonso's 252. May
I approach? 
THE COURT: Yes.
(By [the DPA]) Mr. Balonso, this is a copy of your 252. Can
you review it, please, and look specifically for how many
manned registers you wrote in that 255 [sic]. And [w]hen you
are done if you can look up. 
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, I'm going to object. May we
approach? 
THE COURT: Yes. 
[Defense Counsel]: On the record, please. 
(The following proceedings were held at the bench:)
THE COURT: Okay. What's the objection? 
[Defense Counsel]: The objection is that this is improper
impeachment. It's improper recollection. Your Honor, when
the witness was asked what he wrote in his statement he said
10 registers. The State was allowed to ask the question of
so if you don't recall do you recall what was in your
report. The witness gave a clear answer that he believed it
to be ten. Now, I believe the State intends to -- 
THE COURT: I agree with the refreshing has not been --
foundation has not been laid. So let's move on to prior
inconsistent statement. Is there an objection to that? 
[Defense Counsel]: If that's how he's offering. But I think
there's also -- if that's how he's offering, that is not
what he said.  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6THE COURT: Oh, sorry. 
[Defense Counsel]: That's what the report said. 
THE COURT: Sorry. Erase that. 
[The DPA]: Foundation has been laid for prior inconsistent
statement because he's saying on the stand that there was 10
manned registers. But in the 252 -- 
THE COURT: I'm sorry. Okay, so he said what? 
[The DPA]: He said on the stand that he wrote in his 252
that there were 10 manned registers that he saw the
defendant pass. 
[Defense Counsel]: He was impeached on that.
[The DPA]: That's correct. And I'm laying foundation 'cause
he wrote it. He was specific when he wrote it. He signed it
at the bottom. 
THE COURT: What is your objection? 
[Defense Counsel]: My only objection was because he was
allowed to ask questions about recall. So then I thought we
were refreshing. 
THE COURT: I sustained that objection. But you didn't have
prior inconsistent. 
[Defense Counsel]: Prior inconsistent statement, no
objection. 
THE COURT: Okay. It's received. 
(Bench conference concluded.) 
[Defense Counsel]: Actually, Your Honor, I'm sorry, can we
approach again? 
(The following proceedings were held at the bench:)
[Defense Counsel]: So when the -- proper foundation that
it's prior inconsistent statement.  
THE COURT: Are you objecting to foundation? 
[Defense Counsel]: I think he might have laid most of the
foundation because I was paying attention to refreshing
recollection and not impeachment. 
THE COURT: Okay, you're on notice. 
[The DPA]: Yeah, it's for inconsistent statement.  It's
inconsistent. 
[Defense Counsel]: Okay, all right. 
THE COURT: Okay. 
[Defense Counsel]: Thank you. 
THE COURT: Okay. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7(Bench conference concluded.) 
Q. (By [the DPA]) Mr. Balonso, have you had time to review
your 252 that you submitted to Officer Menchaca? 
A. Did I have time?  Hold on. 
Q. Now, what you wrote in there or that he past two manned
registers? 
A. Yes.
. . . .
Q. (By [the DPA]) But you had just testified that in your
252 you wrote that he had past 10 manned registers; right? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Did he pass 10 manned registers? 
A. No. 
Q. How many registers did he pass? 
A. Two.
After Balonso's testimony, the State rested.  The
defense first called Nguyen to the stand.  Nguyen had known Pham
for more than ten years.  Nguyen and Pham are close friends and
Pham sometimes visited Nguyen at Nguyen's work.  Defense moved
into evidence photographs of Pham wearing sunglasses.  Nguyen
testified that he saw Pham wear sunglasses one time when Pham
visited Nguyen's work, but Nguyen did not remember if those were
the exact same sunglasses as the ones in the defense exhibits. 
The defense next called Officer Menchaca to the stand.  
On May 17, 2015, Officer Menchaca was working for HPD in the
Waikiki district and was dispatched to a theft case at T
Galleria.  As part of his training as a police officer, Officer
Menchaca was trained to gather all evidence, including both
exculpatory and inculpatory evidence.
Officer Menchaca conducted an investigation, which
consisted of "speaking with the Loss Prevention Officers, gettingNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
8their written statements as well as verbal statements, and just
finding out what happened."  Regarding the written statements,
Dunlap and Balonso gave Officer Menchaca a 252 Form.  Officer
Menchaca testified that the written statements were prepared
prior to his arrival.  Officer Menchaca reviewed Balonso's
written statement before Officer Menchaca submitted his report.
Officer Menchaca spoke with Balonso and Dunlap. 
Officer Menchaca testified that he wrote in his report what
Balonso told Officer Menchaca in Balonso's verbal statement. 
Officer Menchaca testified that Balonso told Officer Menchaca
that Balonso saw Pham walk past ten manned registers.  Officer
Menchaca testified that Dunlap also told Officer Menchaca that
Dunlap saw Pham walk past ten manned registers. 
 On cross-examination, Officer Menchaca testified that
he signed at the bottom of Balonso's and Dunlap's written
statements to acknowledge that Officer Menchaca received their
written statements.  Officer Menchaca testified that in preparing
his report, he relied on the HPD 252 forms prepared by Balonso
and Dunlap.  Officer Menchaca testified that Balonso verbally
communicated to him that Balonso saw Pham walk past ten
registers.  Officer Menchaca testified that in Balonso's HPD 252
form, Balonso wrote that Pham walked past two registers. 
On redirect examination, Officer Menchaca testified
that his report consists of "where I get sent, what type of case
it was, what happened there also, the statements provided by the
Loss Prevention Officers, also suspect's name, information,
transport, that's usually how the report goes."  Officer MenchacaNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
9testified that his report is based on both written and verbal
statements from witnesses.  Officer Menchaca testified that in
his experience, sometimes the police reports differ from the
written statements obtained from witnesses. 
Officer Menchaca testified that when he reviewed the
written statements as part of the investigation, he was looking
for information such as "item that was selected, concealment,
constant surveillance, existed the –- walk pass the manned
registers, and how far he was stopped outside the store," and
also looking at the specific details of how many registers that a
person passes.  Defense counsel further questioned the officer: 
[Defense Counsel]: Do you, you know, when you see something
in a written witness's statement that differs from your
recollection, how do you document it in your report, do you
change it to match what you've read in a witness's
statement? 
A. From what they tell me. 
Q. Okay.  So even if their written statement might say
something different from what you've heard, you write down
what you heard? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And what you remember?
A. Yes. 
Q. And is that part of your training as a police officer? 
A. Yes. 
Q. That you have to write reports accurately? 
A. Yes. 
[Defense Counsel]: I have nothing further, Officer Menchaca.
Thank you. 
The DPA's recross examination of Officer Menchaca, in
its entirety, was as follows:NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
10BY [DPA]:
Q. Officer Menchaca, you just testified that when there's a
difference in the verbal statements and the written reports,
you document it in your report? 
A. When there's a difference? 
Q. When there's a difference. If there's a discrepancy, you
would have documented it in your report; correct? 
A. Yes. 
[DPA]: May I approach, Your Honor? 
THE COURT: Yes. 
Q. (By [DPA]) Officer Menchaca, I'm showing you your report.
Can you review your report and indicate to me where you
included the discrepancies between the verbal statements and
the written statements that were provided to you from LPO
Balonso and LPO Dunlap? 
A. No, not included. 
Q. So notwithstanding there being a discrepancy, you never
noted that in your report? 
A. Yes. 
[DPA]: No further questions, Your Honor. 
The Circuit Court then excused the witness.  Defense
counsel stated she wanted to further question the witness:
[Defense Counsel]: I'm sorry, Your Honor, I have further
redirect -- 
THE COURT: We're done. 
[Defense Counsel]: -- based on that. 
. . . .
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, I need to place something on
the record.
(Jury excused.)
. . . .
[Defense Counsel]: I had requested to ask additional
redirect questions of Mr. -- Officer Menchaca and the Court
did not permit me to do that.  Had I been able to question
Officer Menchaca, I would have asked him about the fact
underneath each section where he indicates a written
statement, he says refer to the 252, which would have been a
way to explain to the jury that it is documented that there
is another statement, whether it's inconsistent with his
statement or not.  And he does document it in his report,
which was something raised by the State in recross.  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
11And although the Court prevented me from asking those
questions, that's an important fact for the jury.  I'd ask
Officer Menchaca to remain in the event that the Court will
allow me to recall him, otherwise I'm going to be making a
copy of page 5 of his 7-page report and asking that that be
submitted as Defendant's Exhibit A with respect to this
particular objection. 
THE COURT: Your question was whether he tried to consolidate
the two statements? What was your question, how did you
phrase it? 
[DPA]: The question was whether or not he documented the
discrepancies between the verbal statements and the 252s
that were given to him and if he could show that to me in
the report. His response was negative, he couldn't show me
in the report.  
So the State would be arguing that simple references to the
HPD 252 is beyond the scope because the only issue is
discrepancies being notified or documented in the report. 
[Defense Counsel]: First of all, the questions that were
asked to him was whether or not he did document in his --
does he document when there's a discrepancy.  And the way he
documents it is by saying, refer to this thing.  Don't just
rely on my own verbal statement.
 
THE COURT: Well, that's your take on it.  It's a general
statement, please refer to. 
[Defense Counsel]: But I wasn't even allowed to ask that
question. 
THE COURT: All right. 
[Defense Counsel]: So I'm asking the Court to -- 
THE COURT: No. 
[Defense Counsel]: Can I just make my record? 
THE COURT: Yes.
[Defense Counsel]: I know the Court disagrees with me, but
can I make my record? 
THE COURT: Well, we have been going forever in this case.
Questions are being asked over and over and over again,
okay. And then some of them are argumentative.  Now, there's
been no objection on either side.  But, my goodness, we are
just -- I mean, we have taken a lot more time for this
witness or any other witness that we could have -- it could
have been done in such a shorter more consolidated efficient
manner.  
All right, anything more you want to put on the record? 
[Defense Counsel]: The only thing that I want to place on
the record is my request to ask the Court to allow me to
have officer Menchaca called when we reconvene so I can ask
him the sole question of when he documents in his report a
verbal statement, does he also indicate to refer to the HPD
252, which was done in this case.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
12THE COURT: Okay.  But all it is is please refer to and
there's no specifics other than that; is that right? 
[Defense Counsel]: Well, he would probably also say that he
also submits the 252 as part of his report. 
THE COURT: Well, he would probably say that, is that what, I
don't know.  I think its been brought out that he makes 252
part of the record. 
[Defense Counsel]: I don't think he -- 
THE COURT: You never asked him that in all your questions? 
[Defense Counsel]: Well, he raised it on recross, Judge. 
THE COURT: No, this is a subject that we've gone over a
number of times from different directions. 
[Defense Counsel]: He crossed about the 252, whether or not
he reviewed it.  But he didn't -- he didn't cross about
whether or not it was attached to the report.  And that
wasn't relevant for me to ask those questions until he asked
his recross.
THE COURT: My impression is that he said he collects the
252s.  He takes verbal statements and he writes his report,
okay.  If he writes his report, collects 252s and throws the
252s in the rubbish can, does that make a lot of sense? 
What is the reasonable inference?  Unless you want to allow
that kind of argument, that's silly, right? 
[Defense Counsel]: No, I agree with the Court on that. 
THE COURT: Okay. 
[Defense Counsel]: So the Court's overruling my request? 
THE COURT: Yes. I think the jury has more than enough
information to decide this case.  
The defense then rested its case.  The jury returned a
verdict of guilty as charged.  On April 22, 2016, the Circuit
Court entered its Judgment.  Pham was convicted of Theft in the
Second Degree and sentenced to five years of incarceration, to
run consecutively to any other sentences Pham may have been
subject to.  On May 17, 2016, Pham filed his Notice of Appeal. 
II.POINTS OF ERROR
On appeal, Pham raises two points of error, contending
that the Circuit Court plainly erred when it:  (1) allowed
extrinsic evidence of a prior inconsistent statement of Balonso;NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
13and (2) prevented defense counsel from further examination of
Officer Menchaca regarding Balonso's inconsistent statements. 
III.APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
"A trial court's evidentiary rulings pursuant to HRE
Rule[] 613(b) [is] reviewed on appeal pursuant to the de novo or
right/wrong standard."  State v. Holt, 116 Hawai #i 403, 414, 173
P.3d 550, 561 (App. 2007) (citing State v. Ortiz, 91 Hawai# i 181,
189–90, 981 P.2d 1127, 1135–36 (1999)). 
"Matters regarding the examination of witnesses are
within the discretion of the trial court[.]"  The Nature
Conservancy v. Nakila,  4 Haw. App. 584, 596, 671 P.2d 1025, 1034
(1983) (citations omitted).  
Under this standard, we will not disturb the trial court's
exercise of its discretion unless it is clearly abused.  An
abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has clearly
exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment
of a party-litigant.
State v. Jackson, 81 Hawai #i 39, 47, 912 P.2d 71, 79 (1996)
(citations and quotation marks omitted).
IV.DISCUSSION
A.Extrinsic Evidence of Balonso's Prior Inconsistent
Statement under HRE Rule 613(b)
Pham contends that the Circuit Court erred when it
allowed extrinsic evidence of the prior inconsistent statement of
Balonso, in violation of HRE Rule 613(b)(2), because the DPA
never asked Balonso whether he made the prior statement before
introducing it.  The State submits that this alleged error was
not preserved below, and thus should be deemed waived.  The State
alternatively contends, inter alia , that the extrinsic evidence
was never admitted. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
14HRE Rule 613(b) states:  
(b)  Extrinsic evidence of prior inconsistent
statement of witness.  Extrinsic evidence of a prior
inconsistent statement by a witness is not admissible
unless, on direct or cross-examination, (1) the
circumstances of the statement have been brought to the
attention of the witness, and (2) the witness has been asked
whether the witness made the statement.  
"Normally, an issue not preserved at trial is deemed to
be waived."  State v. Miyazaki , 64 Haw. 611, 616, 645 P.2d 1340,
1344 (1982).  "But where plain errors were committed and
substantial rights were affected thereby, the errors 'may be
noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the
[trial] court.'"  State v. Fox , 70 Haw. 46, 55, 760 P.2d 670, 675
(1988) (quoting Hawai #i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 52(b)).
With regard to evidentiary objections, "[w]here
specific grounds are stated in an objection, the implication is
that there are no others or, if there are others, that they are
waived."  State v. Matias , 57 Haw. 96, 101, 550 P.2d 900, 904
(1976) (citation and quotation marks omitted).  "Waiver also
occurs when an overruled trial objection is abandoned and a
different argument for exclusion is presented on appeal."  A.
Addison M. Bowman, Hawaii Rules of Evidence Manual  1-6 (3rd ed.
2006).
At trial, the DPA sought to have Balonso review his HPD
252 form.  Defense counsel objected.  Defense counsel stated that
the objection "is improper impeachment.  It's improper
recollection."  After some discussion, the Circuit Court again
asked defense counsel what the objection was.  Defense counsel
responded, "[m]y only objection was because he was allowed to ask
questions about recall.  So then I thought we were refreshing." NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
15The Circuit Court stated, "I sustained that objection.  But you
didn't have prior inconsistent."  Defense counsel responded,
"[p]rior inconsistent statement, no objection."  At a subsequent
bench conference, the Circuit Court asked defense counsel if she
was objecting to lack of foundation of prior inconsistent
statement.  Defense counsel replied, "I think he might have laid
most of the foundation because I was paying attention to
refreshing recollection and not impeachment."  The DPA clarified,
"[y]eah, it's for inconsistent statement.  It's inconsistent."  
Defense counsel responded, "[o]kay, all right." 
Defense counsel at trial explicitly stated that there
was no objection on the grounds of improper prior inconsistent
statement.  Defense counsel also explicitly waived the contention
made here on appeal - that the DPA did not lay foundation for
prior inconsistent statement.  Though Pham contends the Circuit
Court plainly erred, Pham makes no argument on how this alleged
error affected his substantial rights.  We conclude that Pham
waived this issue.
Even if the issue was not waived, Tham fails to show
that the State violated Rule 613(b).  To lay the foundation for
the admission of extrinsic evidence of a prior inconsistent
statement under Rule 613(b), the State was required to (1) bring
the circumstances of the prior inconsistent statement to the
attention of the witness and (2) ask the witness whether he or
she made the statement.  Here, even though it may not have been
permissible to show Balonso his HPD 252 statement to refresh his
recollection, it was permissible to show Balonso his HPD 252NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
16statement and ask him whether he wrote that Tham had passed two
registers in order to lay a proper foundation pursuant to Rule
613(b).  Because Balonso admitted that he wrote in his HPD 252
statement that Tham had passed two registers, there was no need
to offer any further extrinsic evidence to prove the inconsistent
statement.  Contrary to Tham's contention, the State's actions
were consistent with, and did not violate, Rule 613(b).   
   Thus, we conclude that Tham's contention is without
merit.
B.Defense Counsel's Attempted Further Redirect of Officer
Menchaca Regarding His Report
Pham contends that the Circuit Court erred when it
prevented defense counsel from further redirect examination of
Officer Menchaca because "defense counsel would have elicited
from Officer Menchaca that he does document the discrepancy by
referring to Balonso's 252."  The State contends that defense
counsel's desire to further question Officer Menchaca was
unnecessary in light of the existing testimony and therefore the
Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion. 
HRE Rule 611(a) states:
Rule 611  Mode and order of interogation and
presentation.  (a) Control by court.  The court shall
exercise reasonable control over the mode and order of
interrogating witnesses and presenting evidence so as to (1)
make the interrogation and presentation effective for the
ascertainment of the truth, (2) avoid needless consumption
of time, and (3) protect witnesses from harassment or undue
embarrassment. 
Pursuant to HRE 611(a), "redirect is properly limited
to the development, correction and refutation of matters brought
out for the first time on cross."  Jackson, 81 Hawai# i at 47, 912 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
17P.2d at 79 (quoting A. Bowman, Hawaii Rules of Evidence Manual
250 (1990)) (brackets omitted).
Pham's trial counsel sought to ask Officer Menchaca on
a second redirect examination if Officer Menchaca says in his
report to refer to the HPD 252 form, and defense counsel argued
to the Circuit Court that this question was necessary "to explain
to the jury that it is documented that there is another
statement."  However, as the Circuit Court noted, ample testimony
was already elicited to that effect.  Officer Menchaca was
trained to gather all evidence.  Officer Menchaca testified that
his investigation consisted of getting both the written and
verbal statements of the LPOs.  Officer Menchaca testified that
his report includes the statements provided by the LPOs, and that
his report is based on both the written and verbal statements of
the witnesses. 
Officer Menchaca testified that Balonso gave his HPD
252 form to Officer Menchaca.  Officer Menchaca testified that he
reviewed Balonso's written statement before Officer Menchaca
submitted his report.  Officer Menchaca testified that in
preparing his report, he relied on Balonso's and Dunlap's HPD 252
forms.  Defense counsel questioned Officer Menchaca during
redirect examination regarding the relationship between his
report and the witnesses' written statements:
[Defense Counsel]. So would it be fair to say that your
report contains information from the written statements of
any witnesses and other information? 
A. Yes, it does. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
18Q. And did you deviate from your general practice in
preparing the report in this case? 
A. No.
 Officer Menchaca testified that Balonso wrote in his
HPD 252 form that he saw Pham walk past two manned registers and
that Balonso gave him a verbal statement in which Balonso stated
that he saw Pham walk past ten registers.  Officer Menchaca
testified that in his experience, sometimes the police reports
differ from the witnesses' written statements. 
Moreover, defense counsel had already questioned
Officer Menchaca about writing his report after noticing
discrepancies in a witness's statements:
[Defense Counsel]: Do you, you know, when you see something
in a written witness's statement that differs from your
recollection, how do you document it in your report, do you
change it to match what you've read in a witness's
statement? 
A. From what they tell me. 
Q. Okay. So even if their written statement might say
something different from what you've heard, you write down
what you heard? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And what you remember?
A. Yes. 
Q. And is that part of your training as a police officer? 
A. Yes. 
Q. That you have to write reports accurately? 
A. Yes. 
[Defense Counsel]: I have nothing further, Officer Menchaca.
Thank you. 
At the time the Circuit Court prevented further
questioning, Office Menchaca had already been subject to direct
examination, cross examination, redirect examination, and recross
examination.  The Circuit Court explained why preventing furtherNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
19questioning would avoid needless consumption of time:  "If he
writes his report, collects 252s and throws the 252s in the
rubbish can, does that make a lot of sense? What is the
reasonable inference?  Unless you want to allow that kind of
argument, that's silly, right?"  Defense counsel conceded, "[n]o,
I agree with the Court on that." 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not
abuse its discretion in denying re-cross. 
V.CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court's
April 22, 2016 Judgment.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 30, 2017.
On the briefs:
Brandon K. Flores,
for Defendant-Appellant.Chief Judge
Donn Fudo,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge