FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
O
F THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
---o0o---
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
E
PHRIM RICHARD FORBES, Defendant-Appellant
NO. CAAP-19-0000585  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CRIMINAL NO. 1CPC-18-0000836) 
N
OVEMBER 20, 2020 
LEONARD, PRESIDING JUDGE, AND WADSWORTH, J., WITH
HIRAOKA, J., CONCURRING AND DISSENTING IN PART 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J. 
In State v. Sheffield, 146 Hawai# i 49, 60, 456 P.3d 
122, 133 (2020), the 
Hawai# i Supreme Court held that a circuit 
court plainly erred when it failed to instruct a jury that the 
restraint necessary to support a conviction for Kidnapping under 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-720(1)(d) (2014) must be 
restraint that is more than incidental to an accompanying crime. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The supreme court did not address the restraint necessary to 
support a conviction for Kidnapping based on other subsections of the Kidnapping statute. Here, we address the restraint necessary to support a Kidnapping conviction under HRS § 707-720(1)(e) (2014), and based on the supreme court's rationale, we hold that the restraint necessary to support a conviction for Kidnapping under HRS § 707-720(1)(e) must be restraint that is more than any restraint incidental to the intended terroristic threatening of the complaining witness. Accordingly, and based on the record in this case, we further hold that the trial court plainly erred in failing to give such an instruction, and that this error was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Defendant-Appellant Ephrim Richard Forbes (Forbes) 
appeals from the August 8, 2019 Judgment of Conviction and 
Sentence (Judgment), which was entered by the Circuit Court of 
the First Circuit (Circuit Court).  Forbes challenges his 
conviction for Kidnapping, in violation of HRS § 707-720(1)(e).
1
 
I. BACKGROUND 
An O# ahu grand jury indicted Forbes for: (1) 
Kidnapping under HRS § 707-720(1)(e);  (2) Robbery in the First 2
1 The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided. 
2 HRS § 707-720 provides, in relevant part: 
§ 707-720 Kidnapping.  (1) A person commits the
offense of kidnapping if the person intentionally or
knowingly restrains another person with intent to:
. . . . 
(e) Terrorize that person[.] 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Degree under HRS § 708-840(1)(b)(i) (2014) (Robbery);  and 
(3) Unauthorized Control of Propelled Vehicle (UCPV) under HRS 
§ 708-836 (2014).  After a jury trial, Forbes was convicted of 
Kidnapping and UCPV. Count 2 (Robbery) was dismissed. 43
Forbes's conviction was based, in part, on the 
following evidence. The complaining witness (CW
) was a taxi 
driver who testified at trial through a Japanese interpreter. CW 
testified that, on May 17, 2018, he was dispatched to the Hampton Inn near Kapolei. He was told that his fare wanted to go to the airport. Forbes was sitting on the sidewalk when CW arrived at the Hampton Inn. CW testified that when Forbes got into his van, "It was kind of smelly so I didn't feel -- I didn't have kind of a good feeling." CW also "didn't like" the fact that Forbes was sitting on the ground. 
3 HRS § 708-840 provides, in relevant part: 
§ 708-840 Robbery in the first degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of robbery in the first degree if, in
the course of committing theft or non-consensual taking of amotor vehicle: 
. . . . 
(b) The person is armed with a dangerous instrumentor a simulated firearm and: 
(i) The person uses force against the person
of anyone present with intent to overcomethat person's physical resistance orphysical power of resistance[.] 
4 HRS § 708-836 provides, in relevant part: 
§ 708-836 Unauthorized control of propelled vehicle.  
(1) A person commits the offense of unauthorized control ofa propelled vehicle if the person intentionally or knowinglyexerts unauthorized control over another's propelled vehicleby operating the vehicle without the owner's consent. 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State moved into evidence a video recording of the 
interior of CW's van taken by a camera mounted on the windshield. 
The video showed CW and Forbes inside the van. 
The video was 
played for the jury, accompanied by the following audio: 
Speaker 1: Hello? Are you (indiscernible)? 
Speaker 2: (Indiscernible). Speaker 1: 
No. Richard? 
Speaker 2: (Indiscernible). Speaker 1: 
Richard. You go to airport? 
Speaker 2: (Inaudible). Speaker 1: Okay. Which airline? Hm? Speaker 2: (Inaudible). Speaker 1: Hawaiian. Okay. Speaker 2: (Indiscernible.) Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: (Indiscernible). Hello? Hello? 
(Indiscernible) to the airport. (Indiscernible). 
Speaker 1: I can go to airport now so --Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: 
I can go to airport. No? 
Speaker 2: (Indiscernible) still get a free ride
(indiscernible). 
Speaker 1: No, no, no. I don't want to take to -- I 
don't want to take to, you know. 
Speaker 2: 
(Indiscernible), okay? 
Speaker 1: (Indiscernible) one? So where are you
like to go? 
Speaker 2: (Indiscernible) keep going. Speaker 1: Kapolei? Speaker 2: 
Yeah. Yeah. 
Speaker 1: Ko Olina, right? 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  
  Speaker 2: (Indiscernible). 
Speaker 1: Which one? Speaker 2: 
Campbell. 
Speaker 1: Campbell. Speaker 2: 
(Indiscernible) go to the very end. 
Speaker 1: No. I don't think so. Speaker 2: (Indiscernible). Speaker 1: (Indiscernible) yeah? Speaker 2: (laughing) No, further. (Indiscernible). Speaker 1: (Indiscernible) here? Speaker 2: No. Turn by (indiscernible). Speaker 1: Here? Speaker 2: (Indiscernible). Speaker 1: Yeah, not here maybe. Speaker 2: Hit it, hit it. Keep going. Keep going,
going (indiscernible). 
Speaker 1: No, no. It's not (indiscernible). 
Speaker 2: 
It's okay (indiscernible) turn around. Go 
back to the bridge. The beach park is right there.   
Speaker 1: No. Please. Please. Speaker 2: Turn around. Hey. Turn around. 
Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Turn around. 
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Turn the fuck around. 
 Now. 
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. 
Speaker 2: Put your hands up. 
Speaker 1: Okay. 
Speaker 2: Put your other hand up. 
Speaker 1: Yeah. I'm sorry. 
Speaker 2: Keep going.  
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  
  
  Speaker 1: Okay. 
Speaker 2: Keep going straight. Speaker 1: Take it. Take it money [sic]. (Video stopped.) 
(Emphasis added). 
CW testified that, as he began driving toward the 
airport, Forbes said he was going to Hawaiian Air. After about 
15 minutes, Forbes told CW to drive to Hale# iwa (located on the 
other side of the island of 
O#ahu).  CW declined to drive to 
Hale# iwa because he did not like to go that far; it was a "less 
popular place, kind of remote area." Forbes asked where CW wanted to go. CW responded, "Ko Olina." Forbes told CW to drive to Ko Olina (which is near Kapolei, where Forbes had been picked up). CW turned around and began driving toward Ko Olina. After ten to fifteen minutes, Forbes asked CW to take him to Campbell Industrial Park. Forbes began talking to his phone. At the end of the video, Forbes pulled the camera off the van's windshield. CW was then asked: 
Q. What was going through your mind at that time? 
A. I was scared. 
Q. What were you scared of? 
A. Before that he showed his gun and then ordered
me to drive on, that's why. 
Q. In your mind what did you think could happen? 
A. I felt I may be shot. 
. . . . 
Q. Now let's talk about what happened after the
defendant took the camera off. 
How much longer did you
drive with the defendant in your car? 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  A. When he showed me the gun and also broke the
camera, video camera, it's about three to five minutes that 
I drove, continued driving. 
. . . . 
Q. Okay. 
Tell the jury exactly what happened
after he took the camera off. 
A. Anyway I was ordered to continue driving. Then 
-- so I -- I tried to run away so I opened the door and then
one step outside the -- the van, however, he pulled me backinto the car. So first time I was -- I was holding my bagcash in [sic] , so tried to get out with my cash bag. Then I 
got pulled back so second time I gave up the cash bag,dropped it. Then I run away. 
Q. Okay. Did -- did you ever see the defendant
with a gun? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Describe to the jury exactly what you saw with
regard to the gun. 
A. First of all, after showing -- showing the gun
to me, he sat down deep in his seat and then just kind ofholding the gun towards me. Then when I tried to run awayfrom the car he used his gun and then the grip side, holdingside, and hit my neck side, neck, and then -- so that's --that's why I kind of -- I gave up running away at the time . 
Then right after that I drop my cash bag. Then I try
to run away again . 
Q. Okay. Describe to the jury the way the
defendant was holding onto your cash bag. 
A. When I -- first time I was trying to run away,
he was just holding onto me.  He wasn't holding to that bag
or cash bag. 
Q. And then what made you think that he was trying
to get your cash bag? 
A. Is that the time when he aim at me with his gun
how I felt, I mean, about the money bag? 
Q. Okay. Describe to the jury how the defendant
was holding you and pulling you into the car. 
A. He grabbed me at underarm here with my shirt
and he pulled me back into the car. 
Q. And where was your cash bag at that time? 
A. I was holding the bag on [sic] my right hand. 
Q. Okay. 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A. At the time. 
Q. So you're holding your cash bag with your right
hand. Which side is the defendant pulling you on? 
A. I was trying to get out of the driving side,
get out, and so he pulled me back from the right-hand side,
underarm side, and then pull me back into the car . 
Q. Okay. But after you -- how was it that your
cash bag came off of your body? 
A. I think I let it go, fall onto the floor. 
Q. And at that point were you able to get out of
your van? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Because at that point the defendant released
his grip on you? 
A. I think it was like that. 
(Emphasis added). 
CW testified that he then asked for help from the 
driver of a vehicle behind his van. 
He got into the passenger 
side of the car and watched his van being driven away. He had 
left his money bag on the floor of the van. 
About ten minutes later, with the police, CW saw his 
van and Forbes at Barbers Point Beach Park, where he identified Forbes to the police. Photographs of the injuries CW sustained when Forbes pulled at him, and when Forbes hit him with the "gun," were admitted into evidence without objection. They depict a scratch and an area of bruising on CW's right arm, as well as a small mark above CW's right temple and what appears to be bruising on his left ear. Photographs of CW's van, personal possessions, cash bag, and cash were also admitted into evidence without objection. 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  
  
  
 On cross-examination CW testified: 
Q. But do you recall how -- you never told this
officer that you were restrained by Mr. Forbes? 
A. I -- I recall that I told the police -- police
officer that I had to drive under the sort of duress of the 
-- under the -- the defendant's holding a gun against me. 
Q. Okay. That you had to drive while the
defendant was holding the gun, is that what you just said? 
A. That's right. 
Q. Because haven't you repeatedly said that
there's only something that you thought was a gun that wasbrought out after you stopped the taxi in the middle of theroad? 
A. I recall after being kind of shown the -- the
-- the pistol or gun that I think still I drove about fiveminutes or so afterwards. 
Q. Okay. Do you remember testifying in this very
courtroom . . . that Mr. Forbes never asked you for anymoney throughout the entire incident? 
A. That's correct. 
Q. I see. And you told Mr. Forbes that you didn't
want to take him any further? 
A. That's correct. 
Q. And it was only after you told him you didn't
want to take him any further that he brought out what you
thought was a gun? 
A. Yes. 
. . . . 
Q. Do you recall that you told the detective once
again that your arm wasn't grabbed but that he -- he had a
hold of your clothing? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Okay. 
And then he released you and you ran
from the van? 
A. The -- first I was tried to run away and he
grabbed me back into the car so I gave up and drove about
five minutes or so . Then second time I tried to run away
but then at that time I dropped my cash bag so maybe that --that's how I could run away . 
. . . . 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  
  
  Q. But you dropped the cash bag in your van? 
A. So after dropping, just before -- just before I
run away I dropped the bag . 
Q. And -- okay. And then that's when you got out
of the -- you were able to get out of the van? 
A. That's right. 
Q. Do you recall testifying in front of the Grand
Jury? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And . . . [d]o you recall telling the Grand
Jury that you thought that the gun was fake because it was
so tiny? 
A. Yes. 
(Emphasis added). 
On re-direct examination, CW testified: 
Q. How -- I want to be very clear about what
happened after the defendant pulled the camera from yourcar. 
A. After that the camera was removed I tried to 
run away by opening my side of door, but he grabbed me back
into the car so then I started to drive for while. And then there was again sort of a struggle between us and that's thetime I could run away , so that's how it developed. 
Q. And how many minutes later were you able to
finally run away? 
A. I think it was about five minutes . 
Q. Okay. And that's only after you released your
cash bag? 
A. That's right . 
(Emphasis added). 
The State called several other witnesses, including the 
Hampton Inn employee who had called the taxi for Forbes, the 
police officers who investigated the case, and a witness who saw Forbes drive CW's van into Barbers Point Beach Park, park the van, search the van's interior, remove three bags, and walk 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
toward a canal. 
The State rested. Forbes moved for judgment of 
acquittal, which was denied. 
Forbes then testified in his own defense. Forbes 
stated that, on May 17, 2018, he was going to meet his boss, 
whose name was Bobby, at the airport about a job at the nearby Navy housing. He did not have a car, so he called for a taxi. The driver was "fidgety." Forbes, who is Black, thought he was being profiled. It made him feel "[u]ncomfortable." 
As they were headed to the airport, he received a call 
from Bobby about a pickup in Hale# iwa. He told CW he needed to 
go to 
Hale# iwa. CW refused. Forbes called Bobby and told him 
the cab driver was not going to take him to Hale# iwa. Forbes 
told CW to drive "down to the beach park by Campbell Industrial, 'cause I know [Bobby] likes to go over there and get breakfast sometimes." Forbes said he then fell asleep in the van. 
As the van approached Barbers Point Beach Park, Forbes 
told CW go to the end of the road and make a turn to get to the park. CW turned down the wrong street and got really nervous. Forbes testified: 
Q. So he went down -- he took a wrong turn? 
A. He took a wrong turn and that woke me up 'cause
I felt he took the wrong turn and I told him to go down one
street down further and he did that. And so when we got onOhai (sic) Street he proceeded immediately getting close tothe entrance of the park, I could see it from here to thedoor. Then he turned around. 
Q. Okay. 
A. And then when he turned around, made to look
back and got nervous, and I don't know what the hell he wasgoing to do so I got upset. 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q. You were upset? 
A. I was upset. 
Q. Okay. Then what happened? 
A. Then things got out of hand. 
Forbes testified that CW stopped the van in the middle 
of the roadway "two businesses down from the beach park." Forbes 
grabbed CW's shirt because he wanted CW to drop him off at the beach park. Forbes testified: 
Q. Okay. Did you grab his shirt? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. Why did you grab his shirt? 
A. 'Cause I wanted him to drop me off. 
Q. To complete the ride? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. Did you let go of his shirt? 
A. I did. 
Q. Why did you let go of his shirt? 
A. 'Cause it was -- I didn't want to put up a
fight with him. It was retarded. It was just retarded. 
Q. Then what happened? 
A. Then I told him -- then I pulled out my -- my
cigarette lighter that I had, I scared him just because he
scared me, to see if he's going to turn around and drop me
off. 
. . . . 
Q. Could you describe that for the ladies and
gentlemen of the jury. 
A. Cigarette lighter is -- is -- was my cigarette
lighter for -- looks like a handgun  because they do make
those like so, and that's what I used to scare him . 
. . . . 
Q. What happened after you let him go and he -
-
you released his shirt? 
A. I released his shirt. 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  Q. Then what --
A. I got out the cab. And since I wasn't that far 
I got in the front seat and I drove myself to my
destination. 
. . . . 
Q. Where did you -- where did you park the van in
the --
A. In the beach park. 
Q. In the beach park --
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. -- parking lot? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. What did you do after that? 
A. Checked the van, see if anything was in there,
and his bag was in there. 
I grabbed it. I never realized 
he had money in his bag until I opened it and I was, like,wow, this guy had a lot of money on him. 
Q. Yeah. 
A. I know I did wrong . I know he's going to call
the police. So I went over there in that vacant lot and I waited. 
(Emphasis added). 
On cross-examination, Forbes testified: 
Q. What -- when you pulled your gun lighter on
[CW], what effect did you think that would have on him? 
A. To drop me off at my destination. 
Q. And why do you think he would drop you off
after you pointed a gun lighter at him? 
A. I don't know. Maybe scare him, scare him at
the most.  I mean, that's the only thing I want to do is get
dropped off. 
Q. And at that moment the best idea you had was to
pull a gun lighter? 
A. I didn't know. Overreacted. 
Q. And you are aware that the gun lighter looks
exactly like a gun? 
A. It does, yes. 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  
  
  Q. Tell the jury, describe the -- to the jury the
way you were hitting [CW] when you were holding the gun in
your hand. 
A. If I would have pistol whipped [CW] as they say
there would have been some real serious marks on him. But there was scratches. 
Q. So --
A. I grabbed him and that was it. 
Q. So describe the way you softly hit him with the
grip of the fake gun . 
A. No. I was trying to grab him. 
Q. And describe to the jury how you were trying to
grab [CW]. 
A. I'm trying to grab him by his shirt. 
. . . . 
Q. I want to be clear. 
There was a series of 
questions that -- on direct examination you talked aboutsome kind of distance from, you said from where you are tothe door, and then you described turning around. At what --what were you talking about? You said -- is that where youpulled the gun on [CW] is just outside the business, orexcuse me, the beach park? 
A. Yes. 
Q. So your testimony -- what we just saw on the
video when you take -- well, you saw yourself take thecamera? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Is that the only time you had pulled the gun on
[CW]? 
A. Correct. 
Q. And that -- you pulled the gun on [CW] just  --
A. Just to force him to drop me off. 
. . . . 
Q. Okay. 
So you pulled the gun on [CW] because
you want to get to the beach park? 
A. Correct. 
. . . . 
Q. Okay. 
And then [CW] jumps out? 
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 A. He turns around. 
Q. Okay. So he totally turns around and leaves? 
. . . . 
THE WITNESS: Yes, ma'am. 
BY [the deputy prosecuting attorney]: Q. And how far does he drive before he jumps out? 
A. He turns around. As soon as he turns around,
turns the car around, maybe 20 feet he stopped. 
Q. Okay. 
And he jumps out? 
A. He starts -- he jumped out, yes. 
Q. Then you get in the car or you get into the
driver seat? 
A. When he tried to jump out, I tried to pull him
back in so he could continue my drive. That's when 
everything got out of hand . 
Q. Okay. At some point [CW] jumps out of the
car? 
A. Right. 
Q. You jump into the driver's seat? 
A. Yup. 
Q. And you drive his car to the beach park? 
A. Yes, I did. 
(Emphasis added). 
The defense called no other witnesses. 
By the agreement of the parties, with respect to the 
Kidnapping charge, the Circuit Court instructed the jury: 
In Count 1 of the Indictment, the Defendant, EPHRIM
FORBES, is charged with the offense of Kidnapping. 
A person commits the offense of Kidnapping if he
intentionally or knowingly restrains a person with intent to
terrorize that person. 
There are three material elements of the offense of 
Kidnapping, each of which the prosecution must prove beyonda reasonable doubt. 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
These three elements are: 
1. That, on or about May 17, 2018 in the City and
County of Honolulu, the Defendant restrained [CW]; and 
2. That the Defendant did so intentionally or
knowingly; and 
3. That the Defendant did so with the intent to 
terrorize [CW]. 
. . . . 
"Restrain" means to restrict a person's movement in
such a manner as to interfere substantially with the
person's liberty by means of force, threat, or deception. 
(Format altered). 
The jury found Forbes guilty as charged of Kidnapping 
and UCPV, as well as of Theft in the Fourth Degree as a lesser 
included offense of Robbery. However, the jury answered "No" to the special interrogatory: "Did the prosecution prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the Defendant did not commit Count 1 [Kidnapping or any of its included offenses] and Count 2 [Robbery or any of its included offenses] as part of a continuing and uninterrupted course of conduct?" Accordingly, the Circuit Court dismissed Count 2 under HRS § 701-109(1) (2014) (merger of offenses).
5 
5 See HRS § 701-109, which provides, in relevant part: 
§ 701-109 Method of prosecution when conduct
establishes an element of more than one offense.  (1) When
the same conduct of a defendant may establish an element of
more than one offense, the defendant may be prosecuted foreach offense of which such conduct is an element. The defendant may not, however, be convicted of more than oneoffense if: 
. . . . 
(continued...) 
16 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5 In addition, the jury answered "Yes" to the special 
interrogatory: 
"Has the prosecution proven beyond a reasonable 
doubt that the Defendant did not release [CW] voluntarily?" 
Accordingly, pursuant to HRS § 707-720, the circuit court sentenced Forbes to a 20-year term of imprisonment for Kidnapping as a class A felony,
6 as well as a 5-year term for UCPV, to be 
served concurrently. 
This appeal followed. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Forbes asserts two points of error on appeal, 
contending that: (1) the Circuit Court plainly erred in failing to instruct the jury that the restraint necessary to support a Kidnapping conviction must be in excess of any restraint that is incidental to Forbes's intent to terrorize CW; and (2) 
(...continued)
(e) The offense is defined as a continuing course of
conduct and the defendant's course of conduct was uninterrupted, unless the law provides thatspecific periods of conduct constitute separateoffenses. 
6 HRS § 707-720 includes: 
§ 707-720 Kidnapping.  . . . 
(2) Except as provided in subsection (3), kidnapping
is a class A felony. 
(3) In a prosecution for kidnapping, it is a defense
which reduces the offense to a class B felony that thedefendant voluntarily released the victim, alive and notsuffering from serious or substantial bodily injury, in asafe place prior to trial. 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
insufficient evidence was adduced at trial to support the 
conclusion that Forbes did not voluntarily release CW. III. 
APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
"As a general rule, jury instructions to which no 
objection has been made at trial will be reviewed only for plain error. An error will be deemed plain error if the substantial rights of the defendant have been affected adversely." Sheffield, 146 Hawai# i at 53, 456 P.3d at 126 (citation omitted). 
[A]lthough as a general matter forfeited assignments of
error are to be reviewed under Hawai #i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 52(b) plain error standard of review,in the case of erroneous jury instructions, that standard ofreview is effectively merged with the HRPP Rule 52(a)harmless error standard of review because it is the duty ofthe trial court to properly instruct the jury. 
As a result,
once instructional error is demonstrated, we will vacate,without regard to whether timely objection was made, ifthere is a reasonable possibility that the error contributedto the defendant's conviction, i.e.
, that the erroneous jury
instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
State v. Malave, 146 Hawai# i 341, 348, 463 P.3d 998, 1005 (2020)
(citation omitted; format altered).  
With respect to the sufficiency of the evidence, it is 
well-established that: 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution whenthe appellate court passes on the legal sufficiency of suchevidence to support a conviction; the same standard applieswhether the case was before a judge or a jury. The test on appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond areasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidenceto support the conclusion of the trier of fact. Indeed,even if it could be said in a bench trial that the conviction is against the weight of the evidence, as long asthere is substantial evidence to support the requisitefindings for conviction, the trial court will be affirmed. 
Substantial evidence as to every material element of
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of 
18 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of
reasonable caution to support a conclusion. And as trier offact, the trial judge is free to make all reasonable andrational inferences under the facts in evidence, includingcircumstantial evidence. 
Sheffield, 146 Hawai# i at 53, 456 P.3d at 126 (citation omitted;
format altered).  
IV. DISCUSSION 
A. The Kidnapping Instruction A person can be convicted under Hawaii's Kidnapping 
statute if that person intentionally or knowingly restrains another person with the intent to do one of seven specified acts. HRS § 707-720, in its entirety, provides: 
§ 707-720 Kidnapping.  (1) A person commits the
offense of kidnapping if the person intentionally or
knowingly restrains another person with intent to: 
(a) Hold that person for ransom or reward; 
(b) Use that person as a shield or hostage; (c) Facilitate the commission of a felony or flight
thereafter; 
(d) Inflict bodily injury upon that person or
subject that person to a sexual offense; 
(e) Terrorize that person or a third person; 
(f) Interfere with the performance of any
governmental or political function; or 
(g) Unlawfully obtain the labor or services of that
person, regardless of whether related to thecollection of a debt. 
(2) Except as provided in subsection (3), kidnapping
is a class A felony. 
(3) In a prosecution for kidnapping, it is a defense
which reduces the offense to a class B felony that thedefendant voluntarily released the victim, alive and notsuffering from serious or substantial bodily injury, in asafe place prior to trial. 
19 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, Forbes was prosecuted for Kidnapping under HRS 
§ 707-720(1)(e), which proscribes intentionally or knowingly 
restraining another person with the intent to terrorize that person. 
Citing 
Sheffield, which decided an appeal from a 
conviction for violating a different subpart of HRS § 707-720(1), Forbes argues that the Circuit Court should have instructed the jury that the restraint necessary to support a Kidnapping conviction based on the intent to terrorize another person must exceed any restraint that is incidental to the defendant's intent to terrorize the other person. Forbes did not request an instruction of this type at trial. Therefore, we review the Circuit Court's jury instructions for plain error. 
In Sheffield, the defendant was convicted of Kidnapping 
under HRS § 707-720(1)(d), which proscribes intentionally or knowingly restraining another person with the intent to inflict bodily injury upon that person or subject that person to a sexual offense. 146 Hawai# i at 51, 456 P.3d at 124. The complaining 
witness in Sheffield testified that she was walking alone at night and that Sheffield followed her. She heard Sheffield say, 
inter alia, "I want to fuck you." Id. at 52, 456 P.3d at 125. 
Sheffield also said he "was going to knock [her] out and put his 
hands up near his face before taking a swing at [her]. [The 
20 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
complaining witness] stated Sheffield missed her face because he 
was not a skilled fighter." Id. As the complaining witness 
turned to run away, Sheffield grabbed a loop on her backpack and pulled her towards some bushes, repeating "more of the fucking kind of stuff" and that "he was going to beat [her] up." Id.
The complaining witness spun around, causing Sheffield to lose his grip on her backpack. She spun around again, and escaped. Id. 
Sheffield was charged with Kidnapping under HRS § 707-
720(1)(d). Sheffield was also charged with Assault in the Third Degree under HRS § 707-712(1)(a) (2014),
7 but that charge was 
dismissed before trial. Sheffield, 146 Hawai# i at 53, 456 P.3d 
at 126. 
The jury found Sheffield guilty of Kidnapping, and 
Sheffield appealed. On appeal, Sheffield argued that, "when kidnapping is the only count tried, the State must prove the defendant used a greater degree of 'restraint' than that incidentally used to commit the underlying unprosecuted assault in the third degree offense[,]" and that the jury should have 
7 HRS § 707-712(1)(a) provides in relevant part: "A person commits
the offense of assault in the third degree if the person . . .
[i]ntentionally, knowingly, or recklessly causes bodily injury to anotherperson[.]" 
21 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
been so instructed. Id. at 51, 456 P.3d at 124.  The supreme 
court held that: 8
[T]he "restraint" required to support a kidnapping
conviction under HRS § 707-720(1)(d) is indeed restraint inexcess of any restraint incidental to the infliction orintended infliction of bodily injury or subjection orintended subjection of a person to a sexual offense;therefore, the circuit court plainly erred in failing to soinstruct the jury.
Id. 
In large part, the supreme court based its holding in 
Sheffield on the language, history, and structure of section 
212.1 of the Model Penal Code (MPC) (Kidnapping), as well as 
Hawaii's Kidnapping and Related Offenses statutes, HRS §§ 707-720 
to 707-722 (2014). The supreme court analyzed and acknowledged that Kidnapping under the MPC requires "substantial removal or confinement," while the Hawai# i Penal Code requires "only the act 
of 'restraint', defined to mean 'to restrict a person's movement in such a manner as to interfere substantially with the person's liberty' by various means or circumstances[.]" Sheffield, 146 Hawai
#i at 56-57, 456 P.3d at 129-30. The supreme court noted: 
There was no evidence at [Sheffield's] trial regarding
actual bodily injury or a sexual offense [as opposed to the
complaining witness's testimony that Sheffield said hewanted to have sex with her and beat her up]. Where the defendant does not complete the underlying offense (whether 
8 Sheffield cited, inter alia , three Hawai #i cases for the 
proposition that "a defendant can be convicted of kidnapping and anothercrime, where the restraint necessary to support the kidnapping conviction wasin excess of any restraint necessary to support a conviction for acontemporaneously committed crime[.]" Sheffield, 146 Hawai #i at 54, 456 P.3d
at 128, citing State v. Hernandez, 61 Haw. 475, 605 P.2d 75 (1980) (percuriam); State v. Halemanu, 3 Haw. App. 300, 650 P.2d 587 (1982); and State
v. Yamamoto, 98 Hawai #i 208, 46 P.3d 1092 (App. 2002). 
22 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
it be assault or sexual assault or some other offense),
however, the MPC Commentators characterized prosecutionsolely for kidnapping as "abusive": "Where the underlyingcrime is not completed, prosecution for kidnapping insteadof attempt may amount to an end run around the specialdoctrinal protections designed for uncompleted crimes."Commentary to § 212.1 at 221. Hawai #i law, however, allows
prosecution for kidnapping without a completed offense. 
Id. at 58 n.11, 456 P.3d at 131 n.11. The supreme court was 
concerned about "abusive" prosecutorial tactics — trying Sheffield for Kidnapping rather than an unprosecuted or uncompleted (attempted)  offense. Id. at 54-55, 456 P.3d at 126-
27. The significance is often substantial. Kidnapping is a class A felony, unless "the defendant voluntarily released the victim, alive and not suffering from serious or substantial bodily injury, in a safe place prior to trial[,]" in which case it is a class B felony. See HRS § 707-720(2) and (3). The sentence for a class A felony is twenty years, whereas the sentence for a class B felony is ten years. See HRS §§ 706-659, 706-660 (2014). As an unprosecuted charge in Sheffield, Assault in the Third Degree is a misdemeanor, unless committed in a fight or scuffle entered into by mutual consent, in which case it is a petty misdemeanor. See HRS § 707-712(2). The sentence for a misdemeanor is one year; the sentence for a petty misdemeanor is thirty days. See HRS § 706-663 (2014). 9
9 "An attempt to commit a crime is an offense of the same class and
grade as the most serious offense which is attempted." HRS § 705-502 (2014). 
23 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Sheffield, there was evidence that the defendant 
told the complaining witness he wanted to have sex with her and 
beat her up, but there was no evidence that the defendant subjected the complaining witness to a sexual offense or actually injured her. 
The Sheffield court recited "a majority rule among 
the states:" 
[K]idnapping statutes do not apply to unlawful confinements
or movements [i.e., restraint] "incidental" to thecommission of other felonies. 
. . . . 
In these other jurisdictions, three formulations of themajority rule have emerged for determining whether arestraint or movement is "incidental" to another crime. 
In 
summary, the three tests for incidental movement orrestraint are 
(1) whether the confinement, movement, or detentionwas merely incidental to the accompanying crime orwhether it was significant enough, in and of itself,to warrant independent prosecution. 
(2) whether the detention or movement substantially
increased the risk of harm over and above that necessarily present in the accompanying crime. 
(3) when the restraint or movement was done to
facilitate the commission of another crime, therestraint or movement must not be slight, inconse-quential, and merely incidental to the other crime, orbe the kind of restraint or movement inherent in the nature of the other crime. Under this test, therestraint or movement must have some significanceindependent of the other crime, in that it makes theother crime substantially easier to commit orsubstantially lessens the risk of detection. 
Id. at 58-59, 456 P.3d at 131-32 (citations omitted; format 
altered). The supreme court adopted the majority rule and held that "the 'restraint' required to support a kidnapping conviction under HRS § 707-720(1)(d) is indeed restraint in excess of any 
24 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
restraint incidental to the infliction or intended infliction of 
bodily injury or subjection or intended subjection of a person to a sexual offense[.]" Id.
 at 59, 456 P.3d at 132. 
The supreme court stated that its holding in Sheffield 
was limited to prosecutions for Kidnapping under HRS § 707-720(1)(d), and did not address the restraint necessary to support a conviction for 'kidnapping' based on the other subsections of 707-720(1), including the one at issue in this case, HRS § 707-720(1)(e). Id. at 59 n.13, 456 P.3d at 132 n.13. The supreme 
court nevertheless observed: "The Commentary to HRS § 707-720 to -722 notes that 'restraint' is the conduct applicable to kidnapping (HRS § 707-720)[.]" Id. at 56, 456 P.3d at 129. HRS 
§ 707-700 (2014) defines "restrain" as: 
to restrict a person's movement in such a manner as to
interfere substantially with the person’s liberty: (1) Bymeans of force, threat, or deception; or (2) If the personis under the age of eighteen or incompetent, without theconsent of the relative, person, or institution havinglawful custody of the person. 
The supreme court then stated: 
Based on the evidence in this case, the circuit court
instructed the jury that "[r]estrain means to restrict aperson's movement in such a manner as to interferesubstantially with her liberty by means of force." Althoughthe circuit court gave this instruction, no instruction wasgiven regarding whether or not the substantial interferencenecessary for a kidnapping conviction was required to be inexcess of the substantial interference with liberty thatwould be incidental to the infliction or intended infliction of bodily injury or the subjection or intended subjection ofa person to a sexual offense. 
Id. at 55–56, 456 P.3d at 128–29 (emphasis added). Thus, 
Sheffield is supportive of the proposition that a Kidnapping 
25 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . conviction requires a finding that the amount of "restraint" 
employed by the defendant upon the complaining witness was "in excess of the substantial interference with liberty that would be incidental to the infliction or intended infliction of" any of the offenses described by the other subsections of 707-720(1). 
In this case, Forbes was prosecuted for intentionally 
or knowingly restraining CW "with intent to . . . [t]errorize [him.]" 
HRS § 707-720(1)(e). Forbes could have been, but was 
not, charged with Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree 
(Terroristic Threatening), of which intent to terrorize is also 
an element.   HRS § 707-715 (2014) provides, in relevant part: 10
§ 707-715 Terroristic threatening, defined.  A person
commits the offense of terroristic threatening if the person
threatens, by word or conduct, to cause bodily injury toanother person . . . or to commit a felony: 
(1) With the intent to terrorize, or in reckless
disregard of the risk of terrorizing, anotherperson[.] 
HRS § 707-716 (2014) provides, in relevant part: 
§ 707-716 Terroristic threatening in the first
degree. (1) A person commits the offense of terroristic
threatening in the first degree if the person commitsterroristic threatening: 
(a) By threatening another person on more than oneoccasion for the same or a similar purpose; 
10 Forbes does not contend that, and we do not decide whether, the
jury should have been instructed on terroristic threatening as a lesserincluded offense of kidnapping under HRS § 707-720(1)(e). 
26 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(e) With the use of a dangerous instrument or a
simulated firearm. For purposes of thissection, "simulated firearm" means any objectthat: 
(i) Substantially resembles a firearm; 
(ii) Can reasonably be perceived to be a
firearm; or 
(iii) Is used or brandished as a firearm[.] 
Here, for example, Forbes admittedly brandished what he 
claimed was a cigarette lighter that resembled a gun — but which 
CW may have thought was a real gun — to "scare" CW. He also testified, in essence, that he grabbed CW's shirt to scare CW to get him to drop him off at the beach park. Under the supreme court's rationale in Sheffield, we conclude that the Circuit Court should have instructed the jury that to convict Forbes of kidnapping, it must find that Forbes restrained CW in excess of the substantial interference with liberty that would be incidental to the offense of Terroristic Threatening. See 
Sheffield, 146 Hawai# i at 55–56, 456 P.3d at 128–29. 
Thus, we must address whether the Circuit Court's 
failure to give a Sheffield-type instruction was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See, e.g., Malave, 146 
Hawai# i at 348, 463 
P.3d at 1005. The supreme court has repeatedly held: 
Erroneous instructions are presumptively harmful and are a
ground for reversal unless it affirmatively appears from therecord as a whole that the error was not prejudicial[.] If there is such a reasonable possibility in a criminal case,then the error is not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt,and the judgment of conviction on which it may have beenbased must be set aside. 
27 B. The Sufficiency of the Evidence FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Bovee
, 139 Hawai# i 530, 537-38, 394 P.3d 760, 767-68 
(2017) (quoting State v. Frisbee, 114 Hawai# i 76, 79–80, 156 P.3d 
1182, 1185–86 (2007) (quoting State v. Gonsalves, 108 Hawai# i 
289, 293, 119 P.3d 597, 601 (2005))). 
Here, the evidence adduced at trial in support of the 
jury's finding that Forbes intentionally or knowingly restrained 
CW with the intent to terrorize CW would have been evidence sufficient to support a conviction for Terroristic Threatening. Although it is possible that the jury could have concluded that there was evidence beyond a reasonable doubt that Forbes restrained CW in excess of the substantial interference with liberty that would be incidental to the offense of Terroristic Threatening, there is a reasonable possibility that a jury could have concluded otherwise. Accordingly, we cannot conclude that the Circuit Court's failure to give the jury a Sheffield-type of instruction was harmless beyond any reasonable doubt. 
Forbes argues that there was insufficient evidence to 
support the conclusion that he did not voluntarily release CW. The jury answered "Yes" to the special interrogatory: "Has the prosecution proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the Defendant did not release [the CW] voluntarily?" Viewed in the strongest light for the State, there was substantial evidence supporting the jury's finding. CW testified that he tried to run away from 
28 V. CONCLUSION FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Forbes twice. 
The first time, CW opened the door and took a step 
out of his van while holding his cash bag. Forbes hit CW with 
the grip of what appeared to be a handgun, grabbed CW's shirt under CW's arm, and pulled CW back into the van. After five minutes, CW tried to run away again, and was able to escape after leaving his cash bag on the floor of the van. We conclude that there was substantial evidence to support the jury's finding that Forbes did not voluntarily release CW. See State v. Mara, 102 
Hawai# i 346, 356, 76 P.3d 589, 599 (App. 2003), cert. denied, 102 
Hawai# i 333, 76 P.3d 576 (2003) ("The fact that Mara did not 
pursue [the complaining witness] after she escaped is not evidence of a release."). 
Based on the reasons set forth above, the August 8, 
2019 Judgment is vacated in part and affirmed in part. We vacate Forbes's Kidnapping conviction and otherwise affirm the Judgment. This case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent with this Opinion. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
29 Walter J. Rodby,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Loren J. Thomas,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 