NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000916
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI fI 
SUZANNE M. NEMIROFF aka SUZANNE M. DITTER,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ALAN H. NEMIROFF,
Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-DIVORCE NO. 02-1-3779)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Alan H. Nemiroff (Mr. Nemiroff)
 
appeals from the 1) "Order Regarding (1) Plaintiff's Motion And
 
Affidavit For Post-Decree Relief Filed November 22, 2011; And (2)
 Defendant's Motion And Affidavit For Post-Decree Relief Filed
 December 16, 2011" entered September 28, 2012 (September 2012
 Order), and 2) "Order Denying Defendant's Motion for
 Reconsideration" entered October 1, 2012 (motion to reconsider). 
Both orders were entered in the Family Court of the First
 
1
Circuit  (family court). 
On appeal, Mr. Nemiroff contends the family court erred
 
when it: 
(1) determined Mr. Nemiroff's obligation to pay past
 
medical and dental insurance premiums, as well as uncovered
 expenses, for the parties' son (the child) from 2003 to 2012;
 
(2) concluded Plaintiff-Appellee Suzanne M. Nemiroff,
 
1
 The Honorable Steven Nakashima presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
now known as Suzanne M. Ditter (Ms. Ditter), did not violate a
 
prior family court order regarding the child's high-school
 tuition;
 
(3) determined Mr. Nemiroff's obligation to pay for the
 
child's college expenses for the 2011 to 2012 school year;
 
(4) granted Ms. Ditter's request for attorney's fees
 
and costs;
 
(5) denied Mr. Nemiroff's motion to reconsider; and
 (6) denied Mr. Nemiroff's "Motion to Vacate Order."
I. BACKGROUND
 
Mr. Nemiroff and Ms. Ditter were divorced on April 8,
 
2003 and have one child together. The parties' divorce decree
 provided, in part: (1) Ms. Ditter was to provide medical and
 dental insurance for the child and the parties were to evenly
 split the child's uninsured medical and dental expenses, (2) Mr.
 Nemiroff and Ms. Ditter were to split private high school tuition
 evenly, and (3) the allocation of college expenses between the
 parties was reserved.
 
On April 21, 2004, Mr. Nemiroff filed a motion for post
 
decree relief with the family court. On May 14, 2004, the family
 court entered an order for the post-decree relief (May 2004
 Order) that principally altered two parts of the parties' divorce
 decree. First, the May 2004 Order required the parties to evenly
 split the child's medical and dental insurance premiums in
 addition to evenly sharing the child's uninsured medical and
 dental expenses. Second, the May 2004 Order required Ms. Ditter
 to annually pay about forty percent of the child's high-school
 tuition, instead of half.
 
Three years later, Ms. Ditter moved for post-decree
 
relief to enforce the May 2004 Order. In response, Mr. Nemiroff
 asked the court to revisit the division of high-school tuition
 because Ms. Ditter was receiving financial aid from the school. 
On November 21, 2007, the family court denied the request to
 modify the division of high-school tuition and ordered Mr.
 Nemiroff to pay his share of medical and dental expenses per the
 May 2004 Order (November 2007 Order).
 
In 2011, Ms. Ditter again moved for post-decree relief
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to enforce Mr. Nemiroff's medical and dental obligations. She
 
also asked the court to order the parties to split the child's
 college expenses evenly, an issue reserved in the divorce decree. 
In response, Mr. Nemiroff filed a motion post-decree relief. He
 alleged that before the parties' divorce settlement, Ms. Ditter
 inherited a condominium and concealed its existence and value.
 Mr. Nemiroff thus requested half of the proceeds from the
 inherited condominium's subsequent sale. Mr. Nemiroff further
 alleged Ms. Ditter owed him $35,034.37 for high school expenses,
 partly on the basis that the inherited condominium's sale put Ms.
 Ditter in a better financial condition than she represented for
 purposes of the May 2004 Order. Mr. Nemiroff also sought
 reimbursement for half the cost of the child's braces, cell phone
 expenses, and certain athletic expenses.
 
The parties went to trial on June 25, 2012 and the
 
family court entered its oral ruling on June 26, 2012. Counsel
 for Ms. Ditter drafted a proposed order. On July 19, 2012, Mr.
 Nemiroff filed a motion to reconsider per Hawaii Family Court
 Rules (HFCR) Rule 59. On September 28, 2012, the family court
 adopted the proposed order with a few corrections and entered the
 September 2012 Order.
 
The September 2012 Order (1) reaffirmed Mr. Nemiroff's
 
delinquent medical and dental expense obligations, (2) found Ms.
 Ditter compliant with the May 2004 Order and denied Mr.
 Nemiroff's request to be reimbursed for part of the child's high
 school tuition, (3) denied Mr. Nemiroff's request for half of the
 inherited condominium's value, (4) ordered Mr. Nemiroff to pay
 half of the child's first year of college tuition, and (5)
 ordered Mr. Nemiroff to pay Ms. Ditter's attorney's fees and
 costs.
 
On October 1, 2012, the family court denied Mr.
 
Nemiroff's motion to reconsider. On October 8, 2012, Mr.
 Nemiroff filed a motion to vacate the September 2012 Order. On
 October 26, 2012, Mr. Nemiroff filed a notice of appeal from the
 September 2012 Order and the family court's denial of his motion
 to reconsider. On November 9, 2012, the family court denied Mr.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nemiroff's motion to vacate.2
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
A. Family Court Rulings
 
Generally, we review a family court's ruling on a
 
motion for post-decree relief, or a motion for reconsideration,
 
for an abuse of discretion. See Lowther v. Lowther, 99 Hawai fi 
569, 577, 57 P.3d 494, 502 (App.2002). We afford the family
 court much discretion:
 
The family court possesses wide discretion in making its
decisions and those decisions will not be set aside unless
 there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Under the abuse of
 discretion standard of review, the family court's decision
will not be disturbed unless the family court disregarded
rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial
detriment of a party litigant and its decision clearly
exceeded the bounds of reason.
 
In the Interest of Doe, 77 Hawai fi 109, 115, 883 P.2d 30, 36 
(1994) (citations, internal quotation marks, brackets, and 
ellipsis omitted). "Furthermore, the burden of establishing abuse of discretion is on appellant, and a strong showing is required to establish it." Ek v. Boggs, 102 Hawai
fi 289, 294-95, 
75 P.3d 1180, 1185-86 (2003) (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted).
B. Evidentiary Rulings
 
"[W]here the admissibility of evidence is determined by 
application of the hearsay rule, there can be only one correct 
result, and the appropriate standard for appellate review is the right/wrong standard." State v. Moore, 82 Hawai
fi 202, 217, 921 
P.2d 122, 137 (1996) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
C. Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
 
Findings of fact are reviewed under the clearly
 
erroneous standard and are "clearly erroneous when (1) the record
 
lacks substantial evidence to support the finding or
 determination, or (2) despite substantial evidence to support the
 finding or determination, the appellate court is left with the
 
2
 We review the family court's denial of Mr. Nemiroff's motion to
vacate the September 2012 Order per Hawaif i Rules of Appellate Procedure
(HRAP) Rule 4(a)(3): "The notice of appeal shall be deemed to appeal the
disposition of all post-judgment motions that are timely filed after entry ofthe judgment or order." 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made." 
Schiller v. Schiller, 120 Hawai fi 283, 288, 205 P.3d 548, 553 
(App. 2009) (citation omitted). Conclusions of law are freely reviewable for correctness and generally reviewed under the right or wrong standard. See Id. A conclusion of law that is 
supported by the trial court's findings of fact and an application of the correct rule will not be overturned. See Id. 
III. DISCUSSION
 
(1) The family court did not abuse its discretion when it
determined Mr. Nemiroff's obligation to pay medical and
dental insurance expenses for the child from 2003 to 2012.
 
The parties' divorce decree provided:
 
10. Medical and Dental. [Ms. Ditter] shall provide
adequate medical and dental insurance coverage for the
parties' minor child. With regard to those additional
medical and/or dental expenses not reimbursed or covered
under any insurance plans, or in the event any major,
non-routine or unusual medical and/or dental expenses for
the child are incurred or contemplated, Plaintiff and
Defendant shall each be responsible for payment of one-half
(1/2) such overages or expenses. 
This obligation shall continue so long as the parties,
or either of them, are obligated to support the child and/or
to pay the child's higher education expenses or any portion
thereof.
 
This provision shall be subject to further order of
the [family court].
 
(Emphasis added.) The May 2004 Order increased Mr. Nemiroff's
 
original obligation, consistent with the divorce decree, to
 include the obligation to pay half of the child's medical and
 dental insurance premiums. The family court re-affirmed this
 obligation in the November 2007 and September 2012 Orders.
 
Regarding the child's medical and dental insurance
 
premiums, the family court found that based on the evidence
 produced at trial: (1) Mr. Nemiroff owed $2,054.62 in unpaid
 medical and dental insurance premiums for the period of 2003
 through 2007, and was entitled to a credit for amounts paid
 totaling $374.96; and (2) Mr. Nemiroff owed $2,694.54 for the
 period of 2008 through 2012 and that Mr. Nemiroff submitted no
 evidence to reduce this amount. Regarding the child's uninsured
 medical and dental expenses, the family court found that based on
 the evidence produced at trial, Mr. Nemiroff owed $509.22 for the
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
period of 2003 through 2012 and was entitled to a credit of
 
$45.70 for amounts paid.
 
Mr. Nemiroff contends the family court abused its
 
discretion in the September 2012 Order by not taking into account
 that Ms. Ditter "concealed funds received from sale of aunt's
 condominium and committed fraud by filing a Motion for Post-
Decree Relief. . . indicating that she could not comply with her
 Divorce Decree obligations." Mr. Nemiroff waived all claims to
 Ms. Ditter's inherited condominium in the parties' divorce
 decree: "Plaintiff shall remain as the Trustee of Plaintiff's
 aunt's real property, and [Mr. Nemiroff] hereby waives any claim
 he may have thereto." And in May of 2004, Mr. Nemiroff testified
 Ms. Ditter "owns a condo she inherited from her aunty that does
 not have a mortgage and generates around $1000.00 a month or so
 in gross rental[.]" The family court concluded Mr. Nemiroff
 waived all claims he might have had to the condominium and any
 such claim was untimely. The family court's allocation of health
 related expenses is in accord with the parties' divorce decree
 
3
and applicable law , and falls well within the bounds of reason.
(2) The family court did not abuse its discretion when it
determined that Ms. Ditter complied with prior family court
orders regarding the child's high-school tuition.
 
The parties' divorce decree provided that private high
 
school tuition would be split evenly, subject to later
 
modification. By stipulation in the May 2004 Order, the parties
 agreed that Ms. Ditter would only pay a specific dollar amount,
 which was less than fifty percent. At that time, Mr. Nemiroff
 
3 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 580-47 (Supp. 2012) provides in
relevant part:
 
§580-47 Support orders; division of property.  (a) Upon
granting a divorce, or thereafter if . . . jurisdiction of those
matters is reserved under the decree by agreement of both parties
or by order of court after finding that good cause exists, the
court may make any further orders as shall appear just and
equitable (1) compelling the parties or either of them to provide
for the support, maintenance, and education of the children of the
parties[.] . . . (4) . . . In making these further orders, the
court shall take into consideration: the respective merits of the
parties, the relative abilities of the parties, the condition in
which each party will be left by the divorce, the burdens imposed
upon either party for the benefit of the children of the parties,
the concealment of or failure to disclose income or an
 asset . . . . and all other circumstances of the case.
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was represented by counsel and knew of Ms. Ditter's financial
 
condition. The family court found the allocation of high school
 tuition between the parties, as modified by the May 2004 Order,
 was a continuing obligation unless further modified by the court. 
The family court partly based this finding on statements Mr.
 Nemiroff made in opposition to the motion for post-decree relief
 that led to the November 2007 Order that indicated Mr. Nemiroff
 understood the May 2004 Order's high school tuition obligation
 would continue until the child graduated high-school or until the
 obligation was modified by further court order.
 
The family court's September 2012 Order concluded that
 
(1) there was no modification to Ms. Ditter's high school tuition
 obligation following the May 2004 Order, and (2) Ms. Ditter met
 her obligation for the required years. The court thus denied Mr.
 Nemiroff's claim that Ms. Ditter owed him past amounts for
 private high-school tuition. 
Mr. Nemiroff also alleged Ms. Ditter owed him past
 
amounts for high school tuition because she committed fraud when
 she first petitioned the family court to reduce the amount of her
 high school tuition obligation: 
The fact that the cash funds ($120,000.00) from the eventual
sale of the aunt's condominium were available for use (in
part) for [the child's] private school education, but
instead were used (in total) for the down payment on the
purchase of another condominium just prior to [the child's]
start of school at Mid-Pacific Institute, resulted in the
Plaintiff-Appellee's claim of her inability to meet the
requirements (the 50/50 share of [the child's] private
school expenses) per the Divorce Decree . . . .
 
For the reasons discussed above, this condominium contention is
 
without merit.
 
(3) The family court abused its discretion when it ordered
Mr. Nemiroff to pay half of the child's first year of
college tuition.
 
The parties' divorce decree provided "the issue of an
 
allocation of college tuition and other expenses shall be [a]
 
reserved subject to the ongoing jurisdiction of the Family
 Court." Mr. Nemiroff contends no oral or written agreement
 allocating the obligation of college expenses existed between the
 parties. He contends the family court erred by concluding such
 an agreement existed because the conclusion was based on hearsay
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testimony.
 
A partial transcript from the June 25, 2012 hearing
 
provides the following: 
[Counsel for Ms. Ditter:] Okay. Um, and how did [the
child] come to choose OSU[?]
 
[Ms. Ditter:] . . . [W]e had a conversation
about . . . what his choice was, and it was Oregon State
University. And, um, so at that time we consulted with the
father over the phone and, um, he agreed to pay half and
this –
 
[Counsel for Ms. Ditter:] "He" being –
 
[Ms. Ditter:] Mr. Nemiroff.
 [Counsel for Ms. Ditter:] –- Mr. Nemiroff?
 [Ms. Ditter:] And this was at the time of acceptance
st st
around 1  of –- end of June, 1  of July. So we had this
 
three-way conversation on the phone.
 
Mr. Nemiroff: Uh, I'm –- I'm gonna . . . 
THE COURT: (Inaudible) objection?
 Mr. Nemiroff: My objection is there was no three-way
conversation on the phone, and –- and I did not –­
THE COURT: Mr. Nemiroff, why don't you (inaudible)
that --
Mr. Nemiroff: Okay.
 THE COURT: –- and ask the question –-
Mr. Nemiroff: Okay.
 THE COURT: –- you can bring it up (inaudible)
 Mr. Nemiroff: Okay.
 [Counsel for Ms. Ditter:] Go ahead.
 [Ms. Ditter:] So it wasn't a speakerphone
conversation. [The child] and I were sitting at the table.
He called the father, had a conversation with him. He, um,
responded to me that the dad would pay half. I agreed to
pay half. Therefore we proceeded to, um, confirm his
acceptance to Oregon State.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence Rule 801 (Supp. 2012) defines
 
hearsay as "a statement, other than one made by the declarant
 
while testifying at the trial or hearing, offered in evidence to
 prove the truth of the matter asserted." Ms. Ditter's statement
 is hearsay because she is testifying about the out-of-court
 statement of the child, who was relaying the out-of-court
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statement of Mr. Nemiroff. Hearsay is generally inadmissible
 
unless it fits within a statutory exemption. See Doe v. Doe, 118
 
Hawaifi 293, 302, 188 P.3d 807, 816 (App. 2008). We conclude Ms. 
Ditter's statement is inadmissable hearsay. 
HFCR Rule 61 (Harmless Error) provides:
 
No error in either the admission or the exclusion of
 
evidence and no error or defect in any ruling or order or in
anything done or omitted by the court or by any of the
parties is ground for granting a new trial or for setting
aside a verdict or for vacating, modifying, or otherwise
disturbing a judgment or order, unless refusal to take such
action appears to the court inconsistent with substantial
justice. The court at every stage of the proceeding must
disregard any error or defect in the proceeding that does
not affect the substantial rights of the parties.
 
(Emphases added.) "Error in admission of evidence is not
 
reversible unless the appellant is able to show that the alleged
 inadmissible evidence influenced the trial judge's decision and
 such decision was insupportable by other evidence." Geldert v.
 
State, 3 Haw. App. 259, 649 P.2d 1165 (1982). 
The family court found "[Ms.] Ditter credibly testified
 
that she and [Mr.] Nemiroff had an agreement for the academic
 year of 2011-2012 that they would send [the child] to Oregon
 State University and share college expenses on an equal basis." 
This finding is based solely on inadmissable hearsay testimony
 from Ms. Ditter. Therefore, the family court's conclusion that
 an "agreement was reached by the Parties to equally share in the
 higher educational expenses," is wrong. See Moore, 82 Hawai
fi at 
217, 921 P.2d at 137. 
(4) Attorney's fees and costs.
 
4
HRS § 580-47(f)  gives the family court broad
4 HRS § 580-47(f) provides:
 
(f) Attorney's fees and costs. The court hearing any
motion for orders either revising an order for the custody,
support, maintenance, and education of the children of the
parties, or an order for the support and maintenance of one
party by the other, or a motion for an order to enforce any
such order or any order made under subsection (a) of this
section, may make such orders requiring either party to pay
or contribute to the payment of the attorney's fees, costs,
and expenses of the other party relating to such motion and
hearing as shall appear just and equitable after
consideration of the respective merits of the parties, the
relative abilities of the parties, the economic condition of
each party at the time of the hearing, the burdens imposed
(continued...)
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
discretion to award attorney's fees and costs. See Doe v. Roe, 
85 Hawai fi 151, 164, 938 P.2d 1170, 1183 (App. 1997). An award 
of litigation expenses is within the sound discretion of the 
family court, subject only to the standard that it is fair and reasonable. See Markham v. Markham, 80 Hawai
fi 274, 288, 909 
P.2d 602, 616 (App. 1996). The September 2012 Order granted Ms. Ditter's request for attorney's fees and costs. The family court's award contains a inherent determination that the resulting award was fair and reasonable. See Riethbrock v. 
Lange, Nos. 28289, 28694 (App. Aug. 8, 2011) (SDO), aff'd, 128 Hawai
fi 1, 282 P.3d 543 (2012). 
Mr Nemiroff contends the family court "erred by not
 
taking into account that [he] had not earned income in three plus
 years and there does not exist a true economic hardship due, in
 part, to [Ms. Ditter's] unwillingness to meet her obligations
 outlined in the Divorce Decree thereby requiring [him] to finance
 her deficient portion." The September 2012 Order provided the
 family court would issue a separate order regarding the amount of
 the award. No separate order appears in the record. Mr.
 Nemiroff does not cite to any such order. Therefore, we cannot
 determine whether any award was fair and reasonable.
(5) Mr. Nemiroff's motion to reconsider is moot.
 
Mr. Nemiroff contends he "submitted supplemental
 
information that clearly indicated that [he] had not committed to
 
paying [the child's] first year of college expenses." Since we
 vacate the family court's college expense determination on other
 grounds, this contention is moot.
(6) Mr. Nemiroff's Motion to Vacate is moot as it relates
 
to the family court's allocation of college expenses; the
family court's denial of the motion is otherwise proper.
 
Mr. Nemiroff's motion to vacate contended the family
 
court should have vacated the September 2012 Order "due to the
 
fact that there does not exist a complete and accurate record of
 the trial to be used as a basis to enact Rule 59 and or Rule 72." 
4(...continued)
upon either party for the benefit of the children of the
parties, the concealment of or failure to disclose income or
an asset . . . and all other circumstances of the case.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Essentially, Mr. Nemiroff claims error because he was unable to
 
comb the record for a basis to request a new trial or appeal the
 September 2012 Order. The family court concluded "[e]ven
 assuming arguendo that [Mr. Nemiroff's] argument is factually
 correct, [Mr Nemiroff] does not contend that the [September 2012
 Order] is inconsistent with the rulings that the [family court]
 placed on the record following the trial in this case." The
 family court thus found no basis to vacate the September 2012
 Order.
 
On appeal, Mr. Nemiroff contends the family court 
erroneously denied his motion to vacate because the transcript was incomplete and did not give him "the benefit of reviewing the judges' commentary throughout the four plus hour trial." Mr. Nemiroff fails to state the specific prejudice he has sustained as a result of the incomplete transcript; the mere inability to review a complete transcript, without more, does not constitute prejudice sufficient to warrant vacating an order. See State v. 
Bates, 84 Hawai
fi 211, 933 P.2d 48 (1997).
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Accordingly, we vacate the part of the "Order Regarding
 
(1) Plaintiff's Motion And Affidavit For Post-Decree Relief Filed
 November 22, 2011; And (2) Defendant's Motion And Affidavit For
 Post-Decree Relief Filed December 16, 2011" that allocates
 college expenses between the parties and remand this case to the
 Family Court of the First Circuit for further proceedings
 consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
fi, December 30, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Alan H. Nemiroff 
Defendant-Appellant pro se. 
Suzanne M. Ditter 
Plaintiff-Appellee pro se. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
11
 