NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000659
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
MK KONA COMMONS LLC, by and through its
managing agent CBRE, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
BUSINESS BROKERS HAWAII-WEST LLC, a Hawaii limited
liability company, doing business as KONA WINE MARKET;
TIMOTHY DRIEDGER and JENNIFER DRIEDGER, Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
NORTH AND SOUTH KONA DIVISION
 
(CIVIL NO. 3RC14-1-667K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant MK Kona Commons LLC (MK Kona)
 
appeals from the Amended Findings of Facts and Conclusions of
 
Law; Amended Judgment (Amended Judgment) entered by the District
 
Court of the Third Circuit, North and South Kona Division
 
1
(District Court),  on September 7, 2016.
MK Kona filed a complaint against Defendants-Appellees

 
Business Brokers Hawaii-West LLC, doing business as Kona Wine
 
Market, Timothy Driedger, and Jennifer Driedger (collectively,
 Defendants). Defendants filed a counterclaim. After a bench
 
1
 The Honorable Margaret K. Masunaga presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
trial, on August 2, 2016, the District Court entered Findings of
 
Facts and Conclusions of Law; Judgment, which entered judgment in
 MK Kona's favor and against all Defendants. Thereafter, MK Kona
 filed a motion requesting attorneys' fees and costs, which was
 denied. The District Court entered the Amended Judgment, stating
 that each party shall bear its own attorneys' fees and costs. 
MK Kona raises two points of error, arguing that the 
District Court erred: (1) in not awarding MK Kona its reasonable attorneys' fees pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 607­
14, because this action is in the nature of assumpsit, and/or was 
an action on a written contract that provides for attorneys' fees, and MK Kona was the prevailing party; and (2) in not awarding MK Kona its costs pursuant to HRS § 607-9 and Hawai
'i 
District Court Rules of Civil Procedure (DCRCP) Rule 54(d) 
because MK Kona was the prevailing party and the District Court 
gave no explanation for its denial of costs. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve MK Kona's contentions as follows:
 
(1) HRS § 607-14 (2016) provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 607-14 Attorneys' fees in actions in the nature of
assumpsit, etc.  In all the courts, in all actions in the
nature of assumpsit and in all actions on a promissory note
or other contract in writing that provides for an attorney's
fee, there shall be taxed as attorneys' fees, to be paid by
the losing party and to be included in the sum for which
execution may issue, a fee that the court determines to be
reasonable; provided that the attorney representing the
prevailing party shall submit to the court an affidavit
stating the amount of time the attorney spent on the action
and the amount of time the attorney is likely to spend to
obtain a final written judgment, or, if the fee is not based
on an hourly rate, the amount of the agreed upon fee. The
 court shall then tax attorneys' fees, which the court
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
determines to be reasonable, to be paid by the losing party;
provided that this amount shall not exceed twenty-five per
cent of the judgment.
Where the note or other contract in writing provides
for a fee of twenty-five per cent or more, or provides for a
reasonable attorney's fee, not more than twenty-five per
cent shall be allowed.
 
Where the note or other contract in writing provides
for a rate less than twenty-five per cent, not more than the
specified rate shall be allowed.
. . . .
 
The above fees provided for by this section shall be
assessed on the amount of the judgment exclusive of costs
and all attorneys' fees obtained by the plaintiff, and upon
the amount sued for if the defendant obtains judgment.
 
Generally, "under HRS § 607–14, if the prevailing party 
meets all the requirements set forth therein, the statute 
mandates an award of reasonable attorneys' fees." Enoka v. AIG 
Hawaii Ins. Co., 109 Hawai 'i 537, 560, 128 P.3d 850, 873 (2006) 
(emphasis in original) (citing Finley v. Home Ins. Co., 90 Hawai
'i 25, 38, 975 P.2d 1145, 1158 (1998)). Therefore, the 
statute requires that the trial court grant reasonable attorneys' fees to the prevailing party if (1) the action is in the nature of assumpsit; or (2) the action is on a promissory note or other contract in writing that provides for attorneys' fees. 
"The 'prevailing party' is the one who prevails on the 
disputed main issue. Even if the party does not prevail to the extent of his original contention, he will be deemed to be the successful party for the purpose of taxing costs and attorney's fees." Nelson v. Hawaiian Homes Comm'n, 130 Hawai
'i 162, 165, 
307 P.3d 142, 145 (2013) (citations, some quotation marks, and brackets omitted). Here, MK Kona prevailed, in part, on its claim against Defendants for rent and charges in the amount of $139.93, as well as on its claim for damages for repairs to the leased space in the amount of $13,161.70. Defendants filed a 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counterclaim for breach of contract, fraud in the inducement,
 
intentional and/or negligent misrepresentation, and unfair or 
deceptive trade practices. Defendants' unfair or deceptive trade
 practices claim was dismissed by stipulation (with no agreement
 as to fees and costs), and the District Court otherwise dismissed
 Defendants' counterclaim with prejudice after trial. The
 District Court entered judgment in favor of MK Kona and against
 all Defendants. Therefore, we conclude that MK Kona was the
 prevailing party.
 
MK Kona sought rent, charges, and damages for 
obligations stated in the subject lease agreement. Its claims were clearly in the nature of assumpsit. See Blair v. Ing, 96 
Hawai
'i 327, 332, 31 P.3d 184, 189 (2001). Defendants' 
counterclaim included a mixture of assumpsit and non-assumpsit claims, alleging claims of breach of contract, fraud in the inducement, intentional and/or negligent misrepresentation, and unfair or deceptive trade practices. 
As MK Kona was the prevailing party and its claims were
 
2
in the nature of assumpsit,  we conclude that the District Courtabused its discretion in denying MK Kona its attorneys' fees. 
See Price v. AIG Hawai 'i Ins. Co., 107 Hawai 'i 106, 110, 111 P.3d 
1, 5 (2005). We note, however, as the counterclaim included both assumpsit and non-assumpsit claims, on remand, the District Court must base its award of fees, if practicable, on an apportionment 
2
 In addition, as MK Kona contends, the subject lease is a contract
in writing that provides for payment of attorneys' fees, litigation expenses,
and court costs incurred in its enforcement. The nature of this action is
 within the fees and costs provisions in the lease.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of the fees claimed between the assumpsit and non-assumpsit
 
claims. Blair, 96 Hawai 'i at 332, 31 P.3d at 189. 
(2) Regarding costs, HRS § 607-9 (2016) states: 
§ 607-9 Cost charges exclusive; disbursements.  (a)
No other costs of court shall be charged in any court in
addition to those prescribed in this chapter in any suit,
action, or other proceeding, except as otherwise provided by
law.
 
(b) All actual disbursements, including but not
limited to, intrastate travel expenses for witnesses and
counsel, expenses for deposition transcript originals and
copies, and other incidental expenses, including copying
costs, intrastate long distance telephone charges, and
postage, sworn to by an attorney or a party, and deemed
reasonable by the court, may be allowed in taxation of
costs. In determining whether and what costs should be
taxed, the court may consider the equities of the situation.
 
Although the trial court has discretion in awarding
 
costs,
 
Rule 54(d) creates a strong presumption that the prevailing
party will recover costs . . . [and] the court may not deny
costs to the prevailing party without explanation, unless
the circumstances justifying denial of costs are plain from
the record. Not only must the court explain its reasons for
denying costs to the prevailing party, but the reasons given
must also be adequate. The presumption that the prevailing
party is entitled to costs must be overcome by some showing
that an award would be inequitable under the circumstances.
The losing party bears the burden of making this showing.
 
Wong v. Takeuchi, 88 Hawai 'i 46, 52, 961 P.2d 611, 617 (1998) 
(brackets omitted) (quoting 10 Moore's Federal Practice
 
§ 54.101(1)(a-b) (3d ed. 1998)). 
A "trial court abuse[s] its discretion in reducing the
 
amount of taxable costs awarded 'without explanation or a readily
 discernable rationale.'" Schefke v. Reliable Collection Agency,
 
Ltd., 96 Hawai
'i 408, 459, 32 P.3d 52, 103 (2001) (quoting 
Finley, 90 Hawai 'i at 38, 975 P.2d at 1158). 
Here, at the hearing on MK Kona's motion, the only
 
explanation the District Court gave for denying costs appeared to
 be that the court had the discretion to do so. This is not an
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"adequate" reason. Upon review, there is no other readily
 
discernible rationale for the District Court's denial of costs. 
On appeal, Defendants contend that they overcame the
 
presumption favoring an award of costs because "MK Kona's
 argument seeking recovery of attorneys' fees and costs relied
 upon certain trial exhibits which were never received into
 evidence due to MK Kona's objection, which the District Court
 sustained." In its motion seeking attorney's fees and costs, MK
 Kona attached "Exhibit E" and stated that the exhibit "reflects
 Defendants' damage calculation on their Counterclaim of
 $36,855.00." MK Kona presumably attached this document because
 under HRS § 607-14 the amount of attorney's fees taxed "shall not
 exceed twenty-five per cent of the judgment," and, as MK Kona was
 the counterclaim defendant, the attorney's fees shall be assessed
 "on the amount of the judgment" and "upon the amount sued for if
 the defendant obtains judgment." See HRS § 607-14. However, HRS
 
§ 607-9 and DCRCP Rule 54(d) do not similarly limit costs based
 on the amount of the judgment or amount sued for. 
In addition, Defendants' argument to the District Court 
that they "prevailed" on the difference between the amount of damages MK Kona sought and the amount of damages awarded in the judgment is without merit. MK Kona prevailed on the merits of its breach of contract claim, as well as the counterclaim. Though MK Kona did not "prevail to the extent of [its] original contention" in regard to money damages, MK Kona is nonetheless "deemed to be the successful party for the purpose of taxing costs and attorney's fees." Nelson, 130 Hawai
'i at 165, 307 P.3d 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 145; see also MFD Partners v. Murphy, 9 Haw. App. 509, 514,
 
850 P.2d 713, 715–16 (1992). 
Accordingly, we conclude that the District Court abused
 
its discretion in denying costs without an adequate explanation
 or a readily discernible rationale.
 
For these reasons, the District Court's September 7,
 
2016 Amended Judgment is vacated in part, with respect to its
 denial of MK Kona's request for attorneys' fees and costs, and
 this case is remanded to the District Court for further
 proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 31, 2017. 
On the briefs: Yuriko J. Sugimura,
(Bendet Fidel Sugimura)for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Joseph Fagundes III
for Defendants-Appellees. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
7
 