 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000438 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
IN THE INTEREST OF 
J.M., a Minor 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(FC-J NO. 104118; REF. NO. 116-159) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.) 
Minor-Appellant J.M. (
JM)1 appeals from (1) the Decree 
Re: Law Violation Petition(s), filed on February 23, 2018 
(Violation Decree), (2) the Decree Re: Modification and Change of 
Law Violations Decree, filed on March 29, 2018 (First Modification Decree), and (3) the Decree Re: Modification and Change of Law Violations Decree, filed on May 3, 2018 (Second Modification Decree), entered by the Family Court of the Second Circuit (Family Court).
2  JM was found by the Family Court to be 
1 It is undisputed that JM was under the age of eighteen at the time
of the alleged law violation, but he was at least eighteen years old at all
other times relevant to this appeal. 
2 The Honorable Adrianne N. Heely presided.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a law violator, pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571-
11(1) (2018),  for the sexual assault of a minor and was, as a 
result, placed on juvenile probation subject to various terms and 
conditions. 3
JM raises three points of error on appeal, contending 
that:  (1) the Family Court erred in denying JM's motion to suppress and admitting incriminating statements JM made to Maui police officers without applying Hawai# i Family Court Rules 
(HFCR) Rule 142; (2) the Family Court erred in Conclusion of Law 
(
COL) 6, which concluded JM was properly advised of his Miranda 
rights,  because law enforcement failed to inform JM of his right 
to have his parents or another adult present during custodial 
interrogation; and (3) the failure to comply with HFCR Rule 142 constitutes clear error. 4
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve JM's points of error as follows: 
3 HRS § 571-11 states, in pertinent part: 
§ 571-11  Jurisdiction; children.   Except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, the court shall have exclusive
original jurisdiction in proceedings:
(1) Concerning any person who is alleged to havecommitted an act prior to achieving eighteenyears of age that would constitute a violationor attempted violation of any federal, state, orlocal law or county ordinance. Regardless ofwhere the violation occurred, jurisdiction maybe taken by the court of the circuit where theperson resides, is living, or is found, or inwhich the offense is alleged to have occurred[.] 
4 See Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966). 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) HFCR Rule 142 provides: 
Rule 142.  EXTRA-JUDICIAL STATEMENTS. 
No extra-judicial statement by the child made as a
result of a custodial interrogation by a police officershall be admitted into evidence absent a showing thatrequired warnings of the child's constitutional rightswere given the child in a meaningful way; that the childwas informed of the child's right to have the child'sparents or other adult present during any custodialinterview; that any waiver of said rights was express andmade with understanding; and that the statement itself wasmade voluntarily and without coercion or suggestion. Indetermining the admissibility of an extra-judicialstatement, attention shall be given to the totality ofcircumstances in giving the warnings and obtaining thestatement, including an examination into compliance withthe provisions of HRS section 571-31. 
By its express terms, HFCR Rule 142 applies to extra-
judicial statements made by a "child" under custodial 
interrogation.  The HFCR do not define "child."  However, the HFCR expressly incorporate the definitions of HRS § 571-2.  See HFCR 121(b).   HRS § 571-2 (2018)  defines a "child" as "a person 
less than eighteen years of age."  This is in accord with the commonly understood meaning of the word "child" as a minor or person under the age of majority.  See Child, Black's Law Dictionary (9th ed. 2009) (defining "child" as "[a] person under 
6 5
5 HFCR Rule 121(b) states: Rule 121.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE; DEFINITIONS. 
. . . . 
(b) Definitions .  In addition to statutory definitions
set forth in HRS section 571-2 as used in these rules,unless the context requires another meaning: 
[listing eight definitions not relevant here]. 
6 HRS § 571-2 states, in relevant part: 
§ 571-2  Definitions.   When used in this chapter,
unless the context otherwise requires:
. . . . 
"Child" or "minor" means a person less than eighteen
years of age. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the age of majority").  HRS 577-1 (2018)7 also provides that 
eighteen years of age is the time at which the age of minority 
ceases.  Accordingly, the definition of "child" applied by the HFCR, and in accord with the common understanding of the term, is a person who is under the age of eighteen. 
The Family Court exercised jurisdiction over this case 
pursuant to HRS § 571-11(1), which provides it has exclusive original jurisdiction in proceedings: 
(1) Concerning any person who is alleged to have committed
an act prior to achieving eighteen years of age thatwould constitute a violation or attempted violation ofany federal, state, or local law or county ordinance.Regardless of where the violation occurred,jurisdiction may be taken by the court of the circuitwhere the person resides, is living, or is found, orin which the offense is alleged to have occurred[.] 
(Emphasis added).  Of note, the statute states that the Family 
Court has jurisdiction over any "person" who is alleged to have committed an act before reaching the age of eighteen that would be a law violation, as opposed to only a "child" that committed such an act.   Thus, the Family Court retains jurisdiction over 
an adult who has committed a law violation under HRS § 571-11 before turning eighteen years of age for, inter alia, "the purpose of holding hearings and/or entering orders of disposition 
8
7 HRS § 577-1 states: 
§ 577-1  Age of majority.   All persons residing in the
State, who have attained the age of eighteen years, shall be
regarded as of legal age and their period of minority tohave ceased. 
8 A number of the jurisdictional provisions in HRS § 571-11
expressly set forth jurisdiction solely over a "child" as opposed to a"person."  See, e.g., HRS § 571-11(2) (jurisdiction over a "child" who isneglected, beyond the control of a parent, who is not attending school, or inviolation of curfew);  HRS § 571-11(3) (jurisdiction to determine custody orappoint a guardian of any child);  HRS § 571-11(6) (judicial consent to
marriage, employment or enlistment of child). 
  
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
concerning the alleged offenses."  See HRS § 571-13 (2018);   In 
re Doe, 86 Hawai# i 517, 519-22, 950 P.2d 701, 703-05 (App. 1997) 
(discussing, inter alia, a family court's retention of 
jurisdiction over an adult).  9
HFCR Rule 142 begins, "No extra-judicial statement by 
the child made as a result of a custodial interrogation by a police officer. . . ."  HFCR Rule 142 is not ambiguous.  The rule only applies when a child is subjected to custodial interrogation by law enforcement, and a child is a person under the age of eighteen, as provided by HRS § 571-2.  We conclude that HFCR Rule 142 was not applicable to JM when he was interrogated by Maui police officers, because it is undisputed that JM had reached the age of majority before the time of questioning, and he was no longer a child.  Accordingly, the Family Court did not plainly err when it determined that HFCR Rule 142 did not apply and admitted JM's statements to the Maui police. 
9 HRS § 571-13 states: 
§ 571-13  Retention of jurisdiction.   Except as
otherwise provided in this chapter, jurisdiction obtained by
the court in the case of a minor may be retained by it, forthe purposes of this chapter, after the minor becomeseighteen years of age until the full term for which anyorder entered shall have expired. Further, in the case ofany person who is alleged to have committed an offense undersection 571-11 prior to reaching eighteen years of age, thecourt shall have jurisdiction after the person becomes
eighteen for the purpose of holding hearings and/or entering
orders of disposition concerning the alleged offenses or forthe purpose of making and issuing orders for pre-trialdetention of persons aged eighteen years or older to anadult correctional facility, when the person is alleged tohave committed an act or acts during the person's minoritythat would constitute a violation of section 571-11(1). Thissection shall not be construed, however, to confer anyjurisdiction upon the family court over a person for anycriminal act committed after the person achieves eighteenyears of age. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) JM argues the Family Court erred in COL 6 by 
concluding that JM was properly advised of his rights pursuant to 
the Miranda decision and that he knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily waived his rights before speaking to Maui police officers on August 31, 2015.  JM contends that he did not knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily waive his constitutional right to remain silent because the police officers failed to inform him of his right to have his parents or another adult present during his custodial interrogation by police, as JM submits is required pursuant to HFCR Rule 142. 
The Family Court's COL 6 stated:   
6.  The Court, having reviewed the evidence presented,
including the recording of the advisement of Miranda rights
to [JM] by detectives, the testimony of the witnesses, andthe filings and arguments of the parties concludes that[JM], was properly advised of his rights pursuant to theMiranda decision and that he knowingly, intelligently, andvoluntarily waived his rights before speaking to DetectivesKrau and Satterfield on August 31, 2015. 
JM argues that, even though he was over eighteen years 
of age when interviewed by the Maui Police Department, HFCR Rule 
142 still applied.  This argument is based on JM's interpretation of the HFCR Rule 121(a).  HFCR Rule 121(a)
10 sets forth the 
purpose and scope of Part D of the HFCR relating to "juvenile proceedings", and states that "[t]he purpose of these rules is to implement the provisions of the Hawai# i Family Court Act, Chapter 
571, Hawai# i Revised Statutes, relating to cases coming under 
10 HFCR Rule 121(a) states: Rule 121. PURPOSE AND SCOPE; DEFINITIONS.
(a) Purpose and scope.   The purpose of these rules
is to implement the provisions o the Hawai #i Family Court 
Act, Chapter 571, Hawai #i Revised Statutes, relating to cases
coming under sections 571-11(1) and (2). 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sections 571-11(1) and (2)."  HFCR Rule 142, pertaining to extra-
judicial statements, is included under Part D of the HFCR.  The Family Court asserted jurisdiction over JM under HRS § 571-11(1). 
JM cites In re Doe, 86 Hawai# i 517, 950 P.2d 701 (App. 
1997), in support of his argument that HFCR Rule 142 was applicable to him even though he was over the age of eighteen, because the Family Court had asserted jurisdiction under HRS § 571-11(1).  In In re Doe, a minor was found to have committed an offense when he was under the age of eighteen, but at the time of adjudication and disposition, Doe was twenty-one-years old. Id. at 519, 950 P.2d at 703.  The case addressed whether the Family Court had jurisdiction to sentence Doe to time in an adult correctional facility.  Id. This court reviewed the statutes that granted the family court's authority, as a court of limited jurisdiction, and concluded that HRS § 571-48, which sets out the disposition authority of the family court, does not permit the family court to commit a person to an adult correctional facility.  Id. at 520-22, 950 P.2d at 704-06.  We conclude that In re Doe does not support the proposition asserted by JM in this case. 
JM makes no additional arguments to support his claim 
that the waiver of his Miranda rights was not knowing, intelligent, and voluntary.  We conclude that the Family Court's COL 6 that found JM's Miranda waiver knowing, intelligent, and voluntary was not wrong. 
(3) JM's third point is not a separate claim of error, 
but rather a request for this court to grant plain error review 
7  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to the alleged violation of his rights under HFCR Rule 142.  As 
we have concluded that HFCR Rule 142 was not applicable to JM when he was interrogated by the Maui police, JM is not entitled to relief under plain error review or otherwise. 
For these reasons, we affirm the Family Court's 
February 23, 2018 Violation Decree, March 29, 2018 First Modification Decree, and May 3, 2018 Second Modification Decree. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 14, 2019. 
On the briefs: James K. Tagupa, 
for Minor-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Brandon L.K. Paredes,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui,for Respondent-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8 