NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000355
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
WILLIAM McDONNELL, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR NO. 13-1-0002)

 
CONCURRING AND DISSENTING OPINION
 
(By: Reifurth, J.)

 
I concur with the majority's analysis concerning
 
Defendant-Appellant William McDonnell's first point of error. 
In regards to McDonnell's second point of error, I concur with
 the majority that KM's disclosure was incomplete and consequently
 agree that Dr. Bivens's testimony concerning incomplete
 disclosure was relevant. I also agree with the majority here and
 the dissent in the Hawaii Supreme Court's denial of certiorari in
 State v. Transfiguracion, No. SCWC-11-0000048, 2013 WL 1285112,
 at *5 (Haw. Mar. 28, 2013), that Dr. Bivens's testimony in the
 instant case concerning delayed reporting is admissible under
 State v. Batangan, 71 Haw. 552, 557-58, 799 P.2d 48, 51-52
 (1990). I write separately to address McDonnell's argument that
 Dr. Bivens's testimony concerning the characteristics and
 practices of typical child molesters and the "abuse process"
 amounted to improper "profile evidence."
1
 
For the reasons expressed in my separate concurrence in
 
State v. Kony, No. CAAP-12-0001114, 2014 WL 812997, at *4 (Haw.
 
1/
 "'Profile evidence' generally 'describes sets of observable
behavioral patterns,' which can be used 'as a tool to identify crime
suspects.'" Transfiguracion, at *6 n.5 (quoting Christopher B. Mueller and
Laird C. Kirkpatrick, Evidence, ยง 7.22 (4th ed. 2009)).
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ct. App. Feb. 28, 2014), cert. granted, No. SCWC-12-0001114, 2014
 
WL 3513030, *1 (Haw. July 15, 2014), I respectfully dissent. I
 believe that the potential prejudice of the profile evidence
 outweighs its probative value and, therefore, would conclude that
 the trial court abused its discretion in admitting it.
 
At trial, Dr. Bivens testified that his Ph.D.
 
dissertation "administered test data to distinguish some of the
 traits that child molesters have that normal men don't have." 
Dr. Bivens also introduced some empirical references into his
 testimony on the behavior and relationships of child molesters. 
In describing molestation, Dr. Bivens stated that "probably 80
 percent of the time there's not any real physical force involved. 
It's much more manipulation than coercive in that way." Dr.
 Bivens added that "the vast majority of the time, 85 percent of
 the time, let's say the child has a pre-existing nonsexual
 relationship with their molester."
 
When asked to describe what studies "show[ed] about the
 
abuse process," Dr. Bivens testified that one source of
 information involved convicted molesters "describing how they go
 about doing the abuse." Dr. Bivens subsequently described "four
 primary ways that have been identified as being typical of most
 molestations[,]" and were "characteristic of the vast majority of
 molestation incidents": seducing and testing, masking sex as a
 game, emotional and verbal coercion, and taking advantage of a
 child in a vulnerable position. In testifying on those "primary
 ways," Dr. Bivens refrained from citing specific percentages or
 other numerical references in testifying about the "abuse
 process," but described what the molester "will establish" or
 "will do" in those hypothetical scenarios, or that the molesters
 would "often" or "frequently" report certain behavior. These
 statements included, "[t]hey sort of lie to themselves. It helps
 them continue on with their crime." 
I share the concern of the dissenting justices in
 
Transfiguracion that "[i]n contrast to the minimal probative
 value of Dr. Bivens['s] testimony, [concerning profile evidence
 and the "abuse process"], the potential for prejudice arising
 from the introduction of evidence regarding the abuse process was
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
high." Transfiguracion, at *9. I agree as well that it was
 
possible to rebut the common stereotype of child molesters
 
"without introducing evidence suggesting that the testimony of
 the complaining witnesses matched the 'typical' sexual assault." 
Transfiguracion, *8. 
Here, Dr. Bivens's statistical testimony regarding
 
child molesters appears to be improper profile evidence. As the
 Transfiguracion dissent stated, "testimony that a certain
 characteristic is commonly possessed by a certain type of
 criminal may suggest to the jury that an individual with that
 characteristic is guilty. However, such testimony actually has
 no probative value for that purpose, because it says nothing
 about how many innocent individuals also possess that
 characteristic." Transfiguracion at *6. Conversely, the
 
prejudicial value of such evidence could be significant, as
 "potential prejudice would arise because the expert's testimony
 could 'guide the jury to a conclusion' that the complaining
 witnesses were telling the truth by demonstrating that the
 details in their testimony matched the details in a typical child
 abuse case, even though fabricated testimony also may include
 such details." Id. 
Similarly, Dr. Bivens's testimony concerning the "abuse
 
process" appears to have been more prejudicial than probative, as
 his description of the "four primary ways that have been
 identified as being typical of most molestations" would likely
 suggest to the jury that KM's testimony described a "typical"
 sexual assault. When Dr. Bivens explained "seducing and
 testing," he testified that a molester would "slowly incorporate
 sexual touch into the relationship." This followed KM's
 testimony that McDonnell gave her "sexual hugs" and touched her
 following a foot massage. Similarly, Dr. Bivens testified
 regarding "emotional and verbal coercion" that "often involves
 sort of bargaining or bribing[.]" KM had testified earlier that
 McDonnell came up with the term "benefits," meaning that KM would
 let him touch her and would not tell anyone in exchange for
 things she wanted, like games or internet access. Additionally,
 Dr. Bivens stated that "taking advantage of a child" was a
 
3
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
phenomenon that "most often refers to approaching a sleeping
 
child." KM had testified about an incident that occurred while
 she was sleeping with McDonnell on his bed.
 
Having earlier determined that Dr. Bivens's testimony
 
on delayed disclosure was admissible under Batangan, the
 Transfiguracion dissent concluded that "Dr. Bivens'[s] testimony
 regarding the abuse process did not possess the same probative
 value as his testimony regarding delayed disclosure." Id.
 
Similarly, here Dr. Bivens testified as to the behavior of
 sexually molested children and reasons why a child would delay
 disclosure after he had completed his description of the
 "uniform" actions of child molesters. Accordingly, here, as in
 Transfiguracion, the probative value of Dr. Bivens's testimony on
 the "abuse process" did not possess the same probative value as
 his testimony regarding delayed disclosure.
 
The majority states that Dr. Bivens "did not profile
 
McDonnell as a sex offender" because "he did not know the facts
 of the case." Majority Opinion at 11. In Transfiguracion, Dr.
 Bivens also testified that he "had no knowledge about the facts
 of the case." Transfiguracion, *9 (quoting State v.
 
Transfiguracion, CAAP-11-0000048, 2012 WL 5897413, at *2 (Haw.
 Ct. App. Nov. 21, 2012)) (internal quotation marks omitted). The
 Transfiguracion dissent explained that "Dr. Bivens may not have
 been aware of the facts of the case, but [the State] was[,]" and
 "[b]y the nature of the questions asked, studies . . . may be
 lined up with the testimony of the complaining witnesses." Id.
 
The dissent concluded that "such testimony would lead the jury to
 improperly conclude that the complaining witnesses were more
 likely to be telling the truth based on the statistics concerning
 perpetrators that was provided by Dr. Bivens." Id. So, I
 
believe, it did here.
 
Dr. Bivens's testimony provides useful context in which
 
to consider the testimony of child-witnesses in sex abuse cases. 
Nevertheless, courts must be particularly careful to consider the
 degree to which common characteristic testimony of this sort
 undermines the foundational principles of our criminal justice
 system.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
I conclude, therefore, that the family court abused its
 
discretion in allowing Dr. Bivens to testify regarding the 
characteristics and actions of typical sexual abusers. As the
 evidence against McDonnell was not overwhelming, the error was
 not harmless. For the foregoing reasons, I would vacate and
 remand for a new trial.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 6, 2015. 
Associate Judge
 
5
 