NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-12-0000645, CAAP-12-0000646 & CAAP-12-0000647
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CAAP-12-0000645
 
In the Matter of the Petition of
 
HANNAH HARRISON, Petitioner-Appellant/Appellant,
v.
 
GORDON I. ITO, INSURANCE COMMISSIONER,
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND CONSUMER AFFAIRS,
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Appellee/Appellee,
and
 
EVERCARE, Respondent-Appellee/Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-2903-11 (HER-11-156920))
 
CAAP-12-0000646
 
In the Matter of the Petition of
 
JENIVIE DELOS REYES, FRANKLIN BIDDINGER,
FLOYD HAYES, JOHN VILLANUEVA, and TEHINE AVILLA,
Petitioners-Appellants-Cross-Appellees/Appellants,
v.
 
GORDON I. ITO, INSURANCE COMMISSIONER,
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND CONSUMER AFFAIRS,
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Appellee/Appellee,
and
 
EVERCARE, Respondent-Appellee-Cross-Appellant/Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-2533-10 (HER-11-156817,
11-156241, 11-156361, 11-156251 & 11-155841))
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-12-0000647
 
AUDREY DELOS SANTOS, Petitioner-Appellant/Appellant
v.
 
GORDON I. ITO, INSURANCE COMMISSIONER,
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND CONSUMER AFFAIRS,
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Appellee/Appellee,
and
 
EVERCARE, Respondent-Appellee/Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-2542-10 (HER-10-154685))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
This consolidated appeal arises out of three separate
 
cases involving enrollees of QUEST Expanded Access (QExA)
 
Medicaid plans offered by UnitedHealthcare Insurance Company dba
 Evercare (Evercare) for aged, blind, or disabled beneficiaries. 
Although the facts in each case differ, the basic legal issue
 presented on appeal is the same: Whether there is a right to
 judicial review of external review decisions made under Hawaii
 
1
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 432E-6 (2005)  of the Patients' Bill of
Rights and Responsibilities Act, pursuant to HRS § 91-14(a)
 (2012) of the Hawai
'i Administrative Procedure Act. 
The Evercare plan enrollees involved in the three cases
 
on appeal (collectively, Enrollees) are: (1) Hannah Harrison
 (Harrison) in Civil No. 11-1-2903-11; Audrey Delos Santos (Delos
 Santos) in Civil No. 11-1-2542-10; and (3) Jenivie Delos Reyes,
 Franklin Biddinger, Floyd Hayes, John Villanueva, and Tehine
 Avilla (collectively, Multiple Claimants) in Civil No. 11-1-2533­
1HRS § 432E-6, which provided for external administrative review of a
managed care plan's final internal determination of an enrollee's complaint,
has been repealed and replaced by HRS §§ 432E–31 through –44 to comply with
the requirements of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010,
Public Law No. 111–148. See 2011 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 230. However, the
repeal of HRS § 432E-6 was not retroactive, and we apply HRS § 432E-6 in
deciding this appeal because HRS § 432E-6 was the law in effect during the
relevant time period. 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
10. In these cases, the Enrollees sought judicial review of 
decisions issued by the Hawai 'i Insurance Commissioner Gordon Ito 
(Commissioner) in external review proceedings brought under HRS 
§ 432E-6. The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit 
2
Court)  ruled that it lacked jurisdiction under HRS § 91-14(a) to
review the Commissioner's decisions because the decisions were
 not made in a "contested case," which is a prerequisite for
 judicial review under HRS § 91-14(a). Accordingly, the Circuit
 Court dismissed all three cases for lack of subject matter
 jurisdiction.
 
As explained below, we conclude that the Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court's decision in Hawaii Management Alliance Association v. Insurance Commissioner, 106 Hawai
'i 21, 100 P.3d 
952 (2004) (hereinafter, HMAA), controls our decision in this case. We read HMAA as concluding that parties to external review proceedings under HRS § 432E-6 have a right to judicial review of external review decisions pursuant to HRS § 91-14(a). Based on HMAA, we hold that the Circuit Court had jurisdiction to decide: (1) Harrison's request for judicial review of the Commissioner's
 denial of her request for certain benefits; and (2) Delos Santos'
 and the Multiple Claimants' requests for judicial review of the
 Commissioner's award of attorney's fees in connection with their
 external reviews. Accordingly, we vacate the Circuit Court's
 dismissal of the Enrollees' cases for lack of subject matter
 jurisdiction, and we remand the cases for decisions on the
 merits.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I. Harrison
 
Harrison, through her mother, submitted a request to
 
Evercare for specialized therapy at a facility in Oklahoma
 (Oklahoma Facility). The therapy had been prescribed by
 Harrison's physician, Dr. Susan Koh, to be conducted for a
 twelve-month period. Harrison's request also included
 
2 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 
3
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
transportation, lodging, and moving family household goods and
 
shipping the family's van to Oklahoma. Evercare denied
 Harrison's request on the ground that the requested services were
 available in Hawai
'i. 
After Evercare issued its final internal determination
 
denying Harrison's request for benefits, Harrison filed a request
 with the Commissioner for external review of Evercare's decision
 
3
pursuant to HRS § 432E-6  and asked that the review be conducted
on an expedited basis.
4 The Commissioner denied Harrison's
 
request that the external review be conducted on an expedited
 basis. The Commissioner appointed an external review panel and
 scheduled a review hearing to decide Harrison's request for
 external review.
5
 
As the date of Harrison's external review hearing
 
approached, Evercare issued a new Notice of Action, which
 partially reversed its previous denial of Harrison's request for
 
3HRS § 432E-6(a)(1) provided:
 
(a) After exhausting all internal complaint and appeal
procedures available, an enrollee, or the enrollee's treating
provider or appointed representative, may file a request for
external review of a managed care plan's final internal
determination to a three-member review panel appointed by the
commissioner composed of a representative from a managed care plan
not involved in the complaint, a provider licensed to practice and
practicing medicine in Hawaii not involved in the complaint, and
the commissioner or the commissioner's designee in the following
manner:
 
(1)	 The enrollee shall submit a request for external
review to the commissioner within sixty days from the
date of the final internal determination by the
managed care plan[.]
 
4HRS § 432E-6.5 (2005) authorized requests for external review under HRS
§ 432E-6 to be determined on an expedited basis under specified circumstances.
 
5HRS § 432E-6(a)(4) provided in relevant part:
 
(4)	 Upon receipt of the request for external review and
upon a showing of good cause, the commissioner shall
appoint the members of the external review panel and
shall conduct a review hearing pursuant to chapter 91.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
benefits.6 In explaining its new Notice of Action, Evercare 
stated that it had "recently been informed" that not all of 
Harrison's medically necessary services were available in Hawai
'i. Evercare agreed to allow Harrison to obtain therapy on 
the mainland and to cover transportation and lodging costs while an evaluation and treatment plan was being developed. However, Evercare did not approve all of the benefits sought by Harrison. Evercare did not agree with Harrison's request that her therapy be provided at the Oklahoma Facility and indicated only that the Oklahoma Facility would be one of the facilities evaluated and considered. Evercare also did not agree to cover the frequency and length of services prescribed by Dr. Koh, and the new Notice of Action only stated that "the frequency of therapy services and length of therapy" would be determined during Harrison's temporary "referral stay" on the mainland. Evercare continued to deny Harrison's request to cover expenses related to obtaining services in Oklahoma, such as moving family household goods and shipping the family's van to Oklahoma. Evercare asserted that it would not pay relocation expenses because if Harrison relocated to Oklahoma with the intention of establishing residence there, she would no longer be eligible for services under the Hawai
'i 
QExA program. 
6The new Notice of Action provided in relevant part:
 
We are approving a combination of individual and group therapy at an
appropriate center on the mainland. We will assess the need for other
 medically necessary services during the referral stay on the mainland
once the evaluation and treatment plan is established at the center on
the mainland. We will then issue authorizations and arrange for such
medically necessary services. We will pay for transportation to/from
Hawaii and lodging while you are temporarily on the mainland.
 
. . . .
 As previously stated in our Notice of Action dated May 27, 2011, we will
not pay to relocate Hannah, you, your household and van to Oklahoma.
Please note that if you relocate to another state, you will no longer be
a resident of Hawaii. As a non-resident, the State of Hawaii will
disenroll you from Medicaid and Evercare QExA. Enrollment and
 eligibility is solely determined by the State of Hawaii, not Evercare.
 
5
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon issuing its new Notice of Action, Evercare sent a
 
letter to the Commissioner requesting that the external review be
 
dismissed as being without good cause under HRS § 432E-6(a)(4)7
 
8
or without merit under HRS § 432E-6(a)(6)  because: (1) Evercare
had overturned its original Notice of Action; (2) there was no
 coverage for Harrison's request to obtain services at the
 Oklahoma Facility if she intended to permanently relocate to
 Oklahoma; and (3) the level of services related to the requested
 relocation was not medically necessary. One day prior to the
 scheduled hearing, the Commissioner notified the parties that he
 was taking the hearing off the calendar and would be issuing an
 order dismissing the external review. In his subsequent "Order
 of Dismissal," the Commissioner referred to evidence that
 Harrison intended to permanently relocate to Oklahoma. The
 Commissioner ruled that "[b]ased on the submissions of the
 parties reflecting [Harrison's] intent to permanently relocate to
 Oklahoma and the applicable Hawaii Medicaid regulations, this
 request for external review should be dismissed as being without
 merit pursuant to HRS § 432E-6(a)(6)." The Commissioner
 accordingly dismissed Harrison's request for external review. 
Harrison appealed the Commissioner's "Order of Dismissal" to the
 Circuit Court pursuant to HRS § 91-14.
9
 
II. Delos Santos
 
Delos Santos received a Notice of Action from Evercare
 
stating that it intended to reduce the hours of her in-home
 nursing care services. After Evercare issued its final internal
 
7
See note 5, supra .
 
8HRS § 432E-6(a)(6) provided:
 
(6)	 After considering the enrollee's complaint, the
managed care plan's response, and any affidavits filed
by the parties, the commissioner may dismiss the
request for external review if it is determined that
the request is frivolous or without merit[.]
 
9In her opening brief, Harrison asserts that after the Commissioner
dismissed her request for external review, Evercare eventually approved, and
she began receiving, services at a facility in New York City.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
determination, Delos Santos filed a request with the Commissioner
 
for external review of Evercare's decision. An external review
 hearing was held, the external review panel affirmed Evercare's
 final internal determination, and the Commissioner entered an
 order to that effect. Delos Santos appealed to the Circuit Court
 pursuant to HRS § 91-14, and the Circuit Court overturned the
 Commissioner's order upholding Evercare's decision to reduce the
 number of hours of in-home nursing care services.
 
Delos Santos filed two motions for attorney's fees and
 
costs with the Commissioner pursuant to HRS § 432E-6(e),
10
 
requesting a total of $43,067.35 in attorney's fees and costs. 
Evercare filed oppositions to the motions. Without holding a
 hearing on the motions, the Commissioner issued an order that
 disallowed $12,227.59 of the requested attorney's fees and costs
 on the grounds that they: (1) were incurred before the issuance
 of Evercare's final internal determination; (2) were for expert
 witness fees; and (3) were "incurred in the general
 representation of the client[.]" The Commissioner awarded the
 reduced amount of $30,389.76 in attorney's fees and costs. Delos
 Santos appealed the Commissioner's attorney's fees and costs
 order to the Circuit Court pursuant to HRS §91-14.
 
III. Multiple Claimants
 
Multiple Claimants all received Notices of Action from
 
Evercare informing them of a reduction in services. Multiple
 Claimants disputed these reductions through Evercare's internal
 procedures, and Evercare issued internal final determinations
 upholding the reductions in each case. Individually, but through
 the same counsel (Attorney), the Multiple Claimants filed 
10HRS § 432E-6(e) provided:
 
An enrollee may be allowed, at the commissioner's
discretion, an award of a reasonable sum for attorney's fees and
reasonable costs incurred in connection with the external review
 under this section, unless the commissioner in an administrative
proceeding determines that the appeal was unreasonable,
fraudulent, excessive, or frivolous.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
requests for external review with the Commissioner of Evercare's
 
decisions.
 
The Commissioner appointed an external review panel and
 
scheduled a hearing date in Hayes' case. The Commissioner issued
 letters requesting information from Evercare in the cases of
 Biddinger and Avilla.
 
Evercare subsequently reversed its decision to reduce
 
services for each of the Multiple Claimants and cancelled the
 Notices of Action it had issued. In response, the Commissioner,
 pursuant to HRS §§ 432E-6(a)(4) and (a)(6), dismissed all of the
 Multiple Claimants' requests for external review, ruling that
 there was no good cause to convene a review panel in light of
 Evercare's reversal of its prior decisions to reduce services.
 
After the requests for external review were dismissed,
 
Attorney filed motions for attorney's fees and costs with the
 Commissioner on behalf of each of the Multiple Claimants. 
Attorney requested specific amounts of attorney's fees and costs
 for each of the Multiple Claimants, which when added together
 totaled $33,237.89 in attorney's fees and $12,349.75 in costs. 
Evercare opposed the motions, arguing, among other things, that
 its cancellation of its final internal determination deprived the 
Commissioner of jurisdiction over the matter. Without holding a
 hearing on the motions, the Commissioner issued a single order
 awarding Attorney a lump-sum amount of $15,000 for attorney's
 fees and costs. The order did not specify the amount awarded
 with respect to each of the Multiple Claimants or distinguish
 between attorney's fees and costs.
 
The Commissioner explained the award as follows:
 
Having considered the entire record in this matter,
the Commissioner finds and concludes that [Multiple
Claimants'] counsel should be awarded a reasonable sum for
attorneys' fees and reasonable costs. However, because the
Commissioner believes that [Evercare] reversed the final
internal determination in these cases primarily as the
result of a business decision in light of the coming end of
the external review process and not primarily as the result
of the work done by [Multiple Claimants'] counsel, we do not
think an award of all of the requested attorneys['] fees is
appropriate. Therefore, we are ordering payment of a lesser
amount.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Multiple Claimants appealed the Commissioner's
 
attorney's fees and costs order to the Circuit Court pursuant to
 
HRS § 91-14. Evercare cross-appealed and argued that the
 Commissioner lacked jurisdiction to award attorney's fees and
 costs because Evercare had cancelled its final internal
 determinations and the Commissioner had dismissed the Multiple
 Claimants' external review requests.
 
IV. Circuit Court Proceedings
 
The three cases were briefed before the Circuit Court. 
The Enrollees were the petitioners-appellants, and Evercare was
 the appellee-respondent in each case. The Commissioner, while
 also a party to each case, did not file an answering brief or
 argue in any of the cases. Evercare also pursued its cross-
appeal in the Multiple Claimants' case.
 
During oral argument in Delos Santos' case, the Circuit
 
Court sua sponte raised the issue of its subject matter
 jurisdiction and requested supplemental briefing in all three
 cases. After receiving the supplemental briefs and hearing
 consolidated oral argument for all three cases, the Circuit Court
 issued orders dismissing the three cases for lack of subject
 matter jurisdiction. In each case, the Circuit Court ruled that
 the Enrollees had failed to demonstrate that Commissioner's order
 being appealed had been issued in a "contested case" as required
 to invoke the Circuit Court's jurisdiction under HRS § 91-14(a). 
The Circuit Court entered its Final Judgment in each case on June
 20, 2012, and the Enrollees appealed to this court.
 
DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, the Enrollees argue that the Circuit Court
 
erred in ruling that it lacked subject matter jurisdiction over
 their appeals from: (1) the Commissioner's order dismissing
 Harrison's request for external review; and (2) the
 Commissioner's orders partially denying Delos Santos' and the
 Multiple Claimants' requests for attorney's fees and costs. The
 question of whether subject matter jurisdiction exists is a 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
question of law that we review de novo under the right/wrong 
standard. Kaniakapupu v. Land Use Comm'n, 111 Hawai 'i 124, 131, 
139 P.3d 712, 719 (2006). 
The Enrollees sought judicial review of the
 
Commissioner's orders pursuant to HRS § 91-14, which authorizes
 an aggrieved person to seek judicial review of a final decision
 and order "in a contested case[.]" HRS § 91-14(a). The Circuit
 Court dismissed the Enrollees' appeals for lack of subject matter
 jurisdiction because it ruled that their HRS § 432E-6 external
 review proceedings were not "contested cases" within the meaning
 of HRS § 91-14(a). We conclude that the Enrollees' external
 review proceedings constituted contested cases and therefore the
 Circuit Court erred in dismissing their appeals for lack of
 subject matter jurisdiction.
 
I.
 
HRS § 91-14(a) provides the means for "aggrieved"
 
persons to obtain judicial review of administrative agency
 decisions. HRS § 91-14(a) provides, in relevant part:
 
Any person aggrieved by a final decision and order in a
contested case or by a preliminary ruling of the nature that
deferral of review pending entry of a subsequent final
decision would deprive appellant of adequate relief is
entitled to judicial review thereof under this chapter[.]
 
HRS § 91-1(5) (2012) defines a "contested case" as "a proceeding 
in which the legal rights, duties, or privileges of specific parties are required by law to be determined after an opportunity for agency hearing." For an agency hearing to be "required by law," "it may be required by (1) agency rule, (2) statute, or (3) constitutional due process." Kaleikini v. Thielen, 124 Hawai
'i 
1, 17, 237 P.2d 1067, 1083 (2007) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). In order to qualify as a contested case, it is not necessary that an agency hearing actually be held as long as a hearing was required by law to be held and would have determined the rights, duties, and privileges of specific parties. Id. at 23-24, 237 P.2d at 1089-90. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
Evercare argues that external review proceedings under
 
HRS § 432E-6 are not contested cases because a hearing is not
 
required by law. In particular, Evercare argues that: (1) a
 hearing is not required by statute because under HRS § 432E­6(a)(4), the Commissioner only has to hold a hearing if there is
 showing of good cause, and under HRS § 432E-6(a)(6), the
 Commissioner may dismiss the external review request upon a
 determination that it is frivolous or without merit; (2) there is
 no rule-based requirement for a hearing; and (3) there is no due
 process constitutional mandate for a hearing regarding Harrison's
 external review claim because Harrison had other means of
 challenging Evercare's benefit determination; and (4) there is no
 due process constitutional mandate for a hearing on Delos Santos'
 and the Multiple Claimants' requests for attorney's fees and
 costs because they had no property interest in the award of such
 attorney's fees and costs under HRS § 432E-6(e).
 
However, in HMAA, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court construed 
HRS § 432E-6 and concluded that the parties to external review proceedings had a right to seek judicial review of external review decisions. HMAA, 106 Hawai
'i at 35, 100 P.3d at 966. 
The only means of judicial review cited by the supreme court in its analysis is HRS § 91-14(a), which provides for judicial review in contested cases. Id. The supreme court stated that 
"Hawai
'i's external review incorporates HRS chapter 91, the 
Hawai'i Administrative Procedures's Act (HAPA)[,]" and that "HAPA 
provides for judicial review of contested cases[.]" Id. We read 
HMAA as concluding that parties to external review proceedings under HRS § 432E-6 have a right to judicial review of external review decisions pursuant to HRS § 91-14(a). Under HRS § 91­14(a), the only way that parties to external review proceedings could have a right to judicial review is if external review proceedings constitute contested cases. Thus, the supreme court in HMAA must have concluded that HRS § 432E-6 external review proceedings constitute contested cases. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The issue in HMAA was whether the Employee Retirement
 
Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) preempted HRS § 432E-6 with
 
respect to employee benefit plans covered by ERISA. Id. at 23,
 
35-36, 100 P.3d at 954, 967. The supreme court held that HRS 
§ 432E-6 was preempted by ERISA based on conflict preemption. 
Id. at 34-36, 100 P.3d at 965-67. Crucial to the supreme court's 
holding was its determination that parties had the right to
 obtain judicial review of external review decisions, which served
 to distinguish HRS § 432E-6 from an Illinois statute that the
 United States Supreme Court had held was not preempted by ERISA. 
Id. at 35, 100 P.3d at 966-67. In making this determination, the
 Hawai
'i Supreme Court stated: 
Nevertheless, the Illinois statute and HRS § 432E–6
differ in several important ways. First, Hawaii's external
review incorporates HRS chapter 91, the Hawai' i 
Administrative Procedure Act (HAPA). See HRS § 432E–6(a)(4)
(stating that "the commissioner shall appoint the members of
the panel and shall conduct a review hearing pursuant to
chapter 91"). HAPA sets forth the procedural requirements
for contested case hearings, see, e.g., HRS § 91–9 (1993 &
Supp. 2003) (providing that all parties in a contested case
"shall be afforded an opportunity for hearing after
reasonable notice"); more importantly, HAPA provides for
judicial review of contested cases: "[a]ny person aggrieved
by a final decision and order in a contested case . . . is
entitled to judicial review thereof under this chapter[.]"
HRS § 91–14 (1993). Second, whereas the Illinois statute
considered in Rush Prudential required one physician to
determine whether the proposed procedure was "medically
necessary," the Hawai' i statute provides for a three-member
panel (only one of whom must be a physician) to determine
whether the HMO's actions were "reasonable."
 
These distinctions are fatal to the external review
 
law. The external review hearing more closely resembles
"contract interpretation or evidentiary litigation before a
neutral arbiter" than "a practice (having nothing to do with
arbitration) of obtaining another medical opinion." Rush
 
Prudential, 536 U.S. at 383, 122 S.Ct. 2151. More damaging,
however, is the right of either party to seek judicial
review. For example, a claimant who is denied benefits
pursuant to Hawaii's external review law can appeal that
denial to the courts, allowing for a judicial determination
of the claimant's entitlement to benefits. This is
 
precisely the type of adjudication barred by Pilot Life, 481
U.S. at 52, 107 S.Ct. 1549 (holding that § 1132(a) is the"exclusive vehicle for actions by ERISA-plan participantsand beneficiaries asserting improper processing of a claimfor benefits"). See HRS § 432E–6; 215 Ill. Comp. Stat. 
125/4–10. Thus, although the Hawai' i legislature is
entitled to regulate insurance by requiring external review(because external review laws are not necessarily preempted 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by ERISA), HRS § 432E–6 too closely resembles adjudication
and therefore is preempted by § 1132(a).
 
Id. (emphases added; brackets and ellipsis points in original;
 
footnote omitted).
 
III.
 
We conclude that HMAA controls our decision in this
 
case regarding the availability of judicial review of decisions
 in external review proceedings under HRS § 432E-6 and whether
 such proceedings constitute contested cases. Although the
 supreme court did not provide a detailed explanation of its
 reasoning, the supreme court concluded that parties were entitled
 to judicial review of HRS § 432E-6 external review decisions
 pursuant to HRS § 91-14(a). This conclusion was integral to the
 supreme court's holding and analysis in HMAA. Moreover, as
 noted, judicial review under HRS § 91-14(a) would only be
 available if HRS § 432E-6 external review proceedings constituted
 contested cases. Based on HMAA, we conclude that external review
 proceedings under HRS § 432E-6 are contested cases and that final
 decisions and orders issued by the Commissioner in such
 proceedings are subject to judicial review pursuant to HRS § 91­14(a).
 
With respect to Harrison's case, the new Notice of
 
Action submitted by Evercare after the Commissioner had scheduled
 the external review hearing only partially resolved Harrison's
 claim for benefits. The Commissioner's order dismissing
 Harrison's request for external review therefore constituted a
 denial of a portion of her claim for benefits. Based on HMAA, we
 conclude that the Commissioner's dismissal order was a "final
 decision and order in a contested case" that was subject to
 judicial review under HRS § 91-14(a). Accordingly, the Circuit
 Court had subject matter jurisdiction over Harrison's appeal of
 the Commissioner's order.
 
With respect to Delos Santos' and the Multiple
 
Claimants' cases, the Commissioner's decisions on their motions
 for attorney's fees and costs were based on and were a part of
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the external review proceedings. HRS § 432E-6(e) authorizes the
 
Commissioner to award "a reasonable sum for attorney's fees and
 reasonable costs incurred in connection with the external review
 under this section[.]" Based on HMAA, we conclude that the
 Commissioner's orders awarding attorney's fees and costs
 constituted final decisions and orders in contested cases that
 were subject to judicial review under HRS 91-14(a). Accordingly,
 the Circuit Court had subject matter jurisdiction over Delos
 Santos' and the Multiple Claimants' appeals from the
 Commissioner's orders. 
CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the Circuit Court's
 
Final Judgments in all three cases (Civil No. 11-1-2903-11, Civil
 No. 11-1-2542-10, and Civil No. 11-1-2533-10), and we remand
 these cases for further proceedings consistent with this
 Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 30, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
RAFAEL G. DEL CASTILLO 
(JOUXSON-MEYERS & DEL CASTILLOAttorneys at Law, a LimitedLiability Law Company)for Petitioners-Appellants,Cross-Appellees/Appellants Chief Judge 
Associate Judge 
ELMIRA K.L. TSANG 
DEBORAH DAY EMERSON Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Appellee/Appellee Associate Judge 
DIANNE WINTER BROOKINS JOHN S. RHEE MICHELLE N. COMEAU (ALSTON HUNT FLOYD & INGAttorneys at LawA Law Corporation)for Respondent-AppelleeCross-Appellant/Appellee 
14
 