NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000451
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
LISA ANN PALI, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 05-1-0366(2))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Lisa Ann Pali (Pali) appeals from
 
the "Order Denying Defendant's Motion for an Order of Expungement
 
Pursuant to [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)] §706-622.5(4)"
 
entered on May 11, 2011 by the Circuit Court of the Second
 
Circuit (circuit court).1
 
On appeal, Pali argues that the circuit court erred in
 
denying her "Motion for an Order of Expungement Pursuant to HRS
 
§706-622.5(4)" (Motion) (1) based on a "hyper-technical"
 
2
construction of HRS § 706-622.5(4)  that disregards the statute's 
1
 The Honorable Shackley F. Raffetto presided.
 
2
 HRS § 706-622.5(4) (2011 Supp.) provides:
 
(4) The court, upon written application from a person
sentenced under this part, shall issue a court order to
expunge the record of conviction for that particular
offense; provided that a person has successfully completed
the substance abuse treatment program and complied with
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
plain meaning and underlying legislative intent; (2) in violation
 
of her due process rights, since she had already been discharged
 
from probation, with which she was found to be compliant; and (3)
 
where the court lacked jurisdiction, since her probation term had
 
ended. She also contends that the circuit court plainly erred by
 
denying the Motion based on a clearly erroneous finding of fact
 
that she accrued criminal convictions during the probation
 
period.
 
The State agrees that the Circuit Court erred in
 
denying the Motion because construing HRS §§ 706-622.5(4) and ­
3
630 together, when Pali's probation period ended she had
"'satisfied' the disposition of the court" by law and, by
 
extension, complied with the "other terms and conditions of
 
probation" required for an order of expungement.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Pali's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Pursuant to the plain language of HRS §§ 706­
622.5(4), to obtain an expungement of a record of conviction by
 
the court, the movant must complete her "substance abuse
 
treatment program and comply with other terms and conditions of
 
2(...continued)
other terms and conditions of probation. 
A person sentenced
to probation under this section shall be eligible for one
time only for expungement under this subsection.
 
3
 HRS § 706-630 (2011 Supp.) provides:
 
Upon the termination of the period of the probation or the
earlier discharge of the defendant, the defendant shall be
relieved of any obligations imposed by the order of the
court and shall have satisfied the disposition of the court,
except as to any action under this chapter to collect unpaid
fines, restitution, attorney's fees, costs, or interest.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3probation."45 , Thus, the Circuit Court's denial of Pali's Motion
because it appeared that Pali was convicted multiple times for
criminal offenses during her probationary period, was consistent
with the plain language of the statute.
We do not read HRS §706-630 as mandating a contrary
result.  HRS § 706-630 governs the probationer's future
obligations after the probation sentence has been completed.  It
does not, by its terms, address the expungement of the record of
that sentence by the court or whether the probationer complied
with the conditions of probation.
(2)  Pali's second argument, that denying her Motion
after her discharge from probation and designation as "probation
compliant" was a violation of due process because it deprived her
of proper notice that the State would "be challenging expungement
at a later date or that her original sentence might be modified"
is without merit.  The State did not seek revocation of Pali's
probation, nor did it seek to modify its terms after Pali's
probation had ended.  Pali presents no authority for the
proposition that the State must raise any violation of probation,
for the purposes of expungement , in advance of the filing of a
motion to expunge.
Pali maintains that the probation department "had
earlier made the opposite finding--that [Pali] was in compliance
with her probation requirements[.]"  However, a careful reading
of the "Certificate of Discharge" filed in this case contains no
such finding.  Rather, it states only that Pali "having completed
the period of probation . . . shall be relieved of any
4The first term and condition of Pali's probation was that she
"must not commit another federal or state crime during the time of probation."
5Pali attached a letter from Aloha House attesting to her
completion of the program to her Motion.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
obligations imposed by the order of the court and shall have
 
satisfied the disposition of the court[.]"
 
(3) Based on her argument that, as her sentence was
 
imposed "pursuant to HRS Section 706-622.5" she became eligible
 
for expungement so long as she completed her substance abuse
 
treatment and was "probation-compliant" Pali maintains that the
 
adjudication of a violation of probation for the purposes of
 
expungement constitutes a modification of her sentence of
 
probation and as her probationary term had elapsed, the Circuit
 
Court lacked jurisdiction to consider whether she violated the
 
terms of her probation. This argument is also without merit. 
Although Pali was sentenced under HRS § 706-622.5, that did not
 
convert the expungement subsection into a term of her probation
 
nor make it subject to revocation or modification procedures.
 
Finally, Pali argues that the Circuit Court committed
 
plain error when it found she had been convicted of multiple
 
crimes during her period of probation because this finding, in
 
her view, was not supported by substantial evidence. The
 
appellate court "will apply the plain error standard of review to
 
correct errors which seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or
 
public reputation of judicial proceedings, to serve the ends of
 
justice, and to prevent the denial of fundamental rights." State
 
v. Nichols, 111 Hawai' i 327, 334, 141 P.3d 974, 981 (2006) 
(quoting State v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai' i 325, 330, 966 P.2d 637, 642 
(1998)). 
The record reveals that, the State represented to the
 
Circuit Court that Pali had been convicted of five crimes during
 her probationary period, based on a review of a computerized
 
database. Subsequent to the State's representation, Pali did not
 
present contrary evidence as movant but instead argued that
 
despite these convictions during her probation, she had
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
successfully completed her probation. We decline to find plain
 
error was committed here.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the May 11, 2011 "Order
 
Denying Defendant's Motion for an Order of Expungement Pursuant
 to HRS §706-622.5(4)," entered by the Circuit Court of the Second
 
Circuit, is affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 29, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Summer M.M. Kupau
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Artemio C. Baxa,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Maui,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 