NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0001077
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE EDWARD C. STERLING
 
QTIP EXEMPT TRUST DATED AUGUST 24, 1995, THE EDWARD
C. STERLING QTIP NON-EXEMPT TRUST DATED
AUGUST 24, 1995, AND THE EDWARD C. STERLING
IRREVOCABLE TRUST DATED AUGUST 24, 1995
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(TRUST NO. 98-0039)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
1
Appellant Patrick Williams (Williams)  appeals, pro se, 
from the following November 25, 2011 Hawai 'i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 54(b)-certified judgments of the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court): (1) Judgment on Order Granting Petition for Approval of Final Accounts (Judgment re Approval of Final Accounts); (2) Judgment on Order Granting 
Petition to Strike Remainder Beneficiaries' Demand for Jury Trial 
1
 Although the Notice of Appeal in this case was filed by counsel on
behalf of all four Remainder Beneficiaries, the Opening Brief was filed pro se
 
by Williams only, after this Court granted counsel's motion to withdraw as
counsel by Order dated March 19, 2012.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Filed December 22, 2010 (Judgment re Demand for Jury Trial); (3)
 
Judgment on Order Denying Petition to Remove Trustee and for
 
Surcharges (Judgment re Removal of Trustees and for Surcharges);
 
and (4) Judgment on Order Denying Remainder Beneficiaries'
 
Petition for Order Permitting Discovery (Judgment re Discovery).2
 
Williams raises seven points of error: (1) the Circuit
 
Court erred by adopting the doctrine of laches; (2) the Circuit
 
Court erred by refusing to grant discovery; (3) the court-
appointed Master, Benjamin M. Matsubara (Master), erred by
 
refusing to take an active role in discovering the facts; (4) the
 
Master and the Circuit Court erred by refusing to look back in
 
time to establish the starting point of trust assets; (5) the
 
Circuit Court erred by failing to hold the Appellee, First
 
Hawaiian Bank (Trustee) to the minimum standards of law; (6) the
 
Circuit Court erred by failing to provide an unbiased mechanism,
 
such as a jury trial, for evaluation of the merits of the case;
 
and (7) the Circuit Court erred by permitting the Master to
 
present and subsequently accepting categorizations of specific
 
errors in the accounting as "general," and ignoring mistakes in
 
the accounting that would be visible if discovery had been
 
permitted.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Williams's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Williams fails to cite to where in the record the
 
Circuit Court relied upon the doctrine of laches in its rulings
 
below. Therefore, it is unclear whether the Circuit Court in
 
fact adopted the Trustee's argument that the doctrine of laches
 
was an appropriate rationale to deny the Remainder Beneficiaries'
 
2
 The Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prayers for relief. As such, this point of error may be 
dismissed pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 
Rule 28(b)(4). In addition, Williams's argument on this point is 
not cognizable. In any case, upon review of the arguments 
presented on the issue of laches, and the record in this matter, 
assuming that the Petition to Remove Trustee and for Surcharges 
was denied based (in whole or in part) upon the doctrine of 
laches, we cannot conclude that the Circuit Court abused its 
discretion by so doing. 
(2) Williams makes no cogent argument supporting his
 
request for relief from the Circuit Court's order denying
 
discovery. Of the seventeen categories of documents sought by
 
Remainder Beneficiaries, only two of the listed items relate to
 
the subject accounting periods. To the extent that the requested
 
documents do not relate to the subject petition, the Circuit
 
Court did not abuse its discretion in denying the Remainder
 
Beneficiaries' request for discovery. As to the remaining items,
 
it appears that the Trustees had previously provided the
 
Remainder Beneficiaries with the available records. To the
 
extent that certain tax documents had not yet been prepared, the
 
Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion when it denied
 
discovery of such documents. Accordingly, the Circuit Court did
 
not abuse its discretion when it denied the Petition for Order
 
Permitting Discovery.
 
(3) & (7) Williams argues that the Master should have 
engaged in more fact-finding process by requesting additional 
documents from the Trustee, and that certain accounting errors 
were not thoroughly explored by the Master. Williams cites to 
Rule 29 of the Hawai 'i Probate Rules (HPR), which defines the 
role of the Master: 
Unless otherwise ordered by the court, the master
shall review the operations of the fiduciary in light of the
terms of the controlling document, as well as the financial
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
transactions of the trust or estate. The fiduciary shall
supply to the master a copy of the accountings and any
masters’ reports for the prior three accounting periods and
shall make available for the master’s inspection all
accounting records for the current accounting period. The
master shall have unlimited access to the books and records
 of the fiduciary with respect to the trust or estate that
are not protected by privilege, including minutes of all
meetings, and may interview any employee of the fiduciary
regarding the trust or estate as the master deems
appropriate. The master shall submit a written report of the
master’s findings to the court and serve a copy on all
interested persons. Interested persons may file objections
or responses to the master’s report, and parties may object
or respond to such pleadings, within the time limits set
forth in Rule 10(c).
 
However, Williams fails to demonstrate that the documents that
 
the Master reviewed in drawing his findings and conclusions were
 
insufficient to meet the above-stated standard.
 
Upon review, it does not appear that the documents
 
reviewed by the Master were insufficient to satisfy the standard
 
stated in HPR Rule 29. The Master reviewed, inter alia: (1) the
 
Edward C. Sterling Trust, dated August 24, 1995; (2) the Last
 
Will and Testament of Mary Elizabeth Sterling, dated February 27,
 
2002; (3) the Edward C. Sterling QTIP Exempt Trust, Statement of
 
Account from 07/01/06 through 10/31/09; (4) the Edward C.
 
Sterling QTIP Non-Exempt Trust, Statement of Account 07/01/06
 
through 10/31/09; (5) Edward C. Sterling Irrevocable Trust,
 
Statement of Account 07/01/06 through 10/31/09; (6) Remainder
 
Beneficiaries' Objection to Petition for Approval of Final
 
Accounts, filed on August 19, 2010; (7) [Trustee's] Response to
 
Remainder Beneficiaries' Objection to Petition for Approval of
 
Final Accounts Filed on May 18, 2010, which was filed on October
 
11, 2010; (8) Remainder Beneficiaries' Supplemental Objections to
 
Petition for Approval of Final Accounts, filed on January 27,
 
2011; (9) [Trustee's] Response to Remainder Beneficiaries'
 
Supplemental Objections to Petition for Approval of Final
 
Accounts, filed on February 10, 2011; and (10) Statements of
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Accounts for the Three Sterling Trusts for the supplemental
 
accounting period through 06/30/10. 
There is no evidence that the Master failed to access
 
additional documents which would have aided the Master in
 
further, necessary findings of fact in this case. Accordingly,
 
we conclude that the Master did not abuse his discretion in not
 
requesting additional documents from the Trustee.
 
(4) In his fourth point of error, Williams appears to
 
argue that the Master and Circuit Court should have looked
 
further back in time to establish the starting point of the trust
 
assets. However, Williams merely poses legal questions to the
 
Circuit Court without any cognizable arguments supported by
 
relevant facts from the record and/or relevant supporting law. 
The entirety of Williams's argument on this point is:
 
We have earlier referenced Hawaii Probate Rule 26.
 
Appellant is not aware of Hawaii case law governing if, when
and how the starting point of the assets in a trust can be
assessed. In other words, can the court look back in time
to determine if what is supposed to be there, is there? If
 the court finds missing assets, can the court then look back
in time, how far, and in what situations?
 
Williams does not provide accurate record citations concerning
 
when this issue was brought to the attention of the Circuit
 
Court. Thus, Williams is precluded from raising this issue for
 
the first time on appeal. See Miller v. Leadership Hous. Sys.,
 
Inc., 57 Haw. 321, 325, 555 P.2d 864, 867 (1976). This argument
 also violates HRAP Rule 28(b)(7), which provides, in relevant
 
part: "The argument, containing the contentions of the appellant
 
on the points presented and the reasons therefor, with citations
 
to the authorities, statutes and parts of the record relied on." 
Therefore, we decline to further address this issue.
 
(5) Williams argues that the Circuit Court did not
 
hold the Trustee to the minimum standards under applicable law. 
Williams again failed to present cognizable arguments. Without
 
any legal citations, Williams argues that: "This gets to the
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
issue of culture. Banks have developed a culture of insularity,
 
where they feel it is their right to 'crash the plane,' [ 3
] and
everyone else should just mind their own business." Without any
 
citations to the record or legal authority, this issue may be
 
dismissed pursuant to HRAP Rule 28(b)(7).
 
Furthermore, even if we attempt to reach the merits of

 
Williams's argument, Williams has not demonstrated that the
 
Circuit Court abused its discretion when it approved the
 
Trustee's final accounts. Williams fails to show how the Master
 
clearly erred in the findings of fact with respect to the
 
accuracy of the accountings. Williams does not allege with any
 
specificity which factual findings of the court were purportedly
 
inaccurate, or in what specific ways the Trustee breached its
 
fiduciary duties. We conclude that this argument is without
 
merit.
 
As the Circuit Court found during the September 29,
 
2011 hearing, Elizabeth J. Brownfield (Brownfield), CPA, listed
 
numerous alleged discrepancies in the Trustee's accounts. 
However, the Circuit Court did not clearly err when it found that
 
all of these discrepancies, to the extent possible, were
 
addressed by the Trustee:
 
There was a response to [Brownfield's letter]. And
 
after that it seemed like the issue just laid there. I mean
 
I don't see anything else in there. She raised the issues. 
Uh, there was a prompt response and there was nothing
further after that. In other words, each and every concern
that was raised by Ms. Brownfield was addressed, and it
seemed like after that the issue was just dormant. So
 taking that into consideration, what else is there?
 
Additionally, Brownfield was the second CPA retained by
 
Remainder Beneficiaries, who submitted Brownfield's findings more
 
than one year after the filing of the Petition for Approval of
 
Final Accounts. The first accountant's (CPA Sakamaki) concerns
 
3
 Williams is referencing Malcolm Gladwell's popular book, Outliers:
 
The Story of Success.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
were thoroughly addressed by Trustee, and taken fully into
 
consideration by the Master in the findings of fact submitted in
 
support of his recommendations to the court. Finally,
 
Brownfield's alleged discrepancies were reviewed by the Master,
 
who also did not credit the allegations, which were already
 
explained by the Trustee in a response to CPA Sakamaki. 
Thus, we conclude the Circuit Court did not err in
 
granting the Trustee's Petition for Approval of Final Accounts.
 
(6) Williams argues that the Circuit Court should have
 
granted the Remainder Beneficiaries' demand for jury trial. The
 
entirety of Williams' argument is:
 
We do not here re-list the case law cited by [the
Master] and Ms. Kanae. Their ample citations are concisely
and compactly included in the record [citations omitted].
Appellant does not believe anything can be added to their
arguments, other than pointing out that allowing a jury
trial may be the simplest means of disallowing prejudice
(toward large trusts and the need to protect them) to
influence a verdict or the collection of information.
 
Again, this Court may dismiss this argument for failure
 
to comply with HRAP Rule 28(b)(7), as it lacks citations to
 
specific errors alleged in the record, as well as citations to
 
legal authority.
 
Even if we assume that it applies, HRS § 560:1-306(a) 
(1996), a part of Hawaii's Uniform Probate Code, requires that 
"[i]f duly demanded, a party is entitled to trial by jury in a 
formal testacy proceeding and any proceeding in which any 
controverted question of fact arises as to which any party has a 
constitutional right to trial by jury." Hawai 'i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) 81(c) provides that "[t]he demand for jury trial 
[in probate proceedings] shall be made by motion within the time 
allowed by statute." HRCP 38(b), which was promulgated pursuant 
to HRS § 602-11, requires that a demand must be served "not later 
than 10 days after service of the last pleading directed at such 
issue." For the purpose of contesting the Trustee's Petition for 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Approval of Final Accounts, it appears that the last pleading
 
prior to its December 22, 2010 demand for jury trial was the
 
Trustee's Response to Remainder Beneficiaries' Objection to
 
Petition for Approval of Final Accounts filed on May 18, 2010.
 
Thus, it appears that the Remainder Beneficaries' demand for jury
 
trial was untimely. 
Upon review, we conclude that this point of error is
 
without merit. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's November 25,
 
2011 Judgments are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, September 30, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Patrick G. Williams 
Appellant Pro-Se Presiding Judge 
Edward M. Sanpei(Rush Moore LLP)for Trustee-AppelleeFIRST HAWAIIAN BANK 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8

 