NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000589
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
RICHARD K. MYERS, Defedant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. No. 11-1-1681)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge and Fujise, J.,
with Ginoza, J., concurring separately)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) appeals 
from the May 21, 2012 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and 
Order Granting Motion to Suppress Evidence" (Order) and the July 
19, 2012 "Order Denying State's Motion for Reconsideration of 
[Order]" (Reconsideration Order) issued by the Circuit Court of 
the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 
Through these two orders, the Circuit Court granted
 
Defendant-Appellee Richard K. Myers's (Myers) Motion to Suppress
 
Evidence (Motion to Suppress), in which Myers moved the court to
 
suppress (1) a "clear[,] plastic zip lock bag" (ziplock bag)
 
containing crystal methamphetamine (crystal meth), seized by the
 
police on November 21, 2011; and (2) Myers's statement which he
 
made at the time the police seized the ziplock bag.
 
1
 The Honorable Colette Y. Garibaldi presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) 
argues that the Circuit Court erred in granting Myers's Motion to 
Suppress because, inter alia Myers did not assert a reasonable 
expectation of privacy in either the ziplock bag or the red 
shopping bag (shopping bag) in which he dropped the ziplock bag. 
After a careful review of the points raised and arguments made by 
the parties, the relevant authority and the record, we resolve 
the State's appeal as follows, vacate the Order and 
Reconsideration Order and remand for further proceedings. 
The uncontested findings of fact made by the Circuit
 
Court are as follows:
 
1. On November 21, 2011, at approximately 9 a.m.,
Officer Tomita and Officer Ozoa were patrolling Kamalii Park
 
on segways.
 
2. From approximately ten (10) feet away, Officer
Tomita observed [Myers] seated with his back against a
planter; [Myers] appeared to be shaking [the ziplock bag]
which was approximately 1-2 square inches in size.
 
3. [Myers] was holding the [ziplock bag] between the
thumb and index finger of his left hand.
 
4. Officer Tomita observed the [ziplock bag] to
contain a white crystalline substance which -- based up on
Officer Tomita's training and experience -- appeared to be
[crystal meth].
 
5. Upon making this observation, Officer Tomita
approached [Myers] on his segway.
 
6. While Office[r] Tomita was approaching [Myers],
[Myers] looked at Officer Tomita and then dropped the
[ziplock bag] into the [shopping bag] located between
[Myers]'s legs.
 
7. The [shopping bag] belonged to [Myers].
 
8. Officer Tomita does not recall what [Myers] did
with his hands after dropping the [ziplock bag] into the
[shopping bag].
 
9. Officer Tomita arrived at [Myers]'s location within
a few seconds after his initial observation.
 
10. Officer Tomita stood over [Myers] and observed the
[ziplock bag] and other contents within the [shopping bag].
 
11. Officer Tomita took the [shopping bag] and walked
five (5) feet away to a nearby planter.
 
12. As he was walking away with the [shopping bag],
Officer Tomita recovered the [ziplock bag] from within the
[shopping bag].
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
13. Officer Tomita did not obtain a warrant prior to
recovering the [ziplock bag] from within the [shopping bag].
 
14. [Myers] did not consent to any seizure of the
[shopping bag] and/or any of its contents.
 
Based on these facts, the Circuit Court ruled that
 
Officer Tomita observed the ziplock bag containing crystal meth
 
in "open view" inside the shopping bag. We agree.
 
"When a governmental intrusion does not invade an 
individual's legitimate expectation of privacy, there is no 
search subject to the Warrant Clause." State v. Meyer, 78 
Hawai'i 308, 312, 893 P.2d 159, 163 (1995) (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted). In Meyer, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
explained: 
A "search" implies that there is an exploration for an
item or that the item is hidden. However, neither factor is
present in open view or plain view observations, and neither
observation involves a search in the constitutional sense.
 In other words, neither open view nor plain view
observations involve an invasion of an individual's
 reasonable expectation of privacy.
 
Id. at 312, 893 P.2d at 163 (citations omitted). 
With regard to the seizure of an object seen in open
 
view,
 
the warrantless seizure of the evidence in question depends
on whether the item is in a constitutionally protected area.
If the evidence is not in an area where there is a
 reasonable expectation of privacy, that is, if it is located
in a common space, such evidence is subject to seizure by
the governmental agent who spots it, without the necessity
of a warrant or exigent circumstances. "If a police officer
sees probable evidence in open view in a constitutionally
non-protected area, he or she may, of course, seize it. He
 or she seizes it because there is no constitutional
 
provision to gainsay the seizure." State v. Hook, 60 Haw.
197, 201, 587 P.2d 1224, 1228 (1978) (citation omitted).
 
Meyer, 78 Hawai 'i at 313, 893 P.2d at 164 (brackets omitted). 
Whether an area is constitutionally protected depends on (1) 
whether a person has exhibited an actual, subjective expectation 
of privacy that (2) society would deem objectively reasonable. 
State v. Bonnell, 75 Haw. 124, 139, 856 P.2d 1265, 1274 (1993) 
(adopting two-part test established in Katz v. United States, 389 
U.S. 347, 361 (1967) and where trial court found defendants
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"demonstrated subjective expectations . . . that their activities
 
in that area would remain private."). Both parts of this test
 
must be satisfied.
 
Here, the Circuit Court concluded that Officer Tomita
 
observed the ziplock bag in the shopping bag in "open view." 
Conclusion of Law ¶4. This conclusion is supported by Officer
 
2
Tomita's testimony  that, after Myers saw him approach, he
observed Myers drop the ziplock bag into the shopping bag held
 
between Myers's legs, the shopping bag remained open and he
 
observed the ziplock bag resting on top of the other contents in
 
the shopping bag. 
Conversely, the Circuit Court made no findings
 
that Myers took any steps to shield the contents of the shopping
 bag from public view, or to otherwise exhibit an actual
 
expectation of privacy.
 
However, the Circuit Court also concluded that the 
shopping bag was a "constitutionally protected area" because 
Myers had a "reasonable expectation of privacy" in the shopping 
bag. 
Given the facts as found by the Circuit Court, stated 
above, the Circuit Court was incorrect in its conclusion that the shopping bag was a constitutionally protected area as the Circuit 
Court found no facts that would support the conclusion that Myers 
exhibited an actual expectation of privacy in the shopping bag. 
Having no facts satisfying the first prong of the Katz/Bonnell 
test, the conclusion that Myers had a reasonable expectation of 
privacy in the shopping bag was insufficient to conclude the 
shopping bag was a constitutionally protected area. Therefore 
the seizure of the ziplock bag was not illegal and the subsequent 
statement by Myers should not have been suppressed. Meyer, 78 
Hawai
'i at 313, 893 P.2d at 164 ("If a police officer sees 
2
 Myers testified that, after he dropped the ziplock bag into the
shopping bag, he picked up a notebook that was in the shopping bag and covered
the opening of the shopping bag with the notebook, such that one could not see
the ziplock bag in the shopping bag. The Circuit Court made an oral finding
that it found Officer Tomita's testimony "far more credible" than Myers's and
did not make a finding that Myers had covered the opening of the shopping bag
after he dropped the ziplock bag into it. The Circuit Court did not change
its ruling in this respect on reconsideration.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
probable evidence in open view in a constitutionally non-
protected area, he or she may, of course, seize it.") (citation
 
and internal quotation marks omitted).
 
Therefore, the May 21, 2012 Order and the July 19, 2012
 
Reconsideration Order are hereby vacated and the case is remanded
 
to the Circuit Court of the First Circuit for further
 
proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 28, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Sonja P. McCullen,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
Evan S. Tokunaga,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
5
 