    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000500
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
TARVAL G. WEBSTER, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P.
 NO. 11-1-0056; CR. NOS. 98-0613 and 99-0358)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Tarval G. Webster (Webster)
 
appeals from the Order Denying Motion for Post-Conviction Relief,
 
filed on May 2, 2012 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (Circuit Court).
1
 
In Cr. No. 98-0613, Webster was found guilty of a
 
lesser included offense of Attempted Assault in the First Degree,
 in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-710 (1993)
 
(Count I), Carrying, Using or Threatening to Use a Firearm in the
 
Commission of a Separate Felony, in violation of HRS § 134-6(a)
 
and (e) (Supp. 1998) (Count II), Place to Keep Pistol or
 
Revolver, in violation of HRS § 134-6(c) and (e) (Supp. 1998)
 
(Count III), and three counts of Reckless Endangering in the
 
First Degree, in violation of HRS § 707-713 and 706-660.1(3)
 
(1993) (Counts IV, V, and VI). Webster was sentenced to 10 years
 
1
 The Honorable Michael D. Wilson presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of incarceration for Count I with a mandatory minimum of 10
 
years, 20 years of incarceration for Count II, 10 years of
 incarceration for Count III, and 5 years of incarceration for
 each of Counts IV, V, and VI with a mandatory minimum of 5 years
 for each count. The sentences in Cr. No. 98-0613 were ordered to
 be served concurrently with each other but consecutively to
 Webster's sentence in Cr. No. 99-0358. 
In State v. Webster, 94 Hawai
'i 241, 249, 11 P.3d 466, 
474 (2000), the supreme court vacated Webster's conviction on Count II in Cr. No. 98-0613 and, on February 5, 2001, a First Amended Judgment was entered, which re-sentenced Webster to the same terms as above on Counts I, III, IV, V, and VI. 
In Cr. No. 99-0358, on September 22, 1999, pursuant to
 
a plea agreement, Webster pled guilty to the lesser included
 charge of Manslaughter and Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver. 
Webster was sentenced to 20 years incarceration for Manslaughter
 with a 5 year minimum and 10 years incarceration for Place to
 Keep Pistol or Revolver, both sentences to be served concurrently
 to each other but consecutively to Cr. No. 98-0613.
 
A Notice and Order Fixing Minimum Term(s) of
 
Imprisonment dated June 29, 2000 set Webster's minimum sentence
 for all counts in Cr. Nos. 98-0613 and 99-0358 at the maximum
 indeterminate term for each count; thus, Webster's minimum
 sentences were also his maximum sentences. 
On June 23, 2010, Webster received a new minimum 
sentencing hearing pursuant to Coulter v. State, 116 Hawai
'i 181, 
172 P.3d 493 (2007), which requires that the Hawaii Paroling Authority (HPA) state the level of punishment and the significant 
criteria upon which the level of punishment is based. A Notice 
and Order of Fixing Minimum Term(s) of Imprisonment dated May 27, 2011 set Webster's minimum sentence for each count again at the maximum terms, except for Count III in Cr. No. 98-0613, which was set at 8 years instead of the maximum term of 10 years. The notice identified Webster's Level of Punishment as Level III and 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the significant factors identified in determining the level of
 
punishment were "(1) Nature of Offense; (2) Degree of Injury/Loss
 to Person." 
On October 11, 2011, Webster filed a Petition to 
Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Illegal Sentence Through a Writ of Habeas Corpus Pursuant to [Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure] Rule 
40 (Petition). On May 2, 2012, the Circuit Court issued an Order 
Denying Motion for Post-Conviction Relief. 
On appeal, Webster argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
in denying him relief because the HPA deviated from its
 
Guidelines when the order fixing his minimum sentence only noted
 Nature of Offense and Degree of Injury/Loss to Person as the
 significant criteria, without providing additional written
 explanation as to what facts or evidence were used to satisfy the
 callous and/or cruel disregard for the safety and welfare of
 others for the Nature of Offense definition. Webster claims
 that, since Manslaughter is defined as acting recklessly, HPA
 deviated when it found that his offense exhibited a callous
 and/or cruel disregard for the safety and welfare of others. 
Webster argues that the HPA acted in an arbitrary and capricious
 manner when "all of the minimum terms were originally set at
 their maximum sentence," and the revised order only reduced one
 minimum from 10 years to 8 years. In addition, Webster claims
 that he received a mandatory minimum of 10 years on that count,
 thus, the HPA could not impose a lesser minimum for that
 conviction. Webster asserts that the "HPA's initial starting
 point should have been Level I or II under the [Level of
 Punishment] matrix for the Nature and Degree criteria because
 this is the baseline for 'comparable' injury or loss for
 similarly situated victims[.]" Finally, Webster argues that he
 was provided ineffective assistance of counsel, primarily because
 he was not informed by counsel of the minimum sentencing
 deficiencies and counsel failed to protect his due process right
 by "not inserting the correct [Level of Punishment] during the
 minimum term hearing and never asked what evidence was to be used
 or what [Level of Punishment] that the HPA was considering." 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Webster's points of error as follows:
 
The Circuit Court did not err by denying Webster's
 
Petition because the claims were patently frivolous and without a
 trace of support in the record. 
In the Notice and Order of Fixing Minimum Term(s) of
 
Imprisonment dated May 27, 2011, HPA cited two significant
 factors, "Nature of Offense" and "Degree of Injury/Loss to Person
 or Property." No additional explanation was provided. 
In the HPA Guidelines, "Nature of Offense" has three 
subsections, of which only subsection (a) could apply to Webster's convictions. Thus, we presume that HPA determined that the "offense was against a person(s) and the offender displayed a callous and/or cruel disregard for the safety and welfare of others[.]" Fagaragan v. State, 132 Hawai
'i 224, 239, 320 P.3d 
889, 904 (2014) (court presumed applicable subsection based on nature of offenses). 
Webster's "Presentence Diagnosis and Report Dated
 
11/4/99" (PSI) described the details of the offenses Webster was
 
convicted of in Cr. Nos. 98-0613 and 99-0358. In Cr. No. 98­
0613, on July 1, 1997, Webster and two other males were in a
 fight with Kenneth Morris (Morris), the complaining witness of
 
the Attempted Assault in the First Degree conviction. Morris and
 
Roman Villanueva (Villanueva) had allegedly stolen drugs from
 
Webster. When Morris saw Webster with a gun, he ran into
 
Villanueva's apartment. Webster fired three shots into the
 apartment, one bullet grazed Villanueva in the head. Villanueva,
 Villanueva's girlfriend, and her baby were in the apartment at
 the time. Webster's three convictions for Reckless Endangering
 in the First Degree were for shooting into the apartment while it
 was occupied. Webster demonstrated callous and/or cruel
 disregard for the safety and welfare of others when he fired 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
three bullets in an attempt to shoot Morris without regard to the
 
presence of others within the apartment and a bullet grazed
 Villanueva in the head. 
The Degree of Injury/Loss to Person or Property to
 
Villanueva was greater than that suffered by similarly situated
 victims of Reckless Endangering in the First Degree. Reckless
 Endangering does not require actual injury to occur. HRS § 707­713. However, Villanueva was injured when Webster shot into the
 
apartment. 
In Cr. No. 99-0358, the decedent, Chih Kai Pan (Pan),
 
was found on the side of Tantalus Drive with dried blood running
 downhill from his head. Pan died of gunshot wounds to the head
 with injury to the brain. An interviewee stated that Webster
 admitted to him that he killed Pan by shooting him in the head
 execution style, and that he robbed the victim of nine hundred. 
A second interviewee reported that Webster mentioned that he had
 driven the victim up to Tantalus before shooting him, and that
 "shooting the victim was better than having sex." Webster said
 that after the victim was shot "his eyes got swollen, and he
 stiffened and fell . . . [and] that blood was coming out of the
 victim like a faucet." A third interviewee stated that Webster
 told him that after the victim fell, he began convulsing and that
 Webster "then unloaded his pistol, shooting the guy a total of
 six times." He also stated Webster shot the victim because the
 victim had nine hundred dollars. Although Webster's conviction
 was for Manslaughter, in conjunction with his guilty plea, the
 statements attributed to Webster by various people reveal that
 Webster shot Pan in the head several times, in what was described
 as execution style, because Pan had money. Those statements
 evidenced a callous and/or cruel disregard for the safety and
 welfare of others. In addition, the circumstances of the
 victim's death, including being driven to the remote location
 before his execution, Webster's taking pleasure in the killing,
 the robbery of the victim, and the extent of the victim's
 suffering support a degree of loss greater than other 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
manslaughter victims. Therefore, the HPA did not act arbitrarily
 
or capriciously when it determined that Webster's level of
 punishment was Level III based upon the "Nature of the Offense"
 and the "Degree of Injury/Loss to Person or Property" criteria. 
The HPA did not deviate from the suggested minimum term
 
lengths. The HPA Guidelines stated that at Level III, the
 minimum sentence may be set at 3-5 years when the maximum term is
 5 years, it may be set at 5-10 years when the maximum term is 10
 years, and it may be set at 10-20 years when the maximum term is
 20 years. The HPA did not set Webster's minimum sentences below
 or above the specified ranges in the HPA Guidelines for his
 various convictions. 
The HPA may set a minimum sentence equal to the maximum 
sentence. Williamson v. Hawai
'i Paroling Auth., 97 Hawai 'i 183, 
193-96, 35 P.3d 210, 220-23 (2001). Webster's minimum sentence of 8 years for Count III in Cr. No. 98-0613 did not have a mandatory minimum of 10 years set by the Circuit Court. 
The HPA Guidelines do not specify any initial starting
 
point such as Level I or II. The HPA Guidelines state, "[i]n
 reaching a decision on a minimum term, the criteria to be taken
 into consideration are discussed in Part IV." All relevant
 criteria are evaluated and a level of punishment is determined;
 the HPA's decision is not based upon an initial starting point
 which allows for the level to increase or decrease based upon the
 criteria. 
Webster argues that his due process and equal
 
protection rights were violated when the Circuit Court denied the
 Petition. Webster cites Coulter but provides no specific
 argument as to how his due process right or right to equal
 protection were violated other than his prior arguments. As
 discussed above, the HPA did not violate the HPA Guidelines, did
 not deviate from the guidelines, and provided a sufficient
 written explanation of the criteria used to determine that Level
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III was appropriate for Webster.2 Thus, Webster's claim that his
 
due process right and right to equal protection were violated is
 
without merit.
 
Webster's counsel was not ineffective in 2000 because
 
Coulter had not yet been decided at the time the HPA issued its
 Notice and Order Fixing Minimum Term(s) of Imprisonment dated
 June 29, 2000. Any deficiency with the June 29, 2000 notice
 would have been cured by providing Webster another minimum
 sentencing hearing, pursuant to Coulter. As explained above, the
 Notice and Order of Fixing Minimum Term(s) of Imprisonment, dated
 May 27, 2011 is not deficient or erroneous. 
It is not clear whether Webster's claim that counsel
 
failed to present mitigating factors is related to his first
 minimum sentencing hearing in 2000 or the second one held on June
 23, 2010. In any case, a subsequent minimum sentencing hearing
 in 2010 should have negated any missed opportunity by counsel to
 present mitigating factors in 2000. The HPA may consider
 mitigating factors listed in Hawaii Administrative Rules § 23­700-24. Webster claims that the transcript of the minimum
 sentencing hearing demonstrates counsel's failure to present
 mitigating and "additional" factors. However,
 
[t]he duty is incumbent on the petitioner alleging
error to make the same manifest by bringing the record
before the appellate court so as to disclose either
that the things complained of were not done in the
manner provided by law or were done in a manner
prejudicial to the rights of the petitioner.
 
State v. Hoang, 93 Hawai 'i 333, 336, 3 P.3d 499, 502 (2000). 
There is no transcript of either minimum sentencing hearing in 
the record on appeal. Without the transcript, this court is unable to conclude that counsel was ineffective. Id. 
2
 In light of the record, the HPA's explanation was sufficient to
permit meaningful review of the HPA's decision. See Nichols v. State, No. 
CAAP-12-0000043, 2014 WL 7334909 (Hawai' i App. Dec. 24, 2014) 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's May 2, 2012
 
Order Denying Motion for Post-Conviction Relief is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, December 31, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Tarval G. Webster 
Petitioner-Appellant Pro Se
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Lisa M. Itomura

 
Diane K. Taira 
Deputy Attorneys General
State of Hawaii
 for Respondent-Appellee
 
8
 