NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000037
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KEVIN ALEXANDER SCOTT, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-0030K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Kevin Alexander Scott (Scott)
 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence for one
 
count of Assault in the Second Degree (Assault Second) in
 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-711(1)(a) (Supp.
 
2011),1
 for causing substantial bodily injury to Leif Martin
(Leif); one count of Terroristic Threatening in the Second Degree
 (Terroristic Threatening Second) in violation of HRS § 707-717
 
(1993),
2
 for threatening Leif with bodily injury; and one count
1
 HRS § 707-711(1)(a) now states, as it did at the time of the
offense:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of assault in the second
degree if:
 
(a)	 The person intentionally or knowingly causes
substantial bodily injury to another[.]
 
2
 Although initially charged with Terroristic Threatening in the
First Degree against Leif, the jury found Scott guilty of the lesser included
offense of Terroristic threatening in the Second Degree under HRS § 707-717,
which now provides, as it did at the time of the offense:
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree (Terroristic
 
Threatening First) in violation of HRS §§ 707-715(1) (1993) and
 
3
707-716(1)(e) (Supp. 2011),  for threatening Kerry Martin (Kerry)
4
with the use of a dangerous instrument, a gun,  entered on
August 30, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
 
(circuit court).5
 
6
After a careful review of the issues raised  and the
arguments advanced by the parties, the applicable authority, and
 
the record, we resolve Scott's points on appeal as follows: 
2(...continued)
(1)	 A person commits the offense of terroristic
threatening in the second degree if the person commits
terroristic threatening other than as provided in
section 707-716.
 
3 HRS § 707-715(1) provides now, as it did at the time of the
offense:
 
Terroristic threatening, defined. A person commits the
offense of terroristic threatening if the person threatens,
by word or conduct, to cause bodily injury to another person
or serious damage to property of another or to commit a
felony:
 
(1)	 With the intent to terrorize, or in reckless
disregard of the risk of terrorizing, another
person[.]
 
707-716(1)(e) stated:
 
(1)	 A person commits the offense of terroristic
threatening in the first degree if the person commits
terroristic threatening: 
. . . . 
(e)	 With the use of a dangerous instrument[.]
 
4 The jury found that a fourth charge, Terroristic Threatening in
the First Degree by common scheme, also alleged to have been committed against
Kerry, merged with the Terroristic Threatening First charge.
 
5
 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided.
 
6
 Preliminarily, we note that Scott's statement of the case in his
opening brief is not in accordance with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure
(HRAP) Rule 28(b)(3) in that it fails to set "forth the nature of the case,the course and disposition of proceedings in the court or agency appealedfrom, and the facts material to consideration of the questions and pointspresented, with record references supporting each statement of fact or mentionof court or agency proceedings." HRAP Rule 28(b)(3). Specifically, Scott'sopening brief failed to outline the underlying facts of the case. Scott's attorney is cautioned that future violation of the rules may result insanctions. HRAP Rule 30. 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) Scott argues that the circuit court violated his
 
right to due process because the circuit court denied Scott's
 
attorney, James Biven's (Biven) request for transcriptions of
 
7
Jefferson Scott's (Jefferson) trial  on charges arising out of
the same incident as the instant case because Biven was
 
"appointed in another case." 
Scott argues that because Kerry and
 
Leif testified at Jefferson's trial regarding the same incident
 for which Scott was indicted, their testimony was "essential to
 
preparation and effective cross-examination for [Scott's] trial." 
However, Scott did not state any reason, let alone specific
 
facts, in support of his transcript request.
8
 
Litigation expenses for indigent criminal defendants
 
may be paid out of court funds as provided in HRS § 802-7 (1993)9
 
7 Jefferson was separately charged with Assault in the Second
Degree, Terroristic Threatening in the Second Degree, and Assault in the Third
Degree for acts committed in the instant incident against Leif. See State v. 
Scott, 125 Hawai' i 30, 251 P.3d 47, No. 30499 2011 WL 1878851 at *1 (App.
May 12, 2011) (SDO). 
8 It appears that on June 15, 2010, Scott moved to continue his
trial because Biven needed more time to obtain seven transcripts from
Jefferson's case "in order to adequately prepare a defense in the instant
case." Biven explained that the transcripts were not ordered because Scott
had authorized Biven to enter into a plea agreement with the State and he did
not want to incur unnecessary expenses. Biven did not explain how he could
have engaged in plea negotiations without the transcripts he asserted were
necessary to prepare a defense. 
The record does not include a transcript of the June 23, 2010
hearing on the motion to continue trial. The minutes reflect that the circuit
 court denied Scott's motion because Scott provided no specifics in support of
his motion, a jury had been summoned, the parties had indicated they were
ready for trial before the plea negotiations fell through, and no request for
expedited transcripts had been filed. Although Scott's requests for
transcripts is dated June 15, 2010 and June 22, 2010, the disapproved stamp is
dated June 24, 2010 and the document was filed on June 29, 2010.
 
9
 HRS § 802-7 provides:
 
Litigation expenses. The court may, upon a
satisfactory showing that a criminal defendant is unable to
pay for transcripts or witness fees and transportation, or
for investigatory, expert or other services, and upon a
finding that the same are necessary for an adequate defense,
direct that such expenses be paid from available court funds
or waived, as the case may be; provided that where the
defendant is represented by the state public defender or by
other counsel appointed by the court except for such other
counsel appointed by the court for reasons of conflict of
(continued...)
 
3
    
   
   
    
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and require a showing that the expense is "necessary for an 
adequate defense." However, "[t]he law is clear in this 
jurisdiction that the appellant has the burden of furnishing the 
appellate court with a sufficient record to positively show the 
alleged error." Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai' i 225, 230, 
909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995) (quoting Union Building Materials Corp. v. The Kakaako Corp., 5 Haw. App. 146, 151, 682 P.2d 82, 87
 
(1984)) (internal quotation marks omitted). The "Request Form
 
for Non Appeal Cases" (Request Form) filed by Scott in this case
 
does not provide any reason for the request and moreover, as it
 
requests transcripts from another case, does not indicate, on its
 
face, any reason that the transcripts are "necessary for an
 
adequate defense" in Scott's case, nor does Scott claim that all
 
of the seven transcripts requested contain the testimony of
 
witnesses he anticipated would testify in his trial. 
Scott does not cite to any authority supporting his 
contention that he was entitled to transcripts of proceedings in 
another case. In State v. Mundon, 121 Hawai' i 339, 219 P.3d 1126 
(2009), upon which Scott relies, the defendant requested but was denied transcripts of the preliminary hearing and grand jury 
proceedings in his own case. Scott asked for, and presumably 
received, because the request was immediately approved, the 
transcript of the grand jury proceeding in this case. In Britt 
v. North Carolina, 404 U.S. 226 (1971), also cited by Scott,
 
9(...continued)
i
nterest on the part of the public defender, the public
defender shall pay for or authorize payment for the same,
if the public defender determines that the defendant is
unable to pay for the same and that the same are necessary
for an adequate defense, and if there is a dispute as to
the financial ability of the defendant such dispute shall
be resolved by the court. In cases where other counsel
 have been appointed by the court for reasons of conflict
of interest, the court may, upon the requisite showing of
inability to pay and a finding that such expenses are
necessary for an adequate defense as set forth above,
direct that such expenses be paid from available court
funds or waived, as the case may be. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
transcripts of an earlier trial ending in a mistrial in the same
 
case was involved.
 
Moreover, although Scott argues that the transcripts
 
were necessary for preparation and cross-examination of
 
witnesses, he did not submit his request for these transcripts
 
until, at the earliest, June 15, 2010, when trial was scheduled
 
for June 23, 2010.
 
We conclude that Scott has failed to establish that the
 
circuit court erred in denying his request.
 
(2) Scott argues that the circuit court erred when it
 
did not include a jury instruction for Assault Third because (1)
 
while Scott was charged with intentionally or knowingly causing
 
substantial bodily injury, the jury could have found that Scott
 
acted recklessly; (2) the jury could have found that Scott caused
 
only bodily injury and not substantial bodily injury (the
 
substantial bodily injury to Leif could have been attributed to
 
Jefferson's actions); (3) the absence of a jury instruction on
 
Assault Third was prejudicial "since the jury did not have a
 
misdemeanor option available to it, and did not have the ability
 
to choose another crime that may have fit [Scott]'s facts more
 
precisely and which was also of a lesser severity"; (4) "the jury
 
may have felt compelled to choose assault in second degree rather
 
than a not guilty verdict, in part because there was no lesser
 
offense of assault in the third degree as an option"; and (5)
 
Assault Third "can be committed if done so negligently and with a
 
dangerous instrument" and it was alleged that Scott used a
 
firearm to hit Leif.
 
However, the Hawai' i Supreme Court has held that the 
failure to instruct on lesser included offenses is harmless where 
the jury finds guilt on the instructed offense as it is presumed 
the jury followed the instructions given, which require that it 
unanimously find the defendant guilty of each described element 
beyond a reasonable doubt. That being the case, the jury would 
not have considered the lesser included offense instruction had 
it been given. State v. Haanio, 94 Hawai' i 405, 415-16, 16 P.3d 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
246, 256-57 (2001). In this case, Scott was charged with Assault 
Second for intentionally or knowingly causing substantial bodily 
injury to Leif. As the jury in this case found Scott guilty of 
the charged offense of Assault Second, it would not have 
considered the lesser offense of Assault Third. Thus, the error, 
if any, was harmless. Haanio, 94 Hawai' i at 415-16, 16 P.3d at 
256-57. 
(3) and (4) In Scott's third and fourth points on 
appeal, he argues his counsel, Biven, provided ineffective assistance of counsel. This court reviews ineffective assistance 
of counsel claims by determining whether, "viewed as a whole the 
assistance provided was within the range of competence demanded 
of attorneys in criminal cases." Dan v. State, 76 Hawai' i 423, 
427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994) (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). In claims of ineffective 
assistance of counsel, the defendant has the burden of proving 
both: (1) "that there were specific errors or omissions 
reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence"; and 
(2) "that such errors or omissions resulted in either the 
withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious 
defense." State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i 504, 514, 78 P.3d 317, 
327 (2003) (quoting State v. Aplaca, 74 Haw. 54, 66-67, 837 P.2d 1298, 1305 (1992)) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
(a) Scott first points to Biven's failure to file a
 
memorandum regarding the appropriateness of an instruction on the
 
lesser included offense of Assault in the Third Degree (Assault
 
Third) as requested by the circuit court. The entirety of the
 
circuit court's directives to counsel are not part of the record,
 
as it appears that, after an in-court discussion held on July 2,
 
2010, the circuit court sent an email to counsel, which
 
apparently contained the direction to include argument on an
 
instruction on Assault Third, which has not been included in the
 
record. Thus, this court is unable to review whether counsel
 
could have reasonably construed the circuit court's directives to
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
have allowed for the option of submitting an email and omitting a
 
discussion on the Assault Third instruction.
 
Moreover, review of the transcript of the July 6, 2010
 
proceedings, wherein the Assault Third instruction was
 
subsequently discussed, reveals that Biven was given ample
 
opportunity to orally present his position, which consisted of an
 
argument regarding whether the evidence presented the possibility
 
that the jury could decide that Scott caused only bodily injury
 
to Leif. Scott does not argue on appeal any aspect of his
 
position on the giving of the Assault Third instruction that
 
Biven was not able to present nor does he argue that the circuit
 
court refused to consider Biven's oral presentation.
 
Finally, the circuit court ruled that there was no
 
rational basis upon which the jury could find that Leif suffered
 
only bodily injury as a result of Scott's striking Leif. 
Therefore, as Scott fails to establish the causation between
 
Biven's failure to file a brief and the circuit court's exclusion
 
of an Assault Third jury instruction, Biven's failure to file a
 
brief did not result in the withdrawal or substantial impairment
 
of the presentation of assault in the third degree to the jury as
 
a potentially meritorious defense.
 
(b) Scott also contends that Biven was ineffective as
 
he should have hired experts in the areas of self-defense and
 
medicine to help him develop Scott's self-defense claim and to
 
have "lessened the mental state associated with the charge of
 
assault in the second degree." Scott does not appear to be
 
arguing that these experts should have been called as witnesses,
 
only that they should have been hired as consultants.
 
Scott offers no specifics regarding the utility of such
 
experts. Scott acknowledges that Leif "had not actually verbally
 
threatened [Scott] nor attempted to swing first" and argues only
 
that "the subtleties involved demand that an expert be employed." 
Scott provides no authority for such a proposition, and we find
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
none. As such, his ineffective assistance of counsel claim is
 
mere speculation.
 
Therefore, the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
 
entered on August 30, 2010 by the Circuit Court of the Third
 
Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, December 17, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Kevin O'Grady,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Linda L. Walton,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Hawai
'i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
8
 