NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000950 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
RADCLIFF LESLIE, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
H
ONOLULU DIVISION 
(Case No. 1DTA-18-02472) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Radcliff Leslie (Leslie) was 
charged with Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an 
Intoxicant (
OVUII) in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
ยง 291E-61(a)(1).  At trial, the State and Leslie's attorney 
stipulated that Honolulu Police Department (HPD) officer Sheldon 
Watts was qualified to administer the standard field sobriety 
test (SFST). Leslie was convicted. He appeals from the "Notice 
of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment" (Judgment), 
entered by the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu 1
1 HRS ยง 291E-61 (Supp. 2017) provides, in relevant part: 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle
under the influence of an intoxicant if the person operates
or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle: 
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair the person's normalmental faculties or ability to care for theperson and guard against casualty[.] NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Division, State of Hawai #i, on November 21, 2018.  The only
issue presented on appeal is whether the district court erred by
failing to place Leslie's personal consent to the stipulation onthe trial record.  We affirm the Judgment based on State v.Wilson, 144 Hawai #i 454, 445 P.3d 35 (2019).2
Officer Watts testified that on July 11, 2018, at about
10:15 p.m., he was dispatched to investigate a vehicle stopped atthe intersection of Queen Emma Street and Vineyard Boulevard.  Hesaw a black Toyota Tacoma pickup truck with the windows rolleddown.  He stopped alongside the truck and observed it while thetraffic signal lights cycled twice.  The engine was running.  Thetruck did not move.  Officer Watts looked inside the truck andsaw Leslie asleep in the driver's seat.  He took three photo-graphs of the truck in the roadway with Leslie asleep at thewheel.  Officer Watts placed the truck in park, woke Leslie, andasked if he was okay.  As they spoke, Officer Watts smelled astrong odor of alcohol on Leslie's breath, and saw that Leslie'seyes were red and watery.  Leslie produced his driver's license,vehicle registration, and insurance card, and agreed to take theSFST.
At that point, the deputy prosecuting attorney informed
the district court of the parties' stipulation:
So the stipulation would be that the officer, that
Officer Watts is trained and qualified to administer and
evaluate a standardized field sobriety test pursuant toHonolulu Police Department protocol and training and pur-suant to the National High -- National Highway TrafficSafety Administration standards.
And with that, the officer could testify to his obser-
vations and would not mention anything about nystagmus,actual nystagmus of the eyes during the Horizontal GazeNystagmus portion of the test or without mentioning actualclues or passing or failing.  So basically the observationsduring the field sobriety test.
THE COURT:  [Defense Counsel].
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  That's correct.
2The Honorable Randal I. Shintani presided.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The district court then addressed Leslie: 
Okay. Mr. Leslie, what a stipulation is from a legal
standpoint is it's been offered to the court that Officer
Watts is qualified and trained to administer and evaluatewhat is called the field sobriety test. 
His training was pursuant or via Honolulu Police
Department protocol or training was well as the -- what theycall NHTSA, National Highway Safety Transportation Agency
[sic], in terms of what the training is required to
administer as well as evaluate the field sobriety test. 
If the court accepts the stipulation, the court
accepts as fact that in fact Officer Watts is properlytrained pursuant to these training requirements of HPD aswell as NHTSA to administer and evaluate what is called the field sobriety test. 
So I take it as a fact that is stipulated to. Your 
attorney and the prosecutor would not be able to questionthe qualification of the officer if I accept thestipulation. 
There is also limitations as you heard. Officer Watts 
would not be able to testify as to observing what they callnystagmus and/or to opine as to any clues pass or failopinions. He will only be able to testify as to what theycall observations that he as a lay -- well, as he observedduring the performance and evaluation of the field sobrietytest. 
So do you understand what a stipulation is? 
[LESLIE]: 
Yes, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: Okay. So your attorney has so stipulated.
The prosecutor has so stipulated. And so the court will 
accept the stipulation. 
The district court did not ask Leslie on the record 
whether Leslie agreed to or approved the stipulation. Leslie 
contends that constitutes plain error, relying on State v. Murray, 116 
Hawai# i 3, 169 P.3d 955 (2007). In Murray the 
supreme court held that "a knowing and voluntary waiver of a defendant's fundamental right must come directly from the defendant, and requires the court to engage in a colloquy with the defendant." Id. at 11, 169 P.3d at 963 (citation omitted). The fundamental right at issue in Murray was the defendant's right to have the State prove every element of an offense to a 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
jury beyond a reasonable doubt.   Other fundamental rights for
which a colloquy with the defendant is required include the right
to a jury trial, State v. Gomez-Lobato, 130 Hawai #i 465, 312 P.3d
897 (2013); the right to confront witnesses, State v. Casey, 51Haw. 99, 451 P.2d 806 (1969); the right to testify, Tachibana v.State, 79 Hawai #i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995); and the right to not
testify, State v. Torres, 144 Hawai #i 282, 439 P.3d 234 (2019).3
In State v. Wilson, 144 Hawai #i 454, 445 P.3d 35
(2019), however, the supreme court held that a colloquy was notrequired where the defendant's attorney stipulated to a policeofficer's qualifications to conduct an SFST:
[T]he stipulation in this case did not establish facts
satisfying any elements of the charged offense.  To convictWilson of OVUII, the State was required to prove that sheoperated a vehicle "while under the influence of alcohol inan amount sufficient to impair her normal mental facultiesor ability to care for herself and guard against casualty." HRS ยง 291E-61(a)(1).  Stipulating that the officer was"qualified and certified to conduct the SFST and that hereceived specialized training in administering and gradingall of the SFSTs" is not in itself proof that Wilson wasoperating a vehicle or that she was impaired.  Thus, thestipulation in this case did not amount to a waiver ofWilson's fundamental right to have every element of acharged offense proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
Neither did the stipulation significantly impinge on
Wilson's confrontation rights.  Unlike the evidentiarystipulation at issue in Casey, the stipulation in this casedid not serve as a substitute for evidence from which afactfinder could conclude that any element of the chargedoffenses was satisfied in whole or in part.  Instead, thisstipulation was to an evidentiary foundation involving thequalifications of a witness.  Under the circumstances, wecannot say that the stipulation so infringed upon Wilson'sright to confront Officer Hattori that a colloquy wasrequired.
Id. at 464-65, 445 P.3d at 45-46 (cleaned up) (footnote omitted).
In this case, as in Wilson, the district court was not required 
3The defendant in Murray was being prosecuted for Abuse of a Family
or Household Member, as a class C felony, in violation of HRS ยง 709-906(1) and
(7) (Supp. 2006).  In order to establish a class C felony, the State wasrequired to prove that the defendant had at least two prior convictions forabuse of a family or household member, and the alleged offense occurred withintwo years of the second or prior conviction.  During the hearing on pretrialmotions, defense counsel stipulated that the defendant had prior convictionswithin two years; defense counsel then argued that evidence of the priorconvictions need not be presented to the jury because of the stipulation.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to have a colloquy with Leslie before accepting his stipulation 
to Officer Watts's qualifications to administer the SFST. 
The "Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and 
Plea/Judgment" entered by the district court on November 21, 2018, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 25, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
Stephen K. Tsushima,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. /S/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge 
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
Associate Judge Earle A. Partington,for Defendant-Appellant. 
/s/ Keith K. HiraokaAssociate Judge 
5 