NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
1 The Honorable Diana L. Van De Car presided.
2 HRS § 703-302 provides, in relevant part:
§ 703-302 Choice of evils.  (1) Conduct which the actor
believes to be necessary to avoid an imminent harm or evil
to the actor or to another is justifiable provided that: NO. CAAP-16-0000572
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
NIKILYN LOVE,
Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(SOUTH KOHALA DIVISION)
(CASE NO. 3DTA-16-00995)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Reifurth, Presiding Judge, Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Nikilyn Love (Love) appeals from a
Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment, filed on July 21, 2016
in the District Court of the Third Circuit (District Court),
convicting her of Operating a Vehicle After License and Privilege
have been Suspended or Revoked for Operating a Vehicle Under the
Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII) under Section 291E-62(a)(2) of
the Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS).1
On appeal, Love contends that the District Court
wrongfully adjudged her guilty by (a) finding that Love's "choice
of evils" defense2 was not properly established, (b) convictingNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
(a) The harm or evil sought to be avoided by such
conduct is greater than that sought to be prevented by the
law defining the offense charged; 
(b) Neither the Code nor other law defining the
offense provides exceptions or defenses dealing with the
specific situation involved; and
(c) A legislative purpose to exclude the justification
claimed does not otherwise plainly appear. 
(2) When the actor was reckless or negligent in bringing
about the situation requiring a choice of harms or evils or
in appraising the necessity for the actor's conduct, the
justification afforded by this section is unavailable in a
prosecution for any offense for which recklessness or
negligence, as the case may be, suffices to establish
culpability.
3 Counsel for the State is cautioned that its brief containing citation
to and attachment of a document that is not contained in the record of the
instant case violates Rule 28(c), related to Rule 28(b)(3) and (10), of the
Hawai#i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP), in the absence of any request for
judicial notice of said document, and that future failure to comply with the
rules may result in sanctions.
2Love based on insufficient evidence to disprove Love's "choice of
evils" defense, (c) not holding the State to its burden of proof
to disprove the "choice of evils" defense, and (d) imposing the
entire burden of proof on Love. 
The State argues that the District Court correctly
determined that the "choice of evils" defense was inapplicable as
related to the facts in this case.3
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised therein, as well as
the relevant case law and authority, we resolve Love's points of
error as follows:
Based on our review of the record, the District Court
properly determined that the "choice of evils" defense was
inapplicable, such that the State was neither required to
disprove nor had the burden to disprove the defense, and the
District Court therefore did not improperly impose a burden of
proof on Love. 
HRS § 701-115(2) provides that "[n]o defense may be
considered by the trier of fact unless evidence of the specified
fact or facts has been presented . . . ."  The statute "places an
initial burden on the defendant to come forward with someNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
4 Under HRS § 291E-62, it is illegal to operate a vehicle after one's
license has been suspended or revoked for operating a vehicle under the
influence of an intoxicant.
3credible evidence of facts constituting the defense . . . ." 
HRS § 701-115 cmt.  Thus, for the HRS § 703-302 "choice of evils"
defense to apply, Love must have presented credible evidence
that: (1) she reasonably believed that her action was necessary
to avoid imminent harm or evil (see HRS § 703-300 ("'Believes'
means reasonably believes.")); (2) the harm sought to be avoided
was greater than the harm sought to be prevented; and (3) she was
not reckless or negligent in bringing about the situation.
With respect to the first factor, Love unreasonably
believed that if she did not drive her car that day, a contempt
of court charge was imminent.  The District Court considered her
belief and found that there was no evidence that a charge or jail
term was other than merely speculative.  Love did not present any
evidence of exhausted alternatives such as calling a cab, calling
the jail to notify them of her situation, or contacting a friend
(which she ultimately did subsequent to her arrest and release in
order to first obtain her car from impound and then transport her
to the jail).
With respect to the second factor, we agree with the
District Court's conclusion that the harm of a potential contempt
charge and sentence to Love was not greater than the harm of
exposing the public to Love's driving after her license was
suspended or revoked for OVUII.4
With respect to the third factor, Love's lack of
reasonable belief of necessity also shows she failed to come
forward with credible evidence that she was not reckless in
bringing about the situation herself.  This third factor is
considered in this case because a reckless state of mind suffices
to establish the offense for which Love is charged, i.e.
violating HRS § 291E-62(a)(2).
Accordingly, the District Court properly determined
that Love failed to produce sufficient facts to establish the
"choice of evils" defense. 
THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the Judgment andNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
4Notice of Entry of Judgment, filed on July 21, 2016 in the
District Court of the Third Circuit, is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 29, 2017
On the briefs:
James M. Yuda,
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant.
E. Britt Bailey,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge