 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000551 18-DEC-2024 08:05 AM Dkt. 101 SO 
NO. CAAP-21-0000551 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI#I 
BOSKO PETRICEVIC, Plaintiff/Counterclaim
Defendant-Appellant, v.
NAN, INC., a domestic profit corporation;
PATRICK SHIN, Defendants/Counterclaimants–Appellees, and
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10;
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; DOE UNINCORPORATED ORGANIZATIONS 1-10;
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-10,
Defendants–Appellees 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 1CCV-19-0002008) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Hiraoka and McCullen, JJ.) 
Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellant Bosko 
Petricevic (Petricevic), a lawyer representing himself, appeals 
from the September 10, 2021 Final Judgment entered by the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).  He also challenges 
the March 11, 2020 Order Denying [Petricevic's] Motion to Dismiss [(MTD)] Defendants/ Counterclaim Plaintiffs' Counterclaim (  Order 
Denying MTD); June 28, 2021 Order Denying [Petricevic's] Motion 
for Summary Judgment [(MSJ)] as to Defendants/Counterclaim Plaintiffs' Counterclaims (Order Denying MSJ); July 30, 2021 1
1 The Honorable James H. Ashford presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part [Petricevic's] Motion 
in Limine No. 2 to Exclude Use of or Reference to Any HRE Rule 408 Settlement Communications (Order Re MIL 2); and July 30, 2021 
Order Denying [Petricevic's] Motion in Limine No. 4 to Prohibit 
Reference to or Questions About [Petricevic's] Other Unrelated Legal Claims and/or Lawsuits (Order Denying MIL 4). 
Petricevic raises seven points of error on appeal, 
contending that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) denying Petricevic's MTD and MSJ; (2) granting Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff-Appellee Nan, Inc. and Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff-Appellee Patrick Shin (Shin) (collectively, Defendants) 
six peremptory challenges during the jury selection process and 
only three to Petricevic in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 635-29 (2016); (3) denying Petricevic's request to 
present rebuttal; (4) denying Petricevic's request to be called 
back onto the witness stand for re-direct examination; (5) entering the Order Re MIL 2 and the Order Denying MIL 4; (6) allowing Defendants to introduce evidence of a termination letter from Petricevic's subsequent job; and (7) giving jury instructions regarding the definition of "employment at will." 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Petricevic's points of error as follows: 
(1) Petricevic argues that the Circuit Court erred in 
denying his MTD and MSJ because it was clear that Defendants' counterclaims were frivolous and the denial of the motions 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
created an "unfair trial" for him because it allowed Defendants 
to effectively double–team him. As to his entitlement to a judgment as a matter of law, Petricevic relies almost entirely on the fact that he ultimately prevailed on the counterclaims, with a stipulated dismissal of the Wrongful Disclosure of Privileged Communications (Count I) and Abuse of Process (Count III) counterclaims. The jury found in favor of Petricevic on the False Light (Count II) counterclaim. However, he offers no record cites, and only offers legal authority related to the Abuse of Process claim, to support his contention that he should have been granted judgment as a matter of law on all three counterclaims. Generally, the denial of a motion to dismiss or motion for summary judgment is unreviewable after the moving party prevails at trial. Takayama v. Zera, No. 27900, 2010 WL 973484, at *4 (App. Mar. 18, 2010)(SDO); 5 C.J.S. Appeal and Error § 875 (2024). Here, although Petricevic alleges broadly that he was harmed by the denial of his motions, because two defense lawyers participated at trial, he fails to point to any particular instance(s) where he was prejudiced. Importantly, Petricevic has not demonstrated that the Circuit Court erred in denying summary judgment on all three of the Counterclaims. For these reasons, we conclude that Petricevic's first point of error is without merit. 
(2) Petricevic argues that the Circuit Court erred in 
granting three peremptory challenges to each of the Defendants and three peremptory challenges to Petricevic in violation of HRS 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 635-29. Regarding the allocation of peremptory challenges, HRS 
§ 635-29(b) provides: 
(b) In civil cases each party shall be allowed to
challenge peremptorily three jurors, without assigning any
reason therefor. Where there are two or more plaintiffs ortwo or more defendants, they may be considered as a singleparty for the purposes of making peremptory challenges, orthe court may allow additional peremptory challenges andpermit them to be exercised separately or jointly. If additional peremptory challenges are allowed to the partieson one side, the opposing party or parties may be allowedadditional peremptory challenges. 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court exercised its discretion 
within the statutory parameters. Regarding whether a trial court 
erred in allocating peremptory challenges, the Hawai# i Supreme 
Court has held: 
"The determination of whether the trial court erred in 
allocation [of peremptory challenges] is made at the time it
makes its decision and not upon hindsight." American Cyanamid Co. v. Frankson, 732 S.W.2d 648, 653 (Tex. Ct. App.1987) (citation omitted). Moreover, 
a judgment will not be reversed unless the error inawarding peremptory challenges to a litigant, or tomultiple litigants having the same interest, is shownto be prejudicial. 
In order to prove the existence of
prejudice, the complaining party must show that itexhausted his peremptory challenges and that aprospective juror, who the challenging party wouldhave otherwise stricken, served on the jury. 
Carter v. Tom's Truck Repair, Inc., 857 S.W.2d 172, 177–78(Mo. 1993) (citations omitted). 
Kawamata Farms, Inc. v. United Agri Products, 86 Hawai#i 214, 
245, 948 P.2d 1055, 1086 (1997). 
Here, during jury selection, Petricevic exercised his 
three peremptory challenges, and Defendants collectively 
exercised five peremptory challenges. Petricevic generally asserts that if he had additional peremptory challenges, he would have exercised them. However, Petricevic fails to specify a prospective juror that he would have stricken who served on the jury. Petricevic has not demonstrated that he was prejudiced by 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Circuit Court's allocation of peremptory challenges. See id.
Therefore, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err with 
respect to the peremptory challenges. 
(3) & (4) Petricevic argues that the Circuit Court 
erred in denying his request to put forward his rebuttal case, and/or allow further redirect of Petricevic. On appeal, Petricevic does not identify any witnesses other than himself that he sought to call back to the stand for rebuttal. 
We first note that testimony commenced on July 13, 
2021, and Petricevic testified for the entire day on July 13, July 14, and July 15. On the second day of testimony, the parties agreed to allow Petricevic to provide more expansive answers to yes or no questions in cross-examination. In conjunction with this, the Circuit Court warned Petricevic's counsel that it intended to keep Petricevic's redirect testimony brief: 
THE COURT: I agree with that. And just to explain a
little bit. The intent here is that rather than have 
redirect readdress the areas where [Petricevic] might wantto explain or equivocate or otherwise elaborate upon, he'lljust be given the opportunity to do so at his whim or desireas he sees fit, because it should be more efficient. 
. . . . 
And I think that that -- and the only other thing I'd
point out is I did forewarn Mr. Rosenbaum that if we agreeto this procedure, which we now have, I do intend to use mydiscretion under Hawai #i Rule of Evidence 611 fairly
aggressively and broadly if need be to keep the redirecttestimony very, very short. 
Mr. Rosenbaum, anything else, since I've sort of had
the last word, I wanna give you the last opportunity. 
MR. ROSENBAUM: No, that's correct. 
On the third day, there was continued cross-examination 
of Petricevic, followed by redirect examination, followed by 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
brief re-cross-examination. The Circuit Court then asked 
Petricevic's counsel whether he had any follow-up, to which he responded, "No, nothing further." Petricevic's attorney then identified Shin as his next witness, and the court released the jury for the day and went into recess. After the jury left, Petricevic's attorney then requested that he be allowed to introduce an email. The court said you can move in anything you want. However, Petricevic's counsel then asked to allow Petricevic back to testify further. At that point, the Circuit Court stated: 
THE COURT: No. No, you are done with him. You could 
have brought this up beforehand. No. He's not getting
recalled. We've endured three days. That's plenty. You had plenty of opportunity, including after the Clay Chapmanletter came in. 
With respect to rebuttal, after the defense rested, 
Petricevic's counsel requested that Petricevic be recalled to the 
stand to present rebuttal evidence: 
MR. ROSENBAUM: Yes. We were just requesting rebuttal
for [Petricevic] to speak to the -- some of the testimony of
Abigail Siatu #u and her lack of memory as to the schedule of
the NBA basketball games and whether or not it was possiblefor her testimony to have been credible considering theschedule of those games. 
The Circuit Court denied this request, stating: 
[T]he record should reflect that long before trial, as
well as immediately before trial and during trial, allcounsel agreed this would be a four- to six-day trial. We are now on day six. 
The record should also reflect that several days ago,
in the earlier part of last week, I believe, I notified allcounsel that Juror Number 2 has a doctor's appointment todayand that to accommodate her schedule, we were going to be
shutting off the evidence today at 1:30. So everybody's
been aware from last week that the evidence would not go --well, for today's purposes, we were going to let the jurorsgo at 1:30; we could not take any further evidence. 
The record will also -- is also very clear that
[Petricevic] testified for three complete days. 
And he 
6   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testified about NBA games, videos, and the like. So this 
topic has been covered very thoroughly repeatedly bydifferent witnesses. 
If Mr. Rosenbaum wanted the Court to take judicial
notice of something, such as when the NBA playoffs were orwhat days were Sundays back in May of 2019, he could havedone so, but he did not do so. 
. . . . 
In light of those facts as well as the sequence of
testimony in this case, under the Takayama versus Kaiser
Foundation Hospital analysis, I agree with Mr. Rand that –-
to put it in his words, I think you have to play your cards
when you have them. The prosecution has already broachedthe issue at -- here in its case in chief. 
And therefore, that's -- those are the reasons that
I'm denying the rebuttal request. 
Upon review of the entire record on appeal, we conclude 
that the Circuit Court did not err or abuse its discretion in 
declining to allow Petricevic to testify further, either after the completion of re-cross or as rebuttal testimony. See generally Hawai# i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 611 (mode and 
order of testimony); see also Nelson v. Univ. of Haw., 97 
Hawai#i 
376, 384-85, 38 P.3d 95, 103-04 (2001); Takayama v. Kaiser Found. Hosp., 82 Hawai# i 486, 496-97, 923 P.2d 903, 913-14 (1996); 
Barbee v. Queen's Med. Ctr., 119 Hawai# i 136, 155-56, 194 P.3d 
1098, 1117-18 (App. 2008). 
(5) Petricevic argues that the Circuit Court erred in 
denying MIL 2 and MIL 4, allowing the introduction of HRE Rule 408 protected communications and evidence regarding an unrelated lawsuit against unrelated defendants.
2 
2 HRE Rule 408 provides in relevant part: 
Rule 408. Compromise, offers to compromise, and
mediation proceedings.  Evidence of (1) furnishing or
offering or promising to furnish, or (2) accepting or
offering or promising to accept, a valuable consideration incompromising or attempting to compromise a claim which wasdisputed as to either validity or amount, or (3) mediation
(continued...) 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court denied in part and granted in part 
MIL 2, making specific rulings that some communications were 
covered by HRE Rule 408, but others were not. However, at trial, Petricevic "opened the door" to the admission of certain text messages the Circuit Court initially deemed protected under HRE Rule 408. During direct examination, Petricevic began testifying about the text messages subject to the MIL 2 ruling, causing Defendants' counsel to interject: 
A. So I immediately -- so I learned about this on
November 1st that he called my boss and left a message
because I had listened to the message. And the message wasinnocuous enough. You know, saying just call me back. And I immediately text him like I know what you -- because, youknow, I -- I had his still numbers like. And basically likeI can't quote. I don't have it memorized. But that messages exist. But along the lines of like, you know, youjust called my boss, I know what you're doing, like stopit.
3 
MR. RAND: He just ran a stop sign, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: Okay. So, Mr. Rosenbaum, do you
understand what Mr. Rand's objection is? We had an MIL 
ruling. 
MR. ROSENBAUM: Yes. 
2(...continued)
or attempts to mediate a claim which was disputed, is notadmissible to prove liability for or invalidity of the claimor its amount. 
Evidence of conduct or statements made in 
compromise negotiations or mediation proceedings is likewisenot admissible. This rule does not require the exclusion ofany evidence otherwise discoverable merely because it ispresented in the course of compromise negotiations ormediation proceedings. 
3 In the Order Re MIL 2, the Circuit Court ruled that the following
text message was protected under HRE Rule 408: 
[Petricevic] to Shin (11/01/19 @ 11:22am) - This is
Bosko. You just called my boss and left him a voicemail.He recorded it. He gave me the recording. He will not call you back or talk to you since everyone knows what thepurpose of your call was. This is witness intimidation since I sued you. This is going into the complaint and theamended complaint will be filed. You just committedretaliation and witness intimidation. I now have recorded evidence of your conduct. This need to stop. I urge you tobe reasonable and stop this and resolve this. The amended complaint will be filed soon. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . 
MR. RAND: 
I think he's opened the door. 
THE COURT: I have no reason to disagree. 
During cross-examination, Petricevic testified about 
the settlement negotiations between himself and Shin: 
A. No. Actually, no. What I wanted, you know, for
him to reimburse me for my damages. And if it was all about 
the money, I would have signed the apology letter and theletter that he wanted me to sign, where I would say that I'm-- withdraw all my allegations. 
The only reason this case didn't settle is because I
refused to sign that letter where I'm withdrawing myallegations, because I'm not going to settle my credibilityfor him to look better. That's the only reason we are heretoday, because I would not sign that letter where he'sasking me to withdraw my allegations. That's the onlyreason we are here today. 
THE COURT: So as far as I'm concerned, [Petricevic]
is waiving any 408 protections. You're either going tocontinue down this road beyond what we've discussed, inwhich case the defense will as well, or you're going tostick to what was previously discussed. 
You understand what I'm saying? In other words, we
had motion in limine rulings, and I expanded upon those,including this morning. 
MR. WILSON: 
And you were clear. 
THE COURT: Those were clear. [Petricevic] is going
beyond those topics. He's opened the door. 
After the Circuit Court made it clear that Petricevic 
had waived his HRE Rule 408 protections, Petricevic continued to 
testify about the settlement negotiations, stating, "I could have settled. If I signed that letter of apology and withdrew all my allegations and, you know, I said everything was false, we could have settled. But I refused to do that." Defendants' counsel then admitted into evidence Defendants' Exhibit 47 containing the text messages subject to the MIL 2 ruling. Petricevic's counsel did not object to the admission of the text messages. We 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclude that Petricevic waived his objections to the admission 
of evidence regarding the settlement negotiations. 
In MIL 4, Petricevic sought to exclude reference to his 
unrelated law suits. The supreme court has held: 
[C]onsonant with the principle that preservation of
error is a necessary prerequisite for review of that error
on appeal, when a motion in limine to exclude evidence issimply denied without a ruling on admissibility and theevidence is subsequently introduced by the opposing partyduring trial, a proper objection at that time is necessaryto preserve the error for appellate review. Thus, as isgenerally true for appellate review of any issue, thefailure to object to evidence introduced after denial of apretrial motion in limine to exclude that same evidence willresult in waiver of the objection on appeal. 
Nevertheless, . . . there [is] an exception to the
general rule: objections need not be renewed if the priorruling on the motion in limine amounted to an unequivocalholding concerning the issue raised. Where a hearing washeld, counsel presented legal arguments, and the trial courtruled whether or not the challenged evidence would beadmitted at trial, there is no necessity of furtherobjection to preserve such error for appeal. 
Kobashigawa v. Silva, 129 Hawai# i 313, 322, 300 P.3d 579, 588 
(2013) (citations omitted and emphasis added). 
Thus, when a trial court simply denies a motion in 
limine without ruling on the admissibility of the evidence at 
that time, an objection is necessary at trial to preserve the error for appeal. Id. (citing Lussier v. Mau-Van Dev., Inc., 4 Haw. App. 359, 394, 667 P.2d 804, 826-27 (1983)). 
Here, the Circuit Court denied MIL 4 without making any 
rulings on the admissibility of evidence related to Petricevic's other lawsuits. The Circuit Court did not make an unequivocal holding regarding whether the evidence would be admitted at trial. At trial, Defendants' counsel cross-examined Petricevic about another lawsuit related to the reasons he left his employment with the Attorney General's office. Petricevic's 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel did not object. Petricevic's failure to object to the 
lines of questioning regarding his other lawsuit waived his assertion of error on appeal. 
(6) Petricevic argues that the Circuit Court erred in 
allowing the introduction of Petricevic's termination letter from Clay Chapman because the letter was inadmissible hearsay. However, even assuming that the admission of the termination letter into evidence was wrong, it was harmless error. "The admission of hearsay testimony is harmless error when it is cumulative of legally admissible evidence showing the same fact." 5 A
M.  JUR. 2d Appellate Review § 659 (2024); Ko v. Adamus, No. 
CAAP–10–0000176, 2011 WL 5997051, at *1 (App. Nov. 30, 2011) (holding that even if the lower court erred in admitting hearsay testimony, the admission was harmless because the hearsay evidence was "merely cumulative and substantial evidence was presented to support the conclusion"). Here, the termination letter stated reasons for Petricevic's termination had already been established during an unopposed line of questioning in the cross-examination of Petricevic. Accordingly, the admission of the termination letter itself was merely cumulative of the testimony already in evidence. 
(7) Petricevic argues that the Circuit Court plainly 
erred in the definition of "at-will employment" provided in jury instructions. He asserts that the definition of "at-will employment" should have included that at-will employees cannot be terminated for improper reasons, such as for whistleblowing. As Defendants point out, this instruction, Model Jury Instruction 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
No. 16.3, Hawai# i Civil Jury Instructions, 1999 ed., was provided 
by the agreement of the parties. In addition, the jury 
instructions included instructions regarding the elements of Petricevic's whistleblower claim. 
We conclude that the 
instructions as a whole were not "prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." See, e.g.
, Medeiros v. 
Choy, 142 Hawai# i 233, 239, 418 P.3d 574, 580 (2018). 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's September 10, 
2021 Final Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i December 18, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Acting Chief Judge
Bosko Petricevic,Plaintiff/Counterclaim /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Defendant-Appellant Pro Se Associate Judge 
Richard M. Rand, /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
(Marr Jones & Wang) Associate Judge
for Defendants/
Counterclaimants–Appellees. 
12 