 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000842
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
HAWAIIAN DREDGING CONSTRUCTION COMPANY, INC.,
Plaintiff-Appellant, v. FUJIKAWA ASSOCIATES INC. dba
Continental Mechanical of the Pacific, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0900)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
This case stems from a dispute arising out of an
 
agreement (the Subcontract) between Plaintiff-Appellant Hawaiian
 
Dredging Construction Company, Inc. (HDCC) and Defendant-Appellee
 Fujikawa Associates, Inc. dba Continental Mechanical of the
 
Pacific (Fujikawa) and an injury suffered by one of HDCC's
 
workers. HDCC appeals from the Judgment (Judgment) entered in
 favor of Fujikawa and against HDCC, on May 2, 2014, in the
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court), after summary
 
judgment was entered in favor Fujikawa.
1
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. BACKGROUND 
On May 1, 2012, HDCC as "Contractor" and Fujikawa as 
"Subcontractor" entered into the Subcontract for general repairs 
to Edmondson Hall at the University of Hawai 'i at Manoa (Work). 
The Subcontract provides in relevant part: 
12.4 To the fullest extent permitted by law, Subcontractor
shall indemnify, and save harmless Contractor and Owner, and
their agents and employees, from and against all Liabilities
on account of: . . . (D) any and all damage or injury to
person or property arising directly or indirectly from the
performance of the Work and/or the operations of
Subcontractor to the extent any such damage or injury is
attributable in whole or in part to the acts or omissions of
Subcontractor, anyone directly or indirectly employed by
Subcontractor or anyone for whose acts Subcontractor may be
liable; and, when requested by Contractor, Subcontractor
shall defend any and all actions and pay all charges of
attorneys and other expenses arising therefrom. 
The Subcontract defines "Liabilities" as "Separately
 
and collectively, any loss, injury, damage, fine, penalty, cost
 
and expense (including legal fees and costs) and other liability
 whatsoever, and any action, suit, proceeding or claims, relating
 to such liability."
 
On July 12, 2012, HDCC sent Fujikawa a Notice of Claim
 
and Demand for Indemnification (Notice of Claim), which notified
 
Fujikawa that "one of HDCC's employees, Mr. Gabriel Balon
 
[(Balon)], a 55-year old laborer, sustained injuries at the
 
Project site when he was struck by a piece of an air duct being
 
installed by Fujikawa[.]" HDCC claimed that Fujikawa "bears full
 responsibility for [Balon's] accident, and that HDCC is entitled
 to indemnification by [Fujikawa] under the Subcontract[.]" HDCC
 demanded that Fujikawa "indemnify [HDCC] and its insurer(s) from
 and against any and all liability, costs and expenses . . . 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
incurred in connection with the subject accident and the
 
resolution thereof." 
On March 25, 2013, HDCC filed a Complaint contending
 
that Fujikawa "is obligated under the Subcontract to indemnify
 and save [HDCC] harmless from the amounts paid by [HDCC] on
 account of the bodily injury to Gabriel Balon" and asserting that
 Fujikawa breached the Subcontract because it "refused to
 indemnify or save [HDCC] harmless from amounts paid by [HDCC] on
 account of the bodily injury to Gabriel Balon[.]" HDCC sought
 damages, prejudgment interest, attorneys fees, and "other and
 further relief as the Court may deem just and equitable." 
On April 24, 2013, Fujikawa filed an Answer to
 
Complaint (Answer) and asserted defenses of, inter alia,
 
comparative negligence, estoppel, unclean hands, waiver, failure
 
to mitigate damages, and failure to join indispensable parties. 
Fujikawa denied that Balon's "bodily injury occurred directly or
 indirectly from [Fujikawa's] performance of Work and/or
 operations under the Subcontract." Fujikawa also denied that it
 was obligated under the Subcontract to indemnify HDCC for the
 amounts paid on account of Balon's bodily injury, and/or that
 Fujikawa breached its Subcontract. 
On February 25, 2014, HDCC filed a Motion for Partial
 
Summary Judgment.  HDCC argued that it was entitled to judgment
 
on the issue of liability as a matter of law because there were
 
no genuine issues as to any material fact. HDCC argued that the
 Subcontract "clearly and unequivocally" requires that Fujikawa
 indemnify HDCC.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On March 27, 2014, Fujikawa filed a memorandum in
 
opposition, arguing that partial summary judgment should be
 
denied because genuine issues of material fact exist as to
 whether or not HDCC is entitled to pass on its workers'
 compensation liability for Balon's injuries to Fujikawa. 
Fujikawa further argued that summary judgment should be granted
 in its favor because the "relief sought by HDCC . . . is not
 contained within the scope of the subject indemnity clause." 
Finally, Fujikawa argued that, if it was not entitled to summary
 judgment in its favor, there were genuine issues of material fact
 concerning whether HDCC is entitled to indemnification for its
 workers' compensation payments to Balon.
 
In an April 1, 2014 Reply Memorandum, HDCC argued that
 
the issue of indemnification, which does not affect Balon's
 receipt of workers' compensation benefits, is outside the scope
 of Chapter 386, and is strictly an issue of contractual dispute. 
HDCC emphasized that the language of the Subcontract "clearly and
 unequivocally requires Fujikawa to indemnify HDCC for any and all
 
damage arising from Fujikawa's performance of its work and/or
 
operations." 
After an April 4, 2014 hearing, the Circuit Court
 
denied HDCC's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment, and granted
 what the court construed as Fujikawa's cross-motion for partial
 summary judgment. The Circuit Court explained: 
In terms of the three Hawaii cases -- the Keawe, the
Kamali, and the Espaniola -- all three cases are factually
and procedurally distinguishable, but there are certain
principles enunciated that lends a certain guidance to the
court. All parties agree that what you garner from those
cases is the phrase "clear and unequivocal assumption of
liability." 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
So taking that particular phrase and interposing it
upon the contract that was entered into between the general
contractor and the subcontractor, in this case HDC[C] and
Fujikawa, it's a matter of contract interpretation in view
of the principles enunciated by the three Hawaii cases. So
 that's the starting point for the court. 
So we're looking at the particular sections. The
section at issue is the 12.4 juxtaposed against the
definitions under liabilities. But in addition in
 looking at contract interpretation, the court also
needs to look at the contract in its entirety and not
in isolation. 
So in looking at Section 7, 'cause it deals with
insurance, the purpose of the insurance provision is
requiring the subcontractor to obtain particular kinds of
insurance such as workers comp, CGL, and other insurance. In
looking at 7.1, it says, for example, "Except as may
otherwise be provided in the contract documents,
subcontractor Fujikawa shall at its own expense secure and
maintain insurance of such types, insurance in such amounts
as may be necessary to protect the subcontractor and the
contractor against all hazards or risk of loss as
hereinafter specified. Responsibility of the subcontractor
to maintain and cause is permitted subcontractor to maintain
adequate insurance." [sic]
 
So in looking at the purpose underlying why you need
to -- why the subcontractor needs to procure insurance, the
subcontractor's fully aware in terms of their obligations
under Section 7 to procure the necessary insurance to
protect against certain risks and losses. In addition
 there's the unemployment and other insurance benefits under
7.8. 
What the employ -- what the general contractor HDC[C]
seeks in terms of invoking Section 12.4 is that in addition
thereto as an additional cost and expense of doing business;
to wit, the workers comp or paying workers comp benefits,
subcontractor Fujikawa were invoking the indemnity provision
such that if a situation arises where the contractor,
general contractor has to pay work comp benefits, Fujikawa,
under the 12.4 indemnity provision as a cost and expense of
doing business, you need to reimburse us or to pay us back
or at a future date because it's not definite yet. But in
 terms of the liability, that is a clear and unequivocal
assumption of liability. 
The court disagrees because in looking at the contract
as a whole in its entirety and the -- not necessarily the
rationale under Chapter 386 which the court is familiar with
but in terms of should the cost and expense of doing
business by the subcontractor include an assumption of
liability for workers comp under the 12.4 provision, the
court in looking at the contract and interpreting it that
there is no clear and unequivocal assumption of liability on
the part of the subcontractor to assume the risk, to assume
the cost of expense of the general contractor's doing
business in paying workers comp benefits for a work-related
injury, I think that's too far a stretch under the contract
itself. 

5

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6On April 23, 2014, the Circuit Court entered an Order
Denying HDCC's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Filed 2/25/14
and Granting Fujikawa's Cross-Motion for Summary Judgment.  The
Circuit Court entered the Judgment on May 2, 2014.  On May 20,
2014, HDCC filed its notice of appeal. 
II.POINTS OF ERROR
On appeal, HDCC contends that the Circuit Court erred
when the court:  (1) concluded that the proper standard for
construing the Subcontract was the "clear and unequivocal
assumption of liability" standard; (2) determined that the
Subcontract did not clearly and unequivocally require Fujikawa to
indemnify HDCC for its costs related to Balon's workers'
compensation claim; and (3) denied HDCC's Motion for Partial
Summary Judgment, and granted Fujikawa's cross motion. 
III.APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW
On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is
reviewed de novo.  See State ex rel. Anzai v. City and
County of Honolulu, 99 Hawai# i 508, [515], 57 P.3d 433,
[440] (2002); Bitney v. Honolulu Police Dep't, 96 Hawai# i
243, 250, 30 P.3d 257, 264 (2001).
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law.  A fact is material if
proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties.  The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party.  In other
words, we must view all of the evidence and inferences
drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the
party opposing the motion.
Kahale v. City and County of Honolulu, 104 Hawai# i 341, 344,
90 P.3d 233, 236 (2004) (citation omitted).
Nuuanu Valley Ass'n v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 119 Hawai# i 90,
96, 194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008). NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
With regard to the burdens of the moving and non-moving
 
parties on summary judgment, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court has 
articulated that: 
The burden is on the party moving for summary judgment
(moving party) to show the absence of any genuine issue as
to all material facts, which, under applicable principles of
substantive law, entitles the moving party to judgment as a
matter of law. This burden has two components.
 
First, the moving party has the burden of producing support
for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material fact
exists with respect to the essential elements of the claim
or defense which the motion seeks to establish or which the
 motion questions; and (2) based on the undisputed facts, it
is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law. Only
when the moving party satisfies its initial burden of
production does the burden shift to the non-moving party to
respond to the motion for summary judgment and demonstrate
specific facts, as opposed to general allegations, that
present a genuine issue worthy of trial.
 
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of
persuasion. This burden always remains with the moving party
and requires the moving party to convince the court that no
genuine issue of material fact exists and that the moving
party is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law.
 
Wong v. Cayetano, 111 Hawai 'i 462, 476, 143 P.3d 1, 15 (2006) 
(quoting French v. Hawaii Pizza Hut, Inc., 105 Hawai 'i 462, 470, 
99 P.3d 1046, 1054 (2004)). 
Furthermore, a trial court "may enter judgment for the
 
non-moving party on a motion for summary judgment where there is

 
no genuine issue of material fact and the non-moving party is
 
entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Konno v. Cty of Haw.,
 
85 Hawai 'i 61, 76, 937 P.2d 397, 412 (1997) (citing Flint v. 
MacKenzie, 53 Haw. 672, 673, 501 P.2d 357, 358 (1972) (per
 curiam)). 
In addition, Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate Procedure 
(HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4) provides that "[p]oints not presented in
 
accordance with [HRAP Rule 28(b)] will be disregarded, except
 
that the appellate court, at its option, may notice a plain error
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
8not presented."   "[T]he appellate court's discretion to address
plain error is always to be exercised sparingly."  Okada Trucking
Co., v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawai# i 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81
(2002) (citation omitted).  An appellate court considers three
factors in its decision to review an issue for plain error,
"(1) whether consideration of the issue not raised at trial
requires additional facts; (2) whether its resolution will affect
the integrity of the trial court's findings of fact; and (3)
whether the issue is of great public import."  Id.  
Finally, "[t]he construction and legal effect to be
given a contract is a question of law freely reviewable by an
appellate court."  Hawaiian Ass'n of Seventh-Day Adventists v.
Wong, 130 Hawai #i 36, 45, 305 P.3d 452, 461 (2013) (brackets
omitted) (quoting Brown v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co. , 82 Hawai #i 226,
239, 921 P.2d 146, 159 (1996)). 
 IV.DISCUSSION
A.The Clear and Unequivocal Assumption of Liability
Standard
HDCC argues that the Circuit Court erred as a matter of
law when it held that the proper standard for construing the
Subcontract was the clear and unequivocal assumption of liability
standard.  However, HDCC did not contest the application of this
standard to the Subcontract in the proceeding before the Circuit
Court.  In its Motion for Partial Summary Judgment, HDCC argued
that the Subcontract "'clearly and unequivocally' assigns
Fujikawa a responsibility to indemnify HDCC."  At the hearing on
the motion, HDCC's counsel argued:  "So the question that the
court asked is what did Fujikawa clearly and unequivocally assumeNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
when it signed this subcontract? And the answer is Fujikawa
 
clearly agreed to indemnify [HDCC] against all of [HDCC's] costs
 and expenses arising from injury to persons because of Fujikawa's
 work." Thus, HDCC raised this challenge for the first time on
 appeal.
 
The supreme court has recognized that "[a]s a general 
rule, if a party does not raise an argument at trial, that argument will be deemed to have been waived on appeal; this rule applies in both criminal and civil cases." State v. Moses, 102 
Hawai
'i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003) (citations omitted). 
However, an appellate court "will consider new arguments on appeal where justice so requires." Id. An appellate court's 
"discretion to address plain error is always to be exercised sparingly." Okada Trucking, 97 Hawai
'i at 458, 40 P.3d at 81 
(citation omitted). An appellate court considers three factors in its decision to review an issue for plain error: "(1) whether consideration of the issue not raised at trial requires additional facts; (2) whether its resolution will affect the integrity of the trial court's findings of fact; and (3) whether the issue is of great public import." Id. 
Here, the issue involves the proper legal standard and 
does not require additional facts. In addition, on summary judgment there are no findings of fact whose integrity could be affected on appeal. See Alvarez Family Trust v. Ass'n of 
Apartment Owners of the Kaanapali Alii, 121 Hawai
'i 474, 491, 221 
P.3d 452, 469 (2009). Nevertheless, as the supreme court has observed, "in civil cases, an issue is of 'great public import' 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
for the purposes of plain error review only when such issue 
affects the public interest." Id. In Alvarez, the supreme court 
determined that the issue of whether appellants had the right to challenge the voting procedures of a condominium association's board of directors was not a matter of "public interest" because "(1) such right is of a private nature and (2) the issue applies exclusively to the facts and circumstances of [appellant's] case." Id. at 492, 221 P.3d at 470; see also Cty of Haw. v. C & 
J Coupe Family Ltd. P'ship, 124 Hawai
'i 281, 305, 242 P.3d 1136, 
1160 (2010) ("Whether the court correctly valued the property in Condemnation 2 is not of general public importance."). As in Alvarez, the issue of whether the Circuit Court improperly applied the "clear and unequivocal assumption of liability" standard to the Subcontract applies exclusively to the facts and circumstances of the instant case. Accordingly, we conclude that plain error review of this issue is unwarranted. 
B.	 Application of the "Clear and Unequivocal Assumption of
Liability Standard" to the Subcontract
 
HDCC challenges the Circuit Court's conclusion that

 
Fujikawa did not clearly and unequivocally agree to indemnify
 
HDCC for the costs HDCC incurred in paying Balon's workers'
 compensation claims.
 
The supreme court has examined indemnity contracts in
 
the following three cases, which were discussed by parties below
 and on appeal: 
Kamali v. Hawaiian Elec. Co. , 54 Haw. 153, 504
 
P.2d 861 (1972); Keawe v. Hawaiian Elec. Co., 65 Haw. 232, 649
 P.2d 1149 (1982); and Espaniola v. Cawdrey Mars Joint Venture, 68
 Haw. 171, 707 P.2d 365 (1985). 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In Kamali, 54 Haw. at 154, 504 P.2d at 862, an employee
 
of a house moving company was severely burned by uninsulated
 
electric wires, owned and maintained by Hawaiian Electric Company
 (HECO). The employee filed a complaint against HECO for
 
"negligent construction and maintenance of its electric wires." 
Id. HECO filed a third-party complaint against the employer for
 
indemnity. Id. HECO argued that the house moving permit
 
(permit) required under a City and County ordinance "form[ed] the
 
basis for [employer's] express contractual agreement to indemnify
 
[HECO] for [employee's] injuries." Id. at 160, 504 P.2d at 865. 
The permit read in relevant part, "[employer] agrees(s) . . . to
 assume full responsibility for any damages to [HECO's] property
 and/or life in connection with our operation under this permit." 
Id. at 161, 504 P.2d at 866. The supreme court determined that
 "the language of the permit did not constitute an indemnity
 contract as a matter of law[.]" Id. The court noted that
 
"contracts of indemnity are strictly construed, particularly
 where the indemnitee claims that it should be held safe from its
 own negligence." Id. The court concluded that the permit did
 
"not amount to a clear and unequivocal assumption of liability by
 the [employer] for [HECO's] negligence." Id. at 162, 504 P.2d at
 
866. 
In Keawe, 65 Haw. at 233-34, 649 P.2d at 1151, an
 
employee was injured while performing contracting work for his
 employer. The employee filed a complaint against HECO for
 damages arising out of his injuries. Id. at 234, 649 P.2d at
 
1151. HECO brought an indemnity action against the employer "for
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
amounts paid by it in settlement in a personal injury suit." Id.
 
at 233, 649 P.2d at 1150. HECO argued that the "'hold harmless
 
clause' contained in its contract with [employer], required
 indemnification by [employer.]" 
Id. at 235, 649 P.2d at 1152. 
The hold harmless clause provided: 
The [employer] shall protect, defend, save harmless and
indemnify [HECO], its employees and the public from claims,
demands or expenses on account of any injury alleged or real
to person or persons or damage alleged or real to property
arising out of anything done or omitted to be done under
this Contract by [employer] or any subcontractor or anyone
directly employed by either of them.
 
Id. at 233 n.1, 649 P.2d at 1151 n.1.
 
The supreme court noted that the employee's lawsuit was
 
"termed in language going strictly to HECO's responsibility for
 
the accident." Id. at 238, 649 P.2d at 1153. The court
 
recognized that "in order for the 'hold harmless clause' to
 effectively bind [employer] . . . for the amount of settlement
 paid by HECO to [employee], the language of the clause must state
 in terms 'clear and unequivocal' the responsibility of [employer]
 for all claims resulting from the acts or omissions by HECO." 
Id. The court concluded that the employer was not required to
 
indemnify HECO because "far from indemnifying HECO from all
 claims and liabilities arising from either party's negligence,
 the clause appears to address only those instances where
 [employer] alone is responsible." Id. at 238, 649 P.2d at 1154.
 
In Espaniola, 68 Haw. at 173-74, 707 P.2d at 367, a
 
subcontractor and general contractor entered into a subcontract
 for framing work. An employee of the subcontractor sustained a
 fatal work injury, and his dependents brought a tort action
 against the general contractor. Id. at 174-75, 707 P.2d at 367­
12
 Id.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
68. The general contractor filed a third party claim against the
 
subcontractor for "indemnification for any damages resulting from
 [subcontractor's] negligence." Id. at 175, 707 P.2d at 368. The
 
indemnification provision of the subcontract provides in relevant 

 
part: 
The Sub-contractor shall protect and indemnify said
Contractor against any loss or damage suffered by any one
arising through the negligence of the Sub-contractor, or
those employed by him or his agents or servants; he shall
bear any expense which the Contractor may have by reason
thereof, or on account of being charged therewith[.]
 
 
Id. at 174 n.2, 707 P.2d at 367 n.2. 
In other words, the subcontract provided that the

 
2
indemnitor would protect and indemnify the indemnitee  against
any loss or damage suffered by any one arising through the
 negligence of the indemnitor.  Following a discussion of
 
Kamali and Keawe, the court concluded that under the language ofthe subcontract, "there has been a 'clear and unequivocal'

 
assumption of liability[.]" Id. at 178, 707 P.2d at 370 (citing
Keawe, 65 Haw. at 237, 649 P.2d at 1153).
 
 

 
In this case, HDCC argues that, under the language of

 
the Subcontract, it is entitled to indemnity from Fujikawa for
 
costs and expenses related to Balon's workers' compensation
 claim. The Subcontract provides in relevant part: 
12.4 To the fullest extent permitted by law, [Fujikawa]
shall indemnify, and save harmless [HDCC] and Owner, and
their agents and employees, from and against all Liabilities
on account of: . . . (D) any and all damage or injury to
person or property arising directly or indirectly from the
performance of the Work and/or the operations of [Fujikawa]
to the extent any such damage or injury is attributable in
whole or in part to the acts or omissions of [Fujikawa],
 
2
 Indemnitor is "[o]ne who indemnifies another." Black's Law
 
Dictionary 837 (9th ed. 2009). 
Indemnitee is "[o]ne who receives indemnity
from another." Id.

 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
anyone directly or indirectly employed by [Fujikawa] or
anyone for whose acts [Fujikawa] may be liable; and, when
requested by [HDCC], [Fujikawa] shall defend any and all
actions and pay all charges of attorneys and other expenses
arising therefrom. 
Thus, the Subcontract requires indemnification for "all
 
Liabilities" arising from Fujikawa's acts or omissions. 
"Liabilities" is defined as "any loss, injury, damage, fine,
 penalty, cost and expense (including legal fees and costs) and
 other liability whatsoever, and any action, suit, proceeding or
 claims, relating to such liability." Fujikawa argues that the
 Subcontract's definition of Liabilities does not include any
 reference to benefits, statutory obligations, compensation,
 disability payments or benefits. Nevertheless, under the express
 terms of the Subcontract, Fujikawa owes a duty of indemnification
 to HDCC for all Liabilities, specifically including any cost or
 expense that resulted from Fujikawa's acts or omissions. 
Fujikawa also expressly agreed in Subsection 12.4 to "pay all
 charges of attorneys and other expenses arising therefrom." 
Therefore, we conclude that the Subcontract includes the clear
 and unequivocal agreement of Fujikawa to assume all Liabilities
 arising from its acts or omissions, including costs and expenses
 related to Balon's workers compensation claim. Espaniola, 68
 
Haw. at 178, 707 P.2d at 370; see also, e.g., T.L. James & Co.,
 Inc., v. Sam's Truck Service, Inc., 875 So.2d 977, 980-81 (La.
 Ct. App. 2004) (recognizing that a subcontractor owed a duty of
 indemnification to contractor for attorney's fees and damage
 awards that it paid as a result of defending the worker's
 compensation claim that resulted from an injury caused by the
 subcontractor's subcontractor when the agreement provided that a
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In 2012, HRS § 386-8 provided, in relevant part: 3
(a) When a work injury for which compensation is
payable under this chapter has been sustained under
circumstances creating in some person other than theemployer or another employee of the employer acting in thecourse of employment a legal liability to pay damages onaccount thereof, the injured employee or the injuredemployee's dependents (hereinafter referred to collectivelyas "the employee") may claim compensation under this chapterand recover damages from that third person.
. . . . 
(c) If within nine months after the date of the
personal injury the employee has not commenced an action
against a third person, the employer, having paid or being
liable for compensation under this chapter, shall be
subrogated to the rights of the injured employee. Except as
limited by chapter 657, the employee may at any time
commence an action or join in any action commenced by the
employer against a third person.
. . . . 
(e) If the action is prosecuted by the employer alone,
the employer shall be entitled to be paid from the proceeds
received as a result of any judgment for damages, or
settlement in case the action is compromised before
judgment, the reasonable litigation expenses incurred in
preparation and prosecution of the action, together with a
reasonable attorney's fee, which shall be based solely upon
the services rendered by the employer's attorney in
effecting recovery both for the benefit of the employer and
the employee. After the payment of the expenses and
attorney's fee, the employer shall apply out of the amount
of the judgment or settlement proceeds an amount sufficient
to reimburse the employer for the amount of the employer's
expenditure for compensation and shall pay any excess to the
injured employee or other person entitled thereto.
15subcontractor would indemnify contractor against damages or
attorney's fees resulting from work performed by subcontractor or
any of subcontractor's subcontractors).
Fujikawa further contends that HDCC is attempting to
evade its statutory workers' compensation obligations.  First,
Fujikawa argues that HDCC avoided the process outlined in HRS
§ 386-8 (2015).3  HRS § 386-8 allows injured employees or their
dependents to bring "negligence or other torts against a third
party, in addition to the remedies under the worker's
compensation laws."  Hun v. Ctr. Props., 63 Haw. 273, 277, 626
P.2d 182, 186 (1981).  HRS § 386-8 also grants a right ofNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
subrogation to employers who paid or are liable for compensation. 
"When subrogation occurs, 'the substitute is put in all respects in the place of the party to whose rights he is subrogated.'" Shimabuku v. Montgomery Elevator Co., 79 Hawai
'i 352, 358, 903 
P.2d 48, 54 (1995) (quoting Peters v. Weatherwax, 69 Haw. 21, 27, 731 P.2d 157, 161 (1987)). 
HRS § 386-8 does not, however, require an employer to
 
assert its subrogation interest; nor does it limit an employer to
 this statutorily-provided remedy. Fujikawa fails to cite any
 authority, and we find none, to mandate that an employer's
 exclusive course of action to recover damages from a responsible
 third party is a subrogation claim under HRS § 386-8. Here, HDCC
 sought reimbursement based on the indemnification provision in
 the Subcontract. Accordingly, we reject Fujikawa's contention
 that HDCC impermissibly evaded the process outlined in HRS § 386­8. 
Fujikawa also argues that HDCC is avoiding its 
statutory duty to provide workers' compensation benefits. Under HRS § 386-85 (2015), "it shall be presumed, in the absence of substantial evidence to the contrary . . . [t]hat the claim is for a covered work injury[.]" The presumption of compensability "imposes upon the employer the burden of going forward with the evidence and the burden of persuasion." Van Ness v. State Dep't 
of Educ., 131 Hawai
'i 545, 558, 319 P.3d 464, 477 (2014) (citing 
Akamine v. Hawaiian Packing & Crating Co., 53 Haw. 406, 408, 495 P.2d 1164, 1166 (1972)). 
[T]he purpose of the Work[ers'] Compensation Law is to
charge against industry the pecuniary loss arising from
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
disabling or fatal personal injury, regardless of negligence
by the employee or lack of negligence by the employer; that
it is designed to obtain for an injured work[er] or his [or
her] dependents an assured, certain and prompt compensation
to replace the doubtful right accorded by common law, and to
secure for the employer freedom from vexatious, delaying and
uncertain litigation with its possibilities of heavy
penalties by way of verdicts and high costs; that it is
based on the obligation of industry to recognize accidental
injury and death arising out of employment as one of the
costs of production. . . .
 
Iddings v. Mee-Lee, 82 Hawai 'i 1, 8, 919 P.2d 263, 270 (1996) 
(quoting Coates v. Pac. Eng'g, 71 Haw. 358, 364, 791 P.2d 1257, 
1260-61 (1990)) (emphasis omitted). 
It is "well settled that contractual indemnification
 
agreements and 'hold harmless' clauses are valid in the workers'
 compensation context and do not contravene or undermine the
 purposes underlying workers' compensation in general." Id. at
 
16, 919 P.2d at 278. In Iddings, an employee filed an action
 against her supervisory co-employee for wilful and wanton
 misconduct. Id. at 4, 919 P.2d at 266. The supreme court
 
determined that absent a contractual indemnification agreement
 between the employer, as indemnitor, and the co-employee as
 indemnitee, the co-employee "will not be able to secure indemnity
 from [the employer] for a judgment against him in a suit by
 [employee], should the [employee] prevail." Id. at 16, 919 P.2d
 
at 278. The supreme court recognized that it was "permissible
 under the workers' compensation scheme for an employer and a
 supervisory employee to voluntarily enter into a contractual
 indemnity agreement for 'another layer of insurance coverage.'" 
Id. at 17, 919 P.3d at 279. 
Here, it is undisputed that Balon was injured in the
 
course and scope of his employment. HDCC accepted Balon's
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
workers' compensation claim and Balon received workers'
 
compensation benefits. Thus, HDCC incurred expenses in paying
 benefits under the workers' compensation law. HDCC's claim for
 indemnity is based on "an independent duty" created by the
 indemnification provision in the Subcontract. See id. at 16, 919
 
P.2d at 278. Thus, we conclude that Fujikawa's contention, that
 by seeking to enforce a contractual indemnification HDCC is
 avoiding its statutory duty to provide workers' compensation
 benefits, is without merit. 
C. Motion for Summary Judgment
 Finally, HDCC argues that the Circuit Court erred as a
 
matter of law in denying HDCC's Motion for Partial Summary
 Judgment, as well in granting Fujikawa's cross motion. In its
 motion, HDCC argued that it was entitled to summary judgment on
 the issue of liability. HDCC asserted that the "indemnification
 provision in the Subcontract clearly demonstrates Fujikawa's
 assumption of liability for Gabriel Balon's accident, there is no
 reason to delay entering summary judgment on the issue of
 Fujikawa's liability to HDCC."
 
As discussed above, we agree that the Subcontract
 
required indemnification to HDCC for costs or expenses, including
 workers' compensation benefits paid to Balon, that resulted from
 Fujikawa's acts or omissions (as more particularly set forth in
 Section 12.4 of the Subcontract). In addition, we recognize that
 HDCC has alleged that Balon's injuries were caused by Fujikawa's
 acts or omissions because he was reportedly struck by an air duct
 being installed by Fujikawa. However, upon review of the
 
18
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
declaration of counsel and two exhibits submitted in support of
 
HDCC's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment, we conclude that HDCC
 failed to provide any evidence supporting its bare contention
 that Balon's injuries were caused by Fujikawa's acts. 
Therefore, the Circuit Court did not err when it denied HDCC's
 motion. See Survivors of Medeiros v. Maui Land & Pineapple Co.,
 
66 Haw. 290, 293, 660 P.2d 1316, 1319 (1983) (citation omitted)
 (recognizing that our appellate courts have "repeatedly held that
 where [a] trial court has reached a correct conclusion, its
 decision will not be disturbed on the ground that the reasons it
 gave for its actions were erroneous."). 
Nevertheless, for the reasons discussed above, we agree
 
that the Circuit Court erred when it granted Fujikawa's cross-
motion based on its conclusion that indemnification for expenses
 stemming from workers' compensation benefits is not within the
 scope of the Subcontract's indemnity clause.
 V. CONCLUSION
 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court's May 2, 2014 Judgment
 
is vacated and this case is remanded to the Circuit Court for
 further proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 17, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Keith K. Hiraoka,
Jodie D. Roeca,Mark J. Kaetsu,(Roeca Luria Hiraoka, LLP)for Plaintiff-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge 
Kenneth K. Fukunaga,
Sheree Kon-Herrera,(Fukunaga Matayoshi Hershey
& Ching, LLP)
for Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge
19
 