NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000589
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
JOHNATHEN SWAIM,
Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
STATE OF HAWAI#I,
Respondent-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(S.P.P. NO. 17-1-0013 (CR. NO. 1PC101001235))
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Chan and Wadsworth, JJ.)
Petitioner-Appellant Johnathen Swaim, aka Jonathen
Swaim, and Jonathan Swaim (Swaim), appeals from the Order Denying
Rule 40 Petition for Post-Conviction Relief Without a Hearing,
filed on June 27, 2018, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
(Circuit Court).1
On January 18, 2011, after pleading no contest, Swaim
was convicted of Burglary in the First Degree, in violation of
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-810(1)(c) (1993) and
sentenced to five years probation, with one year incarceration as
a special condition, subject to early release to participate in
substance abuse treatment.
1The Honorable Edwin C. Nacino presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On July 12, 2017, Swaim filed a Petition to Vacate, Set
Aside, or Correct Judgment Pursuant to Rule 40 of the Hawai#i
Rules of Penal Procedure (Petition).  On June 27, 2018, the
Petition was denied without a hearing.
On appeal, Swaim asserts the Circuit Court erred by
denying his Petition without a hearing because he stated a
colorable claim.  Swaim claims: (1) he did not enter his no
contest plea knowingly and intelligently because he did not
understand the nature of the charge and consequences, he did not
have the requisite state of mind to commit Burglary in the First
Degree, he was advised by counsel to change his plea, there was
ample evidence to beat and overcome the charge, he did not want
to go to prison, and he was not informed his conviction would
result in a ten year prison term; (2) he received ineffective
assistance of counsel because, had his counsel not encouraged him
to change his plea to no contest, the charge would have been
dismissed or he would have been found not guilty; (3) there was
prosecutorial misconduct because the evidence could not prove his
intent to commit Burglary and the charge should have been lowered
to Trespass; (4) his plea was coerced and he was forced to change
his plea by counsel; (5) the Honolulu Police Department (HPD)
failed to conduct a fair and lawful investigation because a
proper investigation would have revealed he did not commit
Burglary and intent to commit Burglary could not be proved; and
(6) Rule 11(g) of the Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) was
violated when he was not asked if there was a factual basis for
his no contest plea before it was accepted.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Swaim's points of error as follows:
(1) Swaim's claim that he did not knowingly and
intelligently enter his no contest plea is without merit.
Specifically, Swaim contends that he did not understand the
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
nature of the charge and consequences, he did not have the
requisite state of mind to commit Burglary in the First Degree,
he was advised by counsel to change his plea, there was ample
evidence to beat and overcome the charge, he did not want to go
to prison, and he was not informed his conviction would result in
a ten year prison term.
Swaim's signed no contest plea stated: "I have received
a written copy of the original charges in this case.  The charges
have been explained to me.  I understand the original charges
against me.  I told my lawyer all of the facts I know about the
case.  My lawyer explained the government's evidence against me,
my possible defenses, and the facts which the government must
prove in order to convict me."  It also stated Swaim was subject
to a maximum term of ten years imprisonment and a $25,000 fine.
It further stated: "I plead of my own free will.  No one is
pressuring me or threatening me or any other person to force me
to plead."  Swaim understood the nature of the charge and its
consequences.  He also understood the evidence against him and
his possible defenses, including reasonable doubt and no
intent/knowledge because those were listed as possible defenses
during plea negotiations and Swaim acknowledged that his counsel
explained his possible defenses to him.  Simply being advised by
counsel to plead no contest does not, by itself, make a no
contest plea not knowing and intelligent.  Swaim's no contest
plea did not require the court to impose a specific sentence and
the State did not agree to support Swaim's sentencing request.
Therefore, Swaim understood that under the no contest plea, he
could be sentenced to up to ten years incarceration.
(2) & (4) Swaim's second and fourth points of error
make overlapping arguments and, therefore, are addressed
together.  Swaim claims his counsel was ineffective for advising
him to plead no contest because, "[h]ad Mr. Swaim not been
strongly advised and urged to change his plea to no contest, he
would have been able to fight to get the Burglary in the first
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
degree charge dismissed and/or have a full jury trial on the
merits in which with reasonable probability he would have been
found not guilty."  Swaim also contends his counsel told him, "it
is no big deal, you already have one felony conviction, another
one won't make a difference.  We can beat the Burglary charge,
but you will go to jail anyways, so just plead no contest and get
probation."  (Brackets omitted.)
"In assessing claims of ineffective assistance of
counsel, the applicable standard is whether, viewed as
a whole, the assistance provided was within the range
of competence demanded of attorneys in criminal
cases."  Dan[ v. State], 76 Hawai #i [423,] 427, 879
P.2d [528,] 532 [(1994)] (internal quotation marks,
brackets, and citation omitted).
[T]he defendant has the burden of
establishing ineffective assistance of
counsel and must meet the following
two-part test: 1) that there were specific
errors or omissions reflecting counsel's
lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; and
2) that such errors or omissions resulted
in either the withdrawal or substantial
impairment of a potentially meritorious
defense.  Determining whether a defense is
potentially meritorious requires an
evaluation of the possible, rather than
the probable, effect of the defense on the
decision maker. . . . Accordingly, no
showing of actual prejudice is required to
prove ineffective assistance of counsel.
Barnett v. State, 91 Hawai #i 20, 27, 979 P.2d 1046,
1052–53 (1999) (ellipsis in original) (citations and
internal quotation marks omitted).
Adams v. State, 103 Hawai#i 214, 220, 81 P.3d 394, 400 (2003);
see also Hill v. Lockhart, 474 U.S. 52, 56 (1985) ("Where, as
here, a defendant is represented by counsel during the plea
process and enters his plea upon the advice of counsel, the
voluntariness of the plea depends on whether counsel's advice
'was within the range of competence demanded of attorneys in
criminal cases.'" (citation omitted)).
Swaim claims that his counsel specifically advised him
to plead no contest to get probation despite being able to beat
the Burglary charge.  The record reflects that the State
submitted a declaration from Swaim's trial counsel in its Answer
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to Petition.  Swaim's counsel explained his reasoning and the
interplay between the Burglary in the First Degree charge and
another case for which Swaim was subject to resentencing.
Counsel's declaration explained his opinion and advice as to why
Swaim might have wished to plead no contest.  In its order
denying the Petition, the Circuit Court found the Petition to be
"patently frivolous and without a trace of support, either on the
record, or from the evidence submitted[.]"  Swaim's presentation
of a colorable claim, coupled with trial counsel's declaration,
entitled Swaim to be present at an evidentiary hearing for the
circuit court to consider that evidence.  See HRPP Rule 40(f);
Carvalho v. State, 81 Hawai# i 185, 190-91, 914 P.2d 1378, 1383-84
(App. 1996), overruled on other grounds by In re Attorney's Fees
of Mohr, 97 Hawai# i 1, 7, 32 P.3d 647, 653 (2001).  Therefore,
the Circuit Court erred when it denied Swaim's Petition without
an evidentiary hearing.
(3) Swaim claims there was prosecutorial misconduct
because the prosecution could not prove his intent to commit
Burglary and "[i]nstead of being fair, logical, respecting Mr.
Swaim's constitutional rights, and perhaps dismissing the
Burglary charge or lowering it to a Trespass charge, the
Prosecutor maintained the Burglary in the first degree charge."
Swaim's claim is without merit.
"[G]enerally, a guilty plea made voluntarily and
intelligently precludes a defendant from later asserting any
nonjurisdictional claims, including constitutional challenges to
the pretrial proceedings."  State v. Hernandez, 143 Hawai# i 501,
508, 431 P.3d 1274, 1281 (2018) (quoting State v. Morin, 71 Haw.
159, 162, 785 P.2d 1316, 1318 (1990)).  "A no contest plea is
equivalent to a guilty plea in terms of waiving alleged
nonjurisdictional claims."  Id.  In State v. De Guair, 108
Hawai#i 179, 189-91, 118 P.3d 662, 672-74 (2005), the supreme
court rejected the defendant's claim that the trial court should
not have accepted his no contest plea to the offense of attempted
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
manslaughter.  The defendant argued that he could not plead to
the non-existent crime of attempted "reckless" manslaughter and
there was no factual basis for a conviction of attempted
manslaughter based on extreme mental or emotional disturbance
where he intentionally shot a person.  Id.  The De Guair court
held that, because there is no requirement to elicit a factual
basis for a no contest plea, "it matters not whether the facts
laid out in De Guair's change of plea hearing failed to establish
the offense of attempted manslaughter by virtue of EMED.  It is
sufficient that the offense of attempted manslaughter exists in
any form."  Id. at 191, 118 P.3d at 674.
Swaim does not dispute that the offense of Burglary in
the First Degree exists.  Thus, the State's ability to prove
intent was irrelevant when Swaim pled no contest to the charge.
If Swaim entered into his no contest plea knowingly and
voluntarily, Swaim waived all nonjurisdictional pretrial
proceeding claims.  Hernandez, 143 Hawai#i at 508, 431 P.3d at
1281.
"[T]here is no constitutional right to plea bargain[.]"
Weatherford v. Bursey, 429 U.S. 545, 561 (1977).  There is
nothing in the record to support Swaim's claim that he was
offered a plea bargain to dismiss the charge of Burglary in the
First Degree or to reduce the charge to Trespass.  Thus, his
claim that the charge would be dismissed or should have been
reduced to Trespass is without any support in the law or record.
(5) As with the prosecutorial misconduct claim above,
Swaim claims HPD failed to conduct itself in a fair and lawful
manner because a thorough investigation would have revealed he
did not commit Burglary in the First Degree and it would be
impossible to prove.  As stated above, the State's ability to
prove intent was not relevant when Swaim pled no contest.  De
Guair, 108 Hawai#i at 191, 118 P.3d at 674.  If Swaim entered
into his no contest plea knowingly and voluntarily, Swaim waived
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
all nonjurisdictional pretrial proceeding claims.  Hernandez, 143
Hawai#i at 508, 431 P.3d at 1281.
(6) Swaim's claim that the Circuit Court violated HRPP
Rule 11(g) is without merit.  At the time Swaim entered into his
no contest plea on October 7, 2010, HRPP Rule 11(f) was
applicable and stated "(f) Determining accuracy of plea.
Notwithstanding the acceptance of a plea of guilty, the court
shall not enter a judgment upon such plea without making such
inquiry as shall satisfy it that there is a factual basis for the
plea."  HRPP Rule 11(f) does not apply to no contest pleas.
State v. Merino, 81 Hawai#i 198, 217-18, 915 P.2d 672, 691-92
(1996).2
Based on the foregoing, we affirm in part and vacate in
part the Order Denying Rule 40 Petition for Post-Conviction
Relief Without a Hearing, filed on June 27, 2018, in the Circuit
Court of the First Circuit.  This matter is remanded for an
evidentiary hearing consistent with this Summary Disposition
Order.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 7, 2020.
On the briefs:
Jonathan E. Spiker,
(Koshiba Price & Gruebner),
for Petitioner-Appellant.
Stephen K. Tsushima,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Respondent-Appellee./s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Derrick H. M. Chan
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
2Effective 2014, HRPP Rule 11(f) was renumbered as HRPP Rule 11(g).  
7