         
     
 
   
   
   
       
   
    
         
         
         
         
        
           
     
       
           
         
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIF IC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000820 25-JUN-2026 07:55 AM Dkt. 133 SO 
NO.  CAAP-24-0000820 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
STATE OF HAWAI I, Plaintiff-Appellee, 
v. 
DAVID RICHARD
 STEVENS, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL  FROM  THE  CIRCUIT  COURT  OF  THE  SECOND  CIRCUIT  
(CASE  NO.  2CPC-23-0000274) 
SUMMARY   DISPOSITION   ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge
 and Wadsworth, J., 
with Gluck, J., concurring) 
Defendant-Appellant David Richard Stevens (Stevens ) 
appeals from the November 8, 2024 Judgment of Conviction and 
Sentence (Judgment ) entered by the Circuit Court of the Second 
Circuit (Circuit Court).1 Following a jury trial, Stevens was 
found guilty of Murder in the Second Degree (Second Degree 
Murder) in violation of Hawai i Revised Statutes  (HRS) 
§ 707-701.5 (2014 & Supp. 2018). Stevens was sentenced to life 
imprisonment with the possibility of parole. 
Stevens raises two points of error on appeal, 
contending that the Circuit Court erred when it: (1) failed to 
issue curative instructions or take other proper action when the 
1 The Honorable Kirstin M. Hamman presided.          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
      
          
    
        
         
        
     
      
       
        
     
         
       
           
          
        
         
         
          
       
          
        
      
      
        
         
          prosecutor repeatedly committed prosecutorial misconduct; and (2) 
failed to provide the jury with an instruction on a lesser 
included offense of reckless manslaughter. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve 
Stevens's points of error as follows: 
(1) Stevens argues that the prosecutor's closing and 
rebuttal arguments repeatedly crossed the boundary of permissible 
advocacy by, inter alia, speculating about motives and emotional 
states, mischaracterizing Stevens's statements, introducing new 
"facts" not in evidence, minimizing the State's burden of proof, 
and repeatedly making disparaging remarks about defense counsel 
in the presence of the jury. Stevens submits that the cumulative 
effect of these improprieties deprived Stevens of a fair trial. 
Prosecutorial misconduct is "a legal term of art that 
refers to any improper action committed by a prosecutor, however 
harmless or unintentional." State v. Willis, 156 Hawai i 195, 
204,
 572 P.3d 668, 677 (2025) (citation omitted). "Whenever a 
defendant alleges prosecutorial misconduct, this court must first 
decide: (1) whether the conduct was improper; and (2) if the 
conduct was improper, whether the misconduct was harmless beyond 
a reasonable doubt." Id. (cleaned up). 
Stevens argues that the prosecutor's conduct was 
improper in closing argument when he described defense counsel's 
advocacy as "drama" and "outrage coming from the other side" 
designed to "distract you [the Jury], plain and simple, to throw 
2
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
          
       
         
           
           
         
   
      
        
         
      
        
       
       
          
            
       
       
           
          
          
         
         
       
          
      
          
       
          
       
        
         
        
       
       
         you off your game[.]" Stevens also argues that the prosecutor's 
following statements, made during rebuttal, were improper: 
Now, [defense counsel] makes a lot of hay about this 
-- about the State being required to prove a weapon, but the 
State is not required to prove a weapon. It's not in the 
instructions. But [defense counsel] is resting on that in 
hoping you'll take that. 
Stevens argues that the statements constituted personal 
attacks against defense counsel that were intended "to diminish 
counsel's credibility and to suggest to the jury that legitimate 
objections and argument were manipulative or insincere." 
The Hawai i Supreme Court has  held that "a prosecutor's 
comment is clearly misconduct where it constitutes an 
impermissible attack on defense counsel's integrity and operates 
to denigrate the legal profession in general." State v. Pasene, 
144 Hawai i 339, 370, 439  P.3d 864, 895 (2019) (cleaned up). The 
supreme court has repeatedly ruled that "[i]mpugning defense 
counsel's principles is serious misconduct" and "undermines a 
trial's fairness because it is a strike at the defendant over the 
shoulders of his counsel in an attempt to prejudice the jury 
against the defendant." State v. Riveira , 149 Hawai i 427, 433, 
494
 P.3d 1160, 1166 (2021) (cleaned up) (quoting State v. 
Underwood , 142 Hawai i 317, 327, 418  P.3d 658, 668 (2018)). 
Other courts have noted the distinction between attacks 
on a defendant's arguments and attacks on defense counsel. For 
example, the Appellate Court of Connecticut explained: 
There is ample room, in the heat of argument, for the 
prosecutor to challenge vigorously the arguments made by 
defense counsel. It was not improper for the prosecutor to 
suggest that the defendant's attorney, by allocating a 
significant share of his closing argument to discussing what 
he deemed to be weakness in [a witness's] credibility and 
testimony, had attempted to divert the jury's attention away 
from the defendant's actions[.] Here, however, the 
prosecutor referred to the argument of the defendant's 
attorney as "smoke and mirrors[.]" We conclude that this 
3          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
        
       
          
         
       
      
        
     
           
          
       
        
           
           
           
        
      
       
        
           
           
        
            
           
       
         
          
          
      
          aspect of the prosecutor's argument was improper because it 
implied, to whatever degree, that the defendant's attorney 
had not based his argument on fact or reason, but had 
intended to mislead the jury by means of an artfully 
deceptive argument. The prosecutor implied that the 
defendant's attorney intended to deceive and thereby 
impugned the integrity of the defendant's attorney. For 
that reason, the argument constituted prosecutorial 
misconduct. 
State v. Orellana , 872 A.2d 506, 528 (Conn. App. 2005); see also 
State v. Fouse, 319 P.3d 778, 786 (Utah App. 2014) ("calling 
defense counsel's theory a distraction or irrelevant is 
permissible but accusing opposing counsel of using such a 
distraction as part of a purposeful scheme to mislead the jury is 
not"); United States v. Shan Wei Yu, 484 F.3d 979, 986-87 (8th 
Cir. 2007) (use of the term "red herring" in rebuttal argument is 
improper when combined with other statements alluding to defense 
counsel and deceitful trial tactics). 
The dividing line between a permissible attack on 
defense counsel's arguments and an impermissible attack on the 
attorney is not always clear. See, e.g., State v. Tunoa,
 113 
Hawai i 393, 402, 153 P.3d 464, 473 (App. 2007). Here, the 
prosecutor stated that defense counsel was trying to "distract" 
the jury - "to throw [the jury] off [their] game" - and "resting 
on that in hoping [the jury would] take that." Notably, the 
prosecutor repeatedly directed his remarks at defense counsel 
himself, rather than counsel's arguments or the defense theory of 
the case. The prosecutor said that defense counsel "scoffed" at 
a witness's testimony and was "outraged." We conclude that the 
prosecutor's statements constituted misconduct. Accord Riveira ,
 
149 Hawai i at 433, 494 P.3d at 1166 (holding that the 
4
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
        
    
       
       
      
        
          
          
         
         
           
        
      
          
           
        
         
      
         
           
         
         
        
          
 
       
       
         prosecutor's comment that defense counsel was trying to "trick" 
the jury constituted serious misconduct). 
Stevens also argues that the prosecutor's references to 
Stevens's "rage" and "explosive anger," and the prosecutor's 
statement that Stevens "snapped," constituted misconduct. 
Stevens maintains that these arguments were improper because none 
of the witnesses at trial described Stevens as angry, enraged, or 
out of control. Stevens submits that even if frustration could 
somehow be inferred from the footage of his police interview, 
that reaction would relate solely to Stevens's mental state at 
the time of interrogation, not his mental state on the night of 
Patrick Wisely's (Wisely) death. This argument has merit. 
"[I]t is well-established that prosecutors are afforded 
wide latitude in closing to discuss the evidence, and may 'state, 
discuss, and comment on the evidence as well as to draw all 
reasonable inferences from the evidence.'" Willis, 156 Hawai i 
at 204, 572
 P.3d at 677 (citation omitted). However, 
"[p]rosecutors are also forbidden from introducing new 
information or evidence in closing argument." State v. Hirata, 
152 Hawai i 27, 33, 520  P.3d 225, 231 (2022) (citation omitted). 
"[E]xpressions of personal opinion by the prosecutor are a form 
of unsworn, unchecked testimony and tend to exploit the influence 
of the prosecutor's office and undermine the objective detachment 
that should separate an attorney from the cause being argued." 
Id. 
Here, the jury heard the prosecutor opine that 
Stevens's conduct in the recorded interview reflected "explosive 
anger," which was the same "explosive anger" that caused Stevens 
5
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
            
       
           
         
       
          
        
       
         
         
         
         
  
       
         
       
      
         
        
      
      
        
          
           
                
        
         to "snap[]" on the night of Wisely's death. Yet, the jury heard 
no evidence that could legitimately support the prosecutor's 
claim: no witness testified as to Stevens's mental state at the 
time of Wisely's murder. The prosecutor's statements were not 
reasonable inferences from the evidence, and improperly expressed 
a personal belief about Stevens's mental state. See id. (holding 
that the prosecutor's statement was misconduct where the jury 
heard no evidence that could legitimately support the 
prosecutor's claim); see also State v. Cardona , 155 Hawai i  23, 
38,
 556 P.3d 369, 384 (2024) (holding that the prosecutor's 
comment that the defendant was "not scared" during an altercation 
based off the defendant's manner of riding an electric bicycle 
was improper). 
Stevens also argues that statements made by the 
prosecutor about a baseball bat "improperly argued facts not in 
evidence by inventing a 'hypothetical' baseball bat and 
improperly bolstered Detective Kaneshiro's credibility." Stevens 
contends that the "baseball bat" created a "new and highly 
inflammatory image unsupported by any testimony" that "served to 
heighten emotion, not illuminate the facts." 
In some instances, the use of hypothetical 
illustrations is not considered prejudicial, even if improper. 
See State v. Kupihea ,
 80 Hawai i 307, 317-18, 909 P.2d 1122, 
1132-33 (1996) (holding that the use of a hypothetical based on a 
fictional scenario to explain the law on extreme mental or 
emotional disturbance manslaughter was not prejudicial, where the 
circuit court "cautioned more than once" that the prosecutor's 
remarks "were not evidence[,]" the defense counsel was able to 
6
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
         
         
        
        
          
          
          
         
        
        
        
        
             
     
       
         
            
        
        
          
      
        
  
       
           
 
       
        refute the prosecutor's statements in rebuttal, and "the jury was 
properly instructed on the law"). However, here, unlike in 
Kupihea , the prosecutor did not create a hypothetical or 
fictional scenario to explain legal principles. Instead, the 
prosecutor suggested a baseball bat was the weapon used to murder 
Wisely - even though the detective who was on scene testified 
there was no object recovered as the weapon and the medical 
examiner testified that "a wide range of objects" could have 
caused Wisely's injuries. The "baseball bat" hypothetical was 
not a reasonable inference from the evidence; instead, the 
prosecutor encouraged new and inflammatory imagery. As Stevens 
argues, "[a] baseball bat evokes deliberate, forceful, and even 
sporting violence . . . . Injecting that imagery . . . served to 
heighten emotion, not illuminate the facts." 
Also, unlike in Kupihea , Stevens's counsel objected -
but the objection was overruled and no curative instruction was 
given. See id. at 317-18, 909 P.2d at 1132-33. Compounding the 
problem, the baseball bat argument was made in rebuttal, 
prohibiting defense counsel from confronting it. See, e.g., 
State v. Nofoa, 135 Hawai i 220, 229-30,  349 P.3d 327, 336-37 
(2015) (noting prejudice associated with improper rebuttal 
argument). We conclude that the prosecutor's "baseball bat" 
hypothetical was improper. 
Stevens points to three other instances of allegedly 
improper conduct, which we conclude do not rise to the level of 
prosecutorial misconduct. 
Finally, Stevens argues that the misconduct was not 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt because it was cumulative, 
7
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
         
         
       
           
          
          
  
        
         
       
          
        
         
        
         
          
           
         
      
       
          
         
      
          
     
        
          there were no curative instructions, and the case rested largely 
on the testimony of Curtis Edward Bryant (Bryant) and Kenneth 
David Bonavia (Bonavia ), who recounted Stevens's statements to 
them the day after Wisely died, but who were not witnesses to 
what happened to Wisely. The State does not address this 
argument at all; instead, the State merely argues that there was 
no prosecutorial misconduct. 
"Prosecutorial misconduct is not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt if there is a reasonable possibility that the 
misconduct complained of might have contributed to the 
conviction." Willis, 156 Hawai i at 204, 572  P.3d at 677 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). We consider 
three factors in applying the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt 
standard: "(1) the nature of the prosecuting attorney's 
misconduct; (2) the promptness or lack of a curative instruction; 
and (3) the strength or weakness of the evidence against the 
defendant." Hirata, 152 Hawai i at 34, 520  P.3d at 232 (citation 
omitted). 
The first factor weighs in favor of Stevens. The 
multiple instances of prosecutorial misconduct undermined defense 
counsel's credibility and improperly inserted new evidence and 
personal opinion. See, e.g., State v. Klinge,
 92 Hawai i 577, 
596, 994 P.2d 509, 528 (2000) (discussing potential prejudice of 
cumulative effect of multiple instances of misconduct). 
The second factor also weighs in favor of a new trial, 
because no curative instructions were given. 
The third factor is more neutral, somewhat favoring the 
prosecution. There were no witnesses to Wisely's death. See 
8
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
           
        
         
         
         
           
            
       
           
           
         
           
   
         
       
        
        
         
            
         
          
          
    
       
         
         
           
         State v. Conroy, 148 Hawai  i 194, 205, 468  P.3d 208, 219 (2020) 
(holding that "[o]f significance to a determination of the 
strength of the prosecution's case is that there were no 
witnesses to the altercation other than [the defendant] and [the 
complaining witness]"). On the other hand, Bryant and Bonavia 
testified that Stevens told them that he killed a guy. Stevens 
also had Wisely's blood on the top of his shoe and under his 
fingernail. However, Stevens repeatedly told the police 
detective that he heard Wisely moaning, so he went to check on 
him, and gave Wisely water at Wisely's request, and then left. 
In his police interview, Stevens denied killing Wisely. No 
object that could be pointed to as a potential murder weapon was 
located by the police. 
On the record before us, we cannot conclude that there 
is no reasonable possibility that the prosecutorial misconduct 
contributed to Stevens's conviction on the charge of Second 
Degree Murder. Accordingly, we conclude that the prosecutor's 
improper conduct deprived Stevens of a fair trial and constitutes 
grounds for a new trial. See Pasene, 144 Hawai i  at 364,  439 
P.3d at 889 ("Prosecutorial misconduct may provide grounds for a 
new trial if the prosecutor's actions denied the defendant a fair 
trial." (quoting State v. Agrabante , 73 Haw. 179, 198, 830 P.2d 
492, 502 (1992)). 
(2) Stevens argues that the Circuit Court erred in 
failing to give the jury a lesser included instruction for 
reckless manslaughter. A trial court is obligated to instruct 
the jury with respect to an included offense where there is a 
rational basis in the evidence for a verdict acquitting the 
9
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
         
           
           
           
         
        
           
      
       
         
          
         
          
 defendant of the offense charged and convicting the defendant of 
the included offense. See HRS § 701-109(5) (2014). We are 
remanding this case for a new trial. We cannot determine whether 
this standard will be met based on the evidence presented at the 
new trial. Accordingly, we decline to reach this issue. 
For the reasons set forth above, the Circuit Court's 
November 8, 2024 Judgment is vacated and this case is remanded to 
the Circuit Court for a new trial. 
DATED:  Honolulu,  Hawai i ,  June  25,  2026.  
On  the  briefs: 
Joanne  S.C.  Hicks 
(Hicks  Law), 
for  Defendant-Appellant 
Renee  Ishikawa  Delizo, 
Deputy  Prosecuting  Attorney, 
County  of  Maui, 
for  Plaintiff-Appellee /s/  Katherine  G.  Leonard  
Presiding  Judge 
/s/  Clyde  J.  Wadsworth 
Associate  Judge 
CONCURRING  OPINION  BY   GLUCK,  J. 
I fully concur
 with the majority's holding regarding 
prosecutorial misconduct. I also concur with the majority that 
these errors were not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, but I 
write separately because I believe that the third Willis factor 
weighs strongly in favor of the prosecution, making this a very 
close case. 
The  prosecution   presented  evidence  from  two  individuals 
who  interacted  with  Stevens  around  the  time  of  Wisely's  death.  
Bryant  testified  that  on  May  20,  2020,  Stevens  told  Bryant  that 
10          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
            
         
            
          
          
             
            
           
  
     
            
         
         
        
          
        
              
          
  
      
          
          
         
         
        
           
             
          "he [Stevens] was going to do away with all the homeless people." 
Bryant also testified that, the following day (May 21), Stevens 
said that "he had -- did something that -- last night that God 
was going to punish him for." Similarly, Bonavia testified that 
on May 21, Stevens told Bonavia: "I broke one of God's 
commandments last night" and "I killed a guy. Do you want to see 
the blood?" Stevens also told Bonavia that "he beat this man to 
death with a stick" and asked if Bonavia "wanted to see the 
body[.]" 
Maui Police Department Detective Jonathan Kaneshiro 
testified that on May 21, 2020, he responded to a scene of a 
deceased male, identified as Wisely, at Waiola Church in Lahaina. 
Kaneshiro was notified about Stevens being a possible suspect and 
located Stevens on Front Street. Detective Kaneshiro testified 
that "[i]t appeared like he had blood on his hands and 
fingernails, especially kind of right around the fingernail area. 
And then it had what looked like blood on his shoes as well." A 
DNA analysis confirmed that the blood found on Stevens was most 
likely from Wisely.1 
Detective Kaneshiro conducted an interview of Stevens 
at the police station, and the recorded interview was played in 
open court. In the interview, Stevens denied being involved with 
Wisely's death and he denied telling individuals that he killed 
someone. Stevens admitted that he encountered Wisely at Waiola 
1 Criminalist Penny Kremer that "the probability of randomly 
selecting an unrelated individual with a DNA profile that cannot be excluded 
as a possible contributor to the partial major DNA profile from this item of 
evidence is one in greater than 8 trillion." 
11          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
            
         
           
          
             
          
          
           
           
  
        
           
       
           
       
       
           
         
         
          
       
    
       
          
           
       
          
          Church on the night of the incident. He stated that he noticed 
Wisely was "moaning" under a blanket, and he (Stevens) asked 
Wisely if Wisely was okay. Stevens stated that he "shook the 
blanket" and touched a water jug because he thought Wisely wanted 
some water. Stevens stated that he did not see any blood. He 
claimed that he "lifted" Wisely's head to help Wisely drink water 
twice, and that Wisely "poured water on himself." Stevens stated 
that, after fifteen to twenty minutes, he told Wisely he had to 
go and left the scene.2 Stevens acknowledged that his DNA would 
be "all over." 
When Detective Kaneshiro asked why Stevens had blood on 
his shoes, Stevens responded, "I don't know." Over the course of 
questioning, Stevens stated that he was "getting frustrated" 
because he had been there for "six to eight hours."3 Detective 
Kaneshiro testified that when he questioned Stevens, Stevens 
became "agitated and very defensive." Detective Kaneshiro 
pressed Stevens about the blood on his shoe: Stevens had stated 
that Wisely's "face was okay," and that perhaps Stevens had 
stepped in some of Wisely's blood. Detective Kaneshiro asked 
Stevens how blood droplets could get on the top of Stevens's 
shoes; after additional questioning, Stevens stated, "I don't 
know about droplets." 
In sum, Bryant and Bonavia testified that Stevens 
confessed to killing someone. Stevens had Wisely's blood on the 
2 Later in the interview, however, Stevens states he was at the 
scene for a half an hour. 
3 Stevens later stated, "I've been detained for six, seven, eight 
hours," and Detective Kaneshiro responded saying "it's only been four hours." 
12          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
          
           
          
           
          
     
      
        
        
         
      
         
          
        
           
        
        
        
        
         
       
          
         
          
            
         top of his shoe and under his fingernail, despite Stevens telling 
Kaneshiro that Stevens did not see any blood on Wisely. True, 
there was no eyewitness testimony to the murder itself. See 
Conroy, 148 Hawai i at 205, 468 P.3d at 219. Nevertheless,  I 
believe that the strength of the evidence here weighs heavily in 
favor of the prosecution. 
"When reviewing the nature of prosecutorial misconduct, 
courts should inspect how the prosecution entwined its improper 
conduct within the case's contextual fabric." Riveira , 149 
Hawai i at 433, 494 P.3d at 1166  (holding that prosecutorial 
misconduct, including the prosecutor's closing argument that 
defense counsel was trying to "trick" the jury, was harmless 
where there were two eyewitnesses to the crime). Here, the 
prosecutorial misconduct – all of which occurred at closing 
argument – had little to do with the central evidence in the 
case. The prosecutor's improper arguments regarding rage, a 
baseball bat, and defense counsel's tactics neither bolstered nor 
undermined any of this evidence. Nevertheless, the Hawai i 
Supreme Court has held that "[p]rosecutorial
 misconduct is not 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt if there is a reasonable 
possibility that the misconduct complained of might have 
contributed to the conviction." Willis, 156 Hawai i at 204, 572 
P.3d at 677
 (citation omitted; emphases added).4 In applying 
this standard to the instant case, I agree with the majority's 
4 As the majority notes, the prosecution did not address Stevens's 
arguments as to harmlessness in its Answering Brief. 
13          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclusion  that  the  prosecutorial  misconduct  was  not  harmless 
beyond  a  reasonable  doubt.  
DATED:   Honolulu,   Hawai i,  June  25,  2026. 
/s/  Daniel
  M.  Gluck 
Associate  Judge  
14 