   
 
         
         
      
        
         
       
      
      
      
      NOT  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST'S  HAWAI I  REPORTS  AND   PACIFIC  REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000079 17-JUL-2025 07:52 AM Dkt. 60 SO 
NO.  CAAP-23-0000079
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE  COURT  OF  APPEALS 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
MARVIN  L.  THEDFORD,  Petitioner-Appellant,  v. 
ADMINISTRATIVE  DIRECTOR  OF  THE  COURTS,  STATE  OF  HAWAI I, 
Respondent-Appellee  
APPEAL  FROM  THE  DISTRICT  COURT  OF  THE  FIRST  CIRCUIT 
HONOLULU  DIVISION 
(CASE  NO.  1DAA-22-00009) 
SUMMARY  DISPOSITION  ORDER 
(By:   Leonard,  Presiding  Judge,  Hiraoka  and  Wadsworth,  JJ.) 
Petitioner-Appellant Marvin L.
 Thedford (Thedford ) 
appeals from the February 3, 2023 Judgment On Appeal (Judgment ) 
entered by the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu 
Division (District Court),1 in favor of Respondent-Appellee 
Administrative Director of the Courts, State of Hawai i (Hearing  
Officer ). The Judgment was entered on the District Court's 
February 3, 2023 Decision and Order Sustaining Administrative 
Revocation (Order Affirming Revocation ), which affirmed the 
Hearing Officer's decision to administratively revoke Thedford's 
driver's license for two years (Administrative Decision ). 
Thedford  raises  two  points  of  error  on  appeal, 
contending  that  the  District  Court  erred  when  it:   (1)  entered 
Conclusions  of  Law  (COLs)  1-5  because  it  did  not  provide 
1 The Honorable Timothy E. Ho presided.          
           
        
         
           
         
         
        
         
        
     
         
        
   
       
       
        
    
         
      
      
          
         
       
       
  
    
   
      
     
       
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sufficient basis for its rulings and all of the COLs are wrong 
for the reasons stated in Thedford's petition for judicial 
review; and (2) found probable cause existed to arrest Thedford 
for any manner of Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an 
Intoxicant (OVUII) and that there was a preponderance of evidence 
to believe Thedford was OVUII by reason of marijuana consumption. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve 
Thedford's points of error as follows: 
(1) Thedford argues that the District Court erred by 
not making independent findings of fact or providing more 
analysis for its COLs. 
We conclude, however, that the District Court properly 
reviewed the Administrative Decision in accordance with the 
requirements of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-40 (2020), 
which provides in relevant part: 
§ 291E-40 Judicial review; procedure. (a) If the 
director sustains the administrative revocation after an 
administrative hearing, the respondent, or parent or 
guardian of a respondent under the age of eighteen, may file 
a petition for judicial review within thirty days after the 
administrative hearing decision is mailed. . . . 
   . . . . 
(c
) The sole issues before the court shall be 
whether the director: 
(1) Exceeded constitutional or statutory authority; 
(2) Erroneously interpreted the law; 
(3) Acted in an arbitrary or capricious manner; 
(4) Committed an abuse of discretion; or 
(5) Made a determination that was unsupported by the 
evidence in the record. 
2          
           
         
         
          
           
         
          
   
         
           
         
          
            
         
       
        
      
           
        
       
        
        
                
          
          
             
             
           
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The statute does not require – or permit – a de novo 
review of the Hearing Officer's factual assessment of the sworn 
statement of the witnesses and other evidence in the record 
before the Hearing Officer. Nor does the statute require or 
permit the District Court to enter its own findings based on the 
evidence before the Hearing Officer. Thedford cites no legal 
authority that supports this point of error2 and we conclude that 
it is without merit. 
(2) Thedford argues that probable cause did not attach 
to arrest him for some violation of OVUII. Thedford argues that 
he "exhibited no 'bad' driving nor any driving reasonably or 
logically associated with 'impaired' driving at all . . . [and 
that] [i]n fact, the sole basis for the stop was that the officer 
noticed that Thedford's safety check had expired." Thedford then 
offers multiple lines of attack against standardized field 
sobriety tests (SFSTs) generally, arguing, inter alia, that the 
studies underpinning SFSTs only demonstrate reliable indicators 
of alcohol impairment, but that they do not prove that SFSTs can 
validly demonstrate reliable indicators of any other kind of 
impairment, most especially marijuana impairment. In other 
words, Thedford contends that the evidence before the Hearing 
Officer was insufficient to show impairment by marijuana, as 
opposed to alcohol, and Thedford did not have alcohol in his 
system. This argument is without merit. 
2 The unpublished decision relied on by Thedford did not involve a 
review of an administrative revocation proceeding and is inapposite. Cf. 
State v. Manzano-Hill , No. 29063, 2010 WL 359901 (Haw. App. Jan. 27, 2010) 
(mem. op.) (an appeal from a suppression order entered by a district court in 
a criminal proceeding stemming from a charge of Promoting a Detrimental Drug 
in the Third Degree). 
3          
       
       
          
       
           
         
          
         
        
            
           
         
          
           
         
         
        
         
         
           
       
       
         
       
         
         
        
         NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Probable cause exists when the arresting officer has 
reasonable grounds to believe, from facts and circumstances 
personally known to the officer, or of which the officer has 
trustworthy information, that the person arrested has committed 
or is committing an offense." State v. Won, 137 Hawai i 330, 
347,
 372 P.3d 1065, 1082 (2015) (citation omitted). Probable 
cause requires more than a mere suspicion, but less than a 
certainty, and it is determined by a "reasonable man" (or 
objective) standard, rather than the subjective opinions of an 
officer. State v. Detroy, 102 Hawai i  13, 18,  72 P.3d 485, 490 
(2003); State v. Delmondo , 54 Haw. 552, 553-54, 512 P.2d 551, 552 
(1973). Finally, "'probable cause is generally based upon a 
combination of factors, which together form a sort of mosaic, of 
which any one piece by itself often might not be enough to 
constitute probable cause, but which, when viewed as a whole, 
does constitute probable cause.'" State v. Ferrer, 95 Hawai i 
409, 430-31,
 23 P.3d 744, 765-66 (App. 2001). 
Here, the SFST was merely one piece in the mosaic 
constituting probable cause to arrest Thedford for OVUII. First, 
the Hearing Officer received into evidence and made a part of the 
record sworn statements of several Honolulu Police Department 
(HPD) Officers, including HPD Officer Jeffrey Fleigner (Officer 
Fleigner ), HPD Officer Bobby Ilae (Officer Ilae), and HPD Officer 
Alena Armstrong (Officer Armstrong ). Officer Fleigner, who 
conducted the stop, observed Thedford to have glassy eyes, and 
while speaking with Thedford, smelled a strong odor of burnt 
marijuana, which led Officer Fleigner to inform the other 
officers that he suspected that Thedford was under the influence 
4          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of  an  intoxicant.   Officer  Ilae  averred  that  he  detected  a  strong 
odor  of  burnt  marijuana  emanating  from  within  Thedford's  vehicle.  
Officer  Ilae  also  stated  that  Thedford's  breath  smelled  of  burnt 
marijuana,  even  from  a  distance  of  approximately  one  foot  away, 
and  that  his  eyes  were  red,  watery,  and  bloodshot.   He  also  noted 
that  Thedford  exhibited  a  noticeable  circular  sway.   Officer 
Armstrong  also  stated  in  her  sworn  statement  that  she  detected  an 
odor  of  burnt  marijuana  in  the  police  vehicle  while  Thedford  was 
present  in  it.   The  foregoing  evidence,  along  with  the  HPD 
officer's  observation  of  Thedford's  physical  performance  on  the 
SFST,  tended  to  show,  in  the  eyes  of  an  objectively  reasonable 
person,  reasonable  grounds  to  believe  that  Thedford  was  under  the 
influence  of  an  intoxicant,  i.e.,  marijuana.  
The  Hearing   Officer  correctly  stated  that  this  court 
has  held  that  a  defendant's  performance  on  field  sobriety  tests 
may  be  used  to  demonstrate  that  there  is  sufficient  evidence  to 
convict  a  defendant  of  OVUII  due  to  a  drug,  pursuant  to  State  v. 
Coffee,  104  Hawai i   193,  195-96,   200,  86  P.3d  1002,  1004-05,   1009  
(App.  2004).   As  the  Hearing   Officer   also  noted: 
Other  jurisdictions  have  reached  similar  results.   See 
Kidd  v.  Commonwealth,  146  S.W.3d  400,  403  (Ky.  Ct.  App. 
2004)  (determining  that  commonwealth  did  not  have  to  prove 
that  defendant  was  driving  erratically  in  order  to  provide 
sufficient  evidence  to  satisfy  the  elements  of  the  DUI 
statute  regarding  marijuana,  when  additional  evidence 
including  failing  the  field  sobriety  test  "establish[ed] 
that  [defendant's]  ability  to  drive  was  impaired-despite  the 
absence  of  erratic  driving.").   See  also  Weil  v.  State,  936 
So.2d  400,  403-04  (Miss.  Ct.  App.  2006)  (determining  that 
there  was  sufficient  evidence  to  support  the  conclusion  that 
defendant,  pulled  over  at  an  ID  checkpoint,  had  been  driving 
under  the  influence  of  marijuana  by  exhibiting  poor  balance, 
admitted  to  smoking  marijuana,  and  other  factors).   See  also 
State  v.  Dixon  II,  2007-Ohio-5189,  2007  WL  2821708  at  *2 
(Ohio  Ct.  App.  2007)(stating  that  while  nystagmus  in  a 
horizontal  gaze  nystagmus  exam  would  not  be  present  after 
consuming  marijuana,  other  field  sobriety  tests  are  known  to 
be  affected  by  marijuana  consumption  (citing  to  National 
Highway  Traffic  Safety  Administration,  Drugs  and  Human 
Performance  Fact  Sheets  11  (2004)).  
5          
       
        
          
        
          
       
            
       
        
        
        
            
          
       
         
        
         
         
           
        
        
         
         
       
   
      
       
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Thedford cites Commonwealth v. Gerhardt , in which the 
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts noted that there is 
"ongoing disagreement among scientists . . . as to whether the 
[SFSTs] are indicative of marijuana impairment" and that the 
studies on whether a person's performance on SFSTs is a reliable 
indicator of impairment by marijuana have produced "mixed 
results." 477 Mass. 775, 781, 81 N.E.3d 751, 757 (2017). The 
Massachusetts court nevertheless concluded that "[t]he lack of 
scientific consensus regarding the use of [SFSTs] in attempting 
to evaluate marijuana intoxication does not mean, however, that 
[SFSTs] have no probative value beyond alcohol intoxication." 
Id. at 776, 81 N.E.3d at 754. The court further concluded that 
"to the extent that [SFSTs] are relevant to establish a driver's 
balance, coordination, mental acuity, and other skills required 
to safely operate a motor vehicle, [SFSTs] are admissible at 
trial as observations of the police officer conducting the 
assessment." Id. With respect to whether observation of a 
driver's performance on an SFST has probative value, we agree 
with the Massachusetts court. While there may be a lack of 
consensus regarding the efficacy of SFSTs in producing reliable 
indicators of marijuana, or other drug, impairment, we cannot 
conclude that a license revocation decision based in part upon 
observations of a defendant's physical performance on an SFST is 
clearly erroneous because the defendant was impaired by 
marijuana, rather than alcohol. 
The sworn statements concerning the HPD officer's 
observations of Thedford's performance on the SFST provides 
relevant and probative evidence regarding Thedford's balance, 
6          
        
         
          
         
          
          
            
         
          
          
        
        
        
          
           
       
        
       
         
        
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
coordination, mental acuity, and other skills required to safely 
operate a vehicle. Here, Officer Ilae averred that Thedford 
could not keep his balance during the instructional stage of the 
SFST, that Thedford stopped walking and stepped off the line 
multiple times, that he failed to correctly execute the turn as 
instructed, and that he swayed and used his arms for balance, 
hopped, and put his foot down during the one leg stand. Officer 
Ilae also reported that during other portions of the SFST, 
Thedford displayed a lack of eye convergence, as well as a 
presence of eyelid and body tremors and some swaying. The 
Hearing Officer found that the SFST performance was offered 
properly into the record and that the officer's observations 
indicated that Thedford was impaired; the District Court found 
that the Hearing Officer did not make a determination that was 
unsupported by the evidence in the record. We conclude that the 
District Court did not err in doing so. 
The District Court was not wrong in determinating that 
the Administrative Decision concluding that Thedford was impaired 
and thus OVUII based on the totality of the circumstances, 
including his SFST performance, was made based on sufficient 
evidence in the record. 
Accordingly,  the District  Court's  February  3, 2023
Judgment
  is  affirmed.  
      
DATED:   Honolulu,   Hawai i,  July  17,  2025. 
On  the  briefs: /s/  Katherine  G.  Leonard 
Presiding  Judge 
Kevin  O'Grady, 
(Law  Office  of  Kevin  O'Grady), /s/  Keith  K.  Hiraoka 
for  Petitioner-Appellant. Associate  Judge 
Christopher  J.I.  Leong, /s/  Clyde  J.  Wadsworth 
Deputy  Attorney  General, Associate  Judge 
for  Respondent-Appellee. 
7 