NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000514 23-APR-2025 12:05 PM Dkt. 59 SO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000514 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI#I 
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
JASON KALUA, Defendant-Appellee,
and 
ALL IN 1 BONDING Surety-Appellant. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CPC-20-0001310) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Hiraoka, and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Surety-Appellant All in 1 Bonding (
Surety) appeals from 
the July 31, 2022 Order Denying Defendant's Motion to Set Aside 
Bail Forfeiture (Order Denying Set Aside) entered by the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 Surety also 
challenges the Circuit Court's July 31, 2022 Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law; Order Denying Defendant's "Motion for Further 
1 The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hearing to Reconsider, Correct Errors, Regarding Setting Aside 
Bail Forfeiture Judgment" (Order Denying Reconsideration). 
Surety raises two points of error on appeal, contending 
that the Circuit Court: (1) erred as a matter of law when it held that notice of forfeiture served on Surety Insurer (Insurer), not Surety, started the 30-day clock under Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 804-51 (2014); and (2) further erred as a matter of law when it denied reconsideration premised on an 
untimely filing of a motion to set aside bail forfeiture. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Surety's points of error as follows: 
Surety argues that pursuant to HRS § 804-51, notice of 
forfeiture was required to be sent to Surety, not Insurer. 
Thus, 
Surety's motion to set aside forfeiture was timely in this case. Plaintiff-Appellee State of 
Hawai#i (State) acknowledges and 
agrees that Surety's motion was timely filed. At the time relevant to this case, HRS § 804-51 provided:
2 
§ 804-51 Procedure. Whenever the court, in any
criminal cause, forfeits any bond or recognizance given in a
criminal cause, the court  shall immediately enter up
judgment in favor of the State and against the principal orprincipals and surety or sureties on the bond, jointly andseverally, for the full amount of the penalty thereof, andshall cause execution to issue thereon immediately after theexpiration of thirty days from the date that notice is givenvia personal service or certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the surety or sureties on the bond, of the 
2 The statute was subsequently amended by Act 154 of 2023. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
entry of the judgment in favor of the State, unless before
the expiration of thirty days from the date that notice isgiven to the surety or sureties on the bond of the entry ofthe judgment in favor of the State, a motion or applicationof the principal or principals, surety or sureties, or anyof them, showing good cause why execution should not issueupon the judgment, is filed with the court.  If the motion 
or application, after a hearing held thereon, is sustained,the court shall vacate the judgment of forfeiture and, ifthe principal surrenders or is surrendered pursuant tosection 804-14 or section 804-41, return the bond orrecognizance to the principal or surety, whoever shall havegiven it, less the amount of any cost, as established at thehearing, incurred by the State as a result of thenonappearance of the principal or other event on the basisof which the court forfeited the bond or recognizance. If the motion or application, after a hearing held thereon, isoverruled, execution shall forthwith issue and shall not bestayed unless the order overruling the motion or applicationis appealed from as in the case of a final judgment. 
This section shall be considered to be set forth in 
full in words and figures in, and to form a part of, and tobe included in, each and every bond or recognizance given ina criminal cause, whether actually set forth in the bond or
recognizance, or not
. 
(Emphasis added). 
In State v. Nelson, 140 Hawai# i 123, 136, 398 P.3d 712, 
725 (2017), the 
Hawai#i Supreme Court held that the insurer in 
that case did not qualify as the surety named on the bond for the 
purposes of the required notice of forfeiture. Although the circumstances of this case are different, that legal principle does not change. Thus, Surety timely filed its motion to set aside on March 7, 2022, within 30 days of February 11, 2022, when Surety received notice of the bond forfeiture. Moreover, Defendant-Appellee Jason Kalua was arrested and in custody on the 30th day of the statutory 30-day search period. Therefore, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in entering the Order Denying Set Aside. We need not reach Surety's second point of error. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's July 31, 2022 
Order Denying Set Aside is vacated. This case is remanded to the 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent with HRS § 804-
51 and this Summary Disposition Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai#i, April 23, 2025. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Acting Chief Judge 
William A. Harrison,for Surety-Appellant. /s/ Keith K. HiraokaAssociate Judge 
Loren J. Thomas,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, /s/ Clyde J. WadsworthCity and County of Honolulu, Associate Judge for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
4 