NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000572
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
DAVID S. BROWN, Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-50 and JANE DOES 1-50, Defendants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
LAHAINA DIVISION
 
(DC-CIVIL NO. 11-1-0358)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In this case, Plaintiff-Appellee Federal National 
Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) filed a "Verified Complaint for 
Ejectment" (Complaint) in the District Court of the Second Circuit, Lahaina Division (district court), seeking a judgment for possession of property located at 95 Hui Road F, Apt. A, Lahaina, Hawai
'i (Property) and a writ of possession directing 
the removal of Defendant-Appellant David S. Brown (Brown) and any other persons from the Property. Fannie Mae asserts that it is entitled to possession of the Property by virtue of a non­judicial foreclosure sale at which it purchased the Property and a "Mortgagee's Quitclaim Deed Pursuant To Power of Sale" in which OneWest Bank FSB (OneWest Bank), as the foreclosing mortgagee, conveyed the Property to Fannie Mae. 
On appeal, Brown challenges the district court's entry
 
of a "Judgment For Possession" (Judgment), a "Writ of Possession"
 (Writ), and an "Order (1) Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Judgment and Writ of Possession [ ] and (2) Denying Defendant
 
David S. Brown's Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Subject Matter
 Jurisdiction [ ]" (Order), all filed on July 15, 2011, in favor
 of Fannie Mae.
1
 
Brown contends that the district court erred by (a)
 
denying Brown's motion to dismiss, adjudicating the merits of the
 case, and entering the Judgment and Writ in violation of Hawaii
 
2
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 604-5(d) (2013 Supp.);  and (b) granting
summary judgment when numerous genuine issues of material fact
 remain. 
We hold that Brown has sufficiently set forth the
 
source, nature and extent of title he claims in the Property, as
 well as other particulars to fully apprise the district court of
 the nature of his claim to the Property. 
Brown has therefore
 
shown that there is an issue of title to the Property and thus
 the district court lacked jurisdiction in this case. The
 Judgment, Writ, and Order issued by the district court are
 vacated, and we remand this case to the district court with
 instructions to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction.
I. Background
 
The following is based on Brown's declaration and the
 
exhibits he submitted to the district court as part of his motion
 
to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction.
3
 
On or about April 9, 2008, Brown obtained a loan in the
 
amount of $612,500 from IndyMac Bank, F.S.B., (IndyMac) a
 Federally Chartered Savings Bank and executed a promissory note
 (Note) for repayment of the loan. To secure the Note, Brown
 
1 The Honorable Jan Apo issued the Judgment, Writ, and Order entered in
this case. The Honorable Blaine Kobayashi issued the "Amended Judgment for
Possession" and the "Amended Writ of Possession" on August 3, 2011, as well as
the "Order Denying Defendant David S. Brown's Motion for a Stay Pending Appeal
Filed on July 28, 2011" on September 23, 2011. 
2
 HRS § 604-5(d) provides that "[t]he district courts shall not have
cognizance of real actions, nor actions in which the title to real estate
comes in question . . . ."
3
 Although Brown alleged several grounds challenging the foreclosure,
we focus on his allegation that he was offered an opportunity to modify his
loan and mortgage.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
executed a mortgage on the Property, dated April 9, 2008 
(Mortgage), which was recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances of the State of Hawai
'i (Bureau) on April 16, 2008 (Doc No 2008­
059465). The Mortgage identified IndyMac as the "lender" and identified Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc. (MERS) as the "nominee" for IndyMac and the mortgagee under the Mortgage. The Mortgage defines "Borrower" as "David S Brown Husband of Alesha Cherie Brown As Tenant In Severalty," and further states that "Borrower covenants that Borrower is lawfully seised of the estate hereby conveyed and has the right to mortgage, grant and convey the Property and that the Property is unencumbered, except for encumbrances of record." The Mortgage further provides that, for the purpose of securing the specified rights, "Borrower does hereby mortgage, grant and convey to MERS (solely as nominee for Lender and Lender's successor and assigns) and to the successors and assigns of MERS, with power of sale, [the Property]." 
After closing the loan, Brown asserts that it "became
 
very difficult" to make the required monthly payments due to a
 disability. In a letter dated June 11, 2009, IndyMac (which the
 letter identifies as a division of OneWest Bank) advised Brown
 that he may qualify for a loan modification under the federal
 government's Home Affordable Modification program (HAMP). The
 letter enclosed a Trial Period Plan (TPP) and stated that if
 Brown qualified under HAMP and complied with the terms of the
 TPP, "we will modify your mortgage loan and you can avoid
 foreclosure." It appears that Brown and IndyMac subsequently
 executed a TPP which provided that "[i]f [Brown is] in compliance
 with this [TPP] and [his] representations in Section 1 continue
 to be true in all material respects, then [IndyMac] will provide
 [Brown] with a Home Affordable Modification Agreement . . . that
 would amend and supplement" the Mortgage and the Note. The TPP
 called for three payments of $2,543.80 to be due on or before
 July 1, 2009, August 1, 2009, and September 1, 2009. The TPP
 also provided that:
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.	 Except as set forth in Section 2.C. below, the Lender
will suspend any scheduled foreclosure sale, provided
I continue to meet the obligations under this Plan,
but any pending foreclosure action will not be
dismissed and may be immediately resumed from the
point at which it was suspended if this Plan
terminates, and no new notice of default, notice of
intent to accelerate, notice of acceleration, or
similar notice will be necessary to continue the
foreclosure action, all rights to such notices being
hereby waived to the extent permitted by applicable
law;
 
C.	 If my property is located in . . . Hawaii . . . and a
foreclosure sale is currently scheduled, the
foreclosure sale will not be suspended and the lender
may foreclose if I have not made each and every Trial
Period Payment that is due before the scheduled
foreclosure sale. If a foreclosure sale occurs
 pursuant to this Section 2.C., this agreement shall be
deemed terminated[.]
 
Brown contends that given the TPP, there was no right to pursue
 
foreclosure on the Property so long as he was in compliance with
 the TPP. At the time the TPP was entered, no foreclosure
 proceeding had been initiated.
 
Brown asserts that he fully complied with the TPP and
 
made all three required payments. However, he contends that on
 or about August 20, 2009, MERS assigned its right, title and
 interest in the mortgage on the Property to OneWest Bank. Brown
 further contends that, upon submission of his third payment in
 the full amount in August 2009, OneWest Bank rejected the payment
 in a letter dated August 27, 2009, and "strangely" stated that
 "the amount received does not represent the total amount due at
 this time." OneWest Bank further instructed that Brown should
 contact the office immediately to discuss how to bring the loan
 current. 
An "Assignment of Mortgage" was recorded in the Bureau
 
on September 16, 2009 (Doc No 2009-141723). On that same date,
 OneWest Bank recorded with the Bureau a "Notice of Mortgagee's
 Intention to Foreclose Under Power of Sale" (Doc No 2009-141724). 
A "Mortgagee's Affidavit of Foreclosure Under Power of
 
Sale" was recorded with the Bureau on June 30, 2010 (Doc No 2010­091765), which indicates that the Property was sold at a public
 auction held on June 16, 2010. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
II. District Court Proceedings
 
Fannie Mae filed its Complaint on February 7, 2011, in
 
the district court. Submitted with the Complaint were a
 
"Mortgagee's Quitclaim Deed Pursuant to Power of Sale" recorded
 with the Bureau on July 27, 2010 (Doc No 2010-106490), indicating
 that OneWest Bank granted the Property to Fannie Mae, as well as
 a copy of a letter dated August 4, 2010, in which Fannie Mae
 instructed Brown to vacate the Property within ten (10) calendar
 days. On April 18, 2011, Fannie Mae filed a motion for summary
 judgment and writ of possession. 
On April 26, 2011, Brown filed his motion to dismiss
 
for lack of subject matter jurisdiction pursuant to HRS § 604­5(d) and District Court Rules of Civil Procedure (DCRCP) Rule
 12.1.
4 Attached to the motion to dismiss was Brown's declaration
 
and seventeen exhibits. Brown's declaration states that he and
 his wife are the owners and superior title holders of the
 Property, as evidenced by an attached "Quitclaim Apartment Deed,"
 and that inter alia he had accepted an offer from Fannie Mae and
 IndyMac to enter into a TPP which provided that the Property
 would not be foreclosed upon and his mortgage would be modified
 so long as Brown complied with the TPP. Brown's declaration
 attests that he fully complied with the TPP, and thus, there was
 no right to initiate the non-judicial foreclosure proceedings
 against the Property (through which Fannie Mae asserts it
 purchased the Property). 
4 DCRCP Rule 12.1 provides 
Rule 12.1. Defense of Title in District Courts. 
Pleadings. Whenever, in the district court, in defense of an
action in the nature of an action of trespass or for the
summary possession of land, or any other action, the
defendant shall seek to interpose a defense to the
jurisdiction to the effect that the action is a real action,
or one in which the title to real estate is involved, such
defense shall be asserted by a written answer or written
motion, which shall not be received by the court unless
accompanied by an affidavit of the defendant, setting forth
the source, nature and extent of the title claimed by
defendant to the land in question, and such further
particulars as shall fully apprise the court of the nature
of defendant's claim.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On May 11, 2011, after filing his motion to dismiss in
 
the district court, Brown filed a complaint against OneWest Bank,
 
Fannie Mae, and MERS in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (circuit court) (Civ. No. 11-1-0941-05) claiming inter alia he
 had superior title to the Property, and that the non-judicial
 foreclosure and transfer of title to the Property were legally
 null and void because he had complied with the TPP. 
The next day, on May 12, 2011, Brown filed a motion in
 
this case requesting that the district court take judicial notice
 of the circuit court action. Brown asserts that the circuit
 court action supports his contention that title to the Property
 is at issue. 
At a June 16, 2011 hearing, the district court granted
 
Fannie Mae's motion for summary judgment and denied Brown's
 motion to dismiss. On July 15, 2011, the district court entered
 the Order, Judgment, and Writ. 
On June 28, 2011, Brown filed a motion for
 
reconsideration. The district court denied the motion. On
 August 3, 2011, the district court entered an "Amended Judgment
 for Possession" and an "Amended Writ of Possession". 
III. Discussion
 
A. Brown's Motion to Dismiss
 
Brown contends that, pursuant to HRS § 604-5(d), the 
district court did not have jurisdiction over Fannie Mae's 
complaint for ejectment because the title to the Property is in dispute, thus the district court should have granted Brown's motion to dismiss. "[T]he existence of jurisdiction is a question of law that [the appellate court reviews] de novo under the right/wrong standard." Captain Andy's Sailing, Inc. v. Dep't 
of Land & Natural Res., 113 Hawai
'i 184, 192, 150 P.3d 833, 841 
(2006) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
Pursuant to DCRCP Rule 12.1., where a defendant asserts
 
HRS § 604-5(d) as a defense to the jurisdiction of the district
 court, the defendant must raise the defense in a written answer
 or motion, and must attach an affidavit thereto. Deutsche Bank
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Nat. Trust Co. v. Peelua, 126 Hawai 'i 32, 36, 265 P.3d 1128, 1132 
(2011). According to the plain language of DCRCP Rule 12.1, 
the source, nature, and extent of title claimed by the
defendant, must be described to the court with some detail
and specificity. In addition to particularly describing the
source, nature, and extent of title, the defendant may also
include in the affidavit any other particulars, the
objective being to apprise the court fully of the nature of
the defendant's claim
.
 
Id. at 37, 265 P.3d at 1133. 
In this case, Brown submitted a declaration and
 
numerous exhibits attached to the motion to dismiss that he
 
argues satisfies the requirements of DCRCP Rule 12.1. In his
 declaration, Brown asserts that he has superior title to the
 Property as demonstrated by an attached deed. Brown further
 declared, among other things, that:
 
12. After closing the loan, due to a disability, it
became very difficult for me to make my monthly payments. .
. . Thus, in July of 2009, Plaintiff Fannie Mae and
[IndyMac] invited me to participate in [HAMP], . . . 
13. On June 19, 2009, I accepted Fannie Mae and
[IndyMac's] offer [to participate in HAMP], and entered into
a [TPP], and provided them with all of the required
documentation . . . . I was promised therein that as long as
I complied with the [TPP], my property would not be
foreclosed upon and my mortgage would be permanently
modified upon making the three monthly payments of
$2,543.8[0] required under the [TPP].
 
14. Therefore, I submitted my first and second
payments under the [TPP] in the amount of $2,543.80, which
were accepted. I submitted my third payment in August 2009,
in the amount of $2,543.80. . . . 
15. Despite my timely submission of that payment and
despite my full compliance with the terms of the [TPP], One
West [sic] Bank returned my check to me along with a letter
dated August 27, 2009, . . . strangely explaining that "the
amount received does not represent the total amount due at
this time."
 
. . . . 
17. [On September 16, 2009] OneWest Bank recorded a
Notice of Mortgagee's Intention to Foreclose Under Power of
Sale in the Bureau of Conveyances, initiating a nonjudicial
foreclosure upon [the Property] in breach of the
[TPP]. . . .
 
. . . .
 
20. [B]ecause I accepted the terms of its and Fannie
Mae's offer to modify my loan through a [TPP] under the
federal HAMP program, because I complied with all of the
requirements of that [TPP], and because Fannie Mae and
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
OneWest Bank breached the terms of that plan, OneWest Bank
was estopped from proceeding with foreclosure upon my home.
 
Approximately two weeks after his motion to dismiss was
 
filed, Brown filed his motion requesting that the district court
 
take judicial notice of the circuit court action and attached the
 circuit court complaint that asserted inter alia his entitlement
 to title of the Property. 
In its answering brief, Fannie Mae does not seem to 
contest whether Brown sufficiently asserted the "source, nature and extent of the title" claimed, simply arguing that a defendant "must provide detail" but then focusing on the argument that the non-judicial foreclosure was conducted properly. Regardless of whether Fannie Mae is challenging the level of detail provided by Brown as to the source, nature and extent of title he claims, Brown has provided enough detail in his declaration, the attached deed, and the Mortgage from which we can "deduce" or "discern" the source, nature and extent of title claimed. See Peelua, 126 
Hawai
'i at 38, 265 P.3d at 1134. The Mortgage reflects that 
Brown held title as Tenant In Severalty, and the Quitclaim Apartment Deed reflects that Brown then conveyed his interest in the Property to himself and his wife as Tenants by the Entirety. See Monette v. Benjamin, 52 Haw. 246, 248-49, 473 P.2d 864, 865 (1970). 
Brown's declaration also sets forth with particularity 
inter alia the basis for his claim challenging Fannie Mae's assertion of title to the Property such as to apprise the district court how his allegation bears on the question of title. See Peelua, 126 Hawai
'i at 38, 265 P.3d at 1134. His declaration 
raised the specific contention that the non-judicial foreclosure was improper because he and IndyMac had entered into the TPP under which IndyMac allegedly agreed not to pursue foreclosure. 
Additionally, Brown brought to the attention of the
 
district court his circuit court complaint, in which Brown inter
 alia sought relief based on his claim that he had superior title
 in the Property and that his full compliance with the terms of
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the TPP meant the non-judicial foreclosure was null and void.5 
Fannie Mae has not contested the timeliness of Brown's challenges 
to the foreclosure. The filing of the circuit court complaint demonstrates title is in dispute because if Brown were to succeed in that action, he would establish title to the subject property. See Fukumoto v. Onogi, 120 Hawai
'i 255, 203 P.3d 675, No. 28561, 
at *3 (App. Feb. 26, 2009) (SDO) (holding that the district court lacked jurisdiction where a defendant in an ejectment action filed a separate action in circuit court to invalidate a trust amendment because the potential success of the petition meant defendant would have title to the subject property). Bare assertions are insufficient to satisfy the requirements of Rule 12.1. See Peelua, 126 Hawai
'i at 38, 265 P.3d at 1134. However, 
Brown's claim that the TPP precluded initiation of the non­judicial foreclosure raises a question whether Fannie Mae has good title to the Property. 
OneWest Bank pursued non-judicial foreclosure pursuant
 
to HRS §§ 667-5 to -10 (1993 and 2010 Supp.). At the time of
 foreclosure in this case, HRS § 667-5 provided in relevant part:
 
§667-5 Foreclosure under power of sale; notice;
affidavit after sale. (a) When a power of sale is contained
in a mortgage, and where the mortgagee, the mortgagee's
successor in interest, or any person authorized by the power
to act in the premises, desires to foreclose under power of
sale upon breach of a condition of the mortgage, the
mortgagee, successor, or person shall be represented by an
attorney who is licensed to practice law in the State and is
physically located in the State. 
(Emphasis added). The Hawai 'i Supreme Court in Lee v. HSBC Bank 
USA, 121 Hawai 'i 287, 218 P.3d 775 (2009) noted that HRS § 667-5 
specifically requires a "breach of a condition of the mortgage"
 
before a right to execute a non-judicial foreclosure arises. Id.
 
at 291, 218 P.3d at 779. The supreme court held that where the
 borrowers were no longer in default, and thus have no longer
 breached a condition of the mortgage, the mortgagee no longer had
 authority to exercise the right to power of sale. Id. 
5
 A court may take judicial notice of records and files of related
cases. Roxas v. Marcos, 89 Hawai' i 91, 110 n.9, 969 P.2d 1209, 1228 n.9
(1998). 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Pertinent to our case, the Lee court favorably cited
 
two cases from other jurisdictions which held that borrowers were
 
not in breach of a mortgage, and were thus not in default,
 because the borrowers and the lenders had entered into
 foreclosure forbearance agreements under which the lenders agreed
 to postpone pursuit of foreclosure. Id. at 293-94, 218 P.3d at
 
781-82 (citing Taylor v. Just, 59 P.3d 308, 310 (Idaho 2002), and
 Staffordshire Invs., Inc. v. Cal-Western Reconveyance Corp., 149
 P.3d 150, 155 (Or. Ct. App. 2006) ("[A]lthough the parties agreed
 that a default exists, they also agreed that that default did not
 entitle [lender] to foreclose the trust deed as long as
 [borrower] complied with the terms of the forbearance
 agreement.")). Here, Brown contends that under the TPP, so long
 as he was in compliance with the TPP, the mortgagee would not
 pursue foreclosure and he was entitled to a modification of his
 loan. Further, IndyMac's letter inviting Brown to enter the TPP
 instructed that "[a]s long as you comply with the terms of the
 [TPP], we will not start foreclosure proceedings or conduct a
 foreclosure sale if foreclosure proceedings have started."
 
Fannie Mae and Brown dispute whether there exists a
 
private cause of action to enforce the terms of the TPP, citing
 to a series of federal district court cases. However, the Ninth
 Circuit Court of Appeals held in Corvello v. Wells Fargo Bank,
 NA, 728 F.3d 878, 884 (9th Cir. 2013), that "[w]here, as here,
 borrowers allege, . . . that they have fulfilled all of their
 obligations under the TPP, and the loan servicer has failed to
 offer a permanent modification, the borrowers have valid claims
 for breach of the TPP agreement." (adopting the reasoning of
 Wigod v. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., 673 F.3d 547 (7th Cir. 2012)).
 
In turn, it is at least arguable that where there is an 
applicable agreement not to pursue foreclosure under a TPP, and the borrower is in full compliance, there is no breach of a condition of a mortgage and thus no right to non-judicial foreclosure under HRS § 667-5. See Lee, 121 Hawai
'i at 292-94, 
218 P.3d at 780-82. At a minimum, this is an issue that Brown asserted with sufficient particularity before the district court 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and that calls into question title to the Property. Brown's
 
declaration in support of his motion to dismiss asserts that he
 was in full compliance with the TPP and that he made all three
 payments required by the TPP. If Brown is correct, it raises a
 question whether the non-judicial foreclosure proceedings should
 have been brought against the Property, through which Fannie Mae
 claims title. Thus, if Brown is successful in his circuit court
 claim, his title to the Property could still be valid.
 
For the reasons stated above, we conclude that Brown
 
has sufficiently demonstrated that title to the Property is in
 issue and thus the district court lacked jurisdiction in this
 matter.
 
B. Summary Judgment
 
Because we have determined that the district court
 
lacked jurisdiction, we also vacate the district court's grant of
 summary judgment.
IV. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the "Judgment For
 
Possession," the "Writ of Possession," and the "Order
 
(1) Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and Writ of
 Possession Filed April 18, 2011 and (2) Denying Defendant David
 S. Brown's Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Subject Matter
 Jurisdiction Filed April 25, 2011", all filed on July 15, 2011,
 in the District Court of the Second Circuit, Lahaina Division. 
This case is remanded to the district court with instructions to
 dismiss this case for lack of jurisdiction.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 19, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Gary V. Dubin
Frederick J. Arensmeyer Zeina Jafar
 (Dubin Law Offices)
for Defendant-Appellant
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Charles R. Prather
 
Sofia M. Hirosane
 for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Associate Judge
 
11
 