 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP–11-0000388
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KIMO KANEAKUA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
PUNA DIVISION
 
(CR. NO. 3P1-09-00260)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Kimo Kaneakua (Kaneakua) appeals
 
from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order, filed on April
 
28, 2011 in the District Court of the Third Circuit, Puna
 Division (District Court).
1
 
Kaneakua was convicted of Assault in the Third Degree,
 
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-712(1)(a)
 
(1993), and sentenced to a one-year term of probation, with a
 
six-month period of incarceration.2 Kaneakua's term of
 
1	 The Honorable Harry P. Freitas presided.
 
2
 HRS § 707-712 states:
 
§ 707-712 Assault in the third degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of assault in the third degree if the
person:
 
(a) 	 Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly causes
bodily injury to another person; or
 
(b) 	 Negligently causes bodily injury to another
person with a dangerous instrument.
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
imprisonment, except for a ten-day period, was stayed pending
 
this appeal.
 
On appeal, Kaneakua contends: (1) the District Court
 
erred by prohibiting testimony of two defense witnesses as a
 discovery sanction; (2) there was insufficient evidence to
 support his conviction; and (3) he received ineffective
 assistance of trial counsel.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant rules, statutes, and case law, we resolve
 Kaneakua's points of error as follows: 
"A court has broad discretion in the decision to impose 
discovery sanctions." State v. Marzo, 64 Haw. 395, 641 P.2d 1338 
(1982). "Because imposition of such a sanction is addressed to the sound discretion of the trial court, we will not disturb the trial court's decision unless there has been an abuse of that discretion." State v. Ahlo, 79 Hawai
'i 385, 398, 903 P.2d 690, 
703 (App. 1995). 
Here, Kaneakua contends that the District Court abused 
its discretion under Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 
16 by precluding testimony of two witnesses as a discovery sanction for failing to comply with the District Court's order to disclose to the State their names, addresses, telephone numbers, a brief statement of their testimony, and their dates of birth. 
HRPP Rule 16 provides, in relevant part:
 
Rule 16. Discovery.
 
(a) Applicability. Subject to subsection (d) of this
rule, discovery under this rule may be obtained
in and is limited to cases in which the defendant is
 charged with a felony, and may commence upon the
filing in circuit court of an indictment, an
information, or a complaint.
 
. . . .
 
2(...continued)
(2) Assault in the third degree is a misdemeanor
unless committed in a fight or scuffle entered into by
mutual consent, in which case it is a petty misdemeanor.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(c) Disclosure by the defendant.
 
(1) SUBMISSION TO TESTS, EXAMINATIONS OR
INSPECTIONS. Upon written request of the prosecutor,
the court may require the defendant:
(i) to perform reasonable acts or undergo
reasonable tests for purposes of identification;
and
 
(ii) to submit to reasonable physical or
medical inspection or examination of the
defendant's body.
Reasonable notice of the time and place for such
tests, inspections or examinations shall be given by the
prosecutor to the defendant and the defendant's counsel who
shall have the right to be present.
 
(2) DISCLOSURE OF MATERIALS AND INFORMATION.
 
The defendant shall disclose to the prosecutor the
following material and information within the
defendant's possession or control:
(i) the names and last known addresses of
persons whom the defendant intends to call as
witnesses, in the presentation of the evidence
in chief, together with their relevant written
or recorded statements, provided that discovery
of alibi witnesses is governed by Rule 12.1, and
provided further that statements recorded by the
defendant's counsel shall not be subject to
disclosure;
(ii) any reports or statements of experts,
including results of physical or mental
examinations and of scientific tests,
experiments or comparisons, which the defendant
intends to introduce as evidence at the trial or
 which were prepared by a witness whom the
defendant intends to call at the trial when the
 results or reports relate to that witness'
testimony;
(iii) any books, papers, documents,
photographs, or tangible objects which the
defendant intends to introduce as evidence at
 the trial.
 
(3) DISCLOSURE OF DEFENSES. The court may
require that the prosecutor be informed of the nature
of any defense which defense counsel intends to use at
trial; provided, that the defense of alibi is governed
by Rule 12.1.
 
(d) Discretionary disclosure.  Upon a showing of
materiality and if the request is reasonable, the court in
its discretion may require disclosure as provided for in
this Rule 16 in cases other than those in which the
 defendant is charged with a felony, but not in cases
involving violations.
 
First, we note that, as stated in HRPP Rule 16(a),
 
disclosures are not automatically required in misdemeanor cases
 
such as this one. However, pursuant to HRPP Rule 16(d), the
 court may, in its discretion, "require disclosure as provided for
 in this Rule 16" in non-felony cases (except in cases involving
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
violations), upon a showing of materiality and if the request is
 
reasonable. Thus, a defendant's disclosure of the witness's
 names and last known addresses can be required pursuant to HRPP
 Rule 16(c)(2), but not telephone numbers, statements of their
 testimony, and dates of birth, as was also required by the
 District Court in this case. 
In State ex rel Marsland v. Ames, 71 Haw. 304, 305, 788
 
P.2d 1281, 1282 (1990), the State petitioned the supreme court
 for a writ of mandamus directing a district court judge to vacate
 two pretrial discovery orders. The State contended that the
 judge abused his discretion and exceeded his authority under HRPP
 Rule 16(d) by permitting discovery of various items sought in a
 written motion by the defendant in a misdemeanor Driving Under
 the Influence of Intoxicating Liquor (DUI) case. Id. at 305-06,
 
788 P.2d at 1282. The court in Ames held that the judge had
 "exceeded his jurisdiction by issuing the dual discovery orders
 in this case and that our intervention is necessary to correct
 persistent misapplication of HRPP Rule 16(d) in DUI cases heard
 in our district courts and to establish parameters of permissible
 discovery in misdemeanor DUI cases." Id. at 308, 788 P.2d at
 
1283. The supreme court also held that the State could not be
 compelled to disclose "a written summary of the testimony each
 witness is expected to give at trial[.]" Id. at 312-13, 788 P.2d
 
at 1286. The court reasoned that discovery not provided for
 under HRPP Rule 16 could not be compelled under HRPP Rule 16(d),
 nor could discovery in a misdemeanor case exceed the limits of
 discovery established by HRPP Rule 16 in a felony case. Id. at
 
314, 788 P.2d at 1287.
 
The Ames court held that the trial court "exceeded
 
[its] jurisdiction" when it ordered discovery outside of the
 scope of HRPP Rule 16. Ames, 71 Haw. at 308, 788 P.2d at 1283. 
Similarly in this case, the District Court exceeded its
 jurisdiction by ordering Kaneakua to disclose information other
 than the names and last known addresses of witnesses, as provided
 under HRPP Rule 16(c)(2). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In State v. Ahlo, 79 Hawai 'i 385, 400, 903 P.2d 690, 
705 (App. 1995) (citation omitted), this court held that: 
when a criminal defendant violates Rule 16 by failing
to disclose to the prosecutor evidence intended to be used
at trial, the trial court must consider the following: (1)
whether the defendant was acting maliciously or in bad
faith; (2) the extent of prejudice to the prosecution caused
by the violation; (3) whether the prejudice could have been
cured by measures less severe than excluding evidence; and
(4) any other relevant circumstances. 
Here, the State concedes that Kaneakua did not act
 
maliciously or in bad faith when he failed to meet the court's
 
deadline for disclosure. The State asserts that substantial
 prejudice resulted from the defense's failure to timely provide
 the information because the State "was neither able to conduct
 background checks of the witnesses nor interview the proffered
 witnesses[.]" However, the record lacks any argument by the
 State at trial that it suffered any prejudice, much less
 substantial prejudice. At trial, the State merely stated that
 the defense failed to provide all of the "required" information
 and that the information provided was five days late. There was
 no argument that providing the information five days late impeded
 the State's investigation of the witnesses' background or the
 State's attempt to interview the witnesses. The record reflects
 that the witnesses' contact information was provided to the State
 more than two weeks before the trial resumed.
 
As no prejudice was asserted at trial, no sanction was
 
warranted. Indeed, it appears from the record that the District
 Court's sanction stemmed, in part, from the District Court's
 misapprehension that Kaneakua violated a disclosure obligation in
 the first instance. Moreover, even if there had been some
 prejudice to the State, such prejudice could have been cured by a
 less severe sanction against Kaneakua, or more appropriately his
 defense counsel (see HRPP Rule 16(e)(9)(ii)), especially since
 defense counsel admitted that he had no explanation as to why he
 had not obtained witness Barrett Smith's (Smith) information
 
while Smith was previously present in court, and counsel stated
 
that he was prepared to take responsibility for his failure to
 provide the information.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Under the circumstances of this case, the District
 
Court abused its discretion when it excluded Kaneakua's two
 
witnesses from testifying as a discovery sanction. Moreover, we
 cannot conclude that it was harmless error to exclude the
 testimony of a percipient witness. Nevertheless, based, inter
 alia, on the testimony of the complaining witness, which the
 District Court found to be credible, there was sufficient
 evidence to convict Kaneakua of Assault in the Third Degree. 
Accordingly, we conclude that Kaneakua's conviction must be
 vacated and remanded for a new trial.
 
In light of this conclusion, we decline to reach
 
Kaneakua's other points of error.
 
For these reasons, the District Court's April 28, 2011
 
Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order is vacated, and the case
 is remanded for a new trial.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 30, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Lars Robert Isaacson 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Roland J.K. Talon Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6
 