NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000415
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
CLIFFORD C. DAVIDSEN, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-0602(1))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
The State of Hawai' i (State) appeals from the March 29, 
2012 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting 
Defendant's Motion to Suppress Evidence (Order) entered by the 
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).1 
The State argues that it was error to conclude
 
Defendant-Appellee Clifford C. Davidsen (Davidsen) "retained an
 
expectation of privacy" in an area into which Davidsen invited
 
the general public and maintains that Davidsen's consent was not
 
vitiated by the use of a ruse by the police.
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
The facts in this case are not in dispute. On
 
September 7, 2011, James Howlett (Howlett) discovered that his
 
storage unit had been broken into and that several items
 
belonging to him and paintings belonging to Caro Walker (Walker)
 
had been stolen. The losses were reported to the police and
 
Howlett located multiple advertisements in the Maui Bulletin
 
offering items for sale similar in description to those stolen. 
All of these ads included the same contact phone number. Based
 
on this information, Walker's boyfriend met with the seller and
 
observed what appeared to be some of Howlett's stolen items. 
Walker subsequently met with the seller, whom she identified as
 
Davidsen, and while she was unable to identify any of the artwork
 
that was present as hers, Davidsen's description of another
 
painting that he was selling did match one of Walker's stolen
 
paintings.
 
Detective Ericlee Correa (Det. Correa) was assigned to
 
the case on September 27, 2011, and Walker advised him that she
 
knew where her paintings could be and wanted him to accompany her
 
to retrieve them. Walker initiated a plan to go to Davidsen's
 
residence on September 28, 2011, and to have Det. Correa pose as
 
her boyfriend. Howlett and his wife and another detective joined
 
Walker and Det. Correa, but agreed to wait outside the Davidsen
 
residence until given a signal to enter. No search warrant was
 
obtained before the visit. Walker called ahead to make sure
 
Davidsen would be home and indicated to Davidsen that she wanted
 
to stop by with her boyfriend. When they approached Davidsen's
 
residence, Walker called to inform him that they were there. 
Det. Correa was dressed casually, with nothing to identify him as
 
a police detective. The front door to the residence was already
 
open, and Davidsen, who was talking on his phone, waved Walker
 
and Det. Correa inside.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Before entering the house, Det. Correa identified one
 
of the stolen paintings. When Davidsen finished his call, Det.
 
Correa advised Davidsen that he was a police detective and that
 
several of the paintings that were offered for sale had been
 
reported stolen. Davidsen stated that he had come into
 
possession of the paintings at a garage sale and on Det. Correa's
 
request, granted Walker and the Howletts permission to look
 
around the house for their stolen property. Walker and the
 
Howletts recovered several of their stolen items.
 
When recovering some of his property, Howlett
 
discovered bolt cutters and a crowbar he suspected were used to
 
break into his storage container. Det. Correa thereafter advised
 
Davidsen that he was a suspect and informed him that he would be
 
questioned at a later date. Det. Correa did not personally
 
instruct or direct the search of the residence and did not
 
participate in the search. A warrant for a subsequent search was
 
later obtained.
 
On November 8, 2011, the State filed a complaint
 
against Davidsen for the following eleven crimes: (1) Theft of
 
Credit Card in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)§ 708­
8102 (1993); (2) Identity Theft in the Third Degree in violation
 
of HRS § 708-839.8 (Supp. 2012); (3) Fraudulent Use of a Credit
 
Card in violation of HRS § 708-8100 (1993 and Supp. 2012); (4)
 
Theft in the Fourth Degree in violation of HRS § 708-833 (1993);
 
(5) Theft of a Credit Card in violation of HRS § 708-8102; (6)
 
Identity Theft in the Third Degree in violation of HRS § 708­
839.8; (7) Fraudulent Use of a Credit Card in violation of HRS
 
§ 708-8100; (8) Theft in the Third Degree in violation of HRS
 
§ 708-832 (Supp. 2012); (9) Theft in the Second Degree in
 
violation of HRS § 708-831 (Supp. 2012); (10) Theft in the Second
 
Degree in violation of HRS § 708-831; and (11) Theft in the
 
Second Degree in violation of HRS § 708-831.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On December 14, 2011, Davidsen moved to suppress
 
evidence and on March 29, 2012, the Circuit Court entered the
 
Order granting Davidsen's motion. This timely appeal followed.
 
II.
 
On appeal, the State challenges the Circuit Court's
 
conclusions of law 14, 15 and 16, that state, 
14. In the instant case, there was deception on the
part of Det. Correa which induced consent for him to enter
an area that the Defendant had a reasonable expectation of
privacy;
 
15. Though Walker had made up the story that she would be
accompanied by her boyfriend, Det. Correa's entry into Defendant's
residence was based on a material misrepresentation that eroded
the consensual quality of his entry;
 
16. This Court concludes that the evidence obtained
 
from Defendant's home is suppressed;
 
The State argues that Davidsen "did not retain a reasonable
 
expectation of privacy in [an] area of his home where [Davidsen]
 
invited members of the general public to conduct business
 
transactions."
 
Like the Fourth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution, article I, section 7 of the Hawaii State 
Constitution protects people from unreasonable government 
intrusions into areas in which they have a legitimate expectation 
of privacy. State v. Bonnell, 75 Haw. 124, 136, 856 P.2d 1265, 
1272 (1993). Hawai' i courts utilize a two-part test to determine 
whether the expectation of privacy is legitimate. "First, one 
must exhibit an actual, subjective expectation of privacy. 
Second, that expectation must be one that society would recognize 
as objectively reasonable." Bonnell at 139, 856 P.2d at 1273-74 
(quoting State v. Biggar, 68 Haw. 404, 407, 716 P.2d 493, 495 (1986)) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The United States Supreme Court has held that "the home
 
is accorded the full range of Fourth Amendment protections."
 
Lewis v. U.S., 385 U.S. 206, 211 (1966). However, "[w]hat a
 
person knowingly exposes to the public, even in his own home or
 
office, is not a subject of Fourth Amendment protection." Katz
 
v. U.S., 389 U.S. 347, 351 (1967). 
The State argues that because Davidsen invited parties
 
interested in the items listed for sale into his home, he gave up
 his expectation of privacy. It has long been established that
 
when "the home is converted into a commercial center to which
 
outsiders are invited for purposes of transacting unlawful
 
business, that business is entitled to no greater sanctity than
 
if it were carried on in a store, a garage, a car, or on the
 
street." Lewis, 385 U.S. at 211. By inviting potential buyers
 
of the stolen items advertised in the Maui Bulletin to come to
 his house, Davidsen clearly converted at least those portions of
 
his home in which he conducted his sales into a commercial
 
center, thereby no longer maintaining an actual expectation of
 
privacy in those areas. 
Although not clear from the Order, based on the
 
findings of fact made by the Circuit Court, it appears that the
 
deception referenced in its conclusion of law 14 was Walker's
 
communication with Davidsen over the phone that she wanted to
 
come up to his house with her boyfriend and that deception
 
vitiated Davidsen's consent to Walker and Det. Correa's entry
 
into his home.
2 However, the Circuit Court expressed no reason
 
why such a deception would affect the voluntary nature of the
 invitation Davidsen had already advertised to the public or to
 
Walker when she first visited his home by herself and we can
 
2
 The State concedes that "Det. Correa's involvement in the matter
 
was sufficient to constitute 'government action'."
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
think of none.3 Nevertheless, issuing a voluntary invitation to
 
the public to engage in commerce in one's home does not mean one
 
relinquishes an actual expectation of privacy in all parts of
 
one's home. Det. Correa asked Davidsen for permission for Walker
 
and the Howletts to "look around" for their stolen property. In
 
doing so, Walker inspected bedrooms and went downstairs in search
 
of her stolen paintings. "A government agent, in the same manner
 
as a private person, may accept an invitation to do business and
 
may enter upon the premises for the very purposes contemplated by
 
the occupant." Lewis, 385 U.S. at 211. However, "this does not
 
mean that, whenever entry is obtained by invitation and the locus
 is characterized as a place of business, an agent is authorized
 
to conduct a general search for incriminating materials." Id.
 
When Det. Correa asked Davidsen for permission to
 
search for stolen items, he had already disclosed to Davidsen
 
that he was a police officer. Thus, whatever influence the ruse
 
3 In any event, a ruse does not automatically invalidate consent to
enter a dwelling. "[I]n the detection of many types of crime, the Government
is entitled to use decoys and to conceal the identity of its agents." Lewis,
 
385 U.S. at 209. In Lewis, an undercover federal narcotics officer solicited
the purchase of marijuana from the petitioner, who directed the officer to his
home and invited him inside to complete the transaction. Id. at 207. In
 
affirming the conviction, the Supreme Court held that "[t]he pretense resulted
in no breach of privacy; it merely encouraged the suspect to say things which
he was willing and anxious to say to anyone who would be interested in
purchasing [marijuana]." Id. at 212.
 
In State v. Roy, the Hawai' i Supreme Court held that "[w]e do not
believe, however, that our constitutional drafters intended to protectcriminal defendants from warrantless secret agents." 54 Haw. 513, 517, 510P.2d 1066, 1068 (1973). The supreme court quoted with approval the followingpassage from Lewis: 
[w]ere we to hold the deceptions of the agent in this case
constitutionally prohibited, we would come near to a rule
that the use of undercover agents in any manner is virtually
unconstitutional per se. Such a rule would, for example,
severely hamper the Government in ferreting out those
organized criminal activities that are characterized by
covert dealings with victims who either cannot or do not
protest. A prime example is provided by the narcotics
traffic.
 
Id. at 517-518, 510 P.2d at 1069 (quoting Lewis, 385 U.S. at 210). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
employed by Walker and Det. Correa might have had on Davidsen's
 
decision to allow the individuals onto his property, it does not
 
appear that Det. Correa's disclosure affected Davidsen's decision
 
to consent to the search of his house. This is supported by the
 
evidence that Davidsen had an explanation for the presence of
 
stolen property in his home. The Circuit Court did not analyze
 
the effect of Det. Correa's disclosure on Davidsen's subsequent
 
consent to search the rest of his home and erred in suppressing
 
all evidence solely based on the ruse.
 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, the March 29, 2012 Findings
 
of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting Defendant's
 Motion to Suppress Evidence is vacated and the case is remanded
 
for further proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 18, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Peter A. Hanano,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui, Chief Judge
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
Phyllis J. Hironaka,
Deputy Public Defender, Associate Judge
for Defendant-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
7
 