NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000019
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v. EUCLIDES MARQUES­
FERNANDEZ, also known as EUCLIDES MARQUES FERNANDES, also known
as "NINJA", Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 13-1-0568(3))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
 
Euclides Marques-Fernandez, also known as Euclides
 
Marques Fernandes and Ninja (Marques-Fernandez), appeals from the
 
January 7, 2016 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered by
 the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit
1
 (Circuit Court),
convicting him of two counts of the lesser included offense of
 Sexual Assault in the Second Degree, violations of Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) § 707-731 (2014 Repl.).
2 This Judgment was
 
1	 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
 
2 § 707-731 Sexual assault in the second degree. (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the second
degree if:
 
(a) 	The person knowingly subjects another person to
an act of sexual penetration by compulsion;
 
(b) 	The person knowingly subjects to sexual
penetration another person who is mentally
incapacitated or physically helpless;
 
(c) 	The person, while employed:
 
(i) 	In a state correctional facility;
 
(ii) 	By a private company providing services at
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
entered upon the acceptance of Marques-Fernandez's No Contest
 
Plea pursuant to a plea agreement with the State.
 
On appeal, Marques-Fernandez argues that the "Circuit
 
Court erred in allowing [Marques-Fernandez's] counsel to disclose
 [Marques-Fernandez's] citizenship status to the court at
 sentencing without first conducting an on-the-record colloquy
 about waiving his right to remain silent about his immigration or
 citizenship status."
 
Upon the careful consideration of the point raised and
 
the arguments by the parties, the record, and the applicable
 authorities, we resolve Marques-Fernandez's appeal as follows and
 
2(...continued)
 
a correctional facility;
 
(iii) By a private company providing
community-based residential services to
persons committed to the director of
public safety and having received notice
of this statute;
 
(iv)	 By a private correctional facility
operating in the State of Hawaii; or
 
(v) 	 As a law enforcement officer as defined in
 
section 710-1000, knowingly subjects to
sexual penetration an imprisoned person, a
person confined to a detention facility, a
person committed to the director of public
safety, a person residing in a private
correctional facility operating in the
State of Hawaii, or a person in custody;
provided that paragraph (b) and this
paragraph shall not be construed to
prohibit practitioners licensed under
chapter 453 or 455 from performing any act
within their respective practices; and
further provided that this paragraph shall
not be construed to prohibit a law
enforcement officer from performing a
lawful search pursuant to a warrant or
exception to the warrant clause; or
 
(d) 	 The person knowingly subjects to sexual
penetration a minor who is at least sixteen
years old and the person is contemporaneously
acting in a professional capacity to instruct,
advise, or supervise the minor; provided that:
 
(i) 	 The person is not less than five years
older than the minor; and
 
(ii) 	The person is not legally married to the
minor.
 
(2) Sexual assault in the second degree is a class B felony.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
affirm.
 
Marques-Fernandez has failed to provide any authority
 
for the proposition that the Circuit Court was required to engage
 
him in a colloquy before his counsel could argue his immigration
 status to the court at sentencing. Furthermore, Marques-
Fernandez does not dispute that, by the time this argument was
 made by his counsel, the Circuit Court had administered to him
 the immigration warning required by HRS § 802E-2 (2014)
3
 several
times.
 
Furthermore, well before sentencing at his May 8, 2014
 
arraignment, Marques-Fernandez, in discussing his trial setting,
 disclosed that he was not a citizen of the United States, at
 which time the Circuit Court advised him of his right to remain
 silent. At the same proceeding, and after this advisement and
 the reading of the immigration warning to him, Marques-Fernandez
 
3 HRS § 802E-2 provides:
 
§ 802E-2 Court advisement concerning alien status
required prior to the commencement of trial, entry of a plea
of guilty or nolo contendere, or admission of guilt or
sufficient facts. Prior to the commencement of trial, entry
of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or admission of
guilt or sufficient facts to any offense punishable as a
crime under state law, except offenses designated as
infractions under state law, the court shall administer the
following advisement on the record to the defendant:
 
If you are not a citizen of the United States, whether
or not you have lawful immigration status, you have
the right to receive advice from your attorney about
the specific impact that this case will have, if any,
on your immigration status. The entry of a guilty or
nolo contendere plea, admission of guilt or sufficient
facts, or conviction, deferred judgment, or deferred
sentence may have the consequences of your immediate
detention, deportation, exclusion from admission to
the United States, or denial of naturalization
pursuant to the laws of the United States. In some
cases, detention and deportation from the United
States will be required. Your lawyer must investigate
and advise you about these issues prior to the
commencement of trial, entry of a guilty or nolo
contendere [plea], or admission of guilt or sufficient
facts to any offense punishable as a crime under state
law, other than those offenses designated as
infractions. You are not required to disclose your
immigration or citizenship status to the court.
 
Upon request, the court shall allow the defendant
additional time to consider the appropriateness of the plea
in light of the advisement as described in this section.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
asserted, "I want to go to my country. I'm not legal . . . ."
 
Thus, the record clearly shows Marques-Fernandez was aware he did
 not need to disclose his immigration status.
 
Finally, there is no indication in the record that the
 
Circuit Court considered or relied upon Marques-Fernandez's
 citizenship in deciding upon the sentence it imposed. The
 Circuit Court did not mention the matter in imposing sentence. 
Marques-Fernandez's counsel argued that, as he was likely to be
 deported, there was no need to impose imprisonment. 
Nevertheless, the Circuit Court imposed consecutive terms of
 imprisonment. Therefore, we conclude the disclosure did not harm
 Marques-Fernandez.
 
Based on the foregoing, the January 7, 2016 Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence, entered by the Circuit Court of the
 Second Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 28, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
Benjamin E. Lowenthal,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Artemio C. Baxa,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 
4
 