NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000905
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
 
AARON DAVID PERSIN, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, STATE OF HAWAI' I DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY,
OAHU COMMUNITY CORRECTIONAL CENTER, SISAR PADERES, M.D.,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
ALTRES STAFFING, INC., dba ALTRES MEDICAL,
Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
DOE NURSES 1-10, DOE DOCTORS 1-10,
DOE HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS 1-10, and DOE ENTITIES 2-10,
Defendants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-1571-05)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Chan, JJ.)
 
In this appeal arising out of a medical malpractice
 
action, Defendant-Appellant Altres Staffing Inc., dba Altres
 
Medical (Altres) appeals from the "Order Granting the Petition
 for Determination of Good Faith Settlement Filed by Defendants
 State of Hawaii and Sisar Paderes, M.D. on September 22, 2015,"
 (Order Granting Good Faith Settlement) filed on November 17, 2015
 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).
1
 
This case involves a medical negligence claim filed by
 
Plaintiff-Appellee, Aaron David Persin (Persin) against
 
1
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presiding .
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendant-Appellees State of Hawai' i (State), State of Hawai' i 
Department of Public Safety (DPS), Oahu Community Correctional 
Center (OCCC), Sisar Paderes, M.D. (Dr. Paderes), and Altres stemming from the medical treatment Persin received while incarcerated at OCCC from September 30, 2011 to October 5, 2011. Persin alleges that as a result of his care and treatment at OCCC, he underwent extremity amputations of both of his feet and all of his fingers and suffered permanent kidney damage. 
On May 29, 2013, Persin filed a complaint alleging
 
medical and nursing negligence in the circuit court, initially
 only against the State, DPS, OCCC and Dr. Paderes. It was only
 discovered during the deposition phase that, of the five nurses
 allegedly involved in the case, two of the nurses were employed
 by Altres at the time of the alleged incident. Persin
 subsequently filed a First Amended Complaint naming Altres as a
 defendant on May 28, 2015.
 
From July 2, 2015 to September 4, 2015 all parties were
 
involved in formal mediation. Although Altres participated in
 the mediation meetings, it did not make any offers of settlement.
 However, Persin, the State and Dr. Paderes came to a settlement
 agreement which involved a payment of $7.2 million to Persin.
 
On September 22, 2015, the State and Dr. Paderes filed
 
a Petition for Determination of Good Faith Settlement (Petition).
 The circuit court entered its Order Granting Good Faith
 Settlement on November 17, 2015. Thereafter, Altres filed its
 Notice of Appeal on November 25, 2015.
 
On appeal, Altres contends that the circuit court erred 
because: (1) the circuit court's interpretation of Troyer
2 
weighed in favor of Altres in precluding a determination of a good faith settlement; (2) there was a failure to comply with the requirements pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 663­15.5(b); and (3) the circuit court granted the Petition prior to final approval of funding by the State of Hawai' i Legislature. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
2
 Troyer v. Adams 102 Hawai 'i 399, 427, 77 P.3d 83, 111 (2003) 
2
  
        
    
        
    
          
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Altres's
 points of error as follows, and affirm.
 
Persin was admitted into OCCC on September 30, 2011.
 
During the first few days of his incarceration, Persin’s
 interactions with the OCCC medical personnel consisted of
 providing his medical history, requesting pain relieving
 medication for back pain, requesting medication for his gout
 flare-up, and checking his blood pressure. On the morning of
 October 4, 2011, Persin was transferred to OCCC infirmary and
 reported being sick with headaches, a sore stomach, chills and
 sweats, and body aches.
3 That afternoon, Persin again went to
 
the OCCC infirmary, reporting blurry vision and feeling dizzy.4
 
Later that night, the nurse noted in Persin’s medical chart that
 his temperature was 101 degrees and he was experiencing chills.
 For each of these visits to the infirmary, Persin was given
 Tylenol and/or Advil, encouraged to increase his fluid intake and
 returned to his cell.
 
Early the next morning, on October 5, 2011, Persin’s
 
blood was drawn for lab work ordered by Dr. Paderes.
5 During the
 
blood draw, Persin mentioned a wound on his left forearm that
 started as an abrasion possibly sustained during his arrest. The
 nurse noted in the medical records that the wound was red and
 warm in the surrounding tissue and had what appeared to be
 purulent material in the abrasion. Persin was seen by Dr.
 Paderes that same morning and discharged from the infirmary.
 Later that afternoon, after being unable to stand for the
 prisoner headcount, Persin was sent to the infirmary. Persin was
 dizzy, had a sore throat and blurry vision, and had vomited five
 times. Dr. Paderes was then advised of Persin’s blood work
 showing abnormal results. Thereafter, Dr. Paderes ordered Persin
 
3
 Persin’s temperature was 103.3 degrees, blood pressure was 137/81,
and pulse was 120.
 
4
 Persin’s temperature was 102.9 degrees, blood pressure was 100/74
and pulse was 120.
 
5
 Persin’s temperature was 101 to 102 degrees, and his blood pressure
 
was 100/61.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
to be transported to the emergency department. Persin was
 
transported by DPS vehicle to Queen’s Medical Center in the early
 evening of October 5, 2011. At the hospital, Persin was
 diagnosed with severe sepsis and kidney failure.
 
"[T]he determination of whether a settlement is in good 
faith [is left] to the sound discretion of the trial court in light of the totality of the circumstances surrounding the settlement." Troyer v. Adams, 102 Hawai' i 399, 427, 77 P.3d 83, 
111 (2003). Therefore, we review the trial court's good faith determination for abuse of discretion. Id., at 434, 77 P.3d at 
118.
 
In Troyer, the Hawai' i Supreme Court adopted the 
"totality of circumstances" approach for trial courts to
 determine if settlements involving joint tortfeasors or co­obligors are made in good faith. Id., at 425, 77 P.3d at 109.
 
The supreme court held that,
 
the trial court may consider the following factors to the
extent that they are known at the time of settlement: (1)
the type of case and difficulty of proof at trial, e.g.,
rear-end motor vehicle collision, medical malpractice,
product liability, etc.; (2) the realistic approximation of
total damages that the plaintiff seeks; (3) the strength of
the plaintiff's claim and the realistic likelihood of his or
her success at trial; (4) the predicted expense of
litigation; (5) the relative degree of fault of the settling
tortfeasors; (6) the amount of consideration paid to settle
the claims; (7) the insurance policy limits and solvency of
the joint tortfeasors; (8) the relationship among the
parties and whether it is conducive to collusion or wrongful
conduct; and (9) any other evidence that the settlement is
aimed at injuring the interests of a non-settling tortfeasor
or motivated by other wrongful purpose. The foregoing list
is not exclusive, and the court may consider any other
factor that is relevant to whether a settlement has been
 given in good faith.
 
Id., at 427, 77 P.3d at 111.
 
Altres contends that the circuit court abused its
 
discretion when it granted the State's and Dr. Paderes's Petition
 
when the Troyer factors weighed heavily in Altres's favor. We
 disagree.
 
This is a complex medical malpractice claim involving
 
expert witnesses from all sides. The case involves several
 alleged joint tortfeasors and the apportionment of any award to
 the individual joint tortfeasors would be based on the expert
 witnesses and evidence. It was asserted by Altres at the hearing
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
on the Petition on October 30, 2015, and is agreed to by Persin
 
in his brief on appeal, that the approximate valuation of the
 case is $25 million to $30 million. However, the State asserts
 that the $25-$30 million total damage estimate by Persins and
 Altres is inflated, because the State defendants' experts opine
 that Persin had pre-existing chronic kidney disease that caused
 part of the alleged damages.
 
Further, the State contends and the evidence suggests
 
that Persin's damages will be reduced by his own degree of fault. 
Prior to his incarceration, Persin was homeless, living in a
 truck, and admits that he was an alcoholic. On the day of his
 arrest, Persin physically resisted police, which likely caused
 the open wound on his forearm. The wound on his forearm was most
 likely the source of Persin’s sepsis. Persin did not mention to
 OCCC medical staff any wound sustained during his arrest until
 several days after his admission to OCCC, on the morning of the
 day he was transferred to Queen’s Medical Center. In light of
 evidence arguably demonstrating negligence on Persin’s part
 contributing to the delay in Persin’s treatment, as well as the
 other circumstances in this case, the settlement amount of $7.2
 million is reasonable.
 
The settlement between Persin and the State and Dr.
 
Paderes is $7.2 million. The State and Dr. Paderes's insurance
 policy limit is $10 million. Of the $7.2 million settlement
 amount, $4 million is to be paid by the State as the self insured
 retention under the policy and $3.2 million is to be paid by the
 State's insurance company. The settlement's purpose is to limit
 potential liability and uncertainties of a trial that faced both
 the plaintiff and these defendants.
 
Determination of a good faith settlement pursuant to 
HRS § 663-15.5 is intended "to provide the court with an opportunity to prevent collusive settlements aimed at injuring the interests of a non-settling joint tortfeasor." Troyer, 102 
Hawai'i at 426, 77 P.3d at 110. We conclude that the circuit 
court did not err in granting the Petition and determining that the settlement was not aimed at injuring Altres or motivated by any other wrongful purpose. Furthermore, Altres did not provide 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
any evidence indicating collusion, fraud, or other tortious or
 
wrongful conduct on the part of the settling parties.6
 
Altres further contends that the circuit court erred
 
because the Petition was not in compliance with HRS § 663-15.5.
 Altres argues that the Petition failed to set forth all of the
 settlement terms and provided an incomplete set of terms that
 were impermissibly redacted.
 
HRS § 663-15.5(b) provides that a petition for
 
determination of good faith settlement "shall indicate the
 settling parties and, except for a settlement that includes a
 confidentiality agreement regarding the case or the terms of the
 settlement, the basis, terms, and settlement amount."
 
In this case, the State adequately provided the basis,
 
terms, and settlement amount in its Petition, declarations and
 exhibits, and memorandum in reply to Altres's objection to the
 Petition. Additionally, the State provided a copy of an email
 from the mediator outlining the basic terms of the settlement
 agreement. As such, the circuit court did not abuse its
 discretion when it determined that the State and Dr. Paderes met
 the requirements set forth in HRS § 663-15.5(b) and granted the
 Petition.
 
Finally, Altres's contention that the circuit court 
erred by granting the Petition when the settling parties had not yet executed a final settlement agreement is without merit. Payments of settlements or judgments against the State are required to be appropriated by the Legislature because the Legislature must approve the funding from the State budget. See 
Hawai'i State Constitution Article VII § 5 ("No public money 
shall be expended except pursuant to appropriations made by law."); HRS § 662-11. As such, the State must obtain legislative approval before executing a final settlement agreement in this 
6 Altres argues that the State's attorney’s unethical conduct and
Persin's counsel's questionable conduct towards the two nurses that were
discovered to be Altres employees during depositions supports a finding that
the settlement was not made in good faith. However, from our review of the
record, we determine that the circumstances, including the depositions,
surrounding the discovery that the two nurses were employed by Altres does not
in this case undermine the validity of the settlement agreement reached by
Persin, the State and Dr. Paderes or the circuit court's good faith
determination pursuant to HRS § 663-15.5. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
case.  Therefore, under the circumstances of this case relating
to the approval of a good faith settlement entered into on behalf
of the State, the circuit court did not err in granting the
Petition nor is it contrary to HRS § 663-15.5 to make a
determination of a good faith settlement when a final settlement
agreement had not yet been executed.
Based on the information provided to the circuit court,
the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in determining
that Persin, the State and Dr. Paderes had entered into a good
faith settlement agreement.
For the foregoing reasons, the "Order Granting the
Petition for Determination of Good Faith Settlement Filed by
Defendants State of Hawai #i and Sisar Paderes, M.D. on
September 22, 2015," filed November 17, 2015 in the Circuit Court
of the First Circuit, is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 31, 2018
On the briefs:
Richard Turbin
Rai Saint Chu
Janice D. Heidt
(Turbin Chu Heidt, A Law
Corporation)
and James S. Bostwick
(Bostwick & Peterson, LLP)
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Caron M. Inagaki
Mark M. Nomura
and Dennis K. Ferm
Deputy Attorneys General
for Defendants-Appellees.
Kenneth S. Robbins
Catherine L. Aubuchon
and Kelly A. Higa
(Bronster Fujichaku Robbins)
for Defendant-Appellant.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
7