 
 
  
 
 
    
   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I  RE PORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-25-0000473 29-APR-2026 08:05 AM Dkt. 80 SO 
NO. CAAP-25-0000473 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
IN THE INTEREST OF A.M., S.M., and M.M. 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. FC-S 22-00027) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.) 
Father-Appellant (Father) appeals from the "Amended 
Order Terminating the Parental Rights of [Mother-Appellee 
(Mother)] and [Father] and Awarding Permanent Custody ([Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter] 587A" (Termination Order), entered by the Family Court of the Fifth Circuit (family court) 
on June 9, 2025.
1 The Termination Order terminated Mother's2 and 
1 The Honorable Stephanie R.S. Char presided. 
2 Mother is a nominal appellee to this appeal.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 Father's respective parental rights to their minor children 
A.M., S.M., and M.M. (collectively, the Children). 
Father raises four points of error on appeal, 
contending that the family court erred: (1) because findings of 
fact (FOFs) 1(c), 1(f), 41(a), 45, 50, and 87 are clearly 
erroneous; (2) "by allowing questioning beyond the scope of 
direct examination and questioning in an impermissible manner"; 
(3) "by refusing to allow questioning consistent with HRS § 587A-21(d) and [the] parents' due process rights"; and (4) "in 
terminating [the] parents' parental rights and adopting the 
permanent plan, as there was not clear and convincing evidence 
that the permanent plan was in the [C]hildren's best interests."  
Upon careful review of the record, briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration 
to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, 
we resolve Father's points of error as follows: 
(1) Father challenges portions of FOFs 1(c), 1(f), 
41(a), 45, 50, and 87  of the Termination Order. 
"[FOFs] are 3
3 The portions of these FOFs that Father challenges are as follows: 
[1(c).] The proposed permanent plan, dated January 21, 
2025 is in the best interests of the [C]hildren. 
 . . . . 
[1(f).
] Under the circumstances that are presented in this case, DHS has made reasonable efforts to finalize 
the permanency plan which in this case is 
permanent out of home placement. 
 (continued . . .) 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 reviewed under the 'clearly erroneous' standard." In re  JK, 
149  Hawaiʻi 400, 406, 491 P.3d 1179, 1185 (App. 2021)  (citation 
omitted) .  To the extent some of these paragraphs can be 
construed as mixed questions of fact and law, "we review [mixed 
questions of fact and law] under the 'clearly erroneous' 
standard because the court's conclusions are dependent on the 
 3(. . . continued) 
 . . . . 
[41(a).] The court met with [A.M.] on November 8, 2024 in 
an in chambers interview. . . . This 8
-year old 
child had an incredible grasp on what was happening (and has happened) to her and her 
siblings being in foster care . . . . She opined 
that in order to have a good life and have kids, 
and have good relationships, adoption would be her 
path. She informed the court that her siblings 
felt the same way. She said she loves her 
parents, but she needed this case to end. 
  . . . . 
45
[.] On January 30, 2025, . . . [t]he [guardian ad 
litem (GAL)] reported that all three children were 
in agreement with adoption. . . . Mother and Father made a joint request that the court 
interview and re- interview the three c hildren 
regarding their feelings about permanent out of home placement, adoption and guardianship and any 
undue influence by the GAL. . . . 
 . . . . 
50
[.] On April 29, 2025, . . . [a]ttorneys were ordered 
to submit written closing arguments. . . . 
 . . . . 
87
[.] The [C]hildren have been consulted, in an age appropriate manner, about the proposed permanency and/or transition goal. 
(Citation omitted.) 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
 facts and circumstances of each individual case." Id. (citation 
omitted). 
We conclude that paragraphs 1(c), 1(f), 41(a), 45, and 
87 are supported by the record evidence and are not clearly 
erroneous. Moreover, they are supported by FOFs that are 
unchallenged by Father, and therefore binding on this court. 
See Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply
, 97 Hawaiʻi 450, 
459, 40 P.3d 73, 82 (2002) ("[U]nchallenged factual findings are 
deemed to be binding on appeal[.]"). 
We further conclude that the alleged error with regard 
to FOF 50 is harmless. 
Father appears correct that the 
"attorneys were ordered to submit proposed [FOFs] and 
conclusions of law [(COLs)], not closing arguments." 
Nevertheless, Father fails to demonstrate that he was prejudiced 
in any way by this error. 
Father's first point of error lacks merit. (2) Father contends that the family court erred by 
allowing "leading questions exceeding the scope of direct in a manner that prejudiced [Father]," and "extensive cross examination of a witness that was not adverse to the [GAL] in 
violation of [Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule] 611(c)." 
Father fails to identify the specific witnesses that 
he alleges were improperly examined. Based on the portions of 
the transcript that Father cites, Father appears to contend that 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 Petitioner-Appellee State of Hawaiʻ i Department of Human 
Services' (DHS
) counsel's cross-examination of Father went 
"beyond the scope of direct examination." Father also appears 
to contend that the GAL asked "leading[-]type questions" during 
its cross-examination of social worker Korin Ann Wakuta-Kenney 
(Wakuta-Kenney), in violation of HRE Rule 611(c). 
"The scope of cross-examination is generally within 
the sound discretion of the court." 
State v. Napulou, 85 Hawaiʻ i 
49, 57, 936 P.2d 1297, 1305 (App. 1997) (citation omitted). 
HRE 
Rule 611 states, in relevant part, 
(b) Scope of cross- examination.  Cross- examination 
should be limited to the subject matter of the direct 
examination and matters affecting the credibility of the witness.  The court may, in the exercise of discretion, 
permit inquiry into additional matters as if on direct 
examination. 
(c) Leading questions. Leading questions should not be 
used on the direct examination of a witness except as may 
be necessary to develop the witness' testimony. 
Ordinarily, leading questions should be permitted on cross-
examination. When a party calls a hostile witness, an 
adverse party, or a witness identified with an adverse party, interrogation may be by leading questions. 
In discussing HRE Rule 611, the Hawaiʻ i Supreme Court 
has explained that, 
The rules of evidence do "not limit cross- examination to 
the same acts and facts to which a witness has testified on direct examination. Rather, the proper scope of cross-
examination includes full development of matters broached 
on direct examination, including facts reasonably related 
to matters touched on direct. " 
State v. McElroy, 105 Hawaiʻ i 352, 356, 97 P.3d 1004, 1008 (2004) 
(quoting Napulou, 85 
Hawaiʻi at 57, 936 P.2d at 1305).   
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
 The family court did not abuse its discretion by 
allowing DHS counsel some leeway with regard to the scope of its 
cross-examination of Father. And it did not violate HRE Rule 
611(c) by allowing the GAL to ask Wakuta-Kenney leading 
questions on cross-examination; HRE Rule 611(c) provides that 
"[o]rdinarily, leading questions should be permitted on cross-
examination." 
Father's second point of error lacks merit. 
(3) Father contends that the family court erred in 
denying Father's request to question the Children, thereby violating his due process rights. "We answer questions of 
constitutional law by exercising our own independent 
constitutional judgment based on the facts of the case. Thus, 
we review questions of constitutional law under the right/wrong 
standard." In re J.M., 150 Hawaiʻ i 125, 137, 497 P.3d 140, 152 
(App. 2021) (quoting State v. Ui
, 142 Hawaiʻi 287, 292, 418 P.3d 
628, 633 (2018)). 
"It is well settled that the fundamental liberty 
interest in the care, custody, and control of one's children may 
not be changed by the state without due process of law." In re
Doe Child.
, 85 Hawaiʻi 119, 123, 938 P.2d 178, 182 (App. 1997) 
(citation omitted). However, "when the rights of parents and 
the welfare of their children are in conflict, the welfare of 
6   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
   the minor children must prevail." Id. at 125, 938 P.2d at 184 
(citations omitted). 
"In determining whether limitations on a child 
testifying violates a parent's due process rights, the[] Family 
Court must balance competing interests, including the interest 
of the parent at stake, the parent's need for the child's 
testimony, and the best interests of the child." In re K
Child., No. CAAP-11-0000805, 2013 WL 6244722, at *3 (Haw. App. 
Nov. 29, 2013) (SDO) (citations omitted). 
Pursuant to HRS § 587A-21(d) (2018), the family court 
has considerable discretion in determining the circumstances 
pursuant to which a child may be directed to testify4: 
A child may be directed by the court to testify under 
circumstances deemed by the court to be in the best 
interests of the child and the furtherance of justice. 
These circumstances may include an on- the-record interview 
of the child in chambers, with only those parties present 
during the interview as the court deems to be in the best 
interests of the child. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The record reflects that the family court properly 
exercised its discretion. The family court explained that 
"[t]he only reason why [it] spoke to [A.M.] in the first place 
4 The record reflects that two of the children were eight years 
old, and one child was seven years old, at the time of the parental 
termination proceeding. The Children's consent to adoption was therefore not 
required by statute. See HRS § 587A- 33(a)(4) (2018) (requiring the family 
court to determine whether "[t]he child consents to the permanent plan if the 
child is at least fourteen years old, unless the court consults with the 
child in camera and finds that it is in the best interest of the child to 
proceed without the child's consent." (emphasis added)). 
7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 is because she requested it." It noted that A.M. "is the 
youngest child that [the family court] ha[s] ever spoken to," 
and that "[f]urther interview or second interview with, 
specifically, [A.M.] would just be repetitive." It further 
noted that it "[did not] think the other two children are of 
sufficient age and maturity such that their voice could be 
heard." In addressing Father's basis for requesting the 
interview, the family court found that "[n]othing that has occurred in the over two years of this case gives rise, in the 
[family court's] opinions, to any indication of improper 
influence on the part of the [Children's] GAL." On these 
grounds, the family court determined that "it is not in the best 
interest of the [C]hildren for the [family court] to further 
interview [A.M.] and interview the other two children." 
Father's third point of error lacks merit. (4) Father contends that the family court erred by 
finding, by clear and convincing evidence, that the termination 
of Father's parental rights and the permanent plan was in the 
best interests of the Children. 
HRS § 587A-33 (2018) states, in pertinent part, 
(a) At a termination of parental rights hearing, the court 
shall determine whether there exists clear and convincing 
evidence that: 
 . . . . 
(3) The proposed permanent plan is in the best interests 
of the child. In reaching this determination, the court shall: 
8   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (A) Presume that it is in the best interests of the 
child to be promptly and permanently placed with 
responsible and competent substitute parents and 
family in a safe and secure home; and 
(B) Give greater weight to the presumption that the 
permanent plan is in the child's best interest, the 
younger the child is upon the child's date of entry 
into foster care[.] 
"Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion 
in making its decisions and those decision[s] will not be set 
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion." In re R
Child., 145 Hawaiʻi 477, 482, 454 P.3d 418, 423 (2019) (citations 
omitted). 
The unchallenged FOFs and mixed FOFs/COLs, which are 
binding upon this court, support the family court's termination 
of Father's parental rights and permanent plan: 
74[.] Father, is unable to currently provide a Safe Family 
Home for the Children. He was on HOPE Probation, and 
was able to participate in work furlough outside of 
KCCC for a period of time, however he ultimately had his probation revoked and was resentenced to a 
maximum term of incarceration with a scheduled 
release date of July 6, 2027. He remains 
incarcerated in Saguaro, Arizona. 
75[.] It is not reasonable to wait for Father to become willing and able to provide a safe family home for 
his 3 children after his release from incarceration 
because although he is eligible for Parole prior to 
his maximum incarceration date of July 6[,] 2027, his 
availability earlier is contingent on first being 
granted parole, and complying with any conditions of 
parole, before he would be available to work on this 
Court's CWS Family Service Plan and further time to 
demonstrate that he can provide a safe family home 
for the [C]hildren. 
76[.] Father has access to online classes at Sa guaro 
Correctional, and testified that he has completed a parenting certificate, however even with completion of available services while incarcerated, it is not 
reasonable to wait until his release to see if he can 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 demonstrate and implement the skills he gained from 
the classes available at S
aguaro. 
77[.] Father, while he was not incarcerated and 
participating in HOPE Probation on Kauai, 
participated in visitation with the [C]hildren, and a few UA tests, he did not complete the Court Ordered 
Psychological Evaluation. 
78[.] Even if Father is released on Parole, he would need 
to complete the psychological evaluation and recommended treatment, and he admitted on 4/29/25, 
that he was the cause of the problems in the 
relationship between Mother and Father, which is 
consistent with Mother's safety issues. According to 
Mother's Psychological Evaluation, she required Domestic Violence Counseling due to past trauma in 
her relationship with Father. 
79[.] Based on history of limited progress and substantial 
regression of both Mother and Father, it is not reasonable to delay terminating their parental rights 
because even if they were both immediately released 
from incarceration, they would need to demonstrate 
the ability to maintain their sobriety, and need time 
to demonstrate the ability to provide a safe family home and the [C]hildren cannot wait for permanency. 
80[.] The court has afforded these parents approximately 28 
hearings, oftentimes setting status hearings so that 
the court could have more frequent review of this case. The 28 hearings, were over the span of 28 
months, which equates to a hearing each month these [C]hildren were in [foster] care for parents to 
demonstrate their progress. They have not done so. 
81[.] Based on the young age of the [C]hildren, the length of time they have been in foster care, the 
[C]hildren's own stated frustrations with being in a 
cycle of foster care and reunification, delaying 
termination of parental rights and therefore delaying permanency would be harmful to the Children. 
Delaying permanency is not in the best interest of 
the [C]hildren. 
82[.] Ordering termination of parental rights and establishing a permanent plan for adoption is in the 
Children's Best Interests, because they have been 
languishing in foster care for nearly 30 months and 
the [C]hildren are suffering from the uncertainty of 
where and with whom they will permanently live. The [C]hildren deserve to remain in a safe and stable 
home. 
83[.] The Court finds that adoption is in the best interest 
of the [C]hildren, not legal guardianship, for the following reasons: 
10   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  a. Permanent stability for the [C]hildren (with 
strong emphasis on the testimony that the 
[C]hildren have spent more time in foster care 
than in the custody of their parents). 
b. Consideration of the [C]hildren's younger ages and need for a permanent and stable home environment, 
with consistent adult caregivers, who will be 
consistently present in their day to day living. 
c. Consideration of the [C]hildren's ([A.M. and 
S.M.'s]) wish to be adopted. 
d. Adoption would provide the adoptive parent the ability to continue homeschooling without being subject to the Department's policy on Homeschool 
and future litigation on the matter. 
e. Lack of progress of parents in addressing the 
issues that necessitated removal not just in the 
present case, but the two prior cases as well. 
(Citations omitted.) 
"Parents have two years from a child's entry into 
foster custody to become willing and able to provide a safe 
family home." In re JH
, 152 Hawaiʻi 373, 379, 526 P.3d 350, 356 
(2023). Father failed to meet this requirement. At the time 
the family court terminated Father's parental rights, the 
Children had been in foster custody for 28 months from their 
date of entry into foster custody. 
Father appears to contend that the family court 
abused its discretion by "refus[ing] to allow questioning of the [C]hildren regarding the permanent plan that was ultimately 
imposed." 
Father's contention lacks merit in light of section 
(3), supra. 
11   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Termination 
Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, April 29, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
Matthew Mannisto, 
for Father-Appellant.  
 Russell K. Goo, Julio C. Herrera, Deputy Attorneys General, 
for Petitioner-Appellee. /s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
Presiding Judge  /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
Associate Judge 
 /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
Associate Judge  
12 