FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
---o0o--­
IN THE MATTER OF THE APPLICATION 
OF WAI'OLA O MOLOKA' I, INC.
For Review and Approval of Rate Increases,
Revised Rate Schedules, and Revised Rules 
NO. CAAP-11-0000148
 
APPEAL FROM THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
 
(DOCKET NO. 2009-0049)
 
JUNE 14, 2012
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING J., FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
Intervenor-Appellant County of Maui (Maui County) 
appeals from the February 8, 2011 Decision and Order (Order) 
filed by the Public Utilities Commission (PUC). 
In its Order, 
PUC granted approval to Applicant-Appellee Wai' ola O Moloka' i 
(Wai'ola) for a rate increase of approximately 284.5% over 
previous rates. 
On appeal, Maui County contends PUC erred by concluding 
Wai'ola's proposed rate increase was just and reasonable when 
(1) the increase was based in part on unauthorized
 
expenses;
 
(2) Wai'ola failed to satisfy its burden of proof; 
(3) the representative appointed by the Division of
 
Consumer Advocacy (Consumer Advocate) did not comply with his
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statutory mandate to represent, protect, and advance the
 
interests of consumers; 
(4) Wai'ola failed to satisfy its burden of proof in 
justifying its depreciation expense; 
(5) Wai'ola failed to support an insurance expense of 
$16,000 by evidence in the record; 
(6) the rate increase included a cost of sales expense
 
that was not supported in the record;
 
(7) PUC failed to consider whether the ratepayers
 
could afford to pay for the approved increase; and
 
(8) the record supporting $225,000 of regulatory
 
expenses was insufficiently descriptive.
 
I.
 
Wai'ola is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Moloka' i 
Properties Limited (MPL), which provides water utility services 
to businesses, residences, churches, and Maui County parks 
located in Maunaloa, Kualapu' u, Kipu, Manawainui, and the Moloka' i 
Industrial Park areas of Moloka' i. In addition to mountain water 
as a source of water, Wai' ola purchases water from Molokai Public 
Utilities (MPU), another subsidiary of MPL, and from the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands (DHHL). 
In 1993, Wai' ola was granted a Certificate of Public 
Convenience and Necessity (CPCN) to provide water service to 
residential, commercial, and agricultural customers on the island 
of Moloka' i. Through granting the CPCN, PUC authorized Wai' ola's 
rates and charges, effective January 13, 1993. 
In March 2008, MPL announced plans to cease all 
business operations on Moloka' i, including Wai' ola, within six 
months because it lacked sufficient revenues to pay its operating 
expenses. On June 5, 2008, the Consumer Advocate requested that 
PUC not allow MPL to terminate its utility operations. PUC 
granted the Consumer Advocate's request, and on June 5, 2008, PUC 
ordered Wai' ola to continue providing services until PUC approved 
a transfer or surrender of Wai' ola's CPCN. 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On June 13, 2008, PUC informed Maui County that PUC 
would be opening a docket to allow for a temporary increase in 
the water rates for Wai' ola in order to allow the utility to 
continue to provide water service to its customers. PUC then 
sua sponte opened Docket No. 2008-0115 to consider temporary rate 
relief for Wai' ola. After a public hearing on the matter, PUC 
approved a temporary increase in Wai' ola's monthly rate from 
$1.85 per thousand gallons to $5.15 per thousand gallons. The 
temporary increase was projected to result in additional annual 
revenues of $156,710. PUC extended the temporary increase until 
August 2009 or until a ruling was made on Wai' ola's application 
for a general rate increase. 
On June 29, 2009, Wai' ola filed its Amended Application 
for Review and Approval of Rate Increases (amended application) seeking an increase in its total revenues to $473,431, or 
approximately 382.85% over its present revenue requirement. 
Wai'ola proposed to implement its increased revenue requirement 
(1) by increasing its water consumption charge from its temporary
 rate of $5.15 per thousand gallons (the last permanent rate being
 
$1.85 per thousand gallons established in 1993) to a permanent
 
rate of $8.9675 per thousand gallons and (2) by various monthly
 
customer meter and private fire protection charges.
 
On September 3, 2009, PUC held a public hearing on the 
amended application. On October 16, 2009, PUC granted 
intervention to Maui County as a party, and on its own motion 
named MPL as a party. On May 19, 2010, the first day of the 
evidentiary hearing, the Consumer Advocate informed PUC that 
Wai'ola and the Consumer Advocate had reached a settlement 
agreement (settlement) on all rate-related issues. In the settlement, Wai' ola and the Consumer Advocate stipulated to a 
rate increase of $356,293 (or approximately 328.69%). Maui County was not a party to the settlement and objected. 
On February 8, 2011, PUC issued its Order approving a rate
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
increase of $360,238 or approximately 284.5%. Maui County timely
 
appealed from the Order on March 10, 2011. 
II.
 
Rate-making decisions by PUC are governed by 
HRS § 269–16 (2007 Repl.), which requires that all rates and 
charges be "just and reasonable." "The 'unjust and unreasonable' 
language does not represent a separate standard of review, but 
rather represents the application of the abuse of discretion 
standard to the statutory scheme underlying the PUC's rate-making 
powers." Paul's Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Befitel, 104 Hawai' i 412, 
419, 91 P.3d 494, 501 (2004). While PUC decisions "are not presumptively valid[,] . . . an agency's discretionary 
determinations are entitled to deference, and an appellant has a 
high burden to surmount that deference[.]" Id. 
III.
 
A.	 PUC did not err in allowing expenses related to
servicing the Kualapu' u area to be factored into 
the proposed rate increases. 
Maui County contends PUC erred in failing to defer
 
charges associated with the Kualapu' u service area. Maui County 
argues that because Wai' ola did not have a CPCN for Kualapu' u, 
Wai'ola was not authorized to charge customers for service in 
that area. PUC agreed it was undisputed that Wai' ola was not 
authorized, nor was seeking authorization, to provide water
 
service to the Kualapu' u area. Nonetheless, PUC found that 
to deny or delay [Wai' ola's] recovery of costs for provision
of water service to customers in Kualapuu is inconsistent
with the public interest given that: (1) there are customersthat require and will continue to require water service inKualapuu; and (2) there does not appear to be anotherprovider of water service "willing" to provide service inthe area. In addition, [PUC] agrees with the ConsumerAdvocate's assessment that denial of recovery of costsassociated with Kualapuu would be "non-conducive to allowing[Wai'ola] to continue to provide safe and efficient service
to its customers[.]" [PUC] is mindful that this proceedingis rooted in Docket No. 2008-0115, where [PUC] provided[Wai'ola] and MPU with temporary rate relief to ensure
continuance of utility operations. Adoption of [MauiCounty's] recommendation with respect to Kualapuu herein mayjeopardize prior efforts to ensure that necessary water 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
service is available without interruption to all of
[Wai'ola's] customers.
Given the above, [PUC] will not "defer" [Wai' ola's]
Kualapuu charges, as requested by [Maui County]. However,
within sixty days of the date of this Decision and Order,
[Wai'ola] shall file an application to expand its service
territory to include the Kualapuu area.
 
Maui County argues that allowing costs associated with 
the Kualapu' u area is inconsistent with HRS § 269-7.5 (2007 
Repl.), which states that no utility "shall commence its business 
without first having obtained from [PUC] a [CPCN]." Maui County 
also argues that PUC's decision to allow Wai' ola to charge for 
costs associated with the Kualapu' u area was inconsistent with 
HRS § 269–16 because such a rate is not "just and reasonable." 
HRS § 269–16(a) requires that "[a]ll rates, fares, charges, 
classifications, schedules, rules, and practices made, charged, 
or observed by any public utility or by two or more public 
utilities jointly shall be just and reasonable and shall be filed 
with the public utilities commission." Maui County cites to 
NAACP v. Fed. Power Comm'n, 425 U.S. 662 (1976) and Mountain 
States Tel. & Tel Co. v. F.C.C., 939 F.2d 1035 (D.C.Cir. 1991) 
for the proposition that when establishing "just and reasonable" 
rates, the PUC "clearly has the duty to prevent its regulatees 
from charging rates based upon illegal, duplicative, or 
unnecessary labor costs." NAACP v. Fed. Power Comm'n, 425 U.S. 
at 668. 
This court has already had occasion to apply NAACP and 
Mountain States to the definition of the phrase "just and reasonable" under HRS § 269-16. In In re Molokai Public 
Utilities, Inc., No. CAAP-10-0000096, 2012 WL 503499, (Hawai' i 
App. Feb. 13, 2012), this court analyzed an application for a rate increase which is factually similar to the instant case. In 
In re Molokai Public Utilities, Inc., MPU, a subsidiary of 
Wai'ola's parent company MPL, also sought a water rate increase 
despite not having the proper permit. In analyzing the phrase "just and reasonable," this court held: 
It is the "aim of rate regulation to protect ratepayers from
having to pay charges unnecessarily incurred, including
 
5
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
those incurred as a result of the carrier's illegal
activity." [Mountain States] at 1043. This rule clearly
states that ratepayers must be protected from charges
unnecessarily incurred as a result of the illegal activity.
[Maui County] has failed to demonstrate how any charges were
unnecessarily incurred from MPU's [operation] without a
proper permit. . . . If a utility's conduct is illegal, but
the utility does not incur any unnecessary expenses as a
result of its conduct, the conduct has no effect on whether
the utility's rates are "just and reasonable."
 
Id. at 3. Thus, this court clearly articulated that in order for
 
a charge to be considered unjust and unreasonable, the charge
 
must be based on expenses unnecessarily incurred as the result of
 
illegal activity. Id. 
In the instant case, Maui County has not demonstrated 
how the rate approved by PUC was unjust and unreasonable. Simply 
alleging Wai' ola does not have the proper permit to service the 
Kualapu'u area is not enough to prove the rate was unjust and 
unreasonable. As was the case in In re Molokai Public Utilities, 
Inc., Maui County has not demonstrated how the lack of a CPCN for 
the Kualapu' u area resulted in unnecessary expenses that would 
not have occurred had Wai' ola complied with law. Maui County has 
failed to demonstrate how PUC's approval of a rate increase was 
not "just and reasonable." Id. 
B. PUC did not err in relying on the settlement. 
Maui County contends PUC erred in relying on the 
settlement between Wai' ola and the Consumer Advocate because PUC 
did not adequately consider the burden of the higher rates on 
Wai'ola's customers. In In re Molokai Public Utilities, Inc., 
this court held that "PUC's reliance on the settlement agreement is subject to a degree of deference. . . . [A]lthough PUC 
decisions 'are not presumptively valid, . . . an agency's 
discretionary determinations are entitled to deference, and an 
appellant has a high burden to surmount that deference.'" Id. at 
4 (quoting Paul's Elec. Serv., 104 Hawai' i at 419, 91 P.3d at 
501) (brackets omitted; first ellipsis added). 
In the instant case, Maui County argues that PUC, "as
 
well as the Consumer Advocate, should have examined whether the
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
proposed rates impose an unreasonable burden on [Wai' ola's] 
customers." However, "[t]he methodology employed by the PUC in
 
its rate-making determination lies within its expertise and
 
discretion." In re Hawaii Elec. Light Co., 67 Haw. 425, 431, 690
 
P.2d 274, 279 (1984).
 
It is not theory but the impact of the rate order which
counts. If the total effect of the rate order cannot be
 said to be unjust and unreasonable, judicial inquiry is at
an end. The fact that the method employed to reach that
result may contain infirmities is not then important.
 
In re Hawaiian Tel. Co., 67 Haw. 370, 381, 689 P.2d 741, 749
 
(1984) (quoting Fed. Power Comm'n v. Hope Natural Gas Co., 320
 
U.S. 591, 602, (1944)).
 
C.	 PUC did not err in approving Wai' ola's 
depreciation expense. 
Maui County contends Wai' ola's "depreciation expense of 
$107,490 should have been rejected by [PUC] because this figure
 
is not supported by the evidence in the record." In its Order,
 
PUC stated that "upon careful review of the full record, [PUC]
 
finds reasonable $107,490 in depreciation expense at present
 
rates[.]" PUC spent eight pages of its order analyzing the
 
validity of the depreciation expense. PUC directly addressed the
 
concerns of Maui County: 
With respect to [Maui County's] specific concerns,
[Wai'ola's] responses generally appear to be reasonable.
For instance, with respect to the 12-inch water main, theconfusion created by [Wai' ola] through its . . . responses
wherein it mistakenly referred to a line that was not built,was sufficiently addressed during the Hearing. While [Wai'ola] should have rectified the confusion earlier (i.e.,
possibly in its rebuttal testimony), [Wai' ola] should not be
penalized for a mistake, which was clarified prior to theclose of the record. With respect to the MaunaloaReservoir, the repairs to the reservoir (the basis of thedepreciation expense) were made years before [Wai' ola's]
parent acquired MPU and, thus, the repairs were made toserve [Wai' ola's] customers. While the record indicates 
that the asset is being used by MPU (which is beingaccounted for in this proceeding), there is no questionthat this [Wai' ola] asset is used and useful for the
provision of utility service to [Wai' ola's] customers.
Moreover, [Wai' ola's] explanation regarding the differences
in depreciated assets between the independent auditor'sreport and [Wai' ola's] witness appears credible. In its 
explanation, [Wai' ola] stated that an auditor for financial
purposes "may take the position that a fully depreciated 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
plant should not be reflected as [an] asset and also shown
in the same amount as accumulated depreciation . . . [while]
[f]or regulatory purposes, . . . it is correct to reflect
plant that is still in use as both plant and accumulated
depreciation."
 
(Ellipses added.)
 
Maui County argues that Wai' ola "did not submit any credible 
or reliable evidence" to justify the depreciation expense. Maui
 
County does not argue that PUC applied the wrong legal standard,
 
but instead challenges PUC's judgment of the record. "However,
 
in deference to the administrative agency's expertise and
 
experience in its particular field, the courts should not
 
substitute their own judgment for that of the administrative
 
agency where mixed questions of fact and law are presented." 
Camara v. Agsalud , 67 Haw. 212, 216, 685 P.2d 794, 797 (1984). 
Given the standard of review, PUC was within its discretion to
 
decide the reasonableness of the depreciation expense based on
 
the evidence before it. 
D.	 PUC did not err in approving Wai
'ola's insurance 
expense. 
Maui County similarly contends PUC erred in 
approving $16,000 in insurance expenses because that figure
 
is not supported by the evidence in the record. Maui County
 
argues the proper insurance expense supported by the record is
 
$7,792. However,
 
[t]he Consumer Advocate states that insurance expense of
$16,000 should not be reduced. The Consumer Advocate asserts that [Wai' ola's] consultant confirmed that the
$7,792 amount shown on Exhibit 10.10 was an amount for fourmonths and did not represent a full year of costs.Moreover, according to the Consumer Advocate, upondiscovery, "[Wai' ola] chose not to increase its test year
estimate from $16,000 in spite of the increase in the actualaccruals which would have provided an increase in the annualallocated insurance amount to $23,396." 
With this in mind, PUC found that 
[Wai'ola's] clarification provided in its opening and reply
briefs that the $7,792 figure proposed by [Maui County]represents a four month total (ended October 31, 2010) asopposed to a full year is credible and supported by therecord. Moreover, the [PUC] notes that the $16,000 estimatefor insurance expense is approximately $3,556 or 18.8% lessthan [Wai' ola's] historic three-year average of $19,556 for
the years 2006 through 2008. 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
PUC's decision to approve the $16,000 insurance expense was not 
erroneous. It was based on evidence in the record and 
clarification by Wai' ola. 
E.	 PUC did not err in approving Wai' ola's cost of 
sales expense. 
Maui County contends PUC erred in approving a cost of
 
sales expense of $135,132. Maui County argues that this approval
 
by PUC was in error because it was even higher than the $114,389
 
agreed upon by Wai' ola and the Consumer Advocate. In approving 
the cost of sales expense of $135,132, PUC found
 
[a]s noted [previously], since [Wai' ola] does not have its
own source of water [Wai' ola] must purchase water from MPU
and DHHL to provide water utility service to its customers.
In addition, [Wai' ola] pays MPU for water treatment
services. On September 23, 2010, [PUC] issued its finaldecision and order in Docket No. 2009-0048, MPU's rate case.In Docket No. 2009-0048, increased MPU's rates for servicesprovided to [Wai' ola] resulting in revenues of $58,458 and
$42,332 for water provided at the Kualapuu Tap and watertreatment services, respectively. These amounts representcharges that [Wai' ola] will be paying MPU to provide water
utility service to [Wai' ola's] customers. To not account for
these known and approved increased amounts would beunreasonable and unjust since the increased rates are forservices that benefit [Wai' ola's] customers and directly
impact [Wai' ola's] cost of sales expense. Due to MPU's 
increased rates for water and water treatment and the cost of water purchased from DHHL, [Wai' ola's] cost of sales
expense for the Test Year is $135,132. 
Because the court "should not substitute [its] own judgment for
 
that of the administrative agency" and because PUC relied on
 
evidence in the record to determine the proper cost of sales
 
expense, there was no reversible error in approving the $135,132
 
cost of sales expense. Camara, 67 Haw. at 216, 685 P.2d at 797.
 
F.	 PUC did not err in approving $225,000 in total
regulatory expenses.
 
Maui County contends PUC abused its discretion in 
approving $45,000 in regulatory expenses for the test year, or 
$225,000 in total regulatory expenses over five years. Maui 
County argues PUC should have reduced the regulatory fees by one-
third because Wai' ola's attorneys submitted bills that were not 
itemized. Maui County cites to Hawaii Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Inc., 116 Hawai' i 465, 173 P.3d 1122 (2007), for the proposition 
that the party requesting attorneys' fees must provide a detailed 
bill describing the substance of the work claimed. 
PUC considered this argument below but ultimately 
followed the reasoning set forth by Wai' ola. PUC summarized 
Wai'ola's efforts to distinguish Hawaii Ventures as follows: 
1. Hawaii Ventures and the other cases cited by the
County are civil court cases where the reimbursement of the
receiver's and attorney's fees was at issue. The reason
 block billing was rejected in Hawaii Ventures was because
there were two types of attorney's fees in the case-­attorney's fees on certain activities were subject to
recovery while attorney's fees on other activities were not
to be recovered. However, fees included in regulatory
expense in this and other commission proceedings are all
reimbursable if reasonable.
 
2. Reimbursement of fees in Hawaii Ventures and the
 
other cases cited by the County were backward looking. For
 ratemaking purposes, ascertaining reasonable regulatory
expenses is forward looking. Similar to other expenses used
to determine rates to be collected prospectively, the
reasonableness of the expenses may be demonstrated with
historical data and comparisons with other utilities and
rate proceedings.
 
PUC agreed Hawaii Ventures is not applicable to the instant case, 
stating: "Upon review, [PUC] finds reasonable $45,000 in 
regulatory expense at present rates. . . . [PUC] agrees with 
Wai'ola's argument that application of Hawaii Ventures is 
inappropriate." 
PUC and Wai' ola are correct in that Hawaii Ventures 
involved distinguishing between compensable and non-compensable fees. Id. at 476, 173 P.3d at 1133. The court in Hawaii 
Ventures held that the description of attorneys' fees were "so vaguely generic that it is impossible to distinguish, in light of 
the circumstances in this case, between compensable and 
non-compensable claims." Id. at 478, 173 P.3d at 1135. 
In the instant case, there is no need to distinguish
 
between compensable and non-compensable fees. PUC correctly held
 
that "all reasonable rate case activities are reimbursable under
 
regulatory expense." HRS § 269-16 allows PUC to set rates which
 
are "just and reasonable." "The language of [HRS § 269-16]
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
grants to [PUC] broad discretionary power in the area of rate
 
regulation, . . . providing that rates set are 'just and
 
reasonable.'" In re Kauai Elec. Div. of Citizens Util. Co. 60
 
Haw. 166, 179, 590 P.2d 524, 534 (1978). Therefore, the standard
 for allowing attorneys' fees to be passed on to the consumer in a
 
rate case proceeding differs from the standard used in civil
 
cases where there is a need to distinguish between types of fees. 
As such, PUC did not err in holding Hawaii Ventures
 
distinguishable from the instant case and approving $225,000 in
 
total regulatory expenses over five years. 
IV.
 
The February 8, 2011 Decision and Order filed by the
 
Public Utilities Commission is hereby affirmed.
 
On the briefs:
 
Margery S. Bronster
Rex Y. Fujichaku
Leslie Patacsil Chinn
 (Bronster Hoshibata)
and
 Patrick K. Wong
Edward S. Kushi, Jr.
Jane E. Lovell
 Deputies Corporation Counsel
for Appellant County of Maui.
 
Michael H. Lau
 
Yvonne Y. Izu
 (Morihara Lau & Fong)
for Appellee Wai' ola O Moloka' i, Inc.
 
Ji Sook Kim 
for Appellee State of Hawai' i
 
Public Utilities Commission.
 
Jon S. Itomura
 
Lane H. Tsuchiyama
for Division of Consumer
 Advocacy, Department of Commerce
and Consumer Affairs.
 
11
 