         
    
    
 
  
        
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIF IC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000433 19-JUN-2026 07:58 AM Dkt. 58 SO 
NO.  CAAP-24-0000433 
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE   COURT  OF  APPEALS 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
STATE  OF  HAWAI I,  Plaintiff-Appellee,  v. 
LORI
  LANDON,  Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT
 COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
KONA DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 3DTA-23-01167) 
SUMMARY  DISPOSITION  ORDER 
(By: Nakasone,
 Chief Judge
 Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant  Lori   Landon  (Landon)  appeals  from 
the  June  14,  2024  Judgment  and  Notice  of  Entry  of  Judgment 
(Judgment )  entered  against  her  by  the  District  Court  of  the  Third 
Circuit  (District  Court).1 
On  July  3,  2023,  Plaintiff-Appellee  State  of  Hawai i 
(the
  State)  filed  a  Criminal  Complaint  charging  Landon  with, 
inter  alia,  Operating  a  Vehicle  Under  the  Influence  of  an 
Intoxicant  (OVUII)  in  violation  of  Hawaii  Revised  Statutes  (HRS) 
§  291E-61(a)(1)  and/or  (a)(3)  (2020).   The  District  Court  held 
trial  on  February  2,  2024,  and  June  14,  2024,  and  found  that  the 
State  proved  OVUII  beyond  a  reasonable  doubt.  
1 The Honorable Kimberly Tsuchiya presided .          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
        
           
         
        
        
        
    
        
         
         
    
      
          
         
           
          
       
         
           
  
       
           
           
          
                   
        Landon raises
  two points of error on appeal, contending 
that the District Court erred by: (1) finding Landon guilty of 
OVUII because there was no substantial evidence to support the 
conviction; and (2) sentencing Landon to complete fourteen hours 
of substance abuse treatment and obtain a substance abuse 
evaluation because such requirements cannot be imposed except as 
conditions of probation. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Landon's 
points of error as follows: 
(1) Landon argues, variously, that the evidence is 
insufficient to support a conviction of OVUII. Landon points to 
the fact that other than her "lone traffic violation," her 
driving was flawless. She further notes that her speech was not 
slurred, she did not struggle to maintain her balance, and that 
"[a]lthough [Hawai i County Police  Department (HPD) Officer Dylan 
Chaves (Officer Chaves)] testified that Landon held on to her 
vehicle while exiting, who does not hold on to their vehicle door 
while exiting?" 
Officer Chaves testified, inter alia, that he witnessed 
Landon ignore a red light and execute a U-turn, cutting off a 
pickup truck in front of him. After he pulled Landon over, 
Officer Chaves observed that Landon had red, watery eyes and an 
odor of alcohol on her breath. Landon fumbled through her wallet 
when Officer Chaves asked for her driver's license, insurance, 
and registration, and initially handed him an expired insurance 
2
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
            
           
        
           
     
          
          
          
          
            
           
             
           
          
          
      
          
     
        
           
       
          
         
         
      
       
          
         card. He also observed a SVEDKA gin bottle in the passenger seat 
of her car, which was noted by another officer to be half-empty. 
Officer Chaves only performed the Horizontal Gaze Nystagmus test, 
due to a slight decline in the area outside Landon's vehicle, but 
observed multiple clues of intoxication. 
Landon testified that she met up with a couple at a 
bar, planning on driving them to the airport. Landon further 
testified that upon her arrival at the bar, she observed the 
couple drinking what appeared to be iced teas and told the 
bartender, "I'll have an iced tea, too." She said that they did 
not taste like iced tea, but she did not think they were 
alcoholic. She drank four of them in a little over an hour. 
When they left the bar, they were headed to the airport and 
that's pretty much the last thing she could remember because, as 
she put it, "It's like the alcohol just affected my memory." 
The District Court credited Officer Chaves's testimony 
and found Landon's testimony that she did not know she was 
drinking alcohol not to be credible. 
To prove OVUII under HRS § 291E-61(a)(1), the State 
must show beyond a reasonable doubt that: (1) the suspect was 
intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly (2) "under the influence 
of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair [her] normal mental 
faculties or ability to care for [herself] and guard against 
casualty." HRS § 291E-61(a)(1); State v. Nesmith ,
 127 Hawai i 
48,
 53-54, 276 P.3d 617, 622-23 (2012). 
Evidence is sufficient to support a conviction when, 
viewed in a light most favorable to the prosecution, there was 
substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of 
3
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
   
      
         
  
       
         
        
        
           
         
     
        
        
         
      
      
        
      fact.   State  v.  Smith,  106  Hawai i  365,  372,  105   P.3d  242,  249 
(App.  2004).   We  do  not  weigh  evidence  on  appeal  or  second  guess 
credibility  determinations.   Id.   "Sufficient  evidence  to  support 
a  conviction  can  be  established  through  the  testimony  of  a  single 
witness."   Id.   A  defendant's  own  testimony  can  constitute  proof 
beyond  a  reasonable  doubt  that  a  defendant  committed  an  element 
of  the  offense.   State  v.  Torres,  70  Haw.  219,  223,  768  P.2d  230, 
233  (1989)  (Appellant's  own  admission  at  trial  that  he  sold  the 
gun  on  April  18,  1986,  was  proof  beyond  a  reasonable  doubt  that 
he  exercised  "control"  over  the  shotgun  within  the  meaning  of  HRS 
§  134–7(b)). 
Upon review of
 all of the evidence presented at trial, 
we conclude that there is sufficient evidence to sustain Landon's 
conviction of OVUII. 
(2) Landon argues that the District Court erred when 
it included substance abuse treatment and evaluation as part of 
Landon's sentence because under State v. Agdinaoay , 150 Hawai i  
223, 500
 P.3d 408 (2021), "substance abuse treatment requirements 
can only be imposed as conditions of probation" and HRS § 291E-
61(b) mandates that an OVUII offender "shall be sentenced without 
the possibility of probation." 
Agdinaoay is inapposite. The statute at issue in 
Agdinaoay has since been amended and HRS § 291E-61(b)(1)(A) 
specifically provides that a first-time offender of OVUII will be 
sentenced to "[a] fourteen-hour minimum substance abuse 
rehabilitation program, including education and counseling, or 
other comparable programs deemed appropriate by the court[.]" 
Section 291E therefore authorizes imposition of rehabilitation 
4          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
          
  programs by its own terms. Landon's arguments to the contrary 
are without merit. 
For  these   reasons,  the  District  Court's  June  14,  2024 
Judgment  is  affirmed. 
DATED:
   Honolulu,  Hawai i,  June  19,  2026. 
On
  the  briefs: 
Henry  P.  Ting, 
Deputy  Public  Defender, 
for  Defendant-Appellant 
Charles  E.  Murray,  III, 
Deputy  Prosecuting  Attorney, 
County  of  Hawai i, 
for  Plaintiff-Appellee /s/  Karen  T.  Nakasone 
Chief  Judge 
/s/  Katherine  G.  Leonard 
Associate  Judge 
/s/  Keith  K.  Hiraoka 
Associate  Judge 
5 