NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-25-0000881 06-OCT-2026 08:25 AM Dkt. 60 SO 
NO. CAAP-25-0000881 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
#I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
TYRUS J DELOS REYES, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 5CPC-22-0000232) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.) 
Tyrus Delos Reyes appeals from the Order of 
Resentencing
 Revocation of Probation entered by the Circuit Court 
of the Fifth Circuit.1 We vacate and remand for resentencing 
because Delos Reyes received ineffective assistance of counsel. 
Delos Reyes pleaded no contest to Promoting a Dangerous 
Drug in the Third Degree. A Judgment Guilty Conviction and 
Probation Sentence was entered on July 25, 2024. Delos Reyes was sentenced to four years probation and placed in the HOPE program. 
On September 23, 2025, the State filed a Motion for 
Modification or Revocation of the Terms and Conditions of Probation and for Issuance of a Bench Warrant. It alleged that Delos Reyes had tested positive for methamphetamine on September 11, 2025; he was unemployed; attempts to contact him had been unsuccessful; and his whereabouts were unknown. A HOPE Violation Report was also filed on September 23, 2025. 
The resentencing hearing was held on November 17, 2025. 
The Order of Resentencing was entered that day. Delos Reyes was 
1 The Honorable Michael K. Soong presided.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
resentenced to five years in prison with credit for time served. 
This appeal followed. 
Jurisdiction 
The State points out that Delos Reyes's notice of 
appeal was not timely filed. A notice of appeal from the Order 
of Resentencing was due on December 17, 2025. Hawai
#i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP
) Rule 4(b)(1). Delos Reyes's appellate 
counsel, the Office of the Public Defender (OPD), filed it on 
December 19, 2025 — two days late. 
We will review an untimely appeal on the merits "when 
defense counsel has inexcusably or ineffectively failed to pursue 
a defendant's appeal from a criminal conviction in the first instance." State v. Knight, 80 Hawai# i 318, 323, 909 P.2d 1133, 
1138 (1996) (cleaned up). 
Delos Reyes's former attorney Craig A. De Costa orally 
moved to withdraw during the November 17, 2025 resentencing hearing. 
The circuit court orally granted the motion and 
directed De Costa to prepare an order; Delos Reyes was not referred to OPD. De Costa did not submit a proposed order until December 31, 2025, after the deadline to appeal the Order of Resentencing had passed. The Order Granting Oral Motion to Withdraw as Counsel for Defendant was entered on January 2, 2026. 
The order did not appoint OPD as substitute counsel. 
We entered an order to show cause why Delos Reyes's 
appeal should not be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction. OPD responded with a declaration. It appears Delos Reyes intended to appeal from the Order of Resentencing. De Costa remained Delos Reyes's attorney of record until the written order granting his oral motion to withdraw was entered on January 2, 2026. De Costa inexcusably or ineffectively failed to file a notice of appeal by December 17, 2025. We have jurisdiction over Delos Reyes's appeal. 
Discussion 
Delos Reyes states a single point of error: De Costa 
"was ineffective by declining the circuit court's offer of more 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
time for Delos Reyes to gain acceptance into a substance abuse 
treatment program and remain on probation."2 
Delos Reyes's ineffective assistance of counsel claim 
was first made on appeal. We may consider it de novo "if the record is sufficiently developed to determine whether there has been ineffective assistance of counsel." State v. Salavea, 147 
Hawai#i 564, 575, 465 P.3d 1011, 1022 (2020) (cleaned up). 
First, Delos Reyes "must show that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence." Id. at 576, 465 P.3d at 1023. Second, he "must 
establish that these errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." Id.He need only show "a possible impairment of a 
potentially meritorious defense"; he need not "show the impairment was probable nor prove that [he] suffered actual prejudice." Id.
The State's motion to revoke HOPE probation was heard 
on November 4, 2025. Delos Reyes admitted the allegations in the motion. The circuit court found he failed to complete a material term and condition of his probation. Resentencing or disposition was set for November 17, 2025. 
Delos Reyes contends that the circuit court offered to 
give him time to get accepted into a rehabilitation program, but De Costa turned it down without consulting with him. The State agrees. 
When the prosecution concedes error, it is incumbent on the
appellate court first to ascertain that the confession oferror is supported by the record and well-founded in law andsecond to determine that such error is properly preservedand prejudicial. In other words, a confession of error bythe prosecution is not binding upon an appellate court, normay a conviction be reversed on the strength of theprosecutor's official action alone. 
State v. Solomon, 107 Hawai# i 117, 126, 111 P.3d 12, 21 (2005) 
(formatting altered). 
2 De Costa was served with the opening brief, consistent with HRAP
Rule 28(a). He has not filed a response. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The transcript of the resentencing hearing shows this 
exchange: 
THE COURT: You -- you know, [counsel], before we
actually get to the resentencing. I -- I thought you were
taking the time to try and get him into a program. And, youknow, with his history of the amount of violations, youknow, the only way that I would reconsider probation again
is if he was accepted in a program . I wouldn't release him 
time served or -- or even, you know, probation and jail. I think either he's in a program or he's looking at the openterm. 
So I don't know if you want time to try  and. 
MR. DeCOSTA: I'm -- I'm sorry, your Honor. I thought
it was -- the Court asked for resentencing I thought thatwould give me time to speak to Mr. Delos Reyes about what hewanted to do. 
As far as getting in applications and so forth, that's 
not something that I really do . 
That is something that I
think the social workers at the jail would do, but theywon't do it if he's presentencing is my understanding. 
Most of the programs -- I've tried this before and
most of the programs go on like a release date or assurancesthat the Court will release him to it. 
So what I asked for when he was initially sentencing
[sic], and I would ask for that now and I understand that'snot the judge's inclination, but would be if you're going toput him back, I would ask you put him back, if that's theCourt's desire to put him back on probation, and say that ifhe gets accepted into a program, a residential program, ifthat's what the Court want [sic] to see, that he can bereleased into the program after a certain amount of days. 
THE COURT: All right. 
We'll proceed with the
resentencing then. 
(emphasis added). 
Under the circumstances, we conclude De Costa's failure 
to consult with Delos Reyes about the circuit court's offer to 
give him time to apply for acceptance into a program was a specific error and omission reflecting De Costa's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence. Salavea, 147 
Hawai#i at 576, 465 P.3d at 
1023. Even if the scope of De Costa's retention did not include helping Delos Reyes apply to rehabilitation programs, he could have requested a continuance of the resentencing hearing and referred Delos Reyes to another attorney, or a non-profit, for help. Because the circuit court appeared willing to give Delos Reyes time to seek acceptance into a program, it is 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
possible that De Costa's error and omission substantially 
impaired Delos Reyes's potentially meritorious defense to the five-year prison term that was imposed. Id.
We conclude that Delos Reyes received ineffective 
assistance of counsel. We vacate the November 17, 2025 Order of Resentencing and remand for resentencing. 
In addition, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the appellate 
clerk shall transmit a copy of this order to the Office of Disciplinary Counsel (ODC) for investigation. 
In referring this 
matter to the ODC, we express no opinion about whether violations of the Hawai# i Rules of Professional Conduct have occurred. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 6, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
Jon N. Ikenaga, 
Seth Patek,Office of the Public Defender, for Defendant-AppellantTyler J Delos Reyes. 
Rebecca V. Like,
Prosecuting Attorney,Tracy Murakami,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Kauai,for Plaintiff-Appellee,State of Hawai# i. /s/ Keith K. HiraokaPresiding Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry
Associate Judge
5
 