 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000468
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
BRIAN L. STANTON, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(SPP NO. 11-1-0044 (CR NO. 08-1-1801))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
  
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Brian L. Stanton (Stanton) filed a 
"Petition for Post-Conviction Relief" (Petition) pursuant to 
Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 (2006). In his 
Petition, Stanton alleged that his trial counsel provided ineffective assistance and that the cumulative effect of errors by the trial court and misconduct by the prosecutor deprived him of a fair trial. On April 13, 2012, the Circuit Court of the 
1
First Circuit (Circuit Court)  issued its "Findings of Fact,
Conclusions of Law[,] and Order Denying Petition for Post
 Conviction Relief (Rule 40, HRPP)" (Order Denying Petition). 
The
 
Circuit Court denied the Petition without a hearing, ruling that
 Stanton had waived the issues raised in his Petition. 
1
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As explained below, we vacate in part and affirm in
 
part the Order Denying Petition, and we remand the case for
 
further proceedings. 
I.
 
In his underlying criminal case, Stanton was convicted 
of attempted first-degree sexual assault of the Complainant, who was a prostitute. Stanton was sentenced to an indeterminate twenty-year term of imprisonment. Stanton filed a direct appeal of his judgment of conviction and sentence (Judgment). Stanton was represented by the Office of the Public Defender, State of Hawai'i (Public Defender's Office), both at trial and on direct 
appeal, and he did not raise a claim of ineffective assistance of trial counsel on direct appeal. On December 20, 2010, this court affirmed the trial court's Judgment. State v. Stanton, No. 
29971, 2010 WL 5146281 (Hawai' i App. Dec. 20, 2010) (SDO). 
Stanton filed an application for writ of certiorari of this court's decision. On May 26, 2011, the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
rejected Stanton's application for writ of certiorari. State v. 
Stanton, No. SCWC-29971, 2011 WL 2132310 (Hawai' i May 26, 2011). 
On March 1, 2011, while his direct appeal was still
 
pending, Stanton filed a "Petition for Post-Conviction Relief" in
 S.P.P. No. 11-1-0013 (Prior Petition), in which he challenged the actions of the Hawai' i Paroling Authority (HPA) in setting his 
minimum term of imprisonment. The Circuit Court denied Stanton's Prior Petition by order filed on June 20, 2011. Stanton appealed and on March 29, 2012, this court affirmed the Circuit Court's denial of the Prior Petition. Stanton v. State, No. CAAP-11­
0000520, 2012 WL 1071484 (Hawai' i App. March 29, 2012) (SDO). 
On August 8, 2011, Stanton filed the instant Petition
 
that is the subject of this appeal. In his Petition, Stanton
 alleged that his trial counsel had provided ineffective
 assistance by: (1) failing to object to portions of Detective
 Sato's testimony regarding prostitution practices as improper
 opinion testimony; (2) failing to rebut the Complainant's
 testimony by referring to trial and other evidence that was
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
inconsistent with Complainant's version of the sexual assault and
 
her injuries; (3) failing to introduce evidence of Complainant's
 prior bad acts that would have cast doubt on her credibility; and
 (4) failing to object to improper remarks made by the prosecutor
 in closing argument. In addition to his claims of ineffective
 assistance of trial counsel, Stanton asserted that the cumulative
 effect of errors made by the trial court and misconduct by the
 prosecutor deprived him of the right to a fair trial.
 
Respondent-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) filed an 
answer to the Petition. In its answer, the State argued that Stanton's Petition should be denied pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of 
2
Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40(a)(3) (2006)  because the issues
Stanton sought to raise had previously been ruled upon or were
 waived. 
The State asserted that: (1) Stanton had previously
 
litigated many of the issues he raised in his Petition in the
 underlying criminal case; (2) Stanton failed to raise any
 remaining issues in the Prior Petition; and (3) Stanton failed to
 establish extraordinary circumstances to justify his failure to
 previously raise the issues presented in the Petition. With
 respect to the merits of Stanton's ineffective assistance of
 counsel claim, the State submitted a declaration from Stanton's
 trial counsel, in which counsel contested Stanton's contention
 that counsel had provided ineffective assistance. 
The Circuit Court denied Stanton's Petition without a
 
hearing. The Circuit Court did not rule on the merits of
 
2
 HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) provides:
 
(3) INAPPLICABILITY. Rule 40 proceedings shall not be
available and relief thereunder shall not be granted where the
issues sought to be raised have been previously ruled upon or were
waived. Except for a claim of illegal sentence, an issue is
waived if the petitioner knowingly and understandingly failed to
raise it and it could have been raised before the trial, at the
trial, on appeal, in a habeas corpus proceeding or any other
proceeding actually conducted, or in a prior proceeding actually
initiated under this rule, and the petitioner is unable to prove
the existence of extraordinary circumstances to justify the
petitioner's failure to raise the issue. There is a rebuttable
 presumption that a failure to appeal a ruling or to raise an issue
is a knowing and understanding failure.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Stanton's claims, but denied the Petition based on HRPP Rule
 
40(a)(3). With respect to Stanton's claims of ineffective
 assistance of trial counsel, the Circuit Court ruled that Stanton
 had waived the issue by not raising it on direct appeal and in
 his Prior Petition. With respect to Stanton's claim of
 cumulative errors, the Circuit Court ruled that Stanton had
 raised many of the cumulative errors on direct appeal and had
 waived any remaining errors by not raising them in the Prior
 Petition.
 
II.
 
On appeal, Stanton argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
in concluding that he waived his right to raise the issues
 presented in his Petition and in denying his Petition without a
 hearing. We conclude that the Circuit Court erred in denying
 Stanton's claims of ineffective assistance of trial counsel based
 on the ground of waiver. Stanton's claim of ineffective
 assistance for failure to object to the prosecutor's improper
 remarks in closing argument, however, was properly denied because
 the underlying allegations of prosecutorial misconduct were
 raised and ruled upon in Stanton's direct appeal. We therefore
 affirm the Circuit Court's denial of that ineffective assistance
 of counsel claim, albeit on a different ground than relied upon
 by the Circuit Court. Apart from Stanton's claims of ineffective
 assistance, we conclude that the other errors asserted by Stanton
 had previously been ruled upon or were waived and were properly
 denied by the Circuit Court.
 
A. 
HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) requires the denial of a petition
 
brought pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 "where the issues sought to be
 raised have been previously ruled upon or were waived." Under
 HRPP Rule 40(a)(3), 
an issue is waived if the petitioner knowingly and
understandingly failed to raise it and it could have been
raised before the trial, at the trial, on appeal, in a
habeas corpus proceeding or any other proceeding actually
conducted, or in a prior proceeding actually initiated under
this rule, and the petitioner is unable to prove the
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
existence of extraordinary circumstances to justify the
petitioner's failure to raise the issue.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
The Circuit Court ruled that pursuant to HRPP Rule
 
40(a)(3), Stanton waived the issue of ineffective assistance of
 
trial counsel because he could have, but failed to, raise the
 issue on direct appeal and in his Prior Petition. The Circuit
 Court erred in this ruling.
 
As the State acknowledges in its answering brief,
 
because Stanton was represented by the Public Defender's Office
 both at trial and on direct appeal, Stanton did not have a
 realistic opportunity to raise the issue of ineffective
 assistance of trial counsel on direct appeal. See Briones v.
 
State, 74 Haw. 442, 459-60, 848 P.2d 966, 975 (1993) (concluding
 that where the petitioner has the same counsel both at trial and
 on direct appeal, the petitioner does not have a realistic
 opportunity to raise the issue of ineffective assistance of trial
 counsel and does not waive the issue by failing to raise it on
 direct appeal). Accordingly, the Circuit Court erred in
 concluding that Stanton waived the issue by failing to raise it
 on direct appeal.
 
We also conclude that the Circuit Court erred in
 
concluding that Stanton waived the issue of ineffective
 assistance of trial counsel by failing to raise it in the Prior
 
3
Petition. HRPP Rule 40(a)(1) and (a)(2)  authorize a petition to
3
 HRPP Rule 40(a)(1) and (a)(2) provide:
 
(a) Proceedings and grounds. The post-conviction proceeding
established by this rule shall encompass all common law and
statutory procedures for the same purpose, including habeas corpus
and coram nobis; provided that the foregoing shall not be
construed to limit the availability of remedies in the trial court
or on direct appeal. Said proceeding shall be applicable to
judgments of conviction and to custody based on judgments of
conviction, as follows:
 
(1) FROM JUDGMENT. At any time but not prior to final
judgment, any person may seek relief under the procedure set forth
in this rule from the judgment of conviction, on the following
(continued...)
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
be filed seeking relief from a judgment (HRPP Rule 40(a)(1)) and
 
from custody (HRPP Rule 40(a)(2)). HRPP Rule 40(a)(1) imposes
 limits on the filing of a petition while the direct appeal from a
 judgment is pending. HRPP Rule 40(a)(1) provides that where the
 defendant files a direct appeal from a judgment, an HRPP Rule 40
 petition seeking relief from the judgment cannot be filed until
 the appellate process has terminated, unless the appellate court
 grants leave to file such a petition during the pendency of the
 direct appeal. 
Under HRPP Rule 40(a)(2), there is no similar
 
limitation on the filing of petition seeking relief from custody. 
Stanton's Prior Petition, which challenged the actions of the HPA
 in setting his minimum term of imprisonment, was filed pursuant
 
3(...continued)
grounds:
 
(i) that the judgment was obtained or sentence imposed
in violation of the constitution of the United States or of 
the State of Hawai' i; 
(ii) that the court which rendered the judgment was
without jurisdiction over the person or the subject matter; 
(iii) that the sentence is illegal; 
(iv) that there is newly discovered evidence; or 
(v) any ground which is a basis for collateral attack
on the judgment. 
For the purposes of this rule, a judgment is final when the
time for direct appeal under Rule 4(b) of the Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure has expired without appeal being taken, or if
direct appeal was taken, when the appellate process has
terminated, provided that a petition under this rule seeking
relief from judgment may be filed during the pendency of direct
appeal if leave is granted by order of the appellate court.
 
(2) FROM CUSTODY. Any person may seek relief under the
procedure set forth in this rule from custody based upon a
judgment of conviction, on the following grounds:
 
(i) that sentence was fully served; 
(ii) that parole or probation was unlawfully revoked;
 
or 
(iii) any other ground making the custody, though not
the judgment, illegal. 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to HRPP Rule 40(a)(2)(iii), which authorizes a petition seeking 
relief from custody on "any other ground making the custody, through not the judgment, illegal." See Williamson v. Hawai' i 
Paroling Auth., 97 Hawai' i 156, 157-58, 34 P.3d 1055, 1056-57 
(App. 2000) (holding that a petition under HRPP Rule 40(a)(2)(iii) is an appropriate means to challenge a minimum term of imprisonment set by the HPA), rev'd on other grounds, 97 Hawai'i 183, 35 P.3d 210 (2001). When Stanton filed his Prior 
Petition, his direct appeal from the trial court's judgment was still pending, and therefore, he could not have raised the issue of ineffective assistance of trial counsel in the Prior Petition absent leave of the appellate court.
4 Accordingly, the Circuit 
Court erred in concluding that Stanton could have raised the issue of ineffective assistance of trial counsel in the Prior Petition and that he waived the issue by failing to raise it in his Prior Petition. 
Although the Circuit Court erroneously relied on waiver
 
in denying Stanton's claims of ineffective assistance of trial
 counsel, we affirm the denial of his claim that his trial counsel
 provided ineffective assistance by failing to object to improper
 remarks made by the prosecutor in closing argument. Stanton
 raised the underlying allegations of prosecutorial misconduct in
 his direct appeal, and this court concluded that the prosecutor's
 remarks did not affect Stanton's substantial rights. See State
 
v. Stanton, No. 29971, 2010 WL 5146281, at *2-3. This court's
 previous ruling on the issue of prosecutorial misconduct in
 Stanton's direct appeal precludes Stanton's claim of ineffective
 assistance based on his trial counsel failure to object to the
 prosecutor's remarks. 
4
 Stanton filed his Prior Petition on March 1, 2011, whereas the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court did not issue its decision rejecting Stanton's application for
writ of certiorari of this court's decision on direct appeal until May 26,2011. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Stanton's other claims of ineffective assistance are
 
that trial counsel provided ineffective assistance by: (1)
 
failing to object to portions of Detective Sato's testimony
 regarding prostitution practices as improper opinion testimony;
 (2) failing to rebut the Complainant's testimony by referring to
 trial and other evidence that was inconsistent with Complainant's
 version of the sexual assault and her injuries; and (3) failing
 to introduce evidence of Complainant's prior bad acts that would
 have cast doubt on her credibility. As to these claims of
 ineffective assistance of trial counsel, the issues underlying
 these claims were not previously ruled upon. We therefore vacate
 the Circuit Court's denial of these three claims on the ground of
 wavier and remand for further proceedings. 
B.
 
In addition to his claims of ineffective assistance of
 
trial counsel, Stanton asserted in his Petition that the
 cumulative effect of errors made by the trial court and
 misconduct by the prosecutor deprived him of the right to a fair
 trial. Certain of the cumulative errors asserted by Stanton in
 his Petition, including issues concerning prosecutorial
 misconduct in closing argument and the improper admission of
 rebuttal evidence, were raised and ruled upon in Stanton's direct
 appeal. Moreover, unlike Stanton's claims of ineffective
 assistance of trial counsel, Stanton had the opportunity to raise
 his claims of trial court error and prosecutorial misconduct in
 his direct appeal. Stanton has not shown the existence of
 extraordinary circumstances to justify his failure to raise all
 his claims of trial error and prosecutorial misconduct in his
 direct appeal. Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 properly rejected all of the other issues (besides ineffective
 assistance of trial counsel) raised by Stanton in his Petition as
 having been previously ruled upon or waived. See HRPP Rule
 
40(a)(3). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate in part and affirm
 
in part the Circuit Court's Order Denying Petition, and we remand
 
the case for further proceedings consistent with this Summary
 Disposition Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 28, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Brian L. Stanton
 
Petitioner-Appellant Pro Se
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Loren J. Thomas
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Respondent-Appellee 
9
 