NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-14-0000737
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
DERRICK SMITH, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P. NO. 10-1-0007 (FC-CR NO. 03-1-0027))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Derrick Smith (Smith) was 
convicted in 2004 of second-degree murder of his infant son. In 
2010, Smith sought post-conviction relief pursuant to Hawai 'i 
Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 (2006). After Smith was appointed counsel for the HRPP Rule 40 proceeding, Smith clarified that his HRPP Rule 40 petition sought relief on the sole claim of ineffective assistance of his trial counsel. In particular, Smith asserted that his trial counsel provided ineffective assistance in failing to call an expert to contradict the medical examiner's testimony that fatal-accident falls are extremely rare for children due to their more pliable/resilient skulls. After holding a hearing, at which Smith's trial counsel testified, the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit 
1
Court) denied Smith's petition.  The Circuit Court concluded
 
1The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Smith had waived his claim of ineffective assistance of
 
counsel by failing to raise it in a federal habeas corpus
 petition he previously filed. It further ruled on the merits
 that Smith had failed to show that his trial counsel provided
 ineffective assistance. 
Smith appeals from the Circuit Court's "Findings of
 
Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Amended Rule 40 Post-
Conviction Relief Petition" (Order Denying Petition) filed by the
 Circuit Court on March 7, 2014. On appeal, Smith contends that
 the Circuit Court erred in concluding that: (1) he waived his
 claim of ineffective assistance of counsel by failing to raise it
 in his prior federal habeas corpus petition; and (2) his right to
 effective assistance of counsel was not violated. As explained
 below, we conclude that Smith failed to demonstrate that his
 trial counsel provided ineffective assistance, and we affirm the
 Order Denying Petition on that basis.
2
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
Respondent-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Smith with second-degree murder for intentionally or knowingly causing the death of his eight-week-old son, Kelbey. Smith was represented at trial by Deputy Public Defender Ronette Kawakami (DPD Kawakami). 
Smith was watching Kelbey alone when the baby sustained
 
fatal head injuries. Smith's defense was that he had accidently
 dropped the baby. The State presented evidence that Smith gave
 several different versions of how he claimed the baby had been
 injured. At trial, the State called Dr. Kanthi Von Guenthner
 (Dr. Guenthner), the Medical Examiner for the City and County of
 
2We note that Respondent-Appellee State of Hawai 'i concedes that 
the Circuit Court erred in concluding that Smith waived his
ineffective assistance of counsel claim by failing to raise it in hisfederal habeas corpus petition.  However, in light of our decisionthat the Circuit Court properly denied Smith's ineffective assistanceof counsel claim on the merits, we do not address the Circuit Court'sruling on waiver. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Honolulu.
 
Dr. Von Guenthner testified that in performing the
 
autopsy on the baby, she found a "constellation of injuries,"
 
including a fracture of the parietal bone on the top of the
 baby's head, a fracture of the right orbital bone, a torn nose,
 bruising to the right and left upper and lower eyelids, retinal
 hemorrhaging, and bruising to the chin, back, and shoulders. 
Dr. Von Guenthner opined that the baby died of "severe head
 injuries sustained as a result of abusive trauma which was non-
accidental." Dr. Von Guenther did not believe that the baby's
 injuries could be explained by a face first fall onto a hard
 surface from three or four feet. Dr. Von Guenthner based this
 opinion on the multiple different injuries observed on the baby
 and her experience that it was extremely rare for babies to die
 from that type of fall. Although acknowledging that she was not
 an expert in biomechanics and therefore did not "have the
 numbers," Dr. Von Guenthner explained that "[w]e don't see too
 many deaths" when babies fall because a baby's "skull is pliable
 and thin and can absorb force" and "is resilient."
 
DPD Kawakami, Smith's trial counsel, sought to cross-
examine Dr. Von Guenthner with information contained in an
 article published in a medical journal that was authored by Dr.
 John Plunkett (Dr. Plunkett), which disagreed with the prevailing
 view that short-distance falls do not result in fatal injuries to
 children. The State moved in limine to preclude such cross-
examination, arguing that the proper way to get the information
 in the article before the jury was to call the author of the
 article. In response, DPD Kawakami argued: "Sure, in a perfect
 world, yeah, we could fly Dr. Plunkett in from Pennsylvania; but
 this is not a perfect world, and we can't do that." DPD Kawakami
 also argued:
 
If the Court is disinclined to allow [the cross-
examination requested by the defense], then we're going to
ask for a recess of the trial so that we could ask the Court
 to fund bringing in a mainland witness because we do not
have the funds to bring in a mainland witness like this. 
 I
 
don't even know if he will come. But the witnesses here
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
would not -- there's no one here with this kind of 
expertise, not in Hawai' i. 
The Circuit Court granted the State's motion in limine and
 
precluded Smith from cross-examining Dr. Von Guenthner about Dr.
 Plunkett's article.
 
The jury found Smith guilty as charged of second-degree
 
murder. The Circuit Court sentenced Smith to life imprisonment
 with the possibility of parole and also imposed a mandatory
 minimum term of fifteen years of imprisonment. 
II.
 
Smith, who continued to be represented by the Public 
Defender's Office, appealed his conviction. On March 28, 2006, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court issued a summary disposition order 
affirming Smith's conviction. Smith subsequently filed a federal habeas corpus petition. The petition was denied in 2007, and this denial was affirmed on appeal in 2008. 
III.
 
In 2010, Smith sought post-conviction relief pursuant
 
to HRPP Rule 40 in the Circuit Court. In support of his claim of
 ineffective assistance of trial counsel, Smith submitted two
 affidavits from Dr. Plunkett, a board certified pathologist, in
 which Dr. Plunkett stated, among other things that: (1) he
 reviewed materials provided by Smith's HRPP Rule 40 counsel,
 including the Medical Examiner's investigation and autopsy
 reports and Dr. Von Guenthner's trial testimony; and (2) based on
 his review of the materials, it was his opinion that (a) a
 closed-head injury caused Kelbey's death; (b) Kelbey had at least
 four scalp bruises, each indicating a separate impact; (c)
 accidentally dropping a pre-mobile infant from a height as little
 as 2-3 feet may cause a skull fracture and result in severe
 injury or death; (d) however, Kelbey did not have a single impact
 injury, but had three other scalp bruises as well as bruises on
 both sides of his posterior thorax, both arms, upper lip, and
 forehead; (e) while an accidental drop may have caused the left
 parietal impact and its sequale, none of the descriptions of the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
incident that Smith provided account for Kelbey's additional
 
injuries; (f) except for the parietal scalp contusion, Dr.
 Plunkett is unable to determine when the other bruises occurred
 because there are no slides showing the microscopic examination
 of these other bruises; and (g) the only way to determine
 accurately when these other bruises occurred is to examine them
 microscopically, and he considers the failure to examine
 microscopically any of the bruises other than the parietal scalp
 bruise to be "a departure from the standard of care." Dr.
 Plunkett also asserted that (1) Dr. Von Guenthner incorrectly
 testified that more force is necessary to fracture the skull of
 an infant than that of an adult; (2) in 2003, his "opinion that
 children could suffer fatal injuries in short-distance,
 accidental falls was a 'minority opinion' that was not the
 prevailing view"; and (3) he did not recall being contacted by
 Smith's trial counsel.
 
At a hearing on Smith's HRPP Rule 40 petition, DPD
 
3
Kawakami  testified that the defense theory at trial was that
Smith had accidentally dropped the baby. 
Smith informed DPD
 
Kawakami that he did not believe that anyone else, such as his
 girlfriend (Kelbey's mother), could have caused the baby's
 injuries, and DPD Kawakami did not have any evidence that someone
 besides Smith had caused the baby's death. Smith had provided
 three different versions of what had happened: (1) he was
 carrying the baby like a football, when the baby slipped out of
 his hand and fell to the floor, hitting the baby's head; (2) the
 baby fell out of Smith's hand, hit Smith's knee, then hit the
 floor; and (3) the baby hit a doorknob as Smith was walking.
 
DPD Kawakami testified that in preparing for trial, the 
defense looked for a medical examiner expert that could help with Smith's case, but could not find one in Hawai
'i. DPD Kawakami 
was assisted by Alen Kaneshiro (Kaneshiro), who at that time was 
3By the time the HRPP Rule 40 hearing was held, Ms. Kawakami no longer
worked at the Public Defender's Office. However, for simplicity, we will
continue to refer to her as "DPD Kawakami."
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
an intern with the Public Defender's Office. The defense used
 
the internet to search for a mainland expert. In scouring sites
 that had medical journals and articles, they came across and
 obtained an article written by Dr. Plunkett. DPD Kawakami
 testified that a problem, however, with Dr. Plunkett's article
 was that it had not been peer reviewed, which raised questions
 about its reliability.
4
 
DPD Kawakami testified that she had several concerns
 
about calling Dr. Plunkett as witness for the defense, including:
 (1) his article was not peer reviewed; (2) her research revealed
 that his opinion regarding whether a short-distance fall could
 case a baby's death was distinctly a minority view; and (3) if
 the defense called Dr. Plunkett as an expert witness, the State
 could cross-examine him on the different versions Smith had given
 on how the baby had been injured, which "would have hurt us and
 would have looked pretty bad." DPD Kawakami was particularly
 concerned about the risk that calling Dr. Plunkett as an expert
 witness would have a negative impact on Smith's case because she
 believed they had enough evidence to mount a credible defense. 
She explained that Smith was tall, which would increase the
 distance of the baby's fall, and there was substantial evidence
 negating criminal intent, including that Smith called 911 to
 report that the baby was unresponsive, he was performing CPR on
 the baby when the paramedics arrived, and Smith had been the
 person able to soothe the baby in the past. DPD Kawakami further
 explained that if she designated Dr. Plunkett as an expert
 witness, the State could interview him and discover information
 that could help the State's case and hurt Smith.
 
When asked whether "financial reasons or cost [was]
 
4Dr. Plunkett asserted in an affidavit submitted after DPD Kawakami had
 
testified at the HRPP Rule 40 hearing that two articles he published in 1999
and 2001 in the American Journal of Forensic Medicine and Pathology had been
peer reviewed by the editors of the journal. However, in her argument on the
State's motion in limine at Smith's trial, DPD Kawakami referred to an article
written by Dr. Plunkett that was dated June 2004. The parties do not clarify
whether the article DPD Kawakami referred to in her testimony at the HRPP Rule
40 hearing was one of the articles Dr. Plunkett referred to in his affidavit.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ever an issue in terms of calling Dr. Plunkett as a witness at
 
trial[,]" DPD Kawakami responded:
 
Financial issues, if we had or -- and let me explain.
The deputy public defender's office of course has limited
resources, unquestionably. However, if we need an expert
and the expert was someone who was going to be completely
beneficial to us, we would pay for it, and we have done it
in the past, spent large amounts of moneys for experts, but
it was only where experts, we knew that their testimony
would be solid, their testimony would be helpful. If the
 testimony would have been wishy-washy and we were unsure
whether it would actually be helpful, then it would not make
sense to expend that kind of money. In fact, that expert
[(Dr. Plunkett)] might hurt the case, and we didn't want
that.
 
IV.
 
The Circuit Court denied Smith's HRPP Rule 40 petition. 
With respect to the merits of Smith's claim that his trial
 
counsel had failed to provide effective assistance, the Circuit
 Court made the following pertinent findings of fact and
 conclusions of law:
 
I. Findings of Fact
 
1. In June 2004, this Court presided over a jury
trial in FC-CR 03-1-0027, wherein Petitioner Derrick Smith
("Petitioner") was charged with the offense of Murder in the
Second Degree for the death of his 13-pound, eight-week-old
son, . . . ("Kelbey").
 
. . . .
 
5. In 2010, Petitioner filed the instant Petition.
He originally asserted various bases for the Petition, but
in January 2013, through counsel Reginald P. Minn, clarified
that he sought relief on one basis only: that he "was
rendered ineffective assistance of counsel by trial
counsel's failure to retain an expert to review the relevant
autopsy report, and to further provide expert testimony to
support petitioner's defense that any injury to the decedent
caused by Smith was the result of an accident or
negligence."
 
6. At trial, then-chief Honolulu Medical Examiner
Kanthi von Guenthner, who performed the autopsy on Kelbey,
testified that she found a fracture of the parietal bone on
the left top of Kelbey's head, which in turn caused a
"fresh" underlying hematoma; a fracture of the right orbital
bone; a torn nose, which Dr. von Guenthner said was
consistent with impact with a "sharp edge"; bruising to the
right and left upper and lower eyelids; retinal
hemorrhaging, which can be, but is not necessarily,
associated with abuse as opposed to other causes; and
bruising to the chin, back, and shoulders. Dr. von
 Guenthner testified that, based upon all of the
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circumstances and a "constellation of injuries" on Kelbey,
she believed that he died from severe head injuries
sustained as a result of abusive trauma which was non-
accidental. Dr. von Guenthner said that she did not
 believe, to a reasonable degree of medical probability, that
Kelbey's injuries could be explained by a single accidental
fall, or a single fall onto his face. However, Dr. von
Guenthner told the jury that a child can fall and sustain
"abusive head trauma" or retinal hemorrhaging, but she
believed these occasions were "rare."
 
7. Former State Deputy Public Defender Ronette
Kawakami ("Ms. Kawakami"), who represented Petitioner at
trial, cross-examined Dr. von Guenthner about her lack of
knowledge and failure to apply principles of biomechanics in
this case. Dr. von Guenthner appeared to agree with defense
counsel that there was a minority in the area of forensic
sciences who advocate the use of biomechanics when seeking
an accurate determination of a fatal fall. Dr. von
 Guenthner said she did not apply biomechanical principles in
this case but relied upon her "experience."
 
8. Petitioner gave authorities three versions of
what had happened to cause Kelbey to suffer injury. He told
 an emergency response person that he had been feeding Kelbey
when Kelbey fell onto the carpeted floor. Petitioner then
 told a police officer that he was carrying Kelbey when his
arm hit the door, causing Kelbey to fall to the floor.
Petitioner then said that his arm did not hit the door, but
that he was carrying Kelbey, who wriggled and fell face-
first from Petitioner's arm onto the floor.
 
9. Petitioner, through his current counsel,
Reginald P. Minn, offered sworn affidavits by Dr. John
Plunkett, a board-certified pathologist, who said that, if
called as a witness, he would have testified that the injury
to the left top of Kelbey's head caused Kelbey's death, and
that "dropping a pre-mobile infant from a height as little
as 2-3 feet may cause a skull fracture, subdural bleeding,
brain swelling . . . and . . . injury or death." Dr.
 Plunkett also said Kelbey had numerous bruises to different
parts of his body and that "none of the descriptions that
Mr. Smith gave to EMS and law enforcement account for these
additional injuries." Finally, Dr. Plunkett said that the
medical examiner should have prepared microscopic samples
from the various bruises because "(t)he only way to
determine accurately when these bruises occurred is to
examine them under the microscope." In his second
 affidavit, Dr. Plunkett said he would have testified that,
in 2003, his opinion that children could suffer fatal
injuries in short-distance, accidental falls was a
"'minority opinion' that was not the prevailing view."
 
10. In preparation for trial, Ms. Kawakami, with the
help of an intern, Alen Kaneshiro, reviewed discovery,
visited sites, interviewed key witnesses, and spoke with
Petitioner about the defenses he wanted asserted and to
 provide Ms. Kawakami with his perception of what had
happened. Ms. Kawakami spoke with Petitioner about whether
anyone else could have been responsible, but Petitioner did
not think it could have been Kelbey's mother. The defense's
 final trial theory was that Petitioner had dropped Kelbey
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
accidentally. There being no evidence to the contrary, Ms.
Kawakami searched for a former Hawai' i doctor who was 
alleged to have done some experimentation with fallingbabies, but found he had passed away. Ms. Kawakami searched the internet for medical articles about the defense theoryand isolated Dr. Plunkett. However, she found two problemswith Dr. Plunkett: 1) an article that would have beenhelpful was not peer reviewed and 2) Petitioner had offeredauthorities three different versions of what had happened,any of which Ms. Kawakami believed could provide materialfor cross-examination of her expert and his theory. Ms. Kawakami concluded that Dr. Plunkett appeared to standalone, or at least in the minority, in his theory, and thatothers supported Dr. von Guenthner's theory. Ms. Kawakami further testified that, if Dr. Plunkett could be "completelybeneficial" to the defense, her office would have funded hisappearance as a witness, but that, here, Dr. Plunkett maywell have helped, as well as hurt, the prosecution. 
II. Conclusions of Law
 
1. In order to succeed on a claim of ineffective 
assistance of counsel, the court looks at whether defensecounsel's assistance was "within the range of competence
demanded of attorneys in criminal cases." State v. 
Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i 504, 514 (2003). Petitioner bears the 
burden of showing that "there were specific errors or
omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, ordiligence" and that "such errors or omissions resulted ineither the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a
potentially meritorious defense." Id. at 516. To satisfy
the second prong, Petitioner only need show a possible
impairment of a potentially meritorious defense, not
probable impairment or actual prejudice. Id. 
2. Generally, the decision whether to call
witnesses in a criminal case normally is a matter within the
judgment of counsel and so will rarely be second-guessed by
judicial hindsight. State v. Richie, 88 Hawai'i 19, 40, 960
P.2d 1227, 1248 (1998).
 
. . . .
 
5. . . . [W]ith the help of her intern Alen
Kaneshiro, Ms. Kawakami had reviewed all discovery,
interviewed witnesses, and talked with her client about what
happened, who may be responsible, and what defenses
Petitioner wanted to assert. Ms. Kawakami searched for an
 expert who might support the defense's theory of the case -­that Petitioner had dropped the baby by accident -- and
found and investigated Dr. Plunkett. Because of potential
reliability questions about his theory and because the
prosecution could challenge his theory on cross-examination
with Petitioner's three different versions of what happened,
Ms. Kawakami decided not to summon Dr. Plunkett as a
 witness. On the record and these facts, the Court concludes
that Ms. Kawakami's assistance was within the range of
competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases, and that
Petitioner has not shown the existence of any specific
errors or omissions reflecting Ms. Kawakami's lack of skill,
judgment, or diligence.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
6. Moreover, both the State and defense put before
the jury the possibility that babies can fall accidentally
and sustain abusive head trauma and/or retinal hemorrhaging,
and that Dr. von Guenthner knew little to nothing about
biomechanical principles as applied to such cases.
 
(Some ellipsis points in original.)
 
DISCUSSION
 
Smith argues that the Circuit Court erred in rejecting
 
his claim that his trial counsel provided ineffective assistance.
 
Smith's argument is without merit. 
To prevail on a claim of ineffective assistance of 
counsel, a defendant bears the burden of establishing: "1) that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." State v. 
Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998) (block 
quote format and citation omitted). We conclude that Smith has failed to meet this burden. 
Whether to call a witness "is generally a strategic 
decision for defense counsel." Id. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court 
has held that "matters presumably within the judgment of counsel, like trial strategy, [including the decision on whether to call a witness,] will rarely be second-guessed by judicial hindsight." Id. at 39-40, 960 P.2d 1247-48 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted); State v. McNulty, 60 Haw. 259, 270, 588 P.2d 438, 446 (1978) ("[T]he decision of whether or not to call a witness in a criminal trial is normally a matter within the judgment of counsel and, accordingly, will rarely be second guessed by judicial hindsight."); see Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 442, 463, 848 P.2d 966, 976 (1993) (stating that actions or omissions of counsel that had "an obvious tactical basis for benefitting the defendant's case will not be subject to further scrutiny"). 
Here, the record shows that DPD Kawakami, Smith's trial
 
counsel, researched and investigated the possibility of obtaining 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
an expert witness to assist the defense. After discovering Dr.
 
Plunkett's article, DPD Kawakami considered and weighed the
 positive and negative impact that retaining and calling Dr.
 Plunkett as an expert witness could have on Smith's case. At
 Smith's HRPP Rule 40 hearing, DPD Kawakami explained why she made
 the decision not to retain and call Dr. Plunkett as an expert
 witness: (1) Dr. Plunkett's article, which would have been
 
5
helpful, had not been peer reviewed;  (2) Dr. Plunkett's opinion
was distinctly a minority view; (3) the State, through its cross-

examination of Dr. Plunkett, would have been able to emphasize
 Smith's differing versions of how the baby had been injured,
 which would have hurt Smith's case; (4) the State may have
 discovered information through Dr. Plunkett that would have
 bolstered its case; and (5) DPD Kawakami believed they had enough
 evidence to mount a credible defense and calling Dr. Plunkett
 could have weakened Smith's case. 
We conclude that DPD Kawakami made an informed and 
strategic decision not to retain and call Dr. Plunkett as an expert witness. 
Her decision fell within "the range of 
competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases" and did not indicate any "lack of skill, judgment, or diligence" on her part. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i at 39, 960 P.2d at 1247 (internal quotation 
marks and citations omitted). We decline to second-guess her judgment that calling Dr. Plunkett may have adversely affected Smith's defense, and we conclude that the Circuit Court properly rejected Smith's claim of ineffective assistance of trial counsel. 
5There is an apparent disagreement over whether Dr. Plunkett's article
had been peer reviewed. See note 4, supra. This apparent disagreement is not
material to our analysis of Smith's ineffective assistance of counsel claim.
Regardless of whether Dr. Plunkett's article had been peer reviewed, he
acknowledged that his opinion was a minority opinion and not the prevailing
view at the time of Smith's trial. Moreover, in this appeal, Smith does not
refer to Dr. Plunkett's assertion that his articles had been peer reviewed in
arguing his ineffective assistance of counsel claim. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CONCLUSIONS
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Order Denying
 
Petition.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, April 30, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Reginald P. Minn 
for Petitioner-Appellant
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Stephen K. Tsushima

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu for Respondent-Appellee
 
12
 