 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000155
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JIMMY ROBINSON, JR., Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-1014)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Jimmy Robinson, Jr., (Robinson)
 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction for Robbery in the First

 
Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 708-840
 
(Supp. 2012) entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (Circuit Court) on November 28, 2012.
1
 
On appeal, Robinson argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
because: (1) it did not properly instruct the jury; (2) it did
 not grant Robinson's motion for judgment of acquittal; and (3) it
 did not sentence Robinson as a young adult defendant.
2
 
1
 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.
 
2
 Robinson's Opening Brief fails to conform to Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28. Specifically, within his Statement of the
Points of Error Robinson fails to state where in the record the alleged errorsoccurred and where these errors were brought to the attention of the court.See HRAP Rule 28(b)(4). 
Further, Robinson's Opening Brief also fails to adequately argue
his second and third asserted points of error. A party is required to present
argument "with citations to the authorities, statutes and parts of the record
relied on." HRAP 28(b)(7). Robinson fails to substantiate his second
 asserted point of error with any references to the record on appeal. Robinson
 fails to substantiate his third asserted point of error with references to
specific instances of the court's alleged abuse within the record on appeal.
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Based on a careful review of the points raised and the
 
arguments made by the parties, the record, and the applicable
 
authority, we resolve Robinson's points on appeal as follows and
 affirm. 
1. Robinson argues that the Circuit Court's jury
 
instructions were prejudicial to the extent that (1) the Circuit
 Court did not specifically instruct the jury that returning a 

 
guilty verdict for the crime of Robbery in the First Degree under
 a theory of accomplice liability requires that the prosecution
 prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Robinson knew that Nofoa
 possessed a gun; and (2) the Circuit Court did not adequately
 explain the lesser included charge of Theft in the Fourth Degree
 because it did not tell the jury to consider the lesser included
 charge if the jury found that Robinson did not possess a weapon.
 
a. The jury instruction for Robbery in the First
 
Degree was not erroneous or insufficient. 
When jury instructions or the omission thereof are at
issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when
read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
misleading. Erroneous instructions are presumptively
harmful and are a ground for reversal unless it
affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the
error was not prejudicial. However, error is not to be
viewed in isolation and considered purely in the abstract.
It must be examined in the light of the entire proceedings
and given the effect which the whole record shows it to be
entitled. In that context, the real question becomes
whether there is a reasonable possibility that error might
have contributed to conviction. If there is such a
 reasonable possibility in a criminal case, then the error is
not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, and the judgment of
conviction on which it may have been based must be set
aside.
 
State v. Pond, 118 Hawai 'i 452, 461-62, 193 P.3d 368, 377-78 
(2008) (quoting State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai 'i 327, 334, 141 P.3d 
974, 981 (2006)) (brackets omitted). The jury was instructed,
 
2(...continued)
Robinson's third asserted point of error makes only conclusory assertions
accompanied by broad statements of law.
 
However, in light of this court's preference for deciding cases on
the merits, In re Blaisdell, 125 Hawai' i 44, 51, 252 P.3d 63, 70 (2011)
(noting the Hawaii Supreme Court's consistent "policy of affording litigants
the opportunity to have their cases heard on the merits, where possible."), we
consider Robinson's points of error despite these deficiencies.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
inter alia, that it must take all the instructions as a whole and
 
to consider each in light of the others and must separately
 consider the evidence applicable to each defendant. The jury was
 also given the definition of the intentional state of mind; was
 instructed on the elements of the sole charged offense of Robbery
 in the First Degree, which required inter alia findings by the
 jury that Robinson possessed a weapon in the course of a theft
 and that Robinson used that weapon to threaten Saronitman; and
 was instructed that, to find Robinson guilty as an accomplice,
 the jury must find "with the intent to promote or facilitate the
 commission of the offense, he . . . [a]id[ed] or agree[d] or
 attempt[ed] to aid the other person in the planning or commission
 of the offense[.]" Taken together, these instructions
 sufficiently apprised the jury that they could find Robinson
 guilty of Robbery in the First Degree if they found he aided
 another person in the planning or commission of that offense,
 which was defined as committing a theft while in possession of a
 dangerous weapon. 
b. The jury instruction on Theft in the Fourth Degree
 
was not erroneous or insufficient. Robinson argues that the
 instruction was insufficient because the court did not tell the
 jury to consider this lesser included offense if the jury found
 that Robinson did not possess a weapon. Robinson argues that a
 "simple interrogatory could have been placed or more aptly
 explained . . . the lesser included [charge]." However, the
 instruction clearly noted that the lesser included offense of
 Theft in the Fourth Degree was to be considered "if, and only if"
 the jury found Robinson "not guilty of Robbery in the First
 Degree" or if the jury was "unable to reach a unanimous
 verdict[.]" Robinson presents no authority for the proposition
 that, in addition to an instruction telling the jury it must find
 all elements of the charged offense before entering a guilty
 verdict on that offense, the jury must also be instructed that if
 it does not find a particular element of that charged offense
 occurred, it should consider the lesser offense.
 
Robinson's first point of error is without merit.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. Robinson argues that the Circuit Court erred when 
it denied his August 2, 2012 motion for judgment of acquittal 
because "there was an insufficient basis for the jury finding guilt of robbery" because "there was no evidence of Robinson having used a firearm in the commission of the offense." Robinson has waived review of his motion for judgment of acquittal at the end of the State's case-in-chief as he presented evidence in his own defense and did not renew his motion thereafter. State v. Elliston, 118 Hawai
'i 319, 188 P.3d 833, 
No. 28453 2008 WL 2781017 at *1 (App. July 18, 2008) (SDO) (citing State v. Rodrigues, 6 Haw. App. 580, 580, 733 P.2d 1222, 1222 (1987)). 
However, we will review the evidence presented at trial 
for sufficiency. Considering the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 33, 960 
P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998), it is clear that substantial evidence supporting the verdict was adduced at trial. The testimony of the State's witnesses, in addition to the video evidence, was "credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion" that co-defendant Jacob Nofoa's use of a firearm to intercept the convenience store's cashier in her attempt to stop Robinson and co-defendant Upu Vai from leaving the store with the unpaid-for beer had been contemplated by defendants. Richie, 88 
Hawai
'i at 33, 960 P.2d at 1241. Among other things, the 
surveillance video shows that while interacting with Robinson in the store, Nofoa is holding an object under his shirt (subsequently revealed to be a gun), which Nofoa later pulls out and points at the cashier, just as Robinson and Vai are quickly walking past him carrying cases of beer on their way out of the store. The jury, as the trier of fact, was free to take the circumstances leading up to the robbery and the manner in which the individuals conducted themselves as circumstantially establishing that Robinson knew the firearm would be used during 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the robbery and to reject Robinson's testimony denying that he
 
had such knowledge. 
Robinson's second asserted point of error is without
 
merit. 
3. The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion by
 
declining to sentence Robinson as a "Young Adult Defendant." HRS
 ยง 706-667 (Supp. 2013) provides that a "young adult defendant"
 may be sentenced to eight years rather than twenty years of
 incarceration for a class A felony such as Robbery in the First
 Degree, if "the court is of the opinion that such special term is
 adequate for the young adult defendant's correction and
 rehabilitation and will not jeopardize the protection of the
 public." Id. At the time of the commission of the robbery,
 
Robinson was less than twenty-two years old and therefore was
 eligible as a young adult defendant.
 
The Circuit Court, however, was not required to treat 
Robinson as a young adult defendant. While "[a] sentencing court must consider all sentencing options[ and] the trial court would be well advised to state clearly on the record that the alternative sentencing options were considered[,]" State v. 
Hussein, 122 Hawai
'i 495, 500-01, 229 P.3d 313, 318-19 (2010) 
(citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted), "[t]he authority of a trial court to select and determine the severity of a penalty is normally undisturbed on review in the absence of an apparent abuse of discretion or unless applicable statutory or constitutional commands have not been observed." State v. Davia, 87 Hawai
'i 249, 253, 953 P.2d 1347, 1351 (1998) 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). "Generally, to constitute an abuse it must appear that the court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Keawe v. State, 79 Hawai
'i 281, 284, 901 P.2d 481, 
484 (1995) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
The Circuit Court explained on the record its reasoning
 
for denying young adult defendant sentencing treatment to
 Robinson: Robinson was previously arrested for attempted murder
 in the second degree but pled to a reduced charge of assault in
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the third degree; was "given ten months and restitution of over
 
$7,000" because he "failed to report[,]" and had a number of
 outstanding alleged violations with OCCC through March 2011. On
 this record, we cannot conclude that the Circuit Court abused its
 discretion.
 
Based upon the foregoing, the November 28, 2012
 
Judgment of Conviction entered by the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 31, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Richard D. Gronna,

for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Stephen K. Tsushima,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
6
 