FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--–
 
HUI MAKA 'AINANA A KALAWAHINE, Appellant-Appellee,
vs. 
HAWAIIAN HOMES COMMISSION; JOBIE M.K. MASAGATANI,
in her capacity as Chairperson of the Hawaiian Homes
Commission and the Director of the Department of
Hawaiian Home Lands; WILLIAM K AHELE RICHARDSON,
MICHAEL P. KAHIKINA, RENWICK V.I. TASSILL,
DOREEN N APUA CANTO, GENE ROSS DAVIS, KATHLEEN PUAMAE 'OLE CHIN,
1
WALLACE A. ISHIBASHI, and DAVID B. KA 'APU , in their capacities
as members of the Hawaiian Homes Commission; and
the DEPARTMENT OF HAWAIIAN HOME LANDS,
Appellees-Appellants
 
CAAP-11-0000377
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-1855-09)
 
DECEMBER 22, 2015
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.

 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
INTRODUCTION
 
I.

 
The Kalawahine Streamside Project (Kalawahine Project)
 
is a planned residential homestead community located on lands
 
1
Pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 43(c)(1) (2010),
the current Chairperson and members of the Hawaiian Homes Commission have been
substituted as parties for the former Chairperson and members whom theysucceeded. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
owned by the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands (DHHL). The
 
Kalawahine Project involved the construction of approximately
 thirty-three single-family homes and fifty-four duplexes and also
 includes common areas for residents. The Kamehameha Investment
 Corporation (KIC), a private developer, developed the Kalawahine
 Project pursuant to an agreement with DHHL.
 
Qualified applicants on DHHL's waiting list entered
 
into a sales contract with KIC to purchase their residence and
 entered into a homestead lease agreement with DHHL for the
 underlying land. In their sales contract with KIC, Kalawahine
 Project residents agreed to be bound by the Kalawahine Project's
 Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (DCCRs). 
The Kalawahine Project residents also agreed to be bound by the
 DCCRs as part of their lease agreement with DHHL. The DCCRs
 imposed conditions and restrictions on the residents' use and
 occupancy of their residences and established a homeowners'
 association called the Kalawahine Streamside Association
 (Association), of which all beneficial owners of the leasehold
 interest in any residential lot were members, to manage, operate,
 and maintain the Kalawahine Project. 
Hui Maka
'ainana a Kalawahine (HM) is a non-profit 
community-based organization comprised of certain Kalawahine Project residents. Approximately five years after members of HM had purchased residences and acquired homestead leases from DHHL in the Kalawahine Project, HM and members of its board of directors filed a petition, and later an amended petition, with the Hawaiian Homes Commission (HHC). In their amended petition, the petitioners sought a declaratory ruling that the DCCRs are void because DHHL had incorporated them into the Kalawahine Project residential leases without first prescribing administrative rules. The petitioners asserted that Section 207.5 of the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, Act of July 9,
 
2
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2
1921 (HHCA)  required DHHL to prescribe rules before imposing the
DCCRs as conditions of the Kalawahine Project residential leases.
 
Following a contested case hearing, a hearings officer
 
rejected the petitioners' arguments. The hearings officer
 
recommended that the HHC rule that HHCA § 207.5 did not apply to
 the Kalawahine Project, that DHHL therefore was not required to
 prescribe rules before incorporating the DCCRs into the
 Kalawahine Project homestead leases, and that DHHL acted
 appropriately in incorporating the DCCRs into such leases. The
 HHC adopted the hearings officer's Findings of Fact, Conclusions
 of Law, and Recommended Decision and Order, denied the amended
 petition, and dismissed the matter. HM appealed to the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court). The Circuit Court
 reversed the HHC's decision and declared the DCCRs void.
 
II.
 
Appellees-Appellants the HHC, its Chairperson and
 
members, and DHHL (collectively, DHHL) appeal from the Final
 Judgment entered by the Circuit Court.
3 On appeal, DHHL argues
 
that the Circuit Court erred in concluding: (1) that HHCA 
4
§ 207.5  applies to the Kalawahine Project; and (2) that DHHL was
therefore required to comply with the rulemaking requirements of
 HHCA § 207.5 before incorporating the DCCRs into homestead leases
 granted to Kalawahine Project residents. DHHL contends that HHCA
 § 207.5 does not apply to the Kalawahine Project because the
 
2
The HHCA, Pub. L. 67–34, 42 Stat. 108, is reprinted in 1 Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) 261 (2009). Unless otherwise indicated, we will cite to the
HHCA as it appears in 1 HRS (2009).
 
3The Honorable Eden E. Hifo issued the orders at issue in this appeal
and the Honorable Virginia Lea Crandall issued the Final Judgment.
 
4
HHCA § 207.5 provides:
 
Housing development. The department is authorized to
develop and construct single-family and multifamily units for
housing native Hawaiians. The method of disposition, including
rentals, as well as the terms, conditions, covenants, and
restrictions as to the use and occupancy of such single-family and
multifamily units shall be prescribed by rules adopted by the
department pursuant to chapter 91.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Project was developed pursuant to HHCA § 220.5.5 DHHL further
 
contends that it properly issued the homestead leases for the
 
6
Kalawahine Project pursuant to HHCA § 207(a),  which DHHL asserts 
permits it, without promulgating rules, to impose conditions,
 
such as DCCRs, on residential lot leases. 
Accordingly, DHHL
 
argues that the DCCRs are valid and enforceable conditions of the
 homestead leases it issued for the Kalawahine Project.
 
DHHL notes that if HM is correct that HHCA § 207.5
 
requires DHHL to promulgate rules in order to impose the DCCRs as
 conditions of the Kalawahine Project's homestead leases, then the
 validity of the sales contracts under which HM members purchased
 
5HHCA § 220.5 provides in relevant part:
 
Development by contract; development by project developer
agreement. (a) Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the
department is authorized to enter into and carry out contracts to
develop available lands for homestead, commercial, and
multipurpose projects; . . . .
 
(b) Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the department
 
is authorized to enter into project developer agreements with
qualified developers for, or in connection with, any homestead,
commercial, or multipurpose project, or portion of any project;
. . . .
 
. . . .
 
(f) Whenever the department enters into a project developer
agreement to develop a homestead project, the department shall
provide for the purchase of the completed project or that portion
of a completed project developed for disposition to native
Hawaiians, and shall dispose of the lands in accordance with this
Act; provided that the project developer agreement shall not
encumber any existing homestead lease in the project area.
 
. . . .
 
(h) The department is authorized to adopt rules in
accordance with chapter 91, Hawaii Revised Statutes, to implement
and carry out the purposes of this section.
 
6HHCA § 207, provides in relevant part:
 
Leases to Hawaiians, licenses. (a) The department is
authorized to lease to native Hawaiians the right to the use and
occupancy of a tract or tracts of Hawaiian home lands within the
following acreage limits per each lessee: . . . (3) not more than
one acre of any class of land to be used as a residence lot;
. . . .
 

4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
their homes would be called into question. HHCA § 207.5 requires
 
DHHL to prescribe rules for the "method of disposition" as well
 as "the terms, conditions, covenants, and restrictions as to the
 use and occupancy" of single-family and multifamily units falling
 within the scope of HHCA § 207.5. Just as DHHL did not prescribe
 rules regarding the DCCRs, it did not prescribe rules regarding
 the method of disposition of units in the Kalawahine Project. 
DHHL asserts that HM's argument, if taken to its logical
 conclusion, would require invalidation of the sales contracts
 under which HM members acquired their residences.
 
DHHL alternatively argues that even if the DCCRs are
 
invalid conditions of the Kalawahine Project homestead leases
 because DHHL should have promulgated rules before incorporating
 the DCCRs into the leases, the Kalawahine Project residents
 agreed to be bound by the DCCRs in their sales contracts with
 KIC. Accordingly, DHHL asserts that independent of the homestead
 leases, the DCCRs remain enforceable by the Association pursuant
 to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 421J, which governs
 planned community associations.
 
III. 
As explained in greater detail below, we conclude that 
HHCA § 207.5 applies to the Kalawahine Project and that DHHL
 should have promulgated administrative rules before incorporating
 the DCCRs into the homestead leases issued to the Kalawahine
 Project residents. We further conclude that independent of the
 homestead leases, the Kalawahine Project residents are bound by
 the DCCRs pursuant to their sales contracts with KIC, and that
 the DCCRs, which are intended to benefit the entire planned
 community, remain subject to enforcement by the Association. 
Accordingly, we affirm the Circuit Court's Final Judgment to the
 extent that it vacated the decision of the HHC and declared that
 under HHCA § 207.5, DHHL was required to promulgate rules before
 incorporating the DCCRs into the homestead leases issued to the
 Kalawahine Project residents. We vacate the Circuit Court's
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Final Judgment to the extent that it declared that the DCCRs are
 
invalid and not subject to enforcement by the Association. 
Under the circumstances of this case, equitable
 
remedies may need to be fashioned to address DHHL's failure to
 promulgate rules as required by HHCA § 207.5. The remedies
 ultimately chosen must take into account their impact on those
 who relied upon or are affected by the actions taken by DHHL
 without promulgating rules required by HHCA § 207.5. On remand,
 the Circuit Court and the HHC should consider whether equitable
 remedies, including interim measures pending DHHL's promulgation
 of rules pursuant to HHCA § 207.5, are necessary and appropriate
 in light of this court's decision.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
DHHL entered into a development agreement with KIC to
 
develop and construct the Kalawahine Project, a planned 
residential homestead community consisting of approximately
 thirty-three single-family homes, fifty-four duplex units, and
 common areas.
7 Pursuant to the development agreement, KIC
 
drafted the DCCRs, which created the Association to manage and
 maintain the Kalawahine Project.
 
Prior to construction of the homes, KIC sent letters to
 
certain applicants on DHHL's homestead waiting list, informing
 them of the lot selection process for the Kalawahine Project. A
 draft copy of the DCCRs was attached to these letters. Selected
 applicants then entered into a "Deposit Receipt and Sales
 Contract" (Sales Contract) with KIC for the construction and
 purchase of homes in the Kalawahine Project.
8 Each Sales
 
Contract between KIC and the selected applicants provided that
 
7The common areas include walking trails and park areas, a pavilion, an
imu and picnic area, portions of Kanaha Stream, and open areas.
 
8The residents of the Kalawahine Project purchased the residential units
from KIC pursuant to the Sales Contract and separately leased the underlying
property from DHHL for $1 per year.
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
everyone purchasing homes in the Kalawahine Project would be
 
subject to the DCCRs as follows:
 
9
DECLARATION. Buyer acknowledges that the Declaration[ ]
provides that all owners in the Project are subject to the
Declaration, copies of which have been received by the
Buyer. The Declaration provides, among other things, that
(a) Buyer automatically becomes a member of the Association
upon issuance of the Lease to Buyer, (b) that Buyer must pay
assessments to the Association (including assessments for
upkeep maintenance and repair of certain common areas within
the Project), (c) that no construction, or alteration of
improvements on the Property is permitted except in
accordance with certain design rules and guidelines, and (d)
that the Property is subject to certain restrictions o[n]
use, all as more fully set forth in the Declaration. The
 Declaration also provides that initiation and monthly or
other periodic assessments must be paid. 
On March 28, 2000, the DCCRs were recorded in the 
Bureau of the Conveyances of the State of Hawai 'i. The purposes 
of the DCCRs are to "enhance the orderly and proper development 
and use" of the planned community, "to protect the value, desirability and attractiveness of the [Kalawahine] Project, and to promote the quality of improvements and uses of the [planned community] as a whole[.]" The DCCRs provide that its covenants, conditions, and restrictions create mutual equitable servitudes upon each lot in favor of every other lot in the planned community and create reciprocal rights and obligations among all persons and entities having any right, title, or interest in and to any lot within the planned community. 
The DCCRs established the Association and imposed
 
various duties and obligations on the Association to be performed
 for the maintenance and improvement of the Kalawahine Project,
 including the responsibility for managing and maintaining the
 common areas. The DCCRs also empowered the Association to, among
 other things: (1) levy assessments on members of the Association
 to cover the Association's costs and expenses in performing its
 
9The Sales Contract defined the term "Declaration" to mean "the
 
Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions for Kalawahine
Streamside, recorded or to be recorded in the Office of the Assistant
Registrar of the Land Court of the State of Hawaii and/or Bureau of
Conveyances of the State of Hawaii, as the same has been or may hereafter be
supplemented or amended
.
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
duties; and (2) adopt and amend rules to govern the use of the
 
common areas and to govern other matters, such as the collection
 and disposal of refuse and the maintenance and preservation of
 the Kanaha Stream. The Articles of Incorporation for the
 Association were filed with the Department of Commerce and
 Consumer Affairs on April 4, 2000, and the Association adopted
 By-laws on May 1, 2000.
 
In addition to entering into Sales Contracts with KIC
 
for the construction and purchase of their homes, the residents
 of the Kalawahine Project entered into homestead leases with DHHL
 for the lots underlying their homes. The homestead leases signed
 by the Kalawahine Project residents specified that the leases
 were subject to the terms and conditions of the DCCRs. 
II.
 
HM is a non-profit community-based organization of 
Kalawahine Homestead residents "formed to increase and improve community involvement and awareness within Hawaiian Homestead communities."
10 Approximately five years after the initial 
Kalawahine Project residents signed their leases, HM and Kahealani Keahi-Wood, Auli
'i Hirahara, Allennette Stender, Edward 
Simeona, and Christopher Wood, as individuals and members of HM's Board of Directors, filed a petition for a declaratory ruling before the HHC. 
The petition sought a declaratory ruling from the HHC
 
on: (1) whether DHHL violated HHCA § 207.5 in subjecting the
 lease of residential lots in the Kalawahine Project to the DCCRs
 without first prescribing administrative rules; and (2) whether
 the DCCRs are void based on DHHL's failure to comply with HHCA 
§ 207.5. In response to the petition, the HHC scheduled a
 contested case hearing. Because a determination of the issues
 presented in the petition would affect homeowners in the
 Kalawahine Project and may also affect homeowners in several
 
10In its opening brief, DHHL assert that "HM is comprised of only five
residents of the Kalawahine Project." 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
other homestead subdivisions with declarations of covenants,
 
conditions, and restrictions, the HHC directed that homestead
 associations with declarations of covenants, conditions, and
 restrictions be informed of the pending contested case and given
 the opportunity to intervene. The Association and the Princess
 Kahanu Estates Association requested and were granted permission
 to intervene in the contested case hearing.
 
The petitioners subsequently filed an amended petition
 
11
for declaratory ruling,  which added to the questions presented
a challenge to the HHC's permitting the homeowners associations

 
to intervene. The amended petition sought relief from the HHC,
 including declarations that: (1) DHHL violated HHCA § 207.5 in
 subjecting the lease of residential lots in the Kalawahine
 Project to the DCCRs without first prescribing administrative
 rules; (2) the Kalawahine Project DCCRs are void based on DHHL's
 failure to comply with HHCA § 207.5; (3) Kalawahine Project
 residents shall not be subject to lease cancellation for failure
 to pay monthly maintenance assessments, fees, fines or penalties;
 
(4)
 all unexpended maintenance assessments shall be returned to
 
residents; and (5) DHHL must prescribe rules as required by HHCA
 § 207.5 before incorporating any covenants, conditions and/or
 restrictions on any lease.
 
The HCC held a contested case hearing on the amended
 
petition before Hearings Officer Jim Nicholson (Nicholson).
 Following the hearing, Nicholson issued Findings of Fact,
 Conclusions of Law, and a Recommended Decision and Order
 (Hearings Officer's Recommended Decision and Order) which
 recommended the denial of the petitioners' claims for relief. In
 pertinent part, the Hearings Officer concluded that: (1) the
 homestead leases for the Kalawahine Project were not issued
 pursuant to HHCA § 207.5, but rather were issued pursuant to HHCA
 § 207(a); (2) the DHHL is authorized to place conditions and
 
11The petitioners for the amended petition were the same as the original
petition except that Auli' i Hirahara was not named as a petitioner in the
amended petition. 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
restrictions on homestead leases issued pursuant to HHCA § 207(a)
 
without engaging in administrative rulemaking; and (3) the
 Association was appropriately established under HRS Chapter 421J. 
The HHC subsequently issued "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of
 Law, Decision and Order; Order Denying Petition and Dismissing
 Matter" (HHC's Decision and Order). The HHC's Decision and Order
 adopted the Hearing Officer's Recommended Decision and Order,
 denied the amended petition, and dismissed the matter.
 
III.
 
HM appealed the HHC's Decision and Order to the Circuit
 
Court. The Circuit Court filed an initial order reversing the
 HHC's Decision and Order. In its initial order, the Circuit
 Court ruled that HHCA § 207.5 applied to the Kalawahine Project;
 that HHCA § 207.5 required DHHL to engage in rulemaking before
 incorporating the DCCRs into the homestead leases that DHHL
 issued to the Kalawahine Project residents; and that DHHL had
 failed to engage in such rulemaking. The Circuit Court therefore
 reversed the HCC's Decision and Order and determined that
 violation of the DCCRs would not be a basis for revoking the
 leases issued to the Kalawahine Project residents. The Circuit
 Court, however, further noted that the DCCRs were separately
 incorporated into the Sales Contracts between the Kalawahine
 Project residents and KIC and were consistent with HRS Chapter
 421J, which governed planned community associations. The Circuit
 Court concluded that its ruling did not affect the Association's
 ability to enforce the DCCRs pursuant to HRS Chapter 421J.
 
HM moved for reconsideration/clarification of the
 
Circuit Court's initial order. HM requested that the Circuit
 Court amend its initial order to declare that the DCCRs are
 invalid altogether and therefore could not be enforced by the
 Association. In the alternative, HM requested that the Circuit
 Court amend its initial order to make clear that it was not 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
ruling on whether the DCCRs could be enforced by the Association. 
The Circuit Court granted HM's motion for reconsideration/
 clarification and issued an amended order, which omitted the
 paragraph in its initial order that referred to HRS Chapter 421J
 and the Associations's ability to enforce the DCCRs. In its
 amended order, the Circuit Court reversed the HHC's Decision and
 Order and declared "the [DCCRs] void."
 
The Circuit Court entered its Final Judgment on April
 
5, 2011, in favor of HM on its first claim for relief (First
 Claim), which sought a declaration that the DCCRs should be
 declared void because DHHL violated HHCA § 207.5 by enacting and
 implementing the DCCRs for the Kalawahine Project without first
 promulgating rules under HRS Chapter 91.
12 This appeal followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
We must interpret several sections of the HHCA in order
 
to determine whether DHHL was required to promulgate rules before
 incorporating the DCCRs into the homestead leases issued for the
 Kalawahine Project. The sections at issue are: (1) HHCA § 207.5,
 which authorizes DHHL to develop and construct single-family and
 mutifamily units for housing native Hawaiians and requires that
 the method of disposition and the terms, conditions, covenants,
 and restrictions as to the use and occupancy of such units be
 prescribed by administrative rules; (2) HHCA § 220.5, which
 authorizes DHHL "to enter into and carry out contracts to develop
 available lands for homestead, commercial, and multipurpose 
12HM's appeal to the Circuit Court asserted three other claims for
relief: DHHL violated HRS Chapter 91 by failing to engage in rulemaking
procedures before enacting the DCCRs (Second Claim); DHHL breached their
fiduciary duties by violating HHCA § 207.5 (Third Claim); and DHHL acted
beyond the scope of their powers by allowing the Association and Princess
Kahanu Estates Association to intervene in HM's petition (Fourth Claim). The
 Circuit Court's Final Judgment dismissed HM's Second and Third Claims without
prejudice because their resolution was unnecessary given the Circuit Court's
ruling on the First Claim, and the Final Judgment entered judgment in favor of
DHHL on HM's Fourth Claim. The Final Judgment's resolution of HM's Second,
Third, and Fourth Claims are not at issue in this appeal. 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
projects[.]"; and (3) HHCA § 207(a), which authorizes DHHL to
 
lease to native Hawaiians land to be used as a residence lot. 
As explained below, we conclude that under its plain
 
language, HHCA § 207.5 applies to the Kalawahine Project. We
 further conclude that HHCA § 220.5 does not warrant deviating 
from HHCA § 207.5's plain language by reading an exclusion into
 HHCA § 207.5 for housing projects developed and constructed by
 DHHL in conjunction with a private developer. Accordingly, we
 hold that DHHL should have prescribed rules pursuant to HRS
 Chapter 91 before incorporating the DCCRs into the leases issued
 to residents of the Kalawahine Project. 
A.
 
HHCA § 207(a) provides DHHL with the general authority 
"to lease to native Hawaiians the right to the use and occupancy of . . . Hawaiian home lands[,]" including "not more than one acre of any class of land to be used as a residence lot[.]" HHCA § 207(a).
13 A 1962 opinion issued by the Department of the 
Attorney General, State of Hawai 'i, interpreted the HHCA as 
authorizing DHHL to lease land to native Hawaiians, but leaving the lessee with the responsibility of developing and improving the land. Attorney General's Opinion No. 62-9. As construed by the Attorney General's opinion, the HHCA did not authorize the DHHL to provide multi-unit dwellings or undertake multi-unit dwelling projects. Id. 
HHCA § 207(a) was amended in 1984 to specifically 
authorize DHHL "to develop and construct multi-family units for
 housing native Hawaiians." 1984 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 27, § 1 at
 67. The 1984 amendment further provided that "[t]he method of
 
disposition, as well as the terms, conditions, covenants, and
 restrictions as to the use and occupancy of such multi-family
 units shall be prescribed by rules adopted by the department 
13The quoted language was also present in the HHCA § 207(a) that was in
effect in 1962. 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
pursuant to chapter 91." Id. Thus, the 1984 amendment gave DHHL
 
the specific authority to "develop and construct multi-family
 
units for housing native Hawaiians[,]" but required rulemaking
 for "[t]he method of disposition, as well as the terms,
 conditions, covenants, and restrictions as to the use and
 occupancy of such multi-family units[.]" Id. 
B.
 
In 1986, the HHCA was amended to add HHCA § 220.5. 
1986 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 84, § 1 at 113-15. HHCA § 220.5
 provides that "[n]otwithstanding any law to the contrary, [DHHL]
 is authorized to enter into and carry out contracts to develop
 available lands for homestead, commercial, and multipurpose
 projects[.]" HHCA § 220.5(a). "Homestead project" is defined to
 mean, in relevant part: "a project or that portion of a
 multipurpose project, including residential . . . uses designed
 and intended for disposition to native Hawaiians under this
 Act[.]" HHCA § 220.5(g). HHCA § 220.5 establishes procedures
 DHHL must follow in entering into, and requirements for, project
 developer agreements with a developer. 
According to a committee report on Senate Bill 2319-86,
 
which eventually became HHCA § 220.5 enacted in 1986, the purpose
 of the bill was "to amend the [HHCA], to authorize [DHHL] to
 develop lands by contract and by agreements with developers." H.
 Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 690-86, in 1986 House Journal, at 1326. 
The report stated that "this type of development would be for (1)
 homesteading purposes and (2) commercial purposes to generate
 income for [DHHL]" Id. 
C.
 
In 1997, the HHCA was amended by creating HHCA § 207.5. 
1997 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 196, § 1-2 at 368-69. Although
 established as a new section, HHCA § 207.5 largely consists of
 language carved out from HHCA § 207(a). Id. The language 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
previously added to HHCA § 207(a) in 198414 was removed from HHCA
 
§ 207(a) and placed into the newly-created HHCA § 207.5, and new
 
language referring to single-family units and rentals was also
 added. HHCA § 207.5, entitled "Housing development[,]" provides:
 
The department is authorized to develop and construct
single-family and multifamily units for housing native
Hawaiians. The method of disposition,  including rentals, as
 
well as the terms, conditions, covenants, and restrictions
as to the use and occupancy of such single-family and
multifamily units shall be prescribed by rules adopted by
the department pursuant to chapter 91.
 
HHCA § 207.5 (emphases added). HCCA § 207.5 added the above-
emphasized references to "single-family and" and "including
 rentals" to the language previously added to HCCA § 207(a) in
 1984; those were the only changes made to the provisions
 transferred from HHCA § 207(a) to the newly-created HHCA § 207.5. 
See 1997 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 196, § 1-2 at 368-69.
 
As referenced in committee reports, the purpose of the
 
1997 legislation was "to expand [DHHL's] authorization to develop
 and construct rental housing units for native Hawaiians to
 include single family units" and "[a]uthorize [DHHL] to undertake
 rental housing projects[.]" S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1826, in
 1997 Senate Journal, at 1566; H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 186, in
 1997 House Journal, at 1189. Committees considering the 1997
 legislation also found that "providing [DHHL] with more housing
 provision options would better suit the changing needs of its
 constituency and could expedite the process of placing more
 native Hawaiians in Department-sponsored housing projects." S.
 Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1114, in 1997 Senate Journal, at 1313. 
14As previously noted, HHCA § 207(a) was amended in 1984 to add the
following language:
 
The department is authorized to develop and construct multi-family
units for housing native Hawaiians. The method of disposition, as
well as the terms, conditions, covenants, and restrictions as to
the use and occupancy of such multi-family units shall be
prescribed by rules adopted by the department pursuant to chapter
91.
 
1984 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 27, § 1 at 67. 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
A.
 
On appeal, DHHL argues that HHCA § 207.5, and its
 
rulemaking requirements, do not apply to the Kalawahine Project
 
because the Project was developed through a project developer
 agreement authorized under HHCA § 220.5. and involved residential
 lot leases issued pursuant to HHCA § 207(a).
15 In particular,
 
DHHL contends that HHCA § 207.5 and HHCA § 220.5 are mutually
 exclusive and therefore HHCA § 207.5 does not apply to residences
 developed pursuant to a project developer agreement under HHCA 
§ 220.5. We disagree with DHHL's argument. 
B.
 
"When construing a statute, this court's foremost 
obligation is to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the legislature which is to be obtained primarily from the language contained in the statute itself." University of Hawai
'i 
v. Befitel, 105 Hawai 'i 485, 488, 100 P.3d 55, 58 (2004) 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). We conclude that the plain language of HHCA § 207.5 establishes that it applies to the Kalawahine Project and that DHHL was required to promulgate rules before incorporating the DCCRs as conditions of the homestead leases issued to Kalawahine Project residents. 
HHCA § 207.5 provides:
 
The department is authorized to develop and construct
single-family and multifamily units for housing native
Hawaiians. The method of disposition, including rentals, as
well as the terms, conditions, covenants, and restrictions
as to the use and occupancy of such single-family and
multifamily units shall be prescribed by rules adopted by
the department pursuant to chapter 91.
 
In this case, DHHL, in conjunction with private
 
developer KIC, developed and constructed the Kalawahine Project.
 
There is no dispute that the Kalawahine Project consists of and
 
15There appears to be no dispute that if HHCA § 207.5 does not apply to
the Kalawahine Project, then DHHL could have imposed conditions, including the
DCCRs, on residential lot leases issued pursuant to HHCA § 207(a) for the
Kalawahine Project without engaging in rulemaking.
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
contains more than eighty-five "single-family and multifamily
 
units for housing native Hawaiians." Thus, the Kalawahine
 Project falls within the plain language of DHHL's authority under 
HHCA § 207.5 "to develop and construct single-family and
 multifamily units for housing native Hawaiians." 
HHCA § 207.5 further provides that for "such single-
family and multifamily units," "[t]he method of disposition,
 including rentals, as well as the terms, conditions, covenants,
 and restrictions as to the use and occupancy . . . shall be
 prescribed by rules adopted by [DHHL] pursuant to [HRS] chapter
 91." The DCCRs which DHHL incorporated as conditions of the
 homestead leases it issued to Kalawahine Project residents
 clearly imposed "terms, conditions, covenants, and restrictions"
 on the residents' use and occupancy of their units. We therefore
 conclude that under the plain language of HHCA § 207.5, DHHL was
 required to prescribe rules pursuant to HRS Chapter 91 before
 incorporating the DCCRs as conditions of these leases.
 
C.
 
DHHL contends that HHCA § 207.5 only applies where DHHL
 
develops and constructs single-family or multifamily housing
 units "on its own" and does not apply where DHHL develops and
 constructs housing units in conjunction with a private developer
 pursuant to a project developer agreement under HHCA § 220.5. 
However, there is nothing in the language of HHCA § 220.5 that
 purports to exempt DHHL's development and construction of single-
family or multifamily housing units through project developer
 agreements from the requirements of HHCA § 207.5. Indeed, DHHL
 provides no explanation for why the Legislature would require
 DHHL to promulgate rules regarding the method of disposition and
 the terms and conditions for the use and occupancy of housing
 units developed by DHHL "on its own," but not for housing units
 developed by DHHL in conjunction with a private developer.
 
The general authorization provided to DHHL "to develop
 
and construct" housing units under HHCA § 207.5 is most naturally
 and conventionally interpreted to encompass DHHL's development
 
16
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and construction of housing units through a project developer
 
agreement. DHHL does not provide any persuasive reason to
 deviate from this reading of the statute. 
In its argument, DHHL cites to: (1) HHCA § 220.5(a),
 
which states: "Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, [DHHL] is
 authorized to enter into and carry out contracts to develop
 available lands for homestead, commercial, and multipurpose
 projects[.]" (emphasis added); and (2) HHCA § 220.5(h) which
 authorizes but does require DHHL to adopt rules to implement and
 carry out the purposes of HHCA § 220.5. DHHL also relies on
 language in a committee report for the bill that added HHCA 
§ 220.5, which stated that the bill "would provide DHHL with
 alternative methods to achieve its objectives in a timely and
 responsive manner." S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 393-86, in 1986
 
Senate Journal, at 943. We conclude that the foregoing
 
provisions of HHCA § 220.5 and the committee report do not
 justify reading an unstated exclusion for housing projects
 developed through project developer agreements into HHCA § 207.5. 
HHCA § 220.5 authorizes DHHL to enter into contracts to
 
develop homestead, commercial, or multipurpose projects on DHHL
 lands. The purpose of authorizing DHHL to engage in development
 of commercial projects is to generate income for DHHL that would
 enable it to better fulfill its trust responsibilities. See S.
 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 393-86, in 1986 Senate Journal, at 942-43. 
There is no conflict or inconsistency between the alternative
 methods that HHCA § 220.5 provides for DHHL to generate income
 and finance homestead projects and the application of HHCA 
§ 207.5 to require DHHL to promulgate rules regarding the method
 of disposition and the conditions for use and occupancy of
 residential units. Accordingly, the prefatory "[n]otwithstanding
 any law to the contrary" language of HHCA § 220.5(a) does not
 exempt units developed through project developer agreements from
 the requirements of HHCA § 207.5. Similarly, DHHL does not
 provide any persuasive reason why DHHL's authority under HHCA 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
§ 220.5(h) to adopt rules to implement HHCA § 220.5 should exempt
 
DHHL from the rulemaking requirements of HHCA § 207.5. 
Therefore, the foregoing provisions cited by DHHL do not
 demonstrate that the Legislature intended to exclude housing
 units for native Hawaiians developed through project developer
 agreements from the requirements of HHCA § 207.5.
 
D.
 
In summary, we conclude that the plain language of HHCA
 
§ 207.5 establishes that it applies to the Kalawahine Project. 
Under HHCA § 207.5, DHHL was required to prescribe rules pursuant
 to HRS Chapter 91 before incorporating the DCCRs as conditions of
 the leases issued to Kalawahine Project residents. Accordingly,
 DHHL violated HHCA § 207.5 by failing to promulgate rules before
 incorporating the DCCRs into theses leases.
 
We note that HHCA § 207.5 requires DHHL to prescribe
 
rules for the "method of disposition" of single-family and
 multifamily units developed and constructed by DHHL as well as
 for "the terms, conditions, covenants, and restrictions as to the
 use and occupancy" of such units." (Emphasis added.) DHHL
 observes that "[j]ust as DHHL's administrative rules do not
 contain any provisions governing the drafting of DCCRs for
 single-family or multifamily housing units, they also do not
 contain any provisions governing how those single family or
 multifamily housing units are to be disposed of to native
 Hawaiians." Thus, DHHL's failure to promulgate rules pursuant to
 HHCA § 207.5 not only raises questions about the validity of the
 DCCRs incorporated into the homestead leases issued to Kalawahine
 Project residents, but also the Sales Contracts by which
 Kalawahine Project residents, including members of HM, acquired
 their units.
 
HM contends that we should rely on DHHL's failure to
 
comply with the rulemaking requirements of HHCA § 207.5 to void
 the DCCRs (which they oppose), but not the Sales Contracts (which
 they favor). However, HM's arguments regarding DHHL's failure to
 comply with its rulemaking obligations apply to both situations. 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
HM cannot selectively rely on HHCA § 207.5's rulemaking
 
requirements when they suit HM's purpose, but ignore the same
 requirements when they would be detrimental to HM. In fashioning
 appropriate remedies, the actions taken by DHHL without
 prescribing rules as required by HHCA § 207.5, and affected
 individuals' reliance on such actions, will need to be
 considered.
 
III.
 
DHHL argues that even if the DCCRs incorporated into
 
the homestead leases for the Kalawahine Project are found to be
 invalid and not enforceable by DHHL (because DHHL failed to
 engage in rulemaking as required under HHCA § 207.5), the
 Kalawahine Project residents agreed to be bound by the DCCRs
 through their Sales Contracts with KIC. DHHL therefore asserts
 that independent of the homestead leases, the DCCRs remain
 enforceable by the Association pursuant to HRS Chapter 421J,
 which governs planned community associations. We agree.
 
A.
 
Similar to other planned communities, the Kalawahine
 
Project includes common areas for use by members of the
 community. Such communities, by their nature, require a method
 of self-governance, typically in the form of a homeowners
 association comprised of residence owners, to ensure compliance
 with community rules and the collection of assessments to pay for
 common expenses that serve to benefit the community as a whole. 
The Sales Contracts between KIC and all the Kalawahine
 
Project residents who purchased homes incorporated the DCCRs and
 made the purchases subject to the DCCRs. By entering into the
 Sales Contract, each resident/buyer agreed to be bound by the
 terms and conditions of the DCCRs. The Sales Contracts
 specifically notified the buyers that pursuant to the DCCRs, "all
 owners in the [Kalawahine] Project [(i.e., residential owners
 with homestead leases)] are subject to the [DCCRs]"; that a buyer
 automatically becomes a member of the Association; that the buyer
 must pay assessments to the Association for such things as upkeep
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and maintenance of common areas within the Kalawahine Project;
 
and that the buyer will be subject to certain design rules and
 other restrictions on use. 
The purposes of the DCCRs include enhancing the orderly
 
and proper development and use of the Kalawahine Project,
 protecting the value, desirability, and attractiveness of the
 Project, and promoting the quality of improvements and uses of
 the planned community as a whole. In furtherance of these
 purposes, the DCCRs created the Association and gave it various
 duties and powers to manage, maintain, and improve the Kalawahine
 Project. The DCCRs establish a structure for self-governance by
 Kalawahine Project residents and create reciprocal rights and
 obligations shared by Kalawahine Project residents for their
 mutual benefit.
 
HM's decision to pursue declaratory relief apparently
 
stemmed from the disagreement of HM's members with certain of the
 restrictions and conditions imposed by the DCCRs. However, the
 DCCRs themselves provide a mechanism for HM members who purchased
 residences, by virtue of their membership in the Association, to
 amend the DCCRs by obtaining an affirmative vote of two-thirds of
 the Association members.
 
B.
 
HRS Chapter 421J governs planned community associations 
in Hawai
'i. DHHL argues, and we agree, that the Association 
satisfies the conditions for a valid planned community association under HRS Chapter 421J. 
As noted, the DCCRs were incorporated into each Sales
 
Contract between KIC and the Kalawahine Project residents. The
 DCCRs as well as the Articles of Incorporation for the
 Association were properly recorded, and the Association adopted
 its By-laws. For the benefit of the community as a whole, all
 the Kalawahine Project residents who purchased their homes
 through the Sales Contracts, including members of HM, agreed to
 be bound by the DCCRs, to become members of the Association, and
 to be subject to the authority granted to the Association.
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
With respect to the freedom to contract, the Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court has recognized that, 
"In general, parties may contract as they wish, and courts
will enforce their agreements without passing on their
substance. The principle of freedom of contract is itself
rooted in the notion that it is in the public interest to
recognize that individuals have broad powers to order their
own affairs by making legally enforceable promises
."
 
City Exp. Inc., v. Express Partners, 87 Hawai 'i 466, 470 n.4, 959 
P.2d 836, 840 n.4 (1998) (citation and ellipsis points omitted; 
emphasis added). We conclude that independent of the homestead leases issued by DHHL, the DCCRs are subject to enforcement by the Association based on the Kalawahine Project residents' contractual agreement to be bound by the DCCRs. 
C.
 
HM argues that the Association cannot be permitted to
 
enforce the DCCRs pursuant to HRS Chapter 421J because HRS
 Chapter 421J conflicts with the HHCA. We disagree.
 
In support of its argument, HM cites Kepo
'o v. Watson, 
87 Hawai 'i 91, 952 P.2d 379 (1988). In Kepo 'o, the Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court held that HRS Chapter 343, which requires the preparation of an environment impact statement before construction on certain projects, "does not significantly affect the land" and did not conflict with the HHCA. Kepo
'o, 87 Hawai 'i 
at 100, 102, 952 P.2d at 388, 390. In support of its decision, the supreme court, among other factors, noted that the effect of HRS Chapter 343 on Hawaiian home lands was incidental because HRS Chapter 343 "does not affirmatively require DHHL to use the land for any particular purposes." Id. at 101, 952 P.2d at 389. It 
also noted that HRS Chapter 343 "merely imposes procedural and informational requirements on DHHL projects[.]" Id. 
Similar to HRS Chapter 343, HRS Chapter 421J
 
establishes procedural requirements to facilitate the management 
of planned communities and does not affirmatively require DHHL to
 use Hawaiian home lands for any particular purpose. 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
HM also cites HHCA § 206 in support of its argument
 
that HRS Chapter 421J conflicts with the HHCA. HHCA § 206
 
provides: "The powers and duties of the governor and the board of
 land and natural resources, in respect to lands of the State,
 shall not extend to lands having the status of Hawaiian home
 lands, except as specifically provided in this title." This
 section is inapposite. Enforcement of the DCCRs by the
 Association does not implicate the powers and duties of the
 Governor or the Board of Land and Natural Resources. We conclude
 that HRS Chapter 421J does not conflict with the HHCA.
 
IV.
 
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that HHCA § 207.5
 
applies to the Kalawahine Project, and therefore, DHHL should
 have promulgated administrative rules before incorporating the
 DCCRs into the homestead leases issued to the Kalawahine Project
 residents. We further conclude that independent of the homestead
 leases, the Kalawahine Project residents are bound by the DCCRs
 pursuant to their Sales Contracts with KIC, and that the DCCRs,
 which are intended to benefit the entire planned community,
 remain subject to enforcement by the Association. Accordingly,
 we affirm the Circuit Court's Final Judgment to the extent that
 it vacated the decision of the HHC and declared that under HHCA 
§ 207.5, DHHL was required to promulgate rules before
 incorporating the DCCRs into the homestead leases issued to the
 Kalawahine Project residents. We vacate the Circuit Court's
 Final Judgment to the extent that it declared that the DCCRs are
 invalid and not subject to enforcement by the Association. 
Under the circumstances of this case, equitable
 
remedies may need to be fashioned to address DHHL's failure to
 promulgate rules as required by HHCA § 207.5. DHHL's violation
 of the rulemaking requirements of HHCA § 207.5 has implications
 that go beyond the effect of DHHL's violation on its ability to
 enforce the DCCRs against HM members. As noted, HHCA § 207.5
 requires DHHL to prescribe rules for the "method of disposition"
 as well as the terms and conditions for the use and occupancy of
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
single-family and multifamily units. Therefore, DHHL's failure
 
to promulgate rules as required by HHCA § 207.5 raises questions
 about the Sales Contracts through which Kalawahine Project
 residents acquired their residences. The impact on those who
 relied upon or are affected by the actions taken by DHHL without
 complying with HHCA § 207.5's rulemaking requirements must be
 considered in fashioning appropriate remedies. Further
 development of the record is required to address these matters. 
On remand, the Circuit Court and the HHC should consider whether
 equitable remedies, including interim measures pending DHHL's
 promulgation of rules pursuant to HHCA § 207.5, are necessary and
 appropriate in light of this court's decision.
 
CONCLUSION
 
We affirm in part and vacate in part the Circuit
 
Court's Final Judgment, and we remand the case for further
 proceedings consistent with this Opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 Diane K. Taira
 
Matthew S.Dvonch
 Deputy Attorneys General
for Appellees-Appellants
 
Moses K.N. Haia
 
Alan T. Murakami
 (Native Hawaiian Legal
Corporation)
for Appellant-Appellee
 
23
 