FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000135 29-JUL-2025 06:46 AM Dkt. 111 OP 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI#I 
–––O0O––– 
CITY & COUNTY OF HONOLULU AND HONOLULU BOARD 
OF WATER SUPPLY, Plaintiffs-Appellees, v.
CHEVRON CORP; CHEVRON USA INC., Defendants-Appellants,
and SUNOCO LP; ALOHA PETROLEUM, LTD.; ALOHA PETROLEUM LLC;
EXXON MOBIL CORP.; EXXONMOBIL OIL CORPORATION; ROYAL
DUTCH SHELL PLC; SHELL OIL COMPANY; SHELL OIL PRODUCTS
COMPANY LLC; BHP GROUP LIMITED; BHP GROUP PLC; BHP HAWAII
INC.; BP PLC; BP AMERICA INC.; MARATHON PETROLEUM CORP.;
CONOCOPHILLIPS; CONOCOPHILLPS COMPANY; PHILLIPS 66;
PHILLIPS 66 COMPANY; AND DOES 1 through 100, inclusive,
Defendants-Appellees 
NO. CAAP-22-0000135 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 1CCV-20-0000380) 
JULY 29, 2025 
WADSWORTH, PRESIDING JUDGE, AND McCULLEN, J., AND
CIRCUIT JUDGE COPELAND, J., IN PLACE OF NAKASONE, CHIEF JUDGE,
AND LEONARD, HIRAOKA, AND GUIDRY, JJ., ALL RECUSED 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY WADSWORTH, J. 
Plaintiffs-Appellees City and County of Honolulu and 
Honolulu Board of Water Supply (together, Plaintiffs) have sued 
several oil and gas producers (together, Defendants) alleging 
that their marketing practices have misled the public about the  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dangers of their products, contributing to climate change and 
resulting injuries to Plaintiffs. While the case has been said by some to raise novel legal issues, this appeal concerns an ordinary choice-of-law dispute between Plaintiffs and Defendants-Appellants Chevron Corporation and Chevron USA Inc. (together,Chevron or the Chevron Defendants).  The Chevron Defendants, 
which until recently were both headquartered in California, brought a motion in the lower court to dismiss the case against them under California's anti-SLAPP (strategic lawsuit against public participation) law (the Anti-SLAPP Motion).  The anti-
SLAPP law is designed to protect persons from lawsuits intended 
to chill their free speech or petitioning activities related to public issues. The Chevron Defendants argued that California's Anti-SLAPP law bars Plaintiffs' claims in this case, because they arise from Chevron's speech on issues of public interest. They further argued that their Anti-SLAPP Motion should be judged under California law, rather than Hawaii's own anti-SLAPP law, which was more limited in scope than the California version when the motion was filed. The lower court rejected Chevron's argument that California law should apply and denied the motion. 
The Chevron Defendants appeal from the "Order Denying 
Chevron Defendants' Special Motion to Strike and/or Dismiss the Complaint Pursuant to California's Anti-SLAPP Law" (Order Denying
Anti-SLAPP Motion) entered on February 15, 2022, in the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1/ Chevron contends 
that the Circuit Court erred by: (1) failing to apply 
California's anti-SLAPP law, where California had the most significant interest in the Anti-SLAPP Motion; and (2) not granting the Anti-SLAPP Motion and dismissing Plaintiffs First Amended Complaint (FAC) with prejudice. 
We hold that the Circuit Court correctly concluded that 
California law did not apply to Chevron's Anti-SLAPP Motion. In determining choice-of-law issues, Hawai# i courts look to the 
state with the most significant relationship to the parties and subject matter. See Mikelson v. United Servs. Auto. Ass'n, 107 
1/ The Honorable Jeffrey P. Crabtree presided. 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai#i 192, 198, 111 P.3d 601, 607 (2005). 
This flexible 
approach involves assessing the interests and policy factors 
involved "with a purpose of arriving at a desirable result in each situation." 
Id.
 at 198, 111 P.3d at 607. Here, the Circuit 
Court considered the respective interests of California and 
Hawai#i implicated by the Anti-SLAPP Motion, including 
California's interest in protecting speech allegedly emanating from that state, along with Hawaii's interest in protecting its residents from the alleged misconduct and resulting harm suffered in Hawai# i. Based on a careful balancing of multiple relevant 
factors, the Circuit Court properly concluded that California law should not apply to the anti-SLAPP Motion. 
We therefore affirm the Order Denying Anti-SLAPP 
Motion. 
I. Background 
The Hawai#i Supreme Court's published opinion in 
City & 
Cnty. of Honolulu v. Sunoco LP,
 153 Hawai#i 326, 537 P.3d 1173 
(2023), provides a thorough summary of the procedural background of this case prior to late-2023. 
As relevant to the current appeal, on March 22, 2021, 
Plaintiffs filed the FAC against Chevron and the other defendants. 
In summary, Plaintiffs allege: (1) greenhouse gas 
emissions, which are largely a byproduct of the combustion of fossil fuels, are causing global warming and climate disruption, which in turn has caused the atmosphere and oceans to warm, sea levels to rise, snow and ice cover to diminish, oceans to acidify, and hydrologic systems to change; (2) Defendants' conduct, including their efforts to deceive about the consequences of the normal use of their fossil fuel products and to conceal the hazards of those products, has caused a substantial portion of global atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations, the attendant climate disruption, and Plaintiffs' injuries; (3) Defendants knew or should have known about the dangers associated with their fossil fuel products; (4) Defendants did not disclose these known dangers to consumers, the public, and regulators, and instead "affirmatively acted to 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
obscure those harms and engaged in a concerted campaign to evade 
regulation," including through misleading advertising; (5) in contrast to their public statements, a variety of Defendants' actions evidence their internal acknowledgment of the reality of climate change and its likely consequences; (6) Defendants' actions have increased the costs of mitigating the adverse effects of climate change; and (7) Defendants continue to mislead about the impact of their products on climate change through deceptive advertisements and promotional materials that do not disclose the risks of their products. 
Plaintiffs allege that they have sustained damages 
caused by Defendants' failure to warn and deceptive promotion of their dangerous products. Plaintiffs claim that Defendants' conduct "is a substantial factor in causing global warming and consequent sea level rise and attendant flooding, erosion, and beach loss in the County; increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events in the County, including hurricanes and tropical storms, 'rain bomb' events, drought, heatwaves, and others; ocean warming and acidification that will injure or kill coral reefs in the County's waters; habitat loss of endemic species in the County, and range expansion of invasive and disease carrying-pest species; diminished availability of freshwater resources; and the cascading social, economic, and other consequences of those environmental changes." Plaintiffs allege that due to Defendants' conduct, Plaintiffs have suffered damage to their facilities and property, incurred increased planning and preparation costs to adapt communities to global warming's effects, collected less tax revenue due to impacts on tourism, and suffered the cost of public health impacts such as an increase in heat-related illnesses. 
Based on these allegations, Plaintiffs assert claims of 
public nuisance, private nuisance, strict liability failure to warn, negligent failure to warn, and trespass. Plaintiffs seek compensatory damages; equitable relief, including abatement of the nuisance; punitive damages; disgorgement of profits; attorneys fees; and costs of suit. 
4   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On June 2, 2021, the Chevron Defendants, then both 
California-domiciled corporations, filed the Anti-SLAPP Motion. 
Chevron asserted that California's anti-SLAPP law provides "a qualified immunity from suit for any 'cause of action' that 'aris[es] from any act' of the defendant that is taken 'in furtherance of the [defendant]'s right of petition or free speech . . . in connection with a public issue.'" (Quoting Cal. Code Civ. Proc. § 425.16(b)(1)  (brackets in original).) Chevron 
contended that under 
Hawai#i choice-of-law rules, the Circuit 2/
2/ When the FAC and the Anti-SLAPP Motion were filed, Cal. Code Civ.
Proc. § 425.16(b)(1) (2015) stated, in relevant part: 
(b)(1) A cause of action against a person arising from any
act of that person in furtherance of the person's right ofpetition or free speech under the United States Constitutionor the California Constitution in connection with a publicissue shall be subject to a special motion to strike, unlessthe court determines that the plaintiff has established thatthere is a probability that the plaintiff will prevail onthe claim. 
(2) In making its determination, the court shall consider
the pleadings, and supporting and opposing affidavitsstating the facts upon which the liability or defense isbased. 
(3) If the court determines that the plaintiff has
established a probability that he or she will prevail on theclaim, neither that determination nor the fact of thatdetermination shall be admissible in evidence at any laterstage of the case, or in any subsequent action, and noburden of proof or degree of proof otherwise applicableshall be affected by that determination in any later stageof the case or in any subsequent proceeding. 
. . . . (d) This section shall not apply to any enforcement action
brought in the name of the people of the State of Californiaby the Attorney General, district attorney, or cityattorney, acting as a public prosecutor. 
(e) As used in this section, "act in furtherance of a
person's right of petition or free speech under the UnitedStates or California Constitution in connection with a public issue" includes: (1) any written or oral statement orwriting made before a legislative, executive, or judicialproceeding, or any other official proceeding authorized bylaw, (2) any written or oral statement or writing made inconnection with an issue under consideration or review by alegislative, executive, or judicial body, or any otherofficial proceeding authorized by law, (3) any written ororal statement or writing made in a place open to the publicor a public forum in connection with an issue of publicinterest, or (4) any other conduct in furtherance of theexercise of the constitutional right of petition or theconstitutional right of free speech in connection with apublic issue or an issue of public interest. 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court should apply California law to the Anti-SLAPP Motion, 
because "[a] defendant's home state has an overriding interest in applying its anti-SLAPP immunity to claims based on the defendant's speech[.]" Chevron further contended that under California law, (1) the FAC was subject to anti-SLAPP immunity, because Plaintiffs' claims arise from speech on issues of public interest; (2) Plaintiffs' claims did not fall within any anti-SLAPP exception; (3) Plaintiffs could not carry their burden of showing "that there is a probability that [they] will prevail on the claim[s]," Cal. Code Civ. Proc. § 425.16(b)(1); and (4) as a result, the claims against Chevron should be stricken or dismissed. 
Plaintiffs opposed the Anti-SLAPP Motion. 
They 
contended that the FAC should be judged under Hawai# i law rather 
than California's anti-SLAPP statute. They argued that Hawai# i 
law presumptively applies to all issues in the case, and Hawai# i 
has the greater interest in seeing its law applied here, because the case is based in 
Hawai#i tort law and has been brought by 
Hawai#i public entities to remedy injuries suffered in Hawai# i. 
Plaintiffs claimed that if similarly situated public entity plaintiffs in California brought the same nuisance claims under California law that Plaintiffs have asserted here, they would come within the anti-SLAPP law's "public enforcement" exception. Plaintiffs further argued that even if California's anti-SLAPP law applied, it would not bar Plaintiffs' claims, which target the conduct within the commercial speech exemption to the anti-SLAPP law. 
Following an August 27, 2021 hearing, the Circuit Court 
entered the Order Denying Anti-SLAPP Motion, which denied the motion on choice-of-law grounds. 
The court ruled that while 
Chevron's California domicile "clearly weighs in favor of applying California's anti-SLAPP law," that factor was "not dispositive" under governing law. Several other factors weighed in favor of applying Hawai# i law, including: "Plaintiffs 
obviously have specific, enduring, and substantial attachments to Hawai#i"; "[t]here are some Hawai# i defendants"; "[t]he alleged 
damages include harm to the shoreline, infrastructure, buildings, 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and economy of Hawai# i"; "Hawai# i has its own anti-SLAPP law, 
[Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)] Chapter 634F,  which is more 
limited than California's version" such that "3/
Hawai#i's [sic] 
legislative policy does not favor the protection sought" by 
Chevron; and "California's anti-SLAPP law may not protect Chevron if a similar suit were brought in California by a California 
3/   When the FAC and the Anti-SLAPP Motion were filed, HRS § 634F-2
(2016), known as the Citizen Participation in Government Act, stated, in
relevant part: 
Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, including rules ofcourt, upon the filing of any motion to dispose of a claimin a judicial proceeding on the grounds that the claim isbased on, relates to, or involves public participation andis a SLAPP lawsuit: 
(1) The motion shall be treated as a motion for judgment
on the pleadings, matters outside the pleadings shallbe excluded by the court, and the court shall expeditethe hearing of the motion; 
. . . . 
(4) The responding party shall: (A) Without leave of court, have seven days to amend
its pleadings to be pled with specificity, andshall include such supporting particulars as arepeculiarly within the supporting pleader'sknowledge; and 
(B) Have the burden of proof and persuasion on themotion; 
(5) The court shall make its determination based upon theallegations contained in the pleadings; 
(6) The court shall grant the motion and dismiss thejudicial claim, unless the responding party hasdemonstrated that more likely than not, therespondent's allegations do not constitute a SLAPPlawsuit as defined in section 634F-1[.] 
In turn, HRS § 634F-1 (2016) stated, in relevant part: 
"Public participation" means any oral or written
testimony submitted or provided to a governmental bodyduring the course of a governmental proceeding. 
"SLAPP" means a strategic lawsuit against public
participation and refers to a lawsuit that lacks substantialjustification or is interposed for delay or harassment andthat is solely based on the party's public participationbefore a governmental body. 
The Citizen Participation in Government Act was repealed and replaced
with the Hawai #i Public Expression Protection Act, HRS chapter 634G, effective
June 17, 2022. 2022 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 96, § 1-5 at 215-18. The new statute "does not affect . . . proceedings that were begun before its effective date."
Id., § 4 at 218. 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
municipality[,] . . . indicat[ing] a public policy in California 
that public enforcement actions should not be overly constrained by the anti-SLAPP provisions." 
On March 16, 2022, Chevron filed a notice of appeal 
from the Order Denying Anti-SLAPP Motion. We have jurisdiction over the appeal under the collateral order doctrine to the extent stated in this court's July 22, 2022 Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Motion to Dismiss. 
II. Standard of Review 
"The question of the choice of law to be applied in a 
case is a question of law reviewable de novo[.]" Mikelson, 107 
Hawai#i at 197, 111 P.3d at 606 (brackets and internal quotation 
marks omitted) (quoting Jenkins v. Whittaker Corp., 785 F.2d 720, 724 (9th Cir. 1986)). "Therefore, a choice of law issue is a question of law we review under the right/wrong standard." Id. 
(citing Jenkins, 785 F.2d at 724). 
III. Discussion 
Chevron first contends that the Circuit Court erred by 
failing to apply California law to the Anti-SLAPP Motion. Chevron acknowledges that under 
Hawai#i choice-of-law rules, the 
law of the state with the most significant relationship to the parties and subject matter should govern a dispute, but argues, based on the dépeçage doctrine, 
see infra, that the court 
conducting the analysis "must determine the state that has the most significant interest in the particular issue in dispute." Chevron argues that, here, the Circuit Court "failed to distinguish the State with the most significant interest in the Anti-SLAPP Motion from the State with the most significant [interest] in the underlying tort claims[,]" and had the court done so, it would have applied California's anti-SLAPP law to the motion. 
Plaintiffs contend that the Circuit Court's choice-of-
law analysis was correct – that "the balance of interests favors applying 
Hawai#i law to all issues, including [the] [A]nti-SLAPP 
[M]otion." More specifically, Plaintiffs argue that Hawai# i law 
8   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
presumptively applies to all issues in the case, the dépeçage 
doctrine does not change Hawaii's flexible approach to choice-of-law analysis, the Circuit Court thoroughly considered Hawai#i and California's respective interests in the Anti-SLAPP 
Motion, and the Circuit Court correctly ruled that Hawaii's interests outweigh California's in these circumstances. 
In determining choice-of-law issues, Hawai# i courts 
"look[] to the state with the most significant relationship to the parties and subject matter." Mikelson, 107 Hawai
#i at 198, 
111 P.3d at 607 (quoting Lewis v. Lewis, 69 Haw. 497, 499, 748 P.2d 1362, 1365 (1988)); see HELG Admin. Serv., LLC v. Dep't of Health, 154 Hawai# i 228, 230 n.4, 549 P.3d 313, 315 n.4 (2024). 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has explained its flexible approach in 
choice-of-law analysis as follows: 
This court has "moved away from the traditional and rigid
conflict-of-laws rules in favor of the modern trend towards a more flexible approach looking to the state with the mostsignificant relationship to the parties and subject matter."Lewis v. Lewis, 69 Haw. 497, 499, 748 P.2d 1362, 1365 (1988)(citing Peters[ v. Peters, 63 Haw. 653, 664, 634 P.2d 586,593 (1981)]). This flexible approach places "primaryemphasis on deciding which state would have the strongestinterest in seeing its laws applied to the particular case."Id. Hence, this court has said that the interests of the
states and applicable public policy reasons should determinewhether Hawai #i law or another state's law should apply.
See Peters, 63 Haw. at 667-68, 634 P.2d at 595. "The preferred analysis, then in our opinion, would be anassessment of the interests and policy factors involved witha purpose of arriving at a desirable result in eachsituation." Id. at 664, 634 P.2d at 593. 
Mikelson, 107 Hawai# i at 198, 111 P.3d at 607 (brackets and 
ellipsis omitted). 
Hawaii's flexible approach to choice-of-law analysis is 
consistent with the well-settled principle that different 
jurisdictions' laws can apply to different claims or issues in the same case, sometimes called the dépeçage principle or doctrine.  See, e.g., Jou v. Adalian, Civ. No. 15-00155 JMS-KJM, 
4/
4/ The term dépeçage, roughly translated, "refers to the process of
cutting something into pieces" — here, "the process of cutting up a case into
individual issues" — Ruiz v. Blentech Corp., 89 F.3d 320, 324, n.1 (7th Cir.1996), and stands for the "routine" rule that a court may properly conduct"separate choice of law analys[e]s of different substantive issues" in thesame case. In re Korean Air Lines Disaster of Sept. 1, 1983, 932 F.2d 1475,
1495 (D.C. Cir. 1991); see Allstate Ins. Co. v. Hague, 449 U.S. 302, 307
(continued...) 
9    
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2018 WL 1955415, at *7-*8 (D. Haw. Apr. 25, 2018) (applying 
Hawai#i choice-of-law rules and concluding that California law 
governed the plaintiff's spoliation claim, while Hawai# i law 
governed other claims); 
DeRoburt v. Gannett Co., Inc., 83 F.R.D. 
574, 581 n.29 (D. Haw. 1979) ("Traditional choice of law rules have also been used to apply different rules of law to different issues arising in the same case."). 
Here, the Circuit Court applied the dépeçage principle 
by considering the respective interests of California and Hawai# i 
implicated by the Anti-SLAPP Motion. 
The court recognized that 
"Mikelson adopted a flexible balancing approach, with no one factor being dispositive[,]" looked at all relevant factors, and determined that California law did not govern the motion.
5/ 
In particular, the Circuit Court observed that the 
Plaintiffs are in, and have "specific, enduring, and substantial attachments to[,]" Hawai# i, "[t]here are some Hawai# i 
[d]efendants," and "[t]he alleged damages include harm to the shoreline, infrastructure, buildings, and economy of 
Hawai#i[,]" 
all of which weighed in favor of applying Hawai# i law. In 
analyzing Chevron's argument that its allegedly tortious conduct all emanated from California, the court considered these Hawai# i-
focused factors in balancing California and Hawaii's respective interests in the Anti-SLAPP Motion. See infra. 
The Circuit Court noted that "Hawai# i has its own 
anti-SLAPP law, HRS Chapter 634F, which is more limited than California's version[,]" and "protects testimony to a governmental body during a government proceeding." 
The court 
concluded that "Hawai# i's legislative policy does not favor the 
protection sought by this motion[,]" which "weigh[ed] against applying California's anti-SLAPP law in Hawai# i." The court also 
observed that "California's anti-SLAPP law may not protect 
4/ (...continued)
(1981) (noting "the recognition, long accepted by this Court, that a set of
facts giving rise to a lawsuit, or a particular issue within a lawsuit, mayjustify . . . application of the law of more than one jurisdiction."). 
5/ The Circuit Court did not expressly state that Hawai #i law 
governed the Anti-SLAPP Motion, but that was the clear implication of itsanalysis and its decision to deny the motion. 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Chevron if a similar suit were brought in California by a 
California municipality[,]" because two provisions of the law, Cal. Civ. Proc. Code §§ 425.16(d) and 731, when read together, "indicate that city public nuisance actions are not protected by the anti-SLAPP law." The court acknowledged that the statutory language "can be parsed and distinguished," but concluded that "it generally indicates a public policy in California that public enforcement actions should not be overly constrained by the anti-SLAPP provisions[,]" which weighed against applying the law in Hawai# i. 
Addressing Chevron's argument that "the allegedly 
tortious conduct would all originate in its California headquarters[,]" the Circuit Court noted that "this is not alleged in Plaintiffs' operative pleading and is disputed." 
The 
court concluded that even if all of Chevron's conduct did emanate from California, this was "a factor to consider, along with where the alleged harm occurred, where the alleged victims reside, etc.," such that the origination factor "weigh[ed] in favor of applying California's anti-SLAPP law, but not substantially." Indeed, because Chevron and the other defendants allegedly marketed their products in 
Hawai#i, with harmful effects that 
allegedly occurred in Hawai# i, Hawai# i has a strong interest in 
protecting its residents from the alleged misconduct and the claimed broad sweep of an anti-SLAPP law that threatens to immunize such conduct. 
The Circuit Court also recognized that "California's 
anti-SLAPP law has a 'commercial speech' exception[,]" and was "not clearly convinced one way or the other on this limited record" whether the exception applied to the alleged conduct. The court concluded that "if this factor weigh[ed] at all, it weigh[ed] slightly in favor of applying California's anti-SLAPP law." 
Based on a careful balancing of these multiple relevant 
factors, the Circuit Court denied the Anti-SLAPP Motion, reasoning that California did not have a sufficient interest to warrant applying its anti-SLAPP law in these circumstances. 
On 
this record, we cannot say that the court erred in balancing "the 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interests and policy factors involved with a purpose of arriving 
at a desirable result in [this] situation." Mikelson, 107 
Hawai#i at 198, 111 P.3d at 607 (quoting Peters, 63 Haw. at 664, 
634 P.2d at 593). If anything, the Circuit Court may have underweighted Hawaii's interest in protecting its residents from the allegedly tortious conduct. See supra. Any underweighting 
of these interests was harmless, however, in light of the resulting balance the court reached. 
Chevron argues that the Circuit Court improperly 
considered Hawaii's interest in Plaintiffs' "underlying tort claims," by recognizing that "[t]here are some Hawai# i 
Defendants" and "[t]he alleged damages include harm to" 
Hawai#i. 
According to Chevron, the court should have conducted a separate, narrower analysis that considered only California's and Hawaii's interests in the Anti-SLAPP Motion, divorced from Hawaii's interests in the claims that are the subject of the motion. Chevron urges this more limited choice-of-law analysis, while also arguing for purposes of the anti-SLAPP-law analysis that the alleged misconduct amounts to political speech intended to influence public debate rather than commercial speech intended to sell gas to consumers - a disputed issue implicating the merits of Plaintiffs' claims. In other words, in these circumstances, California and Hawaii's respective interests in the Anti-SLAPP Motion are not so neatly cut and separated from Hawaii's interests in protecting its residents from the alleged misconduct. The merits of Plaintiffs' claims bleed into the merits of Chevron's anti-SLAPP defense. In these circumstances, a blinders-on approach to choice-of-law analysis runs counter to the "flexible approach" the supreme court applied in Mikelson, which instructs Hawai# i courts to balance "the interests and 
policy factors involved with a purpose of arriving at a desirable result in each situation." 
107 Hawai# i at 198, 111 P.3d at 607 
(quoting Peters
, 63 Haw. at 664, 634 P.2d at 593). 
We further note that the Circuit Court's analysis is 
consistent with a number of federal court decisions that have declined to apply California's anti-SLAPP statute in lawsuits brought outside of California. See, e.g., Kesner v. Baker Botts 
12   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
L.L.P., No. 3:20-cv-01084-WSH-DEB, 2020 WL 5966228, at *3 (S.D. 
Cal. Oct. 8, 2020) ("district courts have been reluctant to apply California's anti-SLAPP statute extraterritorially even with the presence of California factors when California's interest is not sufficiently strong"); Ayyadurai v. Floor64, Inc., 270 F. Supp. 3d 343, 349 (D. Mass. 2017) (declining to apply California's anti-SLAPP statute in a case involving a California defendant, California tortious conduct, and a Massachusetts plaintiff, citing Massachusetts's "interest in protecting its citizens from tortious conduct");
6/ Schering Corp. v. First DataBank Inc., No. C 
07-01142 WHA, 2007 WL 1176627, at *6 (N.D. Cal. Apr. 20, 2007) (applying New Jersey choice-of-law principles: "How individual states choose to prevent the abuse of process within their own courts is best left to individual states to decide for themselves. And while 'California has a great interest in determining how much protection to give California speakers,' . . . California's legislative policies designed to deter baseless tort actions should have no bearing on actions filed in New Jersey." (citation omitted)). Indeed, the Circuit Court's weighing of the relevant factors is consistent with the analytical approach taken by the United States District Court for the District of Hawai# i in Ratner v. Kohler, Civ. No. 17-00542 
HG-KSC, 2018 WL 1055528, at *4-6 (D. Haw. Feb. 26, 2018), where the court ultimately applied California law to a defamation claim and an anti-SLAPP motion based on Hawai# i choice-of-law 
principles. There, the court concluded that California had the most significant relationship to the parties and the subject matter, because the plaintiff's "purported damages would most likely occur in California where he resides and conducts his business[,]" the defendant's allegedly defamatory Facebook post stated that "the purported rape took place in California," and the plaintiff had presented "no evidence that the circulation of 
6/ Like Hawai #i, Massachusetts enacted an anti-SLAPP statute that
applies to claims involving a person's exercise of their right to petition (or
participate in) the government, and "not to claims involving a person'sexercise of free-speech rights more generally . . . ." 
Ayyadurai
, 270 F.
Supp. 3d at 354. More specifically, Hawaii's former statute, HRS Chapter634F, protected testimony to a governmental body during a governmentproceeding. See supra note 3. 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendant's Facebook post was limited to users in Hawaii and was 
not available to users in California." Id. at *6. Here, faced 
with allegations that Defendants marketed their products in Hawai#i, with harmful effects that occurred in Hawai# i
 , the 
Circuit Court considered the same type of factors in determining that California did not
 have the most significant relationship to 
the parties and the subject matter for purposes of the Anti-SLAPP Motion. 
Chevron relies on another line of federal cases that 
apply the "separate" analysis that Chevron favors in this context and that purportedly give the defendant's domicile "near-dispositive weight in any choice-of-law analysis concerning an anti-SLAPP motion." See, e.g., Underground Sols., Inc. v. 
Palermo, 41 F. Supp. 3d 720, 726 (N.D. Ill. 2014) (observing that the "'place of injury . . . is less important' in 'the anti-SLAPP context'" (quoting Chi v. Loyola Univ. Med. Ctr., 787 F. Supp. 2d 797, 803 (N.D. Ill. 2011)); Diamond Ranch Acad., Inc. v. Filer, 117 F. Supp. 3d 1313, 1323 (D. Utah 2015) (noting that "the place where the injury occurred" has "little, if any, relevance in this area of law"); Glob. Relief v. N.Y. Times Co., 2002 WL 31045394, at *11 (N.D. Ill. Sept. 11, 2002) ("California has a great interest in determining how much protection to give California speakers"). None of these cases appears to conduct the type of analysis that Mikelson
 demands of Hawai#i courts, i.e., an 
assessment of all relevant factors in determining the state with the most significant relationship to the parties and subject matter, with no one factor being dispositive. 107 Hawai# i at 
198, 111 P.3d at 607. That is the analysis that the Circuit Court conducted here, so as to "arriv[e] at a desirable result in [this] situation." 
Id.
 (quoting Peters, 63 Haw. at 664, 634 P.2d 
at 593). 
Accordingly, we hold that the Circuit Court did not err 
in concluding that California law did not apply to the Anti-SLAPP Motion, and denying the motion on that basis, without considering its merits. We likewise need not consider the merits of the motion. 
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV. Conclusion 
For the reasons discussed above, the "Order Denying 
Chevron Defendants' Special Motion to Strike and/or Dismiss the 
Complaint Pursuant to California's Anti-SLAPP Law," entered on February 15, 2022, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, is affirmed. 
On the briefs: /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Presiding Judge 
Melvyn M. Miyagi,Ross T. Shinyama,Summer H. Kaiawe /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
(Watanabe Ing LLP), Associate Judge 
Theodore J. Boutrous, Jr.(pro hac vice),Andrea E. Neuman (pro hac vice),Joshua D. Dick (pro hac vice)(Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher LLP),Eica W. Harris (pro hac vice)(Susman Godfrey LLP)for Defendants-Appellants 
Robert N. Kohn,
Nicolette Winter, andJeff A. Lau,Deputies Corporation Counselfor Plaintiffs-Appellees 
/s/ Rebecca A. CopelandAssociate Judge 
15 