  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
#I 
---o0o---
IN THE MATTER OF THE TAX APPEAL OF JEFFREY S. LINDNER
 AND MOLOA# A FARMS, LLC,
Taxpayers-Appellants-Appellees 
NO. CAAP-20-0000431 
APPEAL FROM THE TAX APPEAL COURT 
(CASE NO. 1TX14-1-0241 (Consolidated with 1TX 14-1-0242;
1TX 14-1-0276 and 1TX 14-1-0277; 1TX 15-1-0326 and 
1TX 15-1-0327)) 
N
OVEMBER 28, 2022 
HIRAOKA, PRESIDING JUDGE, NAKASONE AND MCCULLEN, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKASONE, J. 
Appellee-Appellant County of Kaua# i (County), appeals 
from the (1) Order Granting Taxpayers-Appellants' (Taxpayers)1 
Motion for Summary Judgment (MSJ) as to the Issue of Whether the 
Guinea Grass in Question Constitutes a Crop; and (2) Order 
1 In this appeal, Jeffrey S. Lindner ( Lindner) and Moloa #a Farms,
LLC, are referred to collectively, as "Taxpayers." Lindner is a "member,
owner, and controller" of 
Moloa #a Farms, LLC.   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Denying County of 
Kaua#i-Appellee's Motion for Summary Judgment 
as to the Issue of Whether the Guinea Grass in Question 
Constitutes a Crop (collectively, Orders), both filed and entered
on May 29, 2020, by the Tax Appeal Court of the State of 
Hawai#i 
(Tax Appeal Court). 2 
This appeal arises out of cross-motions for summary 
judgment filed by the parties over the County's denial of 
Taxpayers' application to have land used to grow guinea grass that is baled and sold as hay for cattle feed qualify as "agricultural use" for tax purposes.  The parties dispute 
whether the guinea grass is a "crop" qualifying as "agriculturaluse," or whether it is a "forage crop" excluded from qualifying as "agricultural use." 
3
 
The County raises a single point of error on appeal, 
that the Tax Appeal Court erred when it held that: 
"And on that narrow basis [ i.e. 'that this grass is being
raised and cultivated to put into bales of hay for the
purpose of feeding cattle'], this Court concludes that theguinea grass in question does constitute a crop andtherefore is agricultural use within the framework of theissue of this case." 
2 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided. 
3 Taxpayers' MSJ explained that the issue is "important" because if
"growing hay is an 'agricultural use,' property tax breaks are available forTaxpayer[s] through the Agricultural Dedication Program." Under Kaua #i County
Code (K.C.C.) § 5A-9.1(b)(3)(2002), an agricultural dedication is taxed at 50%
of the land's assessed value: 
(3) The dedication shall be recorded either with theAssistant Registrar of the Land Court or with the Bureau ofConveyances, as the case may be; and provided further thatland situated within an agricultural district, which may befurther subdivided, may be dedicated for a period of twenty(20) years and shall be taxed at fifty percent (50%) of itsassessed value in such use, provided that such dedication isrecorded with the Assistant Registrar of the Land Court orthe Bureau of Conveyances, as the case may be. 
(Emphasis added). 
2   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
(Brackets and italics in original).  The County argues that the 
Tax Appeal Court erred in concluding that the guinea grass at 
issue here constituted a "crop" under K.C.C. § 5A-9.1(a)(1) 
because guinea grass is an excluded "forage crop" under the Agricultural Dedication Program Rules (ADPR)  Rule §RP-2-2 (2-
2),
  and thus, does not qualify as "agricultural use." The 7654
4 Taxpayers' counterstatement of the point of error contends that
the issue before the Tax Appeal Court under the stipulated facts was: 
Whether hale koa, panicum, pangola, kikuyu, napier grass and
similar forage crops used for soilage or silage, includingbut not limited to guinea grass, that grow on land zonedagriculture, and that are proposed to be cut and baled andmade into hay, for the purpose described in the 2013Application would qualify as an "agricultural use" underK.C.C. § 5A-9.1 and related administrative rules. 
The County appeals the specific ruling made by the Tax Appeal Court, which isnarrower than the Taxpayers' counterstatement above. Taxpayers did not file across-appeal. We address the specific contention that the County has raisedin this appeal. 
5 K.C.C. § 5A-9.1 (2002), entitled "Dedication of Lands," provides
in pertinent part: 
(a) Definitions. As used in this Section: 
"Agricultural use" means the use of land on a continuous and
regular basis that demonstrates that the owner intends toobtain a monetary profit from cash income received by: 
(1) Raising, harvesting, and selling crops; [(or)] (2) Feeding, breeding, managing, and selling of livestock,
poultry, or honey bees, or any products thereof[.] 
(Emphases added). 
6 The ADPR are the administrative rules of the K.C.C. Director of 
Finance, and their purpose is to "implement the provisions" of K.C.C. § 5A-9.1"relating to dedication of lands to [sic] agricultural use." ADPR Rule § RP-2-1 (2-1). 
7 ADPR Rule §RP-2-2 (2002), defines "crop" as follows: 
"Crop" includes the actual production of specific
agricultural or farm crops such as sugar cane, pineapple,papaya, eggplant, beans, pineapple, truck crops, grain oralfalfa, orchard crops, flowers, nursery or ornamental cropsor the like, but excludes hale koa, panicum, pangola,kikuyu, napier grass and similar forage crops used forsoilage or silage, and which are deemed t[o] be pasture useswithin the urban district. 
3   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
County also argues that the Tax Appeal Court erred in concluding 
that "putting guinea grass into bales of hay" for the purpose of feeding livestock constituted the act of "feeding" to qualify as an "agricultural use" under subsection (a)(2) of K.C.C. § 5A-9.1. 
We hold that the Tax Appeal Court erred in granting 
Taxpayers' MSJ and denying the County's MSJ, where Taxpayers' activity did not constitute "agricultural use" under K.C.C. § 5A-9.1 as a matter of law, because (1) the guinea grass is an excluded "forage crop" under ADPR Rule 2-2 and is not a "crop" under subsection (a)(1); and (2) there was no actual "feeding" of livestock occurring on Taxpayers' land under subsection (a)(2). 
I.
 BACKGROUND 
The parties agreed via stipulation to the following 
facts: 
1. In 2013, [Taypayers] submitted an application (the
"Application") to dedicate additional acreage on TMK 4-9-
003-021-0000 (the "Parcel"). The Application was signed onJune 26, 2013 and stamped by the County as received on June28, 2013. 
2. The Application sought to dedicate 32.406 acres on the
Parcel to the ranching of off site feed for cattle. 3. The Application states that 32.406 acres of the Parcel
was being leased at the time of the 2013 Application to
Makoa Ranch Inc. DBA Farias Cattle Company as an offsitesource for a stocker program for the purposes of growingfeed to prepare the shipping of stocker calves, and that thehaying operation had been in existence since the summer of2012. 
(Emphases added). "Forage" is defined as "food for animals especially when
taken by browsing or grazing." Forage, Merriam-Webster,
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/forage  (last visited Oct. 3, 2022).
"Silage" is defined as "fodder (such as hay or corn) converted into succulent
feed for livestock through processes of anaerobic bacterial fermentation (as
in a silo)." Silage, Merriam-Webster,
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/silage  (last visited Oct. 3, 2022).
"Soilage" is defined as "green crops for feeding confined animals," and as
"green fodder, esp[ecially] when freshly cut and fed to livestock in a
confined area." Soilage, Merriam-Webster,
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/soilage  (last visited Oct. 3,
2022); Soilage, Collins Dictionary,
https://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/soilage  (last visited
Oct. 3, 2022). 
4   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
4. The County denied the Application by letter dated
September 13, 2013. 
5. The letter states that the denial was because 
"Pursuant to Section 5A-9.1 of the Kauai County Code, the
cultivation and harvesting of forage crops (hay) is notconsidered a dedicated agricultural use." 
6. On October 21, 2013, Lorna A. Nishimitsu, Counsel for
Taxpayer[s], informed Deputy County Attorney Jennifer Winn,
that the hay from [Taxpayers'] haying operation was sold for$60 a bale. 
7. The parties stipulate that hay produced from the type
of grass growing on the [Taxpayers'] land is encompassed in
the following: "hale koa, panicum, pangola, kikuyu, napiergrass and similar forage crops used for soilage or silage." 
8. The parties agree that the only issue to be resolved
by the Court is whether hale koa, panicum, pangola, kikuyu,
napier grass and similar forage crops used for soilage orsilage, including but not limited to guinea grass, that growon land zoned agriculture, and that are proposed to be cutand baled and made into hay, for the purpose described inthe 2013 Application would qualify as an 'agricultural use'under K.C.C. § 5A-9.1 and related administrative rules. 
(Emphases added). As the stipulation indicates, it is undisputed 
that the hay made from the guinea grass in this case is a forage crop "used for soilage or silage." Both sides filed opposition memoranda. 
At the February 16, 2019 hearing on the cross-motions 
for summary judgment, the Tax Appeal Court ruled: 
It is simply a question of whether the . . . guinea
grass in question -- constitute a crop. That's the only
question. 
And there is no issue of fact that this grass is
being raised and cultivated to put into bales of hay forthe purpose of feeding cattle. 
And on that narrow basis, this Court concludes that
the guinea grass in question does constitute a crop andtherefore is agricultural use within the framework of theissue of this case. 
So based upon that finding and conclusion, the Court
will grant the [Taxpayers'] motion for summary judgment.But the Court will grant that motion without prejudice to afull litigation regarding all factors that are relevant tothe question of whether a particular use of the propertyconstitutes agricultural use. 
5  
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
This ruling is based upon the narrow issue to the
exclusion of all other issues that bear upon the question of
whether the guinea grass in question would constituteagricultural use. 
But on this record, with the issue as it is framed,
the Court must ignore all of the other requirements foragricultural use and simply focus upon whether the guineagrass in question as it is used constitutes a crop. And the Court finds that it does constitute a crop on this record. 
So the Court will grant the [Taxpayers'] motion
without prejudice to a full litigation of all relevantissues pertaining to what constitutes agricultural use. 
Therefore, the Court will also deny the County's
motion for summary judgment. 
This timely appeal followed. 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW 
A. Summary Judgment 
We review the Tax Appeal Court's grant of summary 
judgment de novo. Kaheawa Wind Power, LLC v. Cnty. of Maui, 135 
Hawai#i 202, 206, 347 P.3d 632, 636 (App. 2014) (citing Kamikawa 
v. Lynden, 89 Hawai# i 51, 54, 968 P.2d 653, 656 (1998)). 
"[I]nasmuch as the facts here are undisputed and the sole 
question is one of law, we review the decision of the Tax Appeal Court under the right/wrong standard." Id. (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted).
B. Statutory Interpretation 
This case requires us to interpret the pertinent tax 
provisions of the K.C.C. and Administrative Rules of the Director 
of Finance. "When interpreting a municipal ordinance, we apply the same rules of construction that we apply to statutes." Ocean 
Resort Villas Vacation Owners Ass'n v. Cnty. of Maui, 147 Hawai# i 
544, 553, 465 P.3d 991, 1000 (2020) (citing Rees v. Carlisle, 113 Hawai#i 446, 452, 153 P.3d 1131, 1137 (2007)). "[T]he general 
principles of construction which apply to statutes also apply to administrative rules." In re Hawaiian Elec. Co. Inc., 149 
Hawai#i 343, 359, 489 P.3d 1255, 1271 (2021) (citation omitted). 
6   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
We interpret statutes in accordance with the following: 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.Second, where the statutory language is plain andunambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plainand obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task ofstatutory construction is our foremost obligation toascertain and give effect to the intention of thelegislature, which is to be obtained primarily from thelanguage contained in the statute itself. Fourth, when thereis doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness oruncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an ambiguityexists. 
Ocean Resort Villas Vacation Owners Ass'n, 147 Hawai# i at 553, 
465 P.3d at 1000 (quoting Rees, 113 Hawai# i at 452, 153 P.3d at 
1137. 
In construing an ambiguous statute, "[t]he meaning of theambiguous words may be sought by examining the context, withwhich the ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may becompared, in order to ascertain their true meaning." [HawaiiRevised Statutes ( HRS)] § 1-15(1) [(1993)]. Moreover, the
courts may resort to extrinsic aids in determininglegislative intent. One avenue is the use of legislativehistory as an interpretive tool. 
Kaheawa Wind Power, LLC v. Cnty. of Maui, 146 Hawai# i 76, 88, 456 
P.3d 149, 161 (2020) (brackets in original). 
III. DISCUSSION 
A. The agricultural use subsections at issue here,(a)(1) and (a)(2) of K.C.C. § 5A-9.1, are separate
ways to qualify for "agricultural use." 
The Tax Appeal Court did not expressly state whether it 
was relying on subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) in concluding there 
was "agricultural use" under K.C.C. § 5A-9.1, but used terminology from both subsections explaining its reasoning. The County argues that: 
[T]he Court's language indicates that its logical
progression was as follows: (1) because the guinea grasswas raised and cultivated to put into bales of hay for thepurpose of feeding cattle, the guinea grass constitutes acrop, and (2) because the guinea grass constitutes a crop,it constitutes agricultural use. That logical progression
is clearly erroneous for the reasons already stated: i.e., 
7    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
guinea grass is not a crop, raising it and cultivating it
for the purpose of feeding cattle does not make it a crop,and if it is not a crop, then it is not an agricultural useunder K.C.C. § 5A-9.1(a)(1). 
. . . . 
. . . To the extent that the Tax Appeals Court was relyingon K.C.C. § 5A-9.1(a)(2) for its holding, putting a foragecrop like guinea grass into bales of hay is plainly not"feeding . . . livestock." 
This argument is persuasive. 
To the extent the Tax Appeal Court relied on "feeding" 
of cattle under subsection (a)(2) to determine whether the guinea 
grass constituted a "crop" under subsection (a)(1), this was erroneous, as the requirements in the subsections must be separately met. K.C.C. § 5A-9.1(a) defines "agricultural use" as the "use of land on a continuous and regular basis that demonstrates that the owner intends to obtain a monetary profit from cash income received by" any of the nine types of activities set forth in subsection (1) through (9),  including raising 
8
8 K.C.C. § 5A-9.1 states: 
(a) Definitions: As used in this Section: 
"Agricultural use" means the use of land on a continuous and
regular basis that demonstrates that the owner intends toobtain a monetary profit from cash income received by: 
(1) Raising, harvesting, and selling crops; 
(2) Feeding, breeding, managing, and selling of
livestock, poultry, or honey bees, or any productsthereof; 
(3) Ranching of livestock; (4) Dairying or selling of dairy products; (5) Animal husbandry, provided that the exclusive
husbandry of horses for recreational or hobby purposes shall
not be considered an agricultural use under this Section; 
(6) Aquaculture; 
(7) Horticulture; (8) Participating in a government-funded crop
reduction or set-aside program; or 
8   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
crops; feeding, breeding, managing, selling, or ranching of 
livestock; dairying or selling dairy products; animal husbandry; aquaculture; horticulture; government-funded crop programs; or cultivating trees. 
K.C.C. § 5A-9.1 specifically uses the term 
"or" rather than "and" in separating subsections (1)-(9), which list various activities that may each qualify as "agricultural use." "Or" is disjunctive, "indicating an alternative[,] [and] [i]t usually connects words or phrases of different meanings permitting a choice of either." State v. Kalani, 108 Hawai# i 
279, 284, 118 P.3d 1222, 1227 (2005) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Because K.C.C. § 5A-9.1 lists "raising, harvesting, and selling crops" in subsection (1) and "feeding" of livestock in subsection (2), the two activities are alternative ways to qualify for "agricultural use." See id. To 
the extent the Tax Appeal Court appears to have relied on the "feeding" of livestock in subsection (a)(2) to arrive at its conclusion that the activity in question constituted a "crop" 
(9) Cultivating of trees on land that has been
prepared by intensive cultivation and tilling, such as by
plowing or turning over the soil, and on which all unwantedplant growth is controlled continuously for the exclusivepurpose of raising such trees. 
. . . . 
Physical evidence such as grazing livestock, fences,artificial or natural windbreaks, water facilities,irrigation systems, or crops that are actually incultivation, or indicia that farm management efforts such asweed control, pruning, plowing, fertilizing, fencing, orpest, insect, or disease control are occurring on the land,shall also be used as factors to determine whether the land is being used for any of the listed activities. 
. . . . 
For parcels involved in the ranching of livestock, theentire dedicated area shall have established fences and livestock present at the time of filing a petition todedicate. 
The term "agricultural use" shall not mean uses primarily as
yard space, landscaped open areas, botanical gardens, or theraising of livestock or fruit trees primarily for home use. 
(Emphases and bolding added). 
9   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
under subsection (a)(1), this was erroneous. 
K.C.C. § 5A-
9.1(a)(2); see Kaheawa Wind Power, LLC, 135 Hawai# i at 206, 347 
P.3d at 636. 
B. Growing and baling of hay done for the purpose
of feeding livestock, where no actual feedingoccurs on the land, does not constitute"feeding" of livestock under the plain meaningof K.C.C. § 5A-9.1(a)(2). 
The County contends that putting guinea grass into 
bales of hay for the purpose of feeding does not constitute 
"feeding" necessary to qualify as "agricultural use" under K.C.C. § 5A-9.1(a)(2). The County argues: 
The word "feeding" means "the act or process of eating or
being fed." Feeding, Merriam-Webster (Sept. 16, 2020, 1:41
PM), https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/feeding.
Managing a feedlot9—where one obtains a monetary profit from
cash income received by the act or process of feedinglivestock—would qualify as feeding. However, no livestockare "eating" or "being fed" while the landowner merely cutsher grass and puts it into bales of hay. 
(Footnote in original). 
"In conducting a plain meaning analysis, this court may 
resort to legal or other well accepted dictionaries as one way to 
determine the ordinary meaning of certain terms not statutorily defined." Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. Omiya, 142 Hawai# i 439, 449-
50, 420 P.3d 370, 380-81 (2018) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). K.C.C. § 5A-9.1(a)(2) specifies that "agricultural use" means "the use of land on a continuous and regular basis that demonstrates that the owner intends to obtain a monetary profit from cash income received by: . . . (2) Feeding, breeding, managing, and selling of livestock, . . . or any products thereof[.]" (Emphases added). The "plain" and "ordinary" meaning of "feeding" livestock is that the actual feeding of livestock is occurring on the land zoned agricultural -- i.e., where livestock are eating or being fed on the land. 
9 "A feedlot is defined as a 'plot of land on which livestock are
fattened for market.' Feedlot, Merriam-Webster (Sept. 11, 2020, 11:48 AM),
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/feedlot." 
10    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
See Ocean Resort Villas Vacation Owners Ass'n
, 147 Hawai# i at 
553, 465 P.3d at 1000; Omiya, 142 Hawai# i at 449, 420 P.3d at 
380. Here, however, the stipulated facts reflect the land is 
used to grow guinea grass that is baled and made into hay for the 
purpose of feeding livestock. There is no evidence of any "act or process of [cattle] eating [the hay] or being fed" the hay on the land proposed for agricultural dedication. Feeding, Merriam-
Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/feeding (last visited Oct. 4, 2022). Thus, there is no "agricultural use" based on "feeding" livestock, and K.C.C. § 5A-9.1(a)(2) plainly does not apply. See Omiya, 142 Hawai# i at 449, 420 P.3d at 380. 
C. Applying principles of statutory construction
and grammar to the forage crop exclusion in
ADPR Rule 2-2, the guinea grass is not a"crop" and does not constitute "agriculturaluse" under K.C.C. § 5A-9.1(a)(1). 
1. Grammatical analysis 
The definition of "crop" in ADPR Rule 2-2 excludes 
"forage crops used for soilage or silage, and which are deemed 
t[o] be pasture uses within the urban district" (forage crop
exclusion). (Italics and bolding added). The parties stipulated 
that guinea grass is a "forage crop[] used for soilage or 
silage," but they disagree on the meaning of the remainder of the forage crop exclusion, including the comma, i.e. "[(comma)], and which are deemed t[o] be pasture uses within the urban district" (comma-and-which clause). 
The County contends that the comma-and-which clause is 
a textbook example of a descriptive "non-restrictive clause" that provides "supplementary information about its antecedent --forage crops used for soilage or silage."
10 According to the 
10 The County relies on multiple cases in explaining that the comma-
and-which clause is nonrestrictive. See generally McCarthan v. Dir. of
Goodwill Indus.-Suncoast, Inc., 851 F.3d 1076, 1126-27 (11th Cir. 2017)
(Wilson, J., dissenting) (finding that a restrictive clause limits and definesthe subject they modify, and unlike nonrestrictive clauses, they are not setoff by commas); NACS v. Bd. of Governors of Fed. Rsrv. Sys., 746 F.3d 474,485-87 (D.C. Cir. 2014) (finding that restrictive clauses are not set off by a 
11   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
County, "[t]he nonrestrictive clause simply informs the reader 
that forage crops used for soilage or silage (like guinea grass) are deemed to be pasture uses in the urban district."
 11
On the other hand, Taxpayers contend that the use of 
the comma and the word "which" does not always signify a non-restrictive clause, and that it is not an "'ironclad grammatical rule.'" Instead, they argue, the court must look to the "'entireprovision'" of ADPR Rule 2-2, and disregard its punctuation to discover its true intent.
 12 
comma, and that "which" is often used with commas and "that" is not);
Elementary v. Orleans Par. Sch. Bd., No. 16-2323, 2016 WL 5390393, at *6 (E.D.La. Sept. 27, 2016) (holding that a clause was nonrestrictive because theclause added detail to the sentence, and if removed, would not change themeaning of the sentence, and also matched the intent of the provision);Maizner v. Haw., Dept. of Educ., 405 F.Supp.2d 1225, 1235 (D. Haw. 2005)(finding that restrictive clauses are relative clauses that limit the meaningof a modified noun); Mass. Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Aritech Corp., 882 F.Supp.190, 195 (D. Mass. 1995) (holding that a provision was nonrestrictive becausethe clause was not set off by commas which also matched the intent of theprovision). 
11 Taxpayers claim that the County's comma-and-which clause argument
was not raised below and is waived. The County maintains that this argumentwas not waived because, inter alia, the "crux of the issue" and the "thrust ofthe County's argument remain the same" -- that the comma-and-which clause isnon-restrictive. 
In Jijun Yin v. Aguiar
, 146 Hawai #i 254, 260 n.17, 463 P.3d 911,
917 n.17 (2020), the Supreme Court of Hawai #i held that this court erred when 
it was tasked with interpreting a statute and failed to consider legislativehistory and "give effect to the intention of the legislature" on grounds ofwaiver where the arguments were not preserved below. The supreme courtstated: 
[t]o the extent that the ICA did not consider thelegislative history or intent of the statutes because Yindid not raise the issues before the trial court, we havepreviously held that appellate courts may resolve a properlypreserved issue by answering a threshold or dispositivequestion of law, even though the argument is not advanced bythe parties. 
Id.
 (citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). Thus, in
applying ADPR Rule 2-2, we are not precluded from considering the County'snonrestrictive comma-and-which clause argument that was not specificallyraised below. Id.
12 Taxpayers rely on the following cases to support its argument that
the comma-and-which clause should be treated as a restrictive clause. See 
generally Food and Drug Admin. v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp., 529 U.S.120, 133 (2000) (holding that the court must interpret words of a statute incontext of the entire provision); U.S. v. Transocean Deepwater Drilling, Inc.,767 F.3d 485, 494-95 (5th Cir. 2014) (citations omitted) (holding that courts 
12   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Generally, while the absence of a comma followed by 
"which" signifies a restrictive clause, the presence of a comma
followed by "which," as in this case, typically signifies a  
nonrestrictive clause. See United States v. Nishiie
, 996 F.3d 
1013, 1021-22 (9th Cir. 2021) (construing a provision that contained the word "which" with no preceding comma).
13 The 
Nishiie court stated that: 
[a] clause is said to be restrictive (or defining) if it
provides information that is essential to understanding theintended meaning of the rest of the sentence. Restrictive 
relative clauses are usually introduced by that (or by
who/whom/whose ) and are never set off by commas from the
rest of the sentence. .[ ].[ ]. A clause is said to be
nonrestrictive (or nondefining or parenthetical) if it couldbe omitted without obscuring the identity of the noun towhich it refers or otherwise changing the intended meaningof the rest of the sentence. Nonrestrictive relative 
clauses are usually introduced by which (or who/whom/whose )
and are set off from the rest of the sentence by commas. 
Id. at 1021-22 (citing The Chicago Manual of Style § 6.27 (17th 
ed. 2017) (ebook)) (emphasis added) (ellipses in original); see also Gold Coast Neighborhood Ass'n v. State, 140 Hawai# i 437, 
473-74, 403 P.3d 214, 250-51 (Nakayama, J., dissenting) (2017) (noting that the majority's construction "ignores the rest of the sentence immediately succeeding the phrase at issue: 'a seawall such as that which is in question here which is used as a public thoroughfare[.]'" and explaining that "[t]he underlined phrase is a non-restrictive relative clause, meaning that it defines the 
should not be strictly guided by grammar in interpreting a statute, but must
consider the entire provision, and may even disregard a punctuation to renderits true meaning); NACS, 746 F.3d at 487 (holding that even though Congressused the word "which" rather than "that," the clause was still restrictive). 
13 In Nishiie, the Ninth Circuit was tasked with interpreting the
Wartime Suspension of Limitations Act of the United States Code, where thecourt had to determine whether a clause that started with the word "which,"was intended to restrict the entire Act. Id. at 1015-16. The Nishiie court 
found the "which" clause to be restrictive to the immediate preceding phrase:"(3) committed in connection with the negotiation, procurement, award,performance, payment for, interim financing, cancelation, or other terminationor settlement, of any contract, subcontract, or purchase order which isconnected with or related to the prosecution of the war or directly connectedwith or related to the authorized use of the Armed Forces[.]" Id. at 1020 
(emphasis added). 
13   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
antecedent noun–the seawall.") (citing William Strunk Jr. & E.B. 
White, 
The Elements of Style 3-4 (3d ed. 1979)). 
Here, both the structure and substance of the comma-
and-which clause indicate that it is a nonrestrictive relative clause.
14 See Nishiie, 996 F.3d at 1021-22. The structure of 
the comma-and-which clause is consistent with a nonrestrictive relative clause, because it is "introduced by which" and is "set off from the rest of the sentence" by a comma. Id.
Substantively, the comma-and-which clause is nonrestrictive because it is "nondefining," where it could be "omitted without obscuring the identity" of the noun (forage crops) to which it refers. Id.The comma-and-which clause is nonrestrictive 
because it is "parenthetical" in nature, where it could be removed without changing the intended meaning of the rest of the forage crop exclusion. Id. 
A grammatical analysis, while helpful to discern the 
meaning of the comma-and-which clause, is not conclusive, however. "[W]hile the rules of grammar are not irrelevant, [courts] should not be guided by a single sentence or member of a sentence[,]" but must "look to the provisions of the whole law, and to its object and policy." Transocean Deepwater Drilling, 
Inc., 767 F.3d at 494 (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting U.S. Nat'l Bank of Or. v. Indep. Ins. Agents of Am., Inc., 508 U.S. 439, 455 (1993)); see Educators Ventures, Inc. v. Bundy, 3 Haw.App. 435, 439, 652 P.2d 637, 639 (1982) ("We do not believe that the placement of a comma in HRS § 467–16 should be determinative of the intent of the legislature in its enactment."). Thus, in addition to a grammatical analysis, we must look to the intent of the law, and apply statutory construction principles. See Ocean Resort Villas Vacation Owners 
14 "A relative clause is 'an adjective clause introduced by a
relative pronoun expressed or suppressed, relative adjective, or relative
adverb and having either a purely descriptive force (as in John, who often 
tells fibs ) or a limiting one (as in boys who tell fibs ).'" Westchester Gen. 
Hosp., Inc. v. Evanston Ins. Co., 48 F.4th 1298, 1306 n.2 (11th Cir. 2022)(citing Relative Clause , Merriam-Webster, http://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/relative% 20clause (last visited Aug. 18, 2022)). 
14   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Ass'n, 147 Hawai# i at 553, 465 P.3d at 1000; Kaheawa Wind Power, 
LLC, 146 Hawai# i at 88, 456 P.3d at 161; Transocean Deepwater 
Drilling, Inc.
, 767 F.3d at 494.
2. Statutory construction analysis 
ADPR Rule 2-2 is ambiguous.  The ADPR set forth rules 
of construction in Rule §RP-2-14 (2-14), which provide: 
§RP-2-14 Rules of construction. 
. . . . 
(c)
 Words to have their usual meaning. Except as
defined in K.C.C. Sec. SA-9.5 [(sic)], the words of these
rules are generally to be understood in their most known andusual significance, without attending so much to theirliteral and strictly grammatical construction, as to theirgeneral or popular use or meaning. 
(d) Construction of ambiguous context. Where words in 
these rules are ambiguous: 
(1) The meaning of the ambiguous words may be sought
by examining the context with which the ambiguous words,phrases, and sentences may be compared, in order toascertain their true meaning; 
(2) The reason and spirit of the law, and the cause
which induced the Council to enact it, may be considered todiscover their true meaning; and 
(3) Every interpretation which leads to an absurdity
shall be rejected. 
"[W]here the statutory language is plain and unambiguous, our 
sole duty is to give effect to its plain and obvious meaning." Ocean Resort Villas Vacation Owners Ass'n, 147 Hawai# i at 553, 
465 P.3d at 1000 (citation omitted). 
"[W]hen there is doubt . . 
. or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an ambiguity exists." Id. (citation omitted). 
"Put differently, a statute is 
ambiguous if it is capable of being understood by reasonably well-informed people in two or more different senses." Gillan v. 
Gov't Emps. Ins. Co., 119 Hawai# i 109, 117, 194 P.3d 1071, 1079 
(2008) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
The County contends that ADPR Rule 2-2 "plainly" 
indicates that all "forage crops used for soilage or silage" are 
15    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
"categorically excluded" from the definition of "crop."15 On the 
other hand, Taxpayers contend that the forage crop exclusion only 
applies in the urban district, and urges that: the comma-and-which clause "plainly" requires that the excluded forage crops be both "used for soilage or silage" and a "pasture use within the 
urban district," because the word "and" signals an independent 
requirement. Taxpayers argue: "if you grow forage crops for ['soilage or silage'] in the urban district, it does not qualify as a 'crop'; if you grow forage crops for ['soilage or silage'] in the rural district, it does." 
Here, the forage crop exclusion in ADPR Rule 2-2 reads: 
"Crop" includes the actual production of specific
agricultural or farm crops such as sugar cane, pineapple,papaya, eggplant, beans, pineapple, truck crops, grain oralfalfa, orchard crops, flowers, nursery or ornamentalcrops or the like, but excludes  hale koa, panicum, pangola,
kikuyu, napier grass and similar forage crops used for
soilage or silage, and which are deemed t[o] be pastureuses within the urban district. 
(Emphases and bolding added). 
The word "and" is not defined in ADPR Rule 2-2, but 
must be accorded its "most known and usual" meaning. ADPR Rule 
2-14(c). "And" is defined as a word to "indicate connection or addition," "express logical modification, . . . or supplementary explanation." And, Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary 
(1987) (emphasis added). Because ADPR Rule 2-2 uses the word "and" immediately following the comma in the comma-and-which clause, it is not immediately apparent whether the use of the word "and" signals an "addition[al]" requirement or a "supplementary explanation" for the excluded forage crops. Id. 
"Deemed" is not defined in ADPR Rule 2-2, but is 
generally defined as to "come to think or judge: Consider"; and "to hold as an opinion[,] think[,] regard as[.]" Deem, Merriam-
Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/deem (last 
15 The Tax Appeal Court did not rule on what the language of ADPR
Rule 2-2 meant. The Tax Appeal Court only held that the guinea grass in
question was a "crop" and was "agricultural use." 
16    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
visited Sept. 23, 2022); 
Deem, Dictionary.com, 
https://www.dictionary.com/browse/deem (last visited Oct. 7, 
2022). In State v. Nesmith, "deem" was defined as "[t]o treat 
(something) as if (1) it were really something else, or (2) it had qualities that it does not have [.]" 127 Hawai# i 48, 71, 276 
P.3d 617, 640 (2012) (Acoba, J., concurring and dissenting) (citing Black's Law Dictionary 446 (8th ed. 2004)) (brackets and parentheses in original). Considering these definitions of "deemed," the forage crop exclusion can be read as "forage crops used for soilage or silage, and which are [considered or regarded as] pasture uses within the urban district." The use of the word "deemed" is descriptive in nature, describing a "quality" of the excluded forage crops. See id. This reading is also consistent 
with our conclusion supra that the comma-and-which clause is a nonrestrictive relative clause that is "nondefining" and "parenthetical" in nature. See Nishiie, 996 F.3d at 1022. 
While the use of the word "deemed" is consistent with 
reading the comma-and-which clause as nonrestrictive, the minds of "reasonably well-informed people" could still differ as to whether the comma-and-which clause contains an additional requirement of, or a supplementary explanation for, the forage crop exclusion. Gillan, 119 Hawai# i at 117, 194 P.3d at 1079. 
As there is doubt about how to apply the forage crop exclusion because of the uncertainty on how to interpret comma-and-which clause, an ambiguity exists. See Ocean Resort Villas Vacation 
Owners Ass'n, 147 Hawai# i at 553, 465 P.3d at 1000. 
The history of ADPR Rule 2-2.  Courts may use extrinsic 
aids, including legislative history, to determine legislative intent. Kaheawa Wind Power, LLC, 146 Hawai# i at 88, 456 P.3d at 
161. ADPR Rule 2-2 is a county program rule, and we must look to 
the "reason and spirit of the law, and the cause which induced the Council to enact it," to discover its "true meaning[.]" ADPR Rule 2-14(d)(2). In this case, however, legislative history such as committee reports or recorded remarks by legislators that would typically evidence intent are not available. In 
17   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
determining legislative intent, we may consider previous versions 
and amendments of a statute. See State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai# i 
383, 392 n.11, 219 P.3d 1170, 1179 n.11 (2009) ("The legislative history from the 2000 revision does not specifically explain why the definition of 'operates' was added, although it appears to have been part of the general purpose of making the statute more uniform and consistent."); see also Ciganek v. Portfolio Recovery Assocs., LLC
, 190 F.Supp.3d. 908, 916 (N.D. Cal. 2016) ("Prior 
versions of a bill are among the forms of legislative history that the Court may consider."); 73 Am. Jur. 2d Statutes § 64 (2022) ("[T]he courts may consider, among other things . . . earlier versions of the statute[.]"). Previous versions of ADPR Rule 2-2 are available, and as we explain infra, this legislative history suggests that the comma-and-which clause serves to inform that forage crops are construed to be a pasture use in the urban district.
16 
ADPR Rule 2-2 was drafted in 1981, then later amended 
in 1988, 1999, and 2002. The 1981 and 1988 versions (1980s 
version) of ADPR Rule 2-2 identically defined "crop" as 
the actual production of specific agricultural or farm crops
such as sugar cane, pineapple, truck crop, grain or alfalfa,orchard crops, flowers, nursery or ornamental crops or thelike in the manner provided in these regulations; butexcludes koa haole, panicum, pangola, kikuyu, napier grassor other like forage crops used for soilage or silage deemed 
to be pasture uses within the urban district . 
(Emphases and bolding added). This 1980s version of the Rule 
continued to use the word "deemed," there was no use of the word "and," and notably, there was no "comma and which." The comma-and-which clause was not included until 1999. As discussed 
16 The County attached the prior versions of the ADPR Rule 2-2 in its
opposition memorandum below to the Tax Appeal Court, arguing that because
there was no "conjunction (, and) between the words 'silage' and 'deemed,'"there was therefore no "requirement" that the guinea grass must also be apasture use within the urban district. The County urged: "This sentence in the Rule merely indicates" that the forage crops "are excluded and are deemed(called) pasture uses in the urban district and that soilage and silage(despite their being precut and not, strictly speaking, grazeable) are deemedpasture uses." 
18   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
supra
, "deemed" is a synonym for "considered" or "regarded as." 
Deem, supra. The 1980s version of ADPR Rule 2-2 and the 
definition of "deem" indicate that forage crops were "consider[ed]" or "deemed to be pasture uses within the urban district." Id.; ADPR Rule 2-2 (emphasis added). The language 
used in the 1980s version evidences the drafters' intent to convey a quality of forage crops used for soilage or silage --that such forage crops are "considered" or "deemed" to be "pasture uses within the urban district"; this is descriptive language. Deem, supra; ADPR Rule 2-2. It would not make sense 
that the subsequently added comma-and-which clause was intended to convert the "deemed to be pasture uses within the urban district" language into an additional requirement for a forage crop, rather than continuing to simply inform the reader that forage crops used for soilage and silage are deemed to be pasture uses within the urban district. Thus, the legislative history suggests that the comma-and-which clause is intended to be descriptive, conveying supplementary information about the forage crop exclusion rather than imposing an additional requirement for it. See Kaheawa Wind Power, LLC, 146 Hawai# i at 88, 456 P.3d at 
161. 
Avoiding superfluous interpretation of ADPR Rule 2-2. 
"[W]hen construing a statute, courts are bound to give effect to all parts of a statute, and no clause, sentence, or word shall be construed as superfluous, void, or insignificant if a construction can be legitimately found which will give force to and preserve all words of the statute." Adams v. CDM Media USA, 
Inc., 135 Hawai# i 1, 18, 346 P.3d 70, 87 (2015) (emphasis added) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
The County and 
Taxpayers both contend that each other's reading of the Rule renders the comma-and-which clause superfluous. 
Taxpayers argue that the County's interpretation of the 
forage crop exclusion as a categorical exclusion applying across-the-board, and not just to the urban district, renders the comma
-
and-which clause superfluous. Taxpayers assert: "[i]n other 
19   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
words, if all the grasses at issue are excluded from the 
definition, then why add the phrase 'and which are deemed t[o] be pasture uses within the urban district?'" 
Taxpayers claim that 
"[w]ithout a credible explanation" for the comma-and-which clause, "it is superfluous under the County's interpretation." 
The County claims that its interpretation would not 
render the comma-and-which clause superfluous because it helps to close a "loophole" in ADPR Rule §RP-2-5 (2-5),
17 where an urban 
district landowner could argue that is entitled to an agricultural dedication for forage crops fed to livestock because such use should constitute "specific livestock use" under ADPR Rule 2-5. The County explains, however, that ADPR Rule 2-2 serves to inform landowners that "forage crops used for soilage or silage" are "deemed to be pasture uses in the urban district," and "pasture uses" are clearly prohibited in the urban district under ADPR Rule 2-5. Thus, according to the County, the comma-and-which clause clarifies that forage crops used for feeding livestock are still excluded from being "crops" for agricultural dedication. This argument is persuasive. 
ADPR Rule 2-5 indicates that "specific livestock uses" 
in the urban district include "feed lots" where livestock are fed on the land, but the Rule also contains an express prohibition on "grazing or pasturing" on agricultural lands in the urban district. Read together, ADPR Rule 2-2 serves to prevent "forage 
17 ADPR Rule 2-5, entitled "Special requirements for dedications in
the various districts," addresses, inter alia , special requirements for lands
dedicated in the urban district for crop cultivation and ranching of
livestock. The requirements for ranching of livestock discuss specificpermitted and non-permitted livestock uses for such lands, and provide asfollows: 
(b) Lands dedicated in urban district for the ranching
of specific livestock shall satisfy the followingrequirements: 
(1) The land to be dedicated must be used for specific
livestock uses, such as feed lots, calf-raising, and similaroperations in dairy, beef, swine, poultry, and aquaculture,but excluding open grazing and pasturing. 
(Emphases added). 
20    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
crops used for soilage or silage" from qualifying as "specific 
livestock use" under ADPR Rule 2-5, because ADPR Rule 2-2 expressly specifies that "forage crops used for soilage or silage" are "deemed t[o] be pasture uses within the urban district." 
Viewed in pari materia, ADPR Rule 2-2's language that 
forage crops used for soilage and silage are deemed a pasture use is consistent with ADPR Rule 2-5's express prohibition on "pasturing" in the urban district. See Omiya, 142 Hawai# i at 
450, 420 P.3d at 381 ("[S]tatutes that are in 
pari materia may be 
construed together," and "[w]hat is clear in one statute may be called upon in aid to explain what is doubtful in another.") (cleaned up). The comma-and-which clause is thus not "superfluous" because it informs a landowner of a quality or description of the excluded "forage crops." Without the comma-and-which clause, an urban district landowner seeking an agricultural dedication would not be informed that "forage crops used for soilage or silage" are "deemed to be pasture uses within the urban district." 
ADPR Rule 2-2. The County's construction 
has merit, as it "preserve[s] all words" of the forage crop exclusion in ADPR Rule 2-2. Adams, 135 Hawai# i at 18, 346 P.3d 
at 87. 
The County argues that Taxpayers' interpretation that 
the forage crop exclusion only applies in the urban district renders the words "deemed t[o] be pasture uses" superfluous. In other words, under Taxpayers' interpretation the exclusion would read: "but excludes . . . forage crops used for soilage or silage . . . within the urban district." ADPR Rule 2-2. Taxpayers posit that an explanation for the inclusion of the phrase "deemed t[o] be pasture uses" is because the County "could potentially grant" other agricultural uses for "the grasses at issue" in the urban district, such as "biomass that are used in the production of alternative, green energy." This argument is unavailing, however, because the ADPR do not allow agricultural 
21    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
dedication for biomass grasses. See
 K.C.C. § 5A-9.1(i)18 
(prohibiting agricultural land dedication for "commercial 
alternative energy facilities[.]"). Taxpayers' interpretation renders the words "deemed t[o] be pasture uses" "insignificant" and "superfluous," and it is unpersuasive. Adams, 135 Haw. at 
18, 346 P.3d at 87 (citations omitted). 
A rational interpretation of ADPR Rule 2-2.  "[A] 
statutory interpretation that is rational, sensible, and practicable is preferred to one which is unreasonable, impracticable[,] inconsistent, contradictory, and illogical." Moranz v. Harbor Mall, LLC, 150 Hawai# i 387, 398, 502 P.3d 488, 
499 (2022) (citations, ellipses, and internal brackets omitted). The ADPR purpose section states: 
"These rules are further 
intended to ensure that the provisions of K.C.C. Sec. [5]A-9.1 are applied in a uniform and equitable manner." ADPR Rule 2-1. 
The County argues that: 
. . . the nonrestrictive clause in the definition of "crop"
in ADPR § RP-2-2, . . . definitively informs landowners thatforage crops used for soilage or silage "are deemed t[o] bepasture uses within the urban district." Pasture uses are expressly prohibited in the urban district under K.C.C. §5A-9.1(l), the very same provision an urban districtlandowner might otherwise hope to rely on to obtain adedication for a "specific livestock use." The nonrestrictive clause thus ensures that a landowner in the urban district cannot evade the "crop" requirement imposedby K.C.C. § 5A-9.1(a)(1) and receive an agriculturaldedication for forage crops under K.C.C. § 5A-9.1(l). The 
nonrestrictive clause thus closes a potential loophole andpreserves the drafters' intent to prohibit all landownersfrom receiving agricultural dedications for forage cropsused for soilage and silage. In so doing, thenonrestrictive clause "ensure[s] that the provisions of 
18 K.C.C. § 5A-9.1(i) states in pertinent part: 
(i) Cancellation Without Rollback Taxes and Penalties.
Notwithstanding any provision in this Section to thecontrary, the occurrence of any of the following eventsshall cause the dedication to be canceled without the imposition of any roll back taxes or penalties whatsoever: 
. . . . 
(3)
 The dedicated land, or portion thereof, has been 
designated and approved for commercial alternative energyfacilities and future land assessments will be valued according to the land's industrial market value. 
22     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
K.C.C. Sec. [5]A-9.1 are applied in a uniform and equitable
manner", consistent with the purpose of the rules. ADPR §RP-2-1. Landowners who are raising, harvesting, and selling
forage crops — whether in the urban district or theagricultural district — will be treated uniformly and, thus,fairly and equally. 
(Emphases added). 
Taxpayers assert that the County's interpretation of 
the forage crop exclusion as applying to all districts is 
inconsistent with the intent of the ADPR, as its purpose is to "promote agricultural activity on Kauai, . . . specifically the raising of cattle, by providing tax breaks." 
Taxpayer argues 
that "[u]nder the County's inconsistent definition . . . you can get a dedication for pasture in the rural district, but you cannot get one for growing forage crops for feeding livestock in the rural district on the exact same parcel," which "makes no sense." However, the raising of cattle already independently qualifies for a tax break as a clearly permitted type of "agricultural use" under K.C.C. § 5A-9.1(a)(2) and (a)(3).  The 
County provides a rational explanation for the different tax treatment of pasturing versus forage crops that are grown and baled into hay, and the further distinction in the Rules based on the location of these activities: 
19
These are plainly different activities (pasturing requires
the presence of livestock, hay baling does not), and so itshould not be surprising if there are some differences inhow they are regulated. For example, the drafters mighthave believed that merely cutting one's wild grass andbaling some hay was not worthy of an agriculturaldedication–no matter the location. On the other hand, thedrafters might have believed that pasturing cattle (whichpresumably requires, at the very least, the owner topurchase and monitor the herd) is worthy of an agriculturaldedication, albeit based on location. They might havebelieved that it made good sense to pasture cows in the
rural district ( i.e. space to roam), but little sense to
pasture cows in the urban district ( i.e. inappropriate use
of congested space). 
19 K.C.C. § 5A-9.1 lists "[f]eeding, breeding, managing, and selling
of livestock" in subsection (a)(2), and "[r]anching of livestock" in
subsection (a)(3). 
23   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
We note that ADPR Rule 2-2's "crop" definition, aside 
from the single reference to "pasture uses within the urban 
district," does not otherwise draw any distinctions based on the location of the land subject to dedication, i.e. urban district or non-urban district. 
It does not seem logical or rational to 
read the "crop" definition as including a geographic "urban district" requirement to exclude forage crops from the definition of "crop." In light of the rationale provided by the County, it is "rational" to not limit the forage crop exclusion to the urban district. See Moranz, 150 Hawai# i at 398, 502 P.3d at 499. 
Applying the forage crop exclusion across-the-board to both urban and non-urban districts is consistent with the express intent of the ADPR to apply K.C.C. § 5A-9.1 "in a uniform and equitable manner." 
ADPR Rule 2-1. In summary, based on the application of the rules of 
grammar and statutory construction set forth above, we conclude that the language, "[comma] and which are deemed t[o] be pasture uses within the urban district," describes a feature of the forage crop exclusion rather than an additional requirement for it. This is a "rational, sensible, and practicable" interpretation that is also consistent with the history of the rule. Moranz, 150 Hawai# i at 398, 502 P.3d at 499; see Ocean 
Resort Villas Vacation Owners Ass'n, 147 Hawai# i at 553, 465 P.3d 
at 1000. 
Therefore, we hold that, as a matter of law, the guinea 
grass at issue is an excluded "forage crop" under ADPR Rule 2-2, and not a "crop" qualifying as "agricultural use" under K.C.C. § 5A-9.1(a). See Kaheawa Wind Power, LLC, 135 Hawai# i at 206, 347 
P.3d at 636. 
The Tax Appeal Court erred in granting Taxpayers' 
MSJ and denying the County's MSJ, where Taxpayers' activity does not constitute "agricultural use." See id.
IV. CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the (1) Order 
Granting Taxpayers-Appellants' Motion for Summary Judgment as to the Issue of Whether the Guinea Grass in Question Constitutes a 
24   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Crop; and (2) Order Denying County of Kaua# i-Appellee's Motion 
for Summary Judgment as to the Issue of Whether the Guinea Grass 
in Question Constitutes a Crop, both filed and entered on May 29,2020 by the Tax Appeal Court of the State of 
Hawai#i, and remand 
for further proceedings consistent with this Opinion.  
On the briefs: 
Andrew S. Michaels, /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Presiding Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate Judge Deputy County Attorney, for Appellee-AppellantCounty of 
Kaua#i. 
Nicholas A. Kacprowski,for Taxpayers-Appellants-Appellees. 
25 