NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001161 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
WHITLEY UNGA, DAWN UNGA, EDDIE UNGA, MELIAME UNGA,
Defendants-Appellants,
and
 
HAROLDINE TRIPP, JEFFREY TRIPP,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-50 AND JANE DOES 1-50,
Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
KO'OLAULOA DIVISION
 
(CIVIL NO. 1RC14-1-5800)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)

 
Defendants–Appellants Whitley Unga, Dawn Unga, Eddie
 
Unga, and Meliame Unga (together, the Ungas) appeal from the
 
"Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and Writ
 
of Possession Filed August 12, 2014" entered by the District
 
1
Court of the First Circuit (district court)  on September 12,
2014, which awarded Plaintiff-Appellee JPMorgan Chase Bank,
 
National Association (JPMorgan) a writ of possession for the
 
property located at 55-706B Wahinepee Street, Laie, Hawai 'i 96762 
(subject property). 
1
 The Honorable Maura McDermott Okamoto presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, the Ungas argue that the district court
 
erred in (1) denying the Ungas' Motion to Dismiss and granting
 
JPMorgan's Motion for Summary Judgment because the district court
 lacked jurisdiction over the case under Hawaii Revised Statutes
 (HRS) § 604–5(d); and (2) granting JPMorgan's Motion for Summary
 
Judgment because there was a genuine issue of material fact as to
 
whether JPMorgan had superior title to the subject property.   As
 
explained below, we conclude that the district court lacked
 jurisdiction over the matter, and therefore we need not address
 the merits of the Motion for Summary Judgment. Accordingly, we
 vacate the "Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary
 Judgment and Writ of Possession Filed August 12, 2014" and remand
 the case with instructions to dismiss the case for lack of
 jurisdiction.
 
In the Ungas' first point of error, they argue that the
 
district court lacked jurisdiction over the summary possession
 action under HRS § 604–5(d) (2016), which provides:
 
§ 604–5 Civil jurisdiction.
. . . .

 
(d)
 The district courts shall not have cognizance of real
actions, nor actions in which the title to real estate comes
in question
, nor actions for libel, slander, defamation of
character, malicious prosecution, false imprisonment, breach
of promise of marriage, or seduction; nor shall they have
power to appoint referees in any cause.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Where a defendant asserts HRS § 604–5(d) as a defense
to jurisdiction of the district court, District Court Rule of
 
2
Civil Procedure (DCRCP) 12.1  requires the defendant to raise the
defense in a written answer or motion, and attach an affidavit. 

 
2
 Rule 12.1. Defense of Title in District Courts.
 
Pleadings. Whenever, in the district court, in defense of
an action in the nature of an action of trespass or for the
summary possession of land, or any other action, the
defendant shall seek to interpose a defense to the
jurisdiction to the effect that the action is a real action,
or one in which the title to real estate is involved, such
defense shall be asserted by a written answer or written
motion, which shall not be received by the court unless
accompanied by an affidavit of the defendant, setting forth
the source, nature and extent of the title claimed by
defendant to the land in question, and such further
particulars as shall fully apprise the court of the nature
of defendant's claim.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Deutsche Bank Nat'l Tr. Co. v. Peelua, 126 Hawai 'i 32, 36, 265 
P.3d 1128, 1132 (2011). In Peelua, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
explained that "[u]nder the plain language of Rule 12.1, an 
affidavit that raises a defense to the court's jurisdiction must set forth 'the source, nature, and extent of the title claimed by defendant' and 'further particulars' sufficient to 'fully apprise the court of the nature of defendant's claim.'" Id. The supreme 
court clarified that "further particulars" in this context "suggests that the affidavit must include some details or specificity regarding the nature of defendant's claim." Id. at 
37, 265 P.3d at 1133. The supreme court noted that a declaration that merely asserts that title is at issue fails to provide "the source, nature, and extent of [the] claim." Id. at 37–38, 265 
P.3d at 1133–34 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
In support of his jurisdictional defense, the defendant
 
in Peelua attached an affidavit to the Motion to Dismiss, which
 provided:
 
5. I am the owner of the Property identified in the
Complaint filed in this matter. Because of time constraints,
I cannot file a copy of my Deed to the property with this
affidavit, but I will furnish a copy of the Deed as soon as
I can.
 
6.
 The Property identified in the Complaint consists of
lands which have been owned by [defendant's] family for
generations, going back to the time of the Great Mahele.
. . . .
 
8.
 The Property has passed down through my family over time,
and it was eventually deeded to me by my family.
 10. . . . I was defrauded, duped, coerced and tricked into
engaging in transaction [sic] which involve the Property in
the Complaint.
 
Id. at 35, 265 P.3d at 1131 (emphasis omitted). The supreme
 
court observed that the defendant "assert[ed] in his affidavit
 that he has a deed to the property. However, [defendant's]
 affidavit does not describe the contents of the deed or the type
 of deed he acquired." Id. at 38, 265 P.3d at 1134. The supreme
 
court noted that "to fully apprise the court, a defendant would
 need to provide some details regarding the basis for the title." 
Id.
 
In contrast, in Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Century 
Ctr., Inc. v. An, 139 Hawai
'i 278, 286, 389 P.3d 115, 123 (2016), 
3
 extentNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the supreme court held that the defendant's affidavit satisfied
 
the requirements of DCRCP 12.1. In An, the defendant's affidavit
 stated in relevant part: 

 
2. I acquired title to the real property identified as 1750
Kalakaua Avenue, Apartment 116, Honolulu Hawaii 96826 (the
“Real Property”) from Lisa Yongsonyi Nose by virtue of an
Agreement of Sale dated December 7, 2010 and recorded as
Land Court Document No. 4028097. The purchase price for the
Real Property was $320,000.
 
3. I am the sole owner of the equitable interests in the
Real Property.
 
4. My interest in the Real Property was wrongfully
foreclosed upon by the Plaintiff, as set forth in detail in
the Counterclaim filed concurrently herewith.
. . . .
 
6.
 In or about June of 2012, I reached an agreement with the
AOAO to pay down the delinquent assessments over a twelve
month period and to remain current on the monthly
maintenance fee assessments.
 
. . . .
 
9.
 . . . Thereafter, I continued to make the settlement
payments and the monthly maintenance fee payments in the
amounts set forth in the monthly statements.
. . . . 
 
14.
 I spoke to Hawaiiana regarding the notice of foreclosure
sale of the Real Property and was told that as long as I was
making any settlement payments and monthly payments, the
foreclosure sale would not occur.
 
. . . .
 
18.
 I dispute the Plaintiff's alleged title to the Real
Property is superior to my title to the Real Property.
 
Id. at 281-82, 389 P.3d at 118-19. The supreme court noted that
"the source of title was the agreement of sale, the nature of
 
title was [defendant's] resulting equitable interest in the
 Property, and the  of the title was [defendant's] sole
 owner[ship] of the interest." Id. at 286, 389 P.3d at 123
 
(emphasis added) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
The supreme court also concluded that An's statements that her
 interest in the property had been wrongly foreclosed upon by the
 AOAO because she had made all the payments required under a
 settlement agreement with the AOAO, and had been assured there
 would be no foreclosure as long as she was making her settlement
 payments, sufficiently showed how An's allegations had a bearing
 on her claim to title to the property. Id. at 287, 389 P.3d at
 
124.
 
 
4

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In the instant case, the Ungas argue that because they
 
asserted their defense to jurisdiction in a written motion, and
 
attached a declaration of Whitley Unga (Mr. Unga) which sets
 
forth the source, nature, and extent of the title claimed by Mr.
 
Unga (Mr. Unga's Declaration), they satisfied the requirements of
 
DCRCP 12.1, and the district court therefore should have
 
dismissed the action for lack of jurisdiction. Mr. Unga's
 Declaration stated in relevant part:
 
1. I am a named Defendant in this action and claim an
interest in the real property located at 55-706 B Wahinepee

Street, Laie, Hawaii 96762 ("subject property"), which is
the subject of the above-entitled action. As necessary to
defend my superior title interest in said property, I hereby
make the following averments, based upon my own personal
firsthand knowledge, setting forth the source, nature, and
extent of my claim to superior title to my property in
compliance with Rule 12.1 of the Hawaii District Court Rules
of Civil Procedure, requiring this Court to dismiss this
action forthwith for lack of subject matter jurisdiction:
 
 
2. I am the rightful owner and superior title holder of the
subject property. 
I acquired my interest in the subject property
in June 2005 by the Grant Deed, a true and correct copy of which
is attached hereto as Exhibit "1", which was recorded as Document
No. 2005-130925 on July 1, 2005. This deed represents the source
of my claim to superior title herein.
. . . .
 
7. However, as argued in my attorneys' attached Motion, MERS
failed to conduct its alleged nonjudicial foreclosure in

compliance with HRS Section 667-5, and the Mortgage, rendering the
foreclosure statutorily void and by conducting a nonjudicial
foreclosure without authority, the purported foreclosure was
conducted by fraud as to the very documents attempting to effect
the foreclosure.
 . . . .
 
14.
 Thus, as argued further in my attorneys' attached Motion, both
the nonjudicial foreclosure and any subsequent attempt to transfer
title to the property are void and unenforceable and as such
Plaintiff cannot have superior title to the subject property.
 
Attached to Mr. Unga's Declaration was a copy of the
 
grant deed referred to in Mr. Unga's Declaration (Grant Deed).3
   
The Grant Deed stated:
 
Jeffrey Tripp and Haroldine Tripp, husband and wife, as tenants by
the entirety hereby GRANT(s) to Jeffrey Tripp and Haroldine Tripp,
husband and wife, as joint tenants as to an undivided 50%
interest, and Whitley Antilose Unga, a married man, as his sole
 
3
 On June 17, 2005, Mr. Unga and non-parties Jeffrey Tripp andHaroldine Tripp acquired the subject property by a grant deed,which was recorded on July 1, 2005 in the Bureau of Conveyances ofthe State of Hawai' i as Document No. 2005-130925. 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and separate property, as to an undivided 50% interest, all as
tenants in common the [subject property]
. . . .
Mr. Unga's Declaration established that the source of
his title was the Grant Deed. The attached Grant Deed
demonstrated that the nature and extent of Mr. Unga's title wasMr. Unga's undivided fifty percent interest as a tenant incommon. Mr. Unga's Declaration also provided sufficient "furtherparticulars" to apprise the court that the nature of his claim totitle was the alleged invalidity of the nonjudicial foreclosure. 
Because Mr. Unga provided enough detail in his
declaration and the attached Grant Deed to sufficiently set forththe source, nature, and extent of the title claimed and suchfurther particulars apprising the court of the nature of hisclaim under DCRCP 12.1, the district court should have dismissedthe case for lack of jurisdiction under HRS § 604–5(d). 
Therefore, we vacate the "Order Granting Plaintiff's
Motion for Summary Judgment and Writ of Possession Filed August 12, 2014," filed on September 12, 2014 in the DistrictCourt of the First Circuit. This case is remanded to thedistrict court with instructions to dismiss the case for lack ofjurisdiction. Other points raised in this appeal are thereforemoot.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 17, 2017.
On the briefs:
Gary Victor Dubin and
Katherine S. Belford for Defendants-Appellants Chief Judge
Associate JudgeAssociate JudgeBernard R. Suter
(Keesal, Young & Logan, LLP) for Plaintiff-Appellee
6