NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-11-0000548
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STEPHEN E. SMITH, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
EDWARD ALEXANDER SMITH, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
WAILUKU DIVISION
 
(DC-CIVIL NO. 11-1-0309)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
In this action for ejectment, Defendant-Appellant
 
Edward Alexander Smith (Edward), representing himself, appeals
 
from the amended Judgment for Possession filed on June 20, 2011,
 in the District Court of the Second Circuit (District Court). 
We
 
affirm.
 
I.
 
Plaintiff-Appellee Stephen E. Smith (Stephen), who is
 
Edward's estranged son, filed a complaint for ejectment seeking
 to remove Edward from certain identified property (Subject
 Property) located in Pukalani, Maui. Stephen alleged that he was
 the sole owner of the Subject Property and that Edward was
 occupying the property without any right to do so. Edward filed
 a document entitled, "Affidavit of Defendant Mr. Edward A. Smith
 Against Complaint for Ejectment and Damages, by Plaintiff and
 Counsel," in which Edward generally asserted ownership of the
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
property through adverse possession. The District Court
 
subsequently set the case for trial. 
Prior to trial, Stephen filed a motion for summary 
judgment. In support of this motion, Stephen submitted his declaration, exhibits showing his chain of title to the Subject Property, and a certified copy, dated March 10, 2008, of a State of Hawai' i "Land Court Certificate of Title" that identified 
Stephen as the sole registered owner of the Subject Property. The District Court granted Stephen's motion for summary judgment, and it issued an amended Judgment for Possession and an amended Writ of Possession on June 20, 2011.
1 This appeal followed.2 
II.
 
It is difficult to decipher the precise arguments
 
Edward seeks to assert on appeal. It appears that Edward 
basically contends that the District Court erred in granting
 summary judgment in favor of Stephen and issuing the amended
 Judgment for Possession and amended Writ of Possession, because
 Edward claims he acquired title to the Subject Property through
 adverse possession. We conclude that Edward's appeal is without
 merit.
 
The document submitted by Edward as his "affidavit" did
 
not serve to raise a question of title as to the Subject Property
 under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 604–5(d) (Supp. 2011) and
 did not divest the District Court of jurisdiction. The
 "affidavit" did not adequately set forth "the source, nature and
 extent of the title claimed by defendant to the land in question,
 and such further particulars as shall fully apprise the court of
 
1
 The amended Judgment for Possession amended the prior Judgment for
Possession in a material and substantial respect regarding the identification
of the Subject Premises. We reject Stephen's claim that Edward's notice ofappeal was untimely. When measured from the date of the amended Judgment forPossession, the notice of appeal was filed within the prescribed time. See 
Poe v. Hawai' i Labor Relations Board, 98 Hawai' i 416, 418-19, 49 P.3d 382, 384­
85 (2002). 
2
 The Honorable Mimi Desjardins set the case for trial, and the
Honorable Jan K. Apo granted Stephen's motion for summary judgment and issued
the amended Judgment for Possession and amended Writ of Possession.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the nature of defendant's claim[,]" as required by District Court 
Rules of Civil Procedure (DCRCP) Rule 12.1 (1972). See Deutsche 
Bank Nat'l Trust Co. v. Peelua, 126 Hawai' i 32, 36-39, 265 P.3d 
1128, 1132-35 (2011). The purported affidavit also was not sworn to by Edward under oath or subscribed to be true under penalty of law. See DCRCP Rule 12.1 (requiring a defendant to submit an 
affidavit setting forth the source, nature and extent of the title defendant claims in order to interpose a defense to the jurisdiction of the District Court); Black's Law Dictionary 62 (8th ed. 2004) (defining "affidavit" as "[a] voluntary declaration of facts written down and sworn to by the declarant before an officer authorized to administer oaths . . . "); Rules of the District Courts of the State of Hawai' i Rule 7(g) (2001) 
(authorizing the submission of an "unsworn declaration . . . subscribed as true under penalty of law" in lieu of an affidavit). 
The District Court did not err in granting Stephen's
 
motion for summary judgment. In support of his motion, Stephen
 submitted evidence establishing his chain of title to the Subject
 Property and a Land Court Certificate of Title verifying that
 Stephen was the sole registered owner of the Subject Property. 
Because the Subject Property was Land Court registered property,
 Edward could not acquire it by adverse possession. HRS § 501-87
 (2006) ("No title, right, or interest in, to, or across
 registered land in derogation of that of the registered owner
 shall be acquired by prescription or adverse possession[.]"); see
 City & County of Honolulu v. Bennett, 57 Haw. 195, 208 n.16, 552
 P.2d 1380, 1389 n.16 (1976) ("Hawaii's Torrens system of land
 registration has, ever since its inception in 1903, flatly banned
 adverse possession against registered land." (citing HRS § 501­87)). Edward's response to Stephen's motion for summary judgment
 did not show that there was a genuine issue for trial, and the
 District Court properly granted Stephen's motion. See DCRCP Rule
 
56(c), (e) (1997).
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the amended
 
Judgment for Possession filed by the District Court on June 20,
 
2011.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 30, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Edward Alexander Smith
 
Defendant-Appellant Pro Se
 
Chief Judge
Guy A. Haywood
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
4
 