NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000719
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
RICHARD EMANUEL JOSEPH PREZA HAYNES, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 1DTA-17–2800)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant, Richard Emanuel Joseph Preza
Haynes (Preza Haynes ), appeals from the Notice of Entry of
Judgment And/Or Order and Plea/Judgment entered against him and
in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee, the State of Hawai#i (State) on
July 25, 2018 ( Judgment), as amended by an Amended Notice of
Entry of Judgment And/Or Order and Plea/Judgment, which was filed
on May 30, 2019 (Amended Judgment), in the District Court of the
First Circuit, Kâne#ohe Division (District Court).   Following a
bench trial, Preza Haynes was convicted of one count of Operating
a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant ( OVUII), in1
1The Honorable James C. McWhinnie presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS ) § 291E-61(a)(1) (2007
and Supp. 2018).  2
On appeal, Preza Haynes raises one point of error,
arguing that the District Court erred when it failed to follow
the mandates of the Tachibana  line of cases when it questioned
Preza Haynes regarding his right to testify or not to testify.3
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Preza Haynes's contentions as follows:
Preza Haynes argues that the District Court erred
because it did not engage in a verbal exchange and true colloquy 
with him to ascertain whether he understood the right to testify
and the right not to testify and whether the decision not to
testify was made with an understanding of those rights.
"It is well settled in Hawai# i law that a defendant
relinquishes fundamental rights only when a waiver is undertaken
intelligently, knowingly, and voluntarily."  State v. Wilson, 144
Hawai#i 454, 463, 445 P.3d 35, 44 (2019) (quoting State v. Ui,
142 Hawai# i 287, 293, 418 P.3d 628 (2018)) (internal quotation
2HRS § 291E-61 provides, in relevant part:
§ 291E-61  Operating a vehicle under the influence of
an intoxicant.   (a)  A person commits the offense of
operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if
the person operates or assumes actual physical control of a
vehicle:
(1)   While under the influence of alcohol in an
amount sufficient to impair the person's normal
mental faculties or ability to care for the
person and guard against casualty[.]
 
3Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai #i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995).
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
marks omitted).  "Before accepting the waiver of a fundamental
right, a trial court must engage in an on-the-record colloquy
with the defendant."  Id.
Hawai#i law has historically protected both the right
to testify and the right not to testify. The right to
testify is guaranteed by the Fifth and Sixth Amendments to
the United States Constitution; the Hawai #i Constitution's
parallel guarantees under article I, sections 5, 10, and 14;
and HRS § 801-2. The right not to testify is guaranteed by
the United States Constitution's Fifth Amendment guarantee
against compelled testimony and the Hawai #i Constitution's
parallel guarantee under article I, section 10.
State v. Celestine, 142 Hawai#i 165, 169, 415 P.3d 907, 911
(2018) (citations omitted).  In Tachibana, the Hawai# i Supreme
Court established requirements that trial courts advise criminal
defendants specifically of the right to testify and obtain an
on-the-record waiver of that right.  79 Hawai#i at 236, 900 P.2d
at 1303.
There are two components of the Tachibana requirement. 
The first is that the trial court inform the defendant as to five
fundamental principles pertaining to his right to testify and
right not to testify:
[(1)] that he or she has a right to testify, [(2)] that if
he or she wants to testify that no one can prevent him or
her from doing so, and [(3)
] that if he or she testifies the
prosecution will be allowed to cross-examine him or her.  In
connection with the privilege against self-incrimination,
the defendant should also be advised [(4)] that he or she
has a right not to testify and [(5)] that if he or she does
not testify then the jury can be instructed about that
right.
Celestine, 142 Hawai#i at 170, 415 P.3d at 912 (citing Tachibana,
79 Hawai# i at 236 n.7, 900 P.2d at 1303 n.7) (original brackets
omitted).
The second component involves the court engaging in a
true "colloquy" with the defendant, which "consists of a verbal
exchange between the judge and the defendant 'in which the judge
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
ascertains the defendant's understanding of the proceedings and
of the defendant's rights.'" Id. at 170, 415 P.3d at 912
(emphasis omitted) (quoting State v. Han, 130 Hawai#i 83, 90, 306
P.3d 128, 135 (2013)).  
The trial court must "elicit[] responses as to whether
the defendant intends to not testify, whether anyone is forcing
the defendant not to testify, and whether the decision to not
testify is the defendant's."  Id. at 170-71, 415 P.3d at 912-13
(citation omitted).  The supreme court has instructed that a
trial court should engage in a verbal exchange with the defendant
at least twice:  (1) once "after the court informs the defendant
of the right to testify and of the right not to testify and the
protections associated with these rights";  and, (2) once again
"after the court indicates to the defendant its understanding
that the defendant does not intend to testify."  Id. at 170, 415
P.3d at 912 (citation omitted).
Here, the record shows two separate Tachibana
colloquies:  the first before the start of trial; and, a second
that followed a decision on an outstanding motion after the
conclusion of the State's case, when defense counsel then
indicated that the defense would rest without presenting any
witnesses, including without Preza Haynes testifying.  The first
colloquy included:
THE COURT:  . . . .
Okay.  And so, Mr. Preza Haynes, we're about to start
your trial.  Before we start, I just want to let you know a
couple of things.  First of all you have a right to testify
in your own defense.  Although you should consult with
[defense counsel] regarding your decision to testify, it is
your decision.  No one can prevent you from testifying
should you choose to do so.  And if you decide to testify, I
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
just want to let you know that the prosecutor will be
allowed to question or cross-examine you.  And have you had
a chance to discuss your right to testify with [defense
counsel]? 
THE DEFENDANT:  Uh, yes.  
THE COURT:  Okay.  And do you have any questions
regarding your right to testify? 
THE DEFENDANT:  No. 
THE COURT:  No.  Okay. 
And you also have a constitutional right not to
testify and to remain silent.  If you choose not to testify,
the court cannot and will not hold that against you in
deciding the outcome of your case.  And have you had a
chance to discuss your right to remain silent with [defense
counsel]?
THE DEFENDANT:  I have, yes. 
THE COURT:  Okay.  And do you have any questions
regarding your right to remain silent? 
THE DEFENDANT:  No, Your Honor. 
THE COURT:  All right.  And if you have not testified
by the end of the trial, I'll just question you again
briefly just to make sure it was your decision not to
testify.  Okay?
[To the State] And please proceed.
(Emphasis added).
The first colloquy with Preza Haynes covered all five 
principles pertaining to his right to testify and right not to
testify.  See Celestineu, 142 Hawai#i at 170, 415 P.3d at 912.
Upon defense counsel's indication that Preza Haynes
would rest without calling any witnesses, the District Court
again engaged Preza Haynes with a second and final Tachibana
colloquy.  This ultimate Tachibana colloquy was as follows:
THE COURT:  . . . . And, Mr. Preza Haynes, as I
mentioned at the beginning of the trial, you have a
constitutional right to testify in your own defense.
Although you should consult with [defense counsel] regarding
your decision to testify, it is your decision and no one can
prevent you from testifying if you choose to do so.  If you
do decide to testify, I just want to remind you again the
prosecutor will be allowed to cross-examine you.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
And you also have a constitutional right not to
testify and to remain silent.  If you choose not to testify,
once again the court cannot and will not hold that against
you in deciding your case.  And it is my understanding based
on [defense counsel]'s representation that you do not intend
to testify.  I just want to make sure it is your decision
and your decision alone that you do not wish to testify. 
THE DEFENDANT:  That is correct. 
THE COURT:  Okay.  Thank you very much. 
[To counsel] So closings.
(Emphasis added).
In the ultimate colloquy, the District Court did not
inquire of Preza Haynes with an open-ended questioning or
discussion as to each of his rights; rather, the District Court
made one sweeping statement lumping all of the principles
together before posing a single question to Preza Haynes about
whether it was his decision alone not to testify.  The District
Court's inquiry did not seek to establish, for example, whether
Preza Haynes understood his rights, whether Preza Haynes was
under any influence or condition that would impair his ability to
think clearly, whether Preza Haynes had sufficiently discussed
testifying with his defense counsel, or whether Preza Haynes had
any questions for the court before making his decision.
The supreme court has guided that a trial court should
"elicit[] responses as to [multiple aspects of a defendant's
understanding]."  Celestine, 142 Hawai# i at 170-71, 415 P.3d at
912-13.  Here, instead of multiple questions on multiple areas of
Preza Haynes's understanding, there was only the one question by
the judge followed by a terse response from Preza Haynes.  The
District Court did not engage in a sufficient exchange with Preza
Haynes to ascertain his understanding of his right to testify.   
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In State v. Eduwensuyi, 141 Hawai# i 328, 335, 409 P.3d
732, 739 (2018), the supreme court rejected this court's
determination that an adequate pretrial advisement,  followed
soon after by a defective ultimate colloquy, could establish a
defendant's understanding of his rights to testify or not
testify, stating:4
[A] general assumption that a trial of short duration
means that the defendant will remember and carefully
consider what was previously stated in a pretrial advisement
is not a fact that can be judicially noticed.  Indeed, the
opposite may be true.  A trial, especially the commencement
of the trial, is an event where a defendant may be anxious
or nervous and not listening effectively.  In addition, it
is questionable that a defendant would extrapolate from what
the judge actually said—it's your decision to testify or not
to testify—to mean something in addition—that no one can
prevent you from testifying.  Further, the ICA's assumption
based on the brevity of the trial builds upon a premise that
the defendant is able to correctly recall a pretrial
advisory at the end of trial.  This assumption treats all
defendants alike in terms of their ability to understand and
recall the initial advisory despite differences, for
example, in education, proficiency in understanding, and
courtroom experience.  It also does not account for what
comes in between the pretrial advisement and the conclusion
of trial: the evidence adduced at trial that may affect the
defendant's ability at the time of the ultimate colloquy to
recall or focus upon a prior advisory.  Finally, the
pretrial advisement notifies the defendant of the right to
testify or not to testify but states that if the defendant
has not testified by the end of trial, the court will
question the defendant later regarding the decision not to
testify.  It is significant that the defendant is told that
the pretrial advisement is preliminary in nature and that
the subject matter will be addressed fully at a later point
if the defendant chooses not to testify.
(Emphasis and footnotes omitted); see also Celestine, 142 Hawai# i
at 171-72, 415 P.3d at 913-14.
For these reasons, we cannot conclude that the District
Court properly established Preza Haynes's understanding of his
right to testify or not to testify.  Therefore, the record does
not demonstrate that Preza Haynes's waiver of his right to
4In Eduwensuyi, the supreme court also concluded that the pretrial
advisory was defective because it did not include that no one could prevent
the defendant from testifying if he wanted to.  141 Hawai #i at 335, 409 P.3d
at 739.
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
testify was knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily made.  Han,
130 Hawai#i at 91, 306 P.3d at 136 ("The failure to ensure that
[the defendant] understood his rights amounts to a failure to
obtain the on-the-record waiver required by Tachibana.").
When the violation of a constitutional right has been
established, "the conviction must be vacated unless the State can
prove that the violation was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." 
Tachibana, 79 Hawai#i at 240, 900 P.2d at 1307.  Under the
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, the court must
determine "whether there is a reasonable possibility that error
might have contributed to [the] conviction."  Eduwensuyi, 141 at
336, 409 P.3d at 740 (emphasis omitted).  If such reasonable
possibility exists, then "the judgment of conviction on which it
may have been based must be set aside." State v. Pulse, 83
Hawai#i 229, 248, 925 P.2d 797, 816 (1996). When assessing
whether the error was harmless, "[a] crucial if not determinative
consideration . . . is the strength of the prosecution's case on
the defendant's guilt."  State v. Tetu, 139 Hawai# i 207, 226, 386
P.3d 844, 863 (2016) (quoting State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai#i 462,
482-83, 946 P.2d 32, 52-53 (1997)).
Here, the record does not contain any indication as to
what Preza Haynes would have said if he had testified.  This case
was tried without any physical or scientific evidence, and the
State made its case solely through the testimony of a single
witness, which the defense sought to discredit on cross-
examination.  On the record in this case, we cannot conclude that
the District Court's error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
because we are unable to determine whether Preza Haynes's
testimony, had he given it, could have shed light on whether
Preza Haynes operated a vehicle under the influence of alcohol in
an amount sufficient to impair his normal mental faculties or
ability to care for the person and guard against casualty.  See,
e.g., Eduwensuyi, 141 Hawai# i at 336-37, 409 P.3d at 740-41.
Based on the above, the District Court's July 25, 2018
Judgment and May 30, 2019 Amended Judgment are vacated, and this
case is remanded to the District Court for further proceedings.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaii, September 30, 2019.
On the briefs:
Jonathan Burge,
for Defendant-Appellant.Presiding Judge
Loren J. Thomas,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
9