FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
---o0o--­
IN THE MATTER OF THE APPLICATION
 
OF MOLOKAI PUBLIC UTILITIES, INC.,
For Review and Approval of Rate Increases,
Revised Rate Schedules, and Revised Rules 
NO. CAAP-10-0000096
 
APPEAL FROM THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
 
(DOCKET NO. 2009-0048)
 
FEBRUARY 13, 2012
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING J., FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
Intervenor-Appellant County of Maui (County) appeals 
from the September 23, 2010 Decision and Order (Decision) of the 
Public Utilities Commission (PUC) of the State of Hawai
'i 
(State). In the Decision, PUC granted approval to Appellee Molokai Public Utilities, Inc. (MPU) for a general rate increase 
of approximately 126.52% over previous rates. On appeal, County FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contends PUC erred when PUC found that MPU's proposed rate
 
increase was just and reasonable 
(1) where the rate increase was based in part on the
 
illegal use of Well 17 without a water use permit;
 
(2) where the rate increase was based in part on the 
use of the Moloka' i Irrigation System (MIS) without an 
Environmental Assessment; and 
(3) when PUC relied on a settlement agreement where
 
(a) the representative appointed by the Division of Consumer
 Advocacy (Consumer Advocate) failed to protect the consumer and
 
(b) MPU failed to satisfy its burden of proof to justify the rate
 
increase.
 
I.
 
MPU is a public water utility that provides potable 
water service in the Kaluakoi area on the island of Moloka' i. 
Specifically, MPU provides potable water to the Kaluakoi Resort, Ke Nani Kai and Paniolo Hale Condominiums, Kaluakoi Villas, 
Papohaku Ranchlands, Moana Makini subdivisions, and Moloka' i 
county parks (collectively, Customers). MPU is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Moloka' i Properties Limited. PUC originally 
authorized MPU to operate as a utility and approved MPU's initial water rates in October 1981. PUC approved a rate increase in 
July 2003 and a temporary increase in August 2008. 
The water supplied by MPU is pumped from Well 17 and 
delivered through the MIS. MPU has no alternative means of 
transporting water from Well 17 to its Customers other than the 
MIS. The MIS is administered by the State Department of 
Agriculture, which has an agreement with Kaluakoi Water, LLC, a 
wholly-owned subsidiary of Moloka' i Properties Limited. Pursuant 
to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 174C-48 (1993), a water use permit was required from the State Commission on Water Resource 
Management to pump water from Well 17. At the time the Decision 
was rendered, MPU did not have the required water use permit from 
that commission. In September 2007, the Department of 
2
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Agriculture determined that any agreement for the continued use
 
of the MIS by Kaluakoi Water, LLC, would require the preparation
 
of an Environmental Assessment pursuant to HRS Chapter 343.
 
MPU filed its Amended Application seeking PUC's
 
approval of a general rate increase on June 29, 2009. In its
 
application, MPU sought an increase in its revenues to $886,259,
 
approximately 201.5 percent over its previous total revenue
 
requirement of $439,838.
 
On October 16, 2009, PUC granted intervention to
 
County. On April 27, 2010, PUC held a prehearing conference in
 
preparation for the evidentiary hearing scheduled to commence on
 
May 11, 2010. On May 6, 2010, MPU and the Consumer Advocate
 
informed PUC that the two parties had reached a full settlement,
 
stipulating to a total revenue requirement of $982,336 for MPU. 
According to the settlement agreement, MPU would continue to use
 
Well 17 and the MIS.
 
The evidentiary hearing commenced on May 11, 2010 and
 
was completed on May 13, 2010. On May 28, 2010, PUC issued its
 
Interim Decision and Order, which approved on an interim basis a
 
125 percent revenue increase of $542,724, resulting in a total
 
yearly revenue of $976,375. In the September 23, 2010 Decision,
 
PUC allowed a revenue increase of $548,682, or 126.52 percent
 
over previous revenues, for a total of $982,333 in revenues. PUC
 
further ordered that, prior to its next rate case proceeding, MPU
 
1
was to complete a cost of service study (COSS),  a wage study,
and a management audit or time and motion study on the proper 
allocation of costs among the Moloka
'i Properties Limited 
utilities. 
County timely appealed.
 
1
 A COSS illustrates the relationship between the different customer
classifications of a utility and serves the purpose of determining whether
there is an undue burden on any of the customer classifications. See In re
 
Hawaii Elec. Light Co.
 (HELCO I), 60 Haw. 625, 641, 594 P.2d 612, 623 (1979).
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 Rate-making decisions by PUC are governed by HRS 
§ 269–16 (2007 Repl.), which requires that all rates and charges 
be "just and reasonable." "The 'unjust and unreasonable' 
language does not represent a separate standard of review, but 
rather represents the application of the abuse of discretion 
standard to the statutory scheme underlying the PUC's rate-making 
powers." Paul's Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Befitel, 104 Hawai' i 412, 
419, 91 P.3d 494, 501 (2004). While PUC decisions "are not presumptively valid[,] . . . an agency's discretionary 
determinations are entitled to deference, and an appellant has a 
high burden to surmount that deference." Id. 
III.
 
A.	 The lack of a water use permit for Well 17 and
lack of an Environmental Assessment for the MIS
 does not render PUC's rate determination unjust
and unreasonable.
 
County contends that approving MPU's requested rate
 
increase based on its illegal use of Well 17 and the MIS is not
 
"just and reasonable." PUC has a duty to ensure that rates
 
charged by a public utility are "just and reasonable." HRS
 
§ 269-16. However, County's interpretation of the phrase "just
 
and reasonable" is erroneous.
 
County essentially argues that charging customers for
 
water without the proper permit or without preparing the required
 
report is per se unjust and unreasonable. County cites to NAACP
 
v. Fed. Power Comm'n, 425 U.S. 662, 96 S. Ct. 1806 (1976), for
 
the proposition that when establishing just and reasonable rates
 
a utility "clearly has the duty to prevent its regulatees from
 
charging rates based upon illegal, duplicative, or unnecessary
 
labor costs." Id. at 668, 96 S. Ct. at 1810. However, a further
 
reading of the applicable case law makes clear that the
 dispositive factor is whether the costs were unnecessarily
 
incurred because of an illegal activity.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Mountain States Telegraph & Telephone Co. v. FCC,
 
939 F.2d 1035 (D.C. Cir. 1991), the United States Court of
 
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit answered the
 
question of whether an FCC policy of not allowing litigation
 
expenses, settlements, and judgments against a utility to be
 
factored into a utility's rate was valid. Id. at 1043. The
 
court held that litigation expenses, settlements, and judgments
 associated with antitrust violations generally could not be
 
factored into a utility's rate. Id. The court clarified,
 
however, that the exception to this rule is that if the
 ratepayers are expected to benefit from the illegal conduct that
 
results in litigation expenses, settlement or judgments, then
 
those expenses can be factored into a utility's rate. Id.
 
It is the "aim of rate regulation to protect ratepayers
 
from having to pay charges unnecessarily incurred, including
 
those incurred as a result of the carrier's illegal activity." 
Id. at 1043. This rule clearly states that ratepayers must be
 
protected from charges unnecessarily incurred as a result of the
 
illegal activity. County has failed to demonstrate how any
 
charges were unnecessarily incurred from MPU's use without a
 
proper permit for Well 17 or MPU's use of the MIS without
 
conducting an Environmental Assessment. If a utility's conduct
 
is illegal, but the utility does not incur any unnecessary
 
expenses as a result of its conduct, the conduct has no effect on
 
whether the utility's rates are "just and reasonable."
 
This logic becomes clearer by drawing an analogy among
 
Mountain States, NAACP, and the instant case. In NAACP, the
 
Supreme Court found that costs (such as backpay awards) and
 
litigation expenses stemming from employment discrimination could
 
not be factored into a utility's rates. 425 U.S. at 668, 96 S.
 
Ct. at 1810-11. In both NAACP and Mountain States, the
 
respective courts looked to costs incurred by a utility's illegal
 
activity, not simply costs incurred during a utility's illegal
 
activity. The reasoning in these two cases may prevent MPU from
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
factoring any fees or litigation expenses stemming from its lack
 
of proper permitting or lack of an Environmental Assessment, but
 
it does not prevent MPU from charging any costs associated with
 
Well 17 and the MIS. Because County cannot illustrate how MPU's
 
purportedly illegal use of Well 17 and the MIS generated
 
unnecessary costs that would not have been incurred if MPU had
 
complied with the law, County has failed to demonstrate how the
 
PUC's approval of a rate increase was not "just and reasonable."
 
B.	 PUC's approval of a rate increase does not violate
the public trust doctrine because the rate
increase does not affect the public trust
resource.
 
County contends PUC violated its duties and
 
responsibilities under the public trust doctrine by approving
 
MPU's requested rate increase in spite of the illegal use of Well
 
17 and the MIS without a water use permit or Environmental
 
Assessment. While County correctly highlights the State's public
 
trust duties, County fails to demonstrate how the rate increase
 
affects the public trust.
 
"[T]he people of [Hawai' i] have elevated the public 
trust doctrine to the level of a constitutional mandate." In re 
Water Use Permit Applications (Waiahole), 94 Hawai' i 97, 131, 9 
P.3d 409, 443 (2000). Article XI, section 1, of the Hawai' i 
Constitution, directed to the "State and its political subdivisions," mandates that "[a]ll public natural resources are 
held in trust by the State for the benefit of the people." 
Article XI, section 7, establishes the duty "to protect, control, 
and regulate the use of Hawaii's water resources for the benefit 
of its people." The Hawai' i Supreme Court held that these 
provisions "adopt the public trust doctrine as a fundamental principle of constitutional law in Hawai' i." Waiahole, 94 Hawai' i 
at 132, 9 P.3d at 444. 
This doctrine undoubtedly establishes a public trust
 
duty in the State and its agencies to protect surface and ground
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
water as a public trust resource. However, County fails to 
allege how any public trust resource has been affected. Cf. In 
re Wai'ola O Moloka' i, 103 Hawai' i 401, 431, 83 P.3d 664, 694 
(2004) (holding that the State has a duty to weigh the impact of 
a proposed use of water on the public trust). In the instant 
case, PUC dealt not with a proposed use, but rather a rate 
increase that did not increase the amount of water used or change 
how the water was extracted. 
Simply put, MPU's effect on the 
public trust water resources would be the same whether or not the rate increase was approved by PUC. Because PUC's rate approval 
had no effect on the public trust, PUC did not violate the public 
trust doctrine. 
To be sure, this is not an approval of MPU's actions. 
The record makes clear MPU was required to obtain a water use
 
permit and to prepare an Environmental Assessment. It is clear
 
that under the law, MPU must take these steps. However, the
 
forum to challenge a lack of water use permit or Environmental
 
Assessment is not a rate approval application. 
C.	 PUC did not err in relying on the settlement
agreement between the Consumer Advocate and MPU.
 
County contends PUC erred in relying on the settlement
 
agreement between the Consumer Advocate and MPU because the
 
Consumer Advocate breached its responsibilities to the consumers. 
The Consumer Advocate has a duty to "represent, protect, and
 
advance the interests of all consumers." 
HRS § 269-51 (2007
 
Repl.). County argues that the Consumer Advocate breached its
 responsibilities by entering into the settlement agreement
 
despite lacking information to support the rate increase.
 
PUC's reliance on the settlement agreement is subject 
to a degree of deference. As stated earlier, although PUC 
decisions "are not presumptively valid[,] . . . an agency's 
discretionary determinations are entitled to deference, and an 
appellant has a high burden to surmount that deference." Paul's 
Elec. Serv., 104 Hawai' i at 419, 91 P.3d at 501. 
7
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
County argues that the Consumer Advocate lacked
 
adequate information regarding MPU's tax and book records for
 
plant in service items. However, the record clearly indicates
 
that any concerns regarding MPU's tax and book records for plant
 
in service items are now moot because MPU agreed not to seek a
 
rate of return, and, therefore, the tax and book records do not
 
affect the determination of revenue requirements. As such,
 
County fails to demonstrate how a lack of information regarding
 
the tax and book records led to a rate increase that was not just
 
and reasonable. Therefore, PUC did not err in approving MPU's
 
requested rate increase.
 
D. PUC did not err by not requiring a COSS.
 
County's final contention is that PUC erred by
 
2
accepting the pre-existing rate design  without requiring a COSS. 
PUC did not require MPU to conduct a COSS, but instead approved an across-the-board percentage increase in MPU's charges to its 
Customers. While the question of whether a COSS is required in a 
rate proceeding has not been specifically addressed in Hawai' i, 
reasoning by the Hawai' i Supreme Court clearly indicates that a 
COSS is not a requirement for a rate proceeding. 
HRS § 269-16 does not require a COSS in a rate-making 
proceeding, but only provides that the rate must be "just and 
reasonable." 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has been clear that 
"[t]he methodology employed by the PUC in its rate-making determination lies within its expertise and discretion." In re 
Hawaii Elec. Light Co., 67 Haw. 425, 431, 690 P.2d 274, 279 (1984). 
It is not theory but the impact of the rate order which
counts. If the total effect of the rate order cannot be
 said to be unjust and unreasonable, judicial inquiry is at
an end. The fact that the method employed to reach that
result may contain infirmities is not then important.
 
2
 "Rate design" is a term used to refer to the allocation or
distribution of costs among the various classes of customers. See In re
 
Inter-City Gas Corp., 389 N.W.2d 897, 901 (Minn. 1986). 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In re Hawaiian Tel. Co., 67 Haw. 370, 381, 689 P.2d 741, 749
 
(1984) (quoting Fed. Power Comm'n v. Hope Natural Gas Co., 320
 
U.S. 591, 602, 64 S. Ct. 281, 288 (1944)). "[T]he reasonableness
 
of utility rates is not determined by a fixed formula but is a
 
fact question requiring the exercise of sound discretion by the
 
Commission." In re Hawaiian Tel. Co., 67 Haw. at 382, 689 P.2d
 
at 749 (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets in
 original omitted).
 
County does not demonstrate specifically how the effect
 
of the rate increase was unjust and unreasonable, but instead
 
essentially argues that without a COSS, the rate increase is per
 
se unjust and unreasonable. Because it is not the method used in
 
determining the rate, but rather the outcome that is dispositive,
 
a COSS is not a necessary component of a rate increase
 
proceeding. Without a further showing of an unjust and
 
unreasonable result, a lack of a COSS alone is not enough to show
 
that PUC erred in approving MPU's requested rate increase.
3
 
IV.
 
The Decision and Order filed on September 23, 2010 by 
the Public Utilities Commission of the State of Hawai
'i is 
affirmed. 
On the briefs: 
Margery S. Bronster
Rex Y. Fujichaku
Leslie Patacsil Chinn
 (Bronster Hoshibata)
and
 
Patrick K. Wong
Jane E. Lovell
 Edward S. Kushi, Jr.
Deputies Corporation Counsel
for Appellant County of Maui.
 
3
 Several courts have specifically held that a COSS is not required in
a rate proceeding when no statutory requirement is present. See, e.g. Midwest
Gas Users Ass'n v. State Corp. Comm'n, 595 P.2d 735, 741-42 (Kan. Ct. App.
1979) (citing to Cleveland Elec. Illuminating Co. v. Pub. Utilities Comm'n of
Ohio, 330 N.E.2d 1, 18 (1975)); Apartment House Council of Metro. Washington,
Inc. v. Pub. Serv. Comm'n, 332 A.2d 53, 57 (D.C. Cir. 1975).
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Michael H. Lau
 
Yvonne Y. Izu
 for Appellee Molokai Public
Utilities, Inc.
 
Michael Azama 
for Appellee State of Hawai' i 
Public Utilities Commission. 
Jon S. Itomura
 
Lane H. Tsuchiyama
for Division of Consumer
 Advocacy, Department of Commerce
and Consumer Affairs.
 
10
 