NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0000930 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF WAIPOULI BEACH RESORT,
through its Board of Directors, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
UNLIMITED CONSTRUCTION SERVICES, INC.;
UNLIMITED WBR, LLC; UPONOR, INC.; DORVIN LEIS CO., INC.;
STO CORP.; GROUP BUILDERS, INC., Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
DOES -1-100, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0059)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Association of Apartment Owners of
 
Waipouli Beach Resort (AOAO) appeals from a Final Judgment filed
 
on June 9, 2014, in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit
 
(circuit court).1
 
On appeal, the AOAO contends that the circuit court
 
erred when it (1) entered summary judgment in favor of
 Defendants-Appellees Unlimited Construction Services, Inc. and
 Unlimited WBR, LLC (collectively Unlimited), Uponor, Inc.
 
(Uponor), Dorvin Leis Co., Inc. (Dorvin), Sto Corp. (Sto), and
 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Group Builders, Inc. (Group Builders) (collectively Defendants);
 
and (2) denied the AOAO's Motion to Compel Mediation and
 
Arbitration.
 
For the reasons stated below, we affirm in part, vacate
 
in part, and remand for further proceedings.
I. Background

 
In this case, the AOAO filed a Complaint on February
 
26, 2013 (2013 Complaint), against the Defendants alleging, inter
 
alia, negligence associated with the construction of the Waipouli
 
Beach Resort Project (Condominium Project). In later filings,
 
the AOAO appears to have focused its claims primarily on alleged
 
defects associated with the PEX plumbing system and soffit
 installation to the Condominium Project. 
On December 3, 2013, the AOAO filed a Motion to Compel
 
Mediation and Arbitration pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
2 3
(HRS) §§ 658A-3  and -7  (2016), Rule 12.2 of the Rules of the
4
Circuit Court of Hawai 'i (RCCH),  and a "Settlement Release and
2 HRS § 658A-3 provides that HRS chapter 658A governs an agreement to
arbitrate.
3 HRS § 658A-7 provides in pertinent part:
 
[§658A-7] Motion to compel or stay arbitration.  (a) On
motion of a person showing an agreement to arbitrate and
alleging another person's refusal to arbitrate pursuant to
the agreement:
(1)	 If the refusing party does not appear or does
not oppose the motion, the court shall order the
parties to arbitrate; and
(2)	 If the refusing party opposes the motion, the
court shall proceed summarily to decide the
issue and order the parties to arbitrate unless
it finds that there is no enforceable agreement
to arbitrate.
4 RCCH Rule 12.2 provides in pertinent part:
 
Rule 12.2 Alternative dispute resolution. 
(a) Authority to order. The court, sua sponte or upon
motion by a party, may, in exercise of its discretion, order
the parties to participate in a nonbinding Alternative
Dispute Resolution process (ADR or ADR process) subject to
terms and conditions imposed by the court. ADR includes
mediation, summary jury trial, neutral evaluation,
 
(continued...)
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Indemnification Agreement" signed in May of 2010 (2010 Settlement
 
Agreement) executed by the AOAO, Unlimited, and WBR LLC, formerly
 
known as Waipouli Beach Resort, LLC (WBR LLC).
 
Subsequently, Unlimited, Group Builders, and Dorvin
 
filed summary judgment motions, and Uponor and Sto filed joinders
 
to Dorvin's summary judgment motion. Unlimited argued that, as a
 party to the 2010 Settlement Agreement, the terms of that
 agreement released Unlimited from the claims asserted by the AOAO
 in the 2013 Complaint. Group Builders, Dorvin, Sto, and Uponor
 all argued that although they were not a party to the 2010
 Settlement Agreement, that agreement released them from the
 AOAO's claims because they were acting on behalf of Unlimited as
 either a subcontractor or a supplier for the Condominium Project. 
Further, all Defendants argued that the doctrine of res judicata
 barred the AOAO's claims because the 2013 Complaint asserted
 essentially identical claims as the claims in a prior Complaint
 filed in 2009 (2009 Complaint) against WBR LLC and Doe Defendants
 
(2009 Lawsuit). In accordance with the 2010 Settlement
 
Agreement, the AOAO and WBR LLC had signed a "Stipulation for
 
Dismissal With Prejudice of All Claims and All Parties"
 (Stipulation for Dismissal), dismissing the claims in the prior
 
2009 Lawsuit.
 
The circuit court granted the Defendants' summary
 
judgment motions and joinders on the basis of res judicata, and
 
denied the AOAO's Motion to Compel Mediation and Arbitration. 
On June 9, 2014, the circuit court filed the Final
 
Judgment. The AOAO timely appealed from the Final Judgment. 
4(...continued)
non-binding arbitration, presentation to a focus group, or
other such process the court determines may be helpful in
encouraging an economic and fair resolution of all or any
part of the disputes presented in the matter. Subsections
(a) through (e) do not apply to ADR administered by theHawai'i Judiciary, such as the Court Annexed Arbitration
Program. 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
II. Summary Judgment
A. Res Judicata
 
The AOAO contends that the circuit court erred when it
 
granted summary judgment based on res judicata or claim
 
preclusion.
 
The party asserting claim preclusion has the burden of
establishing that (1) there was a final judgment on the
merits, (2) both parties are the same or in privity with the
parties in the original suit, and (3) the claim decided in
the original suit is identical with the one presented in the
action in question.
 
Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai 'i 43, 54, 85 P.3d 150, 161 (2004).
1. Claims Decided in the 2009 Lawsuit5
 
The AOAO contends that the claims in the 2013 Complaint
are not barred by res judicata because they do not fall within
 
the scope of the claims released in the 2010 Settlement
 Agreement. However, rather than start with the terms of the 2010
 Settlement Agreement, we first focus on the claims asserted in
 the 2009 Complaint. In this regard, the 2009 Complaint (asserted
 against WBR LLC and Doe Defendants) alleged, in pertinent part:
 
 
5.	 The Defendants were negligent with respect to the
development, design, construction, installation,
supervision, inspection, repairing, testing, building,
site development, product selection, or in some other
manner, in relation to The Waipouli Beach Resort
project and the buildings thereon. The Defendants
 were negligent in violating of [sic] Building Codes
and other applicable laws and ordinances, deviating
from construction industry standards, and constructing
housing that the Defendants knew or should have known
would pose serious risks of physical harm.
 
Further, the 2010 Settlement Agreement provided that
 
the AOAO "will release, discharge, and forever hold harmless
 
RELEASEES from any and all Claims." In turn, "claims" is defined
 in the 2010 Settlement Agreement as follows:
 
5
 The AOAO does not challenge whether there was a final judgment in the
2009 Lawsuit. However, we note that the 2009 Lawsuit was dismissed with
prejudice by way of the Stipulation for Dismissal. "A dismissal of a lawsuit
 with prejudice is generally regarded as an adjudication on the merits of all
issues that were raised or could have been raised in the pleadings, thus
barring, on res judicata grounds, any subsequent litigation involving the same
claims[.]" Gilmartin v. Abastillas, 10 Haw. App. 283, 288, 869 P.2d 1346,
1349 (1994) (citation omitted).
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"Claims" shall mean and include any and all claims for
damages, demands for payment of money, suits at law or
equity, demands for arbitration, mediation, however
denominated, whether past, present or future, arising out
of, caused by or resulting from the development, design,
and/or construction of the condominium project, any
identification of RELEASEES on public reports or documents
relating to the Condominium Project; and any and all
repairs, replacement, remedial actions and/or maintenance to
the Condominium Project undertaken by RELEASEES. The term
"Claims" shall also mean and include any and all alleged
defects and/or discrepancies identified or alleged in the
Lawsuit, whether by Complaint, Pretrial Statement, Answers
To Interrogatories or otherwise, or which could have been
alleged prior to the date of this Agreement. The term
"Claims" shall also include all invoices, billings,
statements of services rendered and/or materials provided to
RELEASOR concerning the Lawsuit[.]
 
Turning to the 2013 Complaint in this case, we first
 
note that the allegations in paragraph 10 of the 2013 Complaint
 
are almost identical to the allegations in paragraph 5 of the
 2009 Complaint. The only material difference is that in
 paragraph 10 of the 2013 Complaint, "remediation" is added after
 "product selection[.]" In short, the claims asserted in the 2013
 Complaint are almost identical to the claims in the 2009
 Complaint. The 2013 Complaint further states:
 
As a direct and proximate result of the foregoing,
[AOAO] has suffered injuries, damages, and losses and is
entitled to recover general, special, compensatory, and
consequential damages in an amount to be shown at trial . .
. said injuries, damage, and losses include but are not
limited to the following:
(a)
	 physical injury to the buildings,
apartments and grounds of the Project;
(b)	 injuries, damage, and losses resulting
from improper development, design, and/or
construction of the buildings, apartments
and grounds;
(c)	 a continuous or repeated exposure to
conditions which resulted in damage or
injury to the buildings, apartments and
grounds;
(d)	 loss in value of the apartments, buildings
and grounds;
(e)	 the cost of experts;
(f)	 increase in maintenance costs;
(g)	 the cost to remedy defects and
deficiencies; and
(h)	 other direct and consequential damages.
 
This is materially identical to what the AOAO asserted and sought
 
in the 2009 Complaint.
 
5

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Given the above, it seems clear that the claims
 
asserted in this case under the 2013 Complaint are essentially
 
identical to the claims asserted in the 2009 Lawsuit. 
2. Parties to the 2009 Complaint
 
The AOAO contends that Dorvin, Uponor, Sto, and Group
 
Builders were not parties to the 2009 Complaint, and thus, res
 judicata does not bar the claims against these defendants in this
 case.
 
The Defendants, in turn, counter that they were parties 
to the 2009 Complaint and the Stipulation for Dismissal because, pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 17(d), 
they should be considered Doe Defendants in the 2009 Complaint. Alternatively, the Defendants argue that they were in privity with WBR LLC. 
The parties identified in the 2009 Complaint are the
 
AOAO, as the plaintiff, and WBR LLC (the developer for the
 Condominium Project) as the defendant, as well as Doe Defendants.
 The AOAO and WBR LLC are the only two parties that signed the
 Stipulation for Dismissal.
 
Defendants assert that, pursuant to HRCP Rule 17(d),
 
they were Doe Defendant parties to the 2009 Lawsuit. That is,
 given the allegations in the 2009 Complaint that Doe Defendants
 included, inter alia, "vendors, suppliers, manufacturers,
 distributors, sub-distributors, sub-contractors, contractors," or
 those who "were in some manner, presently unknown to Plaintiff,
 engaged or involved in the activities alleged herein[,]"
 Defendants argue these allegations include them as parties to the
 2009 Lawsuit. HRCP Rule 17(d) provides in pertinent part:
 
(d) Unidentified Defendant.
 
(1) When it shall be necessary or proper to make a person a
party defendant and the party desiring the inclusion of the
person as a party defendant has been unable to ascertain the
identity of a defendant, the party desiring the inclusion of
the person as a party defendant shall in accordance with the
criteria of Rule 11 of these rules set forth in a pleading
the person's interest in the action, so much of the identity
as is known (and if unknown, a fictitious name shall be
used), and shall set forth with specificity all actions
already undertaken in a diligent and good-faith effort to
ascertain the person's full name and identity.
 
6
 Although, as the Defendants contend, a Doe Defendant
 
under HRCP Rule 17(d) is considered a party defendant, a primary
 
purpose of HRCP Rule 17 "is to toll the statute of limitations
 with respect to Doe defendants who cannot be identified prior to
 the running of the statute." 
Tri-S Corp. v. W. World Ins. Co.,
 
110 Hawai 'i 473, 500, 135 P.3d 82, 109 (2006) (internal quotation 
marks omitted). Importantly, under HRCP Rule 17(d)(3), the
 plaintiff must make the identity of the party known to the court
 within a reasonable time, and under HRCP Rule 17(d)(4), "[w]hen a
 party defendant has been named or identified in accordance with
 this rule, the court shall so certify[.]" The Hawai
'i Supreme 
Court has noted that:
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) Subject to HRS section 657-22, the person intended shall
thereupon be considered a party defendant to the action, as
having notice of the institution of the action against that
person, and as sufficiently described for all purposes,
including services of process, and the action shall proceed
against that person.
 
(3) Any party may, by motion for certification, make the
name or identity of the party defendant known to the court
within a reasonable time after the moving party knew or
should have known the name or identity of the party
defendant. . . . 
(4) When a party defendant has been named or identified in
accordance with this rule, the court shall so certify and
may make any order that justice requires to protect any
party from undue burden and expense in any further
proceedings involving the party defendant.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Unlike most of the Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule
17(d) is not patterned after a federal rule; it was drafted
by our Committee on Civil Rules, . . . . Yet if anything is
clear about its application, it is the need for scrupulous
observance of its procedures and the criteria for pleadings
established by HRCP 11.
 
Tobosa v. Owens, 69 Haw. 305, 316-17, 741 P.2d 1280, 1287-88
 
(emphasis added). 
Here, the Defendants do not assert or provide any
 
evidence that the AOAO identified to the court, or should have
 identified to the court, any of the Defendants as a Doe Defendant
 in the 2009 Lawsuit, and there is no assertion that the
 Defendants were certified as Doe Defendants in the 2009 Lawsuit. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Given these circumstances, where there was not observance of the
 
procedures in HRCP Rule 17(d) or an assertion that the AOAO
 failed to properly comply with the rule, we cannot say that the
 Defendants in this case were parties to the 2009 Lawsuit for res
 judicata purposes.
6
 
The Defendants contend, alternatively, that res
 
judicata applies because they were in privity with WBR LLC. This
 court has stated:
 
The concept of privity has moved from the conventional and
narrowly defined meaning of "mutual or successive
relationship[s] to the same rights of property" to "merely a
word used to say that the relationship between the one who
is a party of record and another is close enough to include
that other within the res adjudicata."
 
In re Dowsett Tr., 7 Haw. App. 640, 646, 791 P.2d 398, 402 (1990)
 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Further, a
 "determination of who are privies 'requires careful examination
 into the circumstances in each case as it arises.'" Id. (citation
 omitted). One major consideration in a privity analysis is
 whether there was "[a]dequate representation of the interests of
 the nonparty[.]" Id.
 
Here, although the Defendants contend they were in
 
privity with WBR LLC, the developer, because they allege they
 were either the general contractor, subcontractor, or supplier to
 the Condominium Project, none of the Defendants presented
 evidence in support of their summary judgment motions
 demonstrating their relationship with WBR LLC. Further, no
 evidence was presented as to WBR LLC representing the interests
 of the Defendants in regard to the 2009 Lawsuit. Therefore, the
 
6 Defendants cite to cases from other jurisdictions to support the
proposition that they should be considered Doe Defendants in the 2009 Lawsuit
and thus the claims here are barred by res judicata. See Manning v. S.C.
Dept. Of Hwy. & Pub. Trans., 914 F.2d 44 (4th Cir. 1990); Goel v. Heller, 667
F. Supp. 144 (D.N.J. 1987); Deaton v. Burney, 669 N.E.2d 1 (Ohio Ct. App.1995). However, as noted above, HRCP Rule 17(d) was specifically drafted by aHawai'i Committee on Civil Rules and its procedures should be scrupulously
observed. Tobosa, 69 Haw. at 316, 741 P.2d at 1287. The cases that 
Defendants rely upon are unpersuasive in light of the requirements under HRCPRule 17(d). Cf. Nagle v. Lee, 807 F.2d 435, 440 (5th Cir. 1987)("[T]he mere
naming of a person through use of a fictitious name does not make that persona party absent voluntary appearance or proper service of process."). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendants did not demonstrate there was no genuine issue of
 
material fact as to whether privity exists in this case.
B. Parties Released Under the 2010 Settlement Agreement
 
The AOAO further contends that the 2010 Settlement
 
Agreement did not release Dorvin, Uponor, Sto, and Group Builders
 from the claims asserted in the 2013 Complaint, because these
 defendants were not parties to the 2010 Settlement Agreement. By
 contrast, Dorvin, Uponor, Sto, and Group Builders contend that
 they are Releasees as defined in the 2010 Settlement Agreement. 
Settlement agreements are a species of contract and the 
principles of contract interpretation apply when interpreting a settlement agreement. Wong v. Cayetano, 111 Hawai
'i 462, 481, 
143 P.3d 1, 20 (2006). "Contract terms are interpreted according to their plain, ordinary, and accepted sense in common speech." Hawaiian Ass'n of Seventh-Day Adventists v. Wong, 130 Hawai
'i 36, 
45, 305 P.3d 452, 461 (2013) (citation omitted). 
The 2010 Settlement Agreement provides: "'RELEASEES'
 
shall mean and include without limitation, WBR LLC; UNLIMITED WBR
 LCC [sic], and UNLIMITED CONSTRUCTION INC., their respective and
 collective officers, directors, shareholders, members, managers,
 agents, employees, consultants, insurers, attorneys, successors
 and assigns and anyone acting on their behalf." (Emphasis
 added.) The 2010 Settlement Agreement clearly releases
 Unlimited. Although not expressly named as Releasees, Dorvin,
 Uponor, Sto, and Group Builders contend that they were acting on
 behalf of Unlimited as either a subcontractor or supplier for the
 Condominium Project, and thus were released under the 2010
 Settlement Agreement.
 
The list of Releasees set forth in the 2010 Settlement
 
Agreement listed after WBR LLC and Unlimited appear to be types
 of agents of the companies. The general term "anyone acting on
 their behalf" must relate to the same category as the specific
 terms it follows. State v. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., 211 P.3d
 
448, 452 n.23 (Wash. Ct. App. 2009) ("The doctrine of ejusdem
 generis provides that when a general term follows or is preceded
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by a series of specific terms, the general term should not be
 
given its broadest possible meaning, but rather should extend
 only to matters of the same general class or nature as the terms
 specifically enumerated. The doctrine applies in both statutory
 and contract interpretation cases.") (citations omitted). It
 does not appear that Dorvin, Sto, Uponor, and Group Builders –­as either a subcontractor or supplier for the Condominium Project
 –- acted on behalf of the developer or general contractor in a
 sense similar to those specifically enumerated as a Releasee. 
Further, Dorvin, Sto, Uponor, and Group Builders did not submit
 evidence in support of their summary judgment motions to show
 that they acted on behalf of WBR LLC or Unlimited.
 
At a minimum, there are genuine issues of material fact
 
whether Dorvin, Sto, Uponor, and Group Builders were Releasees
 under the 2010 Settlement Agreement. Thus, summary judgment in
 favor of Dorvin, Sto, Uponor, and Group Builders was not
 warranted on this ground.
 
However, because it is undisputed that Unlimited was 
expressly identified as a Releasee under the 2010 Settlement Agreement and, as stated above, the 2010 Settlement Agreement covered the type of claims asserted by the AOAO in the 2013 Complaint, summary judgment in favor of Unlimited is proper. Although the circuit court granted summary judgment based on res judicata, we may affirm on different grounds. Poe v. Hawai
'i 
Labor Relations Bd., 87 Hawai 'i 191, 197, 953 P.2d 569, 575 
(1998). 
C. Motion to Compel Mediation and Arbitration
 
The AOAO contends that the circuit court erred when it 
did not compel the Defendants to arbitrate pursuant to the Hawai
'i Uniform Arbitration Act, HRS Chapter 658A, and the 2010 
Settlement Agreement. 
"[W]hen presented with a motion to compel arbitration,
 
the court is limited to answering two questions: (1) whether an
 arbitration agreement exists between the parties; and (2) if so,
 whether the subject matter of the dispute is arbitrable under
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
11such agreement."  Fireman's Fund Ins. Co. v. AIG Hawai #i Ins.
Co., 109 Hawai #i 343, 349, 126 P.3d 386, 392 (2006).
As discussed above, the evidence presented in this case
does not show that Dorvin, Sto, Uponor, and Group Builders were
parties to or Releasees under the 2010 Settlement Agreement. 
Thus, they cannot be compelled to participate in arbitration
pursuant to the terms of the 2010 Settlement Agreement.
Moreover, it does not appear that the claims in this
case are arbitrable under the terms of the 2010 Settlement
Agreement.  With regard to arbitration, the 2010 Settlement
Agreement provides:
Disputes.  In the event of a dispute by any party over the
terms and conditions of this Agreement, or any party's
performance of its obligations thereunder, the parties agree
to resolve such disputes first by reference to binding
mediation pursuant to the Commercial Mediation Rules of
Dispute Prevention & Resolution Inc., ("DPR") before a
single mediator and the location of such mediation shall be
in Honolulu, Hawaii.  Only after the mediator declares an
impasse in writing, the parties shall resolve their disputes
by binding arbitration pursuant to the Commercial
Arbitration Rules of DPR, before a single arbitrator; the
location of such arbitration shall be in Honolulu, Hawaii.
(Emphasis added.)  The claims in this case, set forth in the 2013
Complaint, were for damages related to the Condominium Project
and not based on a dispute over the terms or conditions of the
2010 Settlement Agreement. 
The AOAO also contends that the circuit court should
have compelled the parties to participate in mediation pursuant
to RCCH Rule 12.2, which provides in pertinent part: "The court,
sua sponte or upon motion by a party, may, in exercise of its
discretion, order the parties to participate in a nonbinding
Alternative Dispute Resolution process (ADR or ADR process)
subject to terms and conditions imposed by the court." (Emphasis
added.)
RCCH Rule 12.2 "does not mandate that a circuit court
grant a party's request to mediate; instead, this decision
remains discretionary with the court."  Bowen Hunsaker Hirai
Consulting, Inc. V. Turk, No. CAAP-10-0000104, 2013 WL 5442980,
at *6 (Haw. App. Sept. 30, 2013).  Here, the AOAO does notNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
allege, and nothing in the record indicates, that the circuit
 
court abused its discretion when it denied the AOAO's motion for
 mediation pursuant to RCCH Rule 12.2.
III. Conclusion
 
Based on the above, the Final Judgment, filed on June
 
9, 2014, in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit, is vacated
 with regard to the entry of judgment in favor of Dorvin, Sto,
 Uponor, and Group Builders. The Final Judgment is affirmed in
 all other respects. The case is remanded to the circuit court
 for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, July 25, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
Terrance M. Revere,
Malia Nickison-Beazley,
and 
P. Kyle Smith,
Christina N. Lambe,
for Plaintiff-Appellant. 

Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Michelle-Lynne E. Luke,

for Defendants-Appellees.
 
12
 