NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000448
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
CHANG Y. AIONA, V, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
COUNTY OF HAWAII; JOHN A. MEDEIROS, individually and
official capacity; DOE PERSONS 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; ROE "NON-PROFIT" CORPORATIONS 1-10,
AND ROE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD IRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 16-1-342K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant Chang Y. Aiona, V (Aiona), appeals 
from the May 8, 2017 Final Judgment (Judgment), in favor of 
Defendant-Appellee County of Hawai' i (County) and John A. 
Medeiros (Medeiros), individually and in his official capacity (collectively, Defendants), and against Aiona on all claims, entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 Aiona also challenges the Circuit Court's March 16, 
2017 Order Dismissing With Prejudice All Claims Contained in 
[Aiona's] Complaint (Order of Dismissal). 
1
 The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Aiona raises one point of error on appeal, contending
 
that the Circuit Court erred in concluding that Aiona's claims
 
were barred by the Workers' Compensation Law (WCL).
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Aiona's
 point of error as follows: 
The Complaint was filed on October 21, 2016, alleging
 
four causes of action against all defendants: defamation "per
 se," defamation "per quod," false light, and intentional
 infliction of emotional distress (IIED).  On December 5, 2016,
 
Defendants filed a motion to dismiss, arguing that Aiona's claims
 
all arise out of and in the course of his employment with the
 County and, therefore, the WCL, as set forth in Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) chapter 386, bars adjudication of Aiona's claims
 
against the County. Defendants further argued that claims
 
against Medeiros in his official capacity must be dismissed
 because they are "merely duplicative" of those against the
 County. Although the motion prayed for dismissal of the entire
 action with prejudice, Defendants made no argument concerning
 dismissal of the claims against Medeiros in his individual
 capacity.
 
At a February 15, 2017 hearing on the motion, after
 
argument of counsel, the Circuit Court announced its ruling that
 "the court would find under the unitary test that [Aiona's]
 claims involve exclusivity in plaintiff's employment and injury"
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and "the court will find under the Hawaii Workers' Compensation
 
Law that since there's a nexus, . . . under 12(b)(6) that this
 matter should be addressed in the Hawaii Workers' Comp Law [and]
 the court will grant the motion to dismiss." Aiona's counsel
 asked for clarification, specifically, whether "the court is also
 dismissing Mr. Medeiros in his personal capacity; is that
 correct?" The court responded, "[t]hat's correct." The Order of
 Dismissal dismissed with prejudice all claims against all parties
 and the Judgment was entered accordingly.
 
On appeal, Aiona argues that the Circuit Court erred in 
dismissing the Complaint in its entirety on the grounds that all claims were barred by the WCL. In light of the supreme court's recent decision in Nakamoto v. Kawauchi, SCWC-13-0004947, 2018 WL 2111228 (Haw. May 8, 2018), we agree. Therein, the supreme court held that the torts of defamation and false light are beyond the ambit of the WCL's exclusivity provision and overruled this court's decision in Yang v. Abercrombie & Fitch Stores, 128 Hawai'i 173, 284 P.3d 946 (App. 2012), to the extent it held 
otherwise. Id. at *8. The supreme court's decision rests on its 
analysis and conclusion that defamation and false light claims are not "personal injuries" and therefore are not barred by the WCL exclusivity provision. Id. at *8-13. Therefore, the Circuit 
Court erred in dismissing Counts I, II, and III of Aiona's Complaint. 
With respect to Count IV, alleging IIED, the starting
 
point in determining whether the WCL exclusivity provision bars
 this claim is to determine the legislative intent from the
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
language of the statute itself, reading it in the context of the 
entire statute and consistent with its purpose. Lingle v. Haw. 
Gov't Emps. Ass'n AFSCME Local 152, AFL-CIO, 107 Hawai' i 178, 
183, 111 P.3d 587, 592 (2005). The exclusive remedy provision of the WCL, HRS § 386-5 (2015), provides: 
Exclusiveness of right to compensation; exception.
The rights and remedies herein granted to an employee or the
employee's dependents on account of a work injury suffered
by the employee shall exclude all other liability of the
employer to the employee, the employee's legal
representative, spouse, dependents, next of kin, or anyone
else entitled to recover damages from the employer, at
common law or otherwise, on account of the injury, except
for sexual harassment or sexual assault and infliction of
 emotional distress or invasion of privacy related thereto,
in which case a civil action may also be brought.
 
Under this provision, the workers' compensation 
benefits provided to an employee on account of a work injury 
"shall exclude all other liability of the employer to the employee . . ." on account of that injury. Id. Specific 
exceptions were later carved out by the Legislature: sexual harassment or sexual assault – not harassment or assault in general; infliction of emotional distress related to sexual assault or sexual harassment – not just any infliction of emotional distress; invasion of privacy related to sexual assault or sexual harassment – not invasion of privacy generally. See 
Nelson v. Univ. of Haw., 97 Hawai' i 376, 394-95, 38 P.3d 95, 113­
14 (2001) (discussing that the purpose of the 1992 amendments to exclusivity provision was to enable employees to file suits based on sexual harassment or sexual assault arising out of and in the course of employment). 
HRS § 386-1 (2015) defines "work injury" as a "personal
 
injury suffered under the conditions specified in section 386-3." 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 386-3(a) (2015) describes the nature of the injuries that
 
are compensable:
 
Injuries covered.  (a) If an employee suffers personal
injury either by accident arising out of and in the course
of the employment or by disease proximately caused by or
resulting from the nature of the employment, the employee's
employer or the special compensation fund shall pay
compensation to the employee or the employee's dependents as
provided in this chapter.
 
Accident arising out of and in the course of the employment
includes the wilful act of a third person directed against an
employee because of the employee's employment.
 
(Emphasis added). As discussed above, in Nakamoto, the supreme
 
court held that reputational harms caused by defamation or false
 light are not personal injuries.
 
HRS § 386-8 (Supp. 2017), which covers the liability of
 
a third person for a compensable work injury, provides, in
 relevant part:
 
Liability of third person . (a) When a work injury for
which compensation is payable under this chapter has been
sustained under circumstances creating in some person other
than the employer or another employee of the employer acting
in the course of employment a legal liability to pay damages
on account thereof, the injured employee or the injured
employee's dependents . . . may claim compensation under
this chapter and recover damages from that third person.
. . . .
 
(k) Another employee of the same employer shall not be
relieved of that employee's liability as a third party, if
the personal injury is caused by that employee's wilful and
wanton misconduct.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
In Zemis v. SCI Contractors, Inc., 80 Hawai' i 442, 911 
P.2d 77 (1996), an employee was physically assaulted and
 
seriously injured by a fellow employee at their place of
 employment during the work day. Id. at 444, 911 P.2d at 79. The
 
supreme court held that the claimant's injuries were not
 compensable under the WCL because the assault was related to an
 automobile accident involving the claimant and his co-employee's
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
wife and did not arise out of and in the course of employment. 
Id. The court began its discussion with the well-settled
 
principle that:
 
For an injury to be compensable under a workers'
compensation statute, there must be a requisite nexus
between the employment and the injury. The nexus
 requirement is articulated in Hawai 'i, as in the majority of
jurisdictions, on the basis that, to be compensable, an
injury must arise out of and in the course of employment.
 
Id. at 445, 911 P.3d at 80 (citations and brackets omitted).
 
The supreme court analyzed the circumstances under
 
which a willful act, in that case an assault, is covered by the
 
WCL:
 
Under HRS § 386-3, where an employee is injured by the
wilful act of a third person, a causal connection between
the employment and the resulting injury may be found if the
wilful act of the third person was directed against the
employee because of the employee's employment . See 1 A.
 
Larson, The Law of Workmen's Compensation § 11.00, at 3-178
(1995) ("Assaults arise out of the employment either if the
risk of assault is increased because of the nature or
 setting of the work, or if the reason for the assault was a
quarrel having its origin in the work. . . .").
 
Id. at 446, 911 P.2d at 81 (internal quotation marks, brackets, 
& some parenthetical material omitted).
 
After analyzing the facts before the court, the supreme
 
court repeated and further explained the circumstances under
 which an intentional act, such as an assault, is covered by the
 WCL:
 
[U]nder HRS § 386-3, where an employee is intentionally
assaulted on the job site by a third person, the resulting
injury is not causally connected to the employment unless
the assault itself was "directed against the employee
because of the employee's employment." A personally
motivated assault of an employee by a third person may be
considered as having occurred "because of the employee's
employment," if the animosity or dispute which culminated in
the assault was "exacerbated by the employment." 
Id. at 447, 911 P.2d at 82 (citation omitted). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Iddings v. Mee-Lee, 82 Hawai' i 1, 919 P.2d 263 
(1996), the supreme court dealt with the scope and requirements 
of the wilful and wanton misconduct exception to co-employee immunity under the WCL. In doing so, the supreme court drew a sharp distinction between the broad immunity granted to employers by HRS § 386-5, and the more limited immunity granted to co-employees by HRS § 386-8, which permits civil suits against co-employees who have caused a personal injury by wilful and wanton misconduct. Id. at 15, 919 P.2d at 277. The supreme court 
rejected the argument that a supervisory employee should be treated as an "employer" for the purpose of determining whether he or she could be sued for wilful and wanton misconduct. Id. 
The plain language of HRS § 386-5, and the harmonious
 
reading of the WCL as a whole, mandates the conclusion that the
 workers' compensation remedies available to Aiona exclude all
 other liabilities of the County to Aiona on account of the
 personal injuries he allegedly suffered arising out of and in the
 course of his employment. As the supreme court discussed in
 Iddings, HRS § 386-8 clearly limits the immunity provided to a
 co-employee who has caused an injury by wilful and wanton
 misconduct, which includes intentional and reckless acts. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Iddings, 82 Hawai' i at 12, 919 P.2d at 274.2 Neither HRS § 386-5 
nor HRS § 386-8 include any such limitation for the immunity 
provided to the employer. Nor do these provisions allow suit against the employer for the alleged willful and wanton misconduct of a complainant's fellow employee. 
In amending HRS § 386-5 in 1992, the Legislature
 
created an exception for sexual harassment, which would have been
 wholly unnecessary if the broader tort of harassment was excluded
 because it falls within the category of intentional torts. The
 same is true of the exceptions created for IIED related to sexual
 harassment or sexual assault. An exception for a subset of IIED
 claims would have been wholly unnecessary if IIED were generally
 excluded. IIED claims are generally recognized as personal
 injury claims. See, e.g., Nakamoto, 2018 WL 2111228, at *9
 
(recognizing both mental and physical injuries as personal
 injuries). Accordingly, we conclude that the exclusivity
 provision in HRS § 386-5 bars Aiona's suit against the County, as
 well as against Medeiros in his official capacity, for alleged
 IIED injuries suffered because of his employment. However, as a
 co-employee, Medeiros, in his individual capacity, may be
 
2
 The supreme court held, inter alia , that:
 
the term "wilful and wanton misconduct," as used in HRS
§ 386-8, includes conduct that is either: (1) motivated by
an actual intent to cause injury; or (2) committed in
circumstances indicating that the injuring employee (a) has
knowledge of the peril to be apprehended, (b) has knowledge
that the injury is a probable, as opposed to a possible,
result of the danger, and (c) consciously fails to avoid the
peril.
 
Iddings, 82 Hawai 'i at 12, 919 P.2d at 274. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
considered a "third person" as that term is used in HRS § 386­
3(a). Therefore, in light of the allegations stated in Count IV
 of the Complaint, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in
 concluding as a matter of law that Aiona's claims against
 Medeiros, in his individual capacity, failed to state a claim
 upon which relief can be granted.
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's Judgment and
 
Order of Dismissal are affirmed in part, as to the dismissal of
 Count IV against the County and Medeiros in his official
 capacity, and vacated in part, as to the dismissal of Counts I­III and Count IV with respect to the claim against Medeiros in
 his individual capacity. This case is remanded to the Circuit
 Court for further proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 15, 2018. 
On the briefs: Ted H.S. Hong,
for Plaintiff-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Lerisa L. Heroldt,D. Kaena Horowitz,Deputies Corporation Counsel,County of Hawai' i,
for Defendants-Appellees. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9
 