 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS  AND P ACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-19-0000427 24-MAY-2024 08:04 AM Dkt. 109 SO 
NO. CAAP-19-0000427 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
JULIAN JORDAN D. CORPUZ, II, Plaintiff-Appellee, v. 
VAPEHEAD ORIGINS USA, LLC, a foreign limited liability company; 
24 HOUR VAPES, LLC, a domestic limited liability company, 
Defendants/Cross-Claim Defendants/Cross-Claimants-Appellees, and 
JOCOR ENTERPRISES LLC, dba Volcano Fine Electronic Cigarettes, 
a domestic limited liability company, 
Defendant/Cross-Claimant/Cross-Claim Defendant-Appellant, and 
JOHN DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; 
and DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CC171001631)  
  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: 
Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.) 
Defendant/Cross-Claimant/Cross-Claim Defendant-
Appellant Jocor Enterprises, LLC (
Jocor) appeals from the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit's  (1) May 23, 2019 "Order 
Granting Defendant 24 Hour Vapes, LLC's Substantive Joinder to 1
1 The Honorable James S. Kawashima presided.   
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendant Vapehead Origins USA, LLC's Petition for Determination 
of Good Faith Settlement" (May 23, 2019 Joinder Order); and 
(2) May 29, 2019 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and 
Order Granting Defendant 24 Hour Vapes, LLC's Substantive 
Joinder to Defendant Vapehead Origins USA, LLC's Petition for 
Determination of Good Faith Settlement" (May 29, 2019 Good Faith 
Settlement Order). 
On appeal, Jocor contends the circuit court abused its 
discretion when it determined a "walk away" settlement between Plaintiff-Appellee Julian Jordan D. Corpuz, II (
Corpuz) and 
Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant/Cross-Claimant-Appellee 24 Hour Vapes, LLC (24 Hour Vapes) was a good faith settlement for 
purposes of 
Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 663-15.5 (2016, 
Supp. 2018), which barred Jocor from pursuing 24 Hour Vapes for 
contribution. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve this 
appeal as discussed below, and affirm. 
On October 5, 2017, Corpuz sued Defendant/Cross-Claim 
Defendant/Cross-Claimant-Appellee Vapehead Origins USA, LLC (
Vapehead), 24 Hour Vapes, and Jocor for injuries sustained when 
an electronic cigarette and/or its batteries exploded in his 
2   
 
  
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pocket causing him to suffer injuries. As related to his claim, 
Corpuz asserted: 
• Vapehead manufactured the electronic cigarette; 
• 24 Hour Vapes sold the electronic cigarette; and 
• Jocor sold the batteries for the electronic cigarette. 
Vapehead moved for summary judgment on Corpuz's claims 
and the cross-claims Jocor and 24 Hour Vapes filed. Vapehead asserted the electronic cigarette it manufactured was not 
responsible for Corpuz's injuries because the evidence showed 
the batteries were not in the electronic cigarette when the 
batteries caught on fire. 
To support this assertion, Vapehead attached a report 
by Daren Slee, a Senior Managing Engineer at Exponent, a failure analysis consulting firm. The report indicated there was damage 
to, and soot on, the outside of the electronic cigarette, while 
inside the battery compartment was relatively clean with no heat 
damage on several plastic components. This showed the 
electronic cigarette was exposed to an external heat source. 
Vapehead thus asserted the electronic cigarette did not cause the batteries to fail. 
Vapehead then petitioned for determination of good 
faith settlement, indicating it had reached a "walk away" 
settlement with Corpuz and that Corpuz would be dismissing his 
claims against Vapehead and each would bear their own costs. 
3   
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Vapehead requested the court determine the settlement was a good 
faith settlement for purposes of HRS § 663-15.5, which generally 
bars claims for contribution and indemnity against a joint 
tortfeasor who settles in good faith unless there is an 
indemnity agreement. See generally, HRS § 663-15.5(d)(1) 
(2016). 
24 Hour Vapes moved to join Vapehead's petition for 
determination of good faith settlement. In its request to join 
Vapehead's petition, 24 Hour Vapes asserted Corpuz's injuries 
were from Jocor's batteries, and the electronic cigarette it 
sold did not cause the fire. 24 Hour Vapes also indicated it 
too reached a walk-away settlement with Corpuz. 
Jocor opposed both Vapehead's petition for 
determination of good faith settlement and 24 Hour Vapes' 
joinder motion. 
On May 2, 2019, the circuit court granted Vapehead's 
petition for determination of good faith settlement. The circuit court stated it "considered all of the pleadings and 
evidence filed in support of the Petition and the memoranda 
listed above, and based on the records in this case, arguments 
presented at the hearing, declarations of counsel, and all of 
the exhibits submitted . . . ." The circuit court found, among 
other things, "[s]upport exists for [Corpuz]'s decision to 
dismiss claims as against [Vapehead]." 
4   
 
   
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Subsequently, the circuit court entered its May 23, 
2019 Joinder Order, allowing 24 Hour Vapes to join Vapehead's 
petition. In doing so, the circuit court 
considered all of the pleadings and evidence filed in 
support of the Substantive Joinder, the memoranda listed above, the records in this case, arguments presented at the 
hearing, declarations of counsel, and all of the exhibits 
submitted in regard to the Substantive Joind er, and based 
upon the Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law as stated in the Order Granting Vapehead's Good Faith Petition[.] 
The circuit court also entered its May 29, 2019 Good 
Faith Settlement Order, determining the settlement between 24 
Hour Vapes and Corpuz was entered into in good faith. The circuit court ordered that "(a) any further claims against 24 
Hour [Vapes] by any other joint tortfeasor or co-obligor are 
barred and (b) all cross-claims filed in this matter against 24 
Hour [Vapes] are hereby dismissed with prejudice." 
Jocor appealed from the May 23, 2019 Joinder Order and 
the May 29, 2019 Good Faith Settlement Order. 
(1) Jocor first contends the circuit court erred by 
granting 24 Hour Vapes' "Petition based on its findings of fact and conclusions of law that were specific to Vapehead[.]" Jocor 
thus requests this court vacate the circuit court's May 23, 2019 
Joinder Order. 
In the order granting Vapehead's good faith settlement 
petition, the circuit court found the settlement was reached 
based on Corpuz's evaluation of the evidence as to liability, 
parties would bear their own fees and costs, there was no 
5   
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence of a written indemnity agreement or bad faith 
collusion, and support existed for dismissing the claim against 
Vapehead. 
In its May 23, 2019 Joinder Order, the circuit court 
granted 24 Hour Vapes' joinder motion. The circuit court stated 
it considered all pleadings and evidence, the memoranda, the 
record, the arguments, declarations of counsel, exhibits, and 
"the Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law as stated in the Order Granting Vapehead's Good Faith Petition[.]" 
Jocor cites no statute or rule the circuit court 
violated. That the circuit court considered, among other 
things, the findings and conclusions it made in the order 
granting Vapehead's good faith petition when deciding 24 Hour 
Vapes' joinder motion does not demand we vacate the May 23, 2019 
Joinder Order. See generally, HRS § 603-21.9(6) (2016) 
(providing the circuit court has the power to make orders "as may be necessary to carry into full effect the powers which are or shall be given to them by law or for the promotion of justice 
in matters pending before them"). 
(2) Jocor next contends the circuit court erred by 
"[e]ntering a second, conflicting order granting 24 Hour's 
Petition on May 29, 2019, which contains findings of fact and 
conclusions of law unsupported by the evidence presented." 
6   
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The May 23, 2019 Joinder Order granted 24 Hour Vapes' 
motion to join Vapehead's petition for a determination that 
Vapehead entered into a good faith settlement. The May 23, 2019 
Joinder Order allowed 24 Hour Vapes to join Vapehead's petition; 
it made no determination regarding whether 24 Hour Vapes and 
Corpuz's settlement was entered into in good faith. The 
subsequent May 29, 2019 Good Faith Settlement Order determined 
the settlement between 24 Hour Vapes and Corpuz was entered into in good faith. Thus, the orders were not conflicting. 
As to the findings and conclusions Jocor claims are 
unsupported, Jocor points to finding number 6 and conclusion 
number 14 that state the fees and costs incurred were not 
nominal. The declaration from Corpuz's counsel stated costs are 
"presumably minimal . . . at this stage of the case." 
Even if Jocor is correct, Corpuz and 24 Hour Vapes 
agreed to be responsible for their own fees and costs and, as 
discussed below, there was substantial evidence to support the determination that the settlement between 24 Hour Vapes and 
Corpuz was entered into in good faith. Thus, any error in 
determining the fees and costs were not nominal would be 
harmless. See
 Hawai‘i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 61. 
(3)
 Finally, Jocor contends the circuit court erred by 
granting 24 Hour Vapes' "Petition when the totality of the 
relevant circumstances before it provides no reasonable basis 
7   
 
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for doing so." The gist of Jocor's contention is 24 Hour Vapes 
should not be allowed to rely on Vapehead's expert evidence. 
Contrary to Jocor's contention, the circuit court was 
required to look at the totality of the circumstances 
considering all relevant evidence before it. See Troyer v.
Adams
, 102 Hawai‘i 399, 425-27, 77 P.3d 83, 109-11 (2003) 
(explaining the determination of good faith should be made based 
on the "totality of the circumstances" considering all relevant 
facts available at the time of settlement and providing possible 
factors to consider). This included Vapehead's expert evidence. 
When considering all relevant facts at the time of the 
settlement between Corpuz and 24 Hour Vapes, the totality of circumstances supported the circuit court's determination that 
the settlement was entered into in good faith. 
The evidence 
included the expert's conclusion that the battery was not inside the electronic cigarette when the battery caught fire. 
And Corpuz's counsel submitted a declaration based on 
his assessment of the evidence as developed through discovery 
that "the batteries, not the [electronic cigarette], were the relevant defective products," and Vapehead and 24 Hour Vapes 
were "not in the chain of distribution" of the batteries. 
Further, there was nothing in the record to suggest 
bad faith collusion between Corpuz and 24 Hour Vapes in reaching 
8   
 
  
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a settlement. And there was no evidence of a written indemnity 
agreement. 
In sum, the circuit court based its decision on the 
totality of the circumstances, considering all relevant facts 
available at the time of the agreement and, thus, did not abuse 
its discretion in granting 24 Hour Vapes' joinder motion and 
determining the settlement agreement between 24 Hour Vapes and 
Corpuz was entered into in good faith. See Brooks v. Dana Nance
& Co.
, 113 Hawai‘i 406, 412, 153 P.3d 1091, 1097 (2007) (applying 
abuse of discretion standard). 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the circuit court's 
May 23, 2019 Joinder Order and May 29, 2019 Good Faith Settlement Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘i, May 24, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
 Acting Chief Judge 
Jerold T. Matayoshi,  
Nicholas P. Ching, /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
(Fukunaga Matayoshi Ching & Associate Judge 
Kon-Herrera),  
for Defendant/Cross-Claimant/ /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen Cross-Claim Defendant- Associate Judge 
Appellant. 
 
J. Patrick Gallagher, Kamalolo K. Koanui-Kong, (Gallagher Kane Amai & 
Reyes), 
for Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant/Cross-Claimant-
Appellee 24 Hour Vapes, LLC. 
9 