 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000763 10-FEB-2026 08:37 AM Dkt. 67 SO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000763 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
STATE OF HAWAIʻ I, Plaintiff-Appellee, 
v. 
KAMEALOHANAKEKAIAULU WILBUR-DELIMA, 
Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CPC-23-0000274)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Nakasone, Chief Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Kamealohanakekaiaulu Wilbur-Delima 
(Wilbur-Delima) appeals from the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit's (circuit court) October 23, 2024 "Judgment of 
Conviction and Sentence" (Judgment
).   1
On March 6, 2023, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawaiʻ i 
(State) charged Wilbur-Delima by Indictment with Robbery in the 
1 The Honorable Faʻauuga L. Toʻotoʻo presided.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
 
 
 Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes § 708-
841(1)(a) (2014) and/or (b) (2014). A jury found Wilbur-Delima 
guilty as charged. The circuit court sentenced Wilbur-Delima to 
a ten-year term of imprisonment, with credit for time served, 
and ordered Wilbur-Delima to pay restitution in the amount of 
$49.98 to Malama Market Makakilo (Malama Market). 
Wilbur-Delima raises two points of error on appeal, 
contending that: (1) "the [circuit] court erred in barring and prohibiting Wilbur-Delima from introducing relevant bad act 
evidence regarding the complaining witness [(CW)]"; and (2) 
"insufficient evidence was adduced at trial to convict Wilbur-
Delima of Robbery in the Second Degree." (Formatting altered.) 
Upon careful review of the record, briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration 
to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, 
we resolve Wilbur-Delima's contentions of error as follows: 
(1) Wilbur-Delima contends that the circuit court 
erred by "barring and prohibiting" his introduction of "relevant bad act evidence" of CW. Wilbur-Delima sought to introduce this 
evidence in order "to impeach [CW]," and he contends that "[t]he 
proffered evidence was relevant to show the motive and intent of 
[CW] in prosecuting this criminal indictment." 
Prior bad act evidence under [ Hawaii] Rules of Evidence 
(HRE) Rule 404(b) (1993) is admissible when it is 1) 
relevant and 2) more probative than prejudicial. A trial 
court's determination that evidence is relevant within the 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
  
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  meaning of HRE Rule 401 (1993) is reviewed under the 
right/wrong standard of review. However, a trial court's 
balancing of the probative value of prior bad act evidence 
against the prejudicial effect of such evidence under HRE 
Rule 403 (1993 ) is reviewed for abuse of discretion.  An 
abuse of discretion occurs when the court clearly exceeds 
the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of 
law to the substantial detriment of a party litigant. 
State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawaiʻ i 390, 404, 56 P.3d 692, 706 (2002) 
(emphasis added) (cleaned up). 
The State contends that there was no error because the 
circuit court permitted Wilbur-Delima's counsel to cross-examine 
CW "at length" about the "'unproductive stops' . . . during the 
course of [CW's] employment at Malama Market." 
We agree with the State that the circuit court 
provided Wilbur-Delima ample opportunity to establish CW's 
record of employee discipline. The circuit court expressly 
permitted defense counsel to question CW regarding unproductive 
stops, as long as counsel did not get into "the specific details" of or "basis for" each unproductive stop: 
THE COURT: . . . So, the [circuit c]ourt is not 
allowing you to go into the specific basis for the 
discipline. You have already established he had been disciplined four times already. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: But, Your Honor, is it 
specifically related to unproductive stops. 
THE COURT: Go ahead. And you can ask about the 
purpose of discipline as he failed to follow the rule, but not the specific details. 
 . . . . 
THE COURT: I will not allow you to get into all the 
details of the basis of the discipline. So you get right 
to the specific act that he failed to do per the manual. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Okay. 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  
   
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
    
     
 
 
  
 
 . . . . 
THE COURT: We understand he has been disciplined 
four times for failure to follow the manual. 
So get to the 
specific --
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Okay. Can I just get add [sic] 
that one part where it is because of unproductive stop, 
though, because it is very important? 
THE COURT: It is. I will allow you that, but as to 
any detail --
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Okay. Okay. Thank you. 
THE COURT: Continue. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Defense counsel proceeded to question CW regarding his 
multiple "failure[s] to perform work as required regarding . . . 
incident[s]" that occurred on specific dates. Defense counsel 
ascertained CW's understanding that CW's work performance 
failures "were for unproductive stops," an "unproductive stop is the stopping of a customer a loss prevention officer believes to 
be a shoplifter, when the stop doesn't result in an arrest," and 
"an unproductive stop can result in an employee discipline where 
a failure to perform work is required." CW replied that he 
understood the above statements to be "[c]orrect." 
The record reflects, moreover, that defense counsel 
was permitted to ask CW whether his reason for not "apprehending" Wilbur-Delima was motivated by CW's interest in 
avoiding a "fifth unproductive stop": 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]. Well, Mr. Wilbur- Delima, the 
defendant, he left without you apprehending him, right? 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
    
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 [CW]. That's correct. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL].   And you had to have a reason for 
him leaving without apprehending him, right?  
[CW]
. Not necessarily, no. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL].   You already had four unproductive 
stops, and you have been disciplined for them prior, right?  
[CW]
. I had, yeah. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL].   You couldn't afford a fifth 
unproductive stop, right?  
[CW]
. I could, yeah. 
Wilbur-Delima does not specify what further relevant 
"bad act evidence" he was precluded from introducing, nor has he 
demonstrated that he was harmed by not being permitted to introduce such evidence. We conclude that Wilbur-Delima's 
contention lacks merit. 
(2) Wilbur-Delima contends that the record evidence is 
insufficient to support that he "use[d] force" and/or 
"threaten[ed] the imminent use of force" against CW while in the 
commission of theft. We apply the following standard in our 
review of Wilbur-Delima's contention: 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in 
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate 
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to 
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the 
case was before a judge or jury. The test on appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but 
whether there was substantial evidence to support the 
conclusion of the trier of fact. 
State v. Kalaola, 124 Hawaiʻ i 43, 49, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010) 
(citation omitted). 
"Substantial evidence . . . is credible 
evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to 
5   
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." 
Id. (cleaned up). 
Wilbur-Delima contends he testified at trial that he 
"did not hit, punch or strike [CW]," and that he "did not step 
on [CW's] foot." CW testified that Wilbur-Delima stepped on his 
foot and punched him in the chest. CW also testified that 
Wilbur-Delima told him: "I am not coming back in the store. 
Don't touch my fucking shit. I will beat your ass." As the trier of fact, the jury had the prerogative to find that CW was 
a credible witness, and to accept his version of events. See
State v. Jhun
, 83 Hawaiʻi 472, 483, 927 P.2d 1355, 1366 (1996) 
("In a jury trial, the jury is the trier of fact and, thus, is 
the sole judge of the credibility of the witnesses and the 
weight of the evidence. When reviewing a jury trial, an 
appellate court will not pass upon the jury's decisions with 
respect to the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the 
evidence, because this is the province of the jury as the trier 
of fact.") (citations omitted). We therefore conclude that 
there was substantial evidence to support the jury's finding that Wilbur-Delima used or threatened the imminent use of force 
against CW while in the commission of theft. 
6   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, February 10, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
Walter J. Rodby, 
for Defendant-Appellant.  Loren J. Thomas, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, 
City and County of Honolulu, for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Karen T. Nakasone Chief Judge 
 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth Associate Judge  
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
Associate Judge 
7 