  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000116
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ROBERTA MALORI WILBORN, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
ANTWAN FRASIER, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION

 
(CIVIL NO. 1SS12-1-01200)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)

 
Petitioner-Appellant Roberta Malori Wilborn appeals
 
from the Judgment filed on February 7, 2013 in the District Court
 
of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division ("District Court").1/
 
The Judgment denied Wilborn's petition for an injunction against
 harassment against Respondent-Appellee Antwan Frasier and also
 awarded attorneys' fees to Frasier. At the time of the event
 that inspired Wilborn to file her petition, Frasier was the
 Resident Manager and Wilborn owned a unit at the Ala Wai Palms
 condominium in Waikiki. 
On appeal, Wilborn contends that the District Court
 
erred by (1) denying her petition for injunction when it
 erroneously assessed the evidence presented during the hearing,
 and (2) awarding attorneys' fees to Frasier pursuant to Hawaii
 Revised Statutes ("HRS") § 604-10.5(g) because the injunction
 should have been granted and because awarding attorneys' fees is
 against public policy in this case. In her reply brief, Wilborn
 
1/
 The Honorable Hilary B. Gangnes presided.
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
contends that attorneys' fees were inappropriate under HRS § 607­
14.5 because the District Court never found that her claim was
 frivolous. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs

 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments they advance and the issues they raise, we resolve
 Wilborn's points of error as follows, and affirm:
 
The District Court did not err in denying Wilborn's 
request for an injunction against harassment. "Harassment" is defined as "[p]hysical harm, bodily injury, assault, or the threat of imminent physical harm, bodily injury or assault" or "[a]n intentional or knowing course of conduct directed at an individual that seriously alarms or disturbs consistently or continually bothers the individual and serves no legitimate purpose; provided that such course of conduct would cause a reasonable person to suffer emotional distress." Haw. Rev. Stat. § 604-10.5(a) (Supp. 2012). Hawai
'i law vests in district courts 
"the power to enjoin, prohibit, or temporarily restrain harassment." Haw. Rev. Stat. § 604-10.5(b) (Supp. 2012). "If the court finds by clear and convincing evidence that harassment as defined in paragraph (1) of that definition exists, it may enjoin for no more than three years further harassment of the petitioner[.]" Haw. Rev. Stat. § 604-10.5(g) (Supp. 2012). 
A person requesting an injunction against harassment 
bears the burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence that a protective order should be issued. Luat v. Cacho, 92 Hawai
'i 
330, 343, 991 P.2d 840, 853 (App. 1999) (quoting Coyle v. Compton, 85 Hawai
'i 197, 208, 940 P.2d 404, 415 (App. 1997)). 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has stated that clear
and convincing evidence is 
an intermediate standard of proof greater
than a preponderance of the evidence, but
less than proof beyond a reasonable doubt
required in criminal cases. It is that
 degree of proof which will produce in the
mind of the trier of fact a firm belief or
 conviction as to the allegations sought to
be established, and requires the existence
of a fact be highly probable.
 
Id. at 342, 991 P.2d at 852 (quoting Masaki v. General Motors
 
Corp., 71 Haw. 1, 15, 780 P.2d 566, 574 (1989)). Thus, Wilborn
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
bore the burden to prove by clear and convincing evidence to the
 
District Court that it was highly probable that harassment
 existed. 
In the opening brief, Wilborn cites to her own
 
testimony and to the declaration and Medical-Legal Record and 

 
Sexual Assault Information Form ("Report") prepared by Dr. Wayne
 Lee of the Kapiolani Sex Abuse Treatment Center ("Center")
2/ in
 
support of her contention that the District Court erred by
 finding that the evidence she presented failed to clearly and
 convincingly prove her allegations. Wilborn was one of only two
 witnesses to testify during the hearing, and the only witness to
 testify about incidents allegedly involving Frasier.
3/
 
In denying Wilborn's petition, the District Court
 
emphasized inconsistencies in her testimony and ultimately found
 that Wilborn was not credible:
 
So I honestly cannot say what happened or if anything
happened in that apartment that night, but Ms. Wilborn's
credibility is seriously lacking with this Court. She tape
records multiple conversations, but conveniently the one
thing that could have put to rest in the Court's mind what
happened in that apartment, a recording does not exist
because her [telephone] battery died.
 
She says she asked about charging it when she
got in the apartment. Not credible. I mean, she's
going from her apartment down – she doesn't – the
Court has no problem with believing that she's had
many issues with the condo association. And I have to
 say that there is definitely evidence that this condo
association has acted heavy-handedly with others and
possibly with Ms. Wilborn. But I'm not trying that
case. I'm trying an injunction against harassment
case that requires clear and convincing credible
evidence. And it just doesn't exist here.
 
* * * *
 
It is not credible to the Court that she's afraid of
 
this guy, who happens to be a resident manager, and then she
goes to his place at 1 in the morning because she's
desperate for a key. There was absolutely no reason for her
to go to his place at 1 in the morning. . . .
 
2/
 Dr. Lee's Report includes a detailed description of Wilborn's
examination at the Center on October 18, 2012, and describes Wilborn's
contentions relating to the alleged assault and her physical condition. The
 Report offers no conclusion, however, about the cause of Wilborn's condition
or whether it was consistent with her contentions.
 
3/
 Angel Miguel Mendias testified to the resistance he encountered
from a man named Chris and another man in November 2010 when he tried to sub­lease the unit or a portion of the unit from Wilborn. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
. . . I'm just saying that this is a witness who's got
very serious credibility problems. And because I can't
 
believe a lot of what she says, I can't say that she's
clearly and convincingly testified about a sex assault here,
a non-consensual sex assault.
 
You know, yes, there's medical evidence. But I can't
 
-- that's not the end of the story. Something may or may
not have happened involving Mr. Frasier. I don't -­frankly[,] I can't really say that I'm convinced of what
happened and who was involved. So[,] I'm going to have to
deny the petition for injunction against harassment.
 
"An appellate court will not pass upon the trial judge's 
decisions with respect to the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence, because this is the province of the trial judge." Porter v. Hu, 116 Hawai
'i 42, 60, 169 P.3d 994, 1012 
(App. 2007) (quoting State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai 'i 131, 139, 913 
P.2d 57, 65 (1996)). 
Because the District Court found that Wilborn's 
testimony in support of her allegations was not credible, Wilborn failed to prove by clear and convincing evidence that it was highly probable that harassment existed. Therefore, the District Court did not abuse its discretion by denying Wilborn's petition. In re Guardianship of Carlsmith, 113 Hawai
'i 211, 223, 151 P.3d 
692, 704 (2006). 
Wilborn also claims that the District Court erred by
 
awarding Frasier attorneys' fees under HRS § 604-10.5(g) because
 the District Court erroneously assessed Wilborn's evidence and
 because public policy forbids the assessment of attorneys' fees
 against parties who prove their allegations.
4/ We conclude that
 
the District Court did not abuse its discretion in awarding
 attorneys' fees under HRS § 604-10.5(g). As explained above,
 because the District Court did not err in finding that Wilborn
 failed to prove her case, we need not decide whether awarding
 attorneys' fees against Wilborn for proving her allegations is
 against public policy. 
4/
 We need not address Wilborn's argument that attorneys' fees were
not warranted under HRS § 607-14.5 because (1) Frasier did not seek fees under
HRS § 607-14.5, and (2) Wilborn did not raise the argument until she filed her
reply brief. See State v. Mark, 123 Hawai' i 205, 230, 231 P.3d 478, 503
(2010); Haw. R. App. P. 28(d). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THEREFORE,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment filed
 
February 7, 2013, in the District Court of the First Circuit,
 Honolulu Division, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 15, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Terrance M. Revere and 
Malia Nickison-Beazley
(Revere & Associates)
for Petitioner-Appellant.
 Chief Judge

Associate Judge

John D. Zalewski andMark G. Valencia
 (Case Lombardi & Pettit)
for Respondent-Appellee. 
 
Associate Judge
 
5

 