 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-15-0000235 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
R
OBLYNN WAILANA DASALIA, LEIGHTON NIAKALA PANG KEE,
AND VICKI ELAINE ULSH, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v. 
DR. ALVIN ONAKA, in his official capacity as the
REGISTRAR OF VITAL STATISTICS, OFFICE OF HEALTH STATUS
MONITORING, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH; AND THE DEPARTMENT
OF HEALTH, STATE OF HAWAI# I, Defendants-Appellants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0373) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: 
Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendants-Appellants Dr. Alvin Onaka, in his official 
capacity as the Registrar of Vital Statistics, Office of Health 
Status Monitoring, Department of Health (Onaka
) and the 
Department of Health, State of Hawai# i (DOH) (collectively the 
State
) appeal from the "Final Judgment as to All Claims and All 
Parties" (Final Judgment) entered on February 27, 2015, by the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 The State 
challenges the rulings by the Circuit Court that: granted summary 
judgment in favor of Plaintiffs-Appellees Roblynn Wailana Dasalia (Plaintiff Dasalia), Leighton Niakala Pang Kee (Plaintiff Pang 
Kee), and Vicki Elaine Ulsh (Plaintiff Ulsh) (collectively 
1 The Honorable Karl L. Sakamoto presided over all proceedings. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiffs); denied reconsideration of the summary judgment 
ruling; and awarded attorneys' fees and costs to Plaintiffs. 
On appeal, the State asserts the following points on 
appeal: (1) the Circuit Court erroneously concluded that 
paternity is a "factual error" that a person is entitled to "correct" on his or her birth certificate pursuant to DOH regulations and Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 92F-24 (2012), 
338-15 (2010) and 338-17 (2010); (2) the Circuit Court 
erroneously concluded that DOH could determine paternity on its own, without a court order; and (3) the Circuit Court erred in awarding attorneys' fees to Plaintiffs pursuant to HRS § 92F-27 (2012). 
We conclude the first two points on appeal are moot, 
but affirm the award of attorneys' fees and costs to Plaintiffs.
I. Background 
Plaintiffs sought to have DOH make additions to, or 
change, their original birth certificate with regard to the identity and ethnicity of their respective father, without a court order. The State responded that a court order was required. Plaintiffs then brought this action and the Circuit Court granted summary judgment in favor of Plaintiffs, ruling that the DOH had the authority to make the changes without a court order. Subsequent to its summary judgment ruling, however, the Circuit Court also granted a motion by Plaintiffs to determine their respective natural fathers and ordered DOH to amend each of their respective original birth certificates to reflect the Circuit Court's determination. 
In this appeal, the State does not challenge the 
Circuit Court's determination as to the natural father for each Plaintiff and the order to DOH to amend the original birth certificate for each Plaintiff. Rather, the State challenges the Circuit Court's rulings that DOH had the authority to make the changes without a court order and also the Circuit Court's award of attorneys' fees and costs to Plaintiffs. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A. Undisputed Facts 
In 2012, separately on behalf of each of the 
Plaintiffs, the Native Hawaiian Legal Corporation (
NHLC) sent a 
letter to DOH stating that it was submitting an "Application for 
Major Administrative Amendment of Birth Certificate."  In each 
letter, NHLC sought to either "supplement" or "correct" the original birth certificate of the respective Plaintiff with "the name and racial information" for that Plaintiff's biological father, pursuant to HRS § 338-15, HRS Chapter 92F, and DOH's Public Health Regulations (PHR) Chapter 8B Rules 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 
and 3.5.  
3 2
Each of the Plaintiffs have circumstances particular to
their situation, and therefore, we briefly discuss the background
for each.   
1. Plaintiff Dasalia 
Plaintiff Dasalia was born to mother Paulann Leimomi 
Dasalia, who was unmarried at that time. 
Plaintiff Dasalia's 
birth certificate does not list a father or his race. Prior to 
2 It appears the letter itself was intended as the "application," as
there is no separate document attached that is referenced or titled as an
application. 
3 At the time of the Circuit Court proceedings, HRS § 338-15 provided: 
§338-15 Late or altered certificates.  A person born
in the State may file or amend a certificate after the timeprescribed, upon submitting proof as required by rulesadopted by the department of health. Certificates registered after the time prescribed for filing by the rulesof the department of health shall be registered subject toany evidentiary requirements that the department adopts byrule to substantiate the alleged facts of birth. 
With regard to HRS Chapter 92F (Uniform Information Practices Act),
Plaintiffs specifically relied on HRS § 92F-24(a), which states: "Anindividual has a right to have any factual error in that person's personalrecord corrected and any misrepresentation or misleading entry in the recordamended by the agency which is responsible for its maintenance." The State's position is that the lack of a father named on a birth certificate, or thename of an individual other than the biological father, is not a "factualerror." 
PHR Chapter 8B Rules are located in Chapter 117 of Title 11 of the
Hawaii Administrative Rules. The text of the relevant PHR rules are set forth 
infra . 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the instant case, Plaintiff Dasalia's original birth certificate 
had not been amended. 
NHLC sent a letter dated June 25, 2012, to DOH on 
behalf of Plaintiff Dasalia. The letter noted that no father is listed on Plaintiff Dasalia's original birth certificate and stated the application for Plaintiff Dasalia sought to "supplement the information contained on [Plaintiff Dasalia's] original certificate to include the name and racial information for her biological father, [Robert Kaho# i
wai Ho# opi #i (Robert 
Ho#opi#i)]." Documents submitted with the letter included: 
Plaintiff Dasalia's original birth certificate; DNA test results asserted to show the biological relationship between Plaintiff Dasalia and Robert Ho# opi#i; and an affidavit by Robert Ho# opi#i 
attesting in part that "I have five children including my daughter Roblynn Wailana Dasalia."
2.  
Plaintiff Pang Kee 
Plaintiff Pang Kee was born to mother Florence Kanani 
Silva, who was unmarried at that time. Plaintiff Pang Kee's original birth certificate did not list a father or his race. Thereafter, his mother married Anthony Pa# alani Kim You Pang Kee 
(
Anthony Pang Kee), Plaintiff Pang Kee was adopted at the age of 
four years old by Anthony Pang Kee, and a new birth certificate was issued listing Anthony Pang Kee as Plaintiff Pang Kee's father. 
NHLC sent a letter dated April 4, 2012, to DOH on 
behalf of Plaintiff Pang Kee. The letter noted that no father is listed on Plaintiff Pang Kee's original birth certificate and that the application for Plaintiff Pang Kee sought to "supplement the information contained on [Plaintiff Pang Kee's] original certificate to include the name and racial information for his biological father, Mr. Earick Kukonu, Sr. (
Earick Kukonu, Sr.), 
who died on April 28, 1983." Documents submitted with the letter included: DNA test results asserted to show a biological relationship between Plaintiff Pang Kee and Rodney Kukonu, Earick Kukonu, Sr.'s full biological brother; declarations of individuals involved in administering or overseeing the DNA test; 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a declaration by Plaintiff Pang Kee requesting to supplement his 
original birth certificate; and a copy of Plaintiff Pang Kee's original birth certificate.
3. Plaintiff Ulsh 
Plaintiff Ulsh was born to mother Grace Agnes Ann Konet 
Wong (Grace Wong) who, at that time, was married to Horace Koon 
Fong Wong (Horace Wong). Plaintiff Ulsh's original birth 
certificate listed Grace Wong as her mother and Horace Wong as 
her father. Following Plaintiff Ulsh's parents' divorce, Grace Wong married James Edward Anderson (James Anderson), who adopted 
Plaintiff Ulsh. Plaintiff Ulsh was subsequently issued a new 
birth certificate listing James Anderson as her father. 
NHLC sent a letter dated August 15, 2012, to DOH on 
behalf of Plaintiff Ulsh. The letter noted that Plaintiff Ulsh's original birth certificate lists Horace Wong as her father, that he is not her biological father, that upon Plaintiff Ulsh's later adoption by James Anderson her original birth certificate was sealed and an amended birth certificate identifies James Anderson as her father. The letter sought to "correct the information contained on [Plaintiff Ulsh's] original certificate to include the name and racial information for her biological father, Mr. Charles Kauhiaimokuakama Ahlo ([Charles Ahlo]), who died on 
November 17, 2007." Documents submitted with the letter 
included: DNA test results and a supporting declaration asserted to show the biological relationship between Plaintiff Ulsh and Charles Ahlo; the declaration of Plaintiff Ulsh; the declaration of Plaintiff Ulsh's mother, now known as Grace Kaonohi; and the declaration of Charles Ahlo, dated July 12, 2007, in which he attested, inter alia, "I am the biological father of Mrs. Vicki Elaine Ulsh," that he had acknowledged to Plaintiff Ulsh, family members and close friends that he was Plaintiff Ulsh's father, and that he would bring Plaintiff Ulsh to his family home throughout her childhood.
4.  DOH's denial of the requests 
DOH denied each of the application requests submitted 
by NHLC. With regard to Plaintiff Dasalia, the DOH stated that 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
she should seek a court order to determine paternity. With 
regard to Plaintiff Pang Kee and Plaintiff Dasalia, the DOH stated that "a change in a parent on a birth certificate is a 'Judicial amendment'" pursuant to PHR Chapter 8B section 3.4.A, and not a "Major administrative amendment" as defined by PHR Chapter 8B section 3.4.B. DOH further stated that Plaintiff Pang Kee and Plaintiff Ulsh's respective adoptions legally prevented DOH from modifying their original birth certificates: "[o]nce an adoption decree is entered, adoption records are sealed pursuant to HRS § 578-15." 
B.  Procedural History 
On February 8, 2013, Plaintiffs filed a "Complaint for 
Declaratory Judgment" in the Circuit Court, requesting review of the DOH's denial of their respective requests "pursuant to [HRS] Chapter 92F, § 338-15, and the Department's Public Health Regulations Chapter 8B . . . Rules 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, and 3.5." Plaintiffs made the following requests for relief: 
A. For an order declaring that a major administrative
amendment is the proper means by which to amend the original
birth certificates of [Plaintiffs]; 
B. For an order declaring that Defendant Department of
Health has the authority to amend the original birth
certificates of [Plaintiffs] without a court order; 
C. For an order requiring Defendant Department of Health to
make a determination as to whether the evidence provided in
support of the applications for major administrativeamendment submitted by [Plaintiffs] entitles them to a majoradministrative amendment; 
D. For an order declaring that Defendants violated the
rights of [Plaintiffs] to amend their birth certificates; E. Grant [Plaintiffs] their attorney's fees and costs
pursuant to HRS Chapter 92F-27. F. For such other and further relief as this Court deems 
appropriate. 
On March 22, 2013, the State filed their Answer. 
On September 6, 2013, Plaintiffs filed their Motion for 
Summary Judgment, requesting the same relief as in their Complaint. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On October 3, 2013, the Circuit Court held a hearing on 
the Plaintiffs' Motion for Summary Judgment, and orally ruled 
that given PHR Chapter 8B Rules 3.4 and 3.5,  4 
4 PHR Chapter 8B Rules 3.4 and 3.5 provide: 
3.4 Classification of Amendments 
A. Judicial amendments . Changes in name,
alterations, additions, deletions or
substitutions in data originally entered whichare ordered by a court of competentjurisdiction.
B. Major administrative amendments . Alterations,
additions, deletions or substitutions in dataoriginally entered which materially affect thevalidity or integrity of a certificate or wouldsubstantially modify fundamental relationshipscontained therein. 
C. Minor administrative amendments . All other 
changes including but not limited totypographical errors, spelling errors,transposed errors, and alterations, additions,deletions or substitutions in data originallyentered which would not materially affect thevalidity or integrity of a certificate or wouldnot substantially modify any fundamentalrelationship on it. 
3.5 Amendments to Birth and Fetal Death Certificates A. Judicial amendments include: 
(1) Supplementary birth certificates based onadoption, legitimation or paternitydetermination. 
(2) Amendment of birth certificate to show a change of name by change of name decree orcourt order. 
(3) Amendment of information registeredthrough misrepresentation or fraud.
B. Major administrative amendments include:
(1) Supplementary birth certificates oramendments based on adoption,legitimation, or paternity done inaccordance with law or regulations notordered by a court. 
(2) Any substantial alteration of the surnameof the registrant not covered by change ofname decree or court order. 
(3) Change in sex of registrant based onsurgical alteration.
(4) Registration of given name(s) for thefirst time six years or more after birth.
(5) Change in given name(s) of the registrantninety days or more after date of birth.
(6) Change of name of either parent exceptminor spelling errors.
(7) Change in date or place of the birth. 
(8) Change in sex of child, type of birth andmedical data relating to delivery and postnatal period.
(9) 
Change in date and place of birth of
(continued...) 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(...continued) when read in conjunction with HRS §§ 92F-24, 338-175 and 338-15, 
DOH has the authority to "amend any factual errors in a 
certificate including determination of the birth father for purposes of ancestral facts." The Circuit Court further held that, because Plaintiffs are seeking to establish "genealogical ancestry" and "not trying to establish a child and parent relationship for the purpose of insuring that they receive support benefits from their respective fathers[,]" HRS Chapter 584 (titled "Determination of father and child relationship; who may bring action; when action may be brought; process, warrant, bond, etc.") is not applicable. Rather, the Circuit Court noted that HRS Chapter 338 and the rules under PHR Chapter 8B provide alternative means, separate and apart from HRS Chapter 584, for amending a birth certificate. 
On December 5, 2013, the Circuit Court entered its 
Order granting Plaintiffs' Motion for Summary Judgment (12/5/13
Order). 
On December 13, 2013, the State filed a Motion for 
Reconsideration of the 12/5/13 Order. The Circuit Court denied 
the motion. 
On May 22, 2014, the Plaintiffs filed a "Motion for 
Judicial Determination and an Order Requiring Defendant 
either parent.
(10) Change in marital status of the mother.
(11) Change in medical cause of death and
related information on the fetal death certificate. 
C. Minor administrative amendments include: 
(1) 
Minor errors in spelling, typographicalerrors or corrections of transposedletters. 
(2) Registration of given name(s) for the
first time prior to age six.
(3) 
Change in given name(s) prior to 90 daysof age. 
(Emphases added). 
5 Although the Circuit Court referenced HRS § 338-17, it does not
appear to be applicable as it provides that: "[t]he probative value of a'late' or 'altered' certificate shall be determined by the judicial oradministrative body or official before whom the certificate is offered asevidence." 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Department of Health to Amend Plaintiffs' Birth Certificates" 
(5/22/14 Motion), requesting that the Circuit Court "make a 
judicial determination as to the identity of Plaintiffs' natural 
fathers and ultimately order [DOH] to amend Plaintiffs' birth certificates accordingly." 
On June 20, 2014, the Circuit Court held a hearing and 
orally granted the Plaintiffs' 5/22/14 Motion with regards to all Plaintiffs. On July 24, 2014, the Circuit Court entered its "Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion for Judicial Determination and an Order Requiring [the State] to Amend Plaintiffs' Birth Certificates filed May 22, 2014" (Order Granting Judicial
Determination). 
On September 18, 2014, Plaintiffs moved for an award of 
attorneys' fees and costs against the State. On December 4, 
2014, the Circuit Court entered its "Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion for Attorneys' Fees and Costs" (12/4/14 Order), pursuant 
to HRS § 92F-27(e) (2012),
6 in which it awarded to Plaintiffs 
attorneys' fees in the amount of $40,985.50 and costs in the 
amount of $968.12. 
On February 27, 2015, the Circuit Court issued its 
"Final Judgment as to All Claims and All Parties" in favor of Plaintiffs. 
II. Discussion 
A. The first two points of error raised by the State are moot 
The first two issues on appeal raised by the State 
address whether the circuit court erred in granting summary judgment to Plaintiffs on the question of whether DOH had the authority, without court order, to make the requested changes to their birth certificates. In its opening brief on appeal, the State expressly states it does not challenge the Circuit Court's rulings in its Order Granting Judicial Determination, in which 
6 HRS § 92F-27(e) provides that "[t]he court may assess reasonable
attorney's fees and other litigation costs reasonably incurred against the
agency in any case in which the complainant has substantially prevailed, andagainst the complainant where the charges brought against the agency were
frivolous." 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Circuit Court determined the natural father for each of the 
Plaintiffs and ordered DOH to amend the respective original birth certificates for each of the Plaintiffs.
   7
Given the Order Granting Judicial Determination, we 
must address whether this appeal is moot because Plaintiffs have achieved the requested change to their original birth certificates that they sought from DOH, and the State does not challenge that ruling on appeal. The Hawai# i Supreme Court has 
stated: 
A case is moot if it has lost its character as a present,
live controversy of the kind that must exist if courts areto avoid advisory opinions on abstract propositions of law.The rule is one of the prudential rules of judicialself-governance founded in concern about the proper—andproperly limited—role of the courts in a democratic society.We have said the suit must remain alive throughout thecourse of litigation to the moment of final appellatedisposition to escape the mootness bar.
Kaho# ohanohano v. State, 114 Hawai# i 302, 332, 162 P.3d 696, 726 
(2007) (emphasis and citations omitted). 
Further, the Hawai# i 
Supreme Court has expressed: 
The mootness doctrine is said to encompass the circumstancesthat destroy the justiciability of a suit previouslysuitable for determination. Put another way, the suit mustremain alive throughout the course of litigation to themoment of final appellate disposition. Its chief purpose isto assure that the adversary system, once set in operation,remains properly fueled. The doctrine seems appropriatewhere events subsequent to the judgment of the trial courthave so affected the relations between the parties that thetwo conditions for justiciability relevant on appeal—adverseinterest and effective remedy—have been compromised. 
Hamilton ex rel. Lethem v. Lethem, 119 Hawai# i 1, 5, 193 P.3d 
839, 843 (2008) (citations omitted). 
As noted above, the Plaintiffs' Complaint sought 
declaratory relief. 
[I]n determining whether parties still retain sufficientinterests and injury as to justify the award of declaratoryrelief, the question is whether the facts alleged, under allthe circumstances, show that there is a substantialcontroversy, between parties having adverse legal interests,of sufficient immediacy and reality to warrant a declaratoryjudgment. 
7 The Circuit Court determined that Plaintiff Dasalia's natural father 
is Robert Ho #opi #i, that Plaintiff Pang Kee's natural father is Earick Leialoha
Kukonu, that Plaintiff Ulsh's natural father is Charles Ahlo, and ordered DOHto amend the original birth certificate of each Plaintiff to reflect thecourt's determination. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kaho# ohanohano, 114 Hawai# i at 332, 162 P.3d at 726 (citations 
omitted). 
In paragraph 44 of their Complaint, Plaintiffs assert: 
"By reason of Defendants' refusal to amend Plaintiffs' original 
birth certificate via a major administrative amendment to reflect the identity of their biological fathers, there exists an actual ongoing controversy between Plaintiffs and Defendants within the meaning of HRS Chapter 632." However, in light of the Circuit Court's unchallenged Order Granting Judicial Determination, the circumstances no longer remain the same. 
We conclude that, given these circumstances, the issues 
raised by the State in its first two points of error are moot. Further, none of the exceptions to mootness apply in this case. 
With regard to the "capable of repetition yet evading 
review" exception, the Hawai# i Supreme Court has stated: 
The phrase, "capable of repetition, yet evading review,"
means that "a court will not dismiss a case on the groundsof mootness where a challenged governmental action wouldevade full review because the passage of time would preventany single plaintiff from remaining subject to therestriction complained of for the period necessary tocomplete the lawsuit." 
Hamilton ex rel. Lethem, 119 Hawai# i at 5, 193 P.3d at 843 
(quoting In re Thomas, 73 Haw. 223, 226–27, 832 P.2d 253, 255 
(1992)). This exception does not apply in this instance, as the passage of time would not "prevent any single plaintiff from remaining subject to the restriction complained of for the period necessary to complete the lawsuit." Id. Here, in addition to 
ruling on DOH's authority to independently make the requested changes, the Circuit Court further made the determination as to the Plaintiffs' natural fathers and then ordered DOH to change the respective birth certificates accordingly. Those subsequent rulings, along with the State's decision not to challenge them on appeal, renders this case moot, but need not be the situation in other cases. 
Additionally, the legal landscape has changed such that 
it seems doubtful that the case is "capable of repetition." In 2016, Act 26 was adopted, titled "Relating to Amending Identity 
11   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of Registrant's Parent on a Birth Certificate." Act 26 amended 
HRS § 338-15 by adding the following underlined language: 
§338-15 Late or altered certificates. A person born in the
State may file or amend a certificate after the time
prescribed, upon submitting proof as required by rulesadopted by the department of health. Certificates registered after the time prescribed for filing by the rulesof the department of health shall be registered subject toany evidentiary requirements that the department adopts byrule to substantiate the alleged facts of birth. The 
department may amend a birth certificate to change orestablish the identity of a registrant's parent onlypursuant to a court order from a court of appropriatejurisdiction or pursuant to a legal establishment ofparenthood pursuant to chapter 584. Amendments that changeor establish the identity of a registrant's parent that aremade in accordance with this section shall not be considered corrections of personal records pursuant to chapter 92F. 
2016 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 26, § 1 at 31. Act 26 took effect upon 
its approval on April 27, 2016. 2016 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 26, § 3 at 31. Act 26 is not directly applicable to this case, however it addresses the primary issue that the Circuit Court addressed, i.e., whether H  RS § 92F-24(a), in combination with HRS § 338-15, 
authorized the DOH to make changes to the Plaintiffs' birth certificates without a court order.  As intended by the 
Legislature, it appears that Act 26 has clarified the law on the issues raised in this case. 
8
With regard to the "public interest" exception to 
mootness, we consider "(1) the public or private nature of the question presented, (2) the desirability of an authoritative determination for future guidance of public officers, and (3) the 
8 Two of the four committee reports related to House Bill ( H.B. ) 939,
which became Act 26, indicate that a reason for the bill was because
individuals had sued the DOH related to changing a parent on a birthcertificate. The case is not named, but appears to be the instant action.See S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2893, in 2016 Senate Journal, at 1246-47; S.Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 3572, in 2016 Senate Journal, at 1538. Each of the committee reports indicate H.B. 939 was intended to clarify the law. See H. 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 6-16, in 2016 House Journal, at 759 ("The purpose ofthis measure is to clarify that amendments to birth certificates to change orestablish the identity of a registrant's parents may be made by the Departmentof Health only pursuant to a court order or the legal establishment ofparenthood in accordance with the Uniform Parentage Act and not as acorrection to a personal record under the Uniform Information PracticesAct."); H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 338, in 2015 House Journal, at 894 (Thisreport was issued in 2015 because H.B. 939 was a carry-over bill introduced inthe 2015 legislative session and adopted in the Regular Session of 2016); S.Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2893, in 2016 Senate Journal, at 1246; S. Stand. Comm.Rep. No. 3572, in 2016 Senate Journal, at 1538. 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
likelihood of future recurrence of the question." Hamilton ex 
rel. Lethem, 119 Hawai# i at 6-7, 193 P.3d at 844-45 (citations 
omitted). 
Here, the question is private in nature, affecting the 
birth certificates of the three Plaintiffs. Moreover, given the 
adoption of Act 26, the relevant statutes have been clarified to provide guidance for DOH and, as noted above, it appears unlikely that there would be a recurrence of the question raised in this case. 
The "collateral consequences" exception to mootness has 
been adopted in Hawai# i with regard to "domestic violence 
[Temporary Restraining Orders (
TROs)] where there is a reasonable 
possibility that prejudicial collateral consequences will occur as a result of the entry of the TRO[,]" id.
 at 9-10, 193 P.3d at 
847-48 (quotation marks omitted), and in a family court matter based on the Child Protective Act and the collateral consequences to a parent's visitation rights. In re Doe, 81 Hawai# i 91, 99, 
912 P.2d 588, 596 (App. 1996). 
The "collateral consequences" 
exception is not applicable here. 
We note that the State's third point of error 
challenges the Circuit Court's award to Plaintiffs of attorneys' fees in the amount of $40,985.50 and costs in the amount of $968.12 under HRS § 92F-27(e), which provides in relevant part that "[t]he court may assess reasonable attorney's fees and other litigation costs reasonably incurred against the agency in any case in which the complainant has substantially prevailed." However, the State's appeal of the attorneys' fees and costs award does not save the other issues from being moot. 
In Queen 
Emma Foundation v. Tatibouet, 123 Hawai# i 500, 510, 236 P.3d 
1236, 1246 (App. 2010), we addressed the question of "whether a claim for attorneys' fees and costs keeps alive an otherwise moot controversy." 
There, the circuit court had awarded the plaintiff 
attorneys' fees and costs as the prevailing party under the subject lease in that case and HRS § 607-14. Id. at 505, 236 
P.3d at 1241. 
After determining that the substantive issues 
under the lease were moot, id. at 507-09, 236 P.3d at 1243-45, we cited cases from the U.S. Supreme Court and other jurisdictions 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 in holding that the defendants' appeal of the attorneys' fees and 
costs award did not save the substantive issues from being moot. Id. at 510, 236 P.3d at 1246. 
Applying the analysis in Queen Emma Foundation, the 
State's first two points on appeal in this case remain moot, notwithstanding the State's appeal of the attorneys' fees and costs award. 
B. Award of Attorneys' Fees and Costs 
Although the substantive issues remain moot, under 
Queen Emma Foundation, we have jurisdiction to review the award of attorneys' fees and costs as follows: 
We adopt the approach of the courts that have concluded that
"[a]lthough a claim for attorney's fees does not preserve acase which has otherwise become moot on appeal, ... thequestion of attorney's fees is ancillary to the underlyingaction and survives independently under the Court'sequitable jurisdiction." United States v. Ford, 650 F.2d
1141, 1144 (9th Cir. 1981); see Bishop v. Committee onProfessional Ethics and Conduct of the Iowa State Bar, 686F.2d 1278, 1290 (1982); Rodarte, 127 F.Supp.2d at 1115–17.Where the underlying controversy has become moot, "there isno right to review or redetermine any of the issues in theunderlying action solely for the purpose of deciding theattorney's fees question." Ford, 650 F.2d at 1144 n. 1.
Instead, the question of attorney's fees and costs must bedecided based on whether the recipient of the attorney'sfees and costs award can be considered to be the prevailingparty in the underlying action, "without regard to whetherwe think the [trial] court's decision on the underlyingmerits is correct." Bishop, 686 F.2d at 1290; see Bagby v.
Beal, 606 F.2d 411, 414–15 (3d Cir. 1979). We have jurisdiction, under this approach, to decide Defendants'challenge to the circuit court's award of attorney's feesand costs. 
Id. 
Plaintiffs' Complaint asserts that it is brought, in 
part, pursuant to HRS § 92F-27(a), which provides: "(a) An 
individual may bring a civil action against an agency in a circuit court of the State whenever an agency fails to comply with any provision of this part, and after appropriate administrative remedies under sections 92F-23, 92F-24, and 92F-25 have been exhausted." The Circuit Court's substantive ruling, whether we agree with it or not, was that the DOH had the authority under HRS §§ 92F-24 and 338-15 to make the changes requested by the Plaintiffs to their original birth certificates, 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
without a court order. As noted above, the Circuit Court then 
awarded Plaintiffs attorneys' fees and costs under HRS § 92F-27(e), which states that "[t]he court may assess reasonable attorney's fees and other litigation costs reasonably incurred against the agency in any case in which the complainant has substantially prevailed." Under the Circuit Court's ruling on the substantive issue of DOH's authority under HRS §§ 92F-24 and 338-15 (which we do not review), the Plaintiffs substantially prevailed. Given the standard under which we review it, the Circuit Court's award to Plaintiffs of attorneys' fees and costs under HRS § 92F-27(e) was not erroneous.
III. Conclusion 
Based on the above, we do not address the merits of the 
State's first two points on appeal and dismiss the appeal as moot with regard to those issues. We affirm the "Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion for Attorneys' Fees and Costs," filed December 4, 2014. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 20, 2020. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate JudgeMarissa H.I. Luning,Deputy Solicitor General, Department of the AttorneyGeneral, for Defendants-Appellants. 
Camille K. Kalama,
Li#u
lâ E.K. Nakama,for Plaintiffs-Appellees. 
15 