FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
KARPELES MANUSCRIPT LIBRARY, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
STELLA FAYE DUARTE; MORYLEE FERNANDEZ, and JOHN and
MARY DOES 1-10, Defendants-Appellants
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000166
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-0232)
 
JANUARY 31, 2013
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FUJISE, J.
 
Defendants-Appellants Stella Faye Duarte (Duarte) and
 
Morylee Fernandez (Fernandez) (collectively Defendants) appeal
 
from the Judgment, entered on December 21, 2010 in the Circuit
 
Court of the Fifth Circuit (Circuit Court).1
 
On December 21, 2010, the Circuit Court granted summary
 
judgment in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee Karpeles Manuscript
 
Library Museum (Karpeles) and adjudged Karpeles as the legal
 
owner of the subject property (the Property), held that Karpeles
 
was entitled to possession of the Property, and issued a Writ of
 
Ejectment against Defendants.
 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On February 15, 2011, the Circuit Court granted
 
Karpeles's Motion for Statutory Attorneys Fees and Costs which
 
awarded Karpeles $52,657.43 in attorneys' fees, tax, and costs
 
against Defendants.
 
On appeal, Defendants claim that the Circuit Court
 
erred by granting Karpeles's Motion for Summary Judgment because
 
Defendants demonstrated a genuine issue of material fact and that
 
Karpeles failed to release the mortgage after Defendants invoked
 
their right to rescission under 15 United States Code (USC)
 
§ 1635 (2010).2 Defendants also claim that Karpeles was not
 
entitled to attorneys' fees pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes
 (HRS) § 607-14 (Supp. 2012) because an ejectment action is not in
 
the nature of assumpsit and they are the prevailing party on
 
their rescission claim.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On September 1, 2009, Karpeles filed a Complaint for 
Ejectment (Complaint), averring that it had conducted a non-
judicial foreclosure on the Property pursuant to a power of sale 
provision in a recorded mortgage, that it was the highest bidder 
at auction and received a quitclaim deed for the Property which 
was recorded at the Hawai' i State Bureau of Conveyances on 
August 25, 2009, but that Defendants remained on the property as trespassers and/or uninvited guests. Karpeles requested a Writ 
of Ejectment, pursuant to HRS § 603-36 (1993). 
On October 1, 2009, Defendants filed an Answer to the
 
Complaint, asserting seventeen defenses, including, inter alia,
 
breach of contract, violation of HRS § 480-12 (2008), rescission
 
under the federal Truth-In-Lending Act (TILA) for, inter alia,
 
2
 Defendants also claim that in granting summary judgment in favor
of Karpeles, the Circuit Court failed to address their defenses of common law
fraud and unfair and deceptive practices, pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes(HRS) Chapter 480. The extent of Defendants' argument on appeal with respectto their fraud and Chapter 480 claims is that "Similarly, Appellants' fraudand Chapter 480 defenses remain un-rebutted, and Karpeles clearly was notentitled to judgment as a matter of law for that additional reason."Defendants' argument is conclusory and fails to provide specific argumentsregarding their fraud and Chapter 480 claims. Therefore, the point of erroris waived. Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(7). 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
failure to provide two complete notices of the right to cancel,3
 
fraud, and common law rescission.
 
On October 30, 2009, Karpeles moved for summary
 
judgment and for a writ of ejectment (First Motion for Summary
 
Judgment), claiming that it had title to the Property through a
 
quitclaim deed from the non-judicial foreclosure and, therefore,
 
was entitled to possession of the Property.
 
On December 17, 2009, Defendants filed a Memorandum in
 
Opposition to the First Motion for Summary Judgment. In her
 
declaration attached to the memorandum, Duarte claimed that Eric
 
Capistran (Capistran), of Silva Capital, assisted her in
 
completing a loan application and suggested that her son,
 
Fernandez, should be added to the title of her home and on the
 
loan application so that she could qualify for a new loan. 
Defendants alleged that a completed Uniform Residential Loan
 
Application (Loan Application) was then provided to them for
 
their signature in order to obtain a "cash out" refinancing and
 
that they signed the form but did not notice that the form
 
falsely stated that their combined monthly income was $9,500,
 
3 Section 1635(a) of the United States Code, Title 15 (2010) states:
 
(a) Disclosure of obligor’s right to rescind
 Except as otherwise provided in this section, in the case of
any consumer credit transaction (including opening or
increasing the credit limit for an open end credit plan) in
which a security interest, including any such interest
arising by operation of law, is or will be retained or
acquired in any property which is used as the principal
dwelling of the person to whom credit is extended, the
obligor shall have the right to rescind the transaction
until midnight of the third business day following the
consummation of the transaction or the delivery of the
information and rescission forms required under this section
together with a statement containing the material
disclosures required under this subchapter, whichever is
later, by notifying the creditor, in accordance with
regulations of the Bureau, of his intention to do so. The
creditor shall clearly and conspicuously disclose, in
accordance with regulations of the Bureau, to any obligor in
a transaction subject to this section the rights of the
obligor under this section. The creditor shall also provide,
in accordance with regulations of the Bureau, appropriate
forms for the obligor to exercise his right to rescind any
transaction subject to this section. 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
when in fact, their combined monthly income was $2,547. 
Defendants also claimed that after signing the Notice of Right to
 
Cancel, they were handed blank copies which differed from the
 
notices that they had signed.
 
Duarte admitted that they ultimately obtained a loan of
 
$357,000, secured by a mortgage on the Property. Duarte claimed
 
that upon receiving a copy of the Loan Application, she was
 
surprised to see that the Loan Application falsely stated that
 
her business was making $4,000 per month, her other monthly
 
income was $1,700, and Fernandez's monthly income was $3,800. On
 
July 5, 2009, after learning that they were not provided two
 
complete copies of the Notice of Right to Cancel, they exercised
 
their right to cancel the transaction by sending a letter to
 
Karpeles. 
Based upon these facts, Defendants claimed that
 
granting summary judgment was inappropriate because there was a
 
genuine issue of material fact. Attached as an exhibit to
 
Defendants' Memorandum in Opposition were copies of the two
 
Notices of Right to Cancel, one for each of the Defendants, that
 
they received upon signing. Each copy lacked a signature for an
 
Acknowledgment of Receipt and lacked a date informing Defendants
 
of the time period in which they might exercise their right to
 
cancel. Also attached as an exhibit was a copy of a letter dated
 
July 5, 2009 by Defendants' counsel, informing Karpeles that
 
Defendants wished to exercise their right to cancel and
 
requesting that Karpeles not proceed with a nonjudicial auction
 
scheduled for July 6, 2009.
 
On January 25, 2010, the Circuit Court issued an order
 
denying the First Motion for Summary Judgment.
 
On October 14, 2010, Karpeles again moved for summary
 
judgment and a writ of ejectment (Second Motion for Summary
 
Judgment), stating that Defendants each signed a Notice of Right
 
to Cancel but admitted that Defendants "were given two copies of
 
the unsigned "Notice of Right to Cancel" which did not include
 
the handwritten dates and redaction which was initialed by DUARTE
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and FERNANDEZ." Karpeles also admitted that "on July 5, 2009,
 
counsel for DUARTE and FERNANDEZ, Gary Victor Dubin, Esq., sent
 
KARPELES a letter notifying KARPELES that DUARTE and FERNANDEZ
 
were exercising their right to rescind and/or cancel the Loan." 
Karpeles also noted that Defendants stopped paying on the loan in
 
April 2009 and were in default since that time. Karpeles
 
maintained that the notice of right to cancel was adequate to
 
inform Defendants of their right to cancel and that Defendants
 
failed to timely cancel. Karpeles did not contest that
 
Defendants could use their TILA-rescission argument to challenge
 
the validity of their quit-claim deed in defense to the ejectment
 
action.
 
On November 15, 2010, Defendants filed a Memorandum in
 
Opposition to the Second Motion for Summary Judgment. In it,
 
Defendants again argued that they were not provided with two
 
complete copies of a Notice of Right to Cancel as required by
 
TILA. Defendants claimed that they timely exercised their right
 
to cancel, pointing to their Exhibit "G," the previously
 
submitted July 5, 2009 letter from Defendants' counsel and
 
claimed that they thereby tendered payment in compliance with the
 
TILA ("my clients hereby consider said loan transaction and
 
related mortgage and promissory note null and void . . .
 
tendering hereby any and all amounts otherwise deemed due in
 
accordance with state and federal law").4 Defendants claimed
 
4 Pertinent to their TILA allegations, this letter read, 
On behalf of and at the direction of my clients,
Stella Faye Duarte and Morylee Fernandez, whose property
address is stated immediately above, you are hereby notified
that they each hereby timely exercise their right to cancel
said referenced loan transaction and mortgage and promissory
note related thereto within three years of loan
consummation, based upon each and all of the following:
 
1. numerous Federal Truth-ln-Lending-Act violations,
including the failure to deliver to each of them at closing
two completed copies of notices of the right to cancel (see,
for example, the attached copies lacking in a cancellation
date as well as bearing an inaccurate transaction date) and
to provide each of them with the requisite, accurate good
(continued...)
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that whether they were entitled to rescission must be determined
 
before summary judgment could be granted on whether Defendants
 
could tender payment. Defendants also claimed that the loan was
 
subject to rescission based upon common law fraud and unfair and
 
deceptive practices pursuant to HRS Chapter 480, neither of which
 
required tender of any amount. Defendants also again claimed
 
that the false Loan Application was fraudulent and an unfair and
 
deceptive practice.
 
On November 24, 2010, the Circuit Court held a hearing
 
on the Second Motion for Summary Judgment. Karpeles did not
 
argue that Defendants waived assertion of rescission under TILA
 
or that Defendants failed to file a petition pursuant to HRS
 
§ 667-35 (Supp. 2009). Instead, Karpeles argued that Defendants
 
were required to show that they had the ability to pay back the
 
loan if they sought rescission. Karpeles noted that Defendants
 
defaulted on the loan in April 2009, remained on the property
 
without making payments, and did nothing to litigate their right
 
to rescission. Karpeles argued that, without making a tender or
 
showing the ability to tender, Defendants were not entitled to
 
rescission.
 
Defendants responded that the issue of whether
 
Defendants could tender payment should be determined at trial and
 
4(...continued)
faith disclosures, misstating, for example, their annual
percentage rate, and charging for a prior undisclosed,
highly excessive notary fee;
 
. . . .
 
You are hereby notified that my clients hereby
consider said loan transaction and related mortgage and
promissory note null and void, and hereby demand all
appropriate state and federal common law and statutory
relief, without prejudice to their right to an award of
appropriate exemplary damages, including treble as well as
punitive damages - tendering hereby any and all amounts
otherwise deemed due in accordance with state and federal
 law -- and demanding, accordingly, without prejudice to
their other damages, a return to them of any and all
payments and overpayments made by them, or on their behalf,
and all credit-related closing costs heretofore paid by them
in connection with said promissory note and said mortgage.
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that there was nothing in the record that established their
 
inability to pay. Defendants distinguished their statements
 
regarding their income from statements regarding their ability to
 
pay back the loan.
 
In granting the Second Motion for Summary Judgment, the
 
Circuit Court stated:
 
All right, Counsel, let me state, first of all, that
summary judgment should be granted when the pleadings,
deposition, affidavits and exhibits show that there is no
genuine issue as to any material fact, and that the moving
party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
 
Let me state for the record that the Court is very
familiar and fully understands your respective positions.
and the Court is in agreement with the argument made by
Mr. Brown, both in court and in the pleadings, that the
recision [sic] which the Plaintiffs' have -- excuse me, the
recision [sic] that the Defendants have claimed cannot be
effectuated because it appears that the Defendants lack the
capacity to pay back the Plaintiff's loan. And based on the
 
declarations of the Defendants themselves
, and, in
particular, as pointed out in the motion and memorandum in
support of the motion for summary judgment, and as alluded
to by Mr. Brown on the record this afternoon, it appears
undisputed that the Defendants defaulted on the loan and
that they cannot repay the proceeds.
 
The Court finds that there are no genuine issues of
material fact, given the Court's findings, and, as such, the
Court is awarding summary judgment to the Plaintiff for all
of the relief prayed for in the motion and memo in support
of, including the request for the writ of ejectment.
 
(Emphasis added.) Thus, the Circuit Court's decision was based
 
solely on its determination that it "appears undisputed that the
 
Defendants defaulted on the loan and that they cannot repay the
 
proceeds."
 
On December 21, 2010, the Circuit Court entered its
 
order granting the Second Motion for Summary Judgment and
 
Judgment. On January 4, 2011, the Circuit Court issued a Writ of
 
Ejectment.
 
On January 5, 2011, Karpeles filed a motion for
 
attorneys' fees. Karpeles argued that it was entitled to an
 
award of attorneys' fees and costs, pursuant to HRS § 607-14,
 
because its action was in the nature of assumpsit. Karpeles
 
claimed that the promissory note and mortgage allowed for
 
taxation of attorneys' fees and costs. Karpeles also claimed
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that under Hong v. Kong, 5 Haw. App. 174, 182, 683 P.2d 833
 
(1984), actions for rescission were in the nature of assumpsit
 
and that Defendants claimed the mortgage was subject to
 
rescission.
 
On January 25, 2011, Defendants filed a Memorandum in
 
Opposition to Karpeles's motion for attorneys' fees. Defendants
 
noted that the Complaint was for possession of real property and
 
that Defendants were trespassers, not for monetary damages or
 
breach of the mortgage or promissory note. Defendants argued
 
that the transaction was not transformed into one involving the
 
mortgage or promissory note merely because Karpeles was the
 
seller and successful bidder at a nonjudicial foreclosure. 
Defendants distinguished Hong on the basis that, unlike the
 
plaintiff in Hong, Defendants did not assert a counterclaim for
 
rescission -- merely a defense -- and Defendants did not ask for
 
damages. Lastly, Defendants noted that Karpeles did not ask for,
 
nor was awarded any damages, therefore, it was not possible to
 
limit attorneys' fees to 25 per cent of the judgment, as required
 
by HRS § 607-14.
 
On February 15, 2011, the Circuit Court granted
 
Karpeles's motion and awarded attorneys' fees, tax, and costs in
 
the amount of $52,657.43.
 
Defendants timely filed this appeal.
 
II. DISCUSSION
 
The Circuit Court Erred By Granting The Second Motion For
Summary Judgment
 
Karpeles did not and does not contest Defendants'
 
ability to challenge their title to the Property based on the
 
TILA, common law fraud, or HRS Chapter 480. The Circuit Court
 
granted Karpeles's Second Motion for Summary Judgment on the
 
basis that "it appears undisputed that the Defendants defaulted
 
on the loan and that they cannot repay the proceeds" and that
 
"there are no genuine issues of material fact, given the Court's
 
findings." On appeal, Defendants argue that Karpeles ignored
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
their rescission notice, which, they argue, made the loan void,
 
and improperly refused to release its security interest in the
 
Property. Defendants contend that the Circuit Court should have
 
strictly adhered to the provisions of 15 U.S.C. § 1635(b). 
Defendants also claim that they "tendered payment in compliance
 
with TILA," but that the specific payoff amount was not made
 
known to them by Karpeles and the Circuit Court ruled in
 
Karpeles's favor without any conclusive proof of Defendants'
 
inability to "comply with their subsequent tender obligations."
 
We review the granting of a motion for summary judgment 
de novo. Hawaii Cmty. Fed. Credit Union v. Keka, 94 Hawai' i 213, 
221, 11 P.3d 1, 9 (2000). The standard is well-settled: 
Summary judgment is appropriate "if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law."
 
Gossinger v. Ass'n of Apt. Owners of Regency of Ala Wai, 73 Haw. 
412, 417, 835 P.2d 627, 630 (1992) (quoting Hawai' i Rules of 
Civil Procedure Rule 56(c)(1990)). "A fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting 
one of the essential elements of a cause of action or defense 
asserted by the parties." Hulsman v. Hemmeter Dev. Corp., 65 
Haw. 58, 61, 647 P.2d 713, 716 (1982). "The evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving party." 
Bronster v. Yoshina, 84 Hawai' i 179, 186, 932 P.2d 316, 323 
(1997). 
Taking the evidence in the record in the light most
 
favorable to Defendants, we are not convinced there was no
 genuine issue of material fact regarding their ability to pay.
 
It appears that the Circuit Court relied exclusively on
 
the declaration of Duarte, which cited to the income received by
 
Defendants as the evidentiary basis for its conclusion that it
 
was "undisputed" that Defendants could not pay back the loan. 
However, as Defendants' counsel pointed out, "My clients make
 
statements in their declarations regarding their income. They
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
make no statements regarding their ability under any eventual
 
circumstances to pay back the loan." More importantly, in their
 
pleadings, Defendants attached a copy of the Loan Application
 
which indicated that the Property was valued at $620,000, far in
 
excess of the loan amount of $375,000, and that they were
 
receiving rental income of $900 per month. Thus, there was
 
evidence in the record that there were possible assets apart from
 
their income.5
 
Conversely, there was no determination of the amount
 
Defendants would have to pay, if rescission were granted under
 
TILA. TILA provides that, once the debtor exercises his or her
 
right to rescission, the debtor is "not liable for any finance or
 
other charge," and the creditor must return to the debtor, "any
 
money or property given as earnest money, downpayment or
 
otherwise." 15 USC § 1635(b). We note that the Loan Application
 
indicates Defendants were to make a $40,000 cash payment at
 
closing, and that Karpeles admitted Defendants made some payments
 
toward the loan. Without knowing what amount the Defendants
 
would be called upon to pay, it cannot conclusively be said that
 
Defendants could not pay that amount.
 
Thus, we conclude that it was error to find that there
 
was no genuine issue of material fact regarding Defendants'
 
ability to repay the loan.
 
Finally, as this case must be remanded, we turn to
 
Defendants' argument that the Circuit Court should have
 
determined whether they had a valid right to rescind before
 
determining their ability to repay. While not deciding this
 
question, we note that the current Federal Reserve Board staff
 
commentary provides, "Where the consumer's right to rescind is
 
contested by the creditor, a court would normally determine
 
whether the consumer has a right to rescind and determine the
 
5
 It is true that Defendants maintained the Loan Application was
"false." However, their dispute with the document was as to the amounts
entered for their earned income and did not dispute the other information it
contained.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
amounts owed before establishing the procedures for the parties
 
to tender any money or property." Supplement I to Part 226-­
Official Staff Interpretations, 12 Code of Federal Regulations
 
Pt. 226, Supp. I (2003); 69 Federal Register 16769, 16773 (March
 
31, 2004). For a contrary example, see Yamamoto v. New York
 
Bank, 329 F.3d 1167 (9th Cir. 2003) (the district court granted
 
summary judgment to the creditor before determining whether
 
debtors had a valid right to rescind after the debtors were given
 
60 days to demonstrate their ability to repay the loan). We
 
would also note that if such a procedure would be followed on
 
remand, Karpeles must first provide a balance due amount before
 
requiring Defendants to provide proof of their ability to pay.
 
Based on the state of this record, we conclude that the
 
Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment to Karpeles.
 
Finally, as we vacate summary judgment in favor of
 
Karpeles, we also vacate the attorneys' fees awarded to them.
 
III. CONCLUSION
 
The Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit's Order Granting
 
Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and Judgment entered on
 
December 21, 2010 and the Writ of Ejectment entered on January 4,
 
2011 are vacated, the Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for
 
Statutory Attorneys Fees and Costs entered on February 15, 2011
 
is also vacated, and the case is remanded for further proceedings
 
consistent with this opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Gary Victor Dubin,
Frederick J. Arensmeyer, and
Simeon L. Vance,
for Defendants-Appellants.
 
Philip R. Brown,
Effie Steiger, and
Justin M. Chiu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
11
 