 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000069
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN RE ADOPTION OF A MALE CHILD
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-A 09-1-000369)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Petitioners-Appellants Prospective Adoptive Father and
 
Prospective Adoptive Mother (collectively, Petitioners) appeal
 
from the "Order Denying Petition for Adoption," that was filed on
 December 30, 2010, in the Family Court of the First Circuit
 (Family Court).
1 We affirm.
 
I.
 
Petitioners are the paternal grandparents of the child
 
involved in this case (Child). Child was born in 2005. The
 Honolulu Police Department assumed protective custody of Child
 upon Child's release from the hospital and Child was thereafter
 placed in the foster custody of the Department of Human Services
 (DHS). In January 2006, Child was placed in the foster home of
 
Petitioners. In November 2006, Child was removed from
 
Petitioners' foster home by the DHS after it was confirmed that
 Petitioners had been using marijuana. Prospective Adoptive
 
1 The Honorable Jennifer L. Ching presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Father was using marijuana as treatment for glaucoma pursuant to
 
a medical marijuana prescription while Prospective Adoptive
 Mother was using marijuana without a prescription. After Child
 was removed from Petitioners' care, Prospective Adoptive Father
 participated in substance abuse education classes. After
 completing these classes, he was arrested for and pleaded guilty
 to driving while intoxicated, which he admitted was not the first
 arrest or conviction for this offense. 
Prospective Adoptive Father has a medical history that
 
includes suffering a stroke and surgery for left and right knee
 replacements. The record indicates that he has been consuming
 alcohol in addition to using marijuana and pain medication. 
Prospective Adoptive Mother suffered a heart attack and had open
 heart surgery. She also has degenerative joint disease and has
 been prescribed pain medication. 
In November 2007, Child was placed with non-relative
 
foster parents and had lived with these foster parents since that
 time. In 2008, the DHS referred Petitioners for psychological
 evaluations to permit them to be considered as a foster placement
 option for Child. Prospective Adoptive Mother completed the
 psychological evaluation arranged by the DHS, but Prospective
 Adoptive Father missed three appointments and did not participate
 in the psychological evaluation until over a year after the third
 missed appointment. Prospective Adoptive Father's evaluation
 recommended that he receive additional education to build his
 parenting skills.
 
In February 2009, the parental rights of Child's mother
 
and father were terminated, and the DHS was awarded permanent
 custody of Child. On November 4, 2009, Petitioners filed a
 petition for adoption of Child. The Child's guardian ad litem
 (GAL) opined that it would not be in Child's best interests to be
 adopted by Petitioners. A clinical psychologist testified that
 the Kapiolani Child Protection Center's Multidisciplinary Team
 assessed Petitioners as being inadequate to care for Child. The
 Family Court denied Petitioners' petition for adoption,
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
concluding, among other things, that under Hawaii Revised
 
2
Statutes (HRS) ยง 578-8(a)(4) (2006),  it was not satisfied that
the adoption by Petitioners "will be for the best interests of
 
Child." 
II.
 
On appeal, Petitioners: (1) challenge the validity of
 
numerous findings of fact and conclusions of law entered by the
 Family Court; and (2) contend that the family court failed to
 timely enter findings of fact and conclusion of law in violation
 of Hawai
'i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 110 (2000). We 
conclude that Petitioners' arguments on appeal do not entitle
 them to any relief. We resolve Petitioners' arguments as
 follows:
 
1. The Family Court did not err in denying
 
Petitioners' adoption petition on the ground that it was not
 satisfied that the adoption by Petitioners would be for the best
 
2 HRS ยง 578-8(a) provides:
 
(a) No decree of adoption shall be entered unless
a hearing has been held at which the petitioner or
petitioners, and any legal parent married to a
petitioner, and any subject of the adoption whose
consent is required, have personally appeared before
the court, unless expressly excused by the court.
After considering the petition and such evidence as the
petitioners and any other properly interested person
may wish to present, the court may enter a decree of
adoption if it is satisfied (1) that the individual is
adoptable under sections 578-1 and 578-2, (2) that the
individual is physically, mentally, and otherwise
suitable for adoption by the petitioners, (3) that the
petitioners are fit and proper persons and financially
able to give the individual a proper home and
education, if the individual is a child, and (4) that
the adoption will be for the best interests of the
individual, which decree shall take effect upon such
date as may be fixed therein by the court, such date to
be not earlier than the date of the filing of the
petition and not later than six months after the date
of the entry of the decree.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
interests of Child. The unchallenged findings of fact when
 
combined with the challenged findings that were supported by
 substantial evidence were sufficient to support the Family
 Court's decision. These findings included that: (1) Petitioners
 have a history of serious medical conditions: stroke and knee
 replacements for Prospective Adoptive Father and heart attack and
 heart surgery along with degenerative joint disease for
 Prospective Adoptive Mother; (2) Prospective Adoptive Father's
 failure to participate in a psychological evaluation for over a
 year demonstrated his unwillingness to make Child a priority; (3) 
Prospective Adoptive Father's psychological evaluation
 recommended that he receive additional parenting education; (4)
 after completing substance abuse education classes, Prospective
 Adoptive Father was arrested for and convicted of driving while
 intoxicated; (5) Prospective Adoptive Mother's use of marijuana
 was not at the direction of a physician; (6) Prospective Adoptive
 Mother's testimony about smoking marijuana for heath reasons was
 not credible; (7) Child has been with his current foster parents
 since November 2007; (8) Child's GAL is of the opinion that it
 would not be in the best interests of the Child to be adopted by
 Petitioners; and (9) a clinical psychologist testified that the
 Kapiolani Child Protection Center's Multidisciplinary Team 
assessed Petitioners as being inadequate to care for Child. 
These findings also supported the Family Court's conclusion that
 the DHS did not unreasonably withhold its consent to the petition
 for adoption.
 
2. The timing of the Family Court's filing of its
 
findings of fact and conclusions of law does not entitle
 Petitioners to any relief. HFCR Rule 110, which applies to
 adoptions, provides:
 
Notwithstanding Rule 52 of these rules,
following the hearing, written findings of fact and
conclusions of law that shall be prepared by the court
or by the attorney for the petitioner or petitioners,
shall be entered in each case.
 
HFCR Rule 110 does not contain a time limit for filing findings
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of fact and conclusions of law. Here, the Family Court's
 
findings of fact and conclusions of law were filed before
 Petitioners filed their opening brief, and Petitioners challenged
 the Family Court's findings of fact and conclusions of law in
 their opening brief. Under these circumstances, Petitioners'
 argument that the Family Court should have filed its findings of
 fact and conclusions of law earlier provides no basis for this
 court to overturn the Family Court's denial of their petition for
 adoption. 
III.
 
We affirm the "Order Denying Petition for Adoption,"
 
that was filed by the Family Court on December 30, 2010. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 30, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Michael A. Glenn
 
for Petitioners-Appellants Chief Judge
 
Dean T. Nagamine
Guardian Ad Litem 
Associate Judge
 
Michael G.K. Wong
Mary Anne Magnier 
Associate Judge
Deputies Attorney General
for Department of Human Services
Plaintiff-Appellee
 
5
 