 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS  AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000750 04-JUN-2025 08:14 AM Dkt. 94 SO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000750 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI 
DANIEL BADER and LINDA BADER, Petitioners-Appellees, v. 
CARMELA BURTELL and LAUREN BURTELL, Respondents-Appellants. 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
WAILUKU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 2DSS-22-0000279) 
  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.) 
Self-represented Respondents-Appellants Carmela and 
Lauren Burtell (collectively, the 
Burtells) appeal from the 
District Court of the Second Circuit's1 December 21, 2022 "Order 
Granting Petition for Injunction Against Harassment" (Injunction 
Order) in favor of Petitioners-Appellees Daniel and Linda Bader 
(collectively, the Baders).2 
1 The Honorable Blaine J. Kobayashi presided. 
2 In response to an order of this court, the Baders' counsel filed 
Linda's death certificate and explained that no special administrator or 
personal representative was appointed to her estate. See Hawai‘i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (
HRAP) Rule 43(a) (providing in part that "[i]f the 
(continued . . .)   
 
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Burtells and Baders were neighbors in a six-unit 
condominium complex. The Baders petitioned the district court 
for a temporary restraining order (TRO) and injunction against 
harassment as to the Burtells. The district court granted the 
TRO and held an evidentiary hearing, during which the Burtells 
were represented by counsel and the parties stipulated to 
entering both sides' exhibits into evidence. Daniel and Linda 
each testified as to various events involving the Burtells. The Burtells did not testify. 
The district court found the Baders' testimonies 
credible. The district court then found the Burtells' actions, 
taken as a whole, were "essentially a stalking type behavior" 
and the Burtells "engaged in an intentional and knowing course 
of conduct directed at the petitioners which seriously alarms or 
disturbs, consistently or continually bothers the petitioners, 
and does not serve any legitimate purpose, and that this course 
of conduct would cause any reasonable person to suffer emotional distress." The district court entered the Injunction Order 
prohibiting the Burtells from contacting, threatening, and 
(. . . continued) 
deceased party has no representative, any party may suggest the death on the 
record, and proceedings shall then be had as the court shall direct"). Based on Linda' s death and there being no substitute, we dismiss this appeal as to 
Linda. 
2   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
harassing the Baders, along with other conditions, for a two-
year period. 
On appeal, the Burtells request the Injunction Order 
"be dismissed by the Court without prejudice." We note the 
Burtells' opening brief does not materially comply with Hawai‘ i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b). However, to 
promote access to justice, we address the Burtells' request, and 
construe their request as challenging the sufficiency of the 
evidence supporting the Injunction Order. See Erum v. Llego
, 
147 Hawai‘i 368, 380-81, 465 P.3d 815, 827-28 (2020).3 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve the 
points of error as discussed below, and affirm. 
If a TRO is granted, Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 604-10.5 (2016, Supp. 2022) requires a hearing and, if the 
3 The Burtells improperly filed documents on appeal that do not appear 
on the parties' exhibit lists. See HRAP Rule 10(a) (providing that "[t]he 
record on appeal shall consist of the trial court . . . record, as set out in 
Rule 4 of the Hawai‘i Court Records Rules " (HCRR)); HCRR Rule 4(c) (providing 
that the record includes exhibits "whether admitted into evidence or refused, 
provided that exhibits marked for identification but never offered shall not 
be included"); 
see generally HRAP Rule 1(d) (indicating pro se parties "are 
deemed to be aware of, and are expected to comply with, all of the 
provisions" of the appellate rules). 
The Burtells also improperly filed multiple documents (Dkt. Nos. 27- 38, 
40-45, 47, 49, and 71-73) under seal in this appeal.  Except for dates of 
birth on page 2 of Dkt. No. 38, the sealed dockets do not contain personal information. See HCRR Rules 2.19 (defining personal information) and 9 
(outlining litigants' responsibility to protect personal information). 
3   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court finds harassment under subsection (a)(2) by clear and 
convincing evidence, it shall enjoin further harassment for no 
more than three years: 
§604-10.5 Power to enjoin and temporarily restrain 
harassment. 
(a) For purposes of this section: 
"Course of conduct" means a pattern of conduct 
composed of a series of acts over any period of time 
evidencing a continuity of purpose. 
"Harassment" means: 
 . . . . 
(2) An intentional or knowing course of conduct 
directed at an individual that seriously alarms 
or disturbs consistently or continually bothers 
the individual and serves no legitimate purpose; 
provided that such course of conduct would cause 
a reasonable person to suffer emotional distress. 
 . . . . 
(g) A temporary restraining order that is granted under this section shall remain in effect at the discretion 
of the court . . . . A hearing on the petition to 
enjoin harassment shall be held within fifteen days 
after the temporary restraining order is 
granted. . . . 
The parties named in the petition may file or give 
oral responses explaining, excusing, justifying, or 
denying the alleged act or acts of harassment. The 
court shall receive all evidence that is relevant at the hearing and may make independent inquiry. 
If the court finds by clear and convincing 
evidence that harassment as defined in . . . paragraph (2) of that definition exists, it shall enjoin for no more than three years further 
harassment of the petitioner[.] 
(Emphasis added and formatting altered.) Clear and convincing 
evidence is "an intermediate standard of proof greater than a 
preponderance of the evidence, but less than proof beyond a 
4   
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasonable doubt required in criminal cases." Uyeda v.
Schermer, 144 Hawai‘i 163, 174, 439 P.3d 115, 126 (2019) 
(citation omitted). The granting of injunctive relief is 
reviewed for an abuse of discretion. Id. at 171, 439 P.3d at 
123. 
Here, harassment as defined under HRS § 604-10.5(a)(2) 
was proven by clear and convincing evidence. 
The Baders 
testified the Burtells would go onto the Baders' property, cut and damage the Baders' foliage, follow and film the Baders 
outside, and film into the Baders' unit while maneuvering their 
car so the lights shone directly into the Baders' unit. Linda 
testified she felt threatened and "afraid to walk outside[,]" and Daniel testified he felt threatened. The acts began when 
the Burtells moved into the condominium complex in 2020, and 
continued until the petition for injunction was filed in 2022, 
though there were periods where the Baders were absent from 
their unit. 
The district court found the Baders' testimonies 
credible. See State v. Stanley
, 110 Hawai‘i 116, 124, 129 P.3d 
1144, 1152 (App. 2005) (explaining "[i]t is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent on the 
credibility of witnesses") (internal quotation marks and 
citations omitted). Thus, the Baders' testimonies were sufficient to show, by clear and convincing evidence, an 
5   
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
intentional or knowing series of acts directed at the Baders, 
and consistently bothering the Baders over a period of time that 
would cause a reasonable person emotional distress. 
Based on the foregoing, the district court's 
December 21, 2022 Injunction Order is affirmed as to Daniel, and 
dismissed as to Linda. 
Further, IT IS ORDERED that, withing ten (10) days 
from the date of this summary disposition order: 
1. The appellate clerk shall unseal Dkt. Nos. 27-38, 
40-45, 47, 49, and 71-73, unless a party files a 
motion to seal the documents, HRAP Rule 11(b)(4); 
and 
2. The Burtells shall file Hawaiʻ i Court Records 
Rules Forms 1 and 2 concerning the dates of birth 
on page 2 of Dkt. No. 38, and file an accessible 
version with the dates of birth redacted. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘ i, June 4, 2025. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
 Acting Chief Judge 
Carmela Burtell,  
Lauren Burtell, /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
Respondents-Appellants, Associate Judge 
pro se.  
 /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Brandon M. Segal, Associate Judge 
for Petitioners-Appellees.  
6 