 
       
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
          
NO. CAAP-24-0000009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  Self-represented Respondent-Appellant Daviann Tabion 
(Tabion) appeals from the December 5, 2023 order denying 
Tabion's November 22, 2023 non-hearing motion for reconsideration (Order Denying Reconsideration) on the November 13, 2023 "Order Granting Petition for Injunction Against Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000009 18-MAR-2026 07:58 AM Dkt. 31 SO 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
ADELINO SAMUEL PACHECO, Petitioner-Appellee, 
v. 
DAVIANN TABION, Respondent-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2DSS-23-0000294) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Nakasone, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.) 
This appeal challenges the sufficiency of evidence to 
support the district court injunction against harassment. We 
reverse.  
       
 
 
   
  On appeal, Tabion contends there was insufficient 
evidence to grant Petitioner-Appellee Adelino Samuel Pacheco's 
(Pacheco) November 1, 2023 "Petition for Ex Parte Temporary 
Restraining Order [(TRO)] and for Injunction Against Harassment" (Petition).  
  Upon review of the record on appeal and relevant legal authorities, giving due consideration to the issues raised and arguments advanced in the Opening Brief,
2 we resolve the 
contention as follows.   On November 1, 2023, Pacheco filed the Petition 
pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (
HRS) § 604- 10.5.3 Pacheco 
 
   
 
  
 
    
 
   
 
    
     
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Harassment" (Injunction Order) filed by the District Court of 
the Second Circuit (District Court).1 
1 The Honorable Blaine J. Kobayashi presided. 
While Tabion did not identify or attach the Injunction Order in 
her Notice of Appeal, the Opening Brief only challenges the Injunction Order 
and not the Order Denying Reconsideration. We construe her appeal as 
challenging the Injunction Order. See State v. Greybeard , 93 Hawai ʻi 513, 
516, 6 P.3d 385, 388 (App. 2000) (construing appellant's notice of appeal to 
appeal from judgment not attached to the notice of appeal). 
2 Pacheco did not file an Answering Brief. 
3 HRS § 604-10.5(b) (2016 & 2023 Supp.), provides the district 
courts "the power to enjoin, prohibit, or temporarily restrain harassment." The court must find "harassment" exists "by clear and convincing evidence" to grant an injunction. Subsection (a) defines two types of harassment, a physical harm-based harassment in subsection (a)(1), and a "course of 
conduct"-based harassment in subsection (a)(2), as follows: 
(1) Physical harm, bodily injury, assault, or the 
threat of imminent physical harm, bodily injury, or 
assault; or 
(2) An intentional or knowing course of conduct 
directed at an individual that seriously alarms or 
disturbs consistently or continually bothers the 
individual and serves no legitimate purpose; provided 
that such course of conduct would cause a reasonable person to suffer emotional distress. 
2   
       
 
 
   
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
alleged that Tabion "show[ed] up" at his residence and went 
"thr[ough] [his] b[e]longings while [he was] not there"; made "[r]epeated phone calls with threats of violence"; "sent her son into [his] y[a]rd to kill [his] [d]og"; and sent a realtor to 
"harras[] [sic]" him. Attached to the Petition was a 1998 
rental lease for Pacheco's residence. 
On November 13, 2023, a hearing was held on the 
Petition. Both Tabion and Pacheco, self-represented, were placed under oath, and the District Court asked if Pacheco stood "by the truthfulness of all of [his] statements" in the 
Petition, to which Pacheco responded, "Yes, sir." 
Pacheco also 
testified that he just got released from prison, and that while 
in prison, he had let Tabion stay at his property that he was renting. When Pacheco was released from prison and returned to his residence, he testified that the property was a "mess" with "rubbish all over the place[.]" Pacheco testified that he talked to Tabion about the mess, and that Tabion stated that 
Pacheco was "screwing with the wrong person" and was "going to 
go down." Pacheco testified that despite the property having his "stuff inside," he "tried [to] stay away" from Tabion, and stayed "on the other side" of the property. Pacheco testified that a "guy down the road" told him that Tabion was "calling the cops" on Pacheco, and Pacheco was "scared of the cops[.]" 
Lastly, Pacheco requested a "stay away" as follows: 
They went go lay black plastic on the ground, so 
nighttime get the dew on the ground, so I wake up at night, get tracks all through my thing, all by my 
window and stuff like, you know what I mean. I just 
went -- stay away. I like her [(Tabion)] stay away. I no like bother. I no like go back to jail so I been staying away from her [(Tabion)]. 
"Course of conduct" is defined as "a pattern of conduct composed of a series of acts over any period of time evidencing a continuity of purpose." HRS § 604-10.5(a). 
3  
       
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  The District Court granted the Petition and a three-
year injunction as follows: 
  
 
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
  THE COURT: Okay. The Court has listened to the 
testimony of [Pacheco] and [Tabion]. I'm going to grant the injunction in this case. 
Mr. Pacheco, it can be issued for up to three years. 
How long would you --
MS. TABION: Your Honor, I would --
MR. PACHECO: I'd like the three years, please. 
MS. TABION: Your Honor, why are you granting it? He 
didn't show that I harassed --
THE COURT: Because I'm finding --MS. TABION: I didn't kill his dog. 
THE COURT: I'm finding that --MS. TABION: -- that's what --
THE COURT: -- his testimony is more credible than 
yours. 
MS. TABION: Really? 
THE COURT: So for a period of three years --
MS. TABION: That's fine. 
The District Court's Injunction Order stated: "[t]he parties 
presented evidence and the [District] Court found the 
allegations of the Petition proved by clear and convincing evidence." Tabion was ordered to refrain from "[c]ontacting, threatening or harassing [Pacheco]" and "[e]ntering or visiting" Pacheco's residence or workplace. 
On November 22, 2023, Tabion filed a non-hearing 
motion to reconsider the Injunction Order, arguing there was insufficient evidence to support the Petition and that Pacheco did not "present evidence to support his claim[s]." On December 5, 2023, the District Court filed the Order Denying Reconsideration, from which Tabion timely appealed. 
4  
       
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
  HRS § 604-10.5 requires a court to find "clear and 
convincing evidence" that "harassment" as defined in subsection 
(a)(1) or (a)(2) "exists[.]" "Clear and convincing evidence" is 
"that degree of proof which will produce in the mind of the trier 
of fact a firm belief or conviction as to the allegations sought to be established, and requires the existence of a fact be 
h
ighly probable ." Matter of JK, 149 Hawaiʻ i 400, 409, 491 P.3d 
179, 1188 (App. 2021) (citation omitted). "Clear and 
onvincing evidence" is "an intermediate standard of proof 
reater than a preponderance of the evidence, but less than 
roof beyond a reasonable doubt required in criminal cases." d. (citation omitted). When reviewing whether a fact has been roved by clear and convincing evidence, an appellate court onsiders "whether the record as a whole contains substantial vidence from which a reasonable factfinder could have found it 
ighly probable that the fact was true."
  Id. at 409-10, 491 P.3d 
t 1188-89 (citation and emphases omitted). 
 
 Tabion argues there "was insufficient evidence to 
grant the [P]etition[,]" where Pacheco had the "burden of 
proving by clear and convincing evidence that a protective order should be issued." Tabion claims the record is "devoid of any 
evidence of harassment," and that Pacheco did not testify or 
prove at the November 13, 2023 hearing that any harassment occurred. Tabion's argument has merit. 
1c
g
pIpce
h
a
Here, the record as a whole does not reflect 
substantial evidence from which a reasonable factfinder could have found it highly probable that facts comprising either type of harassment were true. See id. The District Court's oral 
ruling granting the Petition relied on Pacheco's testimony at 
the hearing, which it found was "more credible" than Tabion's. 
The District Court's written Injunction Order found "the 
5  
       
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
allegations of the Petition proved by clear and convincing 
evidence." (Emphasis added.) Pacheco's allegations in the Petition and Pacheco's testimony at the hearing described different sets of vague allegations against Tabion. The 
Petition did not contain dates or times, and alleged that when 
Pacheco was "not there" at his residence, Tabion "show[ed] up," went through Pacheco's belongings, and made "[r]epeated phone calls with threats of violence." Pacheco also alleged that "one [d]ay" he "c[a]me [h]ome" and found his "[d]og" "dead" because Tabion "sent her son" into Pacheco's yard "to kill" it; and 
Tabion sent a realtor to "[h]arras[] [sic]" Pacheco. Pacheco's 
testimony at the hearing also did not provide dates and times, and claimed that: Pacheco's place was a "mess" after he let Tabion stay there while Pacheco was in prison; when Pacheco later confronted Tabion about the mess, Tabion told Pacheco that Pacheco was "screwing with the wrong person" and was "going to go down"; and that a "guy down the road" claimed that Tabion was 
"calling the cops" resulting in Pacheco "staying on the other 
side" of the property because Pacheco did not want to "talk to the cops or go to jail." 
We conclude the District Court's finding in the 
Injunction Order that the Petition's allegations were "proved by clear and convincing evidence" was erroneous, because the 
Petition's allegations were not supported by the evidence at the 
hearing. The District Court did not explain what actions it was relying on to constitute "harassment," and the District Court did not specify whether it found physical-harm-based harassment under HRS § 604-10.5 subsection (a)(1), or course-of-conduct-based harassment under subsection (a)(2). On this record, the 
District Court clearly erred when it found that there was 
substantial evidence to support an injunction against Tabion. 
6  
       
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
  DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘i, March 18, 2026. 
  
 Duarte v. Young, 134 Hawaiʻ i 459, 462, 342 P.3d 878, 881 (App. 
2014) ("Whether there was substantial evidence to support an 
injunction against an alleged harasser is reviewed under the 
'clearly erroneous standard.'" (citation omitted)). 
For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the November 13, 
2025 Injunction Order, filed by the District Court of the Second 
Circuit. 
On the brief: 
 
Daviann Tabion, 
Self-represented Respondent-
Appellant. 
  /s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
Presiding Judge
 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge  
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
Associate Judge  
7 