NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000428
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
PEGGY ANN LASATER, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(KONA DIVISION)
(CR. NO. 14-1-191K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Peggy Ann Lasater (Lasater) appeals
 
from the April 16, 2015 Judgment, Conviction, and Sentence
 
(Judgment) in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit
 
1
Court) convicting her of one count of Theft in the Second Degree
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS
) § 708-831 (2014),
 
four counts of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree in
 violation of HRS § 712-1243(1) (2014), and three counts of
 Prohibited Acts Related to Drug Paraphernalia in violation of HRS
 § 329-43.5 (2010). The Circuit Court sentenced Lasater to
 
1
 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
concurrent five-year terms of imprisonment, with a mandatory
 
minimum term of one year and eight months. 
Lasater raises three points of error on appeal,
 
contending that: (1) the Circuit Court abused its discretion
 when it denied Lasater's oral motion to have her counsel withdraw
 and for new counsel to be appointed; (2) the Circuit Court
 plainly erred when it incompletely instructed the jury regarding
 the definition of possession by using only the standard pattern
 jury instruction; and (3) trial counsel's multiple omissions and
 errors denied Lasater effective assistance of counsel.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Lasater's points of error as follows:
 
(1) The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has held: 
Although "there is no absolute right, constitutional
or otherwise, for an indigent to have the court order a
change in court-appointed counsel," State v. Torres , 54 Haw.
502, 504, 510 P.2d 494, 496 (1973), when an indigent
defendant requests that appointed counsel be replaced, the
"trial court has a duty to conduct a 'penetrating and
comprehensive examination' of the defendant on the record,
in order to ascertain the bases for the defendant's
 request." Soares, 81 Hawai' i at 355, 916 P.2d at 1256
(quoting Kane, 52 Haw. at 487–88, 479 P.2d at 209); see also
Smith v. Lockhart, 923 F.2d 1314, 1320 (8th Cir. 1991). This
"inquiry is necessary to protect the defendant's right to
effective representation of counsel," Soares, 81 Hawai' i at 
355, 916 P.2d at 1256 (quoting Kane, 52 Haw. at 487–88, 479
P.2d at 209), and it must be "the kind of inquiry that might
ease the defendant's dissatisfaction, distrust, or concern,"
Lockhart, 923 F.2d at 1320; United States v. Garcia, 924
F.2d 925, 926 (9th Cir. 1991). 
The trial court's inquiry must also be sufficient to
enable the court to determine if there is "good cause" to
warrant substitution of counsel. 
Soares,  81 Hawai' i at 355,
916 P.2d at 1256. Whether there is "good cause" requiring
substitution of counsel will depend on the facts of the
case. Typically, "good cause" exists when there is a
conflict of interest on the part of defense counsel, a
complete breakdown in communication between the attorney and
client, or an irreconcilable difference between the attorney
 
2

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and client. See, e.g., id. at 355, 916 P.2d at 1256
(collecting cases). 
State v. Harter, 134 Hawai 'i 308, 323-24, 340 P.3d 440, 455-56 
(2014). 
Here, on the day of trial, Lasater informed the Circuit
 
Court that she had concerns about court-appointed counsel Alfred
 
Lerma's (Lerma's)representation of her because: (1) Lerma would
 
not give Lasater a legal opinion on Lasater's chances at trial,
 
purportedly only saying that there were no guarantees as to the
 outcome of a jury trial; (2) Lasater had not been informed of the
 mandatory minimum sentencing attached to her charges until noon
 on the day before trial, and because it took her "several hours"
 to get to Lerma's office, Lasater only had "ten minutes" to make
 a decision about the State's plea offer; and (3) Lasater felt
 that Lerma was not representing her to the fullest extent because
 she felt that Lerma was concerned that he might have to sit in
 front of the prosecutor in the case, based on Lasater having
 heard that the prosecutor was trying to get an appointment to
 become a judge. 
The Circuit Court inquired as to the basis of Lasater's
 
concern about the prosecutor. When Lasater responded that her
 concern was just based on her feelings, the court tried to
 alleviate Lasater's concern by telling her there were no judicial
 vacancies. Lasater's other concerns were focused principally on
 the plea bargains offered by the State, which Lasater had
 rejected, and the assessment of whether to accept a plea or go to
 trial. It appears from the record, however, that the plea offer
 conveyed to Lasater on the day before trial had been conveyed by
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the prosecutor to defense counsel on the day before trial. With
 
respect to Lasater's feeling that Lerma should have given her a
 more specific legal opinion, the court inquired as to whether
 Lerma went over what he believed the State's evidence would be
 and she responded, "Yes, we've gone over that."
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court's inquiry was
 
sufficiently penetrating and comprehensive to ascertain the bases
 for Lasater's concerns. The court clearly tried to address
 Lasater's feelings that Lerma might be thinking about appearing
 in front of the prosecutor some day by informing her that no
 judicial vacancies were open. After identifying Lasater's
 concerns, the court found them not to constitute good cause for
 requiring substitution of counsel, particularly on the day of
 trial. We cannot conclude that the Circuit Court abused its
 discretion in doing so.
 
(2)
 At the conclusion of the evidentiary portion of
 
the trial, the jury was instructed regarding the definition of
 possession, based on the standard pattern jury instruction, as
 follows:
 
A person is in possession of an object if the person
knowingly procured or received the thing possessed or was
aware of her control of it for a sufficient period to have
terminated her possession.
The law recognizes two kinds of possession: Actual
possession and constructive possession.
A person who, although not in actual possession,
knowingly has both the power and the intention, at a given
time, to exercise dominion or control over a thing for a
sufficient period to terminate her possession of it, either
directly or through another person or persons, is then in
... constructive possession of it. The fact that a person is
near an object or is present or associated with a person who
controls an object, without more, is not sufficient to
support a finding of possession.
The law recognizes also that possession may be sole or
joint. If one person alone has actual or ... constructive
possession of a thing, possession is sole. If two or more
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
persons share actual or constructive possession of a thing,
possession is joint.
The element of possession has been proved if you find
beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant had actual or
constructive possession, either solely or jointly with
others.
 
See also Hawai 'i Pattern Jury Instructions - Criminal, § 6.06 
Possession. 
Lasater argues that the court plainly erred in giving 
this instruction because, pursuant to State v. Foster, 128 
Hawai'i 18, 282 P.3d 560 (2012), more emphasis must be placed on 
the element of intent. We disagree. First, read as a whole, the jury instruction correctly reflects the settled law, as stated in Foster, including that "to establish constructive possession of an item, intent to exercise dominion and control over it must be shown in addition to knowledge of the item and the power to exercise dominion and control." Id. at 27, 282 P.3d at 569. 
In addition, the issue in Foster was not the
 
(essentially identical) jury instruction, but whether the
 evidence in that case supported an inference that the defendant
 had the intent to exercise dominion and control over a certain
 firearm and ammunition based on his knowledge of and proximity to
 those items to him in his vehicle. Id. at 29, 282 P.3d at 571. 
Here, Lasater was not convicted solely on the basis that she had
 knowledge of the illegal nature of certain items and that she
 allegedly had ownership or possession over the place where they
 were found. Rather, in addition to jewelry, drugs, and Lasater's
 identification being found at the home where Lasater had resided,
 Tucker Bontecou (Bontecou) testified, inter alia, that he had
 
stolen jewelry from his stepmother, brought the jewelry to
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lasater's residence, and "sold them" to Lasater in exchange for
 
drugs and cash, after he informed Lasater that the jewelry was
 stolen.
2
 
Lasater's argument that her conviction must be vacated
 
based on legally insufficient instruction of the jury is without
 merit.
 
(3) Lasater identifies three categories of ineffective
 
assistance of counsel. 
First, Lasater contends that Lerma failed to properly 
present and argue a pretrial motion regarding issues of suppression and dismissal. In particular, Lasater contends that the first issue raised concerning the movement of items during the search of the subject residence was speculative, absent additional evidence of fraudulent intent associated with the police photography, and the second issue raised, concerning a lack of probable cause to arrest her, also needed to be supported by live witnesses, which trial counsel failed to call. On appeal, Lasater fails to demonstrate that the failure to call such witnesses resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. See, e.g., 
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai
'i 504, 513-14, 78 P.3d 317, 326-27 
(2003) (explaining the defendant's burden of establishing ineffective assistance). In conjunction with this first contention, Lasatar also argues that trial counsel should have 
2
 Lasater testified that, although Bontecou had shown her the
jewelry, told her it was stolen, and offered to sell it to her, she neither
bought it or possessed it, and had moved out of the residence prior to
discovery by the police of the items at issue, pursuant to a search warrant. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
argued "staleness" because the search occurred 11 days after the
 
items to be seized had been seen in the place to be searched
 because "even if unsuccessful, [such motion] would be useful in
 testing the waters of the 'no constructive possession' defense by
 eliciting, and locking in, the testimony of potential alibi
 witnesses at a pre-trial motion hearing." Lasater cites no
 authority for her ineffective-assistance-due-to-failure-to-test­the-waters theory and we find none. Thus, we cannot conclude
 that the failure to pursue this course of action constitutes a
 denial of assistance within the range of competence demanded of
 attorneys in criminal cases.
 In addition, it appears from the reply brief that Lasater 
contends that counsel should have argued that Lasater had "automatic standing" to challenge the search warrant – even though her defense theory was that she no longer lived at the residence and, accordingly, she did not constructively possess the items in question – based on the dissent in State v. Taua, 98 Hawai
'i 426, 49 P.3d 1227 (2002). Even assuming, arguendo, that 
the automatic standing argument was a potentially viable avenue to challenge the search warrant while denying the facts that would otherwise be necessary to establish standing, as discussed above, Lasater has otherwise failed to establish ineffective assistance related to challenging the search. 
Second, Lasater contends that trial counsel improperly
 
presented in limine and other pre-trial arguments, thus
 evidencing counsel's misunderstanding of the rules of evidence. 
However, her argument does not specify how, or otherwise
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
demonstrate that, counsel's alleged missteps resulted in either
 
the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
 meritorious defense. 
Lasater also states that trial counsel should have
 
filed a notice of alibi and subpoenaed Zachary Williams
 (Williams) as an "alibi witness" in support of her defense that
 
she could not have had constructive possession of the items in
 
question at the time of the search because, at that time, she was
 living on a beach sixty miles away. However, as the supreme
 court has noted about the defense of alibi, "[i]ts function is
 not to establish a defense nor to prove anything, but merely to
 raise a reasonable doubt of the presence of the accused at the
 scene of the crime." State v. Cordeira, 68 Haw. 207, 211, 707
 
P.2d 373, 376 (1985) (citation and internal quotation marks
 omitted). In this case, the critical inquiry into the "scene of
 the crime" was not simply the moment when the police executed the
 search warrant, but earlier, when Lasater allegedly accepted the
 stolen jewelry and possessed or constructively possessed the
 other illegal items. Here, Lasater is not entirely denying her
 presence at the scene; at trial, she testified that she was
 present at the subject residence when Bontecou brought the
 jewelry to sell to her.  While additional testimony that she had
 
left the residence and moved to the beach theoretically could
 
have bolstered her defense theory, the decision whether or not to
 call specific witnesses is "normally a matter within the judgment
 of counsel and, accordingly, will rarely be second-guessed by
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
judicial hindsight." State v. Forman, 125 Hawai 'i 417, 426, 263 
P.3d 127, 136 (App. 2011). Nevertheless, 
[i]f counsel does not adequately investigate the underlying
facts of a case, including the availability of prospective
defense witnesses, counsel's performance cannot fall within
the 'wide range of reasonable professional assistance.' . .
. It is only after an adequate inquiry has been made that
counsel can make a reasonable decision to call or not to
 call particular witnesses for tactical reasons.
 
Id. (quoting State v. Aplaca, 74 Haw. 54, 71, 837 P.2d 1298, 1307 
(1992)). It appears from the record that trial counsel considered potential witnesses Williams and Franklin Rivera (Rivera), Lasater's boyfriend. However, in the interview between 
Bontecou and Hawai
'i County Police Department (HCPD) Officer 
Jackson and Detective Sean Smith, Bontecou indicates that Rivera 
was also a drug dealer and that he had supplied Bontecou with methamphetamine. Rivera also indicated during a pre-trial 
hearing on January 14, 2015 that he would likely assert his Fifth 
Amendment right against self-incrimination if called to testify at trial. Lerma's statement to the court during trial that Williams had not yet made up his mind about whether he would testify the next day, and Williams's failure to testify, suggests that he too may have been unwilling to testify. Thus, there was at least a basis for Lerma to believe that if Rivera were cross-examined at trial on credibility, such testimony might have done more harm than good to Lasater's chances of success. In addition, Williams's August 8, 2014 declaration only stated that he encountered Lasater and Rivera, allegedly living on the beach, on November 26, 2013, which is two days after the last time Bontecou stated that he saw Lasater together with the drugs and jewelry at the subject residence. Thus, Lerma may have 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasonably determined, through his inquiry, that the potential
 
testimony of Williams and Rivera would have been fruitless or
 harmful and, on the record before us, we decline to second-guess
 Lerma's decision not to call Williams and Rivera as witnesses.
 
Finally, Lasater presents a list of purported mistakes
 
related to objections, failure to make objections, responses to
 objections, counsel's opening statement, improper evidentiary
 challenges, and a "general lack of knowledge and ability to
 convey that knowledge." We note that "[t]rial counsel is not
 required to make futile objections . . . merely to create a
 record impregnable to assault for claimed inadequacy of counsel." 
State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 351, 615 P.2d 101, 106 (1980)
 (citation omitted). A trial counsel's "decision to refrain from
 objecting [may] constitute[] a legitimate tactical choice." Id.
 
at 352, 615 P.2d at 106. Attorneys "require and are permitted
 broad latitude to make on-the-spot strategic choices in the
 course of trying a case." Id. "Defense counsel's tactical
 
decisions at trial generally will not be questioned by a
 reviewing court." State v. Onishi, 64 Haw. 62, 63, 636 P.2d 742,
 
743 (1981) (citing id.). But, "[w]here trial counsel makes a
 critical tactical decision which would not be made by diligent,
 ordinarily prudent lawyers in criminal cases, the right to
 effective assistance of counsel may be denied." Antone, 62 Haw.
 
at 352, 615 P.2d at 106 (citation omitted). However, even if an
 error is shown, the error alone does not constitute ineffective
 assistance; a defendant must also show that the error resulted in
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the possible impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. 
Wakisaka, 102 Hawai 'i at 514, 78 P.3d at 327. 
Upon review of each of Lasater's contentions, we cannot
 
conclude that any (or all) of counsel's purported errors resulted
 in the possible impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. 
Even the most substantive of these assertions, essentially that
 counsel could have done a better job pursuing the "no
 constructive possession" defense, is highly speculative and
 ignores the strong evidence – including the physical evidence,
 Bontecou's testimony, and Lasater's own testimony – that
 supported Lasater's conviction.
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's April 16, 2015
 
Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 20, 2016. 
On the briefs: Frank L. Miller,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Linda L. Walton,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Hawai
'i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
11
 