 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000541
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
DONNALYN M. MOSIER, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KEITH PARKINSON and SHERRI PARKINSON, Defendants-Appellants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION

 
(CIVIL NO. 1RC12-1-1471)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
In an appeal arising out of a complaint for breach of
 
lease, Defendants-Appellants Keith Parkinson and Sherri Parkinson
 
(the Parkinsons) appeal pro se from the following entered by the
 District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (district
 
1
court):  a June 12, 2012 Judgment for Possession; a June 12, 2012
Writ of Possession; and a June 18, 2012 "Findings of Fact,

 
Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Entry of Judgment for
 Possession and Issuance of Writ of Possession Effective June 1,
 2012." The district court ruled that Plaintiff-Appellee Donnalyn
 Mosier (Mosier) was entitled to possession of the premises
 occupied by the Parkinsons.
 
1
 The Honorable Melanie May presided, except for the June 12, 2013 Writ
of Possession over which the Honorable Hilary Benson Gangnes presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, the Parkinsons raise the following points of
 
error:2 (1) the district court lacked subject matter jurisdiction
 
because the Parkinsons raised an issue of title; (2) the district
 
court violated their due process rights by committing various
 procedural errors; and (3) the Parkinsons are entitled to
 possession of the property. 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm.
 
I. The District Court Was Not Divested of Jurisdiction
 
The Parkinsons contend that, although they executed a 
document entitled "Rental Agreement" with Mosier, they had what they refer to as an "Agreement of Sale" that gave them an interest in title, and which divested the district court of subject matter jurisdiction to decide Mosier's complaint for summary possession under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 604-5(d) (2014).
3 Whether a trial court lacks subject matter jurisdiction 
is a question of law reviewable de novo under the right/wrong standard. Aames Funding Corp. v. Mores, 107 Hawai
'i 95, 98, 110 
P.3d 1042, 1045 (2005). 
Around April or May 2011, the Parkinsons responded to 
Mosier's Craigslist advertisement for the sale of a residence located in Honolulu, Hawai
'i (subject property). It appears that 
the parties engaged in a series of discussions about how the Parkinsons could purchase the property, but did not settle on any contract of sale. 
The parties eventually entered into a written agreement
 
(Rental Agreement) dated July 7, 2011, under which the Parkinsons
 would rent the subject property for a year. The "Special Terms"
 section of the Rental Agreement reads:
 
2
 The points of error set forth in the Parkinsons' opening brief fail
to comply with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4),
which alone raises the potential to waive issues on appeal. Nonetheless, this
court observes a policy of affording pro se litigants the opportunity "to have
their cases heard on the merits, where possible." O'Connor v. Diocese of 
Honolulu, 77 Hawai' i 383, 386, 885 P.2d 361, 364 (1994).
3
 HRS § 604-5(d) provides, in relevant part, that "[t]he district
courts shall not have cognizance of real actions, nor actions in which the
title to real estate comes in question[.]"
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A DOWN PAYMENT - NON-REFUNDABLE - OF $2600 IS MADE A PART OF
 
THIS AGREEMENT, AND SHALL ALLOW TENANT FIRST RIGHT OF
REFUSAL TO PURCHASE SAID PROPERTY. TENANT'S OPTION TO BUY
 EXPIRES WITHIN ONE YEAR OF THIS SIGNED CONTRACT. 
TENANT ACKNOWLEDGES THAT OWNER IS IN MORTGAGE PAYMENT
 
ARREARS AND IS SUBJECT TO FORECLOSURE OF PROPERTY.
 
On the last page of the Rental Agreement, a handwritten note
 
initialed by the parties indicates that the Parkinsons paid the
 $2,600 as consideration for the "PURCHASE OPTION." The parties
 fundamentally disagree as to what rights this provision gave the
 Parkinsons. The Parkinsons argue that they had an "option to
 purchase" whereas Mosier claims that this was merely a "right of
 first refusal."
 
It appears that beginning in mid-December 2011, Mosier
 
advised the Parkinsons that she would be showing the property to
 potential buyers. Because the Parkinsons believed that this
 violated their purported contract rights, they refused Mosier
 access to the property, changed the locks, and would not give her
 a copy of the keys. The Parkinsons failed to pay rent in
 February 2012. Mosier brought the summary possession action in
 March 2012 to recover possession of the premises and the unpaid
 rent. The Parkinsons filed a motion to dismiss, alleging that
 they had an "option to purchase" the property, which put title in
 issue.
 
In order to raise an issue of title, the Parkinsons
were required to comply with the District Court Rules of Civil
 Procedure (DCRCP) Rule 12.1, which provides:
 
 
Rule 12.1. Defense of title in district courts.
 
Pleadings. Whenever, in the district court, in defense of an
action in the nature of an action of trespass or for the
summary possession of land, or any other action, the
defendant shall seek to interpose a defense to the
jurisdiction to the effect that the action is a real action,
or one in which the title to real estate is involved, such
defense shall be asserted by a written answer or written
motion, which shall not be received by the court unless
accompanied by an affidavit of the defendant, setting forth
the source, nature and extent of the title claimed by
defendant to the land in question, and such further
particulars as shall fully apprise the court of the nature
of defendant's claim.
 
(Emphasis added.) Attached to the Parkinsons' motion to dismiss
 
was a joint affidavit in which the Parkinsons alleged that they
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
had an oral agreement with Mosier to purchase the property, under
 
which the cost of repairs would be applied towards the purchase
 price, and that Mosier threatened to sell the property once she
 realized how much repair work would be required. The affidavit
 also claimed that the Parkinsons became concerned about Mosier's
 ability to complete the property sale once they learned that
 there were two mortgages and a tax lien against the property.
 
The Parkinsons' affidavit and supporting materials did
 
not set forth "the source, nature, and extent of title claimed"
 sufficient to "fully apprise the court of the nature of
 defendant's claim." The Parkinsons did not offer any evidence,
 such as a signed written instrument containing a purchase option,
 and there is nothing in the Rental Agreement that brings title
 into question. Although the Parkinsons attached a draft proposal
 for sale, which indicates that the parties intended to negotiate
 the purchase of the property at one point, it contains markedly
 different terms than what the parties ultimately agreed to,
 including a six-month period during which to exercise the option,
 and a $6,000 non-refundable deposit as consideration for the
 option. Further, despite the Parkinsons' attempt to deny the
 existence of a landlord-tenant relationship, the Rental Agreement
 consistently refers to the parties as "LANDLORD" and "TENANT." 
Section 5 of the Rental Agreement provides that the Parkinsons'
 occupancy was fixed, commencing on July 7, 2011 and ending on
 July 7, 2012 with automatic conversion to a month-to-month
 tenancy thereafter. Section 6 requires payment of monthly rent
 of $3,850 to Mosier and Section 16.D advises both landlord and
 tenant to review HRS Chapter 521, the Residential Landlord-Tenant
 Code. Pursuant to Section 16.P, Mosier had the right to enter
 the property upon two days notice to, among other things, show
 the property to prospective buyers, renters, or lenders.
 
Based on the record, the Parkinsons had a right of
 
first refusal, which does not appear to create a colorable claim
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to title under Hawai 'i law.4 A right of first refusal is defined 
as a "potential buyer's contractual right to meet the terms of a
 
third party's higher offer." Kutkowski v. Princeville Prince
 
Golf Course, LLC, 129 Hawai 'i 350, 352 n.2, 300 P.3d 1009, 1011 
n.2 (2013) (quoting Black's Law Dictionary 1439 (9th ed. 2009)). 
See Kaiser Dev. Co. v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 649 F. Supp.
 926, 937 (D. Haw. 1986) (looking to other jurisdictions that have
 recognized that a "preemptive right of first refusal creates no
 interest in property and gives far less than does an options
 contract"). 
In this case, any right of first refusal failed to
 
ripen because there was never any assertion by the Parkinsons or
 any indication in the record of any offer from any third party to
 purchase the property after the Parkinsons took possession of the
 property. The essence of a right of first refusal is the
 
4 Conversely, an option to purchase is:
 
a contract whereby the owner of the property, for valuable
consideration, sells the optionee the right to buy a
specified property, for a specified price, within a
specified time, and on the terms in the option. The option
holder thus may perform or not perform the conditions at his
option, has the power to force conveyance of the land, has
immunity from revocation or repudiation by the optionor, and
may enforce these rights in court. If options contracts do
not actually provide the holder with an interest in the
land, they do provide considerable value on which the holder
can rely.
 
Kaiser Dev. Co. v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 649 F. Supp. 926, 936 (D. Haw.1986) (emphasis added); Arthur v. Sorensen, 80 Hawai' i 159, 165 n.14, 907 P.2d
745, 751 n.14 (1995) (defining an option contract in part as a "right, whichacts as a continuing offer, given for consideration, to purchase or leaseproperty at an agreed price and terms, within a specified time") (quotingBlack's Law Dictionary 1094 (6th ed. 1990) (emphasis added)). 
The facts of this case demonstrate that the Special Terms section did
not give the Parkinsons an option to purchase because a critical term -- the
purchase price -- was missing. By the Parkinsons' own admissions, there was
never any agreement on the price or other terms of sale. The parties disagree
as to why they never settled on a purchase price -- Mosier contends that the
Parkinsons did not have enough capital to complete the purchase whereas the
Parkinsons claim that they had to wait until Mosier finished up a refinancing
deal with her bank. Regardless of any prior negotiations, there was never any
agreed-upon purchase price.
 
Although the Rental Agreement did include a specified time, no other
contract terms explain how the Parkinsons would be able to exercise such a
purchase option or force the sale of the property. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
possibility of matching a third party's acceptable offer. There
 
was no third party offer in this case.
II.	 The District Court Did Not Violate the Parkinsons' Due
 
Process Rights
 
In their second point of error, the Parkinsons argue
 
that the district court deprived them of their due process rights
 
by (1) issuing the Writ of Possession; (2) imposing a rent trust
 fund without a written motion and hearing; (3) refusing to file
 their counterclaims before the trial and refusing to hear
 counterclaims during trial; (4) denying them the assistance of
 their attorney during trial; and (5) issuing garnishee summonses
 to deduct damages from their paychecks.
 
Analysis of these issues implicate several of the 
district court's findings of fact and conclusions of law. However, we note that the Parkinsons do not actually challenge the district court's findings of fact and we are therefore bound by the findings.
5 Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 
Hawai'i 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002); HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(C). 
The Parkinsons have failed to explain how their due 
process rights were violated. Based on our review of the record in light of the relevant case law, we conclude that no violations occurred. "The basic elements of procedural due process of law require notice and an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner before governmental deprivation of a significant property interest." KNG Corp. v. Kim, 107 
Hawai
'i 73, 80, 110 P.3d 397, 404 (2005) (citation and quotation 
marks omitted). The first question is whether the particular interest sought to be protected by a hearing is "property" within the meaning of the due process clauses; if so, the second step involves ascertaining the specific procedures required to protect the interest. Id. Only two of the Parkinsons' alleged interests 
constitute property within the meaning of the due process 
5
 The Parkinsons' arguments implicitly challenge the district court's
finding that they only had a right of first refusal, but even if they raised a
proper challenge to this finding, it was not clearly erroneous. That is, the
evidence supports the finding that the Parkinsons had a right of first
refusal, not an option to purchase.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
clauses: (1) possession of the leased property; and (2) money
 
that went into the rent trust fund.6 See id. (concluding that
 
possession of leased premises and rent paid into a trust fund
 constitute property interests).
A. Possession of the Leased Property
 
The Parkinsons claim that the district court's issuance
 
of the Writ of Possession constituted some sort of trespass or
 illegal seizure of property that violated their due process
 rights. However, the Parkinsons do not challenge any specific
 findings of fact or conclusions of law, and do not explain how
 their due process rights were violated. 
In any event, it is clear that in resolving the
 
possession issue, there were multiple hearings and a two-day
 trial, and that therefore the Parkinsons' due process rights were
 not violated. The district court properly found that the
 Parkinsons violated several provisions of the Rental Agreement,
 including the requirements to pay rent, provide access to the
 landlord, and give the landlord timely notice of defects that are
 not the tenant's duty to fix.
 
6 With regard to the Parkinsons' other contentions, they have not
demonstrated that the district court erred in denying their attempts to file
counterclaims because their requests to file counterclaims were submitted ex
parte, did not describe the nature of the alleged counterclaims, and were
untimely.
 
As to the Parkinsons' claims regarding counsel, review of the record
indicates that the district court allowed the Parkinsons sufficient time to
 retain counsel between the filing of the complaint on March 6, 2012, and the
start of trial on April 26, 2012. At the Parkinsons' request, the hearing on
their motion to dismiss was continued, in part so that they could retain
counsel. Moreover, trial was not scheduled until the motion to dismiss was
denied. On the first day of trial, April 26, 2012, counsel appeared briefly
on behalf of the Parkinsons to request a further continuance, which was
denied. On the second day of trial, held on May 3, 2012, counsel for the
Parkinsons fully participated on their behalf. The district court did not
 abuse its discretion in denying a further continuance of the trial.
 
The Parkinsons' claim regarding the garnishee summonses is not properly
before this court. The garnishee summonses were issued after the Parkinsons
 filed their notice of appeal and thus are not part of this appeal.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B. Rent Trust Fund
 
The Parkinsons assert that the district court's
 
7
 establishment of a rent trust fund under HRS § 666-21 (1993) by
Mosier's oral request violated their rights to due process
 
because there was no separate written motion or hearing. 
These issues were discussed by the Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court in KNG Corp., where the defendant appealed the district court's establishment of a rent trust fund as violative of his federal and state due process rights. 107 Hawai
'i at 75-76, 110 
P.3d at 399-400. The defendant similarly argued that the plaintiff's oral request to establish a rent trust fund should have been made by written motion. Id. at 75, 110 P.3d at 399. 
The court concluded that the "[d]efendant was given notice with respect to possession of the property[]" and had the opportunity to oppose the oral motion at the return hearing. Id. at 80, 110 
P.3d at 404. 
Thus, the notice in this case was sufficient. As to
 
whether the Parkinsons had a meaningful hearing, review of the
 return hearing transcript reveals that the Parkinsons appeared to
 be amenable to establishment of the rent trust fund. The
 Parkinsons asked the district court to push back the hearing date
 on their motion to dismiss so they could seek legal counsel.
 Mosier asked for the imposition of a rent trust fund in the event
 the hearing was postponed because she was being deprived of rent.
 The district court then discussed the details of the rent trust
 fund with the Parkinsons at length.
 
7 HRS § 666-21(a) provides in relevant part:
 
§666-21 Rent trust fund.  (a) At the request of either
the tenant or the landlord in any court proceeding in which
the payment or nonpayment of rent is in dispute, the court
shall order the tenant to deposit any disputed rent as it
becomes due into the court as provided under subsection (c)
. . . provided that the tenant shall not be required to
deposit any rent where the tenant can show to the court's
satisfaction that the rent has already been paid to the
landlord; provided further that if the parties had executed
a written instrument agreeing that the rent could be
withheld or deducted, the court shall not require the tenant
to deposit rent into the fund.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Moreover, the Parkinsons' written objection to
 
establishment of the rent trust fund, filed on March 20, 2012,
 
was unsupported by any factual evidence or legal authority. 
Given that the Parkinsons did not pay rent, requested a
 continuance, and had ample opportunity to present legal argument,
 the district court did not violate their due process rights in
 establishing the rent trust fund.
III. Possession
 
The Parkinsons contend that they have the right to
 
possession of the subject property under the terms of their
 agreement with Mosier. They insist that they have substantially
 performed the agreement by occupying the property, making repairs
 and improvements to the property, and tendering what they call
 "equity payments" (rent) over nine months.
 
As discussed above, the Parkinsons only had a right of
 
first refusal that never ripened because there was never a third
 party offer in this case. Thus, this point of error lacks merit.
IV. Conclusion
 
For the reasons set forth above, the Judgment for
 
Possession and Writ of Possession, both filed on June 12, 2012,
 
and the June 18, 2012 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and
 Order Granting Entry of Judgment for Possession and Issuance of
 Writ of Possession Effective June 1, 2012" entered in the
 District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division are
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 22, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Keith and Sherri Parkinson 
Defendants-Appellants pro se Chief Judge 
Yuriko J. Sugimura(Bendet Fidell
Attorneys at LawA Law Corporation)
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
9
 