NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-20-0000067 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
VICTORIA I. SATOAFAIGA, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2CPC-17-0000969(1)) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Victoria I. Satoafaiga (Satoafaiga) 
appeals from the January 22, 2020 Judgment; Conviction and 
Sentence; Notice of Entry (
Judgment) entered against her by the 
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).   Satoafaiga 
pleaded no contest to, and was convicted of, one count of Sexual 
Assault in the Fourth Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 707-733 (2014),  and one count of Custodial 21
1 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided. 
2 HRS § 707-733 provides, in pertinent part: 
§ 707-733 Sexual assault in the fourth degree.  (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the fourth
degree if:
(a) 
The person knowingly subjects another person tosexual contact by compulsion or causes another
(continued...) (...continued)  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Interference in the Second Degree, in violation of HRS § 707-727 
(2014).3 
Satoafaiga raises a single point of error on appeal, 
contending that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in denying Satoafaiga's March 25, 2019 Motion to Defer; [acceptance 
of her] No Contest Plea (Motion for DANC). 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Satoafaiga's point of error as follows: 
Satoafaiga argues that she met each of the requirements 
for deferral under HRS § 853-1 (2014). In addition, Satoafaiga contends that the Circuit Court "exceeded the bounds of reason by finding that Satoafaiga is likely again to engage in a criminal course of conduct"; inappropriately considered uncharged and irrelevant conduct, used Satoafaiga's failure to admit guilt 
person to have sexual contact with the actor by
compulsion[.]
. . . . 
(2) Sexual assault in the fourth degree is a
misdemeanor. 
3 HRS § 707-727 provides, in pertinent part: 
§ 707-727 Custodial interference in the second 
degree.  (1) A person commits the offense of custodial
interference in the second degree if:
(a) The person intentionally or knowingly takes,entices, conceals, or detains a minor knowingthat the person has no right to do so[.]
. . . . 
(2) Custodial interference in the second 
degree is a misdemeanor, if the minor or incompetent personis taken, enticed, concealed, or detained within the State. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
against her; and improperly "exclud[ed] Satoafaiga from that 
class of first-time or situational offenders whom the legislature found deserving of the opportunity to keep their record free of a felony conviction." 
HRS § 853-1 provides, in pertinent part: 
§ 853-1 Deferred acceptance of guilty plea or nolo
contendere plea; discharge and dismissal, expungement of
records.  (a) Upon proper motion as provided by this
chapter:
(1) When a defendant voluntarily pleads guilty or
nolo contendere, prior to commencement of trial,to a felony, misdemeanor, or petty misdemeanor;
(2) It appears to the court that the defendant isnot likely again to engage in a criminal course
of conduct; and 
(3) The ends of justice and the welfare of society
do not require that the defendant shallpresently suffer the penalty imposed by law,
the court, without accepting the plea of nolo contendereor entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent ofthe defendant and after considering the recommendations,
if any, of the prosecutor, may defer further proceedings. 
(Emphasis added).4 
The grant or denial of a motion for a DANC plea is
within the discretion of the district court and will not be 
disturbed unless there has been manifest abuse of discretion. State v. Tom, 69 Haw. 602, 603, 752 P.2d 597,
597 (1988). "An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or hasdisregarded rules or principles of law or practice to thesubstantial detriment of a party litigant." State v. Davia,
87 Hawai #i 249, 253, 953 P.2d 1347, 1351 (1998) (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted). 
State v. Klie, 116 Hawai# i 519, 521-22, 174 P.3d 358, 360-61 
(2007). 
When ruling on a motion for DANC, a trial court acts
within its discretion where the court (1) considers the HRS  
4 We note that where, as here, statutory provisions are written in
the conjunctive, "[i]t is not enough to satisfy one clause only. All . . . of the clauses must be satisfied." In re Appeal of Century Metalcraft Corp., 41
Haw. 508, 515-16 (Haw. Terr. 1957). Thus, if the Circuit Court properlyconcluded that any one of the HRS § 853-1(a) criteria was not satisfied,Satoafaiga's arguments on appeal will fail. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 853-1(a) factors in light of the circumstances of the offense, 
Presentence Diagnosis and Report (PSI), statements of defendant's 
counsel and defendant, and available alternatives; and (2) 
articulates relevant and significant findings based in the record to support its decision. See State v. Buchanan, 59 Haw. 562, 564, 584 P.2d 126, 127 (1978) (per curiam); State v. Karwacki, 1 Haw. App. 157, 159-60, 616 P.2d 226, 228-29 (1980) (per curiam). 
Here, at the January 22, 2020 sentencing hearing, the 
Circuit Court considered Satoafaiga's Motion for DANC with 
specific reference to, inter alia, the HRS § 853-1(a) factors, the submissions of the parties, and the circumstances of the 
offense as set forth in the PSI. The court found that the first factor was satisfied by Satoafaiga's voluntary plea. 
The Circuit Court looked very closely at the second 
criteria, whether it appears that the defendant is not likely again to engage in a criminal course of conduct, and the third criteria, that the ends of justice and the welfare of society do not require that the defendant shall presently suffer the penalty imposed by law, and stated: 
Ms. Satoafaiga at the time of the offense was 27 years
old. The child victim was 12. So she was double her age,
twice her age, should have known twice as much. Twice as mature, allegedly. 
I agree, Ms. Satoafaiga has a lot of support of family
and friends. She has countless letters from family members,from coworkers, from people from the Guard that you workwith, people from the farm that you work at right now. And they're, yes, lovely, lovely letters, lots of letters, andall speak very glowing of you. 
But it's interesting because all these letters know
you in a different relationship. They know you as adult to 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
adult. They know you as coworker to coworker. They know
you as employer to employee or family member to familymember. 
In this case, it was a different kind of relationship.
It was a child with an adult. 
It was someone who's supposed
to be her mentor, someone who's her supervise -- notsupervisor -- is like teacher/student, is mentor/mentee, islike adult and child, someone that's in your care. 
So the relationship was totally different than all
these letters that were written on your behalf because therelationship with the people who wrote these very niceletters are different. They're not children. They're notsomeone that is under your care, someone that you'reresponsible for. Totally, totally different situation. 
Have you truly taken responsibility and apologized? I 
guess does it appear that you're unlikely to engage in sucha criminal course of conduct again? 
Well, you do admit in your letter that you engaged in
inappropriate text messages. But this was more than text messaging. It was penetration with a finger to a vagina.And the problem is, is that inappropriate text messagingmight be a few messages here and there or maybe even acouple of messages here and there, but 15,978 messages wereexchanged. That means it wasn't just the child sending you15,978 messages. It means there was an exchange going onbetween the two of you. So talk about some inappropriatebehavior. 
Some of these message were totally sexually explicit
and some not so. "I'll put my big dick on your mouth if Ihad one. Might just leave them on and move your panties tothe side. You want to feel me in you? I can't take it slow. I'm so frustrated -- I'm too frustrated. I'd black out. Turn off the light, lock the door behind you. Pick you up. Rub your thighs, kiss your neck, grab your ass, letyou grind on me. Put my tongue in your mouth and let you doyour thing. Pick you up and put you on my bed. Take off myshirt, crawl into the bed with you. Take off your shirt andyour pants," and so on and so forth and so on and so forth. 
So does this appear like someone that's not likely to
engage in a criminal course of conduct? I think if this was a one-time incident -- and I understand it's only two countsthat she's pleading to, but the 15,978 -- well, not all wereinappropriate, obviously. But this is over a four-month period, so by my simple math calculations, over 4,000messages that were going back and forth. So obviously Idon't think -- I think this was definitely more thaninappropriate text messaging. 
Do the ends of justice and welfare of society dictate
that you suffer the penalty imposed by law? 
I'm really concerned because I looked up the Boys &
Girls motto, and it talked about how one should be a mentor,be a role model, improve the lives of the youth, you know, 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counter -- counter -- counter any kind of negative
influences on a youth's life and keep them engaged. 
I think the behavior here is totally just the opposite
of what the Boys & Girls Club is supposed to be -- you'resupposed to be. 
I mean, you were the director of the
Central Maui Boys & Girls Club. This little 12-year-old wascoming to the Boys & Girls Club to –- to engage inactivities, to look up to role models, to be mentored by afemale or a male, but something to improve her life. You know, that's why she was going to the Boys & Girls Club. 
And I think everything you did to her, besides the
digital penetration and the custodial interference, dealingwith taking her out to the breakwater when she was supposedto be going home, and her guardians come to pick her up fromthe Boys & Girls Club and she's not there, and they're goingcrazy, where's my kid, where's my daughter, looking all overfor her. And at two o'clock or four o'clock the next morning, finally a phone call comes in from your partner,Noe, letting Ms. Matsuda know that the child is at yourhouse. So she's gone for, I don't know, 4:30 in theafternoon the day before to like 3:00 or 4:00 a.m. the nextmorning. She's in your -- she's in your trust, she's inyour care this whole time. You were responsible for her,and she ends up with hickeys on her chest during this time.I mean, talk about a negative influence on a child. 
So the Court does find -- it appears to the Court that
the defendant is likely again to engage in a criminal courseof conduct and that the ends of justice and the welfare ofsociety, especially the welfare of our children, our littlegirls, our female children, do not -- do require that thedefendant shall presently suffer the penalty imposed by law.So the Court is going to deny the motion for the deferredacceptance. This matter should and will be on your record. 
Satoafaiga argues that there is nothing in her past 
that even arguably supports the Circuit Court's determination 
that she is likely again to engage in criminal conduct, pointing to the "[f]actors supporting the withholding of a jail term and/or a sentence of imprisonment" set forth in the PSI, particularly her lack of prior delinquency or criminal activity and that her character and attitude and history indicate that she is unlikely to commit another crime. Other factors identified in the PSI, "[f]actors supporting the imposition of a jail term and/or a sentence of imprisonment," cut the other way, including 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Satoafaiga acted without provocation or without reasons 
which (while not amounting to a defense) would have rendered her conduct understandable, and that Satoafaiga's actions indicate or suggest a significant lack of control and good judgment. In any case, in light of the Circuit Court's stated rationale, and the entire record in this case, we cannot conclude that the Circuit Court's determination that Satoafaiga did not satisfy the second and third criteria was arbitrary or capricious. We conclude that Satoafaiga's argument that the Circuit Court abused its discretion is without merit. 
Satoafaiga further argues that the Circuit Court 
inappropriately used her failure to admit guilt and accept responsibility for both charged and uncharged conduct against her. More specifically, Satoafaiga argues that the Circuit Court was prohibited from considering the allegation of "digital penetration" in Count II of the Indictment because the charge which contained the allegation was amended from Sexual Assault in the First Degree, a class A felony, to Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree, a misdemeanor. Count II of the Indictment reads: 
That during or about the period of March 20, 2017,
through March 24, 2017, inclusive, . . . SATOAFAIGA did
knowingly engage in sexual penetration with another personwho is less than fourteen (14) years old, by inserting herfinger into the vagina of the minor, thereby committing theoffense of Sexual Assault in the First Degree in violationof [HRS § 707-730(1)(b)]. 
Pursuant to the plea agreement, the charge in Count II 
was amended to Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree, in violation 
of HRS § 707-733(1)(a).  The plea agreement further provided, 
7  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
inter alia, that Satoafaiga waived any procedural or substantive 
defects to the amendment of Count II of the Indictment and agreed 
to a factual basis to support the charges in Count II, which was that Satoafaiga "did knowingly engage in sexual penetration with another person who is less than fourteen (14) years old, by inserting her finger into the vagina of the minor."  There was 
no other factual allegation or conduct charged in Count II. 
5
As to Satoafaiga's contention that the Circuit Court 
improperly considered Satoafaiga's refusal to admit guilt and accept responsibility, we recognize the cases cited by 
Satoafaiga, in which the Hawai# i Supreme Court has held, inter 
alia: 
Although a sentencing court "has broad discretion in
imposing a sentence, and can consider the candor, conduct,remorse, and background of the defendant," it "may notimpose an enhanced sentence based on a defendant's refusalto admit guilt with respect to an offense the conviction ofwhich he intends to appeal." 
State v. Barnes, 145 Hawai# i 213, 219, 450 P.3d 743, 749 (2019) 
(citations and brackets omitted). 
In State v. Kamana# o, 103 Hawai# i 315, 324, 82 P.3d 401, 
410 (2003), which is also cited by Satoafaiga, the supreme court 
examined the "subtle, yet meaningful, distinction between imposing a harsher sentence upon a defendant based on his or her 
5 We note that Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree is a lesser
included offense of Sexual Assault in the First Degree, and necessarily any
allegation sufficient to establish the latter will also establish the former.See HRS § 701-109(4)(a) (Supp. 2019) ("A defendant may be convicted of anoffense included in an offense charged in the felony complaint, indictment, orinformation. An offense is so included when: (a) It is established by proofof the same or less than all of the facts required to establish the commissionof the offense charged[.]") (format altered). 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
lack of remorse, on the one hand, and punishing a defendant for 
his or her refusal to admit guilt, on the other[.]" Id. at 321-
22, 82 P.3d at 407-08. There, the circuit court's "sentencing remarks" made clear that the defendant's term of imprisonment was extended "simply because [defendant] refused to surrender his privilege against self-incrimination[.]" See id. at 324, 82 P.3d 
at 410. The supreme court thus held that the circuit court violated the defendant's constitutional privilege against self-incrimination. See id. at 320, 82 P.3d at 406. 
However, the denial of a motion for DANC is neither a 
conviction nor a sentence nor a punishment. See State v. Oshiro, 
69 Haw. 438, 442, 746 P.2d 568, 570 (1987). Moreover, the record in this case demonstates that the Circuit Court did not deny Satoafaiga's motion solely on her refusal to admit her culpability for the offenses of which she was convicted. See 
Kamana#o, 103 Hawai# i at 320, 82 P.3d at 406. As the supreme 
court stated in Kamana# o, it is well-established that the circuit 
courts "may consider a defendant's lack of remorse in assessing the likelihood of successful rehabilitation." Id. at 321, 82 
P.3d at 407. It was within the ambit of the court's authority to consider Satoafaiga's lack of remorse, or lack of taking responsibility, as part of the court's broader inquiry into whether the circumstances of the offenses supported granting or denying the instant motion. See State v. Naone, 92 Hawai# i 289, 
307, 990 P.2d 1171, 1189 (App. 1999) ("It . . . behooves a 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defendant whose DANC plea is accepted to acknowledge 
responsibility for his or her actions and strictly comply with the terms and conditions of a DANC plea order. If a defendant is unwilling to do this, he or she is perhaps not a good candidate for a DANC plea."). 
Based on our review of the entire record in this case, 
we reject Satoafaiga's argument that the Circuit Court inappropriately used her failure to admit guilt and accept responsibility for both charged and uncharged conduct against her. 
Finally, Satoafaiga argues that the Circuit Court 
improperly excluded her offenses from eligibility for deferral under HRS § 853-1. This argument is without merit. The record clearly shows that the court did not find Satoafaiga unfit for deferral based on the class of her offenses, but rather on the specific circumstances surrounding their commission. The Circuit Court fully considered Satoafaiga's Motion for DANC in light of the specific circumstances of the offenses underlying the plea and conviction. Indeed, prior to the court's discussion of the HRS § 853-1(a) factors, the Court expressly acknowledged that Satoafaiga is not excepted from eligibility for deferral under the statute. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's January 22, 2020 
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 11, 2021. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge Hayden Aluli, for Defendant-Appellant. 
Richard B. Rost, Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Maui, for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
11 