NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000601 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
CYNTHIA L. SHER, Defendant-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
KONA DIVISION 
(CR. NO. 3FFC-17-0000064) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai# i (State) appeals 
from the "Order Granting Defendant's Motion to Dismiss For Penal 
Summons Issued Absent Probable Cause Supported By Oath or Affirmation, Complaint Lacking Supporting Affidavit, and Improper Arraignment" (D
ismissal Order), entered on July 11, 2017, by the 
Family Court of the Third Circuit (Family Court).1 The Dismissal 
Order dismissed the Complaint against Defendant-Appellee Cynthia L. Sher (Sher) without prejudice. 
On February 13, 2017, the State filed the Complaint 
charging Sher with Abuse of a Family or Household Member, in 
1 The Honorable Aley K. Auna presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 709-906(1) (2014 & 
Supp. 2019) (Complaint). A penal summons was also issued to 
Sher. Following Sher's appearance in court and a subsequent 
motion, the Family Court dismissed the Complaint without prejudice on the grounds that the Complaint was not signed by the complainant under oath or made by declaration under the rules of court, in violation of HRS § 805-1  and Hawai# i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (
HRPP) Rule 5(b)(1). 32
2 HRS § 805-1 (2014) provides: 
Complaint; form of warrant. When a complaint is
made to any prosecuting officer of the commission of
any offense, the prosecuting officer shall examine thecomplainant, shall reduce the substance of thecomplaint to writing, and shall cause the complaint tobe subscribed by the complainant under oath, which theprosecuting officer is hereby authorized toadminister, or the complaint shall be made bydeclaration in accordance with the rules of court. If the original complaint results from the issuance of atraffic summons or a citation in lieu of an arrest pursuant to section 803-6, by a police officer, theoath may be administered by any police officer whosename has been submitted to the prosecuting officer andwho has been designated by the chief of police toadminister the oath, or the complaint may be submittedby declaration in accordance with the rules of court.Upon presentation of the written complaint to thejudge in whose circuit the offense allegedly has beencommitted, the judge shall issue a warrant, recitingthe complaint and requiring the sheriff, or otherofficer to whom it is directed, except as provided insection 805-3, to arrest the accused and to bring theaccused before the judge to be dealt with according tolaw; and in the same warrant the judge may require theofficer to summon such witnesses as are named in the warrant to appear and give evidence at the trial. The warrant may be in the form established by the usageand practice of the issuing court. 
3 HRPP Rule 5(b)(1) provides, in relevant part: 
ARRAIGNMENT. In the district court, if the
offense charged against the defendant is other than afelony, the complaint shall be filed and proceedingsshall be had in accordance with this section (b). A copy of the complaint, including any affidavits insupport thereof, and a copy of the appropriate order,if any, shall be furnished to the defendant. . . .When the offense is charged by complaint, arraignmentshall be in open court, or by video conference whenpermitted by Rule 43. The arraignment shall consistof the reading of the complaint to the defendant and
(continued...) 
2 3(...continued)NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State contends that the Family Court erred in 
dismissing the Complaint on the stated grounds. The State argues 
that: (1) the Complaint complied with HRS § 805-1 and HRPP Rule 7 because it was signed by the prosecutor;  (2) an affidavit in 
support of the Complaint was not required under HRPP Rule 5(b)(1); and (3) a penal summons is distinguishable from a warrant, as a penal summons does not require a probable cause determination in accordance with HRPP Rules 5 and 9.
 54
Upon careful review of the record and briefs submitted 
by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments and issues they raise, as well as the relevant legal 
calling upon the defendant to plead thereto. . . . The
defendant may waive the reading of the complaint . . .at arraignment . . . . In addition to the requirements of Rule 10(e), the court shall, inappropriate cases, inform the defendant of the rightto jury trial in the circuit court and that thedefendant may elect to be tried without a jury in thedistrict court. 
4 HRPP Rule 7(d) provides, in relevant part: 
Nature and contents . The charge shall be a
plain, concise and definite statement of the essentialfacts constituting the offense charged. . . . A complaint shall be signed by the prosecutor. The charge need not contain a formal conclusion or anyother matter not necessary to such statement. . . .Formal defects . . . shall not be ground for dismissalof the charge or for reversal of a conviction if thedefect did not prejudice the defendant. 
5 HRPP Rule 9(a) provides, in relevant part: 
(1) SUMMONS. Upon request of the prosecutor, the
clerk shall issue a summons for a defendant named (i) in thecomplaint. . . . 
(2) WARRANT. The court may order issuance of a
warrant instead of a summons upon request of the prosecutor;provided however, that no warrant shall issue: (i) Upon acomplaint unless it appears from the sworn complaint, orfrom affidavit(s) or declaration(s) filed with thecomplaint, that there is probable cause to believe that anoffense has been committed and that the defendant has committed it. . . . 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
authority, we resolve the State's points of error as follows, and 
we vacate and remand.6 
Sher argued, and the Family Court ruled, that the 
Complaint was fatally defective under HRS § 805-1 because it was not signed by the complainant under oath or made by declaration in accordance with the rules of court. The State argues that the Complaint complied with HRS § 805-1 and HRPP Rule 7(d) because it was signed by the prosecutor. This court recently examined this issue in State v. Thompson, No. CAAP-17-0000361, 2020 WL 1970772 (Hawai# i App. Apr. 24, 2020). In Thompson, we considered the 
legislative intent of HRS § 805-1 and concluded the Family Court erred in dismissing the complaint on the ground that it was neither signed by the complainant under oath nor made by declaration in accordance with the rules of court. Id. at *4-6. 
This case has nearly identical facts as Thompson. 
Here, as in Thompson, it is undisputed that Sher was 
served a copy of the Complaint and a penal summons, and appeared at Family Court for arraignment. It is undisputed that the Complaint was not subscribed by a complainant under oath. However, as in Thompson, we conclude the Family Court erred by dismissing the Complaint on the ground that it was neither signed by the complainant under oath nor made by declaration in accordance with the rules of court. As Thompson held, a complaint is not fatally defective where there was no arrest warrant issued and the complaint was signed by the prosecutor in 
6 As raised by Sher in her answering brief, the State's opening brief
is deficient in regard to the requirements of Rule 28 of the Hawai #i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure ( HRAP ). 
The State failed to identify the allegedly
erroneous finding or conclusion of the Family Court in its points of error,
and failed to provide citations to the record relied upon in the argument, inaccordance with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(C) and 28(b)(7), respectively. In addition, the State appended the incorrect order for an unrelated case insteadof the Dismissal Order at issue in its appeal. However, Hawai #i appellate
courts seek to address appeals on the merits to the extent that we can discernthe arguments raised. See Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 Hawai #i 490, 496, 280 P.3d
88, 94 (2012). 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
compliance with HRPP Rule 7(d). See Thompson, 2020 WL 1970772, 
at *5-6. 
It is also undisputed that no affidavits or 
declarations in support of the Complaint were provided to Sher at 
arraignment. Again, as in Thompson, the Complaint was not the basis for an arrest warrant and no arrest warrant was issued. Neither HRPP Rule 5(b)(1) nor HRPP Rule 9 required the State to furnish Sher with an affidavit under the circumstances. The Family Court erred in dismissing the Complaint on the ground that no supporting affidavit was provided to Sher at the time of her arraignment. See Thompson, 2020 WL 1970772, at *7. 
Finally, the State argues that the Family Court erred 
in dismissing this case for lack of a probable cause determination and for considering a penal summons case similar to a case where an arrest warrant was issued. As discussed in Thompson, HRPP Rule 9(a) distinguishes a penal summons from an arrest warrant and requires a probable cause showing for issuance of a warrant, but not for issuance of a penal summons. Thompson, 
2020 WL 1970772, at *7 (noting the complaint was not the basis for an arrest warrant, and no arrest warrant was issued). Here, Sher was issued a penal summons, and not an arrest warrant. Hence, as in Thompson, we conclude the Family Court erred in dismissing the case for lack of a probable cause determination when none was required.
7 
Therefore, we vacate the "Order Granting Defendant's 
Motion to Dismiss For Penal Summons Issued Absent Probable Cause Supported By Oath or Affirmation, Complaint Lacking Supporting Affidavit, and Improper Arraignment," entered on July 11, 2017, 
7 We note that the penal summons in this case states, in part: "If you
fail to appear, a warrant of arrest shall be issued for you." In making their
arguments on appeal, neither party relies on or references this language inthe penal summons. Moreover, the record reflects that no arrest was made andno warrant was issued. We therefore do not address any issue regarding thislanguage in the penal summons. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by the Family Court of the Third Circuit. We remand this case 
for proceedings consistent with this order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 29, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
Charles E. Murray, III,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Phyllis J. Hironaka,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellee. /s/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
6 