         
  
      
         
         
    
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACI FIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000280 24-JUL-2025 08:40 AM Dkt. 54 SO 
NO.  CAAP-23-0000280 
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE  COURT  OF  APPEALS 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
ERIC  YOUN,  Claimant-Appellant-Appellant,  v. 
STATE  OF  HAWAI I,  DEPARTMENT   OF  LABOR   AND  INDUSTRIAL  RELATIONS, 
EMPLOYMENT  SECURITY  APPEALS  REFEREES'  OFFICE, 
Respondent-Appellee-Appellee 
APPEAL  FROM  THE  CIRCUIT  COURT  OF  THE  FIRST  CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL  NO.  1CCV-22-0001074) 
SUMMARY  DISPOSITION  ORDER 
(By:   Leonard,   Presiding   Judge,  Hiraoka   and  Wadsworth,   JJ.) 
Claimant-Appellant-Appellant  Eric  Youn  (Youn)  appeals  
from  the  March  8,  2023  Final  Judgment  (Judgment )  entered  by  the 
Circuit  Court  of  the  First  Circuit  (Circuit   Court).  Youn  also 
challenges  the  Circuit  Court's  March  8,  2023  Order  Affirming 
Employment  Security  Appeals  Referees'  Office's  [(ESARO's )] 
Decision  2201667  (Reopened)  Dated  August  4,  2022  (Order  Affirming 
Decision ). 1 
Youn  raises  a  single  point  of  error  on  appeal, 
contending   that  the  Circuit  Court  erred  in  affirming   ESARO's 
August  4,  2022  Decision  in  the  Matter  of:   2201667  (Reopened) 
(ESARO  Decision )  because  the  method  of  calculating  Youn's  wages 
was  incorrect. 
Upon careful
 review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Youn's 
point of error as follows: 
1 The Honorable James H. Ashford presided.          
      
       
          
          
         
         
 
 
     
         
         
      
         
         
          
           
          
          
          
   
      
         
           
          
           
            
        
        
        
        
        
          
 
       
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Youn  argues  that  he  met  the  requirement  of  being 
unemployed  for  the  weeks  in  question. 
Hawaii  Revised  Statutes  (HRS)  ยง  383-1  (2015)  provides, 
in  part: 
"Unemployment". An individual shall be deemed 
"unemployed" in any week during which the individual 
performs no services and with respect to which no wages are 
payable to the individual, or in any week of less than 
full-time work if the wages payable to the individual with 
respect to such week are less than the individual's weekly 
benefit amount. 
(Emphasis added). 
Youn's
 claim for unemployment insurance benefits 
(Benefits ) was based on the latter (underlined) clause. However, 
the State of Hawai i Department  of Labor and Industrial Relations 
(DLIR), Unemployment Insurance Division (UID), determined that 
Youn was not entitled to Benefits during certain periods because 
he was not unemployed during those periods. Specifically, UID 
determined Youn was not entitled to Benefits for the weeks ending 
on February 22, 2020, to March 28, 2020; June 6, 2020, to 
August 29, 2020; and October 10, 2020, to February 27, 2021, 
because he earned more than his weekly benefit amount of $648, 
based on the weekly earnings reported by Youn's employer. Youn 
appealed and ESARO affirmed. 
Youn works as Contributing Faculty at Walden 
University, LLC (Walden) and testified that he is paid monthly 
and by the task, rather than having an hourly rate provided by 
his employer. Youn calculates his weekly income using a formula 
of his own creation, which he revises every two years to account 
for changes in how much Walden pays for a given task. Youn's 
testimony concerning his earnings was deemed not credible based 
on information provided by Walden that showed Youn significantly 
underreported his earnings for the subject periods. Youn 
testified that he experienced "connectivity issues" with the DLIR 
website, which affected his ability to accurately report his 
weekly wages, or that the underreporting may have been due to 
server error. 
Ultimately, ESARO explained its reasoning in the ESARO 
Decision, stating in part: 
2          
         
          
        
       
        
           
        
        
        
         
       
      
         
         
         
       
                     
         
        
      
   
       
       
       
          
     
  
     
 
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Youn] argued he used a formula for calculating his weekly 
gross earnings. He argued he did not know about any 
discrepancy between the earnings he reported on his weekly 
claim certifications and the amounts [Walden] actually paid 
him until approximately March 2021, when the UID stopped 
paying him benefits and alerted him. He argued he did not 
discover the discrepancy earlier because he did not check 
his formula or check his monthly earnings statements from 
[Walden] to ensure the accuracy of his weekly claims 
certifications. He argued on appeal that he had provided 
the information on his amended weekly claims certifications 
originally, but somehow, "connectivity issues" prevented the 
amended information from being recorded. He argued to the 
UID claims examiner that the discrepancy was caused by his 
rushing and hunting for Wi-Fi. He argued he subsequently 
amended his weekly claim certifications based on his 
personal work records. He argued dividing his monthly gross 
earnings by the 4 or 5 weeks in a particular month would not 
yield an accurate result. However, [Youn] never offered any 
alternative amounts other than what he provided on his 
weekly claim certifications and amended weekly claim 
certifications. . . . 
Although [Youn] and [Walden] both provided information about 
[Youn's] weekly gross earnings, [Youn's] testimony could not 
be credited since it was determined [Youn's] testimony 
regarding his weekly gross earnings was false. . . . Hence, 
credibility was accorded to [Walden's] evidence. 
The record  supports  the Circuit  Court's  determination
that  ESARO's  findings,  including  that  Youn  was  not  unemployed 
during  the  subject  periods,  are  not  clearly  erroneous.   On  this 
record,  we  will  not  disturb  ESARO's  assessment  that  Youn  was  not 
credible.   Accordingly,  we  conclude  that  the  Circuit  Court  did 
not  err  in  entering  the  Order  Affirming  Decision.        
Therefore, the Circuit Court's March 8, 2023 Judgment 
is affirmed. 
DATED:
 Honolulu, Hawai i, July  24, 2025. 
On  the  briefs: /s/  Katherine  G.  Leonard 
Presiding  Judge 
Pablo  P.  Quiban, 
for  Claimant-Appellant- /s/  Keith  K.  Hiraoka 
Appellant. Associate  Judge 
Li-Ann  Yamashiro, /s/  Clyde  J.  Wadsworth 
Carissa  A.  Goto, Associate  Judge  
Deputy  Attorneys  General, 
for  Respondent-Appellee-
Appellee. 
3
 