NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0001242
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JEANNE CADAWAS AND ROBERT RAPOSAS, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
TWYUS PEAHU, CARL W. CABERTO, BUNNY MATTICE-CLEVENGER,
FUNDINGFORECLOSURE.COM, EMC MORTGAGE CORPORATION, MORTGAGE
ELECTRONIC REGISTRATION SYSTEM, INC., JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES
1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS, PARTNERSHIPS AND OTHER ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0085)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs/Counterclaim Defendants/Appellants Jeanne
 
Cadawas (Cadawas) and Robert Raposas (Raposas) (collectively
 
Appellants) appeal from a "Final Judgment in Favor of Defendant
 U.S. Bank, N.A., on U.S. Bank, N.A.'s Second Claim for Relief in
 its Counterclaim" (Judgment) filed May 1, 2013, in the Circuit
 
1
Court of the Fifth Circuit (circuit court)  pursuant to Hawai 'i 
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 54(b). 
The circuit court entered judgment in favor of
 
Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff/Cross Claim Plaintiff/Appellee
 U.S. Bank, National Association, Successor Trustee to Bank of
 America, National Association, as Successor by Merger to LaSalle
 Bank National Association, as Trustee for Certificate Holders of
 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Bear Stearns Asset Backed Securities I LLC, Asset Backed
 
2
Certificates, Series 2006-HEI (U.S. Bank)  and against, in
3
pertinent part, the Appellants  after determining that there were
no genuine issues of material fact that U.S. Bank is the owner
 and holder of two promissory notes and accompanying valid and
 subsisting mortgage liens on the subject property, and all
 claims, rights, title and interest of the other parties are
 junior, inferior, subject to, and otherwise subordinate to the
 interests of U.S. Bank.
4
 
The Appellants contend that the circuit court erred in
 
granting summary judgment because (1) there are genuine issues of
 material fact whether U.S. Bank is legally entitled to enforce
 the promissory notes and mortgages, and (2) the court relied on
 inadmissible evidence.
5
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve the
 Appellants' points of error as follows and affirm. 
The overall circumstances of this case are fairly
 
complex with multiple claims, counterclaims, and cross-claims in
 this multi-party lawsuit. However, this appeal only addresses
 the HRCP Rule 54(b) judgment as to U.S. Bank's second claim for
 
2 On May 27, 2009, the circuit court certified Bank of America,
National Association as Successor by Merger to LaSalle Bank National
Association, as Trustee for Certificate Holders of Bear Stearns Asset Backed
Securities I LLC, Asset Backed Certificates, Series 2006-HEI (Bank of
America), as DOE Corporation No. 2. On November 4, 2009, Bank of America
filed the counterclaim/cross-claim at issue in this appeal. On March 30,
2012, Bank of America filed a Notice of Name Change, in which it informed the
court that, effective January 20, 2011, its name is U.S. Bank, the identified
appellee in this appeal.
3
 Judgment was also entered against Defendant/Counterclaim
Plaintiff/Cross-Claim Plaintiff/Cross Claim Defendant/Appellee Carl W. Caberto
and Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant/Appellee Bunny Mattice-Clevenger. 
4
 On November 4, 2009, Bank of America filed a joint counterclaim and
cross-claim, and the second claim for relief is both a counterclaim against
the Appellants and a cross-claim against other named defendants.
5
 The Appellants' points of error in their opening brief do not comply
with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4). The 
Appellants' counsel is cautioned to comply with HRAP 28(b)(4). 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
relief.6
 
The Appellants contend that the circuit court erred in
 
granting U.S. Bank's motion for partial summary judgment on its
 
second claim for relief because U.S. Bank did not sufficiently
 demonstrate, via admissible evidence, physical delivery and
 indorsement of both promissory notes at issue (referred to as
 "First Note" and "Second Note") as necessary to establish that
 U.S. Bank is a "person entitled to enforce" the notes pursuant to
 the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC).
7
 
U.S. Bank contends that it need not demonstrate that it 
is a person entitled to enforce the notes because the second claim for relief is not a claim to enforce the notes, but instead merely a claim for recognition of the validity of the mortgage liens. However, in the Judgment, the circuit court determined that U.S. Bank is the current "holder" of the First Note and Second Note, which means U.S. Bank is entitled to enforce the notes. In re Tyrell, 528 B.R. 790, 794 (Bankr. D. Haw. 2015), 
quoted in U.S. Bank N.A. v. Mattos, 137 Hawai
'i 209, 367 P.3d 703 
(App. 2016), cert. granted, No. SCWC-14-0001134, 2016 WL 3524989 (June 23, 2016) ("In order to enforce a note and mortgage under Hawaii law, a creditor must be 'a person entitled to enforce' the note. One person entitled to enforce an instrument is a 'holder' of the instrument." (Footnote omitted.)). Thus, whether U.S. Bank is a "holder" is relevant, and, based on the Appellants' arguments on appeal, the only issue challenged in this appeal.
8 
6 Bank of America (U.S. Bank) asserted eight (8) claims for relief: (1)
Misrepresentation; (2) Declaratory Relief; (3) Judicial Foreclosure; (4)
Contribution/Indemnity; (5) Constructive Trust; (6) Breach of Warranty; (7)
Breach of Contract; and (8) Punitive Damages. Only claims 2, 3, and 5 were
asserted against Appellants. 
7
 Based on our conclusion below that U.S. Bank met its burden to
 
demonstrate that no genuine issue of material fact existed as to its status as
holder of the First Note and Second Note, we need not consider any argument
related to the assignment of mortgages in this case because transfer of the
notes carried the mortgages with it. Carpenter v. Longan, 83 U.S. (16 Wall.)
271, 274 (1872); In re Veal, 450 B.R. 897, 916 (B.A.P. 9th Cir. 2011). 
8
 The Appellants do not appear to make any arguments addressing the
circuit court's determinations that both of the mortgages are valid and
subsisting mortgage liens on the subject property; and that the claims,
rights, title and interest, if any, of, in pertinent part, the Appellants are
(continued...)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We review the circuit court's grant or denial of
summary judgment de novo. Hawai'i Community Federal Credit 
Union v. Keka, 94 Hawai' i 213, 221, 11 P.3d 1, 9 (2000). The
standard for granting a motion for summary judgment is
settled:
 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,

depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material if
proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most
favorable to the non-moving party. In other words, we
must view all of the evidence and the inferences drawn
 therefrom in the light most favorable to the party
opposing the motion.
 
Id. (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).
 
Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai 'i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005) 
(brackets omitted). 
The burden is on the party moving for summary judgment
(moving party) to show the absence of any genuine issue as
to all material facts, which, under applicable principles of
substantive law, entitles the moving party to judgment as a
matter of law. This burden has two components.
 
First, the moving party has the burden of producing support
for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material fact
exists with respect to the essential elements of the claim
or defense which the motion seeks to establish or which the
 motion questions; and (2) based on the undisputed facts, it
is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law. Only
when the moving party satisfies its initial burden of
production does the burden shift to the non-moving party to
respond to the motion for summary judgment and demonstrate
specific facts, as opposed to general allegations, that
present a genuine issue worthy of trial.
 
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of
persuasion. This burden always remains with the moving party
and requires the moving party to convince the court that no
genuine issue of material fact exists and that the moving
part[y] is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law.
 
Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111 Hawai 'i 286, 
295-96, 141 P.3d 459, 468-69 (2006)(block format omitted)(quoting
 
French v. Hawaii Pizza Hut, Inc., 105 Hawai 'i 462, 470, 99 P.3d 
1046, 1054 (2004)).
 
In terms of U.S. Bank's status as "holder", the First
 
8(...continued)
junior, inferior, subject to, and otherwise subordinate to the mortgages.
These issues are therefore waived. Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure
(HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Note and Second Note are negotiable instruments subject to the 
UCC, adopted in Hawai 'i as Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 
490. See HRS § 490:3-104 (2008) (defining negotiable
 
instrument). A "holder" is "[t]he person in possession of a
 negotiable instrument that is payable either to bearer or to an
 identified person that is the person in possession[.]" HRS 
§ 490:1-201(b) (2008). 
In support of its motion for partial summary judgment,
 
U.S. Bank submitted copies of both notes. The First Note and
 Second Note are made payable "to the order of" Mortgage Loan
 Specialists, Inc. (MLS). The Appellants contend that U.S. Bank
 has not demonstrated via admissible evidence an indorsement or
 other transfer of rights in the First Note or Second Note from
 MLS to any other person or entity, or from any person or entity
 to U.S. Bank. The Appellants contend that the First Note and
 Second Note only provide that they are payable to the order of
 MLS, and neither includes any indorsements or allonges to a third
 party.
 
Contrary to the Appellants' latter contention, attached
 
9
to both notes is an allonge  that contains an indorsement in the
name of MLS by Patsy Rackleff (Rackleff), identified as "EVP,
 CCO." "An instrument payable to an identified person may become
 payable to bearer if it is indorsed in blank pursuant to section
 490:3-205(b)." HRS § 490:3-109(c) (2008). "If an indorsement is
 made by the holder of an instrument and it is not a special
 indorsement, it is a 'blank indorsement.' When indorsed in
 blank, an instrument becomes payable to bearer and may be
 negotiated by transfer of possession alone until specially
 
10
 indorsed." HRS § 490:3-205(b) (2008); HRS § 490:3-201(b). 
9
 "An 'allonge' is defined as 'a slip of paper sometimes attached to a
negotiable instrument for the purpose of receiving further indorsements when
the original paper is filled with indorsements.'" Mortg. Elec. RegistrationSys., Inc. v. Wise, 130 Hawai' i 11, 14 n.6, 304 P.3d 1192, 1195 n.6 (2013)
(quoting Allonge, Black's Law Dictionary (9th ed. 2009). 
10 "If an indorsement is made by the holder of an instrument, whether
payable to an identified person or payable to bearer, and the indorsement
identifies a person to whom it makes the instrument payable, it is a 'special
indorsement'. When specially indorsed, an instrument becomes payable to the
(continued...)
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"For the purpose of determining whether a signature is made on an
 
instrument, a paper affixed to the instrument is a part of the
 instrument." HRS § 490:3-204(a) (2008). "An indorsement on an
 allonge is valid even though there is sufficient space on the
 instrument for an indorsement." U.C.C. § 3-204, cmt 1 (2002). 
The signature of Patsy Rackleff, which was not a special
 indorsement, was a blank indorsement and rendered the notes
 bearer paper which may be negotiated by transfer of possession
 alone.
 
The Appellants contend that the First Note, Second
 
Note, and allonges were not admissible due to lack of proper
 foundation. We reject the Appellants' argument. In support of
 their motion for partial summary judgment, U.S. Bank submitted
 the declaration of Shari Middlebrooks, Assistant Vice President
 for J.P. Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. Middlebrooks declared that J.P.
 Morgan Chase is the attorney-in-fact for U.S. Bank; she made the
 declaration based on her personal knowledge; she reviewed the
 loan files and records of EMC Mortgage Corporation (EMC) as
 servicing agent for U.S. Bank related to the pertinent loans,
 which are kept in the ordinary course of business and are
 business records; and the attached exhibits were "true and
 correct" copies of the First Note and Second Note. The
 Appellants do not dispute that the First Note and Second Note
 were executed in favor of MLS and do not raise a genuine question
 as to the authenticity of the originals of the notes. Thus, the
 copies of the notes were admissible. See Hawaii Rules of
 
Evidence (HRE) Rules 803(b)(6) and 1003. Next, the Appellants
 contend that Middlebrooks' declaration does not lay sufficient
 foundation to admit the allonges because "there is no apparent or
 demonstrated relationship between J.P. Morgan Chase Bank and the
 parties to the allonges." This contention is without merit
 because Middlebrooks attested to the relationship between J.P.
 Morgan Chase and U.S. Bank, the current holder of bearer paper,
 and declared that the submitted exhibits were allonges "affixed"
 
10(...continued)
identified person and may be negotiated only by the indorsement of that
person." HRS § 490:3-205(a). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to the notes that were part of the business records.
 
Because the notes were indorsed in blank, they could be
 
negotiated via transfer of possession. To demonstrate possession
 
of the First Note and Second Note, U.S. Bank submitted two
 declarations in support of its motion for partial summary
 judgment. Middlebrooks declared that, upon her review of
 business records of EMC as servicing agent for U.S. Bank, which
 are kept in the ordinary course of business, U.S. Bank is the
 current holder and owner of the First Note and Second Note. 
Additionally, Brandon M. Segal, attorney for U.S. Bank, declared
 that "[o]n behalf of U.S. Bank, my office is in possession,
 custody and control of" the First Note and Second Note.
11 Based
 
on this evidence, U.S. Bank met its initial burden under the
 summary judgment standard and the burden shifted to the
 Appellants to demonstrate the existence of genuine issues of
 material fact regarding U.S. Bank's status as holder. 
Appellants do not provide any counter evidence. 
Rather, Appellants contend that U.S. Bank failed to demonstrate a
 chain of possession of the First Note and Second Note from MLS to
 U.S. Bank. For instance, the Appellants contend that there is no
 documentary evidence of the purported November 21, 2005
 assignment of the notes and mortgages from MLS to EMC (who
 allegedly subsequently transferred the notes and mortgages to a
 predecessor trustee to U.S. Bank). However, this argument does
 not raise a genuine issue of material fact. In this case,
 Rackleff, identified as "EVP, CCO" for MLS, indorsed, or signed
 the instrument for the purpose of negotiating the notes, in
 blank. HRS § 490:3-204; HRS § 490:3-109(c); HRS § 490:3-205(b);
 HRS § 490:3-201(b). The notes thus became bearer paper and any
 
11 The Appellants contend that U.S. Bank has failed to produce any
evidence that Bank of America, see fn. 2, supra, was entitled to enforce the
First Note and Second Note at the time it filed the counterclaim. The
 
Appellants further contend that there is no evidence that Bank of America, as
trustee, ever transferred its purported interest to U.S. Bank, as successor
trustee, such that U.S. Bank is entitled to enforce the notes. We reject the
Appellants' contention because (1) the notes were indorsed in blank and thus
could be negotiated by transfer of possession alone; (2) Bank of America was
certified as a doe defendant at the request of the Appellants because it was
the purported current holder of the notes; (3) Bank of America attached copies
of the First Note and Second Note to the counterclaim; and (4) the evidence
demonstrates that U.S. Bank is the current holder.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
subsequent negotiation was accomplished by transfer of possession
 
alone. U.S. Bank has established that it is the current holder
 of the First Note and Second Note, thus the notes have been
 transferred.
12
 
The Appellants have not demonstrated that there exists
 
a genuine issues of material fact regarding U.S. Bank's status as
 holder of the First Note and Second Note. The circuit court did
 not err.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Final
 
Judgment in Favor of Defendant U.S. Bank, N.A., on U.S. Bank,
 N.A.'s Second Claim for Relief in its Counterclaim," filed on May
 1, 2013, in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 24, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Derek R. Kobayashi,
Lauren U. VanBuren,(Matthew A. Hemme on the briefs),(Schlack Ito)George J. Zweibel,for Plaintiffs-Appellants. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge 
Jade Lynne Ching,
Brandon M. Segal,(Alston Hunt Floyd and Ing),for Defendant-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
12 The Appellants' contention that the doctrine of judicial estoppel
precludes U.S. Bank from contending that the First Note and Second Note were
bearer paper was not raised until the reply brief and is thus arguably waived.In re Hawaiian Flour Mills, Inc., 76 Hawai' i 1, 14 n.5, 868 P.2d 419, 432 n.5
(1994). In any event, Appellants' contention that the doctrine of judicialestoppel precludes U.S. Bank from contending that the First Note and SecondNote were bearer paper is without merit. U.S. Bank's assertion that the FirstNote and Second Note were endorsed in blank and were bearer paper was raisedin the Circuit Court and was not incompatible with other positions taken byU.S. Bank. Appellants have not shown that the doctrine of judicial estoppel
must or should be applied. See Langer v. Rice, No. 29636, 2013 WL 5788676, at
*4-5 (Haw. Oct. 28, 2013) (mem.). 
8
 