 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000056
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JOHN ALBERT WAGNER, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-001K)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise and Leonard, JJ.,
with Nakamura, C.J., concurring separately.)
 
Defendant-Appellant John Albert Wagner, Jr. (Wagner),
 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered by
 
the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court) on
 November 19, 2012.
1 This case arises out of the execution of a
 
search warrant conducted on December 23, 2010 at Wagner's
 residence.
 
2 3
 On appeal, Wagner argues pro se that the Circuit Court
 
1 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided.
 
2 Wagner did not file his appeal within thirty days after entry of
the November 19, 2012 judgment as required by Hawai' i Rules of Appellate
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 4(b)(1) and (3). Instead, his notice of appeal was
filed on January 29, 2013. The Circuit Court's minutes indicate that, onDecember 19, 2012, the Circuit Court granted Wagner's request for extension oftime to file his appeal until February 8, 2013. However, the Circuit Courtwas not authorized to grant a continuance for filing a notice of appeal formore than 30 days. HRAP Rule 4(b)(5). 
Nevertheless, "[i]n criminal cases, [the Supreme Court of Hawai' i]
ha[s] made exceptions to the requirement that notices of appeal be timelyfiled." State v. Irvine, 88 Hawai' i 404, 407, 967 P.2d 236, 239 (1998); State
v. Allen, 2 Haw. App. 606, 612-13, 638 P.2d 338, 343 (1981). Therefore, we
will address Wagner's appeal on the merits.
 
3
 On November 25, 2013, after Wagner's appointed counsel, Teresa D.
Morrison (Morrison), filed an opening brief and the State filed its answering
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
erred when it (1) denied his motion to suppress evidence because
 
(a) the search warrant was improper as to form; (b) probable
 cause to issue the warrant was lacking; (c) the executing officer
 did not satisfy the requirements of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 § 803-37 (2014); and (d) the executing officer did not permit
 Wagner to be present during the search; (2) allowed presentation
 to the jury of Wagner's stipulation that he had a prior
 conviction; (3) limited his cross-examination of the police
 officer who led the investigation; (4) denied his motion to
 compel disclosure of the police informant's identity where there
 was testimony that a male individual was at Wagner's residence
 shortly before the execution of the warrant; (5) accepted the
 jury's guilty verdict when there was insufficient evidence to
 convict; (6) permitted biased jurors to be empaneled; (7) did not
 instruct the jury as to prior bad acts evidence prior to
 testimony; and (8) it abused its discretion. Wagner also claims
 (9) prosecutorial misconduct; and (10) that he did not have
 effective assistance of counsel.
 
After a careful review of the issues raised and the
 
arguments made by the parties, the record on appeal, and the
 relevant legal authority, we resolve Wagner's issues as follows
 and affirm.
 
1. THE MOTION TO SUPPRESS EVIDENCE.
 
Wagner's points of error A-D challenge the Circuit
 
Court's decision to deny his Motion To Suppress. Although Wagner
 
does not challenge any of the Circuit Court's findings of fact or
 
3(...continued)
brief, Morrison filed on Wagner's behalf, the "Second Motion to Withdraw as

Counsel" based in part on Wagner's claim Morrison provided ineffective
assistance of counsel. On December 18, 2013, this court granted Wagner's
motion, remanding this case to the Circuit Court to hear and determine a
motion for withdrawal and substitution of counsel. In the meanwhile, Wagner,
without leave of court, filed his December 17, 2013 "Pro Se Supplemental Brief
to Openning [sic] Brief of Defendant/Appellate [sic]."
 
On January 22, 2014, the Circuit Court excused Morrison as
attorney of record but appointed her as standby counsel for the purpose of
assisting Wagner. By order dated February 24, 2014, and amended by order of
March 12, 2014, this court authorized Wagner to file an amended supplemental
brief to replace the unauthorized December 17, 2013 Supplemental brief. This
 court eventually extended the time for filing Wagner's amended supplemental
brief to August 8, 2014. On July 22, 2014, Wagner filed his "Opening Brief"
(Opening Brief) pro se. We therefore address Wagner's issues as presented in
his Opening Brief.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclusions of law by citation to the Record on Appeal or
 
quotation, he does identify the proceedings he believes are at
 issue by citation to the transcripts of hearings held on July 30,
 2012 and December 28, 2011 giving some specificity to his
 arguments. The July 30, 2012 hearing concerned two motions to
 suppress. The first concerned Wagner's challenge to the
 execution of the search warrant. The second was based on his
 challenge to the form of the warrant. We address the latter
 first.
 
A. Challenge to the search warrant's form.
 
Wagner argues that defects in the form of the search
 
warrant rendered it void. 
Specifically, Wagner asserts that the
 
"affidavit used to produce the search warrant does not bear the
 
magistrate's official designation[ 4
] nor is the affidavit
notarized or impress [sic] with the seal of the court" and has

 
only been rubber stamped with the word "SEAL." Wagner relies on
 
5
HRS § 803-34 (2014)  and Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) 
Rule 41.6
 
4 Wagner cites here to Exhibit C, one of twenty-eight exhibits
attached to his Opening Brief. However, as many, if not most of these
exhibits appear to be excerpts of documents and in any event do not indicate
whether they are part of the record on appeal by citation to the record, they
will be disregarded, except in those instances where the exhibit bears indicia
that it is an accurate copy of a document contained in the record. HRAP
 Rule 28(b)(10). For example, Exhibit C appears to be the first page of the
Affidavit for Search Warrant, the last page of the warrant purporting to show
the issuing judge's signature, and the nine-page "Affidavit of Officer Erich
Jackson" (Officer Jackson) also labeled "Attachment 3." Wagner does not
provide record citations to where these documents may be found. Rather, he
states only that "[t]he affidavit provided from the discovery (HRPP rule 16)
appears to be misleading (see exhibit C) . . ." Therefore, Exhibit C will be
disregarded.
 
5
 
§ 803-34 Contents.  The warrant shall be in writing, signed
by the magistrate, with the magistrate's official designation,
directed to some sheriff or other officer of justice, and
commanding the sheriff or other officer to search for and bring
before the magistrate, the property of articles specified in the
affidavit, to be disposed of according to justice, and also to
bring before the magistrate for examination the person in whose
possession the property or article may be found.
 
6
 Rule 41. Search and Seizure.
 
. . . .
 
(c) Issuance and Contents. A warrant shall issue only
on an affidavit or affidavits sworn to before the judge and
establishing the grounds for issuing a warrant.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Wagner does not support his argument with record
 
references. Even if we were to consider Wagner's Exhibit C, it
 
does not support Wagner's position that the warrant and/or
 application was defective as to form as it shows the applying
 officer was duly sworn before the judge, identified as a judge of
 the District Court of the Third Circuit. Finally, neither HRPP
 Rule 41 nor HRS § 803-34, upon which Wagner relies, requires a
 seal of any type be affixed to the magistrate's signature. Thus,
 Wagner has not shown the search warrant is defective as to
 matters of form.
7
 
B. Probable cause for the issuance of the search warrant.
 
Wagner argues that the search warrant was not supported
 
by probable cause. Specifically, Wagner alleges (1) that the
 
affiant did not corroborate the informant's information; (2) that
 neither the affiant nor informant were within the residence to
 observe contraband or paraphernalia; and (3) that there was no
 basis for the informant's conclusion regarding the location of
 objects sought.
 
8
Wagner does not dispute  that the affidavit in support
of the search warrant averred that "the confidential informant

 
has purchased methamphetamine at the instruction of your affiant
 on previous occasions. Your affiant has corroborated said
 information [through] police investigations and other independent
 means[]" as quoted by the Circuit Court during the December 28,
 2011 hearing on his motion to suppress. Nor does he dispute that
 the affidavit averred the confidential informant participated in
 a controlled purchase of methamphetamine from Wagner. The
 Circuit Court also noted that the affidavit contained "statements
 
7 For the same reasons, we must reject Wagner's sub-argument that
his constitutional rights under the fourth amendment to the United States
Constitution and article I section 7 of the Hawai' i State Constitution were 
violated because state and federal statutory provisions--HRS §§ 803-34, 606.3,456-18, 803-32 and United States Code (USC) Title 28 § 638(c) ¶16 and 1 USC§ 114--were not complied with. 
8
 Indeed, Wagner attached, as Exhibit H to his June 27, 2011
Supplement to Defendant's Request for Franks Hearing, a copy of what appears
to be the officer's affidavit in support of the search warrant, which
corresponds to the Circuit Court's comments at the December 28, 2011 hearing.
This exhibit also reflects the affiant averred that a controlled purchase of
crystal methamphetamine by the confidential informant from Wagner at his
residence was conducted within five days of the affidavit.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the confidential informant states that Mr. Wagner
 
distributed ice from both his residence, located on Kumakani
 Street, and various vehicles he utilizes." Although the amount
 of U.S. currency used to purchase the narcotics was undisclosed,
 that fact is not material to the finding of probable cause for
 the warrant. Wagner's claim that the affidavit includes no
 information about the existence and type of narcotics purchased
 is also contradicted by the documents he relies on. The
 affidavit alleged facts sufficient to support the issuing court's
 conclusion of probable cause.
C. Execution of the search warrant.
 
Wagner argues that the Circuit Court erred when it
 
concluded Officer Jackson's execution of the search warrant

 
complied with HRS § 803-37.9
 
Wagner does not challenge the Circuit Court's Findings
 
of Fact underlying the challenged decision. "Findings of fact
 
that are unchallenged on appeal are the operative facts of a
 case." Cun-Lara v. State, 126 Hawai
'i 541, 544 n.5, 273 P.3d 
1227, 1230 n.5 (App. 2012) (citation and internal quotation marks
 omittted). The Circuit Court found, in relevant part, that
 
6.) [Officer Jackson] immediately exited the
passenger side of this vehicle and in a loud, clear voice
identified himself as a police officer, stating repeatedly
"police, search warrant, demand entry." The statements were
 directed towards [Wagner].
 
7.) During the suppression hearing, Officer Jackson
demonstrated the loud volume and tone of his voice when
 announcing "police, search warrant, demand entry."
 
9 § 803-37 Power of officer serving. The officer
 
charged with the warrant, if a house, store, or other
building is designated as the place to be searched,
may enter it without demanding permission if the
officer finds it open. If the doors are shut the
 
officer must declare the officer's office and the
 officer's business, and demand entrance. If the
 doors, gates, or other bars to the entrance are not
immediately opened, the officer may break them. When
 entered, the officer may demand that any other part of
the house, or any closet, or other closed place in
which the officer has reason to believe the property
is concealed, may be opened for the officer's
inspection, and if refused the officer may break them.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
5
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
8.) As Officer Jackson approached the lanai of the
Subject Residence and while making his announcement, he and
[Wagner] made direct eye contact with each other. [Wagner]
who was still standing on the lanai made no movement or
gesture of an intention to grant entry to the lanai.
 
9.) [Wagner's] testimony that he did not see any
vehicle pull up to his property is not credible and it is
inconceivable that he did not hear Officer Jackson announce
 "police, search warrant, demand entry."
 
. . . .
 
12.) [Wagner's] testimony that the police failed to
demand entry and failed to inform him of the existence of
the search warrant is not credible.
 
. . . .
 
17.) Mrs. Wagner's testimony that she could not hear
the knock and that it took her only a few seconds to get out
of bed and to the front of the house is not credible.
 
These facts are sufficient to support the Circuit 
Court's decision. HRS § 803-37; State v. Garcia, 77 Hawai 'i 461, 
465, 887 P.2d 671, 675 (App. 1995).
D.	 Wagner's right to be present during execution of the
warrant.
 
Wagner argues that he had the right "to be present and 
see from whence the contraband was obtained." Although Wagner 
apparently relies on HRS § 803-37 for this alleged right, the plain language of the statute does not support such a claim. Wagner also apparently relies on State v. Diaz, 100 Hawai
'i 210, 
229-30, 58 P.3d 1257 (2002) (dissenting opinion of Acoba, J.) and The King v. Ah Lou You, 3 Haw. 393 (1872), but without any explanation. Neither case stands for Wagner's asserted proposition. 
Wagner has not shown the Circuit Court erred in denying
 
his Motion to Suppress.
2.	 Introduction of the parties' stipulation regarding Wagner's
prior conviction.
 
Wagner also argues that the Circuit Court abused its 
discretion when it allowed reading to the jury the parties' 
stipulation regarding Wagner's prior felony conviction because it was "bad act" evidence, in violation of his rights under article 1, sections 5, 6, 7, and 14 of the Hawai
'i State 
Constitution. The record reflects that the Circuit Court 
6
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
followed the procedure mandated in State v. Murray, 116 Hawai 'i 
3, 169 P.3d 955 (2007), where a defendant also stipulated to a 
prior conviction for the same offense where such was an element of the current offense. There was no abuse of discretion here. 
3.	 Limitation of cross-examination of Officer Jackson about
 
Halemau and Pea pursuant to HRE Rule 404(b).
 
Wagner argues that the Circuit Court erred when it 
precluded defense counsel from cross-examining Officer Jackson 
about Halemau and Pea because (1) under Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b) "the admissibility of such evidence only pertains to the character of the accused, victim, and/or witness[;]" (2) the Circuit Court was required to conduct an HRE Rule 403 balancing test prior to ruling, the evidence was relevant and the State did not show it would be prejudiced by the evidence; and (3) the exclusion of this prior drug use evidence violated his right to confront witnesses under article 1, section 14 of the Hawai
'i State Constitution. 
First, by its plain language, the exclusion codified in 
10
HRE Rule 404(b)  applies to all "person[s]," and is not limited
to "the accused, victim, and/or witness" as asserted by Wagner.

 
He presents no authority supporting his contrary proposition. 
Moreover, Wagner does not demonstrate that he provided advance
 notice of his intent to use this evidence as required by HRE
 Rule 404(b). 
10	 Rule 404 Character evidence not admissible to prove
conduct; exceptions; other crimes.
 
. . . .
 
(b) Other crimes, wrongs, or acts. Evidence of other
 
crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the
character of a person in order to show action in conformity
therewith. It may, however, be admissible where such
evidence is probative of another fact that is of consequence
to the determination of the action, such as proof of motive,
opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity,
modus operandi, or absence of mistake or accident. In
 criminal cases, the proponent of evidence to be offered
under this subsection shall provide reasonable notice in
advance of trial, or during trial if the court excuses
pretrial notice on good cause shown, of the date, location,
and general nature of any such evidence it intends to
introduce at trial.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Second, without explanation, Wagner argues that, under
 
HRE Rule 403, admission of "[t]he evidence of Mr. Halemau's
 
history of drug use or selling was relevant under HRE 401 to
 Mr. Wagner's state of mind" and "such information in support of
 Mr. Wagner's defense would [have assisted] the jury in assessing
 the evidence and the location of where the items were retrieved." 
Wagner does not explain how Halemau's alleged history of drug use
 or sale is relevant to the trafficking and paraphernalia crimes
 with which Wagner was charged. Although Wagner claims there was
 evidence Halemau was at Wagner's residence prior to the execution
 of the warrant, he does not provide a citation for that evidence
 and Officer Jackson denied seeing Halemau during pre-execution
 surveillance. As Wagner failed to establish the relevancy of
 this evidence, there was no balancing necessary.
 
As to Pea, Wagner was allowed to question Officer
 
Jackson regarding Pea's prior law enforcement contacts involving
 drugs, that she was present at the residence on the date of the
 offense and was also arrested for the same methamphetamine and
 drug paraphernalia with which Wagner was arrested and, most
 importantly, pleaded guilty to charges stemming from the same,
 although Officer Jackson was not sure of the exact nature of
 those charges. Wagner was also allowed, without objection, to
 examine Officer Jackson about Pea's trustworthiness and his
 knowledge of Pea's drug use during the period of August through
 December 2010. Given this testimony, the exclusion of largely
 hearsay testimony regarding whether she traded sex for
 methamphetamine at some unspecified time, or was at a drug
 rehabilitation facility after this offense, or whether she smoked
 the drug on the date of the offense, was of marginal relevance
 and was cumulative. HRE Rules 401, 403.
 
Furthermore, the protections of the Confrontation
 
Clause are not absolute; they do not categorically prevent
 exclusion of any testimony a defendant wishes to elicit. State
 
v. Pond, 118 Hawai
'i 452, 465, 193 P.3d 368, 381 (2008) ("HRE 
Rule 404(b) is not per se unconstitutional even though it may restrict a defendant's constitutional right to confront an adverse witness.") 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion when it 
precluded defense counsel from limiting inquiry into the prior
 
bad acts of Halemau and Pea. 
4.	 Wagner's motion to compel the disclosure of the confidential
informant.
 
Wagner argues that the Circuit Court erred when it
 
denied his motion to compel the State to disclose the name of the
 
confidential informant because "the informant may have evidence
 to the testimony of guilt or innocence of the defendant."
 
HRE Rule 510
11 allows the prosecution to refuse
 
disclosure of the identity of a confidential informant, subject
 to exceptions. Wagner claims the exceptions in HRE Rule
 510(c)(2) and (3) apply. The prosecution submitted affidavits
 
11 Rule 510 Identity of informer.  (a) Rule of privilege. The
 
government or a state or subdivision thereof has a privilege to refuse to
disclose the identity of a person who has furnished information relating to or
assisting in an investigation of a possible violation of law to a law
enforcement officer or member of a legislative committee or its staff
conducting an investigation.
 
. . . .
 
(c)	 Exceptions.
 (1)	 Voluntary disclosure; informer a witness. No
 
privilege exists under this rule if the identity
of the informer or the informer's interest in
 the subject matter of the informer's
communication has been disclosed to those who
 would have cause to resent the communication by
a holder of the privilege or by the informer's
own action, or if the informer appears as a
witness for the government.
 
(2)	 Testimony on merits. If it appears from the
evidence in the case or from other showing by a
party that an informer may be able to give
testimony necessary to a fair determination of
the issue of guilt or innocence in a criminal
case or of a material issue on the merits in a
 civil case to which the government is a party,
and the government invokes the privilege, the
judge shall give the government an opportunity
to show in camera facts relevant to determining
whether the informer can, in fact, supply that
testimony. . . .
 
(3)	 Legality of obtaining evidence. If information
 from an informer is relied upon to establish the
legality of the means by which evidence was
obtained and the judge is not satisfied that the
information was received from an informer
 reasonably believed to be reliable or credible,
the judge may require the identity of the
informer to be disclosed. . . .
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for the Circuit Court's review, in camera. Thereafter, the
 
Circuit Court entered its order denying Wagner's motion, noted
 that Wagner is not seeking the identity of the confidential
 informant, but rather confirmation of his suspicion regarding the
 informant's identity, and in any event that there was "an absence
 of evidence that the confidential informant may be able to give
 testimony necessary to a fair determination of the issue of guilt
 or innocence" under HRE Rule 510(c)(2).
 
Upon our review of the materials submitted in camera,
 
we agree.
5. Sufficiency of the evidence.
 
Wagner argues that the sentence and judgment against
 
him "should be vacated due to insufficient evidence in the record
 that Mr. Wagner knowingly possess [sic] the contraband found."
 Wagner further argues that "multiple occupants occupied the room
 . . . [a]nd co-defendant Deshalynn Pea admitted to the charge"
 and advances reasons why various witnesses should or should not
 have been believed.
 
In reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence, a court 
must view the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution. State v. Tamura, 63 Haw. 636, 637, 633 P.2d 1115, 
1117 (1981). "The test on appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact." State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 
(1998) (block quote format and citation omitted). "It is the province of the jury, not the appellate courts, to determine the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence." State 
v. Smith, 106 Hawai
'i 365, 372, 105 P.3d 242, 249 (App. 2004). 
Wagner was charged with one count of Methamphetamine
 
Trafficking, which requires proof that he possessed an ounce or
 more of methamphetamine, and two counts of drug paraphernalia,
 which requires proof that he possessed zip packets, scales,
 straws, or glass pipes with the intent to use them to "plant,
 propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
 convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
 store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
introduce into the human body a controlled substance[.]" See HRS
 
§§ 712-1240.7 (2014) and 329-43.5 (2010).
 
Officer Jackson testified that he was familiar with
 
methamphetamine and drug paraphernalia through his experience and
 
training, discovered among other things, upon entering what other
 occupants of the house indicated was Wagner's bedroom, $967 on
 the bed, more currency bound by rubber bands found in a shoe; a
 wallet containing documents bearing Wagner's name; a
 methamphetamine smoking pipe; zip packets found in a man's
 jacket; a digital scale and angle cut straw--usually used to
 transfer methamphetamine for weighing--from the pocket of a man's
 gray and black flannel shirt; $10,000 in currency from the pocket
 of a new, gray man's dress shirt; more zip packets from the
 pocket of a darker gray man's shirt; and a notebook that
 contained what appeared to be drug notes. Officer David
 Matsushima recovered all of the sixteen packets discovered in the
 bedroom and submitted them into evidence. The net aggregate
 weight of the contents of all sixteen envelopes was eventually
 determined by police criminalist Edward Oshiro to be 45.38 grams
 or approximately 1.6 ounces and identified as methamphetamine. 
Taking all the evidence in the light most favorable to the
 prosecution, the record contains sufficient and substantial
 evidence to support the jury verdict.
6. Jury selection.
 
Wagner argues that his right to be tried by a panel of
 
impartial jurors under the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments to the
 
U.S. Constitution and Article I Sections Five and Fourteen of the Hawai
'i State Constitution, was violated because the chosen 
jurors made various allegedly biased remarks. Specifically, Wagner asserts that (1) "the record is void to any reference [Juror #7, Peter Chaput] could be fair and impartial[;]" (2) juror #23 Chad Lukeala informed the Circuit Court that he knew two of the witnesses and did not want to judge people that he would see on a daily basis; and (3) Juror #9 Debra Cox, along 
11

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with Jurors Lukeala and Chaput stated that they tended to believe
 
police officers.
 
However, all three jurors were passed for cause. "A
 
defendant in a criminal case cannot sit in silence and accept a
 juror as unprejudiced and fair and then subsequently allege error
 in the retention of the same juror." Territory v. Fukunaga, 30
 
Haw. 697, 704, appeal dismissed, 33 F.2d 396 (9th Cir.), cert.
 denied, 280 U.S. 593 (1929), quoted with approval in State v.
 Graham, 70 Haw. 627, 634, 780 P.2d 1103, 1107-08 (1989).
 
Wagner has failed to show error in the selection of the
 
jury.
7.	 Curative instructions on prior bad acts.
 
Wagner argues that he was "prejudiced . . . when the
 
mention of [his] prior conviction, [] although not the nature of
 
the offense, was continuously mentioned throughout the trial" and
 no curative instruction was given prior to the testimony. 
However, as noted by Wagner, the Circuit Court did give a
 limiting instruction to the jury at the same time the stipulation
 to his prior conviction was read. Wagner's point is without
 merit.
 
8.	 General accusations that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion.
 
Wagner restates a half-dozen arguments under the
 
general heading that "[t]he court abused its discretion." These
 
assertions were previously addressed and/or are undecipherable
 and are without merit.
 
9. 	Prosecutorial Misconduct.
 
Wagner alleges improper conduct by the prosecution
 
based on (a) withholding unspecified "testimony" that "could be
 
viewed as a Brady
 violation"; (b) improper issuance of the search
 
warrant; (c) "open[ing] the door to priors" in the opening
 statement; (d) "open[ing] the doors to priors by witness"
 (e) withholding evidence, insinuating Wagner was falsifying
 evidence and calling him a liar; "misquot[ing] scene" of the
 crime and the layout of evidence; (f) providing insufficient
 discovery; misquoting the law; presenting no evidence Wagner sold
 
12

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or possessed methamphetamine; and (g) stating in closing argument
 
that there was "no evidence of police contact" where it had
 introduced "throughout the trial" evidence of his "priors" and
 presenting multiple instances of hearsay testimony, which Wagner
 apparently equates with perjured testimony.
 
Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are reviewed under
the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, which
requires an examination of the record and a determination of
whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error
complained of might have contributed to the conviction.
Factors to consider are: (1) the nature of the conduct; (2)
the promptness of a curative instruction; and (3) the
strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant.
 
State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai 'i 405, 412, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238 (1999) 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Wagner's allegations are either addressed above or are
 
conclusions without argument or otherwise indecipherable. 
Against these weak allegations is the strong circumstantial
 evidence presented at trial which, as discussed above,
 established Wagner had constructive possession of the requisite
 amount of methamphetamine and drug paraphernalia. Wagner's
 assertions of prosecutorial misconduct are without merit.
10. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel.
 
Wagner argues that he suffered from ineffective
assistance of counsel because (A) court-appointed defense counsel
 
Peter Bresciani (Bresciani) failed to incorporate certain grounds
 in the motion to suppress; (B) due to Bresciani's neglect "in
 order for motion to suppress to be heard, Mr. Wagner must waive
 his right to a speedy trial[;]" and due to Bresciani's
 "dishonesty" Wagner requested to see the original search warrant
 documents; (C) Bresciani did not properly argue the motion to
 suppress to force identification of the informant pursuant to HRE
 Rule 510; (D) Bresciani withdrew as counsel; (E) replacement
 defense counsel Ivan Van Leer (Van Leer) failed to file motions
 on time; (F) "Counsel failed to cite relevant case authority to
 [illegible] bad act motion[;]" (G) jurors Cox, Lukeala, and
 Chaput have current or past relationships with law enforcement or
 have a tendency to believe law enforcement; (H) there were no
 objections to the introduction of Wagner's prior conviction;
 (I) there were no objections to the prosecutions questions "which
 

 
13

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
allowed testimony of Mr. Wagner's priors into trial"; (J) there
 
were no objections to the prosecution's closing argument
 regarding Wagner's prior contacts with law enforcement; and
 (K) defense counsel did not inform or present Wagner with
 documents such as the presentence report, and plea offer in lieu
 of mandatory terms.
 
The Supreme Court of Hawai
'i has explained that 
When an ineffective assistance of counsel claim is
 
raised, the question is: When viewed as a whole, was the
assistance provided to the defendant within the range of
competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases?
Additionally,
 
the defendant has the burden of establishing
ineffective assistance of counsel and must meet
 the following two-part test: 1) that there were
specific errors or omissions reflecting
counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence;
and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted in
either the withdrawal or substantial impairment
of a potentially meritorious defense. This
 court will not judge the assistance provided the
defendant ineffective solely by hindsight. A
 defendant who meets the two-prong test has
proven the denial of assistance within the range
of competence demanded of attorneys in criminal
cases.
 
State v. Silva, 75 Haw. 419, 439-40, 864 P.2d 583, 593 (1993) 
(citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). In addition, "matters presumably within the judgment of counsel, like trial strategy, will rarely be second-guessed by judicial hindsight." State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 39-40, 960 P.2d 
1227, 1247-48 (1998) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
In sub-argument A, Wagner makes vague references to
 
five different motions or arguments relating to the suppression
 of evidence and claims that Bresciani failed to file motions
 regarding these issues or arguments and engaged in "repetitious
 dishonesty" with Wagner. However, the record reveals that
 Bresciani did file a timely motion to suppress. To the extent
 that it did not contain all the grounds Wagner now asserts it
 should have, we presume Wagner has raised those grounds in his
 Opening Brief. As we have previously concluded those grounds are
 without merit, they are not a valid basis for alleging
 ineffective assistance of his counsel. To the extent Wagner
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
accuses his counsel of "dishonesty," his citations to the record 
merely repeat Wagner's own allegations and beliefs and as such do
 not establish his claim that his counsel was dishonest.
 
In sub-argument B, Wagner makes conclusory allegations
 
that delay was caused by his counsel's "neglect." The transcript
 to which Wagner cites is not part of the record on appeal. 
Review of the court's minutes for that date shows only that
 Wagner was not brought to the court from prison, but not the
 reason he was not transported. Therefore, we reject his
 argument. 
Wagner next argues in sub-argument C that his counsel
 
failed to supplement Wagner's pro se motion to disclose the
 identity of the confidential informant filed with the Circuit
 Court. However, he does not identify, either by argument or by
 citation to the record, with what materials the supplementation
 should have been made. We therefore also reject this argument.
 
In sub-argument D, Wagner points to Bresciani's
 
withdrawal as counsel without any argument that this constituted
 ineffective assistance of counsel. We therefore deem this
 argument waived. 
Wagner argues that Van Leer was ineffective, in sub-
argument E, because he filed certain motions after the court's
 deadline, leading to their denial. However, Wagner has failed to
 argue that any of these motions would have been successful. We
 therefore conclude that Wagner has failed to show these errors
 impaired a potentially meritorious defense.
 
We have previously decided that the Circuit Court
 
followed proper procedure with regard to informing the jury of
 the parties' stipulation to Wagner's prior felony conviction. We
 therefore reject Wagner's sub-argument F, which is also based on
 his counsel's representation in this respect.
 
Sub-argument G is based on the seating of Jurors
 
Chaput, Cox, and Lukeala. The selection of jurors is generally a
 strategic decision. American Bar Association, Standards for
 Criminal Justice—Prosecution Function and Defense Function,
 Standard 4–5.2(b) (3d ed. 1993) ("Strategic and tactical
 decisions should be made by defense counsel, after consultation
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with the client where feasible and appropriate. Such decisions 
include . . . what jurors to accept or strike[.]") "[M]atters presumably within the judgment of counsel, like trial strategy, will rarely be second-guessed by judicial hindsight." State v. 
Richie, 88 Hawai
'i at 39-40, 960 P.2d at 1247-48 (citations and 
internal quotation marks omitted). The record reveals that Van Leer was an active participant in general voir dire and Wagner fails to allege his counsel failed to consult with him in passing these jurors for cause or in exercising peremptory challenges on other jurors. We decline to look behind counsel's strategic decision.
 Wagner's sub-argument H, regarding the introduction of
 
the stipulation to his prior felony conviction, has been
 addressed above and decided against him and thus cannot be a
 basis for claiming his attorney was ineffective.
 Wagner's sub-argument I, regarding the failure of
 
counsel to object to the State's questioning of Wagner as
 allowing further testimony regarding Wagner's "priors," is
 without basis. Van Leer objected to the questions during the
 passage Wagner cites and, in any event, the prosecution did not
 ask questions regarding any prior convictions.
 
In sub-argument J, Wagner points to his counsel's
 
failure to object to "statements that the Prosecution made
 regarding prior contacts with law enforcement." The only
 statement the prosecution made at the point Wagner identifies was
 "Defendant's theories. There's no evidence of a police
 conspiracy. There's no evidence the defendant was persecuted for
 any prior contacts with law enforcement." Wagner does not claim
 the prosecutor's arguments were incorrect, and they appear to be
 in response to the defense theory of the case and therefore fair
 argument. Under the circumstances, it was not error for Wagner's
 counsel to refrain from objecting to this argument.
 
Finally, in sub-argument K, Wagner complains that his
 
counsel failed to provide him with the documents pertaining to
 sentencing. The record indicates that Wagner chose not to review
 the PSI with his counsel, Van Leer, who offered to give him a
 copy of the PSI prior to sentencing. At the sentencing hearing,
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Wagner was given a copy of the PSI along with the State's motion
 
to impose mandatory minimums.
 
Wagner has failed in his burden to show his counsels
 
were ineffective.
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the Third
 Circuit on November 19, 2012.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 29, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
John Albert Wagner, Jr.,

Defendant-Appellant, pro se. Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
Jason R. Kwiat,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Hawai 'i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
17
 