NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000521
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
IN THE INTEREST OF TM
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 10-002K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley and Fujise, JJ.,
with Nakamura, C.J., dissenting)
 
Mother-Appellant (Mother) appeals from the Family Court
 
of the Third Circuit's (Family Court) "Order Terminating Parental
 
Rights and Awarding Permanent Custody to DHS" (TPR Order) entered
 
on April 17, 2012, and "Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
 
re TPR Hearing" entered on May 3, 2012.1 In the TPR Order, the
 
Family Court, inter alia, terminated Mother's parental rights to
 
TM, appointed the Director of the Department of Human Resources
 
(DHS) to be permanent custodian of TM, and ordered DHS's
 
Permanent Plan dated December 6, 2011.
 
On appeal, Mother argues that the Family Court abused
 
its discretion when it (1) failed to appoint her counsel until
 
after TM had been in foster care for nineteen months and (2)
 
refused to continue the termination of parental rights (TPR)
 
hearing so she could continue working toward providing TM with a
 
safe family home.
 
1
 The Honorable Aley K. Auna, Jr. presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Mother's points of error as follows.
 
(1) The Family Court did not abuse its discretion by 
failing to appoint counsel to represent Mother prior to 
September 13, 2011. Mother fails to demonstrate that the Family 
Court abused its discretion when it failed to appoint counsel to 
represent her earlier in the proceedings. See Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) §§ 587-34 (2006) and 587A-17 (Supp. 2012); In re Doe, 84 Hawaif i 41, 46, 928 P.2d 883, 888 (1996). She challenges 
none of the Family Court's findings of fact but instead, argues in a vague and conclusory manner that she could have avoided 
termination proceedings if counsel had been appointed sooner. 
Without more, we cannot hold that the court's omission "[led] to 
[an] erroneous decision[.]" Lassiter v. Dep't of Soc. Serv. of 
Durham Cnty., N.C., 452 U.S. 18, 27 (1981); See also In re A Children, 119 Hawaif i 28, 57, 193 P.3d 1228, 1257 (App. 2008). 
An independent review of the record reveals no 
indication that the lack of earlier-appointed counsel prejudiced 
Mother's substantial rights. See In re Doe, 99 Hawaif i 522, 534 
n.18, 57 P.3d 447, 459 n.18 (2002). The Family Court was well aware that Mother was entitled to a GAL and her own attorney: 
Now, [Mother], her situation is a little different, and that
is because she's a minor under the law, she's entitled to a
guardian ad litem [GAL]. At the same time she is a mother,
a parent, and so she's entitled to an attorney. I'm going
to try my best to find a person that can act in both
responsibilities. There may be, though, the situation where
she will have both an attorney and a [GAL], two people,
because what the [GAL] may feel would be in her best
interest may not be what she would like. So that's why she
would need an attorney.
 
It appears that Mother's GAL voiced the possibility that Mother
 
would need an attorney in addition to her services. Three days
 
after her appointment, the GAL told the Family Court that she
 
needed to speak with Mother "because if there's going to be a
 
difference of opinion in working as a [GAL] than working as her
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attorney, then I would be suggesting that she have a separate
 
attorney to deal with her as a mother over [TM]." However, no
 
application for court appointed counsel was filed until, at the
 
Family Court's suggestion that the GAL help Mother file an
 
application for appointed counsel, one was filed on September 19,
 
2011.
 
However, the record shows that the proceedings were not
 
adversarial in nature when these proceedings began in January
 
2010. When the Family Service Plan was filed on February 23,
 
2010, the ultimate goal was to "Maintain [Mother] and [TM] in a
 
safe family home without the need for further DHS Intervention." 
There were a number of resources made available to Mother, when
 
the plan was designed to achieve reunification of TM with Mother: 
The Family Court appointed a GAL for Mother four days after she
 
and TM were placed in foster care. Mother attended all hearings
 
with her GAL. She was provided with the services of a therapist,
 
a substance abuse counselor, a probation officer, a foster parent
 
and DHS social worker. Her substance abuse counselor and
 
probation officer testified on Mother's behalf at the termination
 
hearing.
 
Most importantly, Mother was counseled by the Family
 
Court itself on what was expected of her if she wanted to retain
 
her child. At a combined periodic review hearing and permanency
 
hearing on January 26, 2011, both the DHS social worker and TM's
 
GAL recommended that Mother be given more time to reunify. The
 
court approved a revised Service Plan, which added a requirement
 
that Mother "[f]ollow all the requirements of her probation,
 
including additional treatment needs such as substance abuse
 
treatment, etc."2
 
At the same January 26, 2011 hearing, the Family Court
 
addressed Mother and Father:
 
2
 Mother was on probation for Promoting a Detrimental Drug in the
Second Degree, Theft in the Second Degree, and Violation of Probation.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Now, you know, the both of you are very young parents, and
by your own choice you've become parents. And so with that
 in mind, you've got to accept the responsibility of being
parents. So by your choice, you have in essence given up
your childhood. Okay? You've got someone you are
responsible for, and if you don't want to be responsible for
[the child], then I'm going to have [the child] placed
elsewhere permanently. I'm sorry. Your teenage years is
 over. Okay?
 
So what I'm really telling you is you need to put
yourself on a direct track here and take care of your child.
So whatever it takes, you need to do. Follow through with
your service. When you're in school, ma'am, you take care
of business. Skip your friends. Tell them go take a hike
because you now have a responsibility to take care of a
child that's vulnerable, that needs your care, that needs
the mothering that only you can give. The longer your child
stays away from both of you, the more difficult it's going
to become. 
Now good parents do not use drugs. . . . You should be
spending a hundred percent of your time caring for your
child, learning the skills.
 
. . . . 
So in review, two things: One is skip the playing
around and get down to business and learn how to be a great
parent. You've made that choice. You need to accept that
responsibility, and if you don't want to accept that
responsibility, then we'll do something about it. Number
 two, part of . . . accepting responsibility is you've got to
do everything in your power to live clean and sober and not
get into trouble . . . .
 
At the May 24, 2011 periodic review and permanency hearing, DHS
 
was still interested in giving Mother more time to make efforts
 
toward reunification. The Family Court agreed, directing DHS to
 
file its termination of parental rights petition "anytime" but
 
that a periodic review would be held after Mother reached her
 
eighteenth birthday, September 8, 2011. Turning to Mother and
 
TM's father, the Family Court again counseled,
 
You know, it's really up to you folks. I mean you want to
continue to use drugs, that's really up to you folks. I
 mean no one can force you to live a clean life. And if your
child's being placed into permanent custody is not a
motivating factor, then, you know, it's a sad day. Your
 child deserves the best, and if you cannot be the best, then
someone else will.
 
So I hope the message is very clear to you folks. Be
 
involved in services. Get off the alcohol. Stay away from
the drugs. You'll be fine. But children do not need to be
 raised in a drug-infested home. I think you can agree with
that, right? So you now have -- you've always had this
responsibility. That's a choice that you made when you gave
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
birth to a child, both of you. Now, this might sound like
I'm heartless, but I'm sorry. This is reality, right? It's
 your choice.
 
. . . .
 
September 13 at 8:30 a.m. Now, that's not a trial
date. that's a date to find out where we're going to go.
The state's going to file their motion to terminate parental
rights. We'll hear that motion at that time. If that's
 something that you folks want to agree to, that's great.
We'll terminate parental rights, and we'll move forward.
 
If that's something that if you make significant
progress and you show some signs that you are serious, then,
you know, we many not set a termination of parental rights
hearing. The statute says we have to. We'll see what -­we'll cross that bridge when we get there. Okay?
 
It appears that Mother received information and advice from a
 
number of sources regarding what was required to maintain her
 
rights to TM prior to any termination petition being filed. On
 
this record, it does not appear that the Family Court erred in
 
not sua sponte appointing counsel for Mother before the
 
September 13, 2011 periodic review and permanency hearing.
 
In re A Children is distinguishable. Mother was
 
represented by an attorney for over five months prior to the TPR
 
hearing. Mother does not argue that she failed to understand or
 
would have benefitted from earlier guidance regarding the
 
relationship between her January 21, 2011 DHS Family-Service-Plan
 
(Service-Plan) requirements and probation conditions. Further,
 
she has not demonstrated and the evidence in the record on appeal
 
does not reveal that she lacked the education or intelligence to
 
understand the proceedings; misunderstood any part of the
 
proceedings; failed to comprehend the meaning or significance of
 
any Service-Plan requirement; was marginalized during the
 
proceedings; or missed any hearings.
 
(2) The Family Court did not abuse its discretion by
 
denying Mother's motions to continue the TPR hearing.  Mother was
 
given a reasonable amount of time, more than two years, after TM
 was placed in foster custody, to demonstrate that she was willing
 
and able to provide TM with a safe family home. See HRS § 587A­
33(a)(2) (Supp. 2012).
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) The Family Court's ultimate determination was not 
clearly erroneous.  The record on appeal provides substantial 
evidence to support the Family Court's conclusion that Mother was 
not able or willing to provide TM with a safe family home, even 
with the assistance of a service plan, and would not become able 
or willing to do so within a reasonable period of time. See In 
re Doe, 95 Hawaif i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001). 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Family Court of the Third
 
Circuit's "Order Terminating Parental Rights and Awarding
 Permanent Custody to DHS" entered on April 17, 2012, and
 
"Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law re TPR Hearing" entered
 
on May 3, 2012, are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, June 28, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Benjamin E. Lowenthal,
for Mother-Appellant. 
Associate Judge
 
Mary Ann Magnier and
Nolan Chock,
Deputy Attorneys General,for Petitioner-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
6
 