NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000593
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MARISA K. PICKETT,
Claimant-Appellee/Appellant,
v.
 
CHEESECAKE FACTORY RESTAURANTS, INC.,
Employer-Appellant/Appellee,
and
 
AMERICAN ZURICH INSURANCE COMPANY,
Insurance Carrier-Appellant/Appellee,
and
 
GALLAGHER BASSETT SERVICES, INC.,
Insurance Adjuster-Appellant/Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. AB 2014-126 (DCD NO. 2-12-01648))

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Claimant-Appellee/Appellant Marisa K. Pickett (Pickett)
 
appeals from the "Decision and Order" entered on July 27, 2015 by
 
the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board (LIRAB).
 
On appeal, Pickett contends the LIRAB erred in: (1)
 
reducing her requested attorney's fees based on an hourly rate of
 $165 per hour; and (2) considering qualitative factors based on
 the subjective experience of LIRAB members in upholding the
 reduction.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Pickett began working for Employer-Appellant/Appellee
 
Hawaii Cheesecake Factory Restaurants Inc. (Employer) on
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
September 30, 2010. On March 12, 2011, Pickett sustained a an
 
injury while working, for which she filed a workers' compensation
 claim.
 
The Disability Compensation Division of the Department
 
of Labor and Industrial Relations (DCD) issued a decision
 
compensating Pickett for her injuries on April 14, 2014. 
Employer appealed from the decision to the LIRAB on May 2, 2014.
 
On May 20, 2014, Employer filed a notice of deposition
 
for Pickett, which was scheduled to take place on January 16,
 2015. Employer took the oral deposition of Pickett and agreed to
 pay for Pickett's attorney's fees and costs associated with the
 deposition, but no agreement was reached as to the billable
 hourly rate for Pickett's attorney. 
By letter dated January 21, 2015, Stanford H. Masui
 
(Masui), counsel for Pickett, submitted to the LIRAB a "Request
 
for Approval of Attorney's Fee" at the hourly rate of $210 for
 
10.5 hours of work. Masui stated that he had thirty years of
 experience in workers' compensation cases, participated in over
 one hundred cases before the DCD over the last three years, and
 participated in approximately fifty cases before the LIRAB over
 the last three years. The request also listed Erin Masui as an
 attorney for Pickett, and described her as having two years of
 experience in workers' compensation cases, participating in about
 thirty cases before the DCD over the last three years, and
 participating in approximately ten cases before the LIRAB over
 the last three years.
 
Employer submitted an objection to Masui's request for
 
attorney's fees on February 2, 2015. Employer objected to
 Masui's requested rate of $210 per hour as "excessive." Employer
 reasoned, "[t]his is especially so since his hourly rate
 reflected in his prior Request for Approval of Attorney's Fee
 submitted to the [DCD] dated 3/25/14 in this very same case is
 $160." Aside from Masui's earlier request for fees, Employer
 provided no other documentation or evidence relevant to its
 objection to Masui's requested hourly rate.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On February 5, 2015, the LIRAB granted Masui's request
 
for attorney's fees at the reduced hourly rate of $165. In its
 
"Attorney's Fee Approval and Order," the LIRAB stated:
 
4. In reviewing the subject fee request the [LIRAB]
took into account the benefits obtained for [Pickett] in
this appeal, the novelty and difficulty of issues involved
on appeal, the amount of fees awarded in similar appeals,
and the hourly rate customarily awarded workers'
compensation attorneys possessing similar skills and
experience, including [Masui's] years of practice in the
field of workers' compensation law, the number of clients
represented before the [LIRAB], as well as [Masui's]
responsiveness and timeliness.
 
5. In this case, the [LIRAB] does not approve
the requested attorney hourly rate of $210.00. An
 hourly rate of $165.00 for [Masui] is reasonable and
is consistent with that customarily awarded to
attorneys possessing similar skills and experience
before the [LIRAB].
 
6. [Masui] has practiced in the field of
workers' compensation law in Hawaii for approximately
30 years.
 
7. In the past three years, [Masui] has
represented approximately 100 clients before the [DCD]
and approximately 50 clients before the [LIRAB].
 
8. 10.50 hours were reasonably required to
address the complexities of the issues involved on
appeal.
 
9. Costs in the amount of $21.00 are
 
reasonable.
 
10.
 The total amount of $1,835.14, including
fees and costs, is reasonable.
 
On March 9, 2015, Masui submitted a motion for
 
reconsideration of the LIRAB's order approving the attorney's fee
 
at a reduced hourly rate. Masui attached a declaration stating
 the basis for his requested rate of $210 per hour. Masui
 declared:
 
6. The basis for the hourly fee rate of $210, was the
result of a meeting held on Dec. 22, 2014 of [sic] the
Director of Labor and Industrial Relations, Dwight Takamine,
who extended the meeting invitation to claimants' attorneys
who handle a "substantial number of workers' compensation
cases". Among the concerns discussed was to "ensure
adequate access to legal assistance for claimants". 
7. Mr. Takamine announced a new fee schedule to be
 
implemented no later than Jan. 1, 2015 for all work going
forward, without the need to submit additional request
forms. The attorneys were specifically advised that they
may bill at the rates indicated based on years of
experience, and if questions arose as to other factors (such
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
as the statutory criteria), the DCD would request further
information or clarification. It is my information that
several attorneys have received fee approvals from the DCD
based on the new schedule.
 
8. I have been licensed since 1976, and have been engaged
in private practice since 1982. The first private law firm
I was employed was [sic] with Gary Galiher and Associates,
whose practice involved accident cases and asbestos
litigation. The asbestos litigation involved hundreds of
clients, including class action mass torts. Virtually all
cases [were] workers' compensation companion cases involving
asbestos exposure. Many of the cases involved federal
workers' compensation, but also State of Hawaii cases for
many who were employed in private shipyards, boiler, and
automotive repair companies.
 
9. I carried a caseload of about 200 cases at all times at
 
that firm. My subsequent private employment with Takahashi,
Masui, and Vasconcellos, as the chairman is aware, also
required a caseload of 100-200 workers' compensation cases
at all times. My subsequent solo practice has continued to
involve 100-150 workers' compensation cases at all times.
It is safe to say that I have represented thousands of
injured workers in the last thirty years.
 
10. The most recent "raise" in the hourly rate for myself
was in 2012 to a rate of $160 per hour. The previous
approved rate was $155 per hour which was allowed in 2006.
The increased rate of increase to $160 and hour from 2006 to
 2012 was therefore less than a $1.00 per year.
 
11. An increase in approved hourly rate to $210 in 2015
represents an increase of only $15 per year, from 2012 to
2015.
 
12. I have been approved by the courts at the rate of $325
for civil cases and recently billed a deposition at $325,
which was accepted by the defense attorney. Based on
 information and belief, attorneys in private litigation
practices in Honolulu are presently charging at the rate of
$300-400+ per hour (see Memorandum of Law submitted with
this Declaration).
 
13. I have previously submitted a letter to the [LIRAB]
urging a review of the allowable fee rates, which have in
past practice followed the DCD, by adding an additional
$5.00 per hour, which is an arbitrary method. Since the
 number of appeals and the type of issues both substantive
and procedural have become more complex and esoteric the
hourly fee basis should also require a wholesale review and
upgrading by the [LIRAB]. Additionally, the [LIRAB] may
continue to review attorney fee request for reasonableness
under sec. 386-94 [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)] regardless
of the hourly rate charged.
 
. . . .
 15. It is my understanding and belief that most civil
litigation attorneys will not accept workers' compensation
cases due to the complexity, frustration, and low hourly
rates. It is also common knowledge among workers'
compensation practitioners that most claimant's attorneys
will not accept cases where compensability is at issue,
where there are psychological injuries only, discipline
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
cases, limited impairment, as well as government employees.
It is further my observation that most of the experienced
claimant's attorneys are middle aged or older and younger
attorneys are not getting involved in workers compensation,
so the effect of artificially low rates has been to reduce
access to legal representation for injured workers.
 
In the accompanying motion, Masui argued on behalf of Pickett
 
that "access to legal assistance and justice for injured workers
 should be encouraged," that "[l]ower rates will inevitably lead
 to increased litigation, and further discourage representation of
 injured workers[,]" and the "'hourly rate customarily awarded
 attorneys possessing similar skills and experience' should
 reflect the prevailing fee rates in the community, including the
 DCD rates[.]" Masui attached documents supporting his motion for
 reconsideration, including a "matrix" based on hourly rates
 allowed by a 1983 case in the federal district court in the
 District of Columbia; a letter dated December 10, 2014 signed by
 Dwight Takamine, Director of the Department of Labor and
 Industrial Relations, notifying Masui of a meeting regarding the
 approval of attorney's fees; a table listing the number of years
 an attorney may have handling workers' compensation cases and the
 corresponding hourly rates; and a DCD document, dated July 25,
 2012, approving Masui's request for an increase in his hourly
 rate to $160.
 
On April 16, 2015, Employer submitted its opposition to
 
Pickett's motion for reconsideration. Employer objected, but
 otherwise provided no evidence of the customary hourly rate at
 which workers' compensation attorneys are compensated.
 
The LIRAB issued its decision reconsidering its award
 
of Masui's attorney's fees on July 27, 2015. In its "Decision
 and Order," the LIRAB stated:
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
1. On January 16, 2015, Employer took an oral
deposition of [Pickett] with [Masui] in attendance. 
2. Employer agreed to pay for [Pickett's]
attorney's fees and costs for preparing and attending the
deposition. There was no discussion or agreement as to
[Masui's] billable hourly rate for the deposition.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3. At the time of the deposition, [Masui's]
approved hourly rate for legal services before the Board was
$165.00.
 
4. On January 27, 2015, [Masui] submitted his
Request for Approval of Attorney's Fees for Claimant's
deposition ("fee request"). In the fee request, [Masui]
requested approval for 10.50 hours of legal services at an
hourly rate of $210.00, plus applicable taxes and $21.00 in
costs, for a total of $2,330.62.
 
5. On February 2, 2015, Employer filed its

Objections to [Masui's] fee request. Employer's objections
were only to [Masui's] hourly rate, and not to the time and
costs related to [Pickett's] deposition.
 
6. 
On February 5, 2015, the [LIRAB] issued an
Approval of Attorney's Fee and Order, approving [Masui's]
fees and costs in the amount of $1,835.14 based on an hourly
rate of $165.00. The [LIRAB's] Approval of Attorney's Fee
and Order was supported by findings of fact and conclusions
of law, including a finding that the approved fee award of
$1,835.15 at an hourly rate of $165.00 for 10.50 hours of
legal work at an oral deposition in this workers'
compensation appeal was reasonable. 
7. At the time of deposition, [Masui's] hourly rate

of $165.00 was the hourly rate customarily awarded to
attorneys possessing similar skills and experience in
workers' compensation matters before the Board.
 
8. On March 9, 2015, [Masui] filed his Motion
seeking reconsideration of the Board's February 5, 2015
Approval of Attorney's Fee and Order.
 
9. In support of the Motion, [Masui] submitted a
declaration in which he stated that he was approved for an
hourly rate increase of $210.00 for legal work at the
Disability Compensation Division ("DCD") by Dwight Takamine,
the former Director of Labor and Industrial Relations,
following a meeting in December 2014 that [Masui] was
invited to attend with the former Director and a group of
unidentified claimant attorneys who handle a "substantial
number of worker compensation cases." [Masui] declared that
the hourly rate increase became effective January 1, 2015
without the need for a request to the DCD for an hourly
increase. [Masui] further declared that the rate increase
was spurred by the former Director's concerns about adequate
access to legal assistance for workers' compensation
claimants. 
10. [Masui] also submitted exhibits in support of
his Motion, including a letter . . . from the former
Director inviting [Masui] to attend the above-described
meeting and a table . . . with hourly rates that purportedly
corresponded to the "Number of Years Handling Workers' Comp
cases." On this record, the [LIRAB] is unable to identify
who created or prepared the table.
 
11. On March 19, 2015, [Masui] submitted a
supplemental exhibit in support of his Motion that included
Attorney's Request for Increase in Hourly Rate at the DCD,
which was approved by the DCD at $210.00 on March 11, 2015.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
12. On April 16, 2015, Employer filed a Memorandum
in Opposition to Attorney's Motion.
 
13. A hearing on [Masui's] Motion was held on April
23, 2015 with [Masui] and Employer's counsel, Jennifer M.
Yusi, Esq., in attendance.
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
. . . .
 
The [LIRAB] reviews hundreds of fee requests each year
from attorneys whose skills and experiences are well known
to the [LIRAB]. The [LIRAB] also receives annual or semi­annual requests from attorneys seeking to increase their
hourly rates for legal work on appeal.
 
In approving fee requests, the statute provides that
the Director, Board, or Court "may consider factors such as
the attorney's skill and experience in state workers'
compensation matters, the amount of time and effort required
by the complexity of the case, the novelty and difficulty of
issues involved, the amount of fees awarded in similar
cases, benefits obtained by the claimant, and the hourly
rate customarily awarded attorneys possessing similar skills
and experience. In all cases, reasonable attorney's fees
shall be awarded." [HRS § 386-94 (2015 Repl.)]
 
In evaluating the reasonableness of a fee request, the
[LIRAB] also considers the manner and method of billing,
such as unreasonable minimum billing increments or block
billing that fails to inform the client or the [LIRAB] why
the work was reasonably necessary.
 
In evaluating an attorney's skill, the [LIRAB]
considers an attorney's effectiveness in the appellate
practice of workers' compensation law. The [LIRAB] does not
keep a log or "black book" on attorneys. However, based on
its frequent contacts with attorneys who appear before it,
the [LIRAB] has a general awareness of the many qualities of
a skillful, effective lawyer apart from the factors which
simply measure lawyer activity (such as years of experience
and number of cases handled).
 
These qualitative factors include, but are not limited
to, preparation for conferences and hearings,
professionalism and civility, timely submission of initial
conference statements and other documents to meet discovery
deadlines, compliance with [the LIRAB] rules and orders,
prompt return of telephone calls to the [LIRAB], clients,
and opposing parties, timely appearances for conferences and
hearings, and obtaining proper settlement authority for
settlement conferences.
 
These qualitative factors to assess skill are also
considered by the [LIRAB] in evaluating and reviewing
attorney requests to increase hourly rates.
 
Workers' Compensation vs. Civil Case
 
[Masui] appears to be arguing that his $165.00
approved hourly rate for workers' compensation appeals is
unreasonable, because it is below the rate for civil
litigation attorneys and he has been approved at rates of
more than $300.00 per hour for civil cases in the courts. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[Masui] considers $210.00 to be a reasonable hourly rate
when he is compared with attorneys possessing similar skills
and experience in other fields, such as tort, probate, and
even criminal law. The [LIRAB] disagrees with [Masui's]
arguments. [Masui] did not argue or contend that his
approved hourly rate of $165.00 was not a rate that was
customarily awarded to attorneys possessing similar skills
and experience in State workers' compensation matters before
the [LIRAB].
 
In reviewing or approving an attorney's fee request,
HRS § 386-94 allows the [LIRAB] to consider, among other
things, an attorney's skill and experience "in State
workers' compensation matters" and the hourly rate
customarily awarded attorneys possessing similar skills and
experience. Accordingly, it follows that the hourly rates
customarily awarded attorneys possessing similar skills and
experience are those that are awarded in State workers'
compensation matters. It makes no sense to consider the
 customary hourly rates of attorneys in fields other than
State workers' compensation law.
 
Considering all of the above-mentioned factors that
the [LIRAB] may use to review or evaluate fee requests and
hourly rates, the [LIRAB] determined in its Approval of
Attorney's Fee and Order that [Masui's] hourly rate of
$165.00 for appeal work at the [LIRAB] level is a rate that
is customarily awarded to attorneys possessing similar
skills and experience in State workers' compensation matters
and that the fees awarded to [Masui] based on this rate are
reasonable.
 
. . . .
 
DCD Rate Increase
 
At the hearing on the Motion, [Masui] represented that
at the meeting convened in December 2014, the former
Director informed those in attendance that claimant attorney
hourly rates for legal services at the DCD would be
increased on a sliding scale based on the attorney's years
of practice or experience in worker' compensation law.
[Masui] argued that with his hourly rate increase, the
[LIRAB] should upwardly adjust his hourly rate at the
[LIRAB] to meet or exceed $210.00, his approved rate at the
DCD.
 
In its opposition to [Masui's] Motion, Employer
questioned whether the former Director's actions constituted
improper rule-making without notice and opportunity to be
heard.
 
Without passing judgment on the appropriateness of the
increase in [Masui's] hourly rate at the DCD by the former
Director, and notwithstanding conflicting evidence from
[Masui] that his hourly rate increase at the DCD was not
approved and did not take effect until March 11, 2015, the
[LIRAB] concludes that there is no statutory requirement
that the [LIRAB] must automatically increase attorney hourly
rates in tandem with DCD rate increases. Furthermore, the
[LIRAB] refuses to cede its statutory authority to review
and approve fee requests and attorney hourly rates based on
a unilateral rate increase by the former Director that was
tied solely to years of experience.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Footnote and brackets omitted.) The LIRAB denied Masui's motion
 
for reconsideration.
 
On August 22, 2015, Pickett filed a notice of appeal
 
from the denial of the motion for reconsideration.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
Appellate review of a LIRAB decision is governed by HRS
 
§ 91-14(g) (2012 Repl.), which provides:
 
§91-14 Judicial review of contested cases.
 
. . . .
 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may affirm
the decision of the agency or remand the case with

instructions for further proceedings; or it may reverse or
modify the decision and order if the substantial rights of
the petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutoryprovisions; or 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority orjurisdiction of the agency; or 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or 
(4) Affected by other error of law; or 
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,probative, and substantial evidence on the wholerecord; or 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized byabuse of discretion or clearly unwarrantedexercise of discretion. 
See Tauese v. Dept. of Labor and Indus. Relations, 113 Hawai 'i 1, 
25, 147 P.3d 785, 809 (2006). 
An award of reasonable attorney's fees and costs 
pursuant to HRS § 386-94 (2015 Repl.) is reviewed under the abuse 
of discretion standard. See McLaren v. Paradise Inn Hawaii LLC, 
132 Hawai 'i 320, 331-32, 321 P.3d 671, 682-83 (2014).
III. DISCUSSION
 
HRS § 386-94 governs the award of attorney's fees and
 
costs in workers compensation cases. HRS § 386-94 provides:
 
§386-94 Attorneys, physicians, other health care
providers, and other fees. Claims for services shall not be
 
valid unless approved by the director or, if an appeal is
had, by the appellate board or court deciding the appeal.
Any claim so approved shall be a lien upon the compensation
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
in the manner and to the extent fixed by the director, the
appellate board, or the court.
 
In approving fee requests, the director, appeals
board, or court may consider factors such as the attorney's
skill and experience in state workers' compensation matters,
the amount of time and effort required by the complexity of
the case, the novelty and difficulty of the issues involved,
the amount of fees awarded in similar cases, benefits
obtained for the claimant, and the hourly rate customarily
awarded attorneys possessing similar skills and experience.
In all cases, reasonable attorney's fees shall be awarded.
 
Any person who receives any fee, other consideration,
or gratuity on account of services so rendered, without
approval, in conformity with the preceding paragraph, shall
be fined by the director not more than $10,000.
 
The LIRAB is required to set forth its reasons for reducing an 
award for attorneys' fees and costs. See McLaren, 132 Hawai 'i at 
330-31, 321 P.3d at 681-82. 
McLaren involved an attorney's fee request to the
 
Director of the Department of Labor and Industrial Relations
 through the DCD. Id. at 322, 321 P.3d at 673. McLaren, the
 
attorney requesting a fee award, had submitted a request for
 approval of $4,414.08 in attorney's fees and $2,691.44 in costs. 
Id. The Director approved McLaren's request, but reduced the
 total award to $3,729.63. Id. McLaren objected to the reduction
 
and requested a written explanation. Id. The DCD responded that
 
McLaren was free to review the DCD claim file. Id. at 323, 321
 
P.3d at 674. McLaren filed an appeal to the LIRAB. Id. at 324,
 
321 P.3d at 675. The LIRAB dismissed McLaren's appeal as
 untimely. Id. McLaren submitted a motion for reconsideration
 
with the LIRAB, which the LIRAB subsequently denied. Id. at 325­
26, 321 P.3d at 676-77.
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court, holding that McLaren's 
appeal was timely, addressed the merits of McLaren's appeal. Id. 
at 328-29, 321 P.3d at 679-80. The supreme court applied the holding in In re Bettencourt, 126 Hawai
'i 26, 265 P.3d 1122 
(2011), which required court administrative judges to set forth reasons for their reduction of requested attorney's fees in order to enable appellate review of the reduction. McLaren, 132 
Hawai
'i at 330-31, 321 P.3d at 681-82. The supreme court held 
that like the administrative judge in Bettencourt, the DCD was 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
required to set forth reasons for the 47% reduction of McLaren's
 
attorney fee request. Id. at 331, 321 P.3d at 682. Although the
 
supreme court in McLaren focused on the need for the DCD to
 provide an explanation for a reduction in costs so that the LIRAB
 may review the Director's decision, the reasoning in McLaren is
 applicable to this situation, in which the LIRAB rather than the
 DCD is the body awarding and reducing an attorney's fees request
 under HRS § 386-94.
 
The LIRAB's explanation for its decision to reduce the 
requested hourly rate from $210 per hour to $165 per hour was inadequate. In its award, the LIRAB simply stated "In this case, the [LIRAB] does not approve the requested attorney hourly rate of $210. An hourly rate of $165.00 for [Masui] is reasonable and is consistent with that customarily awarded to attorneys possessing similar skills and experience before the [LIRAB]." The LIRAB's statement that $210 was an unreasonable rate while $165 was a reasonable rate does not seem to be based on any evidence before the LIRAB, and the LIRAB's decision was certainly not explained in sufficient detail in its award of attorney's fees. See McLaren, 132 Hawai
'i at 330-31, 321 P.3d at 681-82. 
The LIRAB's recitation of factors enumerated in HRS § 386-94 is not an explanation for its decision to reduce Masui's requested attorney's fees. The LIRAB is required to apply those factors based on evidence submitted to it so that a reviewing body may adequately assess whether the LIRAB abused its discretion. See 
Id. at 331, 321 P.3d at 682. 
The LIRAB's decision upholding the award and denying
 
Pickett's motion for reconsideration of the LIRAB's reduction of
 Masui's attorney's fees provided no better substantial basis or
 explanation for the award than its initial decision awarding
 fees. The LIRAB's decision denying reconsideration was based on
 four general points: (1) the LIRAB's experience reviewing fee
 requests; (2) the LIRAB's view that workers' compensation cases
 are not comparable to civil cases; (3) the LIRAB's disagreement
 with Masui's argument that the LIRAB should encourage new
 workers' compensation attorneys to enter the field by increasing
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
claimants' attorney's hourly rates; and (4) the LIRAB's
 
conclusion that the Director's decision on attorney's hourly
 rates would not influence the LIRAB's determination of reasonable
 attorney's fees.
 
The LIRAB's first point provided a generalized
 
statement about its assessment of an attorney's skill. In its
 Decision and Order, the LIRAB explained the factors it considers
 in evaluating an attorney's skill under HRS § 386-94. However,
 the LIRAB then failed to explain how it applied those factors to
 evaluate Masui's services provided in this case. The LIRAB must
 base its decision to award or reduce attorney's fees on properly
 submitted evidence and its application of relevant factors in
 arriving at a reasonable fee, not just conclusory statements or
 beliefs about the factors it considers. See McDermott v. United
 
Parcel Service/Liberty Mutual, 57 So.3d 933, 934 (Fla. Dist. Ct.
 App. 2011).
 
The LIRAB's second point which concludes that the
 
hourly rates awarded in other types of civil cases is irrelevant
 to determining a reasonable rate of pay due to a workers'
 compensation attorney is contrary to the statute it cites. The
 LIRAB concludes, "[T]he hourly rates customarily awarded
 attorneys possessing similar skills and experience are those that
 are awarded in State workers' compensation matters. It makes no
 sense to consider the customary hourly rates of attorneys in
 fields other than State workers' compensation law." The LIRAB
 provides no basis for this conclusion. The language of the
 statute states that the LIRAB may consider "the hourly rate
 customarily awarded attorneys possessing similar skills and
 experience." HRS § 386-94. The statute does not limit the
 LIRAB's consideration to only other workers' compensation cases. 
The effect of the LIRAB's reading would be to insulate the
 LIRAB's fee awards from effective review by essentially allowing
 the LIRAB to establish a reasonable fee based entirely on its own
 fee decisions.
 
The LIRAB's third point was its disagreement with Masui
 
that the LIRAB has or should have a role in encouraging new
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attorneys to take on workers' compensation cases. The statute 
allows the LIRAB to consider certain enumerated factors, but is clear that the LIRAB may consider other factors not listed in the statute in its approval of fee requests. See HRS § 386-94. 
Providing attorneys representing claimants with adequate compensation in order to make the field of workers' compensation sufficiently desirable to attract enough attorneys to represent claimants is consistent with "the broad humanitarian purpose of the workers' compensation statute . . . ." Flor v. Holguin, 94 
Hawai
'i 70, 79, 9 P.3d 382, 391 (2000) (quoting Lawhead v. United 
Air Lines, 59 Haw. 551, 560, 584 P.2d 119, 125 (1978)) (describing the court's liberal construction of the workers' compensation statute). 
The LIRAB's fourth point about its refusal to be
 
influenced by the DCD's rate of compensation for attorneys in the
 LIRAB's own determination of a customary hourly rate for
 attorneys is inconsistent with HRS § 386-94. HRS § 386-94 allows
 the LIRAB to consider the "hourly rate customarily awarded
 attorneys possessing similar skills and experience," but the
 LIRAB, in its Decision and Order, announced its "refus[al] to
 cede its statutory authority to review and approve of fee
 requests and attorney hourly rates based on a unilateral rate
 increase by the former Director that was tied solely to years of
 experience." The rate at which the DCD compensates attorneys
 with Masui's skills and experience is certainly relevant to the
 "hourly rate customarily awarded attorneys possessing similar
 skills and experience," and the LIRAB's refusal to consider the
 DCD's rate is questionable.
 
In neither its decision reducing the requested 
attorney's fees nor its order denying reconsideration of its reduced award of attorney's fees did the LIRAB adequately set forth its reasons for reducing the award. See McLaren, 132 
Hawai
'i at 330-31, 321 P.3d at 681-82. Without such an 
explanation, we are unable to ascertain whether the LIRAB abused its discretion in awarding "reasonable attorney's fees" pursuant to HRS § 386-94. See id. 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Therefore, we vacate the "Decision and Order" entered 
on July 27, 2015 by the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals
 
Board and remand this case for further proceedings on Masui's
 request for attorney's fees and costs.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 31, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Stanford H. Masui
 
Erin B.J.H. Masui
 (Law Offices of Masui-Masui)for Claimant­Appellee/Appellant.
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Jennifer M. Yusi

 
Lisa Strandtman 
(Rush Moore)
for Employer­Appellant/Appellee, Insurance
Carrier-Appellant/Appellee,
and Insurance Adjuster-Appellant/Appellee.
 
14
 