NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000004
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
CHRIS GRINDLING, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
MAUI POLICE DEPARTMENT, Respondent-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(SPECIAL PROCEEDING NO. 09-1-0081(3))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Chris Grindling (Grindling)
 
appeals from the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit's (circuit
 
court) Judgment in favor of Respondent-Appellee Maui Police
 
Department (MPD) and against Grindling, declaring Grindling a
 
vexatious litigant, filed July 13, 2010.1
 
Grindling raises the following points of error on
 
appeal: 1) "HRS 634J-Applies to Civil Action Not Criminal[,]" and
 
2) "This Matter is Not a Civil Action as Court Ruled[.]"
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Grindling's points of error as follows:
 
1
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Grindling does not challenge any of the findings made 
by the circuit court other than the finding that this is a civil 
action. Except as to this challenge, we are therefore bound by 
the circuit court's findings. See Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai' i 
43, 63, 85 P.3d 150, 170 (2004). 
Although Grindling is correct in asserting that Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 634J (1993 Repl.) applies to civil
 
2
actions and not criminal actions,  his point of error and
argument that this matter is not a civil action is without merit. 
Grindling initiated a special civil proceeding in this case by 
seeking the return of seized property. 
Although Grindling sought 
the return of property that was seized due to an underlying criminal burglary case, this case is a civil action. See 
Carlisle v. One (1) Boat, 119 Hawai
'i 245, 195 P.3d 1177 (2008). 
Moreover, the cases cited by the circuit court for purposes of 
determining Grindling to be a "vexatious litigant" were civil 
actions rather than criminal proceedings. 
Grindling's argument that the circuit court erred in 
determining that he is a "vexatious litigant" pursuant to 
HRS § 634J-1 is also without merit. We review a lower court's 
determination that a party is a vexatious litigant under an abuse 
of discretion standard. See Ek v. Boggs, 102 Hawai' i 289, 294­
95, 75 P.3d 1180, 1185-86 (2003) ("Although we have not heretofore adopted a standard for reviewing a vexatious litigant 
determination, we believe it should be an abuse of discretion 
standard.") 
2
 "Litigation" is defined, for purposes of HRS § 634J-1, Hawaii's
vexatious litigant statute, as "any civil action or proceeding, commenced,
maintained, or pending in any state or federal court of record." HRS § 634J­1. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3
HRS § 634J-1  sets forth three separate definitions for
"vexatious litigant" and a plaintiff is a vexatious litigant if
 
he or she meets any of the three definitions. In this case, at a
 
minimum, the record establishes that Grindling meets two of the
 
definitions for a vexatious litigant.
 
The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 
determining Grindling to be a vexatious litigant under the first
 
definition. In the seven years prior to MPD's motion seeking to
 
have Grindling deemed a vexatious litigant, Grindling had filed
 
in propria persona4 at least five cases that had been finally
 
determined adversely to him or that had unjustifiably remained
 
pending at least two years without having been brought to trial
 
or hearing.
 
3 HRS § 634J-1 defines a "vexatious litigant" in pertinent part as
follows:
 
"Vexatious ligitant" means a plaintiff who does any of the
following:
(1) In the immediately preceding seven-year period has
commenced, prosecuted, or maintained in propria persona
at least five civil actions other than in a small
 claims court that have been:
 (A) Finally determined adversely to the plaintiff; or
(B) Unjustifiably permitted to remain pending at least
two years without having been brought to trial or
hearing;
(2) After litigation has been finally resolved against the
plaintiff, relitigates or attempts to relitigate in
propria persona and in bad faith, either:
(A) The validity of the determination against the same
defendant or defendants as to whom the litigation
was finally determined; or
(B) The cause of action, claim, controversy, or any of
the issues of fact or law, determined or concluded
by the final determination against the same
defendant or defendants as to whom the litigation
was finally determined;
(3) In any litigation while acting in propria persona,
files, in bad faith, unmeritorious motions, pleadings,
or other papers, conducts unnecessary discovery, or
engages in other tactics that are frivolous or solely
intended to cause unnecessary delay[.]
4
 "'In propria persona' means on the person's own behalf acting as a
plaintiff." HRS § 634J-1. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Alternatively, the circuit court did not abuse its
 
discretion in determining Grindling to be a "vexatious litigant"
 
under the third definition. As set forth in the circuit court's
 
findings and unchallenged on appeal, Grindling attempted to
 
relitigate the same claim as to the same stolen property five
 
times. Furthermore, there are multiple cases filed by Grindling
 
that were withdrawn, dismissed for failure to serve the
 
complaint, or dismissed for non-payment of fees.
 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the Judgment entered by the
 
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit on July 13, 2010, declaring
 Christopher Grindling a vexatious litigant, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 21, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Chris Grindling
Petitioner-Appellant Pro Se Chief Judge 
Moana M. LuteyDeputy Corporation CounselCounty of Mauifor Respondent-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
4
 