 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS  AND PACIFI C REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000334 26-FEB-2026 08:59 AM Dkt. 166 MO 
NO. CAAP-23-0000334 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
STATE OF HAWAIʻ I, Plaintiff-Appellee, 
v. 
MICHAEL ARLO PAVICH, Defendant-Appellant. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2PC011000015(3))  
MEMORANDUM OPINION  
(By: Nakasone, Chief Judge, Leonard and McCullen, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Michael Arlo Pavich appeals from 
the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit's April 20, 2023 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order (April 2023  
Order).
  1
The April 2023 Order denied Pavich's: (1) Motion to 
Withdraw Waiver of Right to Pursue Motion for New Trial, filed April 20, 2019 (2019 Motion to Withdraw Waiver); (2) Motion for 
1 The Honorable Kelsey T. Kawano presided over the post- conviction 
proceedings from January 24, 2020. The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided 
over the trial and post- conviction proceedings prior to January 24, 2020.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
 
     
  
  
  
   
  
 DNA Analysis Pursuant to Hawaiʻ i Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 844D-
121 to -124 (2014), filed June 7, 2019; (3) Motion for New 
Trial, filed March 29, 2021 (
2021 Motion for New Trial); 
(4) Emergency Motion to Dismiss Counsel for Defense and for 
Reconsideration on Motion to Withdraw Waiver of Right to Conduct 
Peer Review, filed August 23, 2021 (2021 Motion for Recon); 
(5) Motion of Notice and/or Clarification of Matters and Need of 
Court Assistance, filed September 21, 2021; (6) Motion for 
Change of Judge, Expedited Ruling Requested, filed March 21, 
2022; (7) Emergency Motion to Dismiss, Expedited Hearing and 
Ruling Requested, filed June 14, 2022; and (8) Defendant's 
Supplemental Motion to Dismiss, filed June 29, 2022.  2
In his opening brief, Pavich presents arguments 
(1) challenging his waiver of his right to a peer review and to move for a new trial (Arguments D and E); (2) challenging the 
disposal of DNA evidence and failure to turn over DNA material 
(Arguments A, B, and C); (3) asserting ineffective assistance of 
2 The April 2023 Order also granted Pavich's (1) Motion to Supplement 
Motion for Reconsideration to Withdraw Waiver of Right to Conduct Peer 
Review, f iled March 3, 2022; (2) Motion to Withdraw Counsel for Defense, 
Expedited Ruling Requested, f iled March 21, 2022; (3) Motion to Allow 
Defendant to B e Pro Per and Steven Slavitt as Stand b y Counsel, f iled June 3, 
2022; and (4) Motion to Exercise Right to Represent Self, Expedited Hearing 
Requested, f iled June 20, 2022. 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 counsel (Argument F); and (4) asserting prosecutorial misconduct 
(Argument G).  We affirm. 3
I. BACKGROUND 
This case spans twenty-five years. The factual 
background of this case was presented at length in State v. 
Pavich (Pavich I), 119 Hawaiʻ i 74, 193 P.3d 1274 (App. 2008). 
Briefly, in December 2000, Dr. Edward Bird was murdered in his 
3 Pavich's opening brief presents no points of error, in violation of 
Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4). Exercising our 
discretion, we nonetheless address the arguments Pavich presents to the 
extent possible. See 
Erum v. Llego
, 147 Hawaiʻi 368, 380, 465 P.3d 815, 827 
(2020) ("This court additionally has long adhered to the policy of affording 
litigants the opportunity to be heard on the merits whenever possible."). 
In the argument section of his opening brief, Pavich argues: 
A. "Due to the Destruction of the DNA Evidence and all Other Evidence 
in this Case, This Case Should Be Dismissed on Due Process Grounds"; 
B. "Due to 
The Destruction of the DNA Evidence in this case, this Court 
Should Dismiss Pavich's Convictions Pursuant to HRS [§ 844D]"; 
C. "The Failure of the State to Turn Over the DNA Material Also 
Violated HRS [sic] 16(b)(1)(iii)"; 
D. "The Defendant's Alleged Waiver of His Right to a Peer Review Should 
Not Prevent Him From Asserting His Due Process Rights at this Time"; 
E. "Even if This Court Determines that Pavich's Waiver of His Right to a Peer Review is Relevant, It was not a Knowing or Intelligent 
Waiver"; 
F. "Aside From The Due Process Violation Stated Above, At The Very Least, The Conviction Should Be Reversed and a New Trial Ordered 
Based on Ineffective Assistance of Counsel"; and 
G. "The State Committed Prosecutorial Misconduct and this Conviction Should be Reversed as a Result." 
In an appendix to his reply brief, Pavich presents what he deems are 
points of error. However, HRAP Rule 28(d) governing reply briefs does not allow for such a filing, and issues raised for the first time in a reply brief will be deemed waived. In re Tax Appeal of Hawaiian Flour Mills, Inc.
, 
76 Hawaiʻi 1, 14 n.5, 868 P.2d 419, 432 n.5 (1994) (explaining arguments 
raised for the first time in the reply brief will be deemed waived). 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
    
 
 
 home. Id. at 76-77, 193 P.3d at 1276-77. At the time, Dr. Bird 
was about eighty-two years old and used a wheelchair. Id. at 
76, 193 P.3d at 1276. 
As for the procedural background, a grand jury 
indicted Pavich for Burglary in the First Degree, Kidnapping, 
Robbery in the First Degree, Murder in the Second Degree, and 
Prohibited Acts Related to Drug Paraphernalia.4 Id. Shortly 
thereafter, the Office of the Public Defender withdrew as 
Pavich's attorney due to a conflict of interest and Keith S. 
Shigetomi, Esq. (Attorney Shigetomi) was appointed. 
Approximately ten months before trial, the State 
disclosed to Pavich a 2004 forensic report prepared by Genetic 
Technologies (Forensic Report) containing DNA analyses of 
various pieces of evidence, including napkins with blood-like 
stains. Id.Pavich then had his chosen laboratory, Forensic 
Science, complete a DNA analysis (Forensic Science's analysis), but did not disclose Forensic Science's analysis to the State or identify a Forensic Science expert as a witness. Id. at 80, 193 
P.3d at 1280. During jury selection, the State disclosed a supplemental forensic report (Supplemental Report), also 
4 Pavich was also indicted on one count of Promoting a Dangerous Drug 
in the Third Degree, but the circuit court granted the State's motion to 
dismiss this count. Pavich I
, 119 Hawaiʻi at 77 n.2, 193 P.3d at 1277 n.2. 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   prepared by Genetic Technologies, that included analysis as to 
one of the napkin stains. Id. at 76, 193 P.3d at 1276. 
A jury found Pavich guilty as charged on all counts. 
Id.
 at 77, 193 P.3d at 1277. 
In November 2005, Pavich moved for approval of 
litigation costs to conduct a peer review of the Supplemental 
Report. Id. at 83, 193 P.3d at 1283. Pavich asserted that the 
Supplemental Report contained new information regarding "a blood 
stain found on a napkin" recovered from Dr. Bird's apartment. 
Pavich wanted to conduct a peer review of the new findings in 
the Supplemental Report and an independent DNA analysis. The 
circuit court denied Pavich's motion and entered its judgment of 
conviction and sentence. Pavich appealed. 
In August 2006, the circuit court ordered "all 
evidence in the custody of the State, Genetic Technologies, Maui 
Police Department and the Court be preserved." 
In September 2008, this court held, among other 
things, that the circuit court erred in refusing to approve Pavich's post-trial request for funds to conduct a peer review 
of the Supplemental Report. Pavich I
, 119 Hawaiʻi at 84, 193 
P.3d at 1284. This court explained that because Pavich could 
not peer review the Supplemental Report, he lacked the 
information to possibly rebut the testimony of the State's 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 expert, Stephanie Beine (
Beine) of Genetic Technologies. Id. at 
81, 86, 193 P.3d at 1281, 1286. 
This court remanded this case as Pavich was "entitled 
to funds for a peer review to evaluate the [Supplemental Report] 
and to move for a new trial after the peer review is conducted." 
Id. at 86, 193 P.3d at 1286. This court explained, "If the peer 
review obtained on remand demonstrates that Beine's testimony 
was essentially accurate or that the availability of the peer review during trial would not have affected the outcome of the 
case, then Pavich was not deprived of a fair trial and a new 
trial is not warranted." Id.And "[i]f the circuit court 
denies the new trial motion, Pavich's convictions shall stand, subject to Pavich's right to appeal the denial of his new trial 
motion." Id.
In a footnote, this court stated, "Obviously, Pavich's 
convictions shall stand if he does not file a new trial motion after completion of the peer review." Id. at 86 n.13, 193 P.3d 
at 1286 n.13. 
In April 2009, on remand, the circuit court held a 
status conference during which Pavich stated he did not want to 
proceed with the peer review or file a motion for new trial. 
Attorney Shigetomi explained that Pavich was aware that his 
convictions would then stand. Attorney Shigetomi also informed 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 the circuit court that he advised Pavich against this course of 
action. 
The circuit court questioned Pavich, explaining this 
court's decision in Pavich I in detail and asking if Pavich 
understood. Pavich indicated he understood. Pavich then 
addressed the court, explaining that "the Lord" helped him see 
it was "not right" to pursue his case because he "participated 
in this crime": 
[Pavich]: Yes, your Honor. I understand the Court's 
position and their ruling. I understand the potential that 
is there to pursue the case further, and what I'd like to 
make clear is that because of the testimony of the Lord in 
my life, the Lord Jesus Christ, he's  made aware to me that 
it's not right in his eyes to pursue this case because of the fact that regardless of what this evidence does or does 
not say, I would like to now take the position and make the 
Court aware that I have been involved in this case.  
I have neglected responsibility and that's not right 
for me to pursue any type of benefit towards my conviction 
because of the fact that, in simplicity, I participated in 
this crime and the crimes therefore that I'm charged with. 
So because of those reasons and basically because God 
has made it clear to me that it is not his will for me to 
partake in this, therefore, I accept the responsibility 
that has been given and the conviction that stands and, you 
know, I'll just stick with that and seek the things that 
are eternal and not temporal in regard to freedom.  
[Circuit Court]: 
I understand. Thank you for 
elaborating on that. I understand your position. 
[Pavich]: Okay. 
[Circuit Court]: So you understand -- in that 
footnote where the Intermediate Court of Appeals says, 
"Obviously, Pavich's convictions shall stand if he does not 
file a new trial motion after completion of peer review in 
this case," you understand there won't be any peer review and there wouldn't be any new trial motion so your 
conviction will stand. Do you understand that?  
[Pavich]: 
Yes, Judge. That's the position that I'm 
directed to accept. 
7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [Circuit Court]: All right. When you say "directed 
to accept," you mean based on your --
[Pavich]: My relationship with Jesus Christ. 
[Circuit Court]: I understand. All right. Well, that all makes sense to the Court, 
and I do understand that you've taken a broader view of 
this, that you understand your rights and that - -
[Pavich]: Absolutely. 
The circuit court determined Pavich made an intelligent, 
knowing, and voluntary waiver of his right to pursue the courses 
of action afforded by Pavich I: 
[Circuit Court]: -- and you at this time have 
determined that in looking at the broader picture, the 
right thing to do is not to pursue anything but to accept 
responsibility. I'm satisfied that you have made an 
intelligent, knowing and voluntary waiver of your right to 
pursue any of these courses of action; that you wish to accept responsibility and you've done so after consultation 
with counsel.  
The circuit court informed Pavich that it was inclined 
to relieve Attorney Shigetomi of any further obligations 
regarding peer review and the motion for new trial, but continue 
Attorney Shigetomi's representation of Pavich for "any dealings 
with the Paroling Authority," and asked if Pavich agreed. 
Pavich answered in the affirmative. 
Regarding Forensic Science's analysis for Pavich, the 
circuit court ordered Attorney Shigetomi to "maintain custody 
and control of [Forensic Science's analysis] even though [Attorney Shigetomi was] not in active participation and the 
case [was] coming to a close." Attorney Shigetomi responded 
8
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 that he did not think he discarded Forensic Science's analysis, 
but he would have to find it. 
In August 2010, over a year later, the State requested 
to withdraw its exhibits from the court, which the circuit court 
approved.  The State's exhibit list did not indicate that the 
actual napkins were offered for identification or received in 
evidence. 
That same day, the circuit court entered an order 
disposing of Pavich's exhibits in its custody pursuant to HRS § 606-4 (1993)  and noting verbal approval by Attorney Shigetomi. 
5
5 HRS § 606-4 was last amended in 2016, after the circuit court entered 
its August 2010 order deeming the evidence abandoned and ordering its 
disposal. Thus, the circuit court cited the 1993 version of HRS § 606-4, 
which provided: 
§  606-4 Custody; disposition of exhibits.  The clerks 
of the supreme, intermediate appellate court, circuit, and district courts shall have the custody of all records, 
books, papers, moneys, exhibits, and other things 
pertaining to their respective courts.  
The attorney of the party who introduced the exhibits 
or things in evidence or left them in the custody of the 
court, or the party, if not represented by any attorney, 
shall remove them from the court within six months after 
the final termination of the action to which the exhibits
or things are related.   The clerks shall have the authority 
and power, upon the written approval of a judge of the 
court given in particular actions or proceedings, to sell, 
destroy, or otherwise dispose of exhibits and things marked 
for identification, other than original files belonging to 
other actions, which have come into their possession or custody under this section, when such  exhibits or things 
have not been already removed by their owners or by the attorneys representing the owners and when more than six 
months has elapsed since the final termination of the 
action  to which the exhibits or things are related.  
9  (continued . . .)   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 Pavich's exhibit list indicates a "Letter from Robert Rivera to 
Keith Tanaka" was offered for identification and received in 
evidence. 
Pavich's amended exhibit list showed the Forensic 
Report, the Supplemental Report, and Forensic Science's analysis were received in evidence. 
In July 2017, nearly seven years later, Pavich 
requested counsel for post-conviction relief and filed other 
letters claiming Attorney Shigetomi was ineffective. The circuit court directed Pavich to go through Attorney Shigetomi 
who remained Pavich's attorney of record as Attorney Shigetomi 
had not withdrawn. 
In April 2019, roughly ten years after waiving his 
right to conduct a peer review of the Supplemental Report and to 
file a motion for a new trial, Pavich filed, through Attorney 
Shigetomi, the 2019 Motion to Withdraw Waiver. Pavich asserted 
his waiver was not intelligent, knowing, or voluntary. 
Anticipating that he might be required to serve as a witness in the case, Attorney Shigetomi moved to withdraw as counsel. The 
circuit court granted Attorney Shigetomi's motion. 
 (. . . continued) 
All moneys received from sales under this section 
shall be 
forthwith deposited with the state director of 
finance as government realizations. 
(Formatting altered and emphases added.) 
10   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
 John Parker, Esq. (Attorney Parker) was appointed 
counsel. Attorney Parker requested funds to conduct an 
independent DNA analysis pursuant to Pavich I. 
In June 2019, during a status conference, the State 
informed the circuit court that all DNA evidence was destroyed 
in November 2011. 
The circuit court ordered both parties to 
"prepare statement of facts of background of handling of the evidence and any destruction of evidence." The State reported that Genetic Technologies tested the DNA material and returned 
all items to Maui Police Department; Maui Police Department 
received the four "napkins with blood-like stains" in 2005 and 
disposed of those four napkins on November 25, 2011. 
From November 2019, and "[o]ver the course of the next 
15 months, approximately 12 hearings were held, and $19,000 was 
spent on DNA matters." In the end, the State determined it 
"would not be able to produce the data necessary to do the peer 
review." 
In March 2021, Pavich moved again to withdraw his 
waiver (2021 Motion to Withdraw Waiver) and filed the 2021 Motion for New Trial. Attorney Parker filed both motions. The 
2021 Motion to Withdraw Waiver alleged the circuit court's 
colloquy was defective. In July 2021, the circuit court held a 
hearing on the 2021 Motion to Withdraw Waiver. During the 
hearing, Pavich asked the circuit court to find that he "did not 
11
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 knowingly, intelligently and voluntarily waive his right to a --
to the process of getting peer review." 
The circuit court denied the motion. 
In considering 
the totality of circumstances, the circuit court found the 
exchange regarding waiver "was reasonable and not deficient." 
The circuit court further found "there was not an iota, not a 
scintilla of evidence to indicate that [Pavich] was afflicted by 
any mental health condition," and the document Pavich submitted under seal was "inadmissible for establishing that fact." 
On August 5, 2021, the circuit court entered its order 
specifically denying the 2021 Motion to Withdraw Waiver filed by 
Attorney Parker (Order Denying 2021 Motion to Withdraw Waiver). 
This order did not address the 2019 Motion to Withdraw Waiver 
filed by Attorney Shigetomi. Pavich did not appeal from this 
post-judgment order. 
On August 23, 2021, Pavich himself filed the 2021 
Motion for Recon, which also requested Attorney Parker's dismissal. The next day, Attorney Parker moved to withdraw from 
his appointment as Pavich's counsel, citing Pavich's motion. 
The circuit court granted Attorney Parker's motion to withdraw 
and appointed Steven Slavitt, Esq. 
Pavich filed subsequent motions. A number of Pavich's 
motions were resolved in the April 2023 Order, including the 
2019 Motion to Withdraw Waiver filed by Attorney Shigetomi, the 
12
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   2021 Motion for New Trial filed by Attorney Parker, and the 2021 
Motion for Recon filed by Pavich himself. Pavich appeals from 
the April 2023 Order. 
II. DISCUSSION 
Again, Pavich (1) challenges his waiver of his right 
to a peer review and to move for a new trial; (2) challenges the disposal of DNA evidence and failure to turn over DNA material; 
(3) asserts ineffective assistance of counsel; and (4) asserts prosecutorial misconduct. We affirm. 
A. Pavich's Waiver of His Right to Conduct a Peer Review and 
to Move for New Trial Stands 
Pavich challenges his waiver of his right to conduct a 
peer review and to move for a new trial (Arguments D and E). 
Pavich argues his waiver was not knowing or intelligent because the circuit court did not engage in a "true colloquy" as it did 
"not ask any questions to see if Pavich really understood the 
rights he was waiving." 
The April 2023 Order from which Pavich appeals 
resolved the 2019 Motion to Withdraw Waiver filed by Attorney 
Shigetomi. The circuit court concluded that, to the extent the 
2019 Motion to Withdraw Waiver filed by Attorney Shigetomi "was not rendered moot by the [Order Denying 2021 Motion to Withdraw 
Waiver], it is nevertheless also properly Denied and will be so 
ordered." The circuit court then concluded that "Pavich 
13
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily waived his right to 
conduct peer review and pursue any new trial in this case." 
The 2019 Motion to Withdraw Waiver filed by Attorney 
Shigetomi asserted that Pavich "did not intentionally, knowing 
or voluntarily waive his right to pursue a peer review or his 
motion for New Trial." Similarly, the 2021 Motion to Withdraw 
Waiver filed by Attorney Parker, was based in part on Pavich not 
intelligently, knowingly, or voluntarily waiving his right to conduct a peer review of the Supplemental Report. 
Because the circuit court denied the 2021 Motion to 
Withdraw Waiver filed by Attorney Parker, the issue of whether 
Pavich intelligently, knowingly, and voluntarily waived his 
right to conduct a peer review was already ruled upon. 
Thus, 
the 2019 Motion to Withdraw Waiver filed by Attorney Shigetomi raising the same issue was rendered moot by the Order Denying 
2021 Motion to Withdraw Waiver. 
And because Pavich did not appeal from the Order 
Denying 2021 Motion to Withdraw Waiver, this court lacks jurisdiction to review that order. State v. Brandimart, 68 Haw. 
495, 496, 720 P.2d 1009, 1010 (1986) (explaining that a motion for reconsideration does not toll the time to appeal). 
In sum, the circuit court did not err in denying the 
2019 Motion to Withdraw Waiver filed by Attorney Shigetomi. 
Thus, Pavich's waiver of his right to conduct a peer review 
14
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
  stands. As the right to move for a new trial hinged on the peer 
review of the Supplemental Report, that waiver also stands. 
B. Pavich's Conviction Stands in Light of His Waiver 
Pavich next challenges the destruction of the DNA 
evidence and the failure to turn over DNA material (Arguments A, 
B, and C). Pavich argues that the destruction of the DNA 
evidence amounted to a violation of his due process rights. 
Pavich relies on (a) Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963), 
(b) HRS § 844D-126 (Supp. 2005), and (c) Hawai
ʻi Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 16(b)(1)(iii). 
1. Brady 
Pavich provides no authority to show 
Brady applies in 
this situation. To the contrary, the U.S. Supreme Court has 
expressly held that "
Brady is the wrong framework" for a 
defendant's rights in post-conviction proceedings. Dist.
Att'y's Off. for Third Jud. Dist. v. Osborne, 557 U.S. 52, 69 
(2009). 
2. HRS § 844D-126 HRS § 844D-126 governs the retention of biological 
evidence and requires the evidence to be retained until the 
latter of the exhaustion of all appeals or the completion of the 
15
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 imposed sentence to which the evidence relates.6 Thus, the 
biological evidence (i.e., four napkins with blood-like stains) 
should have been retained. 
We note that HRS Chapter 844D does not expressly 
provide penalties for violating HRS § 844D-126. 
And, although Pavich was afforded an opportunity to 
conduct a peer review of the Supplemental Report, he did not 
pursue it. Disregarding the advice of Attorney Shigetomi, Pavich expressly waived his right to conduct a peer review of 
the Supplemental Report. As discussed above, this waiver 
stands. 
6 HRS § 844D-126 (Supp. 2005) provides: 
[§ 844D- 126]  Retention of biological evidence. 
(a) All evidence in the custody or control of a 
police department, prosecuting attorney, laboratory, or 
court that is related to the investigation or prosecution of a case in which there has been a judgment of conviction 
and that may contain biological evidence that could be used 
for DNA analysis shall be retained at least until the later 
occurring of either: 
(1) The exhaustion of all appeals of the case to 
which the evidence is related; or 
(2) The completion of any sentence, including any 
term of probation or parole, imposed on the 
defendant in the case to which the evidence 
relates. 
(b) The attorney general shall establish procedures 
and protocols, which shall be uniform throughout the State, 
for the collection and preservation of evidence retained 
pursuant to this section. 
(Formatting altered and emphases added.) 
16   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 A year after Pavich's waiver, the State moved to 
withdraw its evidence from the circuit court, and the circuit 
court ordered that Pavich's evidence be "deemed abandoned and 
disposed of" pursuant to HRS § 606-4. 
A decade after waiving his right to conduct a peer 
review, Pavich sought to challenge his waiver. By then, defense 
counsel did not have Forensic Science's analysis and Maui Police 
Department did not have the four napkins. Efforts were made and funds were expended to determine whether a peer review could be 
conducted. In the end, a peer review could not be conducted. 
Thus, in light of Pavich's waiver, we decline to 
vacate his convictions under HRS § 844D-126. 
3. HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(iii) Pavich appears to argue the State violated HRPP 
Rule 16(b)(1)(iii)
7 because it "not only utterly failed to 
7 Pavich actually argues the State violated " HRS 16(b)(1)(iii)," but no 
such revised statute exists. 
Under Arraignment and Preparation for Trial, HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(iii) 
governs Discovery disclosures by the prosecution: 
Rule 16. DISCOVERY. 
 
(b) Disclosure by the Prosecution. 
(1) DISCLOSURE OF MATTERS WITHIN PROSECUTION 'S 
POSSESSION . The prosecutor shall disclose to the defendant 
or the defendant's attorney the following material and 
information within the prosecutor's possession or control: 
    . . . .
   . ..
.
(continued . . .) 
17   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 produce the discovery of the [Supplemental Report] requested by 
the defense and ordered compelled by this Court, it then failed 
to have the Maui Police Department and [Genetic Technologies] 
preserve the materials." 
However, in his opening brief, Pavich does not 
identify the order to which he refers, and the State produced 
the Supplemental Report during trial. See HRPP Rule 16(e)(2) 
("CONTINUING DUTY TO  DISCLOSE. If subsequent to compliance with 
these rules or orders entered pursuant to these rules, a party 
discovers additional material or information which would have 
been subject to disclosure pursuant to this Rule 16, that party 
shall promptly disclose the additional material or information, and if the additional material or information is discovered 
during trial, the court shall also be notified."). 
Under these circumstances, we decline to vacate 
Pavich's conviction under HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(iii). 
 (. . . continued) 
(iii) any reports or statements of experts, which 
were made in connection with the particular case or which 
the prosecutor intends to introduce, or which are material 
to the preparation of the defense and are specifically designated in writing by defense counsel, including results 
of physical or mental examinations and of scientific tests, 
experiments, or comparisons[.] 
(Formatting altered.) 
18   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  C. No Ineffective Assistance of Counsel 
Pavich next asserts that Attorney Shigetomi and 
Attorney Parker were ineffective (Argument F). 
For claims of ineffective assistance of counsel, we 
look at whether the "assistance was within the range of 
competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases": 
When reviewing a claim of ineffective assistance of 
counsel, [the appellate court] looks at whether defense 
counsel's assistance was within the range of competence 
demanded of attorneys in criminal cases.  The defendant has 
the burden of establishing ineffective assistance of 
counsel and must meet the following two- part test:  1)  that 
there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 
2)  that such errors or omissions resulted in either the 
withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially 
meritorious defense. To satisfy this second prong, the 
defendant needs to show a possible impairment, rather than 
a probable impairment, of a potentially meritorious 
defense. A defendant need not prove actual prejudice.  
State v. Yuen, 154 Hawaiʻ i 434, 443-44, 555 P.3d 121, 130-31 
(2024) (quoting State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai
ʻi 504, 513-14, 78 
P.3d 317, 326-27 (2003)). 
1. Attorney Shigetomi 
In particular, Pavich argues Attorney Shigetomi was 
ineffective because, regarding Beine's testimony, he did not 
bring a motion in limine, object to the testimony, or seek a 
continuance. Pavich, however, has not shown that the 
Supplemental Report and Beine's testimony were inadmissible. 
See State v. Richie , 88 Hawaiʻi 19, 40, 960 P.2d 1227, 1248 
(1998) ("Failing to object to 
admissible evidence cannot be 
considered an error or omission."). And Attorney Shigetomi did
19   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 move for a continuance and to compel production of Genetic 
Technologies' DNA evidence to allow Forensic Science to conduct 
a peer review of the Supplemental Report. 
Pavich also argues that Attorney Shigetomi did not 
call James Welling to testify. 
But Pavich provides no sworn 
statement describing Welling's expected testimony. Seeid. at 
39, 960 P.2d at 1247 ("Ineffective assistance of counsel claims 
based on the failure to obtain witnesses must be supported by 
affidavits or sworn statements describing the testimony of the 
proffered witnesses."). 
And Pavich argues that Attorney Shigetomi did not 
request the evidence be preserved after his waiver, approved the 
destruction of the evidence retained by the circuit court, and destroyed the evidence in his possession. Against Attorney 
Shigetomi's advice, Pavich expressly waived his right to a peer 
review, expressly waived his right to move for a new trial, and 
expressly stated he participated in the crimes with which he was 
charged. When the circuit court ordered Attorney Shigetomi to 
preserve the analysis from Forensic Science (Pavich's expert), 
Attorney Shigetomi indicated he would but needed to locate it first. In addition, the circuit court disposed of Pavich's 
evidence in its possession under HRS § 606-4, for which it did 
not need Attorney Shigetomi's permission. 
20
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  Under these facts, we cannot say Attorney Shigetomi's 
assistance was not "within the range of competence demanded of 
attorneys in criminal cases." See Yuen, 154 Hawaiʻ i at 443-44, 
555 P.3d at 130-31. 
2. Attorney Parker 
Pavich argues that Attorney Parker should have 
subpoenaed Maui Police Department, the State, and Genetic Technologies regarding the destruction of evidence. This was 
unnecessary because the circuit court ordered the parties to 
present a statement of facts regarding the circumstances 
surrounding the DNA evidence. 
Pavich also argues that Attorney Parker spent his time 
on a motion to withdraw his waiver rather than a motion for new trial. Attorney Parker filed both the 2021 Motion to Withdraw 
Waiver and the 2021 Motion for New Trial. 
And Pavich argues that Attorney Parker failed to call 
a mental health expert to look at Pavich's mental health at the 
time of his 2009 waiver. But Pavich provides no sworn statement 
and fails to explain how a newly hired mental health expert would, in 2019, opine as to Pavich's mental health at the time 
of the waiver, in 2009. See Richie, 88 Hawaiʻ i at 39, 960 P.2d 
at 1247. 
Under these facts, we cannot say Attorney Parker's 
assistance was not "within the range of competence demanded of 
21
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  attorneys in criminal cases." See Yuen, 154 Hawaiʻ i at 443-44, 
555 P.3d at 130-31. 
D. No Prosecutorial Misconduct 
Finally, Pavich asserts the State committed 
prosecutorial misconduct (Argument G). 
For prosecutorial misconduct claims, this court must 
decide if the conduct was improper, and if so, whether the conduct was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. 
Willis, 156 Hawaiʻ i 195, 204, 572 P.3d 668, 677 (2025). 
Pavich makes various arguments based on the State's 
conduct prior to and during trial. These arguments could have been raised during Pavich's first direct appeal, Pavich I
, and 
Pavich did not do so. See 119 Hawaiʻ i at 77, 193 P.3d at 1277.  
Therefore, Pavich's prosecutorial misconduct claims based on the 
State's conduct at trial are waived. 
Pavich also argues that the State engaged in 
prosecutorial misconduct because it failed to turn over the DNA 
evidence pursuant to Pavich I. The State did not turn over the DNA evidence pursuant to Pavich I because, after the case was 
remanded, Pavich waived his right to conduct a peer review of 
the Supplemental Report. 
Pavich also argues that the prosecutor committed 
misconduct because "[t]here is no evidence in the record that 
the State followed any protocols under HRS [§] 844D to preserve 
22
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
 
 
 this DNA evidence." Beyond this statement, Pavich does not 
identify which "protocol" the prosecutor violated. And, as 
discussed above, we decline to vacate Pavich's convictions under 
HRS § 844D-126 because his waiver of his right to conduct a peer 
review of the Supplemental Report stands. 
III. CONCLUSION 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the circuit court's 
April 2023 Order. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, February 26, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
 
Steven Slavitt, 
for Defendant-Appellant.  
Richard B. Rost, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui, for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Karen T. Nakasone Chief Judge 
 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard Associate Judge 
 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen Associate Judge 
23 