NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001277
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
BRENT LOCKWOOD, Appellant-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL
RELATIONS EMPLOYMENT SECURITY APPEAL & REFEREES'
 
OFFICE, Appellees-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-0186(2))

 
AMENDED SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Appellant-Appellant Brent Lockwood (Lockwood) appeals 
pro se from the Final Judgment (Judgment) in favor of Appellee-
Appellee State of Hawai 'i, Department of Labor and Industrial 
Relations, Employment Security Appeals Referees' Office (DLIR Referees' Office), which was filed on October 6, 2014 (Judgment), 
1
in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).  In
 
the Judgment, the Circuit Court affirmed the decision of the DLIR
 
Referees' Office that Lockwood was disqualified from receiving
 unemployment benefits because he was discharged for misconduct
 
1
 The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
connected with work, as provided in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 383-30(2) (2015).
 
In this secondary appeal, Lockwood contends that the 
Circuit Court erred in affirming the DLIR Referees' Office's 
finding that his unauthorized absence constituted misconduct connected with work under Hawai
'i unemployment insurance laws. 
The crux of Lockwood's argument is that his decision to fly standby on his return to Hawai
'i (on the last day of a holiday 
weekend and the day before he was scheduled to return to work) did not constitute a wilful or wanton disregard of his employer's interest, or wilful disobedience of the employer's directives, but rather, it was a good faith error in judgment or discretion. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Lockwood's appeal as follows:
 
A discharge of employment for misconduct connected with
 
work disqualifies a person from receiving unemployment benefits. 
HRS § 383-30(2). "A discharge occurs when an employer is the
 'moving party' in the termination of the employment
 relationship." Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) § 12-5-51(a)
 
(1981). It is undisputed that Lockwood was required to return to
 
work on October 15, 2013, that he was fired for failing to do so,
 and that his employer, Employer-Appellee-Appellee Ka Lima O Maui,
 Ltd. (Ka Lima), was the moving party in the termination of the
 
employment relationship. Thus, Lockwood was discharged from
 
employment for conduct connected with work. HAR § 12-5-51(a). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Accordingly, we must review whether the DLIR Referees' Office
 
properly found that Lockwood's unapproved absences constitute
 misconduct.
 
The standards for misconduct under the unemployment
 
insurance laws are set forth in HAR § 12-5-51, which provides in
 relevant part:
 
(c) Misconduct connected with work consists of
 
actions which show a wilful or wanton disregard of the
employer's interests, such as deliberate violations of or
deliberate disregard of the standards of behavior which the
employer has a right to expect of an employee, or
carelessness, or negligence of such a degree or recurrence
as to show wrongful intent or evil design. Mere
 inefficiency, unsatisfactory conduct, poor performance
because of inability or incapacity, isolated instances of
ordinary negligence or inadvertence, or good-faith errors in
judgment or discretion are not misconduct. The misconduct
 shall be related to the work of the individual or the
 individual's status as an employee.
 
(d) In determining whether an individual's act
constituted "misconduct" the department shall consider any
relevant evidence presented which relates to:
(1) 	Employee's reasons for the act or omission, and
efforts to avoid the act or failure to act;
(2) 	The relevant circumstances of the case and any
causative effect therefrom upon the employee's
actions;
(3) 	The nature and importance to the employer of the
offended interest of the employer;
(4) 	Any lawful and reasonable company policy or
custom;
(5) 	Employer's actions to curtail or prevent, if
possible, the objectionable conduct; and
(6) 	The nature of the act or failure to act.
 
(e) Situations where misconduct may be found
include, but are not limited to, the following where the
evidence demonstrates:
 
(1) 	
Unexcused absence or recurring unexcused

tardiness; or
 
. . . .
 
(4) 
	Employee's gross neglect of duty;
(5)	 Employee's wilful disobedience of employer's
directives or employee's insubordination.
 
HAR § 12-5-51(c)-(e). The burden of proof is on the employer to
 
show that the claimant was discharged for misconduct. Medeiros
 
v. Haw. Dep't of Labor & Indus. Relations, 108 Hawai 'i 258, 262, 
3
  Upon review, the Circuit Court did not err when it
 
determined that these findings are not clearly erroneous in view
 
of the substantial evidence in this record. In addition, with
 respect to the HAR § 12-5-51(d) factors, the evidence included
 that: (1) Although Lockwood traveled to California because he
 needed to contest a trusteeship for an estate by October 5, 2013,
 his explanation for waiting until October 14, 2013 to try to
 travel back to Hawai
'i was that there were "other [unspecified] 
issues" involved regarding an inheritance estate that "he had to
 deal with" that "would take time" (HAR § 12-5-51(d)(1)); (2)
 Lockwood was aware there was a workload issue, as several other
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
118 P.3d 1201, 1205 (2005); see also Hardin v. Akiba , 84 Hawai 'i 
305, 933 P.2d 1339 (1997).
 
Here, as stated by the Circuit Court in the court's
 
findings of fact, the Appeals Officer found, inter alia:
 
a. 	Claimant's vacation ended on October 11, 2013, a
Friday, and he was scheduled to return to work on
Tuesday, October 15, 2013, after the Federal holiday
on Monday, October 14, 2013.
 
b. 	Claimant traveled to California on a standby ticket
and intended to fly back to Hawaii on October 14,
2013, but was unable to get a seat until October 18,
2013, seven days after his vacation ended.
 
c. 	Employer had informed Claimant when he went on
vacation in February, 2013, that if Claimant did not
return on time he would be terminated.
 
d. 	Claimant was fully aware of the importance of
returning to work after his vacation on time because
when Claimant asked Employer what would happen if he
did not return on time from his October vacation,
Employer informed Claimant that that would be his
problem.
 
e. 	The very nature of a standby ticket means that there
is no guarantee of a travel date. By only trying to
travel on October 14, 2013, a Federal holiday,
Claimant was gambling with Employer's interests.
Employer had a right to expect Claimant to return to
work to avoid inadequate staffing, increased work, and
overtime for other employees.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
people were taking vacation at that time and his absence would
 
cause a staff shortage (HAR § 12-5-51(d)(2)); (3) Lockwood had
 been informed of the importance of showing up on his scheduled
 return-to-work date and a February memo had put him on notice
 that not returning to work as scheduled was a serious enough
 offense to potentially merit termination from Ka Lima (HAR § 12­5-51(d)(3)); (4) as the Appeals Officer found, Ka Lima "had a
 right to expect [Lockwood] to report to work on time and as
 scheduled, as an employee's absence would foreseeably and
 reasonably affect business operations through inadequate staffing
 and increased work and/or required overtime for other employees"
 (HAR § 12-5-51(d)(4)); (5) Lockwood's supervisor had met with
 Lockwood to negotiate the October vacation dates and reportedly
 told him that he needed to be back by October 15, 2013, and that
 a failure to do so would be his "problem," as well as issued the
 February memo (HAR § 12-5-51(d)(5)); and (6) Lockwood's
 explanation provided no compelling reason why he was unable to
 try for an earlier flight (HAR § 12-5-51(d)(6)). Rather,
 Lockwood's failure to try to return on an earlier flight showed
 "carelessness" and a "deliberate disregard of the standards of
 behavior which the employer ha[d] a right to expect" of him. HAR
 § 12-5-51(c). 
We reject Lockwood's contention that his actions
 
constituted a good-faith error in judgment, rather than wilful
 misconduct. The supreme court has explained that, "as set forth
 in this court's prior decisions and discussed below, the level of
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
culpability required to show wilful or wanton disregard is not 
subjective intent, but conscious disregard of a known (or which should have been known) risk with respect to a result of the conduct." Medeiros, 108 Hawai
'i at 268, 118 P.3d at 1211. The 
supreme court held in Medeiros that the claimant "knew or should have known that her job would be in jeopardy" if she violated the policy, and that she consciously disregarded that risk. Id. at 
271, 118 P.3d at 1214. Thus, her actions showed a wilful or wanton disregard for her employer's interests and she was disqualified from unemployment benefits. Id. at 268-69, 118 P.3d 
at 1211-12; see also Keanini v. Akiba, 93 Hawai
'i 75, 82, 996 
P.2d 280, 287 (App. 2000) (recognizing that claimant "knew or should have known that his job would be in jeopardy if he chose to drive uninsured, and that he made a conscious decision in the face of this risk to do precisely that which demonstrated a wilful or wanton disregard of the employer's interests" (citation, internal quotation marks and ellipsis omitted)). Here, Lockwood knew or should have known that his job would be in jeopardy if he failed to return to work as scheduled and, in making his travel plans, he consciously disregarded that risk. Thus, we conclude that his actions showed a wilful or wanton disregard for his employer's interests and he was disqualified from unemployment benefits. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's October 6, 2014
 
Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 6, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Brent Lockwood,
Appellant/Appellant Pro Se. Chief Judge 
Frances E.H. Lum,Li-Ann Yamashiro,Deputy Attorneys General,for Appellees/Appellees. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7
 