NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NOS. CAAP-11-0001081, CAAP-13-0000306,
and CAAP-13-0001307

 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CAAP-11-0001081
 
GMAC MORTGAGE, LLC, a Delaware Limited Liability Company,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
vs.
 
JOYCELYN WANDA UNCIANO, Defendant-Appellant
and
 
WAYNE NOELANI TOM, et al., Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(Civil No. 03-1-1029-05)

 
and
 
CAAP-13-0000306
 
GMAC MORTGAGE, LLC, a Delaware Limited Liability Company,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
vs.
 
JOYCELYN WANDA UNCIANO, Defendant-Appellant
and
 
WAYNE NOELANI TOM, et al., Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(Civil No. 03-1-1029-05)

 
and
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-13-0001307
 
JOYCELYN W. UNCIANO, Petitioner-Appellant,
vs.
 
GMAC MORTGAGE, LLC, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE LAND COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
(APPLICATION NO. 1069; CASE NO. 11-1069) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
In these consolidated appeals, Defendant-Appellant
 
Joycelyn W. Unciano (Unciano) appeals from: (1) the Judgment
 
filed in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)1
 
on August 18, 2011 (Foreclosure Judgment), entered pursuant to
 the Circuit Court's "Findings of Fact; Conclusions of Law; and
 Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion to (1) Substitute Party and
 Amend Caption, and (2) for Summary Judgment and for Interlocutory
 
2
Decree of Foreclosure";  (2) the Judgment filed in the Circuit
Court on March 25, 2013 (Confirmation of Sale Judgment), entered
 pursuant to the Circuit Court's "Order Granting in Part and
 Denying in Part Plaintiff's Motion for (1) Confirmation of Sale,
 (2) Approval of Commissioner's Report, (3) Attorneys' Fees and
 Costs; and (4) a Deficiency Judgment, filed on May 23, 2012";
3
 
(3) the Judgment for Possession filed by the Circuit Court on
 March 25, 2013; and (4) the "Final Order and Decree Denying
 Petition of Joycelyn Wanda Unciano to Cancel Land Court Order
 186175 and Amendment of Transfer Certificate of Title No.
 546,739, Filed August 4, 2011" (Order Denying Land Court 
1/ The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided over the entry of the pertinent
judgments and orders issued by the Circuit Court after July 1, 2009. The
 
Honorable Karen N. Blondin presided over the entry of orders in the Circuit
Court prior to that time. 
2/ The Circuit Court certified the Foreclosure Judgment as a final
judgment under Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 54(b) (2000). 
3/ The Circuit Court certified the Confirmation of Sale Judgment as a
final judgment under HRCP Rule 54(b). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Petition) filed in the Land Court of the State of Hawai 'i (Land 
4 5
Court) on May 20, 2013.
Unciano's primary argument underlying all her
 
consolidated appeals is that Plaintiff-Appellee GMAC Mortgage,
 
LLC (GMAC) did not establish that, and there were genuine issues
 of material fact concerning whether, GMAC was the valid holder of
 the note and mortgage on which the foreclosure action regarding
 the subject property is based. As explained below, we conclude
 that there were genuine issues of material fact regarding whether
 GMAC was the valid holder of the note and mortgage on the subject
 property. We therefore vacate the Foreclosure Judgment,
 Confirmation of Sale Judgment, Judgment for Possession, and Order
 Denying Land Court Petition, and we remand for further
 proceedings.
6
 
I.
 
On March 21, 1995, Wayne and Coleen Tom (collectively,
 
the "Toms") executed a promissory note (Note) in favor of Western
 Pacific Mortgage, Inc. (Western Pacific). The Note was secured
 by a mortgage (Mortgage) executed by the Toms in favor of Western
 Pacific on property located at 92-309 Nohona Place, Kapolei, 
4/ The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided. 
5/ GMAC filed separate requests for judicial notice in CAAP-11-0001081,
CAAP-13-0000306, and CAAP-13-0001307, requesting that we take judicial notice
of various matters filed and proceedings held in the cases underlying theseconsolidated appeals and in related cases filed in Circuit Court and federalcourt, as well as certain documents regarding the Subject Property filed inLand Court. We grant GMAC's requests for judicial notice as we conclude thatits requests pertain to materials that are the proper subjects of judicialnotice. See Hawai' i Rules of Evidence Rule 201 (1993); Roxas v. Marcos, 89 
Hawai'i 91, 110 n.9, 969 P.2d 1209, 1228 n.9 (1998). 
6/ We reject Unciano's claim that the Circuit Court and Land Court were
divested of jurisdiction to enter the challenged judgments and orders based on
GMAC's removal to federal court of a separate lawsuit filed by Unciano and the
Toms. The removed action raised issues and sought relief that were different
than the issues raised and relief sought in the actions underlying this
appeal, and the federal court itself recognized that the Circuit Court and
Land Court cases at issue here were ongoing.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i (Subject Property).7 The Mortgage was recorded in Land 
Court and noted on the Subject Property's certificate of title. 
On December 1, 1999, the Toms conveyed the Subject
 
Property to Unciano by Warranty Deed, and the Land Court issued
 
Transfer Certificate of Title (TCT) No. 546,739, which identified
 Unciano as the registered owner of the Subject Property. Unciano
 did not assume the Toms' obligations under the Note and Mortgage. 
After transferring the Subject Property to Unciano, the Toms
 defaulted on their obligations under the Note and Mortgage. 
The Mortgage was transferred by various assignments. 
In 2000, Fleet Mortgage Corp. (Fleet), the holder of the Mortgage
 at that time, instituted a non-judicial foreclosure of the
 Mortgage, which resulted in the sale of the Subject Property to
 Fleet as the successful bidder at the public auction. However,
 Fleet subsequently rescinded its non-judicial foreclosure, and
 Fleet obtained an order from the Land Court cancelling the
 transfer certificate of title issued pursuant to the non-judicial
 foreclosure and reinstating TCT No. 546,739, which identified
 Unciano as the registered owner. 
Subsequently, Washington Mutual Bank, FA (WAMU) became
 
the holder of the Note and Mortgage. On May 15, 2003, WAMU filed
 a complaint for judicial foreclosure in the Circuit Court
 (Foreclosure Action), which is the action that underlies the
 appeals from the Circuit Court. After WAMU filed the Foreclosure
 Action, the Circuit Court granted motions to substitute other
 parties as the plaintiff based on the purported assignment of the
 Mortgage. GMAC was the last party substituted as the plaintiff,
 and the Circuit Court's judgments challenged by Unciano on appeal
 were all issued in favor of GMAC. 
II. 
Unciano's primary argument on appeal is that GMAC was
 
not entitled to pursue foreclosure of the Subject Property
 
7/ The Note and Mortgage erroneously identified the address of the
Subject Property as 92-309 Nohona Street.
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
because it did not establish that it was the valid holder of the
 
Note and Mortgage on the Subject Property. The following
 evidence in the record is pertinent to this claim:
 
1. On May 1, 2006, WAMU assigned the Mortgage to
 
Homecomings Financial Network, Inc. The Assignment of Mortgage
 executed by WAMU identifies the "Assignee" of the mortgage as
 "HOMECOMINGS FINANCIAL NETWORK, INC., a MINNESOTA CORPORATION,
 whose address is 1 MERIDIAN CROSSING, SUITE 100, MINNEPOLIS, MN
 55423[.]" (Emphasis added.) 
2. On September 10, 2008, Homecomings Financial, LLC,
 
a Delaware limited liability company, petitioned the Land Court
 for an order regarding conversion of entity. The petition
 asserted that "HOMECOMINGS FINANCIAL NETWORK, INC., a Delaware
 corporation, was converted into and under the charter and title
 of HOMECOMINGS FINANCIAL, LLC, a Delaware limited liability
 company[.]" (Emphasis added). Attached to the petition was a
 
Delaware certificate of conversion showing that on October 6,
 
2006, "Homecomings Financial Network, Inc., a Delaware
 corporation" (emphasis added), which was first incorporated in
 Delaware on October 10, 1995, and was incorporated in Delaware
 immediately prior to filing the certificate of conversion, was
 converted to Homecomings Financial, LLC, a Delaware limited
 liability company. The Land Court issued an order on September
 10, 2008, granting Homecomings Financial, LLC's petition, which
 authorized the Assistant Registrar of the Land Court to accept
 for filing documents executed in the petitioner's new name,
 Homecomings Financial, LLC.
 
GMAC's claim that it was the valid holder of the
 
Mortgage is based on an assignment from Homecomings Financial,
 LLC.
8 Significant to this appeal, GMAC has not cited to any
 
8/ On August 27, 2010, GMAC recorded an assignment of mortgage from
"Homecomings Financial Network, Inc." (with no reference to the state of
incorporation) to GMAC in the Land Court on TCT No. 546,739. On March 2,
2011, GMAC filed a "Petition of GMAC Mortgage, LLC for Amendment of Transfer
Certificate of Title No. 546,739 and Order" (Petition for Correction). The
 
(continued...)
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence in the record (and we are not aware of any evidence)
 
which shows (1) that Homecomings Financial Network, Inc., a
 Minnesota corporation (hereinafter, "Homecomings, Inc.
 (Minnesota)"), the entity to which WAMU assigned the Mortgage,
 was the same entity as Homecomings Financial Network, Inc., a
 Delaware corporation (hereinafter, "Homecomings, Inc.
 (Delaware)"), which was converted into Homecomings Financial,
 LLC; or (2) that Homecomings, Inc. (Minnesota) transferred the
 Mortgage to Homecomings, Inc. (Delaware) or to Homecomings
 Financial, LLC.
9
 
III.
 
GMAC moved in the Circuit Court to substitute as the
 
plaintiff for Homecomings Financial, LLC in the Foreclosure
 Action and for summary judgment and decree of foreclosure.
10
 
Unciano opposed GMAC's motion arguing, among other things, that
 there were genuine issues of material fact as to whether GMAC was
 the owner and holder of the Mortgage and had the authority to
 foreclose on the Subject Property. In opposing GMAC's motion,
 Unciano cited to evidence in the record showing that WAMU
 assigned the Mortgage to Homecomings, Inc. (Minnesota) as well as
 to the absence of any evidence in the record linking GMAC to any
 assignment derived from Homecomings, Inc. (Minnesota). In
 particular, Unciano asserted and demonstrated that GMAC had
 
8/(...continued)
Petition for Correction sought to amend TCT No. 546,739 to show that the

assignment of the Mortgage was from Homecomings Financial, LLC, instead of
Homecomings Financial Network, Inc. In support of its Petition for
Correction, GMAC cited the Land Court's prior order granting Homecomings
Financial, LLC's petition regarding the conversion of entity from Homecomings,
Financial Network, Inc., a Delaware corporation, to Homecomings Financial,
LLC. The Land Court issued Order 186175, which granted the Petition for
Correction, and it recorded Order 186175 on TCT No. 546,739 on March 3, 2011.
Unciano subsequently petitioned the Land Court to cancel Order 186175 and the
amendment it made to TCT No. 546,739.
 
9/ GMAC also has not cited to any evidence in the record that shows that
Homecomings, Inc. (Minnesota) and Homecomings, Inc. (Delaware) were related in
some fashion. 
10/ The motion was jointly filed by GMAC and Homecomings Financial, LLC,
which the Circuit Court had previously substituted as the plaintiff.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
failed to present any evidence showing that Homecomings, Inc.
 
(Minnesota) was the same entity as Homecomings, Inc. (Delaware),
 or that Homecomings, Inc. (Minnesota) was in any way related to
 Homecomings, Inc. (Delaware). Despite the specific showing and
 assertions made by Unciano, GMAC did not respond by presenting
 any evidence that Homecomings, Inc. (Minnesota) and Homecomings,
 Inc. (Delaware) were the same entity or were related in some
 fashion. GMAC also did not present any evidence showing that
 Homecomings, Inc. (Minnesota) has assigned the Mortgage to
 Homecomings Inc. (Delaware) or to Homecomings Financial, LLC.
 
IV.
 
We review a trial court's grant or denial of summary 
judgment de novo, Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai
'i 48, 56, 109 
P.3d 689, 697 (2005), using the same standard applicable to the trial court. Iddings v. Mee–Lee, 82 Hawai
'i 1, 5, 919 P.2d 263, 
267 (1996). Summary judgment is proper "if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." HRCP Rule 56(c) (2000). "A fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties." Blair 
v. Ing, 95 Hawai
'i 247, 252, 21 P.3d 452, 457 (2001) (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted; format altered). The evidence and the inferences drawn from the evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai
'i 92, 104, 
176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008). 
The burden is on the party moving for summary judgment
(moving party) to show the absence of any genuine issue as
to all material facts, which, under applicable principles of
substantive law, entitles the moving party to judgment as a
matter of law. This burden has two components.
 
First, the moving party has the burden of producing
support for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material
fact exists with respect to the essential elements of the
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
claim or defense which the motion seeks to establish or
 
which the motion questions; and (2) based on the undisputed
facts, it is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of
law. Only when the moving party satisfies its initial
burden of production does the burden shift to the non-moving
party to respond to the motion for summary judgment and
demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general
allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial.
 
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of
persuasion. This burden always remains with the moving
party and requires the moving party to convince the court
that no genuine issue of material fact exists and that the
moving party is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of
law.
 
French v. Hawaii Pizza Hut, Inc., 105 Hawai 'i 462, 470, 99 P.3d 
1046, 1054 (2004) (emphasis in original omitted; format altered) 
(quoting GECC Fin. Corp. v. Jaffarian, 79 Hawai 'i 516, 521, 904 
P.2d 530, 535 (App. 1995)). 
As summarized above, in opposition to GMAC's motion for
 
summary judgment, Unciano made a specific showing (through
 presenting evidence and identifying the absence of evidence) of a
 clear break or gap between the assignment of the Mortgage to
 Homecomings Inc. (Minnesota) and the purported acquisition by
 Homecomings Inc. (Delaware) of the Mortgage. GMAC's claim to
 ownership of the Mortgage was based on an assignment by
 Homecomings Financial, LLC, the entity into which Homecomings
 Inc. (Delaware) had been converted. However, GMAC failed in the
 Circuit Court to present evidence showing how Homecomings Inc.
 (Delaware) had acquired the Mortgage. Based on the existing
 record, we conclude that there were genuine issues of material
 fact as to whether Homecomings Inc. (Delaware) had been a valid
 owner and holder of the Mortgage. This, in turn, created genuine
 issues of material fact regarding whether GMAC (whose interest in
 the Mortgage was derived from Homecomings Inc. (Delaware)) was
 the owner of the Mortgage and was entitled to foreclose on the
 Subject Property. Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit 
Court erred in granting GMAC's motion for summary judgment and
 decree of foreclosure.
11
 
11/ GMAC argues that Unciano did not prove that Homecomings Inc.
(Minnesota) and Homecomings, Inc. (Delaware) were separate entities. However,
(continued...)
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For essentially the same reasons, we conclude that the
 
Circuit Court erred in substituting GMAC for Homecomings
 
Financial, LLC as the plaintiff. GMAC lacks standing to pursue
 the Foreclosure Action unless GMAC can show that it is the owner
 of the Mortgage. Therefore, we vacate the Circuit Court's
 Foreclosure Judgment, which was based on the Circuit Court's
 order granting GMAC's motion to substitute as the plaintiff and
 for summary judgment and decree of foreclosure, and we remand the
 case for further proceedings.
12
 
V.
 
The Circuit Court's Confirmation of Sale Judgment and
 
Judgment for Possession were based on its Foreclosure Judgment. 
Our decision to vacate the Foreclosure Judgment requires that we
 also vacate the Confirmation of Sale Judgment and Judgment for
 Possession. We also vacate the Land Court's Order Denying Land
 Court Petition. The question of whether the assignment of
 mortgage to GMAC is properly recorded on TCT No. 546,739 will
 depend upon how the dispute over whether GMAC is the valid owner
 of the Mortgage is resolved on remand.
 
VI.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we: (1) vacate the Circuit
 
Court's Foreclosure Judgment, Confirmation of Sale Judgment, and
 Judgment for Possession; (2) vacate the Land Court's Order 
11/(...continued)
as the movant in the motion for summary judgment and decree of foreclosure,

GMAC had the burden of establishing the absence of a genuine issue of material
fact and its entitlement to relief.
 
12/ We reject Unciano's claim that she was entitled to summary judgment
in the Foreclosure Action. GMAC would be entitled to the relief it requests
in the Foreclosure Action if it can show on remand that it is the owner of the
 Mortgage.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Denying Land Court Petition; and (3) remand the matters for
 
further proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition
 Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 30, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Joycelyn W. Unciano

Defendant-Appellant Pro Se Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Louise K.Y. Ing

Laura P. Mortiz
 
(Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing) for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
10
 