 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-12-0000023
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KIRBY ENRIQUES, aka KIRBY JENAI HOKULANI ENRIQUE,
Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
KONA DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. FC-CR 11-1-142K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Kirby Enriques (Enriques), also
 
known as Kirby Jenai Hokulani Enrique, appeals from the Judgment
 
filed in the Family Court of the Third Circuit (Family Court)1 on
 
December 14, 2011. Enriques was charged with abuse of a family
 or household member, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 (HRS) ยง 709-906(1) (Supp. 2011).
2 At the time relevant to this
 
1
 The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo, Jr., presided.
 
2
 HRS ยง 709-906(1) provides in relevant part:
 
It shall be unlawful for any person, singly or in concert,
to physically abuse a family or household member . . . . 
For the purposes of this section, "family or household
member" means spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, former spouses
or reciprocal beneficiaries, persons who have a child in common,
parents, children, persons related by consanguinity, and persons
jointly residing or formerly residing in the same dwelling unit.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
case, the complaining witness (CW) was in a romantic relationship
 
with Enriques, and they were living together.
 
After a jury-waived bench trial, the Family Court found
 
Enriques guilty as charged. The Family Court sentenced Enriques
 to two years of probation, subject to the condition that she be
 imprisoned for a period of thirty days, with all but two days
 suspended, as long as she remained arrest and conviction free and
 in compliance with counseling orders.
 
On appeal, Enriques argues that: (1) there was
 
insufficient evidence to negate her defense of self-defense; and
 (2) there was insufficient evidence that she acted with the
 requisite state of mind to physically abuse the CW. We affirm.
 
I.
 A.
 
The evidence adduced at trial included the following: 
Enriques and the CW were involved in an altercation outside of a
 Sack'n Save store. The police were called and the CW gave a
 signed, written statement to the responding officer. The CW 
identified Enriques as the person who hurt the CW and described
 her relationship to Enriques as "Girlfriend." In her written
 statement, the CW described what happened as follows:
 
I was buying a beer (12 pack) forgot my Id in my truck so I
went out to grab my Id then she [(Enriques)] pushed me and I
pushed her back and told her get the fuck away from me and leave
me alone. I walked to inside the store and grabbed a 12 pack
trying to walk to the cashier to pay for my beer but I just put my
beer down and walked out of the store then I was trying to get in
my truck but she kept pushing me so I pushed her back and then she
pulled my hair and punched me w/her left hand on the right side of
my face, then after she punched me I punched her back with my
right hand. 
The CW also stated that she told Enriques "to leave me alone"
 
before Enriques hurt the CW and that the CW felt pain in her neck
 from the "pulling of hair[.]" 
When called to testify at trial, the CW recanted her
 
statement to the police. The CW denied that Enriques had made
 physical contact with the CW, pushed the CW, grabbed the CW's
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hair, or punched the CW during the incident. The Family Court
 
admitted the CW's written statement to the police in evidence.
 
Jose Miranda (Miranda) testified that he saw two
 
females involved in a "public disturbance" at Sack'n Save and
 separated them. One of the females got into a truck, and the
 other female, who Miranda identified as Enriques, went over to
 the driver's side window and "start hitting in there." Miranda
 stated that Enriques was very upset, hit the window of the truck
 and the back of the truck, and accused the other female of
 stealing Enriques's money. Miranda did not see how the
 altercation started, but stated that he was concerned about
 Enriques's behavior and described Enriques as "pretty aggressive"
 and the "more aggressive" person. Miranda called the police but
 left the scene before they arrived.
 
Police officer Jeremy Lewis (Officer Lewis) testified
 
that he was one of the officers who responded to the Sack'n Save
 parking lot. Officer Lewis testified that he observed swelling
 under the CW's right eye.
 
B.
 
Enriques testified in her own defense at trial. 
Enriques testified that she noticed that $300 of her money was
 missing. When she saw the CW at Sack'n Save, she accused the CW
 of stealing her money and tried to stop the CW from spending it
 to buy beer. According to Enriques, the CW backhanded her and
 punched her. This prompted Enriques to defend herself by
 grabbing the CW's hair and holding the CW down, while the CW
 continued to swing at Enriques.
 
C.
 
The Family Court found Enriques guilty as charged of
 
abuse of a family or household member. The Family Court stated
 that it did not believe the CW's trial testimony, but instead
 credited the CW's written statement to the police, which the
 Family Court found was "more reliable evidence of the events of
 that day." The Family Court found that Enriques "was the
 aggressor in the immediate events leading up to the act of abuse"
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and that Enriques "was upset at [the CW] because [Enriques]
 
believed [the CW] stole her money and that [the CW] was using Ms.
 Enriques' money to purchase alcohol." It further found that
 Enriques pushed the CW, who pushed back, and that Enriques then
 pulled the CW's hair and punched the CW in the face. The Family
 Court stated that in its view, the CW's reaction in punching
 Enriques was an act of self-defense on the CW's part. 
II.
 
In evaluating the sufficiency of the evidence, we view 
the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution. State v. Tamura, 63 Haw. 636, 637, 633 P.2d 1115, 1117 (1981). "The test on appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact." State v. Richie, 
88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) (block quote format 
and citation omitted). 
Substantial evidence is "evidence which a reasonable mind
 
might accept as adequate to support the conclusion of the
fact finder." Matters related to the credibility of
witnesses and the weight to be given to the evidence are
generally left to the factfinder. The appellate court will
neither reconcile conflicting evidence nor interfere with
the decision of the trier of fact based on the witnesses'
 credibility or the weight of the evidence.
 
State v. Mitchell, 94 Hawai' i 388, 393, 15 P.3d 314, 319 (App. 
2000) (citations omitted). We give "full play to the right of 
the fact finder to determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw justifiable inferences of fact." State v. Yabusaki, 58 Haw. 
404, 411, 570 P.2d 844, 848 (1977) (block quote format and citation omitted). 
III.
 
We resolve the arguments Enriques raises on appeal as
 
follows:
 
1. There was sufficient evidence to negate Enriques's
 
defense of self-defense. The Family Court found that Enriques
 was the aggressor and pulled the CW's hair and punched the CW in
 the face. When viewed in the light most favorable to the
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
prosecution, there was substantial evidence to support the Family
 
Court's finding and to negate Enriques's claim of self-defense. 
Enriques's argument that there was insufficient 
evidence to negate her self-defense claim presumes that the Family Court should have accepted the CW's trial testimony and Enriques's version of the incident. However, the Family Court was not required to accept the CW's trial testimony and Enriques's version, but could reasonably reconcile the conflicting evidence in a manner adverse to Enriques. The prosecution disproves a defendant's claim of self-defense beyond a reasonable doubt when the trier of fact believes the prosecution's case and disbelieves the defense. In re Doe, 107 
Hawai'i 12, 19, 108 P.3d 966, 973 (2005); see State v. Pavao, 81 
Hawai'i 142, 146, 913 P.2d 553, 557 (App. 1996). The Family 
Court's findings establish that it disbelieved Enriques's self-defense claim. We conclude that there was substantial evidence to support the Family Court' rejection of Enriques's self-defense claim. See Mitchell, 94 Hawai' i at 393, 15 P.3d at 319 ("Matters 
related to the credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given to the evidence are generally left to the factfinder."). 
2. There was sufficient evidence to show that 
Enriques acted with the requisite state of mind to physically abuse the CW. The requisite state of mind for a violation of HRS ยง 709-906(1) is acting intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly. State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai' i 131, 140, 913 P.2d 57, 
66 (1996). A defendant's state of mind "may be read from his or her acts or conduct and the inferences fairly drawn from all of the circumstances." State v. Pudiquet, 82 Hawai' i 419, 425, 922 
P.2d 1032, 1038 (App. 1996) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). When viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution, there was substantial evidence to show that Enriques intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly caused physical abuse to the CW when Enriques pulled the CW's hair and punched the CW in the face, causing swelling under the CW's eye. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV.
 
We affirm the Family Court's December 14, 2011,
 
Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 9, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Pedric T. Arrisgado
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant 
Chief Judge 
Linda L. Walton Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai' i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6
 