NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000493 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
CITIBANK, NA AS TRUSTEE FOR WAMU SERIES 2007-HE2 TRUST,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
WILLIAM GASPAR; JOYAL GASPAR,
Defendants-Appellants,
and 
HAWAIIAN OCEAN VIEW ESTATES ROAD MAINTENANCE CORPORATION,
Defendant-Appellee,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; DOE ENTITIES 1-50; and
DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 17-1-0137) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendants-Appellants William Gaspar and Joyal Gaspar 
(collectively, the Gaspars) appeal from the Judgment (Foreclosure 
Judgment) entered in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee  Citibank, NA as 
Trustee for WAMU Series 2007-HE2 Trust (Citibank) pursuant to the "Findings of Fact; Conclusions of Law; Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment as Against All Defendants and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure" (Foreclosure Decree), both filed on May 18, 2018, in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit 1
1 Hawaiian Ocean View Estates Road Maintenance Corporation is also named
as a Defendant-Appellee, but did not participate in the appeal. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(circuit court).2 
On appeal, the Gaspars contend that the circuit court 
erred by granting Citibank's December 15, 2017 "Motion for 
Summary Judgment as Against All Defendants and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure" (MSJ) because genuine issues of material fact remained as to whether Citibank had standing to foreclose on the subject mortgage.  Specifically, the Gaspars appear to contend that there was no evidence that Citibank was in possession of the subject "Fixed/Adjustable Rate Balloon Note" (Note) at the time it filed its Complaint and that any purported evidence was inadmissible.
3 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as well as the relevant case law, we resolve the Gaspars' appeal as follows. 
The appellate court reviews "the circuit court's grant or
denial of summary judgment  de novo ."  Accordingly, "[o]n
appeal, an order of summary judgment is reviewed under the
same standard applied by the circuit courts.  Summaryjudgment is proper where the moving party demonstrates thatthere are no genuine issues of material fact and it isentitled to a judgment as a matter of law.  In other words,summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions onfile, together with the affidavits, if any, show that thereis no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party isentitled to a judgment as a matter of law." 
Kawashima v. State, 140 Hawai# i 139, 148, 398 P.3d 728, 737 
(2017) (block quote format altered) (internal citations omitted). 
In reviewing a circuit court's grant or denial of a motion for summary judgment, the appellate court "must view all of the 
2 The Honorable Henry T. Nakamoto presided. 
3 In its Answering Brief, Citibank argues that the Gaspars' Opening
Brief should be stricken for failure to comply with Hawai #i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28 (2016).  While it is true that HRAP Rule 28(b)
requires that an opening brief on appeal contain certain elements, weacknowledge that Hawai #i's appellate courts "consistently adhere[] to the
policy of affording [pro se] litigants the opportunity to have their casesheard on the merits, where possible[.]"  Hous. Fin. & Dev. Corp. v. Ferguson, 91 Hawai #i 81, 85-86, 979 P.2d 1107, 1111-12 (1999) (citation omitted).  This
is traditionally true when the HRAP Rule 28(b) violations are chiefly a matter
of form and the underlying legal arguments are still ascertainable, as they
are in this case.  See O'Connor v. Diocese of Honolulu, 77 Hawai #i 383, 386, 
885 P.2d 361, 364 (1994) (citations omitted).  Accordingly, we address the Gaspars' points of error on the merits. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light most 
favorable to the party opposing the motion."  Crichfield v. Grand Wailea Co., 93 Hawai# i 477, 483, 6 P.3d 349, 355 (2000) (internal 
quotation marks, brackets, and citation omitted). 
The Gaspars first contend that the undated indorsement 
in blank associated with the Note and attached to the Complaint presents a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Citibank had possession of the Note at the time the Complaint was filed. 
"A foreclosing plaintiff must [] prove its entitlement 
to enforce the note and mortgage."  Bank of America, N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai# i 361, 367, 390 P.3d 1248, 1254 (2017) 
(citations omitted).  "A foreclosing plaintiff's burden to prove entitlement to enforce the note overlaps with the requirements of standing in foreclosure actions as '[s]tanding is concerned with whether the parties have the right to bring suit.'"  Id. (quoting Mottl v. Miyahira, 95 Hawai# i
 381, 388, 23 P.3d 716, 723 (2001)). 
"As standing relates to the invocation of the court's jurisdiction, it is not surprising that standing must be present at the commencement of the case."  Id. at 368, 390 P.3d at 1255 (citing Sierra Club v. Haw. Tourism Auth., 100 Hawai# i 242, 257, 
59 P.3d 877, 892 (2002)).  Thus, a foreclosing plaintiff must establish entitlement to enforce the note and standing to foreclose on the mortgaged property at the commencement of the suit.  See id.
A blank indorsement occurs when an indorsement is made by
the holder of an instrument and is not a specialindorsement; in other words, a blank indorsement is notpayable to an identified person.  When indorsed in blank, aninstrument becomes payable to bearer and may be negotiatedby transfer or possession alone until specially indorsed. 
Id. at 370, 390 P.3d at 1257 (internal citations omitted) (citing 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 490:3-205(b)  (2008)).  When a 
note being foreclosed upon is indorsed in blank, the relevant question is whether the foreclosing plaintiff possessed the note, 4
4 HRS ยง 490:3-205(b) states: 
(b) If an indorsement is made by the holder of an
instrument and it is not a special indorsement, it is a
"blank indorsement".  When indorsed in blank, an instrumentbecomes payable to bearer and may be negotiated by transferof possession alone until specially indorsed. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or was otherwise a holder of the note, not only at the time the 
foreclosing plaintiff filed for summary judgment, but also at the time the foreclosing plaintiff brought the foreclosure action. Id.  To be entitled to summary judgment, there must be affirmative evidence that the note and indorsement in blank were in the foreclosing plaintiff's possession at the time the complaint was filed.  U.S. Bank N.A. v. Mattos, 140 Hawai# i 26, 
33, 398 P.3d 615, 622 (2017). 
Here, on April 21, 2017, Citibank filed its Complaint 
against the Gaspars seeking to foreclose on the Gaspars' property due to their alleged breach of the Note and Mortgage originally executed in favor of Washington Mutual Bank.  The Complaint indicates that Citibank subsequently acquired the interest in the Note and Mortgage by an "Assignment of Mortgage" recorded in the State of Hawai# i Bureau of Conveyances on April 27, 2009, and 
that Citibank "is now the owner and holder of the Note and the Mortgage."  Attached to the Complaint was the Note with an undated, blank indorsement stamp on the reverse side of the final signature page. 
Citibank submitted with its MSJ a "Declaration of 
Plaintiff in Support of Motion" (Fullmer Declaration) made by Ryan Fullmer, an employee of Select Portfolio Servicing, Inc. (SPS), as affirmative evidence that Citibank possessed the Note at the time of the Complaint.  The Fullmer Declaration states that the original Note was executed and delivered to Washington Mutual Bank on January 10, 2007, and that a true and correct copy of the Note including any allonge or endorsement is attached as an exhibit to the MSJ.  The Fullmer Declaration further states that the Gaspars' mortgage was assigned to Citibank via an assignment of mortgage recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances of the State of Hawai# i as Document Number 2009-063098 on April 27, 
2009.  The Fullmer Declaration does not provide a date for any physical transfer of the Note to Citibank's possession. 
However, such issue was yet remediable so as to merit 
summary judgment if Citibank presented affirmative evidence that it was the physical holder of the Note at the time the Complaint was filed.  Id. 
The Fullmer Declaration states that "SPS 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
currently services the loan as attorney-in-fact for [Citibank]." 
The Fullmer Declaration further states that "[Citibank], directly or through an agent, has possession of the note in this instant action [], which has been duly endorsed, and was in possession of the Note at the time of the filing of the complaint."  (Emphasis added).  The MSJ also included as exhibits documents granting SPS Limited Power of Attorney to act as Citibank's agent and a document from SPS's internal records verifying that the Note was physically located in an SPS facility at the time the Complaint was filed. 
If such evidence was admissible and properly 
authenticated, addressed infra, then Citibank would have successfully met its burden under Mattos and Reyes-Toledo to present affirmative evidence that it was the holder of the physical Note at the time the Complaint was filed. 
However, the Gaspars next contend that there were 
multiple issues regarding the admissibility of the Fullmer Declaration under Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 803(b)(6) (2016), which provides a hearsay exception for the admission of business records.
5 
Any evidence submitted by a foreclosing plaintiff in 
support of its motion for summary judgment must be admissible, else it "cannot serve as a basis for awarding or denying summary judgment."  Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. Behrendt, 142 Hawai# i 37, 
44, 414 P.3d 89, 96 (2018) (citations omitted).  To qualify as 
5 HRE Rule 803(b)(6) states in relevant part: 
Hearsay exceptions; availability of declarant immaterial . 
The following are not excluded by the hearsay rule, even
though the declarant is available as a witness:
. . . .  
(b) Other exceptions.
. . . .  
(6)  
Records of regularly conducted activity.  A 
memorandum, report, record, or data compilation, inany form, of acts, events, conditions, opinions, ordiagnoses, made in the course of a regularly conductedactivity, at or near the time of the acts, events,conditions, opinions, or diagnoses, as shown by thetestimony of the custodian or other qualified witness,or by certification that complies with rule 902(11) ora statute permitting certification, unless the sourcesof information or other circumstances indicate lack of trustworthiness. 
5  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
such admissible evidence, a declaration in support of a motion 
for summary judgment under Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rule 56(e) (2000),  "must be based on personal knowledge, 
contain facts that would be admissible in evidence, and show that the declarant is competent to testify as to the matters contained within the declaration."  Id. at 44, 414 P.3d at 96 (quoting Mattos, 140 6
Hawai# i at 30, 398 P.3d at 619). 
In this case, per HRE Rule 803(b)(6), the Fullmer 
Declaration stated that Fullmer was an officer of SPS, servicer for Citibank related to the Gaspars' loan, and that Fullmer had access to and was familiar with the Gaspars' loan records through the regular performance of his job.  Furthermore, the Fullmer Declaration indicated that the documents to which Fullmer referred to in preparing his declaration were "maintained by SPS in the course of its regularly conducted business activities and are made at or near the time of the event, by or from information transmitted by a person with personal knowledge.  It is the regular practice to keep such records in the ordinary course of a regularly conducted business activity."  Thus, the Fullmer Declaration established that Fullmer was a "qualified witness" as to SPS's records because SPS relies on the documents related to the Gaspars' loan, there are further indicia of reliability given SPS's business practices, and the documents constituted "records of regularly conducted activity" that were admissible as a hearsay exception, pursuant to Rule 803(b)(6).  See Mattos, 140 
6 HRCP Rule 56(e) states: 
(e)  Form of affidavits; further testimony; defense 
required.  Supporting and opposing affidavits shall be made
on personal knowledge, shall set forth such facts as wouldbe admissible in evidence, and shall show affirmatively thatthe affiant is competent to testify to the matters statedtherein.  Sworn or certified copies of all papers or partsthereof referred to in an affidavit shall be attached thereto or served therewith.  The court may permitaffidavits to be supplemented or opposed by depositions,answers to interrogatories, or further affidavits.  When a motion for summary judgment is made and supported asprovided in this rule, an adverse party may not rest uponthe mere allegations or denials of the adverse party'spleading, but the adverse party's response, by affidavits oras otherwise provided in this rule, must set forth specificfacts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.  If the adverse party does not so respond, summary judgment, ifappropriate, shall be entered against the adverse party. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai# i at 32, 398 P.3d 621. 
However, SPS was not the original servicer of the loan, 
and the Fullmer Declaration states that SPS's business records 
incorporated the business records of the previous loan servicer. Thus, the Fullmer Declaration must also establish that Fullmer is a "qualified witness" with regards to records incorporated from the prior loan servicer.  Id. at 32-33, 398 P.3d 621-22.  
The court in Mattos held that a witness may be
qualified to provide the testimony required by HRE Rule
803(b)(6) even if the witness is not employed by thebusiness that created the document or lacks direct, personalknowledge of how the document was created.  Id. "There is no requirement that the records have been prepared by theentity that has custody of them, as long as they werecreated in the regular course of some entity's business." Id. (quoting State v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawai #i 354, 366, 227 
P.3d 520, 532 (2010)).  The witness, however, must haveenough familiarity with the record-keeping system of thebusiness that created the record to explain how the recordwas generated in the ordinary course of business.  Id. 
Records received from another business and 
incorporated into the receiving business' records may insome circumstances be regarded as "created" by the receivingbusiness.  Id. Incorporated records are admissible underHRE Rule 803(b)(6) when a custodian or qualified witnesstestifies that the documents were incorporated and kept inthe normal course of business, that the incorporatingbusiness typically relies upon the accuracy of the contentsof the documents, and the circumstances otherwise indicatethe trustworthiness of the document.  See id.; Fitzwater, 122 
Hawai #i at 367-68, 227 P.3d at 533-34. 
Behrendt, 142 Hawai# i at 45-46, 414 P.3d at 97-98.  When 
reviewing a declaration testifying to the incorporation of 
records from a previous business (in addition to the declarations required under HRE 803(b)(6) and Fitzwater
  concerning the 
employee's familiarity with the records of their own business) the Hawai# i Supreme Court has reviewed an employee's declaration 
to ascertain whether the employee had knowledge of the record keeping system of the previous business, whether the records were created by the previous business in the normal course of business, and whether the records were received from the previous business and incorporated into the present business's records. 7
7 Incorporated records are admissible under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) when
a custodian or qualified witness testifies that the documents wereincorporated and kept in the normal course of business, that theincorporating business typically relies upon the accuracy of thecontents of the documents, and the circumstances otherwiseindicate the trustworthiness of the document. 
Behrendt, 142 Hawai #i at 97-98, 414 P.3d at 45-46 (citations omitted). 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mattos, 140 Hawai# i at 32-33, 398 P.3d 621-22; Behrendt, 142 
Hawai# i at 45-46, 414 P.3d at 97-98. 
In this case, the Fullmer Declaration states that: 
Fullmer had knowledge of the record keeping system of the 
previous loan servicer; the previous servicer followed industry-wide standards in keeping and maintaining business records related to mortgage records; and SPS received, verified, incorporated, and currently relies on the prior servicer's records as part of SPS's business records.  Accordingly, to the extent that SPS's records incorporated the records of a prior loan servicer, Fullmer was a "qualified witness" who properly authenticated those records via the Fullmer Declaration. 
However, while the statements made by Fullmer are 
necessary to lay a foundation for admissibility under HRE
Rule 803(b)(6) with regard to being a qualified witness whomay testify as to the reliability of the records at issue,[they] are not sufficient to show trustworthiness on theirown [under HRE Rule 803(b)(6)] when the totality ofcircumstances indicate the opposite. 
Nationstar Mortg. LLC v. Kanahele, No. SCWC-16-0000319, 2019 WL 
1931703, at *8 (Haw. May 1, 2019).  In Kanahele, the Hawai# i 
Supreme Court held that conflicting information contained in declarations in support of a motion for summary judgment, without sufficient explanation by the moving party, could render untrustworthy, and thus inadmissible, the record evidence under HRE Rule 803(b)(6), even if the witnesses were otherwise qualified and the evidence was otherwise admissible.  Id. at *8 & *10.  The supreme court clarified, however, that "not all mistakes, or allegations of mistake, in a company's business records will render that company's record-keeping practices untrustworthy, and therefore render their records inadmissible." Id. at *9.  "[V]ague testimony that a company 'kept bad paperwork,' without more, [does] not warrant a conclusion that the company's records as a whole were untrustworthy."  Id. (brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Forman, 125 Hawai# i 417, 
424-25, 263 P.3d 127, 134-35 (App. 2011)).  Thus, while the totality of the circumstances must be considered when evaluating the trustworthiness of a business record, application of the business records rule cannot be avoided on the basis "that a 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
regular practice is occasionally broken."  Id. at *8-9. 
In the present case, the Gaspars contend on appeal that 
the records authenticated by the Fullmer Declaration raise 
questions regarding whether Citibank actually possessed the Note at the time the Complaint was filed. 
The Fullmer Declaration states that the mortgage on the 
Gaspars' property was assigned to Citibank and recorded on April 27, 2009.  There is no information as to whether the original, physical copy of the Note, and indorsement in blank, were delivered to Citibank's (or its agent's) possession at that time.  Paragraph three of the Fullmer Declaration states that "Plaintiff [Citibank] does not hold or maintain any of the loan level business records, and thus Plaintiff [Citibank] does not have loan level business records to integrate into SPS's records."  (Emphasis added).  However, paragraph twelve of the Fullmer Declaration states that "Plaintiff [Citibank], directly or through an agent, has possession of the [N]ote in this instant action[], which has been duly endorsed, and was in possession of the Note at the time of the filing of the complaint."  (Emphases added).  The Fullmer Declaration further states that Exhibit 4 to the MSJ was an excerpt from SPS's internal records indicating that the original Note, and attached indorsement in blank, were located in a specific SPS facility as of April 12, 2017, prior to Citibank's filing of the Complaint on April 21, 2017.  Thus, the Fullmer Declaration is internally inconsistent. 
Additionally, the Fullmer Declaration and its exhibits 
do not establish that on April 12, 2017, SPS held the Note on behalf of Citibank.  According to Exhibit 8 to the Fullmer Declaration, SPS did not become attorney-in-fact for JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association (JPMorgan), the "Master Servicer" for Citibank, until October 24, 2017; and JPMorgan did not become attorney-in-fact for Citibank until October 4, 2017. Thus, the record is devoid of any evidence showing that SPS held the Note on behalf of Citibank when the Complaint was filed on April 21, 2017.  Because Citibank has not shown that it was entitled to enforce the Note when the Complaint was filed on April 21, 2017, summary judgment was inappropriate. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai# i at 368-69, 390 P.3d 1255-56. 
The Gaspars also contend on appeal that various prior 
assignments of the mortgage were invalid because they involved 
persons named as "robo-signers" in other cases and they were in violation of the relevant pooling and servicing agreement (PSA). As we resolve the case on other grounds, a determination of the legal effect of robo-signing is not necessary at this time. Mattos, 140 Hawai# i at 34, 398 P.3d at 623. 
Regarding whether the assignments of the mortgages 
violated the relevant PSA, the Gaspars do not provide the actual text of the PSA, so there is no evidence that the prior mortgage assignments violated the terms of the PSA.  Id. at 35, 398 P.3d at 624.  As third parties, unrelated to the PSA, the Gaspars lack "standing to challenge assignments based on alleged violations of the PSA's terms unless the violation would render the assignment void."  Id. Accordingly, because the PSA is not in evidence, we do not decide whether any of its terms were violated and, if so, whether any such violation renders an assignment void or voidable. 
Based on the foregoing, the May 18, 2018 "Judgment" 
filed in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit is vacated.  This case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 28, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
William Gaspar,
and Joyal Gaspar,Defendants-Appellants. Chief Judge 
Marvin S.C. Dang,and Amy Jackson,(Law Offices of Marvin S.C.Dang, LLLC)for Plaintiff-Appellee.  Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
10 