    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000426
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
THE ESTATE OF THOMAS H. GENTRY, also known as
THOMAS HENRY GENTRY, Deceased.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(PROBATE NO. 98-0077)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Respondent-Appellant Kiana E. Gentry (Kiana) appeals
 
from (1) the March 25, 2013 "Final Judgment re: Order Granting
 
Personal Representative's Petition for Approval of Final Accounts
 
and Distribution and Complete Settlement of Estate, as Amended
 
and Supplemented," (Final Judgment) and (2) the March 25, 2013
 
"Order Granting Personal Representative's Petition for Approval
 
of Final Accounts and Distribution and Complete Settlement of
 
Estate, as Amended and Supplemented," (Order Granting Petition)
1
both entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit
 
court).
 
On appeal, Kiana contends the circuit court erred by: 
(1)
 approving Petitioner/Personal Representative-
Appellee Mark L. Vorsatz's (Vorsatz) April 1, 2010 Petition for
 Approval of Final Accounts and Distribution and Complete
 
Settlement of the Estate (Petition) and the November 23, 2010
 
1 
The Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Amendment to the Petition (Amended Petition) because the final
 
accounting for calendar years 1998 through 2009 appended to the
 
Petition (Estate accounting) included an annual reclassification
 
of income received by the Estate of Thomas H. Gentry (Estate) to
 
be "rolled over" into principal; and
 
(2) approving Estate accounting that incorrectly
 
identified income from the four business entity interests
 
contained in the Estate (Gentry Companies) as principal by
 
classifying the income as "equity pickups."
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
conclude that Kiana's appeal lacks merit.
 
A court of equity's approval of an accounting is
 
reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard:
 
The relief granted by a court [in] equity is discretionary
and will not be overturned on review unless the [circuit]
court abused its discretion by issuing a decision that
clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment
of the appellant. 
Aickin v. Ocean View Investments Co., Inc., 84 Hawai 'i 447, 453, 
935 P.2d 992, 998 (1997) (quoting AIG Hawai 'i Ins. Co., Inc. v. 
Bateman, 82 Hawai 'i 453, 457, 923 P.2d 395, 398 (1996)). 
Kiana contends (1) $615,983 was improperly rolled over
 
from net income to the Estate into net credits to principal
 
during the years 1998-2007, and (2) approximately $6,413,324 in
 
income was categorized as "equity pickup" earnings and improperly
 
allocated to principal during the years 2001-2007.
 
The Uniform Principal and Income Act, Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) Chapter 557A defines income interest as "an income
 
beneficiary's right to receive all or part of the net income,
 
whether the terms of the trust require it to be distributed or
 
authorize it to be distributed in the trustee's discretion." HRS
 
§ 557A-102 (2006 Repl.). Net income is defined as the "total
 
receipts allocated to income during an accounting period minus
 
the disbursement made from income during that period." HRS
 
§ 557A-102. "[M]oney received by a trustee from an entity shall
 
2
      
     
     
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
be allocated to income[,]" HRS § 557A-401(b) (2006 Repl.), except
 
it shall be allocated to principal in situations that the parties
 
do not indicate apply here. See HRS § 557A-401(c)(1)-(4).2
 
Kiana contends Vorsatz admitted that $615,983 was
 
improperly rolled over in his counsel's January 10, 2011 letter,
 
which indicated Vorsatz's agreement that "approximately $600,000
 
of Estate receipts that qualify as 'income'" should be
 
distributed to the Thomas H. Gentry Revocable Trust (Revocable
 
Trust) as income. However, in his March 9, 2011 "Reply to
 
[Kiana's] Response to Petition for Approval of Final Accounts and
 
Distribution and Complete Settlement of Estate and Amendment to
 
Petition for Approval of Final Accounts and Distribution and
 
Complete Settlement of Estate Filed February 2, 2011," Vorsatz
 
wrote, "upon close examination of the income/principal
 
allocations on a year by year basis, the previously proposed
 
adjustment of $615,983 is not supported." Vorsatz argued to the
 
circuit court that the rollover issue was moot because
 
disbursements payable from Estate income exceeded the income
 
receipts of the Revocable Trust and therefore net income payable
 
to Kiana would be negligible or nonexistent. Vorsatz provided a
 
spreadsheet to the circuit court, which represented the Revocable
 
Trust as carrying a cumulative net income deficit of
 
2 	HRS § 557A-401(c) provides:
 
§557A-401 Character of receipts.
 
. . . .
 
(c) Receipts from an entity that shall be allocated
to principal include:
 (1)	 Property other than money;
 
(2)	 Money received in one distribution or a series
of related distributions in exchange for part or
all of a trust's interest in the entity;
 
(3)	 Money received in total or partial liquidation
of the entity; and
 
(4)	 Money received from an entity that is a
regulated investment company or a real estate
investment trust if the money distributed is a
capital gain dividend for federal income tax
purposes.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
approximately $1.8 million. Kiana contends Vorsatz's
 
spreadsheet, showing total income and principal in the amount of
 
$780,733 for 1998 is inconsistent with the figures he provided in
 
the Estate accounting showing $746,393 for the same category and
 
year. However, Vorsatz stated the differences in these amounts
 
reflected the Estate accounting used gross income and his
 
spreadsheet used net income figures.
 Vorsatz stated he used equity pickups, as opposed to
 
the "carry value" (i.e., the date of death value), in his Estate
 
accounting "in an attempt to reflect a more current picture of
 
the value of the Gentry companies' equity during the
 
administration" which had been lengthy. In regard to Kiana's
 
"equity pickup" contention, Vorsatz stated that the equity
 
pickups were not income to the Estate, but reflected income
 
within the Gentry Companies, and were not "money received by a
 
trustee" that was required to be allocated to income under HRS
 
§ 557-A-401(b). He further stated, "any such income cannot be
 
recognized in the Estate accounting until the Gentry Companies
 
make a distribution to the Estate." (Emphasis omitted.) 
Kiana relies on a report she commissioned from John A.
 
Hartog (Hartog) for the proposition that "Vorsatz's 'fiduciary
 
duty required that he, as controlling shareholder of [Tom Gentry
 
California] and Gentry Industrial, force those corporations to
 
make distributions, unless distributions would have impeded
 
corporate operations.'" Kiana cites Ninth Circuit authority to
 
support her assertion that "in the absence of contradictory
 
expert opinion, the [circuit] court was required to accept
 
[Hartog's] opinion as definitive." However, the record does not
 
indicate the circuit court recognized Hartog as an expert
 
witness. Furthermore, Vorsatz stated the Gentry companies "had
 
legitimate business purposes to refrain from making
 
distributions, such as paying down debt, and not violating strict
 
covenants under third party loan agreements that severely limit
 
the companies' ability to make shareholder distributions."
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, since the circuit court did not abuse its
 
discretion in approving the final accounts and distribution and
 
complete settlement of the Estate,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that (1) the March 25, 2013 "Final
 
Judgment re: Order Granting Personal Representative's Petition
 
for Approval of Final Accounts and Distribution and Complete
 
Settlement of Estate, as Amended and Supplemented," and (2) the
 
March 25, 2013 "Order Granting Personal Representative's Petition
 
for Approval of Final Accounts and Distribution and Complete
 
Settlement of Estate, as Amended and Supplemented," both entered
 
in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 23, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Margery S. Bronster
Jae B. Park (Bronster Hoshibata)for Respondent-Appellant.
 Presiding Judge 
Carroll S. Taylor(Taylor, Leong & Chee)
for Petitioner/PersonalRepresentative-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 