 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-14-0001284
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORPORATION, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KURT EDWARD MOORE and RYAN EDWARD MOORE, Defendants-Appellants,

and LARRY ALPHA SHAVER; JOHN DOE OR JANE DOE; ALL PERSONS
RESIDING WITH AND ANY PERSONS CLAIMING BY AND THROUGH
 
OR UNDER THEM, Defendants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-3125 KTN)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Kurt Moore and Ryan Moore (the
 
Moores) appeal from the Judgment on Plaintiff-Appellee Federal
 
Home Loan Mortgage Corporation's (FHLMC's) Motion for Summary
 Judgment filed October 29, 2014 (Judgment) and challenge the
 Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment (Summary
 Judgment Order) filed on May 1, 2014, both of which were entered
 by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1
 
The Moores raise the following points of error on
 
appeal:
 
1
 The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) The Circuit Court erred when it denied the Moores
 
– who held title to the subject property jointly with the

 
deceased mortgagor, Larry Shaver (Shaver) – the ability to
 
contest FHLMC's quiet title claim and to introduce evidence that
 
the non-judicial foreclosure was invalid under Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) § 667-5 (Supp. 2011) (repealed), on the grounds
 
the Moores did not have standing to contest the nonjudicial
 
foreclosure because they were not parties to the note and
 mortgage;
 
(2) The Circuit Court erred by disregarding the
 
Declaration of Barbara Miller (
Miller), who was the executor of
 
Shaver's estate, on the basis that Miller was not a party to the
 action;
 
(3) The Circuit Court erred by applying contract law
 
to the quiet title and ejectment claims in conjunction with its
 ruling that the Moores could not present evidence concerning the
 purported non-compliance with HRS § 667-5; and
 
(4) The Circuit Court erred when it held that the
 
letter from Aurora Loan Services (Aurora), dated April 23, 2010,
 
proved that Aurora complied with HRS § 667-5.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve the Moores' points of error as follows:
 
In paragraphs 17 and 18 of the Summary Judgment Order,
 
the Circuit Court stated:
 
17. Because the Moore Defendants were not parties to
the contract herein, i.e. the Mortgage, they cannot raise
 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contractual defenses. As non-parties to the Mortgage, the
Moore Defendants may not challenge the validity of the
Mortgage or the foreclosure sale conducted thereto. 
18. The only individual who could contest the
foreclosure sale was Executor Miller, the personal
representative of Defendant Shaver's estate. Executor
 Miller, however, is not a party to this lawsuit, and was not
made a party to this lawsuit by either Plaintiff or Moore
Defendants.
[2]
 
(Emphasis added).3
 
While non-parties to the subject note and mortgage may
 
not be contractually entitled to directly "cure the default and
 
reinstate the loan," property owners whose interests are affected
 by a nonjudicial foreclosure can defend a subsequent quiet
 title/ejectment action by asserting that the foreclosure failed
 to comply with the law, in this case, HRS § 667-5. See, e.g.,
 
Montenegro v. Ocwen Loan Servicing, LLC, 419 S.W.3d 561, 567
 (Tex. App. 2013); Kiper v. BAC Home Loans Servicing, LP, 884 F.
 Supp. 2d 561, 576 (S.D. Texas 2012) ("'Modern cases have expanded
 the class of parties with standing to dispute the validity of the
 foreclosure sale by adopting a more liberal attitude toward this
 privity requirement.' Now cases allow parties that at the time
 of foreclosure 'have an ownership interest in the property
 affected by the foreclosure.'") (citations omitted). Thus, the
 Circuit Court erred in concluding that Miller was the only
 individual who could contest the foreclosure sale.
 
The record is unclear as to whether, as the Moores
 
contend, the Circuit Court disregarded Miller's Declaration, as
 
2
 The issue of whether Miller was an indispensible party in FHLMC's
quiet title/ejectment action is not before the court on this appeal.
 
3
 Also, in paragraph 14 of the Summary Judgment Order, the Circuit
Court stated that "the only individual who could contest the non-judicial
foreclosure was Executor Miller for Defendant Shaver's estate."
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
there is no specific ruling to that effect. However, at the
 
February 25, 2014 hearing, the court said, "if the estate is not
 a party, and they're not going to be named a party, I don't
 understand on what basis I can consider Barbara Miller's
 declaration[.]" At the same hearing, in conjunction with an
 invitation for the parties to address the issue, the court
 stated:
 
[L]et me just tell you folks what my preliminary
thoughts are. . . . 
My concern is now there is a -- I see that there's a
declaration by the estate representative filed. The estate
 
is not a party. The challenge to the foreclosure that the
defendants raised in the opposition to the summary judgment,
to me it's a contract based challenge. It arises out of the
 mortgage.
 
The only parties to the contract, the mortgage, is the
decedent. And any person who could properly assert any
defense, claim or remedy arising out of that contract, I
think can only be a party to that contract, or a named third
party beneficiary to the contract. And the contract here is
 the mortgage document. So my thoughts are that only
defendant Shaver himself, or his estate, are the parties
that can raise any contract based challenge. 
And what I'm faced with here is that the defendant
 
Moores, who are non-parties to the contract, are attempting
to raise contract based challenges, which I think are
improper. That while they may be on title, that doesn't
give them any rights to challenge a contract that they were
not parties to. And that the only entity, at this stage,
that could raise the kind of challenge that the Moores are
seeking to raise is the estate. But the estate is not a
 party here.
 
In the Summary Judgment Order, the Circuit Court
concluded that: (1) FHLMC was entitled to summary judgment
 
because the Moores were not parties to the note and mortgage and
 therefore not entitled to raise defenses related to those
 agreements; and (2) even if the Moores were entitled to challenge
 the validity of the foreclosure, the Moores' challenge
 nevertheless fails. The Circuit Court did not specifically
 address Miller's Declaration, but concluded, inter alia, that:
 
 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
23. Under HRS § 667-8, "[i]f it appears by the
affidavit that the affiant has in all respects complied with
the requirements of the power of sale and the statute, in
relation to all things to be done by the affiant before
selling the property, and has sold the same in the manner
required by the power, the affidavit, or a duly certified
copy of the record thereof, shall be admitted as evidence
that the power of sale was duly executed." 
24. Based on the record before this Court, including
the affidavit recorded on January 26, 2011 with theAssistant Registrar of the Land Court, State of Hawai' i,
Plaintiff has shown the non-judicial foreclosure wasconducted in compliance with the power of sale in theMortgage and HRS § 667-1, et seq., and has demonstratedentitlement to judgment as a matter of law. 
Thus, it appears that the Circuit Court either (1)
 
disregarded Miller's Declaration, presumably for the reasons
 
articulated at the February 25, 2014 hearing as preliminary
 thoughts, or (2) concluded that Miller's Declaration failed to
 raise a genuine issue of material fact. We have rejected the
 former proposition and therefore turn to the latter one. 
The Moores contend on appeal that they raised a genuine
 
issue of material fact concerning whether the nonjudicial
 foreclosure complied with HRS § 667-5, citing HRS § 667-5(c)(1)
 and Miller's Declaration. 
HRS § 667-5(c)(1) provided:

 
(c) Upon the request of any person entitled to
notice pursuant to this section and sections 667-5.5 and
667-6, the attorney, the mortgagee, successor, or person
represented by the attorney shall disclose to the requestor
the following information:
 
(1) 	The amount to cure the default, together with
the estimated amount of the foreclosing
mortgagee's attorneys' fees and costs, and all
other fees and costs estimated to be incurred by
the foreclosing mortgagee related to the default
prior to the auction within five business days
of the request[.]
 
Miller's Declaration states, in relevant part:
 
11. After Mr. Shaver's death, I contacted Aurora Loan
Services as the representative of Mr. Shaver's Estate for
the purpose of having Kurt Moore take over the payments on
the subject mortgage. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
12. Although I contacted Aurora Loan Services many
times, Aurora Loan Services was nearly impossible to
communicate with. 
13. On at least one occasion, I requested information
on the subject account and Aurora Loan Services refused to
talk with me, even though I had documentation proving that I
was the representative of my father's estate. 
14. After a period of over one month of trying to get
a hold of a representative from Aurora Loan Services, I
finally started a dialogue with a woman named "Sarah." 
15. I called and talked with Sarah at least two times
 
about allowing Kurt Moore to continue to make the payments
on the subject mortgage[] and supplied all of the requested
documentation. 
16. At one point, reinstatement figures from Aurora
Loan Services were requested and that request was ignored. 
17. Aurora Loan Services eventually admitted to me,
around June of 2009, that it was supposed to send some
paperwork to me for the purpose of allowing Kurt Moore to
take over the account, but that it didn't. 
18. Aurora Loan Services kept giving me a different
story every time I talked with them. 
In the Summary Judgment Order, the Circuit Court
 
addressed the issue of compliance with HRS § 667-5 as follows:
 
22. On April 23, 2010, Aurora Loan Services mailed a 
letter to the Estate of Larry Shaver containing,  inter alia,
the amount necessary to cure the default. See
 Defendant's
 
Opposition to Plaintiff Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation's Motion for Summary Judgment (filed 9/3/13),
Exhibit H. Therefore, the Moore Defendants' argument that
they were deprived of any and all opportunity to cure the
default prior to the auction fails. The entity legally
entitled to notice, the Estate of Larry Shaver, was given
such notice. 
Viewing Miller's Declaration in a light most favorable
 
to the Moores, Miller contacted Aurora multiple times between
 
Shaver's death and when Aurora eventually admitted to her that it
 was supposed to send "some paperwork" but it did not. There is
 nothing in the record to indicate that Aurora complied with its
 obligations to disclose:
 
The amount to cure the default, together with the estimated
amount of the foreclosing mortgagee's attorneys' fees and
costs, and all other fees and costs estimated to be incurred 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
by the foreclosing mortgagee related to the default prior to
the auction within five business days of the request[.]
 
HRS § 667-5(c)(1).
 
The April 23, 2010 letter referenced by the Circuit
 
Court was addressed to Shaver, apparently at Miller's address,
 
many months later and does not appear to state, inter alia, "the
 estimated amount of the foreclosing mortgagee's attorneys' fees
 and costs, and all other fees and costs estimated to be incurred
 by the foreclosing mortgagee related to the default prior to the
 auction[.]" Accordingly, we conclude that the Moores raised a
 genuine issue of material fact as to whether Aurora complied with
 HRS § 667-5.
 
On this basis, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred
 
in entering summary judgment in favor of FHLMC and against the
 Moores. The Circuit Court's October 29, 2014 Judgment and May 1,
 2014 Summary Judgment Order are vacated; this case is remanded to
 the Circuit Court for further proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 30, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Gary Victor Dubin, 
Frederick J. Arensmeyer,Richard T. Forrester,for Defendants-Appellants. Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Robert E. Chapman,
Mary Martin,
(Clay Chapman Iwamura Pulice
& Nervell) 
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
7 