NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000466
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
DENNIS GOUVEIA, JR., Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR NOS. 08-1-1275, 09-1-2226, 12-1-1238, 12-1-1404)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Chan, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Dennis Gouveia, Jr., (Gouveia) 
appeals from orders denying his petitions pursuant to Hawai 'i 
Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 (2006) to correct and/or 
modify judgment in four separate family court criminal cases. In each case, Gouveia was originally placed on probation for one or more misdemeanor convictions by the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court). However, Gouveia repeatedly violated the conditions of his probation, including seven occasions in which Gouveia's probation was revoked or modified, but the Family Court permitted Gouveia to continue on probation. Eventually, the Family Court revoked Gouveia's probation in all four cases and sentenced Gouveia to one year of incarceration in each case. The Family Court imposed the one-year term of incarceration in each of the cases consecutively to each other, for a total of four years of incarceration. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Gouveia filed a motion to reconsider his sentence in
 
each case, which the Family Court denied. Gouveia then filed a
 
"Petition Pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 to Correct and/or Modify
 Judgment" (Petition) in each of the four cases. On May 17, 2016,
 the Family Court issued its "Order Denying Petition Pursuant to
 HRPP Rule 40 to Correct and/or Modify Judgment" (Order Denying
 Petition) in each case. Gouveia appeals from these Orders
 Denying Petition.
 
On appeal, Gouveia argues that the Family Court
1/ 
abused its discretion in sentencing him to four consecutive one-year terms of incarceration. As explained below, based on the Hawai
'i Supreme Court's recent decision in State v. Barrios, 139 
Hawai'i 321, 389 P.3d 916 (2016), we vacate the Orders Denying 
Petition, vacate Gouveia's multiple consecutive sentences, and remand the cases for resentencing. 
I.
 A.
 
Gouveia was convicted of the following misdemeanor and
 
petty misdemeanor offenses in four Family Court criminal cases:
 
1. In FC-CR No. 08-1-1275, Gouveia was convicted in
 
2008 of (1) abuse of a family or household member, namely, his
 wife, and (2) harassment of another individual.
 
2. In FC-CR No. 09-1-2226, Gouveia was convicted in
 
2010 of (1) violation of a protective order; (2) interference
 with reporting an emergency or crime by his wife; and (3) fourth-
degree criminal property damage of his wife's property.
 
3. In FC-CR No. 12-1-1238, Gouveia was convicted in
 
2012 of abuse of a family or household member, namely, his wife. 
4. In FC-CR No. 12-1-1404, Gouveia was convicted in
 
2012 of violation of a protective order.
 
B. 
Gouveia was originally sentenced to terms of probation
 
for his convictions in all four cases. However, Gouveia
 
1/ The Honorable Steven S. Alm presided over the proceedings relevant to
this appeal.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
repeatedly failed to comply with the conditions of probation. 
Between 2010 and 2013, the Family Court revoked or modified his
 probation on seven occasions, but reimposed terms of probation
 after revoking his probation.
 
In March 2014, Gouveia's probation officer filed a
 
consolidated motion to revoke Gouveia's probation in all four
 cases. At a hearing on the consolidated motion held on March 12,
 2014, the Family Court revoked Gouveia's probation in each case,
 and it sentenced Gouveia to four consecutive one-year terms of
 incarceration. In explaining its sentence, the Family Court
 stated:
 
Mr. Gouveia, we've given you chances in the past, and
back almost two years, a year-and-a-half ago in October 2012
I told you don't run away, and that's what you did. So it
 doesn't mean you're a bad guy, but it means your actions are
showing me you're just not up to doing probation.
 
. . . .

 
. . . [Y]our attorney's telling me you go to work, you
do all this other stuff. So you can do stuff you want to
do, you just don't do stuff that you don't want to do. And
 my concern always is, is there a potential for violence? I
 mean, you're in here on two different abuses, violent order
for protection. That means you're not following what other
judges are telling you to do, and you're just doing whatever
you want to do, so I think the time out is what you need.
 
. . . .
 
But, Mr. Gouveia, your family needs you, but they need
you clean and sober, and they need you for the next 20
years, so I urge you. Once you get out, stop using and make
a life of it and be there for them.
 
. . . .
 
. . . [Y]ou've run away more than once, and you've
shown you're just not up to doing probation, and these are
violent offenses.
 
C.
 
On March 18, 2014, Gouveia filed a motion to reconsider
 
his sentence in each case. The Family Court held a hearing on
 
Gouveia's motions on April 15, 2014, and it orally denied the
 motions. 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In June 2015, Gouveia filed the four Petitions at issue
 
in this appeal. In the Petitions, Gouveia asserted, among other
 
things, that:
 
8. Since there is no parole and/or furlough for
misdemeanor offenses, Defendant will serve every day of his
four (4) year sentence; 
9. Defendant is currently on the prison work-line,
and does not qualify for programming or substance abuse
programs, such as Kashbox;
 
10. Defendant is married, with five children, and his
incarceration has proven to be a financial hardship on his
wife and children[.]
 
At the hearing held on Gouveia's Petitions, Gouveia
 
called his wife as a witness. Gouveia's wife testified that she
 
was not afraid of Gouveia and asked that he be released.
 
The Family Court denied the Petitions, explaining:
 
. . . Mr. Gouveia, . . . I don't doubt whatever . . .
your wife is saying, although, you know, she's been a victim
of your violence in the past. And the fact that she's now
 struggling with the kids, she wants you out, she's an
optimist, I get all that. And if I had a crystal ball to
know that there'd be no violence by you in the future, I'd
give you a chance to go do this. I don't doubt what was
 said. But I -- I don't have that.
 
And I have to look at what your record is, the fact
that you've had, you know, convictions for [Unauthorized
Control of Propelled Vehicle] multiple times, theft, escape,
and here, it's violations of orders for protection which
means another judge has told you not to do something and you
violated that, and convictions of abuse of household member
means you've been violent. And in addition, you didn't show
up in court. We had to issue a warrant. You got arrested.
I then told you don't run away or I am going to send you up,
and you ran away.
 
So, you know, like I said, . . . if I knew that, in
fact, you had really changed and you weren't going to be
violent in the future, I would give you a chance to do it.
I'm not going to take that chance.
 
So . . . it's four years. You're not going to be
hurting anybody in that time. If you're really serious
about this, when you get out, you won't hurt anybody else in
the future, and you can have a life with your kids. You can
 be there for them the way you should. So the motion is
 denied. I wish you the best in the future but . . . I think
I made the right sentence before, and I am going to stick to
it.
 
The Family Court filed its Order Denying Petition in
 
each of the four cases on May 17, 2016, and this appeal followed.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
Gouveia argues that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion in sentencing him to four consecutive one-year terms
 
of incarceration, rather than concurrent terms of imprisonment. 
In particular, Gouveia argues that the Family Court's consecutive
 sentences were arbitrary and violated his right to due process
 because the Family Court failed to consider all the sentencing
 factors set forth in HRS § 706-606 (2014).
 
After the Family Court imposed its four consecutive 
sentences and after Gouveia filed his opening brief, the Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court issued its decision in State v. Barrios, 139 Hawai
'i 321, 389 P.3d 916. In Barrios, the supreme court held 
that where multiple consecutive sentences are imposed, the sentencing court is required to explain its reasoning for each consecutive sentence: 
[A] sentencing court should explain its rationale for each
consecutive sentence in order to inform the defendant and appellate courts of the specific factors underlying eachsentence. This helps to ensure that a sentencing judgetakes into account the differences among convictions priorto imposing multiple consecutive sentences. Thus, in orderto provide a rational basis for imposing consecutivesentences as required by [State v.] Kong, [131 Hawai' i 94,
315 P.3d 720 (2013),] sentencing courts must state on therecord the HRS § 706–606 factors that support eachconsecutive sentence. While the same factors could be sufficiently aggravated to justify imposing more than oneconsecutive sentence, the sentencing court should specifythat basis or identify another basis for determining howmany consecutive sentences to impose. 
Barrios, 139 Hawai 'i at 337, 389 P.3d at 932. 
Here, we disagree with Gouveia's claim that the Family
 
Court failed to consider all the sentencing factors set forth in
 
HRS § 706-606. It is well settled that "[a]bsent clear evidence
 to the contrary, it is presumed that a sentencing court will have
 considered all factors before imposing concurrent or consecutive
 terms of imprisonment under HRS § 706–606." Id. at 333, 389 P.3d
 
at 928 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). In
 addition, "'the sentencing court is not required to articulate
 and explain its conclusions with respect to every factor listed
 in HRS § 706–606,' but rather must 'articulate its reasoning only
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with respect to those factors it relies on in imposing
 
consecutive sentences.'" Id. at 336, 389 P.3d at 931 (citation
 
and brackets omitted). The Family Court explained its reasoning
 with respect to the factors it relied upon in deciding to impose
 consecutive sentences, and Gouveia fails to overcome the
 presumption that the Family Court considered all relevant factors
 under HRS § 706-606. 
However, while the Family Court generally explained its 
reasons for imposing consecutive as opposed to concurrent sentences, it did not, as required by Barrios, "state on the record the HRS § 706–606 factors that support each consecutive sentence." Barrios, 139 Hawai
'i at 337, 389 P.3d at 932 
(emphasis added). In other words, the Family Court's explanation was adequate to support its decision to impose the sentences in two of the four cases consecutively, but the Family Court failed to adequately explain on the record its reasons for running the sentences in all four cases consecutively. Thus, while the Family Court's explanation was adequate to support one consecutive sentence, its statements were not adequate to support multiple consecutive sentences. Based on Barrios, because the Family Court failed to adequately explain its rationale for imposing multiple consecutive sentences, that is, running the sentences in all four cases consecutively, we conclude that Gouveia's multiple consecutive sentences must be vacated and that the cases must be remanded for resentencing. We express no opinion on what sentence Gouveia should receive on remand, as our decision is based only on the Family Court's failure to adequately explain its rationale for imposing multiple consecutive sentences. 
III.
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the Order Dismissing
 
Petition filed in each case and Gouveia's multiple consecutive
 sentences. We remand the cases for resentencing of Gouveia and 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
for further proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition
 
Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 25, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Jon N. Ikenaga
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant. 
Chief Judge 
Donn Fudo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
7
 