NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000433
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
WILMINGTON SAVINGS FUND SOCIETY, FSB, d/b/a
Christiana Trust, not individually but as
Trustee for Pretium Mortgage Acquisition Trust,
Plaintiff-Appellee, v. JOYAL YASUDA and VIRGINIA
PAAKONIA, individually and as Co-Trustees of the
Virginia Paakonia Revocable Living Trust, dated
March 15, 1995, Defendants-Appellants, and
MIL RAVIEL ROHAN, fka MILLIE GERALDINE ROHAN;
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY,
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE; DIRECTOR, DEPARTMENT OF
TAXATION, STATE OF HAWAII, Defendants-Appellees, and
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE ENTITIES 1-10, and
DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-10, Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 15-1-345K)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, and Reifurth, J.;
with Ginoza, J., concurring)
Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff/Cross-claim Plaintiff-
Appellant Joyal Yasuda ( Yasuda), Individually and as Co-Trustee
of the Virginia Paakonia Revocable Living Trust dated March 15,
1995, appeals pro se from the Judgment entered on April 19, 2017,
in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court ), in
favor of Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee WilmingtonNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Savings Fund Society, FSB, dba Christiana Trust, not individually
but as Trustee for Pretium Mortgage Acquisition Trust
(Wilmington ), and against all defendants ( Judgment).1  Yasuda
also challenges the Circuit Court's Findings of Fact; Conclusions
of Law; Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment as
Against all Defendants and for Interlocutory Decree of
Foreclosure, also entered April 19, 2017 (Foreclosure Decree ).  
In her points of error on appeal, Yasuda contends that
the Circuit Court erred by granting Wilmington's November 7, 2016
Motion for Summary Judgment as Against all Defendants and for
Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure (Motion for Summary Judgment )
on multiple grounds.2 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the
relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Yasuda's points of
error as follows:
Yasuda argues, inter alia , that Wilmington failed to
establish that it had standing to bring this foreclosure action
and relies in part on the Hawai #i Supreme Court's decision in
Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai# i 361, 390 P.3d 1248
1The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided.
2Notwithstanding Wilmington's arguments, we decline to dismiss this
appeal pursuant to Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP) Rule 28(b)
because Yasuda's statement of the case is allegedly misleading and Yasuda did
not provide adequate record cites in her points of error section.  Upon
review, the alleged non-compliance with HRAP Rule 28(b) does not warrant
dismissal in this case.  See Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai #i 225, 230,
909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995) (Hawai #i Supreme Court "has consistently adhered to
the policy of affording litigants the opportunity to have their cases heard on
the merits, where possible." (internal quotation marks omitted)).  
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(2017).  In Reyes–Toledo , the supreme court held that in order to
establish a right to foreclose, the foreclosing plaintiff must
establish standing or entitlement to enforce the subject note at
the time the action was commenced.  139 Hawai #i at 367–71, 390
P.3d at 1254–58.  The supreme court stated, inter alia , that a
foreclosing plaintiff must typically "prove the existence of an
agreement, the terms of the agreement, a default by the mortgagor
under the terms of the agreement, and giving of the cancellation
notice."  Id. at 367, 390 P.3d at 1254 (citing Bank of Honolulu,
N.A. v. Anderson, 3 Haw. App. 545, 551, 654 P.2d 1370, 1375
(1982)).  Furthermore, "[a] foreclosing plaintiff must also prove
its entitlement to enforce the note and mortgage."  Id.
(citations omitted).  The supreme court also stated, "[a]
foreclosing plaintiff's burden to prove entitlement to enforce
the note overlaps with the requirements of standing in
foreclosure actions as 'standing is concerned with whether the
parties have the right to bring suit.'"  Id. (internal brackets
omitted) (quoting Mottl v. Miyahira , 95 Hawai #i 381, 388, 23 P.3d
716, 723 (2001)).  In concluding that the foreclosing bank failed
to satisfy its burden as the movant for summary judgment, the
court reasoned, "Although Bank of America produced evidence that
it possessed the blank-indorsed Note at the time it sought
summary judgment, a material question of fact exists as to
whether Bank of America possessed the Note, or was otherwise a
holder, at the time it brought the foreclosure action."  Id.  at
370, 390 P.3d at 1257. 
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In U.S. Bank, N.A. v. Mattos, 140 Hawai# i 26, 29, 398
P.3d 615, 618 (2017), summary judgment was also granted in favor
of the foreclosing bank, U.S. Bank.  On appeal, the supreme court
addressed whether relevant loan documents had been properly
admitted through the declaration of an individual named Richard
Work (Work), as records of regularly conducted activity under
Hawai#i Rules of Evidence ( HRE) Rule 803(b)(6).  Id.  at 28,
30–33, 398 P.3d at 617, 619–622.  In his declaration, Work
attested, inter alia , that he was a "Contract Management
Coordinator" of OCWEN Loan Servicing, LLC (Ocwen), the "servicer"
for U.S. Bank on the subject loan.  Id. at 30–31, 398 P.3d at
619–20.  Because Work did not attest that he was the custodian of
records for either U.S. Bank or Ocwen, the supreme court noted
that "the documents attached to his declaration are admissible
under the HRE 803(b)(6) hearsay exception only if he is a
'qualified witness' with respect to those documents."  Id. at 32,
398 P.3d at 621.  The supreme court applied its analysis in State
v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawai# i 354, 365–66, 227 P.3d 520, 531–32
(2010) and ruled as follows:
To the extent the ICA ruled that Work's declaration
established him as a "qualified witness" with respect to
Ocwen's records, we agree. To the extent the ICA opinion
concluded that Work met the requirements to be a "qualified
witness" with respect to U.S. Bank's records, however, we
disagree. Fitzwater addresses situations in which one
business receives documents created by another business and
includes them in its own records. Work's declaration does
not indicate that U.S. Bank's Records were received by Ocwen
and incorporated into the Ocwen Records. Work's declaration
also does not establish that Work is familiar with the
record-keeping system of U.S. Bank. Rather, Work merely
states that he has access to and is familiar with U.S.
Bank's records. Thus Work's declaration does not satisfy
foundational requirements to make him a "qualified witness"
for U.S. Bank's records pursuant to 
Fitzwater.
Id. at 32–33, 398 P.3d at 621–622.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In light of its prior ruling in Reyes–Toledo , the
supreme court in Mattos  further held that:
[s]ince [an] allonge was apparently used to specifically
indorse the note to U.S. Bank, admissible evidence was
needed to demonstrate that U.S. Bank was in possession of
the note and allonge at the time of the filing of this
foreclosure complaint for U.S. Bank to be entitled to
summary judgment.
Id. at 33, 398 P.3d at 622.  The supreme court noted that Work's
declaration did not attest that U.S. Bank possessed the original
note and allonge when the foreclosure complaint was filed.  Id. 
The supreme court thus ruled that "Work's declaration failed to
meet U.S. Bank's burden of establishing facts necessary for a
grant of summary judgment."  Id. 
In Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. Behrendt, SCAP-16-0000645,
2018 WL 1325153 at *2 (Haw. Mar. 15, 2018) (designated for
publication), summary judgment was granted in favor of the
foreclosing bank, Wells Fargo.  Wells Fargo had attached a copy
of the subject note to its unverified complaint together with an
allonge indorsing the note in blank.  Id.   The supreme court
reviewed the admissibility of these documents under HRE Rule
803(b)(6) through a similar declaration as in Mattos3 attached to
Wells Fargo's motion for summary judgment.  Id.   This declaration
was made by Vanessa Lewis (Lewis), who was also a "contract
management coordinator" for Ocwen, Wells Fargo's loan-service
provider.  Id.   Because Lewis did not attest that she was the
custodian of record for either Wells Fargo or Ocwen, the supreme
court again observed that the documents attached to her
3 The Behrendt court observed that the Lewis and Work declarations
were "nearly identical."  Behrendt, 2018 WL 1325153 at *7.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
declaration were admissible under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) only if her
declaration demonstrated that she was a "qualified witness."  Id.
at *7 (citing Mattos, 140 Hawai #i at 32, 398 P.3d at 621).  The
supreme court stated the rule regarding necessary qualifications
to admit incorporated records under Mattos and Fitzwater  as
follows:
The court in Mattos held that a witness may be
qualified to provide the testimony required by HRE Rule
803(b)(6) even if the witness is not employed by the
business that created the document or lacks direct, personal
knowledge of how the document was created. "There is no
requirement that the records have been prepared by the
entity that has custody of them, as long as they were
created in the regular course of some entity's business."
The witness, however, must have enough familiarity with the
record-keeping system of the business that created the
record to explain how the record was generated in the
ordinary course of business.
Records received from another business and
incorporated into the receiving business' records may in
some circumstances be regarded as "created" by the receiving
business. Incorporated records are admissible under HRE Rule
803(b)(6) when a custodian or qualified witness testifies
that the documents were incorporated and kept in the normal
course of business, that the incorporating business
typically relies upon the accuracy of the contents of the
documents, and the circumstances otherwise indicate the
trustworthiness of the document.
Behrendt, 2018 WL 1325153 at *7-8 (citations omitted) (citing and
quoting Mattos , 140 Hawai #i at 32, 398 P.3d at 621).  
In holding that Lewis was not a "qualified witness"
under its decision in Mattos, the Behrendt court stated:
Mattos Here, as in , the Lewis Declaration does not
establish that the loan documents were received by Ocwen and
then incorporated into Ocwen's records. In addition,
although Lewis averred that Ocwen's records relating to the
loan were made and maintained in the regular course of
Ocwen's business, Lewis asserted only that she had "access
to and [was] familiar" with Wells Fargo's records and
documents relating to this case. The Lewis Declaration does
not establish that Lewis was familiar with Wells Fargo's
record-keeping system. It also makes no assertions as to
Lewis's familiarity with the record-keeping systems of
Funding Group or Option One, which first created the Note
and allonges. Thus, the Lewis Declaration satisfies the
foundational requirements to make Lewis a qualified witness
only with respect to Ocwen's 
original records about the loan
and not any records of Wells Fargo or the loan documents
themselves.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The Lewis Declaration also refers only to the Note and
not the allonges that Wells Fargo asserts were used to
endorse the Note in blank. As noted, the Lewis Declaration
does not establish that Lewis was a qualified witness, and
thus she could not have satisfied the requirements of HRE
Rule 803(b)(6) with respect to the allonges. But, as with
the declaration in Mattos , the Lewis Declaration did not
attempt to admit the allonges under the business records
exception.  Thus, even if the Note fell within the bounds of
HRE Rule 803(b)(6), the allonges endorsing it in blank did
not because the declaration did not provide the requisite
foundation. This is to say that the documents purporting to
allow Wells Fargo to enforce the Note were not admissible
under the business record exception. Since the documents
were not admissible as asserted, Wells Fargo did not meet
its burden of establishing facts necessary for a grant of
summary judgment.
Id. at *8 (citations omitted) (citing Mattos , 140 Hawai #i at
32-33, 398 P.3d at 621-22). 
In the instant case, CitiMortgage, Inc. ( CitiMortgage)
filed a complaint on September 29, 2015 ( Complaint ).  The
Complaint alleged that on July 2, 2008, Millie Geraldine Rohan
(Rohan) executed a promissory note in favor of Just Mortgage,
Inc. (Just Mortgage) for $320,000.00 ( Note), secured by a
mortgage on real property executed by Rohan and recorded on July
10, 2008 in the Bureau of Conveyances ( Mortgage).  CitiMortgage
alleged that it was the owner of the Mortgage by virtue of a
December 3, 2011 assignment of mortgage, that Rohan was in
default, and that CitiMortgage was the "holder of the Note"
indorsed-in-blank.4 
Attached to the Complaint was, inter alia, the Note
together with a single-page allonge dated July 2, 2008,
4Specifically, the Complaint alleges: 
As indicated on Exhibit 1, JUST MORTGAGE, INC. endorsed the
Note "pay to the order of" CITIMORTGAGE, INC., Plaintiff
herein, which then endorsed it in blank, whereby it became
"bearer" paper as defined in HRS § 490:3-109.  Plaintiff
continues to be the holder of the Note and is entitled to
enforce it pursuant to HRS § 490:3-301.
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
apparently executed by a representative of Just Mortgage and
specifically indorsing the Note to CitiMortgage ( Allonge).5   The
Allonge also contains an undated indorsement stamp in the middle
of the page, apparently executed by a representative of
CitiMortgage indorsing the Note in blank.6 
Wilmington maintains that CitiMortgage "was in
possession of the note at the time it filed the Complaint" and
that its evidence is admissible under Mattos and Fitzwater .7  In
support of that contention, Wilmington relies on the following:
(1) the Note and Allonge attached to the Complaint; and (2) a
declaration dated October 27, 2016, by Cedric Small (Small ), a
5The Allonge reads in pertinent part:
ALLONGE TO NOTE DATED JULY 2, 2008
IN FAVOR OF JUST MORTGAGE, INC., A CALIFORNIA CORPORATION
AND EXECUTED BY
MILLIE GERALDINE ROHAN
PAY TO THE ORDER OF
Citimortgage, Inc.
WITHOUT RECOURSE
JUST MORTGAGE, INC, A CALIFORNIA CORPORATION
BY [signature]
MINH LAM
TITLE ASSISTANT VP
6This indorsement stamp on the Allonge reads:
Pay to the order of
___________________
Without recourse on us CitiMortgage Inc
F/K/A Citicorp Mortgage Inc
D/B/A Citicorp Mortgage Inc in NM, on its own
behalf or as Attorney in Fact for Citibank FSB
Citibank (New York State), Citibank (Nevada) NA,
Citibank NA F/K/A Citibank (West) FSB
[Signature]
Janet L. Sans  Senior Vice President
CitiMortgage, Inc
7It appears that the subject mortgage was assigned to Wilmington by
Pretium Mortgage Credit Partners I Loan Acquisition, LP through an Assignment
of Mortgage dated December 18, 2015, and recorded in the Bureau of
Conveyances, State of Hawai #i (Bureau).  It further appears that CitiMortage
assigned the subject mortgage to Pretium Mortgage Credit Partners I Loan
Acquisition, LP through an Assignment of Mortgage dated December 5, 2015, and
recorded in the Bureau.  An order approving the substitution of Wilmington for
CitiMortgage and amendment of the caption was entered on May 2, 2016.
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
"contested foreclosure manager" of Selene Finance LP ( Selene
Finance), the "authorized servicer" of the subject loan for
Wilmington, which was attached to the Motion for Summary
Judgment. 
However, there is no admissible evidence in the record,
including the documents and declaration relied upon by Wilmington
on appeal, showing that CitiMortgage was the holder of the Note
and Allonge at the initiation of the suit.  Like the declarants
in Mattos and Behrendt, Small did not purport to be the custodian
of record for CitiMortgage or Selene Finance.  See Mattos, 140
Hawai#i at 32, 398 P.3d at 621; Behrendt, 2018 WL 1325153 at *7. 
Nor does the Small declaration lay adequate foundation to
establish him as a "qualified witnesses" under HRE Rule 803(b)(6)
as to CitiMortgage's records under Mattos, as explained below.
As Yasuda points out, the Small declaration does not
indicate that he had any familiarity with the record-keeping
systems of Just Mortgage or CitiMortgage, to explain how these
documents were generated in the ordinary course of business.  See
Behrendt, 2018 WL 1325153 at *8.  In fact, it appears that Small
attested that Wilmington "made" the Note and Allonge in the
ordinary course of business, which contradicts these documents
and contradicts his other statements attesting that the Note and
Mortgage were executed in favor of Just Mortgage.8  Also, like in
8Small attested in pertinent part,  
The records regarding the loan that is the subject of this
action are made and maintained in the course of Plaintiff's
regularly conducted business activity.  Entries in those
records are made at or near the time of the acts or events
recorded in those records by persons having personal
(continued...)
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Mattos and Behrendt, Small attested that he was "familiar with
the records of Selene Finance LP and with the subject loan," not
that he was familiar with the record-keeping systems of Just
Mortgage, CitiMortgage, or even Wilmington.  See id.  Nor does
the Small declaration attest that Selene Finance received and
incorporated CitiMortgage's records into its own. and relied upon
the accuracy of those records, as set out in Mattos.
We conclude that Wilmington did not establish that
Small was a "qualified witness" under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) to admit
CitiMortgage's records, including the Note and Allonge, which
were attached to the Complaint and to Small's Declaration.  See
Mattos, 140 Hawai# i at 32-33, 398 P.3d at 621-22.  Thus, even if
Small had attested that CitiMortgage was in possession of the
original Note and Allonge at the time the Complaint was filed
(which he did not),9 such a statement would not be admissible for
lack of foundation.  See id. ("Even if Work's declaration had
stated that U.S. Bank records contain the original note, this
statement would not be admissible because, as noted, Work's
8(...continued)
knowledge of those acts or events.  This Declaration is made
from personal knowledge and from the records regarding the
subject loan.  I am familiar with the records of Selene
Finance LP and with the subject loan.  The attached Exhibits
are in those records.
 
(Emphasis added).  Small defines "Plaintiff" as Wilmington.  One of the
attached exhibits is the Note and Allonge. 
9Small attested in pertinent part, "[t]he original copy of the Note
is held by Plaintiff at Selene Financing LP, 9990 Richmond Ave S, Houston, TX
77042 (full address where the original Note is held) for Plaintiff.  A true
and correct copy of the Note (which is in the subject loan records) is
attached as Exhibit '1.'"   This declaration was made approximately one year
and one month after the filing of the Complaint and contains no statement
about the possessor of the Note and Allonge on September 29, 2015.  
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
declaration is insufficient to render him a 'qualified witness'
as to U.S. Bank's records.") 
Lastly, we also observe, like in Mattos  and Behrendt,
that Small did not attempt to admit the Allonge attached to the
Note.  Even if the Note were admissible through the Small
declaration, Wilmington still failed to authenticate the Allonge. 
See Behrendt, 2018 WL 1325153 at *8 ("as with the declaration in
Mattos, the Lewis Declaration did not attempt to admit the
allonges under the business records exception.  Thus, even if the
Note fell within the bounds of HRE Rule 803(b)(6), the allonges
endorsing it in blank did not because the declaration did not
provide the requisite foundation.")  Because the Allonge was not
admissible through Small's declaration, the fact that it is dated
July 2, 2008, i.e., before the filing of the Complaint, is
immaterial, contrary to Wilmington's contention.
As Wilmington raises no other arguments about the
admissibility of its evidence, we conclude that Wilmington did
not satisfy its burden to produce admissible evidence
demonstrating that CitiMortgage was entitled to enforce the
subject note at the time this action was commenced.  See Mattos,
140 Hawai #i at 32-33, 398 P.3d at 621-22.  As such, viewing the
facts and inferences in the light most favorable to Yasuda, as we
must for purposes of a summary judgment ruling, there is a
genuine issue of material fact as to whether CitiMortgage was
entitled to enforce the subject note at the time this foreclosure
action was commenced.  Therefore, the Circuit Court erred in
granting Wilmington's Motion for Summary Judgment.  Accordingly,
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
we need not reach the other issues and arguments raised by Yasuda
in this appeal.10   
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Circuit
Court's Foreclosure Decree and Judgment, both entered April 19,
2017, and remand this case for further proceedings.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 23, 2018.
On the briefs:
Joyal Yasuda,
Defendant-Appellant, Pro Se.Presiding Judge
Marvin S.C. Dang,
Summer Okada,
(Law Offices of Marvin S.C.
  Dang, LLLC),
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
10Yasuda raises issues regarding the validity of the Mortgage
because, in another Circuit Court case, Civ. No. 10-01-247K, the Circuit Court
set aside the July 2008 warranty deed conveying the subject property from
Yasuda and Paakonia to Rohan, and returned title to Yasuda.  We need not reach
this issue, among the others raised on appeal, as Wilmington did not establish
that its predecessor-in-interest had standing at the initiation of the instant
action.   
12