 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000376 13-APR-2026 09:04 AM Dkt. 81 SO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000376 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
GEORGE TONG, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CPC-23-0000694) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.) 
George Tong was convicted of Criminal Property Damage 
in the Second Degree1 after a bench trial.2 He appeals from the 
Amended Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence and the 
Free Standing Order of Restitution entered by the Circuit Court 
of the First Circuit. We affirm. 
Tong was charged with damaging the property of American 
Savings Bank (ASB). He allegedly applied glue to an ASB 
automatic teller machine (ATM) on February 17, 2023. During his 
1 Hawaii Revised Statutes § 708-821 (2014) provides: 
(1) A person commits the offense of criminal property
damage in the second degree if by means other than fire: 
. . . . (b) The person intentionally or knowingly damages
the property of another, without the other'sconsent, in an amount exceeding $1,500[.] 
2 The Honorable Catherine H. Remigio presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial he admitted he "spilled the glue or squeezed the glue all 
over the machine." He was found guilty as charged, and sentenced to four years of probation. A restitution hearing was held. The Amended Judgment of Conviction and the Order of Restitution were entered on April 24, 2024. This appeal followed. 
Tong contends the trial court erred by: (1) admitting 
the amount of a proposal to fix the ATM; and (2) finding that Tong knew he was causing more than $1,500 of damage to the ATM.
(1) State's Exhibit 11 was a redacted copy of Diebold 
Nixdorf's proposal to fix the damaged ATM for $7,435.68. When the State offered Exhibit 11 into evidence, Tong objected "as to foundation, hearsay, and confrontation." On appeal, Tong argues Exhibit 11 "is hearsay" and "without requiring a witness to explain the bases for that amount, the Circuit Court denied Tong his Due Process right to a Fair Trial." 
Exhibit 11 was offered to prove the amount of damage to 
the ATM. One of ASB's employees testified that Diebold Nixdorf "repair and maintain our ATMs." ASB's ATM operations manager, Laura Ibanes, authenticated Diebold Nixdorf's proposal as the one 
she signed to authorize the repair. Exhibit 11's $7,435.68 
amount was not hearsay because it was not offered to prove what Diebold Nixdorf thought the repair would cost; it proved the amount ASB paid its regular vendor to fix the ATM that Tong damaged. The declarant was Ibanes; she authorized the $7,435.68 repair. The trial court correctly stated, "the amount that she approved is obviously relevant." 
The trial court noted that Tong "will have the 
opportunity to question [Ibanes] as to why she approved that amount." On cross-examination, Ibanes confirmed that Diebold Nixdorf was "the company that services all of the ATM machines" and that "a service technician was deployed to American Savings Bank to determine the amount of damages in this case[.]" She was not asked why she approved the repair cost or what she did before approving the repair. There was no confrontation clause violation. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) Tong argues the trial court erred by finding he 
knew he was causing over $1,500 in damage to the ATM. Relevant 
here, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-801 (2014) provides: 
Whenever the value of property or services is determinative
of the class or grade of an offense, or otherwise relevantto a prosecution, the following shall apply: 
. . . . 
(4) When acting intentionally or knowingly with respect tothe value of property or services is required toestablish an element of an offense, the value ofproperty or services shall be prima facie evidencethat the defendant believed or knew the property orservices to be of that value. 
Tong argues that "the Circuit Court expressly found 
against the presumption of HRS § 708-801(4)." He cites this 
excerpt from the trial transcript, after the court found Tong's acts to be "deliberate, that means intentional": 
Now, whether or not this Court believes that at the
time that this happened that this defendant, Mr. Tong, knew
that it was going to be $7,435.68, I don't find that. That is a very specific amount. That is a lot, and I don'tbelieve that that was proven beyond a reasonable doubt. But 
the Court does believe that an amount greater than 1,500 was proven, given the machine itself, given the areas that were
deliberately squirted with glue, including a dispenser wherecash could not come out anymore, including the place wheremagnetic cards of ATM, debit, or whatever you use in therewould go in, and include buttons that if glued togetherwould not be able to work would indicate to this Court that there was, at least an intimate understanding that quite abit of damage would be done, not simply damage that could bewiped off by a rag and water. And in fact that was attempted by [ASB's assistant branch manager] to no avail.And the damage was more than that. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The court found that the State did not prove beyond a 
reasonable doubt that Tong believed or knew the specific cost to 
repair the damage to the ATM caused by the glue he squeezed on it was $7,435.68. But the court also found that the State proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Tong believed or knew the amount of damage was greater than $1,500. That finding was supported by substantial evidence in the record and was not clearly erroneous. See State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 246, 831 P.2d 924, 930 (1992) 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(stating, of jury-waived criminal trial, that "findings of the 
trial court will not be disturbed unless clearly erroneous"). 
The April 24, 2024 Amended Judgment of Conviction and 
Probation Sentence and Free Standing Order of Restitution are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 13, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
Henry P. Ting, 
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant George Tong. 
Robert T. Nakatsuji, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, City and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-AppelleeState of Hawai# i. /s/ Keith K. HiraokaPresiding Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate Judge
4 