
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000545
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
KELLY ANN CARR, formerly known as
 
KELLY ANN BUENGER, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
 
SOCRATES WILLIAM BUENGER, Defendant-Appellee
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
 
(FC-DIVORCE NO. 05-1-0044)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Kelly Ann Carr, formerly known as
 
Kelly Ann Buenger (Mother), appeals from a Family Court of the
 
Second Circuit's (Family Court's) June 16, 2011 post-decree order
 entitled Court's Order Re: Parenting Plan and Access Schedule
 
1
(Parenting Order).  Mother also challenges various findings of
 
fact (
FOFs) and conclusions of law (COLs) set forth in the Family
 
Court's October 4, 2011 FOFs and COLs.
 
I. BACKGROUND FACTS

 
Mother and Socrates William Buenger (Father) were
 
married on July 27, 2003. Mother filed a complaint for divorce
 
1
 The Honorable Keith E. Tanaka presided.
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 




 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on January 27, 2005. On October 4, 2006, the Family Court
 entered a Judgment Granting Divorce and Awarding Child Custody
 (Divorce Decree).
2
 
The Divorce Decree awarded the parties joint legal
 
custody of their daughter (Daughter). Mother was awarded primary
 
physical custody of Daughter, subject to Father's reasonable
 
right of visitation. The Divorce Decree further provided:
 
Visitation shall be as recommended by Jacque Ford. Ms. Ford
 
shall remain as Guardian Ad Litem for [Daughter] until she
is dismissed by the Family Court pursuant to a filed
Stipulated Order between the parties or further order of the
Family Court, with each party paying half of her fees.
 
In addition, the Divorce Decree provided for the Family
 
Court's "continuing jurisdiction and specific authority to make
 
any other orders it deems appropriate or necessary" to enforce
 the decree.
 
Prior to the entry of the Divorce Decree, Guardian Ad
 
Litem (GAL) Jacque Ford (Ford) filed three reports concerning the
 
parties' then-two-year-old child. The first report recommended
 
two hours of visitation, twice a week, to be incrementally
 increased to two overnight visits per week, if the increased
 visits were deemed "successful" by the GAL, ultimately to be
 increased to every Wednesday night with Father, and alternating
 weekends with Father, along with a specified holiday/special
 occasion schedule, if visitation "goes well." The second report
 memorialized, but then dismissed as mistaken, the GAL's "thought"
 that she had detected alcohol on Mother's breath during a visit
 by Mother to the GAL's office. The third report included the
 GAL's continuing observations, and reflected a high level of
 
2
 The Honorable Simone C. Polak presided.
 
2
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
monitoring/supervision of Father's visitation (e.g. "[GAL] will
 supervise the last two hours of each of these visits to assure
 that [Daughter's] needs are being met and that [Father] is able
 to feed her lunch and put her down for a nap in a satisfactory
 manner"), but did not in any way criticize or raise doubts
 
3
concerning Father's parenting or change the initial GAL
 
 
recommendations.
 
Although the exact circumstances are unclear (and
 
disputed) it appears that, at some point in late 2006, Ford
 resigned as GAL.
 
On July 11, 2008, Father filed pro se a motion for
 
post-decree relief requesting the appointment of a child custody
 evaluator to create a "definitive parenting plan" in light of
 Ford's resignation and Mother's alleged lack of cooperation. On
 August 26, 2008, through counsel, Father filed a second motion
 for post-decree relief, which sought a broader range of relief.
 On September 8, 2008, Mother filed a motion for post-decree
 relief seeking, inter alia, sole legal custody so that she alone
 could make the decisions that she believes are in the best
 interest of Daughter. 
On September 19, 2008, a stipulated order was entered
 
for the employment of retired Judge Eric G. Romanchak (Romanchak)
 
to mediate "the issues of custody, visitation and other related
 
matters." On September 29, 2008, a stipulated order was entered
 directing the parties to use Romanchak's services to mediate the
 issues raised in their motions.
 
3
 It appears from the third report that Mother was "very concerned"
about increased visitation and the GAL felt that it would be desirable if
 
"some of [Mother's] fears [were] allayed."
 
3
 
 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On March 17, 2009, Father filed a "Memorandum of Law"
 
that, inter alia, reported that mediation had not been successful
 and summarized the parties' requests for relief. 
On April 29, 2009, the Family Court entered an order
 
providing, inter alia, that Dr. Giuletta Swenson (Swenson) would
 
be appointed to serve as GAL, and that Swenson would have the
 
discretion to allow overnight visitation with Father if the GAL
 opined that it was in Daughter's best interest. On June 22,
 2009, the Family Court entered an order providing, inter alia,
 for Father's visitation with Daughter twice a week for eight
 hours, until further order of the court or an alternative
 recommendation by Swenson. On June 23, 2009, the order formally
 appointing Swenson as GAL was entered, which, inter alia, again
 granted Swenson the discretion to allow overnight visits. 
Swenson filed a report dated October 8, 2009 (Swenson Report) and
 
an updated report dated April 14, 2010 (Swenson Update). The
 Family Court held various hearings, and the parties submitted
 
various documents to the court throughout these proceedings, not
 all of which are chronicled here.
 
The Swenson Report made no custody recommendation, but
 
stated, inter alia, that it was the GAL's opinion that Daughter's
 time-sharing schedule with Father was behind what it should have
 been given her age and circumstances and that the primary goal
 should be working to build up to a developmentally appropriate
 schedule where Mother, as the "residential parent," has 10/14
 overnights and Father, as the "non-residential parent," has 4/14
 nights. The GAL included a "feasible" timetable to build up to
 that by February or March of 2010, assuming Daughter's "normal
 
4
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 






 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
adjustment" to the transition. The GAL also opined that a "firm
 
holiday schedule" needed to be established and that the parents
 needed to discuss vacation and potential travel arrangements,
 including "small vacation periods" with Father 3-4 times per
 year. The GAL stressed the need for parental cooperation.
 
The Swenson Update reflected various difficulties,
 
which we will not detail herein. The GAL opined that a formal
 written Holiday/Access schedule would be of benefit. The GAL
 further opined that the Family Court needed to hear from each
 parent concerning the 10/4 schedule, and whether or not it would
 be in Daughter's best interest to stay with it or expand it. The
 Swenson Update noted that "parental conflict is high" and that
 Swenson did not have an effective working relationship with
 parents. The Swenson Update also recommended parent counseling,
 a new GAL, re-evaluation of the 10/4 schedule, and resolution of
 the holiday/access schedule.
 
In the meantime, following a November 13, 2009 hearing
 
at which the Family Court took "extensive" offerings of proof,
 evidence, and argument on the parties' various motions, on
 January 12, 2010, the Family Court entered certain FOFs and COLS
 (Interim FOFs/COLs). The Interim FOFs/COLs resolved numerous
 
financial disputes between the parties. With respect to custody
 
4
and visitation, the Interim FOFs/COLs's "COLs"  included:
 
 
2. The Decree awarded Mother and Father joint legal
custody with primary physical custody to Mother subject to
Father's reasonable rights of visitation. Under joint legal
custody arrangements, major decisions that affect the
child's welfare are made by both parents.
 
3. The Decree did not set a visitation schedule and
 
4
 As some of the paragraphs identified as COLs were stated as
recommendations, they appear to be advisory in nature.
 
5
 


 



 





 



 



 




 


 

 




 


 


 




 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
left it up to the GAL recommendation. The Court in granting
the divorce should not have delegated its authority to a
GAL. Bencomo v. Bencomo, 112 Hawaii 511, 147 P.3d 67 (App.
2006). The failure of the original GAL to implement any
type of visitation schedule only added to the litigious
nature of this case.
 . . . .
 
 
17. . . . In considering whether to award joint
versus sole legal custody [which was requested by Mother],
the Court is concerned about capacities of the parents to
communicate constructively with each other with respect to
the child's welfare, and the parties' parenting styles.
 
18. The Family Court concludes that, in the instant
case just because the parents are unable to co-parent
effectively this is not a material change in circumstance.
 
19. The Family Court further concludes that it is in
the best interest of [Daughter] that Mother and Father have
joint legal custody of [Daughter]. Mother shall continue to
 have primary physical custody of [Daughter], subject to
Father's visitation schedule on a 10/4 schedule (10 nights
with Mother, 4 nights with Father as also recommended in the
[Swenson Report].
 
20. The Family Court recommends that the 10/4
schedule be utilized for 4 to 6 months with a review date
 set at the end of that time to revisit how that schedule is
 working and whether it should be expanded to give Father
more visitation time (as also recommended in the [Swenson
Report] on October 8, 2009).
. . . .
 
22. The Family Court recommends that the parents seek
the services of Dr. Michael Rim to assist them to
 
communicate constructively and co-parent effectively as
joint legal custodians (as also recommended by the GAL).
 
23. The Family Court recommends that the parents
continue to work with the GAL, Dr. Guilietta Swenson to
facilitate a visitation schedule/parenting plan in the best
interest of the child.
 
On March 29, 2010, once again without counsel, Father
 
 
filed a motion seeking clarification of the Interim FOFs/COLs,
 
 
noting the resignation of Swenson and essentially arguing that a
 
 
clear time-sharing schedule was needed. Thereafter, Mother's
 
 
counsel withdrew as well, and Mother filed pro se an opposition
 
 
to Father's motion. At a June 30, 2010 hearing on Father's
 
 
motion, the Family Court ordered the parties to attend a co-
 
parenting class run by Sherry Fisher (Fisher). During the
 
 
hearing, Mother expressed familiarity with Fisher, describing her
 
 
as "incredible" and "really good at what she does." The court's
 
 
6
 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
written order, entered on June 30, 2010, ordered that Fisher
 would provide a "Report on Mediation/Progress Status" to the
 court in ten weeks, but did not otherwise rule on Father's
 motion. This schedule was apparently delayed to allow both
 parties to complete Fisher's class, although various status
 hearings appeared to have been called and the matter continued.
 
It appears that, after both parties completed Fisher's
 
class, they initially agreed (but were not ordered) to
 "mediation" with Fisher, although it does not appear that the
 parties necessarily agreed to the scope of the mediation. By the
 time of a February 16, 2011 hearing, Mother was strongly opposed
 to mediation with Fisher, apparently because Mother felt that
 Fisher was "abandoning neutrality" and attempting to insert
 herself into the litigation. In light of the long history of the
 conflict between the parties, the court nevertheless ordered them
 to contact Fisher regarding mediation. 
Thereafter, Mother filed two "updates," first reporting
 
that the parties were meeting with Fisher, then reporting that
 mediation with Fisher had failed. Father also filed an update,
 agreeing that mediation had failed, but also submitting a report
 by Fisher entitled "[Daughter] Detailed Therapeutic Assessment"
 (Fisher Assessment).
 
On April 20, 2011, the Family Court held a status
 
conference, noted that mediation had failed, and set the matter
 for trial. Both parties filed pre-trial position statements,
 including their proposed parenting schedules.
 
On June 3, 2011, the Family Court held an evidentiary
 
hearing and trial on custody and visitation. Both parties
 
7
 
 





 







 



 
 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appeared pro se. Father sought to present testimony from Fisher. 
 
Mother objected and asked that the Fisher Assessment be stricken
 
 
from the record. The Family Court then called Ms. Fisher into
 
 
court, 
 
not as a witness or anything . . . I want to get it clear on
the record as far as her capacity, how she was dealing with
both of you and with [Daughter], and if she is comfortable
even testifying if she has to testify. I want to put that
on the record here. And then I'll make a decision whether
 

or not she should testify. [ 5]

 
The Family Court asked Fisher whether, following the
 
 
hearing, she would still be willing to work with the parties and
 
 
Daughter, if she did or if she did not testify. Fisher answered
 
 
affirmatively. Upon the court's inquiry, Fisher also confirmed
 
 
that it was her opinion that the court needed to set a schedule,
 
 
for Daughter's sake. After Fisher gave her statement, the Family
 
 
Court orally denied Mother's request to "strike and seal" the
 
 
Fisher Assessment because
 
 
. . . I have read that report, which you have read and both
of you have read. Like I said, I don't think she's making
any recommendations as far as who should have custody or
what the schedule should be. She's just making comments as
far as her concerns, what's happening, you know, between you
folks and how that's effecting [sic] [Daughter].
 
And then she's also recommending that, you know,
 
because you folks -- she's tried to work out a visitation
 
schedule, but it hasn't been successful, which you both know
 
you've been trying to do that for years. She's asking the
 
Court to do that.
 
 
So, I don't know how I can strike her report if I've
already read it. I can't just strike it from my mind. 
The Family Court decided that it was not going to allow
 
 
Fisher to testify for either side "based upon the Court's
 
 
findings here that because she has been working with both parties
 
 
and with the child and there may be a possibility she will
 
 
5
 Fisher was not under oath at the time she gave her statement.
 
8
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 









 






 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
continue to work with both parties and the child, I don't want to
 
jeopardize that relationship by testifying here[.]"
 
Mother and Father each presented their case through
 
their own testimony/argument. Father argued for equal parenting
 time with Daughter in order to reduce parental conflict and to
 foster a closer relationship with Daughter. Mother stated that
 she formulated her proposed parenting plan in response to
 observations by herself and Fisher that Daughter is "feeling very
 conflicted." Mother's parenting plan included less time with
 Father than the schedule proposed by Father.
 
Mother requested to cross-examine Father regarding
 
"some really specific issues," such as why he failed to meet with
 Daughter's teacher and why he had not taken Daughter to a school
 event. The Family Court indicated that it did not want to get
 into a "cross-examination type technique," but allowed Mother to
 argue that Father is not there for Daughter. In addition, the
 court made inquiry into the areas raised by Mother.
 
At the close of the June 3, 2011 evidentiary hearing,
 
the Family Court took the issues of custody and visitation under
 advisement in order to further review the proposed parenting
 plans. The Family Court also stated:
 
you've been here years already . . . there's been a lot of
conflict, okay. And I think you're both kind of tired of
the conflict, and we've tried all kind[s] of different
options to resolve the conflict between both of you, whether
it's through mediation, whether through professionals,
whoever we try to deal with, and you know, whether it's
through your attorneys or whatever, it just hasn't worked.
And the person that we're kind of losing sight of is
[Daughter] and she's the one suffering all this time.
 
So even though you want me to just not consider Sherry
Fisher's report, I think it's evident, and I think you both
recognize, that something has to change because [Daughter]
is the one suffering here. I think I've already made that
clear from the last hearing and that's why I said, well, if
you can't do it on your own or with professional help, I'm
 
9
  

 

 


 


 



 

 




 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
just going to have to make a decision for the sake of
[Daughter], because I don't want to see her suffer any more.
 
. . . .
 So I want to look at your schedules here and I want to see
what's best for her. . . .
 
So I'm going to consider all that. 
I'm going to consider
all your arguments today. I will review all of the
 pleadings again, and I will make a written decision and then
you'll get my written decision.
. . . . 
 
It's what has to be done for [Daughter]. 
So whether it's
 
going to be a five two two five schedule, or a ten four
schedule, or even something else all together, I have to
determine what's best for her. But I will consider your
arguments and your position statements.
 
On June 16, 2011, the Family Court filed its Parenting
 
Order. Therein, the Family Court ordered that Mother and Father
 
are to share joint legal and physical custody of Daughter and
 provided detailed guidance and specific instructions for
 Daughter's regular schedule, holidays, and other non-regular
 events, as well as specific steps for conflict resolution,
 communications with each other, and other matters related to
 Daughter's care and well-being.
 
On June 27, 2011, Mother filed a motion for
 
reconsideration of the Parenting Order. On July 1, 2011, the
 Family Court denied Mother's motion for reconsideration. Mother
 filed a notice of appeal on July 15, 2011. On July 26, 2011,
 Mother requested that the Family Court enter FOFs and COLs. On
 
October 4, 2011, the Family Court entered its final FOFs and
 
COLs.
 II. POINTS OF ERROR ON APPEAL
 
Mother raises thirteen points of error, arguing that
 
the Family Court erred in: (1) failing to strike the Fisher
 Assessment; (2) eliciting Fisher's opinion at the June 3, 2011
 hearing; (3) relying on Fisher's opinions; (4) entering FOF 63,
 
10
 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 








 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
which found that it was imperative to establish and implement a
 
time-sharing schedule; (5) entering COL 1, which incorporated by
 reference the Family Court's January 12, 2010 FOFs and COLs; (6)
 entering COL 3, which concluded that Fisher's report should not
 be stricken; (7) entering COL 4, regarding the Family Court's
 decision not to let Mother directly cross-examine Father; (8)
 awarding Father joint physical custody; (9) entering COL 7, which
 concluded that Father established a material change of
 circumstances warranting a modification of physical custody; (10)
 entering COL 8, which concluded that physical custody of Daughter
 should be shared equally; (11) establishing the Parenting Plan
 and Access Schedule in paragraphs I and II of the Parenting
 Order; (12) establishing mandatory steps to be taken by the
 parties prior to seeking further court intervention; and (13)
 entering COL 9, which incorporated the Parenting Order and
 described the extent to which it did and did not modify the child
 support, custody, and visitation provisions in the Divorce
 Decree.
 III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion
in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus,
[an appellate court] will not disturb the family court's
decisions on appeal unless the family court disregarded
rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial
detriment of a party litigant and its decision clearly
exceeded the bounds of reason.
 
Fisher v. Fisher , 111 Hawai 'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(citation omitted). "Furthermore, the burden of establishing
 
 
abuse of discretion is on appellant, and a strong showing is
 
 
required to establish it." Ek v. Boggs, 102 Hawai 'i 289, 294-95, 
75 P.3d 1180, 1185-86 (2003) (citations, internal quotation
 
 
11
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
marks, and brackets omitted). 
 
The family court's FOFs are reviewed on appeal under
 
the "clearly erroneous" standard. A[n] FOF is clearly
 
erroneous when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to 

support the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in 

support of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless 

left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has 
 
 
been made. "Substantial evidence" is credible evidence 
 
 
which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable 

a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion. 
 
 
On the other hand, the family court's COLs are 

reviewed on appeal de novo, under the right/wrong standard. 

COLS, consequently, are not binding upon an appellate court 

and are freely reviewable for their correctness. 
 
 
Moreover, the family court is given much leeway in its 

examination of the reports concerning a child's care, 

custody, and welfare, and its conclusions in this regard, if 

supported by the record and not clearly erroneous, must 

stand on appeal. 
 
 
Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360 (citation and ellipses 
omitted; format altered).
 
It is well-settled that an appellate court will not
 
pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses
 
and the weight of evidence; this is the province of the
 
trier of fact.
 
 
Id. (citation and quotation marks omitted).
 
Finally, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court has held: 
[D]ifferent standards of review must be applied to
 
trial court decisions regarding the admissibility of
 
evidence, depending on the requirements of the particular 

rule of evidence at issue. When application of a particular 

evidentiary rule can yield only one correct result, the
 
proper standard for appellate review is the right/wrong
 
standard. However, the traditional abuse of discretion
 
standard should be applied in the case of those rules of
 
evidence that require a "judgment call" on the part of the
 
trial court.
 
 
State v. West, 95 Hawai 'i 452, 456-57, 24 P.3d 648, 652-53 (2001) 
(quoting Kealoha v. Cnty. of Hawaii, 74 Haw. 308, 319-20, 844
 
P.2d 670, 676 (1993)).
 IV. DISCUSSION
 
Before addressing Mother's list of alleged errors, it
 
 
is important to consider the fundamental facts of this case and
 
 
the paramount legal principles that guide the courts in these
 
 
12
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
situations.
 
At its core, this case is about a little girl whose
 
divorced parents seem to have been in a continuous, perhaps
 constant, state of conflict about matters, great and small,
 concerning her care and upbringing, since she was two-years-old
 and possibly earlier. Despite the assistance of GALS, counselors
 and therapists of various kinds, classes, mediation, and the 
efforts of the Family Court, these two parents appear to have
 prioritized bolstering and defending their respective rights and
 positions over working together, communicating nicely with one
 another, and/or understanding and forgiving each other's
 differences, imperfections, and/or transgressions, for the sake
 of Daughter. Courts are generally ill-equipped to truly resolve
 these sorts of issues, but must nevertheless make decisions
 concerning custody, visitation, and other parenting-related
 issues in accordance with the applicable constitutional
 parameters, statutes, rules, precedent, and the evidence
 presented to the court. With that, we turn to Mother's arguments
 on appeal.
 
A. Sherry Fisher
 Mother asserts that the Family Court erred in failing
 
to strike Fisher's report, eliciting Fisher's opinion at the June
 3, 2011 hearing, and relying on Fisher's opinions.
 
Fisher's role in this case was not clearly defined, and
 
Fisher often possessed multiple, conflicting roles with respect
 to her involvement with Daughter and the parties.
6 The Family
 
6
 The Fisher Assessment indicates that Mother initiated the
 
assessment of Daughter with Fisher so that Daughter "had an 'advocate.'" The
 
(continued...)
 
 
13
  
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 








 


 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court ordered the parties to attend Fisher's co-parenting class;
 
however, the Family Court did not appoint Fisher as a GAL in the
 case, nor did the Family Court appoint Fisher as a child custody
 evaluator or mediator. The Family Court did, however, allow the
 
parties to enlist Fisher to "help you as far as further than just
 
the program itself. If you want to use her as a family
 counselor, that's fine too."  The parties later independently
 
engaged Fisher for therapy and/or counseling sessions, as well as
 
for mediation. Although Fisher's report mentions the individual
 sessions she had with Mother and/or Father, and notes the co-
parenting group sessions as part of a "treatment overview" for
 Daughter, no particular child custody or time-sharing arrangement
 was recommended; rather, Fisher's report emphasized and concluded
 that Daughter was being adversely impacted by the ongoing
 conflicts between her parents and that it was important that some
 time-sharing arrangement be determined and for the litigation to
 end.
 
The Family Court clearly erred, at the June 3, 2011
 
hearing, when the court solicited Fisher's unsworn opinion that
 the court needed to set a parenting schedule, for Daughter's
 sake, yet refused to allow Father to call her as a witness or to
 allow Mother to cross-examine her. We are aware of no legal
 basis for such action, notwithstanding the broad discretion given
 
6(...continued)
 
Fisher Assessment explains that Mother was verbally given information on the

scope of services and changes in confidentiality upon entering Fisher's
private practice, and that both Mother and Father agreed to have Fisher "act
as advocate for their child, assess her, and act as the mediator for their
family[.]" The Fisher Assessment also states that Fisher met individually
with Mother and covered consent to services, scope of services, details of
confidentiality, and fees, and that Mother "consented to participation in
services for herself and [Daughter] by signing documentation[.]" No such
 documentation or confidentiality agreement appears in the record on appeal. 
14
   
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to family courts regarding the examination of reports concerning a child's care, custody, and welfare. See In re Doe, 95 Hawai
'i 
183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001). The Family Court similarly erred to the extent that it relied on Fisher's opinions, which were stated in Fisher's report and "confirmed" at the June 3, 2011 hearing.
7 
Nevertheless, our review of the entire record of these
 
proceedings leads us to conclude that the Family Court's
 consideration of Fisher's opinion was harmless error. See Hawaii
 
Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 103(a) (Supp. 2013) ("[e]rror may
 
not be predicated upon a ruling which admits or excludes evidence
 
unless a substantial right of the party is affected"). First,
 neither party was prejudiced because, as Mother acknowledged in
 her opening brief, Fisher's report "did not recommend any
 particular child custody or timesharing arrangement." More
 importantly, the record of this case overwhelmingly demonstrates
 the parties' inability to establish and implement a long-range
 time-sharing arrangement, as well as their inability to end the
 ongoing conflict between them, without a specific parenting plan
 and access schedule. The Family Court's decision to specifically
 address the custody and visitation issues affecting Daughter was
 also clearly necessitated by the Divorce Decree's delegation of
 the Family Court's decision-making authority concerning
 visitation to GAL Ford. As the Family Court correctly determined
 in the Interim FOFs/COLs, this delegation was both unauthorized
 and problematic. As the Family Court concluded: "The Court in
 
7
 Accordingly, we need not address each of Mother's alternative
arguments that Fisher's opinion constituted error.
 
15
    
  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 



 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
granting the divorce should not have delegated its authority to 
a GAL. . . . The failure of the original GAL to implement any type of visitation schedule only added to the litigious nature of this case." (Citation omitted); see Bencomo v. Bencomo, 112 Hawai
'i 511, 515, 147 P.3d 67, 71 (App. 2006) ("[i]n a divorce 
case, the family court is not authorized by statute or otherwise to delegate its decision-making authority to a guardian ad litem"). 
B. COL 1
 We reject Mother's contention that the Family Court
 
erred, in COL 1, by incorporating by reference the Interim
 FOFs/COLs. In conjunction with the November 13, 2009 hearing,
 the Family Court admitted nineteen of Mother's exhibits into
 evidence, including a copy of the parties' Divorce Decree, and
 other evidence relating to child support, uninsured medical costs
 incurred on behalf of Daughter, the removal of GAL Ford from the
 case, and conversations between Mother and Father regarding a
 visitation schedule. The Family Court's Interim FOFs/COLs
 
entered on January 12, 2010, gave an introduction and background
 
of the parties and the litigation.
8 The Family Court then
 
articulated its findings of fact naming the parties, Daughter,
 and discussing the Divorce Decree.  Further findings of the
 
Family Court detailed uninsured medical costs of Daughter
 
8
 The January 12, 2010 Interim FOFs/COLs indicated that the Family
Court carefully considered "all the evidence presented and admitted at the
November 13, 2009 hearing, and . . . the credible evidence before the Court
and the records and files herein" in articulating its Interim FOFs/COLs. The
 Family Court also indicated that it reviewed Mother's proposed findings of
fact and conclusions of law, Father's proposed findings of fact and
conclusions of law, and Mother's response in entering its Interim FOFs/COLs.
 
16
 	 

	 


	 



	 



 
	 




 

 

 
	 
 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
incurred by Mother, and Father's child support arrearages. There
 
 
is sufficient support for these findings in the exhibits admitted
 
 
into evidence at the hearing.  With regard to legal and physical
 
 
custody, the Family Court found:
 
 
27.	 Both Mother and Father are loving, caring parents who
intend to support the needs of [Daughter].
28.	 On September 4, 2008, Mother filed her Motion for
Post-Decree Relief, seeking, among other things, sole
legal custody of [Daughter].
29.	 On March 17, 2009 Father filed a Memorandum in support
of his motions and in opposition to Plaintiff's
motions. Also on March 17, 2009, Father filed his
affidavit in response to the motions mentioned above.
30.	 On October 14, 2009, all parties and their counsel
appeared before the Honorable KEITH E. TANAKA for a
Family Court Rule 16 conference regarding all pending
matters.
 
31.	 On November 13, 2009, Father's August 26, 2008 motion,
Mother's September 4, 2008 motion, and Mother's
February 17, 2009 motion came on for hearing before
the Honorable Keith E. Tanaka. At the hearing, Mother
and Father made extensive offerings of proof. The
 Court also received Mother's nineteen exhibits into
 evidence.
 
Based on a review of the evidence admitted at trial,
 
 
the parties' other filings with the Family Court, the statements
 
 
made at the November 13, 2009 hearing, and other documents and
 
 
reports in the record, it appears that all of the Family Court's
 
 
findings are supported by substantial evidence in the record. 
 
Accordingly, Mother's contention that the Family Court erred in
 
 
entering COL 1 is without merit.
 
 
C.
	 Cross-examination of Father
 
Mother contends that the Family Court erred when it
 
 
declined to allow Mother, who was appearing pro se, to cross-
 
examine Father, who was also pro se. Mother wanted to question
 
 
Father under oath in regard to what she claimed was his lack of
 
 
involvement and parental disinterest when Daughter was in his
 
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
18care.  The Family Court denied Mother's request, stating that
"instead of going into a cross-examine type technique here, since
I'm just allowing you folks to argue here, you can make your
point."  Mother then proceeded to argue what she perceived as
Father's involvement, or rather lack thereof, in Daughter's
schooling and medical care, his failure to pay child support
payments, etc.
"[T]he family court possesses wide discretion in making
its decisions and those decisions will not be set aside unless
there is a manifest abuse of discretion."  In re Jane Doe, 84
Hawai#i 41, 46, 928 P.2d 883, 888 (1996) (citations and internal
quotation marks omitted).  The appellate court will not disturb
the family court's decision "unless the family court disregarded
rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial
detriment of a party litigant, and its decision clearly exceeded
the bounds of reason."  Id.  Moreover, "[c]ourts have inherent
equity, supervisory, and administrative powers as well as
inherent power to control the litigation process before them." 
Doe v. Doe , 98 Hawai #i 144, 154-55, 44 P.3d 1085, 1095-96 (2002)
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted).  Accordingly,
discretion resides within a trial court to determine the scope
and extent, if any, of cross-examination.  See, e.g., HRE Rule
611 (1993) (vesting discretion in the trial court to control the
proceedings before it); HRE Rule 1101 (1993) (stating that the
HRE "apply to all courts of the State of Hawaii," including
therefore, the family courts).  This discretion is limited by the
requirement that a court 
 

 





 

 









 

 

 

 

 


 


 
 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
exercise reasonable control over the mode and order of
 
interrogating witnesses and presenting evidence so as to (1)
make interrogation and presentation effective for the
ascertainment of the truth, (2) avoid needless consumption
of time, and (3) protect witnesses from harassment or undue
embarrassment.
 
Doe v. Doe, 98 Hawai 'i at 155, 44 P.3d at 1096 (footnote 
omitted).
 
Here, Mother's stated purpose for attempting to cross-
 
examine Father under oath was to establish her factual
 
 
allegations of his lack of involvement and parental disinterest
 
 
when Daughter was in his care. On appeal, Mother contends that
 
 
she was prejudiced by the inability to cross-examine Father
 
 
because she was not able to 
 
more fully bolster her contention that Father was not
involved in Daughter's care and supervision during those
times when she was with him, that he was generally
disinterested in parenting, and that increasing his time
with Daughter, with a corresponding decrease in the time
Daughter spent with her, would not be beneficial to
Daughter, evidently impaired her ability to develop the
evidence in her favor in regard to this critical aspect of
the case.
 
However, it is not clear how Mother would have been
 
able to further bolster her argument by cross-examining Father
 
because the same evidence was already established through other
 means. As recognized by the Family Court, Mother's stated intent
 was to "reiterat[e] what's already in [her] position statement." 
Although it appears that the Family Court erred in completely
 
disallowing cross-examination, Mother's inability to cross-
examine Father was not prejudicial to Mother's case because she
 nevertheless retained the ability to set forth her observations
 and opinions, present evidence in support of her position,
 respond to Father's arguments, and respond to the evidence being
 
19
 
 

 

 

 
	 



	 

 

	 
 



	 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 
	 
 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
presented against her. See In re Doe, 100 Hawai 'i 335, 346 n.23, 
60 P.3d 285, 296 n.23 (2002)("The exclusion of testimony is 
harmless where the same evidence is established through other means.")(citing Kekua v. Kaiser Found. Hosp., 61 Haw. 208, 221, 601 P.2d 364, 372 (1979)). 
In addition, the Family Court's ruling essentially
 
adopted the factual allegations that Mother attempted to
 establish by cross-examining Father. Namely, the Family Court
 entered the following FOFs in its October 4, 2011 FOFs and COLs:
 
67.	 Father was relatively uninvolved in [D]aughter's
school activities, and rarely, if ever, attended
parent-teacher conferences or scheduled events related
to [D]aughter's school enrollment and/or attendance.
68.	 Father's relative lack of involvement in [D]aughter's
school activities resulted from the fact that:
 . . . . 
(c) 	He did not invest the time or attention that
 would have been required on his part to have a
greater level of involvement in [D]aughter's
school activities. 
69.	 Mother was the parent who routinely took [D]aughter to
appointments with her doctor and dentist, and Father
rarely, if ever, was involved in [D]aughter's medical
care.
 
Thus, it appears that Mother successfully established the same
 
allegations by other means, without cross-examining Father.
 
Accordingly, any error in the Family Court's ruling to
 
prevent Mother from employing a cross-examination type of
 technique to directly confront Father on his purported
 shortcomings as a parent was harmless error.
 
D.	 The Family Court's Custody Rulings
 Mother's remaining contentions include that the Family
 
Court erred in: concluding that Father had established a
 material change of circumstances warranting a modification of the
 custody of Daughter awarded in the Divorce Decree; concluding
 
20
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 








 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that physical custody of Daughter should be shared equally;
 
establishing the Parenting Plan and Access Schedule in paragraphs
 I and II of the Parenting Order; establishing mandatory steps to
 be taken by the parties prior to seeking further court
 intervention; and entering COL 9, which incorporated the
 Parenting Order and described the extent to which it did and did
 not modify the child support, custody, and visitation provisions
 in the Divorce Decree.
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571-46(a)(6) (Supp. 
2013) provides that "[a]ny custody award shall be subject to modification or change whenever the best interests of the child require or justify the modification or change[.]"
9 As the Family 
Court recognized, this court has previously held that "[t]o obtain the family court's change of a custody order, the movant 'must show a material change of circumstances since the previous custody order, and must show that such a change of custody is in the best interest of the child.'" Egger v. Egger, 112 Hawai
'i 
312, 318, 145 P.3d 855, 861 (App. 2006) (quoting Nadeau v. Nadeau, 10 Haw. App. 111, 121, 861 P.2d 754, 759 (1993)). 
It is evident from the Family Court's FOFs and COLs
 
(and the entire record in this case) that the extraordinarily
 high level of conflict between these parents, notwithstanding the
 
9
 In determining what constitutes the "best interest of the child,"
the court is further guided by the principles articulated in HRS § 571-46(b),
and include, inter alia, the "overall quality of the parent-child
relationship," the "history of caregiving or parenting by each parent prior
and subsequent to a marital or other type of separation," "[e]ach parent's
cooperation in developing and implementing a plan to meet the child's ongoing
needs, interests, and schedule," and the "areas and levels of conflict present
within the family." 
21
 
 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
many attempts to encourage and/or aid the parties through
 mediation, professional services, and prior court orders,
 qualified as a material change in circumstances sufficient to
 warrant the Family Court's consideration of a change in the
 original custody and visitation terms in the Divorce Decree. 
This is particularly true in light of the lack of specificity and
 clarity in the original custody and visitation provisions, which
 improperly delegated the time-sharing arrangements between the
 parents to a GAL, and the evolving and changing arrangements that
 were implemented thereafter. We conclude that the Family Court
 did not err in determining that these circumstances, and the best
 interests of Daughter, warranted consideration of all of the
 circumstances of the parties and Daughter in crafting a modified
 custody order.
 
We further conclude that, under the facts and
 
circumstances of this case, the Family Court did not abuse its
 discretion in establishing the detailed Parenting Plan and Access
 Schedule, which included equal physical custody and a mandatory
 dispute resolution regimen. A family court is statutorily-
required to base its determination on the best interests of the
 child. HRS § 571-46 ("Custody should be awarded to either parent
 or to both parents according to the best interests of the
 child[.]"); Fujikane v. Fujikane, 61 Haw. 352, 354, 604 P.2d 43,
 45 (1979) ("[t]he critical question to be resolved in any custody
 proceeding is what action will be in the best interests of the
 child" (citing Turoff v. Turoff, 56 Haw. 51, 55, 527 P.2d 1275,
 1278 (1974))); see also HRS § 571-46.5 (2006) (re parenting
 
22
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
plans). 
HRS § 571-46(b) sets forth a non-exclusive list of
 
factors that the Family Court may consider when determining what
 constitutes the best interests of the child in the context of
 custody awards, including modification of custody awards. HRS
 §§ 571-46(a)(6), 571-46(b). These factors include, inter alia:
 "(3) The overall quality of the parent-child relationship;" "(7)
 The emotional needs of the child;" "(9) The educational needs of
 the child;" "(10) The child's need for relationships with
 siblings;" "(11) Each parent's actions demonstrating that they
 allow the child to maintain family connections through family
 events and activities;" "(12) Each parent's actions demonstrating
 that they separate the child's needs from the parent's needs;"
 and "(15) The areas and levels of conflict present within the
 family[.]" HRS § 571-46(b). The record reflects the parties'
 submissions, representations, and arguments concerning these and
 other factors affecting Daughter's bests interests, as well as
 the report and recommendations of GAL Swenson, all of which
 appear to have been taken into consideration in the Family
 Court's shaping of the June 16, 2011 Parenting Order, as well as
 the October 4, 2011 FOFs and COLs. Upon careful review, we find
 no abuse of discretion in the Family Court's formulation of the
 terms of the Parenting Order.
 
23
 	 
 

 

 

 


 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
V.	 CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Family Court's June 16, 2011
 
Parenting Order is affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 30, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Peter Van Name Esser 
(& Robert M. Harris, deceased)
 
for Plaintiff-Appellant
 
Kelly Ann Carr Chief Judge

 
Socrates William Buenger Defendant-Appellee Pro Se
 
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
 
24
 