 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000621
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
CAROL L. NEPAGE-FONTES, Petitioner-Appellee,
v.
 
JOHN E. NEPAGE, Respondent-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(TRUST NO. 00-1-0069)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Respondent-Appellant John E. NePage (NePage) appeals
 
from (1) the November 30, 2011 "Findings Of Fact, Conclusions Of
 
Law, And Order Regarding The August 30 and 31, 2011 Hearing"
 
(FOFsCOLs) and (2) the June 7, 2012 Final Judgment entered in the
 
1
Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (probate court).  The probate
 
court entered judgment in favor of Bruce Fontes (Fontes), as
 
personal representative of the estate of Carol NePage-Fontes
 
(NePage-Fontes).
 
1
 The Honorable Kevin S.C. Chang presided over this matter until
September 1, 2000. The Honorable Colleen S. Hirai presided until April 16, 2010.
The Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan presided thereafter.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
John E. NePage and Carol NePage-Fontes, siblings, were
 
the co-trustees and beneficiaries of the John S. NePage Revocable
 
Trust (Trust) created by their father, John S. NePage (Settlor). 
At Settlor's death in March 1998, the Trust possessed the
 
following: (1) liquid assets of $529,923, (2) a condominium at
 
1717 Ala Wai Boulevard (Ala Wai condominium), (3) an undivided
 
one-third leasehold interest in a condominium at 1650 Kanunu
 
Street (Kanunu Street condominium), and (4) Settlor's tangible
 
personal property. The Trust's dispositive provisions stated the
 
Trust's assets were to be distributed "in equal shares, one share
 
to each of my children who outlive me[.]"
 
Pursuant to a verbal agreement, the siblings
 
distributed the liquid assets in 1998. NePage received $323,132,
 
and NePage-Fontes received $198,147, giving NePage an excess
 
distribution of $124,985. Around April 1998, NePage-Fontes
 
asserted NePage had breached an oral agreement that the $124,985
 
excess distribution represented payment in full for NePage's
 
entire interest in the real property held by the Trust, and she
 
began demanding NePage tender his interest to her. NePage-Fontes
 
repeated her demand at a meeting on November 11, 1998 and in
 
writing on March 25, 1999, April 13, 1999, and July 16, 1999. It
 
is undisputed that NePage never returned the excess distribution
 
to the Trust, nor did he transfer his interest in the Trust's
 
real property.
 
On May 9, 2000, NePage-Fontes filed a petition in the
 
probate court requesting court intervention and supervision to
 
finalize the distribution of the Trust's assets. The petition
 
alleged certain assets had been distributed, and NePage had
 
received an excess of his share but refused to equalize the
 
distribution by deeding the real property. The probate court
 
granted the petition and ordered NePage-Fontes to, among other
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
things, provide NePage with a complete financial accounting of
 
all Trust assets and divide Settlor's tangible personal property.
 
Over the next ten years, the parties continued
 
litigation in the probate court. In the interim, the probate
 
court issued a May 16, 2002 order removing NePage-Fontes as co­
trustee and ordering NePage-Fontes to "relinquish possession of
 
and turn over to Respondent [NePage] all remaining trust property
 
owned by the Trust, including but not limited to, all tangible
 
personal property and the Trust's real property[.]"
 
NePage-Fontes passed away on April 7, 2007. She
 
remained in the Ala Wai condominium until her death. She also
 
retained possession of the Kanunu Street property until her
 
death. NePage-Fontes's husband, Bruce Fontes, remained in the
 
Ala Wai condominium until NePage commenced eviction proceedings
 
and evicted Fontes in September 2007. From 2007, NePage had
 
exclusive control of the two properties.
 
Fontes was appointed personal representative of NePage­
Fontes's estate. Fontes filed several petitions on the estate's
 
behalf, including a petition (Petition) filed May 25, 2010
 
requesting, among other things, that NePage "wind up the affairs
 
of the Trust and terminate said Trust and make final
 
distributions as follows: a[] $124,985.00 priority distribution
 
to Petitioner [Fontes] and one-half of the Trust assets to
 
Petitioner forthwith."
 
Fontes requested an evidentiary hearing, which the
 
probate court conducted on August 30 and 31, 2011. The probate
 
court heard testimony from NePage, Fontes, an accountant who
 
testified about the Trust's expenses NePage had paid, and a
 
contractor who testified about repairs to the Ala Wai
 
condominium.
 
On November 30, 2011, the probate court entered its
 
FOFsCOLs, granting Fontes's request for a priority distribution
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of $124,985 from the Trust. The probate court concluded NePage
 
had breached his fiduciary duties as trustee by withholding the
 
$124,985 excess distribution. It removed NePage as trustee and
 
ordered a surcharge in the form of 10% interest on the excess
 
distribution from January 2000 to August 2011. The probate court
 
also ordered partial reimbursement for NePage's real property
 
repair expenses and his attorneys' fees and costs; denied NePage
 
reimbursement for real property taxes, maintenance and utility
 
fees, eviction expenses, and litigation expenses; ordered a
 
partial award for unpaid real property rental income; and denied
 
trustee compensation or any award of Settlor's tangible personal
 
property.
 
The probate court entered a certified judgment on June
 
7, 2012, from which NePage timely appealed. On appeal, NePage
 
contends:
 
(1) preclusion doctrines barred the probate court from
 
determining the propriety of the excess distribution and whether
 
NePage had breached his fiduciary duties;
 
(2) the probate court erred in concluding NePage had
 
breached his fiduciary duty and in assessing the interest
 
surcharge;
 
(3) the probate court erroneously removed NePage as
 
trustee without providing notice and opportunity to be heard; and
 
(4) the probate court erred in denying NePage's claims
 
for reimbursement, recovery of real property rent, tangible
 
personal property, and trustee compensation.
 
II. DISCUSSION
 
A. Breach Of Fiduciary Duty And Removal Of Trustee
 
The probate court removed NePage as trustee based on
 
its conclusion that NePage had breached his fiduciary duty by
 taking an excess distribution from the Trust in 1998. 
NePage
 
contends the probate court had previously determined the excess
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
distribution was not a breach of fiduciary duty, and the
 
doctrines of collateral estoppel and law of the case prohibit the
 
probate court from revisiting the issue.
 
Neither doctrine applies here. Collateral estoppel 
prevents the relitigation of a fact or issue only when "(1) the 
issue decided in the prior adjudication is identical to the one 
presented in the action in question; (2) there is a final 
judgment on the merits; (3) the issue decided in the prior 
adjudication was essential to the final judgment; and (4) the 
party against whom [collateral estoppel] is asserted was a party 
or in privity with a party to the prior adjudication." Bremer, 
104 Hawaif i at 54, 85 P.3d at 161 (quoting Dorrance v. Lee, 90 
Hawaifi 143, 149, 976 P.2d 904, 911 (1999). The doctrine has no 
applicability to prior rulings in the same pending case. S.O.V. 
v. People in Interest of M.C., 914 P.2d 355, 359 (Colo. 1996).
 
The law of the case doctrine "refers to the usual
 
practice of courts to refuse to disturb all prior rulings in a
 
particular case, including rulings made by the judge[.]" Wong,
 
66 Haw. at 396, 665 P.2d at 162; see also Jordan v. Hamada, 64
 Haw. 446, 454, 643 P.2d 70, 73 (1982). The doctrine does not
 
apply "if the initial ruling was made on an inadequate record or
 
was designed to be preliminary[.]" Naser Jewelers, Inc. v. City
 
of Concord, N.H., 538 F.3d 17, 20 (1st Cir. 2008).
 
The doctrine does not apply here because the probate
 
court's previous orders were preliminary in nature and it did not
 make any rulings addressing the excess distribution's propriety
 
or a potential breach of fiduciary duty. The probate court had
 
not held an evidentiary hearing until the 2011 hearing, and the
 
probate court did not err in issuing a ruling based on the
 
developed record. Although the probate court had issued several
 
orders denying petitions from NePage-Fontes and Fontes to
 
distribute or compel the sale of the trust assets, the record
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
shows the probate court denied the petitions not on the merits,
 
but rather because the petitions' requests were premature given
 
the ongoing proceedings.
 
NePage further contends preclusive effect should be
 
given to the probate court's May 16, 2002 order that
 
NePage-Fontes relinquish possession of the Trust's real property. 
The record shows, however, that the probate court issued the
 
order as a sanction against NePage-Fontes due to her failure to
 
comply with the court's previous orders. The court did not rule
 
on either party's entitlement to the real property or to the
 
excess distribution. Therefore, the order was not a judicial
 
determination on a question of law to which the law of the case
 
doctrine applies. See Jordan, 64 Haw. at 454, 643 P.2d at 73.
 
NePage also claims he did not receive adequate notice
 
that his role as trustee was at issue because Fontes's petition
 
did not request removal. Contrary to NePage's argument, a court
 
may remove a trustee on its own initiative, even without an
 
express petition requesting a trustee's removal. In re Holt's
 
Trust Estate, 33 Haw. 352, 355 (Haw. Terr. 1935) (affirming
 decree of removal issued during a hearing "not upon a petition
 
properly brought for [the trustee's] removal but in a collateral
 
proceeding"). Nothing in the HPR expressly provides that removal
 
proceedings must be instituted only by petition. Rather, HPR
 
Rule 3(c) states: "Petitions shall be construed liberally, and
 
may be deemed amended to conform to the evidence presented," and
 
the commentary states: "This rule is in keeping with the informal
 
nature of the proceedings and the desire to dispose of matters
 
quickly without delay caused by failure to follow technical rules
 
of pleading."
 
We agree with NePage's contention that a trustee is
 
entitled to due process, with notice and an opportunity to be
 
heard, before removal. Restatement (Third) of Trusts § 37 cmt. d
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2003); In re Estate of Mercier, 961 N.E.2d 958, 963 (Ill. App.
 
Ct. 2011); Woods v. Wells Fargo Bank Wyoming, 90 P.3d 724 (Wyo.
 
2004); see also In re Holt, 33 Haw. at 356 (noting the masters'
 
reports gave notice of the removal issue, and the trustee
 
appeared in court personally and by counsel to defend his trust
 
activities). In this case, NePage received adequate notice and
 
opportunity to be heard at the evidentiary hearing. Fontes
 
orally requested removal during his opening argument, and NePage
 
did not object or request a continuance. NePage testified and
 
submitted evidence on his administration of the Trust. 
Therefore, the probate court's removal of NePage as trustee did
 
not deprive him of due process.
 
Moreover, the removal was justified because NePage had
 
breached his fiduciary duties by withholding the excess
 
distribution. Trustees have a duty to "manage the trust assets
 
solely in the interest of the beneficiaries[,]" HRS § 554C-5
 
(2012), which "precludes a trustee from dealing with trust assets
 
to his own advantage or benefit[]" without the beneficiaries'
 
consent. Steiner v. Hawaiian Trust Co., 47 Haw. 548, 558, 393
 
P.2d 96, 103 (1964).
 
The record shows that although NePage and NePage-Fontes
 
initially agreed to NePage's receipt of the excess distribution,
 NePage-Fontes began objecting to the excess distribution in 1998. 
NePage does not challenge the probate court's finding that by
 
mid-1999, it was clear that an amicable resolution would not be
 
reached regarding the distribution. A beneficiary who consents
 
to a deviation from the trust's terms may retract her consent and
 
hold the trustee liable for continuing the improper conduct
 
thereafter. Restatement (Third) of Trusts § 97 cmt. c (2012);
 
see also Hawaiian Trust Co. v. Gonser, 40 Haw. 245, 254 (Haw.
 
Terr. 1953) ("[W]here a cestui has consented [to an alteration of
 
7
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the trust] he may withdraw the same before it has been acted
 
upon.").
 
NePage argues the language of the Trust gave trustees
 
discretion in making distributions.2 However, the discretion
 
given by the Trust's language did not empower the trustee to vary
 the trust's dispositive provisions or to benefit in any way one
 
beneficiary at the expense of another. Although the Trust gave
 
NePage discretion in allotting the various trust assets, NePage
 
remained obligated to make distributions "in equal shares" as
 
directed by the Trust's terms. "Any deviation from the terms of
 
the trust instrument . . . would constitute a breach of trust
 
even though the trustee was acting in good faith and his
 
deviation was merely a mistake in judgment." Steiner, 47 Haw. at
 
575, 393 P.2d at 111. Therefore, the probate court did not err
 when it removed NePage as trustee based on his breach of
 
fiduciary duties. 
2
 The Trust states:
 
F. TRUSTEE'S POWERS. The Trustee shall have the
 
following powers in addition to those now or later conferred
by law which are to be exercised as the Trustee in the
Trustee's discretion determines to be in the best interests
 of the beneficiaries:
 
* * * *
 
(i) DISTRIBUTION DISCRETION. to make any payment,
division, segregation, allocation or distribution required or
authorized in this instrument in pro rata or non pro rata shares,
in kind or partly in kind and partly in cash, to make any such
payment, division, segregation, allocation or distribution in
undivided fractional interests in property or entire interests in
property all without liability for, or obligation to make
compensating adjustments by reason of, disproportionate
allocations of unrealized gain for federal income tax purposes;
and to make any distribution, division, segregation or allocation
subject to any mortgage or pledge which may be a lien on any
property to be divided, segregated, allocated or distributed
without paying the debt or obligation for which such mortgage or
pledge was given as security[.]
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B. Surcharge
 
The probate court also assessed a surcharge for
 
interest on the excess distribution in the amount of 10% per
 year, from January 1, 2000 to July 31, 2011. The probate court
 
surcharged NePage for the interest because he knew about his
 
potential liability since January 1, 2000 (a reasonable amount of
 
time after NePage-Fontes first objected to the distribution), and
 
he benefitted from personal use of the distribution. The probate
 
court has discretion to surcharge a trustee for breach of
 
fiduciary duty, Steiner, 47 Haw. at 575, 393 P.2d at 111, and as
 
discussed above, we agree with the probate court's conclusion
 
that NePage breached his fiduciary duty. 
NePage argues the probate court erred in surcharging
 
interest on the entire amount of the excess distribution
 
($124,985), rather than half of the distribution representing
 
NePage-Fontes's share. We disagree. The probate court correctly
 
concluded "[b]ecause [NePage] has already received a $124,985.00
 
distribution of Trust residue, the Estate of [NePage-Fontes] is
 
entitled to a distribution of like amount." It follows that
 
NePage-Fontes is entitled to interest on like amount. See
 
Restatement (Second) of Trusts § 255.
 
We also disagree with NePage's claim that the probate 
court erred in assessing interest at a rate of 10%. The probate court based the rate on testimony from one of Fontes's witnesses, 
an accountant who calculated NePage's liability by applying a 10% 
interest rate. The legal rate of interest in Hawaif i is 10%, HRS 
§ 478-2 (2008 Repl.), and where a trustee is liable for the payment of interest, the trial court has discretion to fix the 
interest rate at the legal rate. Restatement (Second) of 
Trusts § 207; In re Testamentary Trust of Hamm, 707 N.E.2d 524, 
530 (Ohio Ct. App. 1997); Burch v. Dodge, 608 P.2d 1032, 1037 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Kan. Ct. App. 1980). We cannot conclude the probate court
 
abused its discretion in assessing the surcharge. 
C. Reimbursement For Repairs
 
The probate court reimbursed NePage in the amount of 
$3,330 for repairs and renovations he performed on the Ala Wai condominium. The probate court based this amount on an estimate 
provided by a general contractor who testified about the repairs. 
NePage claims the probate court erred in ordering reimbursement 
based on the expert's estimate, rather than on the figures NePage 
provided at the hearing. We conclude the probate court did not 
err because "it is within the province of the trier of fact to 
weigh the evidence and to assess the credibility of the 
witnesses, and this court will refrain from interfering in those 
determinations." Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v. 
Wailea Resort Co., Ltd., 100 Hawaif i 97, 117-18, 58 P.3d 608, 
628-29 (2002) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
The probate court also found NePage incurred $8,260.48
 
in expenses to repair and renovate the Kanunu Street leasehold. 
The court reimbursed NePage for only one-third of his expenses
 
($2,753.49), however, "[b]ecause the Trust owns one-third (1/3)
 
of the Kanunu Street leasehold[.]"
 
Generally, "[t]rustees have an inherent equitable right
 
to be reimbursed all expenses which they reasonably and properly
 
incur in the execution of the trust[.]" In re Bishop, 36 Haw.
 
403, 411 (Haw. Terr. 1943) (emphasis added); Bishop Trust Co. v.
 Cooke Trust Co., 39 Haw. 641, 651 (Haw. Terr. 1953) ("[T]hose who
 
perform services beneficial to a trust estate will be compensated
 
therefor."). Nothing in the FOFsCOLs or in the record indicates
 
the Kanunu Street repair expenses were unreasonable or were not
 
properly incurred. We conclude the probate court erred in
 
denying full reimbursement based solely on the fact that the
 
Trust owns only a partial interest in the leasehold.
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
D. Other Reimbursements And Compensation
 
The probate court denied NePage any reimbursement for
 
the taxes and maintenance and utility fees for the Trust's real
 property. The record indicates the above expenses were properly
 
incurred, and the probate court did not find otherwise. However,
 
the court denied reimbursement because NePage did not rent or
 
offer the properties for sale and therefore breached his duty to
 
make the properties productive. "A trustee is also under a duty
 
to the beneficiary to use reasonable care and skill to make the
 
trust property productive, and where the trust corpus is land,
 
the trustee is normally under a duty to manage it so that it will
 
produce income." Matter of Estate of Dwight, 67 Haw. 139, 146,
 
681 P.2d 563, 568 (1984) (citation omitted). If a trustee has
 incurred a liability for a breach of trust, the amount of his
 
reimbursement can be reduced to the extent of his liability for
 
the breach. Restatement (Second) of Trusts § 244 cmt. e. 
Indemnity will be altogether denied if the amount of the
 
trustee's liability equals or exceeds the amount of indemnity to
 
which he would be entitled. Id.
 
The probate court applied the amount of NePage's
 
liability for lost rental income to set off his reimbursement
 
entirely. However, the record does not support the probate
 
court's calculation of the amount of his liability. NePage
 
testified that the fair rental value for the Ala Wai condominium
 
from 1998 to 2007 was between $1,200 to $2,000 per month. The
 
probate court found the rental value from 2007 to August 2011
 
(during which NePage had exclusive possession of the condominium)
 
was also within this range. Fontes did not introduce any
 
evidence of the condominium's rental value, however. Rather, the
 
only evidence of the condominium's rental value after 2007 was
 
NePage's testimony that he found the property in "unrentable"
 
condition after Fontes's eviction. Although Fontes denied the
 
11
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
extent of the property’s damaged condition, he admitted certain
 
damages. The probate court also credited evidence from a
 
contractor confirming that parts of the condominium showed
 
"excessive wear and water damage" and that several major fixtures
 
needed to be replaced. Viewing the record as a whole, we
 
conclude the probate court erred in calculating the property’s
 
rental value.
 
Moreover, NePage's decision not to sell the properties
 
did not constitute a breach of duty. Although trustees are
 
generally under a duty to sell unproductive or underproductive
 
property within a reasonable time, Restatement (Second) of Trusts
 
§ 240; Rutanen v. Ballard, 678 N.E.2d 133, 138 (Mass. 1997), in
 
this case the Trust's terms permitted the trustee to "abandon" or
 
"retain as investments any property . . . even though such
 
property may be . . . underproductive[.]"
 
Therefore, NePage's reimbursement may be reduced to the
 
extent of his liability for any loss that may have been caused by
 
his failure to rent out the properties. However, the probate
 
court erred in calculating lost rental income based on a figure
 
that had no support in the record, and we vacate this portion of
 
the probate court's FOFsCOLs. 
The probate court also erred when it denied
 
reimbursement for expenses related to NePage's eviction of Fontes
 
from one of the Trust's condominiums in 2007. The probate court
 
concluded the eviction expense was "unnecessary" because NePage
 
did not make the condominium productive. However, on March 8,
 
2002, the probate court had issued an order to NePage-Fontes to
 
relinquish possession of and turn over to Nepage "all remaining
 
trust property owned by the Trust, including but not limited 
to, . . . the Trust's real property[.]" NePage-Fontes and Fontes
 
remained in the condominium until NePage-Fontes's death in 2007,
 
and Fontes remained until NePage evicted him. Because the
 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
eviction was necessary to effectuate the probate court's order,
 
the probate court erred in denying reimbursement based on the
 
grounds it stated.
 
The probate court did not abuse its discretion in
 
denying NePage (1) compensation for his services as trustee and
 
(2) prejudgment interest on the reimbursement for the master's
 
fees. Generally, "[i]f the trustee commits a breach of trust,
 
the court may in its discretion deny him all compensation or
 
allow him a reduced compensation or allow him full compensation." 
Steiner, 47 Haw. at 574, 393 P.2d at 110. Given NePage's breach
 
of duty and the resulting prolonged litigation, the probate
 
court's denial of compensation was within the scope of its
 
discretion.
 
The probate court also did not err in denying NePage's
 
request for rental income for the period during which NePage-
Fontes and Fontes occupied the Ala Wai condominium. NePage does
 
not dispute the court's finding that, in accordance with
 
Settlor's wish that NePage-Fontes live at the condominium, the
 
parties never had a rental agreement in effect, and NePage never
 
charged or attempted to collect rent. Therefore, NePage
 
consented to NePage-Fontes's occupation of the Ala Wai
 
condominium rent-free. We further conclude the probate court did
 
not abuse its discretion in denying a partial amount of rental
 
income from the Kanunu Street condominium, based on its finding
 
that there was insufficient credible evidence of the amount of
 
income.
 
E. Attorneys' Fees And Costs And Personal Litigation Costs
 
The probate court limited the award of attorneys' fees
 
and costs paid to Bruce B. Kim because it found insufficient
 credible evidence that certain fees were related to the Trust or
 
the trustee's duties. NePage argues this finding was incorrect
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
but fails to provide any specific basis on which to find clear
 
error.
 
The probate court did not err in finding the attorneys'
 
fees and costs of Randall Yee were $14,016.60. The probate court
 
apparently based its calculation on the amount reflected in Yee's
 
invoices. Although the record indicates NePage may have paid in
 
excess of $14,016.60, the probate court did not err basing its
 
award on the amount reflected in the invoices. 
The probate court did not abuse its discretion in
 
denying (1) the remainder of NePage's claims for attorneys' fees
 
and costs, (2) NePage's personal litigation costs, and (3) pre­
judgment interest on its award of attorneys' fees to NePage. The
 
probate court determined NePage's breach of fiduciary duty
 
contributed to a lengthy litigation and delay in winding-up the
 
Trust, which did not benefit the Trust or the beneficiaries'
 
interests. We find no abuse of discretion in the court's denial
 
of fees on those grounds.
 
F. Settlor's Tangible Personal Property
 
The probate court clearly erred in finding Settlor's
 
tangible personal property in the Trust had already been
 distributed. The uncontroverted evidence in the record shows
 
that NePage and his sister had divided and boxed the personal
 
property, but Fontes prevented NePage from removing the boxes
 
from the Ala Wai condominium. NePage testified that none of the
 
boxes were in the condominium when he evicted Fontes, and Fontes
 
presented no evidence accounting for the personal property's
 
current location. We vacate this portion of the probate court's 
FOFsCOLs. 
III. CONCLUSION 
Accordingly, we (1) vacate the June 7, 2012 "Final
 
Judgment Pursuant to Haw. R. Civ. P. 54(b) In Favor Of Petitioner
 Bruce Fontes, As Personal Representative Of The Estate Of Carol
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NePage-Fontes" and (2) vacate the following Findings of Fact from
 
the November 30, 2011 "Findings Of Fact, Conclusions Of Law, And
 
Order Regarding The August 30 and 31, 2011 Hearing": Findings of
 
Fact 112, 117-20, 125-27, and 147. All portions of the Findings
 
of Facts, Conclusions of Law and Order that are based on the
 
vacated Findings of Fact are also vacated. We affirm the
 
remainder of the FOFsCOLs and remand this case for further
 
proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, June 18, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Douglas C. Smith
Mark M. Murakami E. Kumau Pineda-Akiona (Damon Key Leong KupchakHastert)for Respondent-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Michael D. RudyCheryl R. Ng(MacDonald Rudy Byrns O'Neill& Yamauchi)for Petitioner-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
15
 