NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0003062
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ROBERT TETU, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-0833)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Robert Tetu (Tetu) with second-degree
 
burglary, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 708-811
 (2014).
1 After a jury trial, Tetu was found guilty as charged. 
The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)2
 sentenced
Tetu to five years of imprisonment. 
Tetu appeals from the Judgment entered on August 14,
 
2013, in the Circuit Court. On appeal, Tetu contends that: (1)
 the Circuit Court erred in denying his motion to compel 
1HRS ยง 708-811 provides in relevant part: "A person commits
the offense of burglary in the second degree if the person
intentionally enters or remains unlawfully in a building with
intent to commit therein a crime against a person or against
property rights."
 
2The Honorable Colette Y. Garibaldi presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
discovery; and (2) there was insufficient evidence to support his
 
conviction. We affirm.
 
BACKGROUND.
 
I.
 
Tetu was charged with burglarizing the Maunaihi Terrace
 
condominium building. Matthew Robinson (Robinson) was the
 resident manager for the Maunaihi Terrace. On March 25, 2010,
 Robinson was informed by a tenant that someone had broken into
 the tenant's car. The next day, Robinson could not find a hand
 grinding tool he had been using and discovered that batteries and
 lights were missing from a locked utility closet in the basement. 
These events prompted Robinson to review the condominium
 building's surveillance video recordings. The surveillance video
 showed that on March 25, 2010, at about 2:00 a.m., there was a
 man, later identified as Tetu, in the basement. The surveillance
 video revealed that Tetu tried to open two locked utility closet
 doors and eventually succeeded. Tetu went into the first closet
 and wiped the doorknob with his jacket. He went into the second
 closet and emerged with a bag, wiping the doorknob as he left. 
Tetu appeared to have a flashlight in his mouth. Upon inspecting
 the basement area, Robinson noticed "[a] deep gauge [sic] mark
 right at the doorknob wood area[]" that was not there before
 March 25, 2010. 
Robinson testified that on March 25, 2010, neither Tetu
 
nor his wife, Sachiko Tetu (Sachiko),3
 were residents of Maunaihi
Terrace. Robinson further testified that the basement utility
 closets that Tetu was seen entering in the surveillance video
 were not used by residents to store their things. The closets,
 which were located next to the elevators, were locked and
 required keys to open. Only Robinson, the property manager, the
 cleaning staff, and the fire department possessed or had access
 to the keys. 
3On March 25, 2010, Sachiko and Tetu were still married, but
they were divorced by the time of trial.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
Tetu testified in his own defense at trial. Tetu
 
admitted that he was the person seen in the surveillance video. 
According to Tetu, on March 24, 2010, he and Sachiko, who at that
 time was his wife, got into an argument. Tetu dropped Sachiko
 off in an area near the Maunaihi Terrace, and Sachiko had two
 plastic bags, two small suitcases, and a handbag with her. Later
 that night or early the next morning, Sachiko called him and
 asked that he help her, and Tetu went back to where he had
 dropped Sachiko off. Sachiko led Tetu down a ramp to a door on
 the side of the Maunaihi Terrace and asked him to retrieve her
 clothes from a closet by the elevator. Tetu did not know if
 Sachiko had "accidentally" locked her belongings in the closet. 
Tetu entered the building through the side door alone. Tetu did
 not know where Sachiko went after he entered the building. Once
 inside, Tetu broke into the closets using "a piece of twine" to
 unlock the doors, but he only took Sachiko's clothes, which he
 found in the second closet, and nothing else. Tetu testified
 that his intent when he went into the building and the closets
 was only to retrieve Sachiko's clothes, and not to take anything
 that did not belong to him.
 
III.
 
The State called Sachiko in rebuttal. Sachiko refuted
 
almost every material aspect of Tetu's version of events. 
Sachiko testified that she was not familiar with Maunaihi
 Terrace; had never been there; and did not have any friends who
 lived in that building. Sachiko specifically denied being at the
 Maunaihi Terrace on March 25, 2010. Sachiko further testified
 that she never kept any of her belongings at Maunaihi Terrace;
 she never told Tetu to go into Maunaihi Terrace to get her
 clothes; and she never held the door open to Maunaihi Terrace
 "for [Tetu] to go inside[.]" Sachiko stated that after she got
 into an argument with Tetu on March 24, 2010, she went to a
 friend's house. She denied that Tetu had given her a ride to an
 area near Maunaihi Terrace. Sachiko testified that she married
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Tetu in January 2010 and that they were divorced in September
 
2011. 
IV. 
Tetu's theory of defense was that he was guilty of
 
criminal trespass but not burglary because he did not have the
 intent to commit a crime in the building. In closing argument,
 Tetu's counsel stated:
 
The video shows him looking into the utility closets, where
Sachiko had told him that she left her property. Indeed, he
is seen leaving with what looks like a garbage bag at the
end of the video. He knows he had no permission to be
there, he doesn't live there, and he's not a guest, but he
was stressed, uncomfortable with what he was doing, but he
had no intent to commit a crime against person or property.
 
Counsel asserted that "the State has shown trespass, but not
 
burglary."
 
DISCUSSION.
 
We resolve Tetu's arguments on appeal as follows.
 
I.
 
Tetu contends that the Circuit Court erred in denying
 
his motion compel discovery, which sought a court order
 compelling the State or the owners of Maunaihi Terrace to make 
the premises of the alleged burglary available for inspection,
 measurement, and photographs. We disagree.
 
A.
 
In his written motion, Tetu justified his need for
 
access to Maunaihi Terrace as follows:
 
The State's diagrams, video and photograph discovery
do not adequately orient defendant and counsel to the area
in question for purposes of cogently presenting this case to
a jury. The video is from a fixed camera, and the footage
does not show the inside of the rooms; only a partial photo
of the interior of the room #3
[4] [disc. P. 99, exh. A].
Defendant is not a resident, and he was not known to
frequent the area.
 
Nor is the area surrounding room #3 depicted.
Familiarity with the distances [diagrams are not drawn to
scale] and scene will help counsel to intelligently question
 
4The reference to "room #3" is to the utility closet which
Tetu entered and then came out of carrying a bag. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and cross-examine witnesses, present visual evidence to the
jury and to understand the account of defendant, who is
currently in custody. Additionally, counsel should be
permitted to photograph areas which may be significant to
the defense if they are not already depicted in the
discovery already produced.
 
(Brackets, except those around footnote, in original.)
 
At the hearing on his motion, Tetu's counsel 
additionally argued:
 
It seems that a conscientious defense lawyer will usually go
to the scene of the alleged offense to get his bearings and
to understand what allegedly happened versus what the
defendant is saying. And it helps to orient the attorney in
terms of making the trial go smoothly when cross-examining
and so forth. I think knowing the area where the offense
allegedly occurred gives the attorney something in common
with the witnesses. And it's so you come up with a more
cogent questioning and trial.
 
I'm just not comfortable relying on what the police
deemed important at that moment. And I think that's the
 photographs I was given. You know, there are -- there's
drawings and there's -- there's some photographs. But you
know, I think to adequately represent the defendant and in
the exercise of diligence, I should be allowed to look at
the area.
 
There's like three doors that were involved. There's
 
an elevator which may or may not have been used. There's a
 long hallway where apparently the defendant had either come
or gone through. And we don't know what's beyond there. So
 I think we should be allowed to look at it.
 
The Circuit Court denied Tetu's motion. The Circuit
 
Court found that "there's no real plausible justification for
 
[the request for access]" and that the request "appears to be
 speculative and conjecture with a hope to turn up something." 
The Circuit Court further found that there was already video
 surveillance of the entry area; that the State had provided
 discovery (which included the surveillance video, diagrams, and
 photographs); that more than a year had passed since the charged
 offense and thus the current "set up may not be helpful"; and
 Tetu's actions within the utility closets were not relevant
 except for the missing property, which had been identified.
 
B.
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
 
denying Tetu's motion to compel discovery. Under Hawai
'i Rules 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 16, the prosecutor is required to
 
provide discovery of materials and information in his or her
 possession or control and make diligent good faith efforts to
 cause the disclosure of discoverable evidence in the possession
 or control of other governmental personnel. HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)
 and (2). Tetu cites no authority for the proposition that the
 State can be compelled to provide discovery, in the form of
 access for inspection, regarding property that is in the
 possession or control of a private individual or entity, such as
 the privately-owned Maunaihi Terrace. We conclude that the
 Circuit Court did not err in denying Tetu's motion to compel the
 State to provide him access to Maunaihi Terrace.
 
Courts from other jurisdictions have held that under
 
certain circumstances, a criminal defendant may have a due
 process right of access to a crime scene in the control of a
 private party. 
See People v. Nicholas , 599 N.Y.S.2d. 779, 780-83
 
(N.Y. Sup. Ct. 1993) State v. Muscari, 807 A.2d 407, 417-18 (Vt.
 2002); Bullen v. Superior Court, 251 Cal. Rptr. 32, 33-34 (Cal.
 Ct. App. 1988). These courts have concluded that in determining
 whether a private party in control of property should be ordered
 to provide access to a criminal defendant, the court must balance
 the defendant's need for access to the crime scene with the
 private party's right to privacy. Muscari, 807 A.2d at 417. In
 
order to justify the requested access, the defendant must make a
 prima facie showing of how the proposed inspection would be
 relevant and material to his or her defense, Nicholas, 599
 N.Y.S.2d. at 782, and "demonstrate sufficient 'plausible
 justification' and 'good cause' for the intrusion." Bullen, 251
 
Cal. Rptr. at 34. A speculative or conclusory showing, or the
 failure to explain how the proposed inspection would yield
 information different from that already disclosed in discovery,
 is insufficient to overcome the privacy rights of the private
 party. Nicholas, 599 N.Y.S.2d. at 782-83; Bullen, 251 Cal. Rptr.
 
at 34. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, in support of his motion to compel, Tetu only
 
made non-specific, speculative, and conclusory claims regarding
 
how access to Maunaihi Terrace was relevant and material to his
 defense. In essence, Tetu sought access because it would help
 familiarize his counsel with the scene. However, he did not
 explain how his proposed inspection would yield information that
 was different from the materials already disclosed in discovery. 
Tetu also did not show how his counsel's viewing the scene was
 material to his defense. Tetu did not dispute that he was the
 person depicted in the surveillance video or that he had broken
 into the utility closets. He did not explain to the Circuit
 Court with any specifics how becoming more familiar with the
 scene was relevant to his defense.
 
On appeal, Tetu attempts to provide specifics by
 
asserting that if an inspection of the side door into the
 building did not reveal signs of a forced entry, it would have
 shown that someone, such as Sachiko, let him into the building,
 and that measurements could have explained how Sachiko could have
 let him in without appearing on the surveillance video. However,
 Tetu did not make these arguments to the Circuit Court. 
Accordingly, he cannot rely on these arguments, which were not
 raised before the Circuit Court, to show that the Circuit Court
 erred. Based on the arguments Tetu actually made to the Circuit
 Court, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in denying
 his request to order Maunaihi Terrace to provide access to the
 crime scene.
 
II.
 
We reject Tetu's claim that there was insufficient
 
evidence to support his conviction.
5 Tetu did not dispute that
 
5Tetu also contends that the Circuit Court erred in denying
his motion for judgment of acquittal made at the close of the
State's case in chief. However, it is well established that when
a defendant presents evidence after the denial of his or her
motion for judgment of acquittal at the close of the government's
case in chief, the defendant thereby waives any error in the
(continued...)
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
his entry was unlawful. Indeed, Tetu conceded in closing
 
argument that "[h]e knows he had no permission to be there, he
 does not live there, and he's not a guest." However, Tetu
 contends the evidence was insufficient because "he credibly
 testified that he lacked any intent to commit a crime against
 person or property."
 
When viewed in the light most favorable to the State,
 
the evidence showed that Tetu unlawfully entered Maunaihi Terrace
 with intent to commit a crime against property rights therein. 
The evidence showed that neither he nor Sachiko was a resident of
 or guest at Maunaihi Terrace, and that at 2:00 in the morning,
 Tetu was roaming the basement, with a flashlight in his mouth,
 breaking into locked utility closets. Based on this evidence, a
 reasonable jury could infer that his entry was unlawful. Even
 assuming arguendo that Tetu was licensed, invited, or privileged
 to enter some portion of the building, there was substantial
 evidence to support the conclusion that he had no license,
 invitation, or privilege to enter the locked utility closets. 
See HRS ยง 708-800 (2014) ("A license or privilege to enter or
 remain in a building which is only partly open to the public is
 not a license or privilege to enter or remain in that part of the
 building which is not open to the public."); State v. Norfolk,
 745 S.W.2d 737, 739 (Mo. Ct. App. 1987).
 
The evidence that Tetu broke into the locked utility
 
closets; that he left one closet carrying a bag; that batteries
 and lights stored in the closet were missing; that he wiped the
 doorknobs to the closets; and that Sachiko denied ever being
 present at Maunaihi Terrace or asking Tetu to go inside and
 retrieve her belongings was more that sufficient to show Tetu's
 
5(...continued)
trial court's denial of the motion. State v. Mitsuda , 86 Hawai 'i 
37, 38 n.3, 947 P.2d 349, 350 n.3 (1997); State v. Kreps, 4 Haw.
App. 72, 75, 661 P.2d 711, 714 (1983). Tetu presented evidenceafter the State rested its case in chief. Thus, we review Tetu'ssufficiency of the evidence claim based on all the evidencepresented at trial. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
intent to commit a crime against property rights. Tetu's attempt 
to argue that the evidence was insufficient based on his own testimony ignores the applicable standard of review, which requires us to view the evidence in the light most favorable to the State. See State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 
1227, 1241 (1998). 
CONCLUSION 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment. DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 29, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Stuart N. Fujioka
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Donn Fudo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9
 