FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
O
F THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
---o0o---
JEROME C. PAVE, Claimant, 
v. 
P
RODUCTION PROCESSING, INC., Employer-Appellee/Appellee,
and 
GALLAGHER BASSETT SERVICES, INC., Insurance Carrier-
Appellee/Appellee,
and 
SPECIAL COMPENSATION FUND, Appellant/Appellant 
NO. CAAP-17-0000600 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD 
(CASE NO. AB 2015-011 (DCD No. 2-10-02936)) 
       
CLYDE A. DIAS, Claimant, 
v. 
ALTRES, INC., Employer-Appellant/Appellee,
and 
HAWAII EMPLOYERS' MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY, Inc., Insurance
Carrier-Appellant/Appellee,
and 
SPECIAL COMPENSATION FUND, Appellee/Appellant 
NO. CAAP-17-0000925 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD 
(CASE NO. AB 2014-387 (DCD No. 2-08-08354)) 
DECEMBER 22, 2022 
LEONARD, PRESIDING JUDGE, HIRAOKA AND NAKASONE, JJ. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY HIRAOKA, J. 
In each of these consolidated appeals, a person was 
accidentally injured while working. Before being injured, the 
person had an asymptomatic physical condition that contributed to cause post-work-accident disability, but there was no evidence that the preexisting condition had impaired the person's physical functioning before the work accident. Each person was awarded permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits under the Hawai# i 
Workers' Compensation Law, Hawaii Revised Statutes (
HRS) 
Chapter 386. The Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board (LIRAB or the Board) apportioned liability for PPD benefits to 
the Special Compensation Fund (SCF). The issue in each appeal is 
whether SCF is liable to pay a portion of the PPD award.
1 
We hold that SCF is not liable for PPD benefits if an 
employee's preexisting "condition" did not cause a "disability" — 
that is, "loss or impairment of a physical or mental function" — before the employee's work accident. The record in each case contains no evidence that the injured employee was physically impaired before their work accident. In each case, at least one doctor apportioned causation of post-work-accident disability to a preexisting condition; but in neither case was there evidence that the preexisting condition had caused a pre-work-accident loss or impairment of physical or mental function. Accordingly, in each appeal we reverse the decision and order issued by LIRAB. 
BACKGROUND 
The Hawai# i Workers' Compensation Law was enacted as a 
humanitarian measure, to create legal liability for work injuries without relation to fault. See Evanson v. Univ. of Haw., 52 Haw. 
595, 598, 483 P.2d 187, 190 (1971). Such laws "represent a socially enforced bargain: the employee giving up [their] right 
1 The injured persons are not parties to these appeals and our
decision does not affect their rights to receive PPD benefits, or the amounts
of benefits to which they are entitled. Only the source of the benefits is atissue. 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to recover common law damages from the employer in exchange for 
the certainty of a statutory award for all work-connected injuries."
2 Id. 
SCF is a trust fund administered by the State of 
Hawai# i. HRS § 386-151(a) (2015). It is funded by annual levies 
upon workers compensation insurers, HRS § 386-153 (2015), and uninsured employers and self-insurance groups, HRS § 386-154 (2015). If an employer fails to pay workers compensation benefits to an injured employee, SCF pays the benefits and becomes subrogated to the injured employee's rights against the employer. 
HRS § 386-56 (2015). 
One benefit to which an injured worker may be entitled 
is compensation for permanent partial disability, or PPD, under HRS § 386-32(a) (Supp. 2007).
3 "The purpose of a PPD award . . . 
is to compensate a worker for the loss or impairment of a physical or mental function." Ihara v. State Dep't of Land & 
Nat. Res., 141 Hawai# i 36, 42, 404 P.3d 302, 308 (2017). "A PPD 
award is payable to the worker even if the worker returns to work, and the amount of the award derives from the extent of a worker's impairment rather than [their] wage-earning capacity." Id. (citing HRS § 386-32(a)). 
SCF can become obligated to pay PPD benefits. HRS 
§ 386-33 (Supp. 2007) provides, in relevant part: 
Subsequent injuries that would increase disability.
(a) Where prior to any injury an employee suffers from aprevious  permanent partial disability  already existing prior
to the injury for which compensation is claimed, and the 
2 Accordingly, apportionment-of-damages tort cases, see, e.g.,
Montalvo v. Lapez, 77 Hawai #i 282, 884 P.2d 345 (1994), do not apply to
workers compensation cases. 
3 Permanent partial disabilities fall into two classes: scheduled
and unscheduled. Scheduled disabilities are those listed in HRS § 386-32(a);unscheduled disabilities are those not listed. The statutory schedule listsbenefits to be paid for partial or complete loss of specific body parts orfunctions. For loss or impairment of a body part or function that is notscheduled, or not comparable to a scheduled loss or impairment, the PPD israted as a percentage of the total loss or impairment of a physical or mentalfunction of the whole person. Ihara v. State Dep't of Land & Nat. Res., 141
Hawai #i 36, 42-43, 43 n.5, 404 P.3d 302, 308-09, 309 n.5 (2017). 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
disability resulting from the injury combines  with the 
previous disability , whether the previous permanent partial
disability was incurred during past or present periods of
employment, to result in a greater permanent partial
disability  . . . then weekly benefits shall be paid as
follows: 
(1) In cases where the disability resulting from theinjury combines  with the previous disability  to 
result in greater permanent partial disabilitythe employer shall pay the employee compensationfor the employee's actual permanent partialdisability but for not more than one hundred 
four weeks ; the balance if any of compensation
payable to the employee for the employee'sactual permanent partial disability shallthereafter be paid out of the specialcompensation fund; provided that in successiveinjury cases where the claimant's entirepermanent partial disability is due to more thanone compensable injury, the amount of the awardfor the subsequent injury shall be offset by theamount awarded for the prior compensableinjury[.] 
. . . . 
(b) Notwithstanding subsection (a), where the director or
the appellate board determines that the previous  permanent partial
disability  amounted to less than that necessary to support an
award of thirty-two weeks of compensation for permanent partialdisability , there shall be no liability on the special
compensation fund and the employer shall pay the employee . . .full compensation for the employee's permanent partial . . .disability[.] 
(Emphasis added.) "Disability" is defined as "loss or impairment 
of a physical or mental function." HRS § 386-1 (1993). 
HRS § 386-33 potentially reduces an employer's 
liability to pay PPD benefits for a work injury if the injured employee had a loss or impairment of a physical or mental function before the work injury at issue, and the preexisting disability combined with the work injury to cause a greater disability. In such cases, HRS § 386-33 envisions three scenarios: 
(1) if the preexisting loss or impairment of a
physical or mental function was the subject
of an award of PPD benefits, the amount ofthose benefits is deducted from the PPD award for the work injury at issue; 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) if the preexisting loss or impairment of a
physical or mental function was not the
subject of an award of PPD benefits, butwould have supported an award of at leastthirty-two weeks of compensation for PPD, theemployer's PPD liability is capped at onehundred four weeks, and SCF is liable to payany remaining PPD benefits; or 
(3) if the preexisting loss or impairment of a
physical or mental function was not the
subject of an award of PPD benefits, andwould not have supported an award ofthirty-two weeks of compensation for PPD, theemployer is liable for the full amount of PPDbenefits. 
Under any of these scenarios, HRS § 386-33 is triggered 
if, when the work accident happened, the injured employee already 
had a loss or impairment of a physical or mental function that, combined with additional loss or impairment of the same physical or mental function caused by the work accident, resulted in a greater post-work-accident loss or impairment of the physical or mental function. See Bumanglag v. Oahu Sugar Co., 78 Hawai# i 
275, 280, 892 P.2d 468, 473 (1995). 
The Pave Case 
On March 19, 2010, Claimant Jerome Pave
 injured his 
neck while working for Employer-Appellee/Appellee Production 
Processing, Inc. The employer reported the accident to the Hawai# i Department of Labor and Industrial Relations (DLIR) and 
claimed apportionment with SCF. 
DLIR's disability compensation division (DCD) found 
that Pave "suffered 34% PPD of the whole person for the neck" and held his employer liable for the first 104 weeks of the PPD award, with the remainder to be paid by SCF. 
SCF appealed to LIRAB. The sole issue on appeal was 
whether any PPD liability should be apportioned to SCF. LIRAB issued a decision and order on July 27, 2017, affirming the DCD 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
decision. 
SCF appealed, resulting in CAAP-17-0000600 (the Pave 
Appeal). 
The Dias Case 
On June 4, 2008, Claimant Clyde Dias accidentally 
injured his right knee while working for Employer-
Appellant/Appellee Altres, Inc. The employer reported the accident to DLIR and claimed apportionment with SCF. 
DCD found that Dias "sustained 45% PPD of the right 
leg" and held his employer liable for the first 104 weeks of the PPD award, with the remainder to be paid by SCF. SCF requested reconsideration. Reconsideration was granted. DCD issued an amended decision holding the employer solely liable for PPD benefits and denying the employer's claim for contribution from SCF. 
The employer appealed to LIRAB. The sole issue on 
appeal was whether any PPD liability should be apportioned to SCF. LIRAB issued a decision and order on November 30, 2017, reversing the amended DCD decision. LIRAB concluded that liability for Dias's PPD benefits should be apportioned between the employer and SCF. SCF filed a timely notice of appeal, resulting in CAAP-17-0000925 (the Dias Appeal). 
POINTS OF ERROR 
In the Pave Appeal, SCF challenges LIRAB's findings of 
fact (FOF) nos. 17, 27, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, and 44; and four of 
LIRAB's conclusions of law, which were not numbered by LIRAB. 
In the Dias Appeal, SCF challenges LIRAB's FOF nos. 4, 
5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 14; and LIRAB's conclusion of law 
(COL) no. 1. 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
LIRAB Decisions 
"Appellate review of a LIRAB decision is governed by 
the provisions of the 
Hawai# i Administrative Procedure Act 
relating to judicial review of agency action." Ihara, 141 
Hawai# i at 41, 404 P.3d at 307 (citations omitted). The Act 
provides, in relevant part: 
Upon review of the record, the court may affirm the decision
of the agency or remand the case with instructions forfurther proceedings; or it may reverse or modify thedecision and order if the substantial rights of thepetitioners may have been prejudiced because theadministrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or ordersare: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; 
(4) Affected by other error of law; (5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarrantedexercise of discretion. 
HRS § 91-14(g) (Supp. 2021). 
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law 
LIRAB's label of a finding of fact or a conclusion of 
law does not determine the standard of review. City & Cnty. of 
Honolulu v. Honolulu Police Comm'n, 151 Hawai# i 56, 62, 508 P.3d 
851, 857 (App. 2022) (citing Crosby v. State Dep't of Budget & 
Fin., 76 Hawai# i 332, 340, 876 P.2d 1300, 1308 (1994)). "The 
question whether an agency's determination is a finding of fact or a conclusion of law is a question of law. 
Thus, the accuracy 
of the label affixed by the agency is freely reviewable by reviewing courts." Kilauea Neighborhood Ass'n v. Land Use 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Comm'n
, 7 Haw. App. 227, 229, 751 P.2d 1031, 1034 (1988) 
(citation omitted). 
Findings of fact are reviewed under the clearly 
erroneous standard. HRS § 91-14(g)(5); Del Monte Fresh Produce 
(Haw.), Inc. v. International Longshore & Warehouse Union, Local 142, 128 Hawai# i 289, 302, 287 P.3d 190, 203 (2012). A finding 
of fact is clearly erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding or when, despite substantial evidence to support the finding, we are left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been committed. Est. of Klink 
ex rel. Klink v. State, 113 Hawai# i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 504, 523 
(2007). 
"Substantial evidence" is "credible evidence which is of 
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Id. (citations 
omitted). 
When reviewing findings of fact, however, we "cannot 
consider the weight of the evidence to ascertain whether it weighs in favor of the administrative findings, or review the agency's findings of fact by passing upon the credibility of witnesses or conflicts in testimony, especially the finding of an expert agency in dealing with a specialized field." Sierra Club 
v. D.R. Horton-Schuler Homes, LLC, 136 Hawai# i 505, 522, 364 P.3d 
213, 230 (2015) (cleaned up). 
Conclusions of law are reviewed de novo under the 
right/wrong standard. HRS § 91-14(g)(1), (2), (4); Ihara, 141 Hawai# i at 41, 404 P.3d at 307 (citation omitted). When a 
conclusion of law presents mixed questions of fact and law, we review it under the clearly erroneous standard because LIRAB's conclusions are dependent on the facts and circumstances of each individual case, Klink, 113 Hawai# i at 351, 152 P.3d at 523, 
while giving deference to the agency's expertise and experience in the particular field and not substituting our own judgment for that of the agency, Ihara, 141 Hawai# i at 41, 404 P.3d at 307. 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Statutory Interpretation 
Interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard. Cabatbat v. 
Cnty. of Haw., Dep't of Water Supply
, 103 Hawai# i 1, 6, 78 P.3d 
756, 761 (2003), as corrected (Dec. 8, 2003). "[T]he fundamental 
starting point of statutory interpretation is the language of the statute itself. Where the statutory language is plain and unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain and obvious meaning." Priceline.com, Inc. v. Dir. of Tax'n, 144 
Hawai# i 72, 87, 436 P.3d 1155, 1170 (2019) (cleaned up). 
"The general principles of construction which apply to 
statutes also apply to administrative rules. As in statutory construction, courts look first at an administrative rule's language. Thus, . . . the interpretation of a[n administrative] rule presents a question of law . . . [reviewed] under the right/wrong standard." Cabatbat, 103 Hawai# i at 6, 78 P.3d at 
761 (cleaned up). 
DISCUSSION 
An employer seeking to obtain contribution from SCF for 
PPD benefits under HRS § 386-33 must prove that: (1) the injured employee suffered from a preexisting permanent partial disability; (2) the preexisting permanent partial disability would support an award of thirty-two weeks of PPD benefits; and (3) the preexisting permanent partial disability and the subsequent work-related injury combined to cause a greater present permanent partial disability. Bumanglag, 78 Hawai# i at 
280, 892 P.2d at 473. 
"Disability" is defined as "loss or 
impairment of a physical or mental function." HRS § 386-1. 
Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR
) § 12-10-28 requires 
that "[t]he extent of medical impairment preexisting the work injury[] shall be assessed by a physician pursuant to section 12-10-21(a)." HAR § 12-10-21(a) states: "Impairment rating guides issued by the American Medical Association, American 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons, and any other such guides which 
the director [of the Department of Labor and Industrial Relations] deems appropriate and proper may be used as a reference or guide in measuring a disability." Thus, "initial PPD ratings for unscheduled injuries are typically provided by medical experts using rating categories outlined in the various editions of the American Medical Association's Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (AMA Guides), and then the LIRAB may add additional percentage points depending on the magnitude of the impairment rating." Ihara, 141 Hawai# i at 43, 
404 P.3d at 309 (citing HAR § 12-10-21(a)). LIRAB decides the final PPD rating. Id. (citing Cabatbat
, 103 Hawai
#i at 9, 78 
P.3d at 764). 
The Pave Appeal 
4Pave's neck injury was evaluated by doctors Peter Lum,
5 6Christopher Brigham,  Lorne Direnfeld, and Clifford Lau,  among 
others. The following findings of fact by LIRAB are unchallenged and binding on appeal. See Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water 
Supply, 97 
Hawai# i 450, 459, 40 P.3d 73, 82 (2002). 
1. [Pave] was injured on March 19, 2010, while
working at Makaha on Oahu as a water safety person for
Employer, a media services company engaged in filmproduction. 
2. At the time of the March 19, 2010 injury, [Pave]
was in the ocean, in six to eight feet of surf, moving a 60-pound camera mounted on a surfboard for Employer, when hedove beneath the surfboard to avoid an incoming wave. The surfboard struck his head. 
3. On March 19, 2010, [Pave] was hospitalized after
he was pulled to shore by a co-worker because he was unableto move his extremities. He regained movement while beingtransported to the emergency room. After emergency 
4 Dr. Lum was Pave's treating physiatrist. 
5 Dr. Brigham reviewed Pave's pre- and post-work-accident medical
records and examined Pave on behalf of SCF. 
6 Drs. Direnfeld and Lau reviewed Pave's post-work-accident medical
records and examined Pave on behalf of Pave's employer. 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
treatment at the Waianae Coast Comprehensive Health Center,
[Pave] was transferred to Kaiser Permanente at Moanalua(Kaiser). 
4. On March 19, 2010, Kaiser Emergency Department
physician Ben Kulia, M.D.'s impression of [Pave]'s injurywas of a cervical cord contusion. Neurologic examinationrevealed some hypesthesia[
7] to both upper arms on the
triceps and biceps. 
5. A[n] MRI of [Pave]'s cervical spine done on
March 20, 2010, revealed a congenitally narrow spinal canal,superimposed cervical disc protrusions at C3-4 and C4-5causing mild spinal stenosis,[
8] and a large central disc
protrusion at C5-6 causing severe spinal stenosis andcompressing the spinal cord. . . . 
6. On March 20, 2010, Jaelene Yates, M.D. noted in
a Kaiser discharge summary that on March 19, 2010, [Pave]had a "[c]ervical spine contusion[
9] in the setting of a
preexisting spinal stenosis." . . . Dr. Yates also noted that [Pave] had not seen a physician in several years and
had been in good health prior to the March 19, 2010 workinjury . 
. . . . 
9. On September 14, 2010 . . . , neurologist Lorne
Direnfeld, M.D. examined [Pave] at Employer's request,reviewed [Pave]'s medical records, and gave the followingdiagnoses in his September 17, 2010 report: cervicalmyelopathy[
10] (problems with spinal cord function at neck
level), cervical spondylosis[11] (age-related, genetically
influenced degenerative disc and joint changes in thecervical spine) . . . . 
10. Dr. Direnfeld reported that, on examination,
[Pave] complained of burning pain in his arms and numbnessin his upper body with neck movement. [Pave] experienced an 
7 "Hypesthesia" means "impaired or decreased tactile sensibility[.]"
Hypesthesia, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-
webster.com/medical/hypesthesia  (last visited Dec. 14, 2022). 
8 "Stenosis" means "a narrowing or constriction of the diameter of a
bodily passage or orifice[.]" Stenosis, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/stenosis  (last updated Dec. 11, 2022). 
9 "Contusion" means "injury to tissue usually without laceration[.]"
Contusion, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/contusion  (last updated Dec. 9, 2022). 
10 "Myelopathy" means "a disease or disorder of the spinal cord or
bone marrow." Myelopathy, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/myelopathy  (last visited Dec. 14, 2022). 
11 "Spondylosis" means "any of various degenerative diseases of the
spine." Spondylosis, Merrian-Webster, https://www.merriam-
webster.com/medical/spondylosis  (last visited Dec. 14, 2022). 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
occasional needle sensation in both hands and stiffness in 
the morning. [Pave] also reported bowel and bladder control
problems and difficulty with sexual function. 
11. Dr. Direnfeld noted that prior to the March 19,
2010 work injury, [Pave] did not have symptoms of cervicalmyelopathy . Dr. Direnfeld opined that [Pave]'s primary
diagnosis of cervical myelopathy was the result of acombination of factors, including the March 19, 2010 workinjury and the pre-existing cervical spondylosis. 
12. Dr. Direnfeld assessed [Pave] as having 22%
whole person ("WP") permanent impairment, pursuant to theAmerican Medical Association's Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition ("AMA Guides"), usingTable 15-6, Rating Corticospinal Tract Impairment, tomeasure neurological impairment of the neck (15% WPimpairment) and using Table 15-5, Criteria for RatingImpairment Due to Cervical Disorders (DRE estimates), toobtain a DRE rating of the neck (8% WP impairment). 
13. Dr. Direnfeld then combined the two impairment
ratings, and apportioned one-half or 50% (11% WP permanentimpairment) to [Pave]'s preexisting condition  of cervical 
spondylosis and 50% (11% WP permanent impairment) to theeffects of the March 19, 2010 work injury. 
. . . . 
18. On January 28, 2011, [Pave's treating
physiatrist] Dr. Lum noted in his progress notes that [Pave]"denies having similar complaints or injury to the same body
parts in the past ." 
. . . . 
21. On March 13, 2013, at Employer's request, [Pave]
was examined by orthopedic surgeon Clifford Lau, M.D. . . . 
22. After examining [Pave] and reviewing the medical
records, Dr. Lau's impression was: 
1. Status post anterior cervical
discectomy and fusion using hardware forcervical disk protrusion with cervicalcord myelopathy with underlyingpreexisting cervical spondylosis. 
. . . . 
24. Dr. Lau rated [Pave] at 25% WP permanent
impairment of the cervical spine according to the AMA 
Guides
DRE cervical category IV (for a cervical fusion causing lossof movement and joint space), and 7% impairment of the upperextremity for the cervical cord. Combining these ratings,using the combination table of the AMA Guides, Dr. Lau rated[Pave]'s neck/cervical spine at 30% WP impairment. 
. . . . 
26. Dr. Lau opined that he agreed with
Dr. Direnfeld's apportionment of [Pave]'s WP impairment with 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the underlying degenerative condition  of the cervical spine
due to the congenital narrowing of the cervical spine plus
[Pave]'s metabolic problems and diabetes. Dr. Lau would assign 50% of [Pave]'s WP impairment (equal to 15% WP) topreexisting causes (cervical spondylosis, cervical stenosisand [Pave]'s untreated medical problems) and 50% (or 15% WP)to the March 19, 2010 work injury. 
. . . . 
29. At his oral deposition on April 1, 2015, [Pave]
testified that other than a tennis elbow condition duringhis early twenties, tendinitis of the left wrist whileworking for a previous employer, and a knee and low backinjury twenty years earlier, for which he receivedchiropractic treatment, he only went to the doctor forthings like flu shots prior to the March 19, 2010 workinjury. Before the work injury, [Pave] actively engaged in
mountain biking, surfing, diving, playing a guitar anddriving. 
He could perform all activities of daily living . 
30. [Pave] also testified that before the March 19,
2010 work injury, he never had an injury to his head, neck,
and thoracic region or any restricted motion in his neck or arms . He had never sought treatment for his neck , or had a
neck x-ray, range of motion study or imaging study prior to
the 2010 work injury . 
31. Occupational medicine specialist Christopher
Brigham, M.D. performed a records review. In an August 21,2015 report, Dr. Brigham opined that [Pave] sustained anacute spinal cord contusion with probable central cordsyndrome, a traumatic injury to the cervical spine from aforceful hyperextension neck injury with prior degenerativespinal column disease, resulting in more extensive motorweakness in the upper extremities than in the lowerextremities. 
32. Dr. Brigham noted that [Pave] "had pre-existing
cervical degenerative disease with spinal stenosis at C5-C6;however this diagnosis had not been made prior to theMarch 19, 2010 injury, and [prior to the work injury] he had
not [sic] subjective complaints or objective findings of any
functional difficulties or impairment ." Dr. Brigham stated
that degenerative findings alone (from imaging studies)would not be a basis for rating impairment becausedegenerative changes are commonly seen in asymptomaticindividuals. 
33. Dr. Brigham opined that Dr. Direnfeld's and
Dr. Lau's 50/50 apportionment assessments of [Pave]'spermanent impairment for the cervical condition were notconsistent with how permanent impairment was to beattributed to a work injury and to pre-existing status,pursuant to the AMA Guides. Dr. Brigham commented thatDr. Direnfeld had opined that both pre-existing factors  and 
the work injury contributed to [Pave]'s impairment and thensimply allocated equal weight to each. However,Dr. Direnfeld did not analyze what [Pave]'s permanentimpairment would have been on the day prior to the workinjury . 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Emphasis added.)12 
SCF challenges a number of LIRAB's findings of fact. 
LIRAB found (the portions specifically challenged by SCF are 
underscored): 
17. On December 28, 2010, [Pave]'s treating
physician Dr. Lum reported that he agreed with
Dr. Direnfeld's assessment of 22% WP permanent impairmentfor [Pave]'s work injury, but he disagreed withDr. Direnfeld's apportionment rating "because [Pave's]impairment prior to the injury was 0% whole man." Dr. Lum 
provided no explanation for his opinion that [Pave] had nopreexisting WP impairment. 
LIRAB's own findings contradict FOF no. 17. FOF no. 18 
states, in relevant part: "Dr. Lum noted in his progress notes 
that [Pave] 'denies having similar complaints or injury to the same body parts in the past.'" LIRAB's finding that "Dr. Lum provided no explanation for his opinion that [Pave] had no preexisting WP impairment" was clearly erroneous; Dr. Lum's explanation was that Pave did not complain about his neck before his work accident. 
LIRAB found: 
27. On May 15, 2013, Dr. Lum reported that he agreed
with the impairment rating by Dr. Lau but not with the
apportionment because [Pave] "had no previous history of[sic] spinal cord injury" and "no known preexistingimpairment prior to the injury therefore the rating shouldnot be apportioned." Dr. Lum did not mention [Pave]'s
pre-existing asymptomatic neck/cervical spine condition. 
Dr. Lum was Pave's treating physiatrist; his progress 
notes mention that Pave was diagnosed with "stenosis of cervical 
spine [with] myelopathy" after his work injury, and that Pave denied "having similar complaint or injury to the same body parts in the past." The finding that Dr. Lum did not mention Pave's preexisting condition was not clearly erroneous, but is irrelevant to the issue presented by this appeal. As we explain below, for purposes of HRS § 386-33 there is a distinction 
12 In FOF no. 32, the insertion of "[sic]" and the brackets around
"prior to the work injury" were by LIRAB. 
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
between an asymptomatic preexisting condition and a preexisting 
disability — that is, "loss or impairment of a physical or mental function." 
Therefore, what is relevant is Dr. Lum's report that 
Pave had no neck impairment before his work accident. Dr. Lum's opinion on apportionment was not based upon Pave having no preexisting condition; it was based upon Pave having no history of neck impairment before his work accident. 
LIRAB found: 
39. The Board finds that a determination of the 
extent of preexisting PPD is a legal question to be
determined by the Director [of Labor and IndustrialRelations] or the Board, upon consideration of all theevidence, including the medical records and testimony in therecord. 
FOF no. 39 is actually a conclusion of law; it is not 
wrong. Under the DLIR workers compensation administrative rules, 
"[t]he extent of medical impairment preexisting the work injury[] shall be assessed by a physician[,]" HAR § 12-10-28, using the American Medical Association's Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (AMA Guides) "and any other such guides 
which the director [of labor and industrial relations] deems 
appropriate and proper[,]" HAR § 12-10-21(a). But "[i]t is . . . ultimately the director of the Department of Labor and Industrial Relations [through the DCD] or the Board, and not the physician, that decides the final PPD rating." Ihara, 141 Hawai# i at 43, 
404 P.3d at 309 (citing Cabatbat, 103 Hawai# i at 9, 78 P.3d at 
764). 
However, LIRAB's finding that a claimant had a preexisting 
disability must be based upon some evidence in the record showing that the claimant had an actual loss or impairment of a physical or mental function before the work accident. 
LIRAB found: 
40. In this case, based upon the opinions of
Drs. Direnfeld, Lau and Brigham that [Pave] had significant
pre-existing cervical conditions  that contributed to his 
post[-]injury impairment, the Board finds thatapportionment, based on the application of theclinical/pathological judgment of the rating physician, in 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the absence of an impairment rating prior to the work
injury, is appropriate. 
41. The Board finds that in this case, with evidence
of significant pre-existing conditions  in the medical 
records, the clinical judgment method of assessingapportionment employed by Drs. Direnfeld and Lau isreasonable for determining the extent of medical impairment
pre-existing the work injury. 
42. The Board credits Dr. Direnfeld's and Dr. Lau's 
apportionment methodology allocating equal weight to pre-existing factors and to the work injury where measurements 
of [Pave]'s neck impairment were not available prior to theMarch 19, 2010 industrial accident . 
43. Applying Dr. Lau's apportionment of 50% of
permanent impairment of [Pave]'s neck/cervical spine resultsin 119.5351 weeks of compensation (15% x 312 weeks at themaximum compensation rate for 2010 = 119.5351 weeks) for 15%pre-existing PPD. 
44. Based upon Dr. Direnfeld's and Dr. Lau's
clinical judgment of apportionment, the Board finds thatEmployer has produced sufficient evidence to establish thestatutory 32-week compensation threshold of previous PPDnecessary for SCF liability. 
(Emphasis added) (footnotes omitted). These combined findings of 
fact and conclusions of law are clearly erroneous. 
There is no dispute that Pave had spinal stenosis and 
cervical spondylosis before his work accident. But there is also no dispute that Pave had not seen a physician in several years and was in good health with no impairment of his neck function before his work accident. Dr. Direnfeld noted that before the March 19, 2010 work accident, Pave did not have symptoms of cervical myelopathy. Pave testified that other than a tennis elbow condition during his early twenties, left wrist tendinitis while working for a previous employer, and a knee and low-back injury twenty years earlier, for which he received chiropractic treatment, he only went to the doctor for things like flu shots before his work injury. He could perform all activities of daily living and actively mountain biked, surfed, dived, played guitar, and drove. He had never injured his head, neck, or thoracic region or had any restricted motion in his neck or arms before his work accident. He had never sought treatment for his neck, or had a neck x-ray, range of motion study, or imaging study 
16 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
before his work injury. LIRAB recognized that "measurements of 
[Pave]'s neck impairment were not available prior to the March 19, 2010 industrial accident" and that "no evaluation for rating permanent impairment was conducted before [Pave]'s March 19, 2010 work injury." 
After his work accident, Pave "complained of burning 
pain in his arms and numbness in his upper body with neck movement[,] . . . occasional needle sensation in both hands and stiffness in the morning[, and] . . . bowel and bladder control problems and difficulty with sexual function." Pave's treating physiatrist noted that Pave "denies having similar complaints or injury to the same body parts in the past." The record contains no evidence that Pave experienced any "disability" — defined as "loss or impairment of a physical or mental function" by HRS § 386-1 — because both of his preexisting conditions were asymptomatic before the work accident. 
LIRAB relied upon the opinions of Drs. Direnfeld and 
Lau, both of whom apportioned 50% causation of Pave's work injury to physical conditions that preexisted the work accident, and 50% to his work accident. But Dr. Direnfeld also "noted that prior to the March 19, 2010 work injury, [Pave] did not have symptoms of cervical myelopathy." LIRAB noted (in unchallenged findings): 
14. In his September 17, 2010 report, Dr. Direnfeld
explained that apportionment applied to [Pave]'s impairment
rating because in the absence of pre-existing cervicalspondylolysis[
13] it was improbable  that [Pave] would have 
developed  signs and symptoms of cervical myelopathy as a
result of the March 19, 2010 work injury. Dr. Direnfeld referred to Section 1.6b on page 11 of the AMA Guides, whichdiscusses apportionment analysis as follows: 
Apportionment analysis in workers'compensation represents a distribution orallocation of causation  among multiple
factors  that caused or significantly
contributed to the injury or disease andresulting impairment. The factor could be 
13 "Spondylolysis" means "disintegration or dissolution of a
vertebra[.]" Spondylolysis, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-
webster.com/medical/spondylolysis  (last visited Dec. 15, 2022). 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a pre-existing injury, illness, or
impairment[.] 
15. Dr. Direnfeld noted that before determining
apportionment, pursuant to Section 1.6b, the physician mustverify that all of the following are true: 
1. There is current documentation of a 
prior factor. 
2. The current permanent impairment is
greater as a result of the prior factor 
(i.e. prior impairment, prior injury, or
illness). 
3. There is evidence indicating the prior
factor  caused or contributed to the 
impairment  based on reasonable probability
(greater than 50% likelihood). 
(Reformatted) (emphasis added). Thus, Dr. Direnfeld apportioned 
50% of the causation for Pave's post-work-accident disability to a preexisting condition. But Dr. Direnfeld gave no opinion that Pave's preexisting condition caused a disability — loss or impairment of a physical or mental function — before Pave's work accident. Nor did Dr. Lau, or any other physician involved in Pave's care or case, give such opinions. The only opinion about Pave's disability, or lack thereof, before his work accident was given by Dr. Brigham, who stated: 
Degenerative findings alone would not serve as the basis for
rating impairment. Degenerative changes [such asspondylosis and spondylolysis] are commonly seen amongasymptomatic individuals. The [AMA] Guides explain on page383: 
The [Diagnosis-Related Estimates ( DRE)] method
recommends that physicians document physiologic andstructural impairments relating to injuries ordiseases other than common developmental findings,such as: 1) spondylolysis, found normally in 7% ofadults; 2) spondylolisthesis, found in 3% of adults;3) herniated disk without rediculopathy, found inapproximately 30% of individuals by age 40 years; and4) aging changes, present in 40% of adults after age35 years and in almost all individuals after age 50.As previously noted, the presence of theseabnormalities on imaging studies does not necessarilymean the individual has an impairment due to aninjury. (5th ed., 383) 
. . . . 
18 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In summary, the day prior to the injury Mr. Pave would meet the
definition of a DRE Cervical Category I in Table 15-5 (5th ed.,392): 
No significant clinical findings, no observed muscleguarding or spasm, no documentable neurologicimpairment, no documented alteration in structuralintegrity, and no other indication of impairmentrelated to injury or illness: no fractures. 
This is associated with no impairment; i.e., his pre-existing impairment is 0% . 
(Emphasis added.) The record contains no evidence — objective, 
subjective, or anecdotal — that would support a contrary opinion. Accordingly, it was clear error and wrong for LIRAB to apportion liability to SCF. 
SCF challenges the following conclusion of law by 
LIRAB: 
The opinions of both of the examining/rating
physicians in this case are consistent with the principle
enunciated in Flores v. City and County of Honolulu,Department of Parks and Recreation, 67 Haw. 663 (1985), thata preexisting, asymptomatic degenerative condition canconstitute a ratable impairment for apportionment purposes. 
The conclusion correctly states the holding of Flores 
v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 67 Haw. 663, 701 P.2d 1282 (1985), 
superseded in part by statute, 1982 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 93, § 1 at 127-28, as recognized in Bumanglag, 78 Hawai# i at 280 n.3, 892 
P.2d at 473 n.3. 
The plaintiff in Flores had a heart attack in 1979, 
while working for the City. He had no previous cardiac history, but his physician reported that he had preexisting asymptomatic arteriosclerosis.
14 The DCD determined that Flores was totally 
and permanently disabled, and the City was liable to pay him workers compensation benefits. The City appealed to LIRAB, and joined SCF as a party. LIRAB determined that Flores was totally and permanently disabled, apportioned 20% of the disability to 
14 "Arteriosclerosis" is "a chronic disease characterized by abnormal
thickening and hardening of the arterial walls with resulting loss of
elasticity[.]" Arteriosclerosis, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/arteriosclerosis  (last updated Dec. 12, 2022). 
19 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the City (based upon a physician's opinion), and held SCF 
responsible for the remainder of the compensation benefits. 
67 
Haw. at 664-66, 701 P.2d at 1283-85. SCF appealed. 
The supreme court, applying the version of HRS § 386-33 
in effect when Flores had his heart attack, Flores, 67 Haw. at 666-67, 701 P.2d at 1285, affirmed. The court stated that Flores's "heart condition was a permanent partial disability that preexisted his employment although it was in an asymptomatic form[,]" id. at 669, 701 P.2d at 1286, and held that "[t]he pre-employment manifestation of a previous injury is not required before apportionment with the SCF can be made[,]" id. at 670, 701 P.2d at 1287. In so holding, the supreme court stated: 
some states have required by legislation that preexisting
injuries be registered with the commission administering thesecond injury fund. The legislature, in time, may find itfeasible to adopt a similar approach for Hawaii. Or it mayprefer to explicitly require previous injuries to bemanifest. 
Id. at 669-70, 701 P.2d at 1287 (footnote omitted). 
HRS § 386-33 was amended in 1982 to add the thirty-two 
week threshold requirement in subsection (b). Thus, the 
legislature explicitly required that a preexisting condition manifest itself in "loss or impairment of a physical or mental function" that would "support an award of thirty-two weeks of compensation for permanent partial disability" before SCF would become liable to pay PPD benefits. 
In Bumanglag, which was decided after the 1982 
amendment, the supreme court noted: 
Employer and Adjuster cite Flores v. City and County
of Honolulu, 67 Haw. 663, 701 P.2d 1282 (1985), to support
their argument that the mere fact that a previous disabilityor condition is asymptomatic before the work injury does notpreclude apportionment with the SCF. However, Flores wasdecided under HRS § 386–33 prior to the 1982 amendmentswhich introduced the thirty-two week threshold requirement.The purpose of the threshold was "to significantly reducethe total number of cases in which the [SCF] is required toparticipate," Sen.Stand.Comm.Rep.No. 215, in 1982 SenateJournal, at 1041, by precluding any apportionment with theSCF in which the preexisting permanent partial disabilitydoes not reach the required threshold amount. 
20  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bumanglag, 78 Hawai# i at 280 n.3, 892 P.2d at 473 n.3.15 Thus, 
"[s]ubsection (b) of HRS § 386–33 authorizes the director or the 
appellate board to apportion liability with SCF if the Director or Board determines that the previous permanent partial disability amounted to an award of thirty-two weeks of compensation." Id. at 280, 892 P.2d at 473. 
The claimant in Bumanglag had "no prior history of back 
pain or injuries" until a 1985 work accident. 78 Hawai# i at 277-
78, 892 P.2d at 470-71. The physician who reported the negative history initially apportioned 100% of Bumanglag's injury to his work accident "based upon reasonable medical probability and the AMA Guide." Id. at 278, 892 P.2d at 471. But the physician 
changed his opinion "and took a new position that 20 to 25 percent of [Bumanglag]'s overall impairment after the accident was attributable to [Bumanglag]'s preexisting congenital defects." Id. at 280, 892 P.2d at 473. The changed opinion was 
not based on the AMA Guide but on the physician's "own 'best guess.'" Id. LIRAB decided: 
Even if  we were to accept Dr. Hendrickson's opinion as to
[Bumanglag]'s preexisting impairment for his low back
condition, and apply it to the highest permanent impairmentrating for the lumber region (11% of the whole person), 20to 25% of 11% would provide, at most, 2.75% preexistingpermanent partial disability of the whole person. Permanent partial disability of 2.75% of the whole person is equal to10.71 weeks of compensation . . . . It has not been shown that [Bumanglag] has a preexisting permanent partialdisability of 32 weeks of compensation necessary to warrantapportionment with SCF. 
Id. at 278, 892 P.2d at 471 (emphasis added). The supreme court 
affirmed. But the court did not reaffirm Flores. Bumanglag 
stands for the proposition that a preexisting disability must support an award of at least thirty-two weeks of PPD compensation before liability can be apportioned to SCF under HRS § 386-33(b). 
15 "Even when the meaning of a law is apparent on its face,
legislative history may be used to confirm the court's interpretation of a
statute's plain language." Priceline.com, Inc., 144 Hawai #i at 88, 436 P.3d
at 1171 (cleaned up). 
21 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
See id. at 280, 892 P.2d at 473. As we noted above, the plain 
statutory language requires that a "disability" supporting an award of thirty-two weeks of PPD benefits must involve "loss or impairment of a physical or mental function." HRS § 386-1; see Ihara, 141 Hawai# i at 42, 404 P.3d at 308 ("The purpose of a PPD 
award . . . is to compensate a worker for the loss or impairment of a physical or mental function."). In any event, the proposition for which LIRAB cited 
Flores was abrogated by the 
1982 amendment to HRS § 386-33. Bumanglag
, 78 Hawai# i at 280 
n.3, 892 P.2d at 473 n.3. 
SCF also challenges the following conclusions of law by 
LIRAB: 
The extent to which a claimant may be awarded an
amount for PPD is different from a medical impairment
rating, because the extent of PPD for a work injury, andprior PPD are legal, not medical, determinations. 
Thus, while the SCF in this case would rely on the AMA
Guides for rating purposes, supported by Dr. Brigham'sopinion, and while the AMA Guides can be a helpful tool indetermining disability, the Board is not bound by them.Cababat [sic] v. County of Hawaii, Dept. of Water Supply,103 Hawai #i 1, 6 (2003).[
16] In the instant case, the Board
concludes that [Pave] had significant pre-existingdisability  in terms of congenital and degenerative
conditions  of the cervical spine, capable of supporting an
award of 32 weeks of permanent disability, which combinedwith the work injury to the cervical spine resulted ingreater disability than for the work injury alone. 
Given the foregoing, the Board concludes that
permanent disability should be apportioned between theEmployer/Insurance Carrier and the SCF. 
Given the foregoing, the Board concludes that
104 weeks of PPD should be paid by Employer/InsuranceCarrier, with the balance of [Pave]'s PPD, stipulated to bythe parties, payable to [Pave] by the SCF. 
(Emphasis added.) 
16 In Cabatbat, the supreme court held that HAR § 12–10–21 did not
preclude the use of guides other than the AMA Guides, and that LIRAB'sconstruction of the administrative rule to the contrary was wrong. 
103 
Hawai #i at 6, 78 P.3d at 761. Cabatbat does not stand for the proposition
that DCD or LIRAB can make PPD determinations without reference to any medicalguides. 
22 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
An injured worker's final PPD rating is a legal 
determination made by LIRAB (or the DCD). Ihara
, 141 Hawai# i at 
43, 404 P.3d at 309. LIRAB can "take other factors into account 
to reach an accurate disability determination" "where the 
AMA 
Guides and the physician's assessment do not give an accurate portrayal of the total loss [or] impairment[.]" Id.
 at 44, 404 
P.3d at 310 (citing Cabatbat, 103 Hawai# i at 9, 78 P.3d at 764). 
Those other factors can include "information about the individual's skills, education, job history, adaptability, age, and environment requirements and modifications." Duque v. Hilton 
Hawaiian Vill., 105 Hawai# i 433, 439, 98 P.3d 640, 646 (2004) 
(citation omitted). There must, however, be substantial evidence in the record supporting LIRAB's determination that SCF is obligated to pay PPD benefits because of a preexisting disability capable of supporting at least 32 weeks of compensation. 
In Pave's case, LIRAB incorrectly equated a preexisting 
"condition" with a preexisting "disability." 
Thus, LIRAB's 
"conclusion" that Pave had a preexisting "disability . . . capable of supporting an award of 32 weeks of permanent disability" was actually a finding of fact and clearly erroneous based on the record. Drs. Direnfeld and Lau opined that Pave's preexisting condition contributed to cause his work injury, but neither reported that the condition had caused a loss or impairment of Pave's physical functioning before his work accident. 
The record is to the contrary; it contains no evidence 
that Pave's spinal stenosis or cervical spondylosis caused any loss or impairment of his physical or mental functions before his work accident, much less any loss or impairment that would support an award of thirty-two weeks of compensation for PPD. 
"[A] PPD award requires a finding of some physical or 
mental impairment." Ihara, 141 Hawai# i at 45, 404 P.3d at 311. 
Because there is no evidence in the record that Pave had any neck impairment before his work accident, it was clear error and wrong for LIRAB to apportion liability for Pave's PPD benefits to SCF. 
23 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Dias Appeal 
Dias's knee injury was evaluated by doctors John
Endicott, Brian Mihara, and James Scoggin; each of whom reviewed 
medical records and examined Dias on behalf of Dias's employer. 
LIRAB made the following findings of fact that are unchallenged and binding on appeal: 
1. [Dias] sustained a work injury to his right knee
on June 4, 2008. 
2. [LIRAB] finds that [Dias] sustained 45% PPD of
the right leg, as determined by the Director. 
3. [LIRAB] finds that [Dias] had osteoarthritis[17]
of his right knee before his June 4, 2008 work accident, and
that the work accident aggravated [Dias]'s osteoarthritis. 
The issue in the Dias Appeal is not whether Dias's preexisting 
osteoarthritis was aggravated by his work injury; it is whether his preexisting osteoarthritis actually impaired his right knee before his work accident. 
SCF challenges LIRAB's FOF nos. 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 
12, and 14; and COL no. 1. LIRAB found: 
4. [LIRAB] finds that despite the unanimous
opinions that [Dias] had a pre-existing right knee
condition , a specific rating of pre-existing impairment  was 
not provided by Drs. Endicott, Mihara, and [sic] Scoggin,because of the lack of information [in] the medical recordsand/or format of the diagnostic films. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The record on appeal supports LIRAB's finding that Dias 
had a preexisting right knee condition (osteoarthritis), and that 
17 "Osteoarthritis" is defined as: 
[A] common form of arthritis typically with onset during
middle or old age that is characterized by progressivedegenerative changes in the cartilage of one or more joints(as of the knees, hips, and hands) accompanied by thickeningand overgrowth of adjacent bone and that is markedsymptomatically chiefly by stiffness, swelling, pain,deformation of joints, and loss of range of motion. 
Osteoarthritis, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/osteoarthritis  (last updated Nov. 29, 2022). 
24 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Drs. Endicott, Mihara, and Scoggin did not rate Dias as having 
any functional impairment of the right knee before his work accident. 
Dias's right knee was x-rayed two weeks after his work 
accident. 
The radiologist noted: "Fairly advanced degenerative 
changes are seen. There is moderately severe narrowing of the medial joint compartment and tricompartment degenerative spurring demonstrated. Lateral view demonstrates a [sic] 11 mm calcification in the suprapatellar region along with a probable joint effusion." 
Dr. Endicott examined Dias on May 5, 2009 (one year 
after the work accident). Dr. Endicott reported that Dias was a 58-year-old pool construction foreman who had done construction work for most of his adult life. Dias denied having any significant problems with his knee until his work accident. He owned two horses and enjoyed riding, but had not done so after the work accident because of the problems with his knee. Dr. Endicott reported: 
The diagnosis is a right knee sprain with probable medial
meniscus tear, and a 10 degree flexion contracture as aresult of aggravation of the underlying pre-existingosteoarthritis in the right knee. . . . 
. . . . 
There is evidence of pre-existing osteoarthritis that wasreportedly not symptomatic until after the subject injury . 
This is contributing to the current scenario because ofaggravation of the underlying degenerative osteoarthritis. 
. . . . 
It appears that the right knee condition is due to theemployment factors with the twisting injury of June 4, 2008.There is no evidence that his condition would have developedbut for the distinctive conditions of employment. It does 
not appear that his condition is a natural progression ofthe pre-existing osteoarthritis . 
It appears that the injury
caused a permanent aggravation of the pre-existingcondition . 
. . . . 
It appears that he can return to work avoiding kneeling onthe right knee, or activities that require flexion of theright knee more than 90 degrees. 
He can work avoiding 
25 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
kneeling and flexion activities in the right knee. The 
restrictions are the results [sic] of work injury . . . . 
. . . . 
There is no evidence of pre-existing impairment or need for
apportionment at this time . 
(Emphasis added.) 
Dr. Mihara examined Dias on May 2, 2012 (four years 
after the work accident). Dr. Mihara noted that Dias had 
sprains to multiple joints including the knees prior to 2008related to training horses. He says that none of theinjuries were very bad and none of them required any medicalcare. He denies any permanent problems from any of thesehorse injuries. 
. . . . 
. . . [H]e used to enjoy hiking and riding his horse. 
He 
says that the last time he went riding on his horse wasabout a year ago. He says that this is simply too painful.The last time he played volleyball was about a year ago[(three years after the work accident)]. He notes that he did not sustain any lingering injury to his knee, riding hishorse or playing volleyball. 
Dr. Mihara noted that Dr. Endicott had evaluated Dias 
in 2009, and that Dias's records did not mention any significant 
anterior or posterior right knee instability before his work injury. 
Dr. Mihara diagnosed probable right knee medial 
meniscal tear from his work accident, which aggravated preexisting osteoarthritis. He reported: 
[Dias] denies any history of significant injury in the past
noting that he has injured multiple joints but never had to
see a doctor for any of these injuries while traininghorses. The medical record indicates that he did attend physical therapy for a right knee sprain approximately 25years prior to the listed date of injury, but he healed up
without any residuals . The medical record indicates that 
there were no previous x-rays to the right knee forcomparison, suggesting that his right knee was doing okay
prior to 2008  [the date of his work injury]. 
. . . . 
3. I see evidence of preexisting osteoarthritis which hascontributed slightly to his current condition. 
At the 
same time, the vast majority of these problems wouldappear to be related to the indexed injury of 
26 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
06/04/08. While he had preexisting osteoarthritis,
the available record suggests that this was mild and 
perhaps not even impairing . . . . 
4. [Dias]'s current condition is primarily due to the[work] injury of 06/04/08. The condition diagnosedwould not have developed if not for this injury . This 
was a permanent aggravation of his preexistingosteoarthritis. 
(Emphasis added.) 
After giving an estimated impairment rating but noting 
that Dias had not medically stabilized, Dr. Mihara noted: "Based 
on what I could gather from the available [x-rays], it did not appear that his arthritis prior to 2008 was an impairment-level problem." 
Dr. Scoggin examined Dias on July 15, 2013 (five years 
after the work accident). Dr. Scoggin reported: 
Mr. Dias recalls that he had an injury to his right knee
when he twisted it 30 years ago . He states that a rope hit
him and he fell over while working with horses. He recalls that his right knee swelled after that injury, and he saw adoctor. He was told that he had strained ligaments in hisright knee. He did not require crutches at that time, buthe recalls that he was sent to physical therapy. 
He had no other trouble with his right knee after that . He 
had no instability of his right knee after that. He had no 
other swelling of his right knee after that. He never saw a doctor again for his right knee again until the 6/4/08[work] incident. 
. . . . 
2. Mr. Dias denies any symptoms in his right knee priorto 6/4/08 . 
X-rays taken on 6/19/08, however, showed
advanced degenerative changes in the right knee,including moderately severe narrowing of the medialjoint compartment and tricompartmental degenerativespurring. A large calcification or loose body waspresent in the suprapatellar region. 
Clearly, these degenerative changes could not have
occurred in the interval between 6/4/08 and 6/19/08,but rather represent advanced degenerative changesthat developed over a prolonged period of time. These changes were confirmed and further elucidated on theMRI of 10/9/08, which again showed severe thinning ofthe cartilage of the medial compartment, loose bodies,and tricompartmental osteoarthritic changes, mainly atthe medial and patellofemoral compartments. 
Mr. Dias'[s] injury, it should be recalled, was a
twisting injury on 6/4/08, which he was able to "work 
27 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
through." It was noted that he did not try any
medications. Apparently, no Emergency Room visit wasrequired, and no visit to a doctor of any kind wasrequired for approximately 2 weeks. There was no fracture or dislocation. 
Most likely, then, this represented a symptomatic
aggravation of his pre-existing osteoarthritis. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Dr. Scoggin diagnosed "[r]ight knee strain resulting in 
symptomatic aggravation of pre-existing osteoarthritis." He 
explained: 
At most, this would appear to be a symptomatic
aggravation of very significant pre-existingosteoarthritis, which would have been expected toprogress with time, even in the absence of any trauma. 
The prognosis for the injury is good. The prognosis for the pre-existing osteoarthritis is
poor, since osteoarthritis is a progressive condition,in general. 
. . . . 
It should be absolutely clear that Mr. Dias hadpre-existing osteoarthritis, which was well documentedon his initial x-rays, subsequent MRI, and eventuallyhis arthroscopy. 
None of these imaging findings are
explainable based upon the injury that occurred on6/4/08. 
Mr. Dias states that his knee was asymptomatic prior
to 6/4/08 . No prior medical records from before that
date were available for my evaluation. 
While Mr. Dias may have become symptomatic on 6/4/08,
according to his history, there is certainly noobjective finding on any of his imaging studies orobjective finding at the time of his arthroscopy thatis explainable based upon the 6/4/08 injury as it hasbeen described. 
. . . . 
It is impossible to explain all of Mr. Dias'[s]osteoarthritis as being related to the incident thatoccurred on 6/4/08, since his imaging studies clearlyshowed that the osteoarthritis was already present.If Mr. Dias first noticed symptoms of hisosteoarthritis as a result of the 6/4/08 incident, itis not the same as saying that the 6/4/08 incidentcaused his osteoarthritis. 
28 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Emphasis added.) In other words, Dr. Scoggin reported that Dias 
had preexisting osteoarthritis that became symptomatic when he twisted his right knee while working, but the work accident did not cause the osteoarthritis. 
Dr. Scoggin was asked: 
9. If it is necessary to rate a pre-existing condition 
based on worsening or aggravation, please provide an
apportionment. Please also apportion the impairmentthat may be attributed to any intervening trauma. 
(Emphasis added) (underscoring omitted). He answered:18 
Osteoarthritis, in general, is a degenerativecondition, with progression, as expected[, ]with time. 
I would note that at the time of John S. Endicott,
M.D.'s Independent Medical Evaluation (IME) on 5/5/09,Mr. Dias only had a 10° flexion contracture, which wasrated as a 20% lower extremity impairment. 
Mr. Dias has subsequently had an arthroscopy of the
knee. At the time of that arthroscopy, nomeniscectomy was performed, no meniscus tear wasfound, and no chondroplasty was required.Nevertheless, Mr. Dias'[s] range of motion hasdecreased in the 4 years since the 5/5/09 IndependentMedical Evaluation. This is due to the progressiveosteoarthritis, to a reasonable degree of medicalprobability, and is no longer explainable based uponthe injury that occurred on 6/4/08, to a reasonabledegree of medical probability. 
I would therefore apportion the current impairment  as 
25% to the 6/4/08 injury and 75% to his pre-existing
osteoarthritis and its expected progression with time ,
to a reasonable degree of medical probability. 
(Emphasis added.) There is no evidence in the record that Dias 
had any limitation in the range of motion or other impairment of 
18 Dr. Scoggin prefaced all of his answers by stating: 
The following are answers to your specific questions only.
The answers to these specific questions are advisory innature only. They are not to be taken out of context of themore full discussion in the body of this report. In and of themselves, these answers may not accurately reflect thecomplete opinions offered in this report, and taken out ofcontext, may result in inaccurate interpretation or opinion. 
29 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
his right knee function before his work accident. 
Dr. Scoggin's 
report read as a whole apportioned the causation of Dias's 
present impairment five years after his work accident. Dr. Scoggin never opined that Dias's osteoarthritis had caused any impairment before Dias's work accident — much less any impairment that would support an award of thirty-two weeks of compensation for PPD. 
Under these circumstances, LIRAB's FOF no. 4 that 
"despite the unanimous opinions that [Dias] had a pre-existing right knee condition, a specific rating of pre-existing 
impairment was not provided by Drs. Endicott, Mihara, and 
Scoggin, because of the lack of information [in] the medical 
records and/or format of the diagnostic films" was not clearly erroneous. (Emphasis added.) But the issue before LIRAB was not whether Dias had a preexisting condition; it was whether Dias's preexisting right knee condition had actually impaired his physical functioning before his work accident. No doctor expressed an opinion, and the record contains no evidence, that Dias had a preexisting "disability" that combined with his work injury to cause a greater post-work-accident disability. 
LIRAB found: 
5. Although Drs. Endicott and Mihara acknowledged a
pre-existing condition , neither apportioned permanent
impairment to such condition , based on [Dias]'s
representations that he had no problems for many years
before the industrial accident and/or because of a lack ofspecificity in the medical records. 
(Emphasis added.) FOF no. 5 is supported by substantial evidence 
and is not clearly erroneous. 
LIRAB found: 
6. Given the extent of [Dias]'s pre-existing right
knee condition  as reported by the radiologist reading the
July 19, 2008 films, [LIRAB] does not credit  the opinions of
Drs. Endicott and Mihara that no apportionment of permanent
impairment  was warranted. 
(Emphasis added.) 
30 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
LIRAB conducts "a de novo, trial-like hearing on the 
appeal from the [DCD]'s determination." Ihara, 141 Hawai# i at 
43, 404 P.3d at 309 (citing HRS § 386-87(a)-(c)). 
If FOF no. 6 
was a finding of witness credibility, it would not be disturbed 
on appeal. Tamashiro v. Control Specialist, Inc., 97 Hawai# i 86, 
92, 34 P.3d 16, 22 (2001). 
However, if "the record reveals no 
conflict in the evidence or impeachment of any witness, the court will not sustain a finding as to credibility which it is firmly convinced is mistaken." De Victoria v. H&K Contractors, 56 Haw. 
552, 559, 545 P.2d 692, 698 (1976) (citations omitted). 
The 
record in the Dias Appeal contains no evidence that Dias's osteoarthritis caused an actual loss or impairment of a physical or mental function before his work accident. Accordingly, LIRAB's failure to "credit" the opinions of Drs. Endicott and Mihara was clear error. And to the extent FOF no. 6 was a conclusion of law that an asymptomatic preexisting condition which did not cause actual loss or impairment of a physical or mental function before a work accident warranted apportionment under HRS § 386-33, it is wrong. 
LIRAB found: 
7. [LIRAB] finds that Dr. Scoggin presented a
clinical judgment apportionment, which took [Dias]'s
significant pre-existing osteoarthritis into account. 
. . . . 
9. [LIRAB] credits Dr. Scoggin's opinion regarding
apportionment. 
LIRAB's finding that Dr. Scoggin took Dias's 
significant preexisting osteoarthritis into account in making an 
apportionment was supported by substantial evidence and not clearly erroneous. Dr. Scoggin, however, apportioned the cause of Dias's present PPD five years after his work accident. Dr. Scoggin did not apportion PPD before and after Dias's work accident; he never opined that Dias's osteoarthritis caused a loss or impairment of his physical functioning before his work accident. There is no evidence in the record that Dias had a 
31 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
preexisting loss or impairment of right knee function that, 
combined with his work-related loss or impairment, resulted in a greater level of total PPD. See Bumanglag
, 78 Hawai# i at 280, 
892 P.2d at 473. Thus, FOF nos. 7 and 9 are not relevant to whether SCF should be liable for part of LIRAB's PPD award. 
LIRAB found: 
10. [LIRAB] finds that under the AMA Guides' stated
method of apportionment, no pre-existing impairment could be
determined, because the medical records before the accidentlacked specificity as to [Dias]'s pre-injury ranges ofmotion or measurements of decreased space in [Dias]'s rightknee. 
11. Applying Dr. Scoggin's apportionment (75% x 45%
permanent impairment) results in 33.75% pre-existingpermanent impairment of the right knee. 
12. [LIRAB] finds that Employer met its burden of
proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that [Dias] hada pre-existing PPD of more than 32 weeks. 
FOF no. 10 is supported by substantial evidence and not 
clearly erroneous. 
FOF no. 11 is actually a conclusion of law; it is 
wrong. Dr. Scoggin did not apportion Dias's present disability 
between a pre-work-accident impairment capable of supporting at least 32-weeks of compensation, and a post-work accident impairment. See Bumanglag, 78 Hawai# i at 280, 892 P.2d at 473. 
Instead, Dr. Scoggin apportioned causation of Dias's present PPD between an asymptomatic pre-work-accident condition that was not the cause of any preexisting impairment, and a work injury that caused all of the impairment. 
FOF no. 12 is clearly erroneous because there is no 
evidence in the record that Dias's right knee was actually impaired before his work accident. 
We need not consider LIRAB's FOF no. 14, which 
disapproved SCF's proposed findings of fact. 
Finally, LIRAB concluded: 
1. [LIRAB] concludes that permanent disability
should be apportioned between Employer/Insurance Carrier and
the SPECIAL COMPENSATION FUND. 
32 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
This is a combined finding of fact and conclusion of 
law. It is clearly erroneous because no doctor opined that 
Dias's right knee osteoarthritis had caused him loss or impairment of physical function before his work accident, and the record contains no other evidence that Dias's right knee osteoarthritis caused any loss or impairment of his right knee function before his work accident. 
Accordingly, it was wrong for 
LIRAB to apportion liability for Dias's PPD benefits to SCF. 
CONCLUSION 
In each of these cases, there was no expert opinion or 
other evidence that the injured person's asymptomatic preexisting condition had caused any actual "disability" — that is, "loss or impairment of a physical or mental function" — before the person's work accident. Under those circumstances, it was error for LIRAB to apportion liability for the person's PPD award to SCF. LIRAB's decision and order in each case is reversed. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate JudgeHerbert B.K. Lau, Frances E. H. Lum,Deputy Attorneys General, Department of the Attorney General, State of Hawai# i,
for Appellant-Appellant Special Compensation Fund in CAAP-17-0000600. 
Robyn M. Kuwabe,
Frances E. H. Lum,Deputy Attorneys General,Department of the AttorneyGeneral, State of 
Hawai# i,
for Appellee-Appellant
Special Compensation Fundin CAAP-17-0000925. 
33 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Brian G.S. Choy,
Keith M. Yonamine,for Employer-Appellee/AppelleeProduction Processing, Inc. andInsurance Carrier-Appellee/AppelleeGallagher Bassett Services, Inc.in CAAP-17-0000600. 
Brian G.S. Choy,
Keith M. Yonamine,for Employer-Appellant/AppelleeAltres, Inc. and InsuranceCarrier-Appellant/AppelleeHawaii Employers' Mutual InsuranceCompany, Inc.in CAAP-17-0000925. 
34 