NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-000958
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
CHAU LUONG, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1-DCC-15-0004331)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Chau Luong (Luong) appeals from the
Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment, filed on November 25,

 
2015, in the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu
 
Division.1
 
 
Luong was convicted of Criminal Trespass in the First
Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708­813(1)(c) (2014).
2
  
 
1
 The Honorable Michael Tanigawa presided.
 
2
 HRS § 708-813(1) states:
 
§ 708-813 Criminal trespass in the first degree. (1) A person commits
the offense of criminal trespass in the first degree if:
(a)	 That person knowingly enters or remains unlawfully:
(i)	 In a dwelling; or
(ii) 	In or upon the premises of a hotel or apartment building;
(b)	 That person:
(i)	 Knowingly enters or remains unlawfully in or upon premises
that are fenced or enclosed in a manner designed to exclude
intruders; and
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Luong contends there was insufficient
 
evidence that he acted with the requisite mens rea. 
Specifically, Luong contends that the State failed to establish
 that he "knowingly" entered or remained unlawfully on the
 property, as alleged in the charge against him. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Luong's point of error as follows and reverse.
 
Luong contends that because the Complaint and the oral
 
charge read to him before trial alleged that he acted
 "knowingly," but the District Court found that he acted
 "recklessly," there was insufficient evidence to convict him. 
The Complaint alleged that Luong "did knowingly enter or remain
 unlawfully in or upon the premises of any noncollegiate academic
 school established and maintained by the Department of Education
 between 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., thereby committing the offense
 of Criminal Trespass in the First Degree[.]" The oral charge was
 materially similar.
 
The State recognizes that "[i]nexplicably, both the
 
written and oral charge specified only 'knowing' as the state of
 mind[,]" even though no state of mind is specified in the statute
 and thus generally an intentional, knowing, or reckless state of
 mind is applicable under HRS § 702-204 (2014). The State thus
 concedes that "principles of due process and notice required the
 State to prove the case as it charged it, that is, that Defendant
 knowingly entered or remained unlawfully on school premises."
 
2(...continued)
(ii)	 Is in possession of a firearm, as defined in section 134-1,
at the time of the intrusion; or
(c)	 That person enters or remains unlawfully in or upon the premises
of any public school as defined in section 302A-101, or any
private school, after reasonable warning or request to leave by
school authorities or a police officer; provided however, such
warning or request to leave shall be unnecessary between 10:00
p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Emphasis added.) The State further notes that "[t]here appears
 
to be a legitimate question as to whether the [District Court]
 misapplied the applicable state of mind[,]" but asserts that
 there was sufficient evidence to establish that Luong acted with
 a knowing state of mind.
 
As the parties agree, unlike HRS § 708-813(1)(a) and
 
(b), no state of mind is specified in HRS § 708-813(1)(c). "When
 the state of mind required to establish an element of an offense
 is not specified by the law, that element is established if, with
 respect thereto, a person acts intentionally, knowingly, or
 recklessly." HRS § 702-204. Thus, generally, a defendant may be
 convicted of Criminal Trespass in the First Degree, in violation
 of HRS § 708-813(1)(c), if the defendant acted intentionally,
 knowingly, or recklessly. 
A charge should set forth the applicable state of mind 
to satisfy due process requirements. Schwartz v. State, 136 
Hawai
'i 258, 271-72, 361 P.3d 1161, 1174-75 (2015); State v. 
Nesmith, 127 Hawai 'i 48, 52-54, 61, 276 P.3d 617, 621-23, 630 
(2012). Here, although the written and oral charge only stated that the offense was committed "knowingly," and not "intentionally" and/or "recklessly," it was a valid charge because a person can be convicted of Criminal Trespass in the First Degree with a knowing state of mind. However, as the State concedes, it could not enlarge the charge during trial to encompass "recklessness" after specifying that Luong committed the crime "knowingly." See Nesmith, 127 Hawai
'i at 52, 54, 276 
P.3d at 621, 623 (recognizing that a charge must provide fair notice to the defendant of the nature and cause of the accusation). 
During closing argument at trial, after the State
 
initially argued that there is no state of mind required under
 HRS § 708-813(1)(c), the following discussion ensued: 
THE COURT:  But you're not arguing that there's no intent
element? 
You're just arguing that it's reckless?
 
[DEPUTY PROSECUTOR]: Yes, Your Honor.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT:  Okay. And so what would -- what about his
conduct made it reckless?

 
(Emphasis added.) The State and defense then provided further
 
argument to the court, primarily regarding whether Luong's
 conduct was reckless. At one point, the District Court noted:
 
THE COURT:  . . . Certainly he had notice it was a school ––
 
. . .

 
THE COURT:  –- a public school.

 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Yes. 
Yes.
 
THE COURT:  So it was reckless that he went on to a school

 
since he had notice of that.
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Yes.

 
The District Court then concluded as follows:
 
THE COURT:  All right. Okay. Thank you. Based upon the
credible evidence, I find the officer testified credibly. It

seems undisputed that he was on the premises of a school, a
public school; that it was between ten and five -- 10:00
P.M.
 and 5:00 A.M.; that under those circumstances no
warning or request to leave is necessary. Defense agrees
that it was at least reckless, that he was – that he knew
that it was a school, at least reckless disregard of the
risk that it was a public school. Um, and therefore I find
in favor of the State, find the defendant guilty as charged.
Uh, sentencing.
 
Given this record, it appears that the District Court
 
convicted Luong based on a finding that Luong acted with a
 
"reckless" state of mind. However, because Luong was charged
 with "knowing" conduct in the Complaint and oral charge, a
 finding that he acted "recklessly" is insufficient to convict
 Luong as charged.
 
Moreover, based on our review of the evidence in the
 
record, we conclude there is not sufficient evidence that Luong
 acted "knowingly," as charged, particularly that he knowingly
 entered or remained unlawfully on the property. There was
 testimony about some fencing around the school, but also that
 there are a lot of accessible areas that are open. Moreover,
 although there was general testimony about signs that say there
 is no trespassing, the evidence indicates the signs are only on
 the fences and there was no evidence whether there were any signs
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in the area where Luong was located or where he may have entered
 
the school. The State's argument before the District Court was
 essentially that the evidence showed it was dark at the school,
 there was no one else around, there was some fencing around the
 school and signs, and there were no indications that it was
 lawful to be on the school grounds. Even considering the
 evidence in a light most favorable to the State, as we must, we
 cannot say that there is sufficient evidence that Luong knowingly
 entered or remained unlawfully on the school property. Hence, we
 conclude that remanding this case for further proceedings is
 unwarranted.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment and Notice of
 
Entry of Judgment, filed on November 25, 2015 in the District
 Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division is reversed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 22, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Walter J. Rodby,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Loren J. Thomas,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
5
 