NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000609 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
BRADLEY GABRIEL, Defendant-Appellant, and
CHYNNA ROBELLO-PASSI and JAMES MALGANA, Defendants-Appellees 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CR. NO. 1CPC-18-0001881) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Bradley Gabriel (Gabriel) appeals 
from the July 30, 2019 "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence; 
Notice of Entry" (
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence) entered by 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit C  ourt).  A jury 
found Gabriel guilty of one count of Burglary in the First Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-
810(1)(c)(2014).  Gabriel was sentenced to ten years 
21
1 The Honorable Todd W. Eddins presided . 
2 HRS § 708-810 reads in relevant part: 
Burglary in the first degree.  (1) A person commits the
offense of burglary in the first degree if the person
intentionally enters or remains unlawfully in a building,with intent to commit therein a crime against a person oragainst property rights, and: 
(continued...) (...continued)
.... NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
incarceration, to run concurrent with any other sentence 
currently being served. 
The complaining witness's home surveillance camera 
captured two videos of the burglary, which occurred on November 27, 2018. The key issue at trial was the identity of the burglars. Two police officers, whose testimony was admitted as lay witness opinion testimony under Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 701, identified Gabriel as one of the individuals in 
one of the surveillance videos and a still frame photograph taken 
from that video. 
On appeal, Gabriel raises the following points of 
error: (1) the trial court erred in allowing Honolulu Police Department (HPD) officer Garret Maekawa (Officer Maekawa) and 
officer Darren Soto (Officer Soto) to testify as to the identity 
of Gabriel in a surveillance video and a photograph taken from 
the video; (2) the trial court erred and abused its discretion in its HRE Rule 403 analysis in allowing the police officers' identification testimony; and (3) the trial court erred in failing to give an eyewitness identification instruction to the jury. 
Given the evidence of the police officers' prior 
interactions with Gabriel and the Circuit Court's limiting instructions to the jury, the Circuit Court did not err in admitting Officer Soto's and Officer Maekawa's lay opinion testimony as to the identity of Gabriel through the surveillance video and photograph. We therefore affirm. 
I. Background 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i (State) charged 
Gabriel by felony information with Burglary in the First Degree, alleging that "[o]n or about November 27, 2018, . . . [Gabriel 
(c) The person recklessly disregards a risk that the
building is the dwelling of another, and the building is
such a dwelling. 
2  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and co-Defendants] Chynna Robello-Passi [(Robello-Passi)]. . . 
and James Malgana [(Malgana)] did intentionally enter unlawfully 
. . . the residence of Jason Hirata . . . with intent to commit 
therein a crime against a person or property rights . . . in violation of Section 708-810(1)(c) of the Hawaii Revised Statutes."
3 
On May 20, 2019, Gabriel filed a motion in limine to 
exclude, among other things, "lay testimony by any police officer attempting to identify [Gabriel] and based on video or photographs in this case" because "[s]uch identification evidence is unfairly prejudicial and invades the province of the jury to make factual determinations based on observation of evidence." Gabriel asserts the record does not support why the police officers' identification would be more correct than the jury's when the police officers' familiarity with Gabriel is based only on encounters with Gabriel in the past. The jury can determine from the evidence the identification of the burglar; thus, the police officers' identification testimony lacks probative value. 
On the same day, the State filed a motion in limine and 
requested, inter alia, the trial court to allow identification testimony by Officer Maekawa and Officer Soto pursuant to HRE Rule 701, or require a hearing on admission of such testimony prior to trial. 
At the motions in limine hearing on May 28, 2019, the 
Circuit Court indicated it would hold an HRE Rule 104
4 hearing 
(Rule 104 Hearing) before trial on the issue of identification of 
Gabriel. On May 29, 2019, after the Rule 104 Hearing and 
argument, the Circuit Court concluded that the identification testimony of Officer Soto and Officer Maekawa identifying Gabriel 
3 Although Gabriel, Robello-Passi, and Malgana were charged together,
Robello-Passi entered a no contest plea to the charge and Malgana failed to
appear for trial. Trial proceeded only as to Gabriel. Robello-Passi and Malgana are not parties to this appeal. 
4 HRE Rule 104 permits the trial court to determine "[p]reliminary
questions concerning the qualification of a person to be a witness, theexistence of a privilege, or the admissibility of evidence[.]" 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
as one of the burglars in a surveillance video and photograph was 
admissible. The Circuit Court also concluded, after an HRE Rule 403 balancing analysis, that the probative value of the police officers' testimony was not substantially outweighed by the danger of prejudice. The Circuit Court advised it would issue a limiting instruction that "the jury can't draw any adverse inferences from the contacts with the law enforcement." 
Furthermore, in settling jury instructions, the parties 
agreed that the Circuit Court would issue a limiting instruction as to the identification testimony and an instruction pertaining to the credibility of witnesses. 
On May 29, 2019, the jury found Gabriel guilty of 
Burglary in the First Degree. On July 30, 2019, the Circuit Court entered the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence.
II. Discussion 
A. The Circuit Court did not err in allowing Officer
Maekawa and Officer Soto to give lay opinion testimonyidentifying Gabriel in a surveillance video andphotograph. 
In his first point of error, Gabriel contends the 
trial court erred in allowing Officer Soto and Officer Maekawa to 
offer lay opinions identifying Gabriel as the individual in a surveillance video and photograph when the "high-def" surveillance video contained an obscured, but not grainy, depiction of the person therein. Gabriel argues that because the surveillance video was "not of poor quality[,]" the Circuit Court's admission of the police officers' lay testimony identifying him infringed upon the province of the jury, as the trier of fact, to determine for itself the identity of the individual in the surveillance video and photograph.
5 
5 The State published seven exhibits to the jury including: Exhibits 5
and 6, surveillance video clips of what Hirata identified as his living room
with each showing two individuals rummaging through items; and Exhibit 18, astill frame captured from the Exhibit 5 surveillance video, which the officersreviewed to identify Robello-Passi and Gabriel in what Hirata identified ashis living room. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 In turn, the State argues that HRE Rule 701, regarding 
lay witness testimony, is materially identical to its federal 
counterpart and that Hawai# i courts should look to federal case 
law in construing this Hawai
#i rule. The State contends federal 
courts have interpreted Federal Rules of Evidence (FRE) Rule 701 
as permitting lay opinion identification testimony from police 
officers so long as certain factors are met, and that the relevant factors were met in this case such that the Circuit Court properly allowed the police officers to identify Gabriel from the surveillance video and photograph evidence. 
In reviewing the Circuit Court's admission of the 
police officers' identification testimony, we consider the following: 
[D]ifferent standards of review must be applied
to trial court decisions regarding the admissibility
of evidence, depending on the requirements of theparticular rule of evidence at issue. When application of a particular evidentiary rule can yieldonly one correct result, the proper standard forappellate review is the right/wrong standard.However, the traditional abuse of discretion standardshould be applied in the case of those rules ofevidence that require a "judgment call" on the part ofthe trial court. 
Ching v. Dung, 148 Hawai# i 416, 427, 477 P.3d 856, 867 (2020) 
(quoting State v. West, 95 Hawai# i 452, 456-57, 24 P.3d 648, 
652-53 (2001)). "A trial court's determination that evidence is 
'relevant' within the meaning of HRE . . . Rule 401 (1993) is reviewed under the right/wrong standard of review." Id. (quoting 
State v. St. Clair, 101 Hawai# i 280, 286, 67 P.3d 779, 785 
(2003)). 
Our analysis begins with HRE Rule 701, which provides: 
If the witness is not testifying as an expert, the witness'
testimony in the form of opinions or inferences is limitedto those opinions or inferences which are (1) rationallybased on the perception of the witness, and (2) helpful to aclear understanding of the witness' testimony or thedetermination of a fact in issue. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The commentary for HRE Rule 701 states as follows: 
This rule is identical with Fed. R. Evid. 701.[] The 
rule retains the common-law requirement that lay opinion be
based upon firsthand knowledge, McCormick § 10, butliberalizes the traditional doctrine of "strict necessity,"which allowed such testimony only where "all the factscannot be placed before the jury with such clearness as to6
enable them to draw a correct inference...." Tsuruoka v. 
Lukens, 32 Haw. 263, 264 (1932). The present rule adopts inits place the more liberal "convenience" test, McCormick§ 11, allowing such testimony when it is "helpful" to thetrier of fact in determining or clarifying facts in issue. 
. . . 
Several considerations support substitution of the"convenience" standard for the "strict necessity" test. Asthe Advisory Committee's Note to Fed. R. Evid. 701 puts it:"[N]ecessity as a standard for permitting opinions andconclusions has proved too elusive and too unadaptable toparticular situations for purposes of satisfactory judicialadministration." The committee also cited the "practicalimpossibility" of distinguishing fact from opinion. 
The danger that such liberalization might open the door to
factually unsupported, conjectural, or biased inferences isaverted by the explicit requirement of firsthand knowledge,by implicit judicial discretion under the rule to excludeopinions for lack of "helpfulness," and by express judicialdiscretion under Rule 403 . . . to exclude because of the danger of prejudice, confusion, or misleading the jury. 
The 
adversary system itself provides still another safeguard,allowing detailed cross-examination on the factual bases ofsuch opinions. 
(Emphasis added.) 
6 HRE Rule 701 was adopted in 1980. Since then, FRE Rule 701 was
amended in 1987, 2000, and 2011. For purposes of the issue in this case, theHawai #i and Federal versions of Rule 701 are materially similar. 
FRE Rule 701 now reads: 
If a witness is not testifying as an expert, testimony inthe form of an opinion is limited to one that is: 
(a)
 rationally based on the witness's perception; 
(b) helpful to clearly understanding the witness's testimony
or to determining a fact in issue; and 
(c)
 not based on scientific, technical, or other specialized
knowledge within the scope of Rule 702. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Because HRE Rule 701 is materially similar to FRE Rule 
701, case law interpreting the federal rule is persuasive 
authority in interpreting HRE Rule 701. See State v. Abrigo, 144 
Hawai# i 491, 500 n.14, 445 P.3d 72, 81 n.14 (2019) ("Federal 
cases interpreting the [FRE] serve as 'persuasive authority in interpreting similar provisions of the [HRE].'" (second alteration in original) (citation omitted)). 
Gabriel cites United States v. LaPierre, 998 F.2d 1460 
(9th Cir. 1993), where the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals (Ninth 
Circuit) held that the district court had improperly admitted 
identification testimony of a police officer because of the 
testimony's "dubious value."  998 F.2d at 1465. The Ninth 
Circuit explained, however: 
[W]e have held that while lay opinion testimony of this sort
is sometimes permissible, "the use of lay opinionidentification by policemen or parole officers is not to beencouraged, and should be used only if no other adequateidentification testimony is available to the prosecution."United States v. Butcher, 557 F.2d 666, 670 (9th Cir.1977).Our cases upholding the use of testimony of this type havebeen limited to two types. The first type is those in whichthe witness has had substantial and sustained contact with the person in the photograph. United States v. Langford,
802 F.2d 1176, 1178–79 (9th Cir.1986) (one witness had metwith defendant over 50 times and another had known him most of his life); United States v. Barrett, 703 F.2d 1076,1085–86 (9th Cir.1983) (witness was defendant's girlfriend).The second type is those in which the defendant's appearancein the photograph is different from his appearance beforethe jury and the witness is familiar with the defendant ashe appears in the photograph. Barrett, 703 F.2d at 1086(defendant had a full beard and mustache at time of therobbery but was clean-shaven at trial); United States v.Saniti, 604 F.2d 603, 604–05 (9th Cir.1979) (witnesses knewdefendant well and were familiar with defendant's clothing,which defendant was wearing in photo but not wearing beforethe jury). The common thread binding these two types ofcases is that in both there is reason to believe that the witness is more likely to identify correctly the person thanis the jury. 
Id. In LaPierre, the Ninth Circuit noted there was no evidence 
the defendant's appearance at trial was significantly different 
than at the time of the alleged offense. Id. Moreover, the 
police officer who testified as to the defendant's identification did not know the defendant, had never seen the defendant in person, and the officer's knowledge of the defendant's appearance 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 was based entirely on review of photographs and witness 
descriptions of the defendant. Id. Thus, the court concluded 
the police officer's level of familiarity with the defendant's appearance fell far short of the requirement of helpfulness under FRE Rule 701, and thus, whether the person in the surveillance photographs was the defendant was properly left to the jury. Id. 
As for the element of "helpfulness," the Eighth Circuit 
Court of Appeals, like the Ninth Circuit, noted that: "A witness's opinion concerning the identity of a person depicted in a surveillance photograph is admissible if there is some basis for concluding that the witness is more likely to correctly identify the defendant from the photograph than is the jury." United States v. Farnsworth, 729 F.2d 1158, 1160 (8th Cir. 1984); see also United States v. Allen, 787 F.2d 933, 936 (4th Cir. 1986), cert. granted, judgment vacated on other grounds by 479 U.S. 1077 (1987); United States v. Barrett, 703 F.2d 1076, 1086 (9th Cir. 1983); United States v. Borrelli, 621 F.2d 1092, 1095 (10th Cir. 1980), cert. denied, 449 U.S. 956 (1980); United States v. Brannon, 616 F.2d 413, 417 (9th Cir. 1980), cert. denied, 447 U.S. 908 (1980). The Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals noted that "[t]he witness's prior familiarity with the defendant's appearance is the most critical factor to determine if such a basis exists." United States v. Contreras, 536 F.3d 
1167, 1170 (10th Cir. 2008) (citing Allen, 787 F.2d at 935-36). 
The Ninth Circuit, in United States v. Henderson, 68 
F.3d 323 (9th Cir. 1995), rejected the defendant's argument that FRE Rule 701 requires the lay witness to have had "substantial [and sustained] contact with the defendant[.]" 68 F.3d at 326. Rather, the Ninth Circuit stated "[i]nstead of any particular amount of sustained contact, we require a lay witness to have sufficient contact with the defendant to achieve a level of 
familiarity that renders the lay opinion helpful." Id. (emphasis 
added) (citations omitted). The Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals 
held it was permissible to allow a witness who had only seen the defendant once prior to testifying that the defendant was the 
8   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
robber in bank surveillance photographs. United States v. 
Jackson, 688 F.2d 1121, 1123 n.1, 1125 (7th Cir. 1982). The 
Ninth Circuit has held that nine contacts, before and after the incident, were "sufficient contact with the defendant to achieve a level of familiarity that renders the lay opinion helpful." United States v. Payne, 165 F.3d 36, 1998 WL 788872, at *1 (9th Cir. 1998) (quoting Henderson, 68 F.3d at 326). 
Here, in ruling that the lay witness testimony of 
Officer Soto and Officer Maekawa was admissible under HRE Rule 701, the Circuit Court noted its reliance on several federal and state cases that addressed the admissibility of lay witness testimony identifying defendants in surveillance videos or photographs.
7 
Based on the overwhelming authority in other 
jurisdictions, we conclude the applicable test is the "totality-of-the-circumstances" approach employed by the Circuit Court and adopted in other jurisdictions, which analyzes several factors, including: (1) the witness's familiarity with the defendant; (2) the witness's familiarity with the defendant's appearance at the time the surveillance photograph was taken or whether the defendant was dressed in a manner similar to the individual depicted; (3) whether the defendant disguised his appearance at the time of the offense; (4) whether the defendant had altered his appearance prior to trial; and (5) the degree of clarity of the surveillance recording and the quality and completeness of the subject's depiction in the recording. People v. Thompson, 49 
N.E.3d 393, 403-04 (Ill. 2016), as modified on denial of reh'g (Mar. 28, 2016) (citations omitted). The Thompson court explained: 
7 At the HRE 104 hearing, the Circuit Court referenced various federal
cases and cases from other jurisdictions, including: United States v. Dixon,
413 F.3d 540, 545-46 (6th Cir. 2005); Henderson, 68 F.3d at 326; Allen, 787F.2d at 935-37; Farnsworth, 729 F.2d at 1160-62; People v. Thompson, 49 N.E.3d393, 403-06 (Ill. 2016), as modified on denial of reh'g (Mar. 28, 2016);People v. Leon, 352 P.3d 289, 312–13 (Cal. 2015). 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 The existence of one or more of these factors indicates 
there is some basis for concluding that the witness is morelikely to correctly identify the defendant from thephotograph than is the jury. Moreover, it has often beenheld that the extent of a witness's opportunity to observethe defendant goes to the weight to be given the testimony,not its admissibility. 
Id. at 405 (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). The 
Thompson court further recognized: 
[T]estimony by those who knew defendants over a period of
time and in variety [sic] of circumstances offers to thejury a perspective it could not acquire in its limitedexposure to defendants. Human features develop in themind's eye over time. These witnesses had interacted with defendants in a way the jury could not, and in naturalsettings that gave them a greater appreciation ofdefendants' normal appearance. Thus, their testimonyprovided the jury with the opinion of those whose exposurewas not limited to three days in a sterile courtroomsetting. 
Id. at 404 (other citations omitted) (quoting Allen, 787 F.2d at 
936). 
Here, at the Rule 104 Hearing, testimony by Officer 
Soto and Officer Maekawa addressed the first and most critical factor — their general level of familiarity or sufficient contacts with Gabriel. Officer Soto testified that he identified Gabriel in November 2018 from a video and a photograph provided by Detective Samuel Delovio (Detective Delovio). Prior to the 
positive identification, Officer Soto had encountered Gabriel at 
a minimum of five stops, but had never arrested him, and the most recent interaction occurred within a few months before the November 2018 burglary. Officer Soto testified that these interactions were friendly, lasted about fifteen minutes, and from about five to ten feet away. Officer Soto testified that Gabriel, Robello-Passi, and Malgana usually hang out with each other because they are friends, but he had never stopped all of them at once. Officer Soto testified that once he identified the individuals in the photograph in this case, he made a follow-up report, which required that he be sure of the identification. From the ten-second surveillance video, Officer Soto testified that he was able to identify Gabriel and the co-Defendants "based 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on their mannerisms, their facial features, and their general 
appearance[.]" 
In addition, the Circuit Court requested that the State 
elicit testimony as to the identification of Robello-Passi and Malgana, as their identification would be made through Officer Soto. Accordingly, the State elicited testimony from Officer Soto that he had over twenty interactions with Robello-Passi "at her home, game rooms, hotspots, and [Gabriel's girlfriend's] house," and had arrested Robello-Passi for a warrant. These interactions lasted between thirty to forty-five minutes and were mostly friendly. As for Malgana, Officer Soto testified that prior to viewing the photograph in this case he had interacted with Malgana over ten times, but made no arrests. Each interaction lasted around twenty minutes. Officer Soto testified that he last saw Robello-Passi and Malgana within a couple of months of the positive identification in November 2018. 
Officer Maekawa testified he received the surveillance 
video through Detective Delovio. Like Officer Soto, Officer Maekawa testified that he had to be sure of his identification in notifying Detective Delovio of the positive identification made through the surveillance video. Prior to identifying the co-Defendants, Officer Maekawa had seen Robello-Passi in November 2018, and Gabriel and Malgana in October 2018. 
Officer Maekawa testified that he had never encountered 
all three co-Defendants together but from his experience he knew they were friends. Also based on numerous prior occasions, Officer Maekawa testified that his identification of the co-Defendants was "based off of their--their facial features and just overall appearance, their mannerisms, the way they--they moved in the--the surveillance video." Officer Maekawa testified that he met Gabriel in 2016 at a homeless camp that Gabriel frequented, and since then they built "a bit of a rapport where we would see each other here and there on the street and just kind of say what's up to each other. . . . I wouldn't say they were all through official capacities. Some of them were through 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
arrests, but it was also times that I would just see [Gabriel] 
and kind of say hi." 
Officer Maekawa testified that he could identify 
Gabriel through his "mannerisms": 
Just meaning like the way they carry themselves,
I guess, the way they walk, the way their arms swing,types of things like that. That's kind of what we do for our job, is to kind of pick up on things likethat. Everyone has a kind of distinct way of walking,way of moving about, and that's what I meant bymannerisms. . . . I--I would describe it as swagger,like just the way, I guess, he kind of moves about.And not only in this--this specific incident but theway he kind of walks and--and carries himself is witha bit of confidence, I guess you could say. . . . Iwould describe it as confident, comfortable. . . .[L]ike I explained, from a distance, I could easilysay in past encounters like, eh, that's [Gabriel]right there based off of his mannerisms. 
Similarly, as for the second factor, the witness's 
familiarity with the defendant's appearance at the time the 
surveillance photograph was taken or whether the defendant was dressed in a manner similar to the individual depicted, the Circuit Court was satisfied that Officer Soto and Officer Maekawa had sufficient contact with Gabriel in close temporal proximity to the November 2018 burglary. The Rule 104 Hearing testimony supports this factor. There was no implication and no testimony about Gabriel's attire, and likewise, no implication about whether Gabriel disguised his appearance at the time of the offense (third factor), or whether Gabriel had altered his appearance prior to trial (fourth factor). 
As to the fifth factor, the degree of clarity of the 
surveillance recording and the quality and completeness of the subject's depiction in the recording, the Circuit Court reviewed the short surveillance video clip beforehand and concluded: 
[I]t's not necessarily grainy. It is high-def.
But what is depicted is it is hard--or I thinkit's more in the lines of an obscuring of theperson depicted in the video, if it is indeedMr. Gabriel, to these witnesses. But it's more obscured than, say, grainy. And that does mean,in my view, that there is a helpful aspect tothe testimony. 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Emphases added.) While a witness need not have specialized 
knowledge of a defendant's appearance that is unavailable to a jury, Henderson, 68 F.3d at 326, "such knowledge makes an identification particularly valuable." United States v. 
Henderson, 241 F.3d 638, 651 (9th Cir. 2000), as amended (Mar. 5, 2001) (citing Henderson, 68 F.3d at 326) (other citation omitted). 
Given the testimony elicited in the Rule 104 Hearing 
and the Circuit Court's analysis of the totality of the circumstances pertaining to the police officers' sufficient contact and subsequent positive identification of Gabriel through a surveillance video and photograph, the Circuit Court did not err in admitting the officers' lay opinions as helpful to the jury under HRE Rule 701.
B. The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in 
allowing the testimony of the police officers under HRERule 403. 
In his second assertion of error, Gabriel challenges 
the Circuit Court's ruling that the police officers' 
identification testimony was admissible under HRE Rule 403 balancing. Gabriel contends the Circuit Court abused its discretion because Officer Soto and Officer Maekawa "testifying as police officers who investigate crimes and identify suspects will reasonably persuade the jury to favor their testimony[,]" making their testimonies unfairly prejudicial. We conclude the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in its HRE Rule 403 analysis. 
"A trial court's balancing of the probative value of 
relevant evidence against the prejudicial effect of such evidence under HRE Rule 403 is reviewed for an abuse of discretion." State v. Pasene, 144 Hawai# i 339, 362, 439 P.3d 864, 887 (2019) 
(citing State v. Klafta, 73 Haw. 109, 115, 831 P.2d 512, 516 (1992)). 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRE Rule 403 provides: 
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative
value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfairprejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury,or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, orneedless presentation of cumulative evidence.
In Henderson, the Ninth Circuit Court rejected the 
defendant's argument that the testimony of a detective familiar 
with him should have been excluded under FRE Rule 403,  noting: 8
Although there is a danger of unfair prejudice
whenever an officer identifies a defendant because "[the defendant is] presented as aperson subject to a certain degree of policescrutiny," [United States v. Butcher, 557 F.2d666, 669 (9th Cir. 1977)], there is no per serule against such testimony. See Henderson, 68
F.3d at 327. Rather, a court should consider"the interrelationship of lay identifications bypolice officers, other identification evidence,and the probative value requirement of FederalRule of Evidence 403." Id. "[I]f the only
identification evidence is the officer's layopinion testimony ... a district court will notabuse its discretion if it determines the probative value of the evidence outweighs itsprejudicial effect." Id. 
Henderson, 241 F.3d at 651 (some alternation in original) 
(emphases added). 
In Thompson, the defendant argued there would be 
prejudice by allowing identification testimony from law enforcement officers because a complete and uninhibited cross-examination regarding the witness's familiarity is not possible since questions could reveal information about the defendant's criminal past and unfairly cause the jury to focus onthat. 49 N.E.3d at 406. The defendant thus argued law enforcement officers should not be allowed to offer lay opinion  
identification testimony. Id. The Supreme Court of Illinois 
rejected this argument. Instead, it acknowledged the "precautionary procedures" approved by the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals in Allen, 787 F.2d at 937–38, and held: 
8 FRE Rule 403 and HRE Rule 403 are materially similar. 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
when the State seeks to introduce lay opinion identification
testimony from a law enforcement officer, the circuit courtshould afford the defendant an opportunity to examine theofficer outside the presence of the jury. This will providethe defendant with an opportunity to explore the level ofthe witness's familiarity as well as any bias or prejudice.Moreover, it will allow the circuit court to render a moreinformed decision as to whether the probative value of thetestimony is substantially outweighed by the danger ofunfair prejudice. Although a witness may identify himselfas a law enforcement officer, his testimony involving hisacquaintance with the defendant should consist only of howlong he knew the defendant and how frequently he saw him orher. Moreover, to lessen any concerns regarding invadingthe province of the jury or usurping its function, thecircuit court should properly instruct the jury, before thetestimony and in the final charge to the jury, that it neednot give any weight at all to such testimony and also thatthe jury is not to draw any adverse inference from the factthe witness is a law enforcement officer if that fact is disclosed. 
Thompson, 49 N.E.3d at 407 (emphases added) (citing Henderson, 68 
F.3d at 328 (approving a cautionary instruction that stated officer's identification "was simply an opinion and if it did 'not assist you, then you need not give it any weight at all" and further instruction that jury "should not draw any adverse inference from the fact [the identifying witness] is a police officer."). 
Here, the only identification evidence was Officer 
Soto's and Officer Maekawa's lay opinion testimony. The Circuit Court further concluded, after an HRE Rule 403 balancing analysis, that the probative value of this testimony was not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. In its analysis, the Circuit Court addressed whether the evidence would be cumulative, stating: 
I don't believe that if Ms. Robello-Passi[]9 testifies, that
would preclude Mr. Soto or Mr. Maekawa from testifying. The 
State's able to proffer as much evidence as it feels issufficient to prove a case. It does have the burden of proof. The defense might engage in a vigorouscross-examination of Ms. Robello-Passi which would undermine her testimony and, therefore, making the testimony ofofficers Soto and Maekawa more critical. But even if the defense didn't undermine Robello-Passi's credibility, theState is permitted to satisfy its burden of proof throughthis testimony. Now, I certainly wouldn't allow six 
9 The State called Robello-Passi as a witness in Gabriel's trial, but
Robello-Passi asserted her right not to testify. 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
officers to come in. But two officers, in my view, is
reasonable and is not cumulative. 
In addressing whether the probative value of the police officers' 
testimony is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, the Circuit Court reasoned: 
I do feel that the prejudice [sic] is not
substantially outweighed also because of Soto'scontacts really being not contacts in the sense ofwe've arrested this guy and he's in the interrogationroom with us. In fact, he said he never did arresthim. It was just sort of in public areas. 
Now, Maekawa, on the other hand, did say he
arrested Mr. Gabriel one time. And I'm not going topermit any testimony about the arrest. You can talk about interactions. I want you to use the phrasesinteractions or contacts. Any other term is liable toperhaps result in unfair prejudice. I'm not saying itwould, but that's how we got to keep it. 
So as far as 
the parameters of the testimony of these witnesses,we'll refer to it as interactions, not any arrests.Keep it to the -- sort of the number of times, theduration of the contact with the defendants, and keepit at that. 
I am going to instruct the jury so that it's
crystal clear, . . . I'm open to giving an instructionthat the jury can't draw any adverse inferences fromthe contacts with the law enforcement. I think I'm 
going to give it, and I'll entertain any suggestionthe defense might have as to any limiting instructionI would give, but I think it would be warranted. 
Defense made an assertion that if the evidence 
is permitted that it might thwart its ability to fullycross-examine the officers. I'm not thwarting you atall. 
I think if you look at the Van Arsdall[]10 case – 
that's a U.S. Supreme Court case on the SixthAmendment and the right to confrontation -- is that aslong as the defense has the right to confront thedefense [sic], it's not foreclosed from establishingany bias or prejudice through cross-examination. So you can cross them as much as you want on theseissues. 
Your defense is not foreclosed in any way in
cross-examining the witnesses as to their basis oftheir lay opinion testimony. 
So for all those reasons, the officers'
testimony will be permitted. 
I do want to caution the prosecution. When you're
talking about interactions between Gabriel, Malgana, 
10 Delaware v. Van Arsdall , 475 U.S. 673, 678-79 (1986) ("[E]xposure of
a witness' motivation in testifying is a proper and important function of theconstitutionally protected right of cross-examination.") (citation omitted). 
16  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Robello-Passi, again, similar to the other point, we want to
stay away from arrests or any type of criminality. 
(Emphases added.) During the Rule 104 Hearing and subsequent 
trial, the precautionary procedures outlined in Thompson were observed. The police officers' testimony was confined to interactions only, not arrests. The details of these interactions included the number of times with each defendant, their duration, and when discussing Gabriel, the police officers' distance from Gabriel. Moreover, the Circuit Court issued two cautionary instructions regarding each of the police officers' testimony about previous contacts with Gabriel and the co-Defendants, in accordance with HRE Rule 105.
11 The jury was told 
before each police officer's testimony and in the final charge not to draw an adverse inference from the fact that the identification was made by police officers. 
Given this record and the Circuit Court's HRE Rule 403 
balancing analysis, we conclude the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in admitting the police officers' identification evidence under HRE Rule 403. 
C. The Circuit Court did not err in failing to provide the
jury with an eyewitness identification instruction. 
In his third assertion of error, Gabriel contends the 
Circuit Court erred in not instructing the jury, sua sponte, on 
eyewitness identification, thus affecting Gabriel's substantial rights to a fair trial. Gabriel also contends that because there was no eyewitness to the burglary, the Circuit Court erred in failing to exercise its discretion to provide the jury a "specific eyewitness instruction" under the circumstances of "this particular case." 
11 HRE Rule 105 provides: 
When evidence which is admissible as to one party or
for one purpose but not admissible as to another partyor for another purpose is admitted, the court, uponrequest, shall restrict the evidence to its properscope and instruct the jury accordingly. 
17 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
When jury instructions or the omission thereof
are at issue on appeal, the standard of reviewis whether, when read and considered as a whole,the instructions given are prejudiciallyinsufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, ormisleading. 
Erroneous instructions are presumptively harmful
and are a ground for reversal unless itaffirmatively appears from the record as a wholethat the error was not prejudicial. Error is not to be viewed in isolation and considered purely in the abstract. It must be examined in the light of the entire proceedings and giventhe effect which the whole record shows it to be entitled. In that context, the real questionbecomes whether there is a reasonable possibility that error might have contributed toconviction. If there is such a reasonable possibility in a criminal case, then the erroris not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, andthe judgment of conviction on which it may havebeen based must be set aside. 
Stanley v. State, 148 Hawai# i 489, 500–01, 479 P.3d 107, 118–19 
(2021) (citation omitted). 
Gabriel relies on the holding in State v. Cabagbag, 127 
Hawai# i 302, 277 P.3d 1027 (2012), that "in criminal cases, the 
circuit courts must give the jury a specific eyewitness 
identification instruction whenever identification evidence is a central issue in the case, and it is requested by the defendant, . . . [however,] a circuit court may, in the exercise of its discretion, give the instruction if it believes the instruction is otherwise warranted in a particular case[.]" Id. at 304, 277 
P.3d at 1029 (emphases added) (footnote omitted). 
In Cabagbag, the Hawai# i Supreme Court considered the 
problems of eyewitness identification testimony and acknowledged research findings of variables that affect the accuracy and reliability of eyewitness identification, such as "passage of time, witness stress, duration of exposure, distance, 'weapon focus' (visual attention eyewitnesses give to a perpetrator's weapon during crime, and cross-race bias (eyewitness more 
18 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
accurate at identifying persons of their own race)." Id. at 310-
11, 277 P.3d at 1035-36 (footnotes omitted). The Hawai# i Supreme 
Court reasoned that "[w]ithout appropriate instructions from the 
court, the jury may be left without sufficient guidance on how to assess critical testimony, sometimes the only testimony, that ties a defendant to an offense." Id. at 313, 277 P.3d at 1038. 
Gabriel's reliance on Cabagbag is misplaced. Although 
the identification of Gabriel as one of the burglars was a central issue in this case, Gabriel did not request an eyewitness identification instruction during the settling of instructions. Accordingly, the Circuit Court was not required to issue an eyewitness identification instruction and committed no error. Moreover, there were no eyewitnesses to the burglary and the police officers did not testify as eyewitnesses to the burglary, rendering an eyewitness identification instruction inconsistent with the evidence in the case. As noted in Cabagbag, the reliability of eyewitness testimony depended, in part, on "the opportunity . . . to view the criminal at the time of the crime[.]" Cabagbag, 127 Hawai# i at 309, 277 P.3d at 1034 
(citation omitted). 
The circumstances in this case are 
different. 
We recognize, however, that the Hawai# i Supreme Court 
has emphasized the requirement that trial courts "issue a legally correct limiting instruction," derived from "the trial courts' . . . duty and ultimate responsibility to insure that juries are properly instructed on issues of criminal liability." State v. 
Gallagher
, 146 Hawai# i 462, 475, 463 P.3d 1119, 1132 (2020) 
(quoting State v. Adviento, 132 Hawai# i 123, 137, 319 P.3d 1131, 
1145 (2014)); see also HRE Rule 105. Here, the Circuit Court fulfilled this duty and issued nearly identical limiting instructions during the direct examinations of Officer Maekawa and Officer Soto, stating: 
You have heard evidence that the defendant, Bradley
Gabriel, at another time may have had a prior contactor interaction with a Honolulu Police Departmentofficer. The evidence, if believed by you, may be 
19   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
considered only on the issue of the defendant's
identity as the person who committed the offensecharged. Do not consider the evidence for any otherpurpose. You must not use this evidence to conclude 
because the defendant, at another time, may have hadprior interactions or contacts with the HonoluluPolice Department officer that he is a person of badcharacter and, therefore, must have committed theoffense charged in this case. You must not draw any
adverse inference against Mr. Gabriel from the factthat the witness is a law enforcement officer. In 
considering the evidence for the limited purpose forwhich it has been received or will be received, youmust weigh it in the same manner as you would allother evidence in the case and consider it along withall other evidence in this case. If believed, you maygive the evidence such weight as you feel it deservesbut only for the limited purpose that I described toyou. 
(Emphases added.) In addition, the Circuit Court's final 
instructions reminded the jury about the limiting instructions the court had previously given,  and included an instruction 
pertaining to the credibility of witnesses.
13 12
12 Court's Instruction No. 1.5, Direct and Circumstantial Evidence;
Weight of the Evidence states, in pertinent part: 
During the course of the trial, I instructed you that
certain evidence was received for a particular and limitedpurpose. Therefore, you must consider that evidence onlyfor that limited purpose and not for any other purpose. 
13 Court's Instruction No. 1.6, Credibility of Witnesses, provides, in
part: 
You are the exclusive judges of the credibility, or"believability," of each witness and the weight and value tobe given to the witness' testimony. 
In evaluating the credibility, accuracy, weight,
value, and effect of a witness' testimony, you may want toconsider such questions as: 
1. What was the general reasonableness,
probability, or improbability of the witness' testimony inlight of all the evidence? 
2. What was the extent to which the witness' 
testimony was supported or contradicted by other evidence? 
(continued...) 
20 (...continued) NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Considering the instructions as a whole, we conclude 
the Circuit Court did not commit plain error by not giving a 
specific jury instruction on eyewitness identification. 
3. Did the witness testify in a candid, frank,
upfront, forthright or open way or testify in a way lacking
these qualities. 
4. What was the witness' demeanor and manner of 
testifying? 
5. Was the witness' testimony uncertain, confused,
or evasive? 
6. Did the witness clearly see or hear things about
which she or he testified? 
7. Did the witness have a good memory of the things
about which she or he testified? 
8. Was the witness' ability to see, hear, remember
or describe the matters about which she or he testified affected by youth, old age, any physical, mental orintellectual deficiency, or intoxication? 
9. What was the witness' relation, if any, to a
party or other witness? 
10. What was the witness' bias, if any was shown? 
11. What was the witness' means and opportunity of
acquiring information? 
12. What was the extent to which the witness made 
contradictory statements, whether in trial or at othertimes? 
13. Did any inconsistencies or discrepancies in the
testimony of the witness or between the testimony ofdifferent witnesses concern matters of importance, or onlymatters of unimportant details, and did they result frominnocent mistake, mis-recollection or lapse of memory, orfrom an intentional or deliberate falsehood? 
These questions are not placed in any order of
importance and are not meant to be all-inclusive with regardto your evaluation of the credibility of a witness and theweight and value to be given to the witness' testimony. You should consider all circumstances and factors surroundingthe witness and bearing upon her or his credibility. 
21 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. Conclusion 
Based on the foregoing, the "Judgment of Conviction and 
Sentence; Notice of Entry," entered by the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit on July 30, 2019, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 29, 2022. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge Randal I. Shintani,for Defendant-Appellant 
Stephen K. Tsushima,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee 
22 