 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000382
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ANTHONY ROBERT LEOFFLER, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 03-1-0221K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge and Ginoza, J.,
with Reifurth, J., concurring separately)
 
Defendant-Appellant Anthony Robert Leoffler (Leoffler)
 
appeals from the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit's (circuit
 
court) "Order Denying Non-Hearing Motion for Hearing on Motion
 
for Reconsideration of Sentence filed September 3, 2004, filed
 
November 30, 2010 and Denying Motion for Reconsideration of
 
Sentence filed September 3, 2004" (Order Denying Rule 35
 
Motion).1
 
Pursuant to a "Judgment Guilty Conviction and Sentence"
 
entered on June 8, 2004, Leoffler was convicted of Manslaughter
 
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 707-702(1)(a)
 
(1993 Repl.), and the circuit court ordered that Leoffler serve
 
an indeterminate term of twenty years incarceration.2 On
 
1
 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided with respect to the Order
Denying Rule 35 Motion. 
2
 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided with regard to the judgment and
sentence. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
September 3, 2004, Leoffler filed a "Motion for Reconsideration 
of Sentence" (Rule 35 Motion) pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 35.3 On November 30, 2010, Leoffler filed 
a "Non-Hearing Motion for Hearing on Motion for Reconsideration 
of Sentence Filed September 3, 2004" (Motion for Hearing).4 On 
April 7, 2011, the circuit court filed its Order Denying Rule 35 Motion, which denied both the Motion for Hearing and the Rule 35 
Motion. On May 4, 2011, Leoffler filed a notice of appeal from 
the Order Denying Rule 35 Motion. 
Leoffler's single point of error on appeal is that the 
circuit court erred in the part of its ruling that held the Rule 
35 Motion did not present any new evidence and/or arguments that 
could not have been presented prior to sentencing, relying on 
Sousaris v. Miller, 92 Hawai' i 505, 993 P.2d 539 (2000). 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Leoffler's point of error as follows. 
In denying Leoffler's Rule 35 motion, the circuit court
 
based its ruling on the following: 
1.	 The Motion for Reconsideration does not present any new
evidence and/or arguments [that] could not have been
presented prior to sentencing[.] See Sousaris v.
Miller, 92 Hawaii 505, 513, 993 P.2d 539, 547 (2000).
 
3 HRPP Rule 35 states, in relevant part: 
(b) Reduction of Sentence.  The court may reduce a
sentence within 90 days after the sentence is imposed, or
within 90 days after receipt by the court of a mandate
issued upon affirmance of the judgment or dismissal of the
appeal, or within 90 days after entry of any order or
judgment of the Supreme Court of the United States denying
review of, or having the effect of upholding the judgment of
conviction. A motion to reduce a sentence that is made
 within the time prior shall empower the court to act on such
motion even though the time period has expired. The filing
of a notice of appeal shall not deprive the court of
jurisdiction to entertain a timely motion to reduce a
sentence. 
4
 It is unclear from the record why the Rule 35 Motion was not
adjudicated earlier.
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2.	 The Motion for Reconsideration does not present
sentencing matters correctable under the power granted
to the Court pursuant to Rule 35 of the Hawaii Rules of
Penal Procedure (HRPP).
 
3.	 The Petitioner's Motion for Reconsideration is without merit. 
4
 The Petitioner's Non-Hearing Motion for Hearing on Motion for
Reconsideration of Sentence Filed September 3, 2004 is
thereby moot.
 
Loeffler thus challenges only one of the circuit court's bases
 
for its ruling.
 
We review the circuit court's denial of Leoffler's Rule
 
35 motion under an abuse of discretion standard. 
[A] sentencing judge generally has broad discretion
in imposing a sentence. The applicable standard of
review for sentencing or resentencing matters is
whether the court committed plain and manifest abuse
of discretion in its decision.
 
"[F]actors which indicate a plain and manifest abuse of
discretion are arbitrary or capricious action by the judge
and a rigid refusal to consider the defendant's
contentions." And, "[g]enerally, to constitute an abuse it
must appear that the court clearly exceeded the bounds of
reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice
to the substantial detriment of a party litigant."
 
State v. Kahapea, 111 Hawai' i 267, 278, 141 P.3d 440, 451 (2006) 
(citations omitted). 
Even if we assume arguendo that the circuit court erred 
in relying on Sousaris, a civil case decided under Rule 59 of the 
Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure, and that a motion pursuant to 
HRPP Rule 35 is not limited to presenting only new evidence and/or arguments that could not have been presented prior to 
sentencing, it would be harmless error in this case. The circuit 
court's other grounds for denying the Rule 35 Motion, and the 
record as a whole, demonstrate that the circuit court did not 
abuse its discretion in issuing its Order Denying Rule 35 Motion. 
Leoffler's Rule 35 Motion requested that the circuit
 
court reconsider the twenty year sentence imposed on him and
 
reduce his sentence to a ten year term of probation. Leoffler's
 
motion was based primarily on the assertion that, prior to
 
sentencing, the circuit court had not been made fully aware of
 
the limited rehabilitative opportunities afforded to Leoffler in
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the past, that Dr. Blase Harris had been successfully treating
 
him, and that Dr. Harris's treatment or an intense substance
 
abuse treatment program like Habilitat would be more conducive to
 
achieving rehabilitation goals.
 
Leoffler does not challenge the circuit court's
 
conclusion that "[t]he Petitioner's Motion for Reconsideration is
 
without merit." He concedes in his Reply Brief that he does not
 
assert that his sentence was illegal, that "[i]ndeed, the circuit
 
court imposed a sentence within the discretion enumerated by the
 
Hawaii State Legislature and Constitution of the State of
 
Hawaii[,]" and that the circuit court "did not base its decision
 
entirely on the fact that no new evidence was presented in the
 
[Rule 35] motion."
 
Based on the above, even if we assume arguendo that one
 
part of the circuit court's reasoning was erroneous, Leoffler has
 failed to demonstrate that the circuit court abused its
 
discretion in denying his Rule 35 Motion. 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the circuit court's Order
 
Denying Rule 35 Motion is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 31, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Harrison L. Kiehm 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Linda L. Walton Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai' i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Associate Judge
CONCURRING OPINION BY REIFURTH, J.
 
I concur in the result.
 
4
 