NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000287
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
WALTER GUITY, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-10288 and FC-CR. NO. 10-1-0022)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Leonard, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Walter Guity (Guity) with multiple offenses 
in two cases. Pursuant to a plea agreement encompassing both cases, Guity pleaded guilty to (1) the amended charge of third-degree sexual assault of his wife and (2) second-degree sexual assault of a different person. 
Under the law applicable to the charges in Guity's 
cases, the offense of third-degree sexual assault to which Guity
 pleaded guilty could not be committed by a defendant against his
 or her spouse. Guity pleaded guilty to third-degree sexual
 assault, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707­732(1)(f) (2014), which defined the offense as being committed if
 "[t]he person knowingly, by strong compulsion, has sexual contact
 with another person or causes another person to have sexual
 contact with the actor." At the time applicable to Guity's
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
cases, the term "sexual contact" was defined by statute to mean,
 
in relevant part: "any touching, other than acts of 'sexual
 penetration', of the sexual or other intimate parts of a 
person 
 
not married to the actor, or of the sexual or other intimate
 parts of the actor by the person . . . ." HRS § 707-700 (2014)
 (emphasis added). Accordingly, given the Legislature's
 definition of the offense, Guity pleaded guilty to an offense -­third-degree sexual assault against his wife -- that was legally
 impossible for Guity to commit.
1
 
The parties and the Circuit Court2
 were all aware that
Guity could not legally commit the third-degree sexual assault to
 which he agreed to plead guilty pursuant to the plea agreement. 
Nevertheless, as requested by the parties, the Circuit Court
 accepted the parties' plea agreement and Guity's guilty pleas. 
Pursuant to the plea agreement, Guity pleaded guilty to one count
 of third-degree sexual assault and one count of second-degree
 sexual assault; the State dismissed the remaining charges against
 Guity; and the Circuit Court agreed to be bound by the parties'
 agreement on sentencing, which called for Guity to be sentenced
 to concurrent five-year terms of probation, subject to concurrent
 
1
We note that the Hawai' i Legislature subsequently amended the
definition of "sexual contact" during the 2016 legislative session so that it
no longer excludes sexual contact between persons married to each other. 2016 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 231 (Act 231), § 32 at 753. As amended by Act 231, theterm "sexual contact" is now defined in HRS § 707-700 to mean, in relevantpart: "any touching, other than acts of 'sexual penetration', of the sexual orother intimate parts of another, or of the sexual or other intimate parts ofthe actor by another . . . ." Id. As a result of the amendments made by Act
231 to the definition of "sexual contact," a person who knowingly, by strongcompulsion, has sexual contact with his or her spouse or causes his or herspouse to have sexual contact with the actor would now be guilty of third-degree sexual assault. However, the effective date of the amendments to thedefinition of "sexual contact" made by Act 231 is July 1, 2016, and suchamendments do not "affect rights and duties that matured, penalties that wereincurred, and proceedings that were begun before [Act 231's] effectivedate[.]" Id. at §§ 70, 72 at 755-76. The 2016 amendments to the definition 
of "sexual contact" do not apply to Guity's alleged offenses in his cases,which predated the effective date of the 2016 amendments. 
2Charges were filed against Guity in the Family Court of the First
Circuit (Family Court) and the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
Court). The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided in both cases. For simplicity,
we will refer in this Memorandum Opinion to both the Family Court and the
Circuit Court as the "Circuit Court." 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
jail terms of twelve months for the third-degree sexual assault
 
and eighteen months for the second-degree sexual assault, with
 credit for time served.
 
Guity subsequently sought to withdraw his guilty pleas, 
arguing, among other things, that: (1) he could not be charged with third-degree sexual assault of his wife under the Hawai
'i 
statutes; and (2) his guilty pleas were invalid due to the ineffective assistance of his counsel. Guity represented himself, with the assistance of stand-by counsel, during the hearing on his oral motion withdraw his guilty pleas. The Circuit Court denied the motion, and it later sentenced Guity pursuant to the plea agreement. 
On appeal, Guity contends: (1) the Circuit Court erred
 
in accepting Guity's guilty plea to third-degree sexual assault
 of his wife, an offense that he was statutorily precluded from
 committing; (2) he was entitled to withdraw his guilty pleas on
 the ground that his counsel provided ineffective assistance in
 advising him regarding the plea agreement; and (3) the Circuit
 Court failed to obtain a valid waiver of Guity's right to counsel
 prior to the hearing on his motion to withdraw his guilty pleas,
 thereby invalidating the Circuit Court's ruling on the motion. 
We hold that the Circuit Court erred in accepting
 
Guity's guilty plea to, and entering judgment on, the offense of
 third-degree sexual assault of his wife, a crime that was legally
 impossible for Guity to commit. We further hold that the Circuit
 Court failed to obtain a valid waiver of Guity's right to counsel
 prior to the hearing on Guity's motion to withdraw his guilty
 pleas. We vacate the judgments entered by the Circuit Court, and
 we remand the cases for further proceedings consistent with this
 Memorandum Opinion.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
On May 25, 2010, the State charged Guity by indictment
 
in FC-CR No. 10-1-0022 (the Family Court Case) with abuse of a
 family or household member (Count 1); second-degree terroristic
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
threatening (Count 2); kidnapping (Count 3); attempted first-
degree sexual assault (Counts 4 and 5); and interference with
 reporting an emergency or crime (Count 6). The indictment in the
 Family Court Case alleged that the victim of and complaining
 witness for the charged offenses was Guity's wife, NG. Guity
 retained Reginald Minn, Esq. (Minn) to represent him in the
 Family Court Case. 
While trial was pending in the Family Court Case, the
 
State on March 2, 2011, charged Guity by indictment in CR. NO.
 11-1-0288 (the Circuit Court Case) with second-degree sexual
 assault (Counts 1 through 3) and fourth-degree sexual assault
 (Counts 4 through 6). The indictment in the Circuit Court Case
 
alleged that the victim of and complaining witness for the
 
charged offenses was CA, a different person than the alleged
 victim in the Family Court Case. Deputy Public Defender Craig
 Nagamine (Nagamine) was appointed to represent Guity in the
 Circuit Court Case.
 
II.
 
By letter dated April 12, 2011, Minn made a plea offer
 
to resolve both cases, which provided that:
 
Mr. Guity would plead guilty to one count of Sexual
Assault in the Second Degree in [the Circuit Court Case] and
one count of Sexual Assault in the Third Degree as to [the
Family Court Case]. All other counts would be dismissed. 
Further, pursuant to Rule 11, the parties and the court
would agree that Mr. Guity would be sentenced to concurrent
five-year terms of probation with a special condition of
incarceration not to exceed 18 months. All standard terms
 of conditions relating to sex assault cases would apply.
 
The State responded by making a counteroffer that included more
 
details but incorporated the essential terms contained in Guity's
 plea offer. With respect to the proposed guilty plea to third-
degree sexual assault in the Family Court Case, the State's
 counteroffer provided that Guity shall plead guilty in Count 4 to
 the amended/lesser charge of third-degree sexual assault, in
 violation of HRS § 707-732(1)(f), and that Guity "shall waive any
 substantive or procedural defects to the amendment of the
 charge." Guity accepted the State's counteroffer.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At the change of plea hearing held on May 18, 2011,
 
Minn was substituted as counsel for Nagamine in the Circuit Court
 
Case and accordingly represented Guity in both cases. Pursuant
 to the parties' plea agreement, Guity signed "Guilty Plea" forms
 in both cases. In the Family Court Case, Guity had originally
 been charged in Count 4 with attempted first-degree sexual
 assault for "attempting to insert his penis into [his wife's]
 genital opening[.]" Pursuant to the plea agreement, Guity agreed
 to plead guilty to the amended/lesser offense in Count 4 of
 third-degree sexual assault. In his Guilty Plea form, Guity
 stated that the factual basis for this guilty plea was: "On May
 18, 2010, at our home in Mililani, I used physical force to have
 sexual contact with my wife's genital area." In the Circuit
 Court Case, Guity agreed to plead guilty to Count 1, which
 charged him with second-degree sexual assault for knowingly
 subjecting CA to an act of sexual penetration by compulsion.
3
 
At the change of plea hearing, the Circuit Court
 
discussed with Guity, and Guity acknowledged, that he sought to
 plead guilty to third-degree sexual assault against his wife, for
 conduct which the Legislature at that time had not made a crime:
 
THE COURT: . . . . In [the Family Court Case] your
plea of guilty in count 4 to sexual assault in the third

degree carries five years in jail and $10,000 in fines.
 
Now, sexual assault in the third degree is actually

defined by the Legislature to exclude sexual contact, under
this statute, with someone you're married to. But in
 accordance with the plea bargain you have agreed to plead to
this offense. Is that -- you understand all of that?
 
THE DEFENDANT:
 
Yes, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: 
Okay. Are you giving up your right to be
excluded from that statute by legislative language?
 
THE DEFENDANT: 
Yes, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: 
Okay. Do you have any questions about that?
 
THE DEFENDANT:  
No, Your Honor.
 
3In his Guilty Plea form in the Circuit Court Case, Guity stated the
factual basis for his plea was: "On December 7, 2010, I had sexual intercourse
with [CA] without her consent at her home in Ewa Beach." 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In pleading guilty to the amended third-degree sexual
 
assault charge, Guity acknowledged that the victim of that charge
 
was his wife:
 
THE COURT:  All right. Then in [the Family Court
Case], in count 4, to sexual assault in the third degree,

how do you wish to plead? Not guilty, guilty or no contest?
 
THE DEFENDANT: 
Plead guilty, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: 
I'm sorry?
 
THE DEFENDANT:  
Plead guilty, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: 
Okay. And on the second page [of the
Guilty Plea form] it says May 18, 2010, at home in Mililani,
you used physical force to have sexual contact with your
wife's genital area. Is that true?
 
THE DEFENDANT:  
Yes, Your Honor.
 
After completing its colloquy under Hawai 'i Rules of 
Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 11 for Guity's guilty pleas to third-
degree sexual assault in the Family Court Case and second-degree sexual assault in the Circuit Court Case, the Circuit Court found that: (1) Guity understood "the nature of the offenses, and the consequences of pleading, and his rights"; (2) he "voluntarily, knowingly and intelligently decided to give up his rights and to enter his pleas of guilty"; and (3) "[t]here is a factual basis for those pleas." Accordingly, the Circuit Court accepted Guity's guilty pleas and set sentencing for July 25, 2011. At Guity's request, sentencing was continued to September 6, 2011. 
III.
 
Prior to sentencing, Guity sent a letter to the Circuit
 
Court dated August 6, 2011, in which he stated that he wanted to
 "withdraw [his] plea and get [his] due process under the law." 
Guity also stated that he no longer wanted to be represented by
 Minn. Guity asserted that he had lost confidence in Minn, that
 Minn had given Guity misleading advice, and that Minn had
 pressured Guity to accept the plea agreement. On August 23,
 
2011, Minn filed a motion to withdraw as Guity's retained counsel
 
in both cases, stating that he received correspondence from Guity
 that required his withdrawal. Minn also represented that Guity
 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
had been in custody since about February 2011 and was without
 
financial means to retain counsel. 
On September 6, 2011, the Circuit Court held a hearing
 
on Minn's motion to withdraw as counsel. The Circuit Court
 granted the motion and referred Guity to the Public Defender's
 Office for representation. 
IV.
 
By letter dated December 10, 2011, Guity notified the
 
Circuit Court that he wanted to represent himself, claiming that
 the Public Defender's Office, due to its heavy caseload, had
 failed "to do anything with my case." Guity also indicated that
 he wanted to withdraw his guilty pleas and proceed to trial. 
The Circuit Court discussed Guity's requests at a
 
hearing held on December 19, 2011. Deputy Public Defender
 Nagamine appeared at the hearing on behalf of Guity, who was also
 present. Guity informed the Circuit Court that he wanted to
 represent himself and withdraw his guilty pleas so that his cases
 could go to trial "as soon as possible." The Circuit Court
 
stated that it wanted a written motion before deciding the
 
representation issue. Nagamine promised to discuss the issue
 with Guity. The Circuit Court advised Guity, "I would never
 represent myself in a felony case[,]" and it discussed certain
 disadvantages he would face if he represented himself.
 
On January 3, 2012, Nagamine filed a motion to withdraw
 
as counsel, in which he requested that new counsel be appointed. 
Nagamine represented that Guity was dissatisfied with Nagamine
 and the Public Defender's Office and wanted a new lawyer. 
On January 17, 2012, the Circuit Court held a hearing
 
on the motion to withdraw as counsel. Guity explained that he
 was unhappy with the Public Defender's Office because after Minn
 was allowed to withdraw, Guity did not hear from the Public
 Defender's Officer for three months. Guity indicated that
 because he was in custody, time was his main concern and that he
 wanted to get his cases to court for trial. Guity stated that he
 wanted to "go pro se," but also asked if the Circuit Court could
 appoint him counsel other than Nagamine.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nagamine stated that he informed Guity that his heavy
 
caseload would necessitate delays and that he could not
 
realistically take Guity's cases to trial for six months. 
Nagamine indicated that this upset Guity, who asked Nagamine to
 withdraw from the case. 
The Circuit Court reminded Nagamine that Guity had
 
already pleaded guilty, so that the first step would be to
 determine whether Guity would be permitted to withdraw his guilty
 pleas. Nagamine apologized and said he was assuming that the
 cases would be reset for trial. The Circuit Court informed Guity
 that it could hold a hearing in three days (that Friday) on a
 motion by Guity to withdraw his guilty pleas, and it informed
 Guity that Nagamine could represent Guity or act as stand-by
 counsel if Guity wanted to represent himself.
 
Guity informed the Circuit Court that he wanted the
 
hearing on his request to withdraw his guilty pleas held that
 Friday. The Circuit Court then asked Guity what he wanted to do
 with respect to representation by counsel, and the following
 discussion ensued:
 
THE COURT: Do you want to represent yourself or you
want Mr. Nagamine to represent you? Or do you want Mr.
Nagamine simply to be here to help you?
 
THE DEFENDANT: I'll go pro se and Mr. [Nagamine][4]
 
can be stand-by counsel, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: Okay. You understand that you have a
right to a lawyer? And that's always the advisable thing.
You understand that? And if you can't afford one, the
court's going to pay for it. You understand that, Mr.
Guity?
 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: Okay. You're making -- I take it that
you're making a voluntary, knowing, and intelligent decision
that you do not want Mr. Nagamine to actually handle this,
or you do not want to exercise your right to a lawyer and
you want to do it yourself.
 
THE DEFENDANT: I need a lawyer, Your Honor.
 
4The hearing transcript shows that Guity mistakenly referred to Deputy
Public Defender Nagamine as "Nakayami."
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: Look, I'm not going to play games, Mr.
Guity.
 
THE DEFENDANT: I know. I -- Your Honor -­
THE COURT: If your problem is time, I'm denying your
motion. Let's proceed. We're going Friday. 
(Formatting altered.) 
V. 
Guity did not file a written motion to withdraw his
 
guilty pleas. On January 18, 2012, the State filed a memorandum
 
in opposition to Guity's oral motion to withdraw his guilty
 pleas. On January 20, 2012, the Circuit Court held a hearing on
 Guity's oral motion to withdraw his guilty pleas. At the outset
 of the hearing, Guity informed the Circuit Court that he was
 representing himself and that Nagamine was acting as stand-by
 counsel. 
At the hearing, Guity stated the grounds for his motion
 
to withdraw his guilty pleas, arguing, among other things, that:
 (1) he could not be charged with third-degree sexual assault of his wife under the Hawai
'i statutes; and (2) Minn provided 
ineffective assistance because Guity alleged that Minn had: (a) failed to explain the laws regarding his cases; (b) failed to explain the law of consent as it applied to his second-degree sexual assault charge against CA; (c) failed to adequately explain his plea offer and the State's counteroffer; and (d) threatened and coerced Guity into accepting the plea bargain.  
The State moved the transcript of the change of plea

 
hearing and the letters reflecting Guity's plea offer and the
 State's counteroffer into evidence. The State also called Minn
 to testify. Minn's testimony contradicted Guity's allegations
 that Minn failed to adequately explain the laws applicable to
 Guity's cases or the content of the plea offer and counteroffer. 
Minn also testified that he did not force Guity to plead guilty
 and that he believed Guity was thinking clearly and knew what he
 was doing when he entered his guilty pleas. With respect to
 Guity's plea of guilty to third-degree sexual assault of his
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
wife, Minn testified that he explained to Guity that under the
 
law, Guity's wife could not be a victim of that charge. Minn
 testified that he told Guity that "it was up to [Guity] whether
 he wanted to waive [this defect]," and that Guity responded that
 he would waive the defect and that he was willing to "do the
 deal[.]" Minn stated that he and the Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
 (DPA) informed the Circuit Court of this issue, and the Circuit
 Court indicated it would have to colloquy Guity regarding the
 issue.
5
 
The Circuit Court denied Guity's motion to withdraw his
 
guilty pleas and filed its written "Order Denying Oral Motion to
 Withdraw Guilty Plea." The written order provided in relevant
 part:
 
Defendant elected voluntarily, knowingly, and
intelligently to represent himself for this proceeding, with
Mr. Nagamine acting as stand-by counsel. The Court took
 judicial notice of the files and records under [the Circuit
Court Case] and [the Family Court Case], and received
without objection State's Exhibit 1, a transcript of
change-of-plea proceedings before this Court in both cases
conducted on May 18, 2011.
 
Further, the Court heard testimony by Reginald Minn,
Esq., Defendant's prior counsel. Finally, the Court
incorporated all of Defendant's representations during this
proceeding into and as Defendant's testimony for this
hearing.
 
Based upon the credible evidence, and all reasonable
inferences to be drawn therefrom, the Court finds that no
fair and just reason has been shown to permit Defendant to
withdraw his guilty pleas in the two cases. The Court
 confirms that Defendant voluntarily, intelligently, and
knowingly entered his pleas of guilty on May 18, 2011. The
 Court also finds that Defendant waived his attorney-client
 
5The record indicates that the lack of representation by counsel created
difficulties for Guity at the hearing. For example, Guity did not file a
written motion to withdraw his guilty pleas, and he therefore had to explain
his grounds for the motion at the hearing. After Minn testified on direct
 examination by the State, Guity initially only asked Minn one question on
cross-examination, and even after the Circuit Court reopened Minn's
examination with its own questions, Guity's further cross-examination was
short. When the Circuit Court asked Guity if he had any other evidence to
present, Guity responded, "Your Honor, I wasn't aware that I was going to
introduce evidence. I would have brought my whole evidence to shed more light
on my cases, Your Honor." When the Circuit Court asked Guity what evidence he
had in mind, Guity failed to describe the evidence with clarity or explain how
the evidence was relevant to his motion. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
privilege as to all testimony proffered by Mr. Minn, except
for one answer to a question posed by [the DPA], which
answer the Court struck from the record and completely
disregarded.
 
VI.
 
In accordance with the plea agreement, Guity was
 
sentenced to concurrent terms of five years of probation, subject
 
to the condition that he serve concurrent terms of twelve months
 of imprisonment on his conviction for third-degree sexual assault
 of his wife and eighteen months of imprisonment on his conviction
 for second-degree sexual assault of CA, with credit for time
 served.
6 The Circuit Court entered its Judgment in the Circuit
 
Court Case on March 5, 2012, and its Amended Judgment in the
 Family Court Case on March 8, 2012, and this appeal followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
We first address Guity's argument that the Circuit
 
Court erred in accepting Guity's guilty plea to the amended
 charge of third-degree sexual assault, in violation of HRS § 707­732(1)(f) (2014), of his wife. Guity argues that the Circuit
 Court's acceptance of his guilty plea to this offense constitutes
 plain error because the offense, as defined by the statues
 applicable to his Family Court Case, cannot be committed against
 a spouse. The State does not dispute that under the law
 applicable to Guity's Family Court Case, Guity was statutorily
 precluded from committing third-degree sexual assault in
 violation of HRS § 707-732(1)(f) against his wife. However, the
 State argues that Guity waived the right to challenge his guilty
 plea based on this substantive defect because he knowingly and
 voluntarily waived the defect as part of his plea agreement. 
As explained below, we hold that the Circuit Court
 
erred in accepting and entering judgment on Guity's plea of
 guilty to a crime that was legally impossible for him to commit. 
6It appears that by the time briefing in this appeal was completed,
Guity had completed serving his concurrent terms of imprisonment on both
convictions.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We further hold that this substantive defect in Guity's plea of
 
guilty to third-degree sexual assault of his wife could not be
 waived through agreement by the parties. We therefore vacate
 Guity's conviction for third-degree sexual assault.
 
A.
 
Count 4 of the indictment in the Family Court Case
 
originally charged Guity with attempted first-degree sexual
 assault of his wife by attempting to subject her to an act of
 sexual penetration, to wit, attempting to insert his penis into
 her genital opening, by strong compulsion, in violation of HRS 
§§ 705-500 and 707-730(1)(a) (2014). The statutory definition of
 "sexual penetration," which has remained unchanged from the time
 applicable to Guity's Family Court Case, does not exclude acts
 committed by a defendant against his or her spouse. See HRS §
 
707-700 (defining the term "sexual penetration"). Therefore, at
 the time relevant to Guity's Family Court Case and currently, a
 defendant could commit first-degree sexual assault and attempted
 first-degree sexual assault against his or her spouse.
 
However, at the time relevant to Guity's Family Court
 
Case, the amended charge of third-degree sexual assault in
 violation of HRS § 707-732(1)(f), to which Guity pleaded guilty,
 could not be committed by a defendant against his or her spouse. 
HRS § 707-732(1)(f) provided that "(1) A person commits the
 offense of sexual assault in the third degree if: . . . (f) The
 person knowingly, by strong compulsion, has sexual contact with
 another person or causes another person to have sexual contact
 with the actor." (Emphasis added.) The term "sexual contact,"
 in turn, was statutorily defined to mean, in relevant part: "any
 touching, other than acts of 'sexual penetration', of the sexual
 or other intimate parts of a person not married to the actor, or
 of the sexual or other intimate parts of the actor by the person 
. . . ." HRS § 707-700 (2014) (emphasis added.) Accordingly, at
 the time relevant to Guity's Family Court Case, the Legislature
 had defined the offense to which Guity pleaded guilty to 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
specifically exclude sexual contact by strong compulsion
 
committed by a defendant against his or her spouse. 
B.
 
HRPP Rule 11 establishes the procedures applicable to
 
guilty pleas. HRPP Rule 11(g) provides: "Determining accuracy of
plea. Notwithstanding the acceptance of a plea of guilty, the
 
court shall not enter a judgment upon such plea without making
 
such inquiry as shall satisfy it that there is a factual basis
 for the plea." Under HRPP Rule 11(g),
 
the court is prohibited from entering judgment upon a guilty
plea if it is not subjectively satisfied that there is a
factual basis for the plea. The court must satisfy itself
that the conduct which the defendant admits constitutes the
 offense charged in the indictment, complaint, or information
or an offense included therein to which the defendant has
 pleaded guilty. While the factual basis may come from
various sources, it must appear on the record.
 
State v. Merino, 81 Hawai 'i 198, 217, 915 P.2d 672, 691 (1996) 
(emphasis and brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Teves, 4 Haw. 
App. 566, 569, 670 P.2d 834, 837 (1983)).7 
Here, the Circuit Court clearly violated HRPP Rule
 
11(g) in entering judgment on Guity's plea of guilty to third-
degree sexual assault of his wife. Not only did the Circuit
 Court and the parties know that there was no factual basis for
 Guity's guilty plea to third-degree sexual assault, but they
 affirmatively knew that it was legally impossible for Guity to
 have committed this offense. Count 4 of the indictment in the
 Family Court Case identified Guity's wife as the alleged victim;
 in his Guilty Plea form, Guity stated that the factual basis for
 his plea to the amended charge of third-degree sexual assault in
 Count 4 was that "at our home in Mililani, I used physical force
 to have sexual contact with my wife's genital area"; and at the
 change of plea hearing, the Circuit Court advised Guity that he
 
7In Merino, the supreme court discussed HRPP Rule 11(f), which has not
changed since 
Merino but was renumbered as HRPP Rule 11(g) in 2014. Rule
 
11(g) was patterned after Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure Rule 11(b)(3),
which similarly provides: "Determining the Factual Basis for a Plea. Before
 entering judgment on a guilty plea, the court must determine that there is a
factual basis for the plea."
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
We note that some courts from other jurisdictions would permit a
defendant, pursuant to a plea agreement, to plead guilty to a hypothetical
offense or an amended charge for which there is no factual basis.  See People
v. Foster, 225 N.E.2d 200 (N.Y. 1967); State v. Zhao, 137 P.3d 835 (Wash.
2006).  A California Court of Appeals, under circumstances somewhat analogous
to this case, applied the doctrine of estoppel to prevent a defendant from
avoiding a portion of her plea agreement.  People v. Ellis, 240 Cal. Rptr. 708
(Cal. Ct. App. 1987).  However, in light of the plain language of HRPP Rule
11(g) and the importance of maintaining the integrity of and public confidence
in the criminal justice system, we decline to follow the approach taken by
these courts in deciding this case.8
14was pleading guilty to third-degree sexual assault which the
Legislature defined to "exclude sexual contact . . . with someone
you're married to."  Although HRPP Rule 11(g) does not prohibit a
court from accepting, but only entering judgment on, a guilty
plea for which there is no factual basis, where, as in this case,
the Circuit Court definitively knew that it was legally
impossible for Guity to have committed third-degree sexual
assault of his wife, it should not have accepted his guilty plea
to this offense.
With respect to the State's contention that Guity
waived his right to challenge the substantive defect in his
guilty plea to third-degree sexual assault of his wife, we
conclude that a court's acceptance of, and entry of judgment on,
a guilty plea to an offense that it knows the defendant could not
legally commit implicates the integrity of the judicial system. 
We conclude that allowing such action by a court would be
contrary to the truth-seeking function of the criminal justice
system and would serve to undermine the integrity of the system
and public confidence in the system.  The plain language of HRPP
Rule 11(g) prohibits a court from entering judgment upon a guilty
plea without satisfying itself that there is a factual basis for
the plea.  HRPP Rule 11(g) does not contain an exemption for
guilty pleas entered pursuant to the agreement of the parties. 
Under the circumstances of this case, where the factual basis for
Guity's guilty plea was not only lacking, but affirmatively
showed that it was legally impossible for Guity to commit the
offense to which he pleaded guilty, we hold that Guity's
challenge to his guilty plea could not be barred by waiver.8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
15C.  
For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that the 
Circuit Court erred in accepting and entering judgment on Guity's
guilty plea to third-degree sexual assault of his wife.  Guity's
plea of guilty to third-degree sexual assault cannot stand, and
we vacate his conviction for this offense.
II.
Our conclusion that Guity's guilty plea to third-degree
sexual assault of his wife cannot stand does not mean that Guity
is entitled to withdraw from his guilty plea to second-degree
sexual assault of CA.  The Circuit Court rejected Guity's motion
to withdraw his guilty plea to second-degree sexual assault. 
However, the Circuit Court's decision was based on evidence and
arguments presented at a hearing at which Guity appeared pro se,
with the assistance of stand-by counsel.  We therefore must first
determine whether Guity validly waived his right to counsel
before appearing pro se at the hearing on his oral motion to
withdraw his guilty pleas.
A.
Guity contends that the Circuit Court erred in allowing
him to proceed pro se with standby counsel without first
obtaining his valid waiver of his right to counsel.  We agree.
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has held that
[w]hen a defendant elects to proceed pro se, the
record must indicate that the defendant was offered
counsel, but he or she "voluntarily, knowingly, and
intelligently rejected the offer and waived that
right."  The trial court must ensure two requirements
are met: first, the waiver of counsel is "knowingly
and intelligently" made, and second, "the record is
complete so as to reflect that waiver."
State v. Phua, 135 Hawai #i 504, 512, 353 P.3d 1046, 1054 (2015)
(citations and footnote omitted).  
We conclude that the record does not reflect a valid
waiver of counsel.  Instead, our review of the record reveals
that the Circuit Court's discussion with Guity regarding his
waiver of the right to counsel was disjointed, took place atNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
16different hearings, was intermingled with discussion of other
issues, and did not result in Guity's valid waiver of his right
to counsel. 
B.
Several months after the Circuit Court granted Minn's
motion to withdraw as counsel and referred Guity to the Public
Defender's Office, Guity wrote a letter to the Circuit Court.  In
this letter, Guity informed the Circuit Court that he wanted to
withdraw his guilty pleas and proceed to trial and that he wanted
to represent himself because the Public Defender's Office was not
providing him with assistance.  At a hearing held by the Circuit
Court on Guity's requests, at which Guity appeared with Nagamine,
the Circuit Court stated that it wanted Guity to file a written
motion on the representation issue.  The Circuit Court discussed
certain disadvantages Guity would face if he represented himself,
but deferred any ruling on the representation issue.
Nagamine subsequently filed a motion seeking to
withdraw as Guity's counsel, which requested that Guity be
appointed new counsel.  The motion did not request that Guity be
allowed to proceed pro se.  The Circuit Court held a hearing on
this motion, which took place about a month after the prior
hearing.  At the hearing on the motion filed by Nagamine, Guity
informed the Circuit Court that because he remained in custody,
his main concern was avoiding delay in having his cases proceed
to trial.  He was upset with Nagamine and the Public Defender's
Office because for three months after Minn withdrew and his case
was assigned to the Public Defender's Office, no one from the
office had come to see him.  Nagamine stated that he had informed
Guity that because of Nagamine's case load, Nagamine would not be
able to proceed to trial in Guity's cases for another six months,
which also upset Guity and prompted Nagamine to file the motion
to withdraw as counsel. 
The Circuit Court, however, informed Nagamine that
Guity had pleaded guilty and therefore Nagamine would only need
to prepare for trial if Guity was permitted to withdraw hisNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
17guilty pleas.  Nagamine apparently had not distinguished between
the time he would need to prepare for trial and the time needed
to prepare for a motion to withdraw guilty pleas, because when
the Circuit Court stated that Guity had pleaded guilty in both
cases, Nagamine responded, "I'm sorry, I'm sorry.  I'm assuming
that we're going to reset.  Yeah, my bad."  The record does not
show that Guity understood that he could be represented by
counsel at his motion to withdraw his guilty pleas and then, if
his motion was granted, elect to proceed pro se to avoid a delay
in the scheduling of trial.  At the hearing, Guity asked the
Circuit Court to appoint him counsel other than Nagamine, which
further complicated the discussion.
In the end, without a meaningful discussion at that
hearing of the risks and disadvantages of self-representation,
the Circuit Court asked Guity whether he wanted to represent
himself, have Nagamine represent him, or have Nagamine act as
stand-by counsel.  Guity responded that he would "go pro se" with
Nagamine as stand-by counsel.  However, almost immediately after
informing the Circuit Court that he would proceed pro se with
Nagamine as stand-by counsel, Guity told the Circuit Court, "I
need a lawyer, Your Honor. "  In response, the Circuit Court
accused Guity of "play[ing] games."  The Circuit Court then
confusingly told Guity that "I am denying your motion."  Since
the motion for which the hearing was held was the motion filed by
Nagamine to withdraw as Guity's counsel and requesting the
appointment of new counsel, the Circuit Court's statement that it
was "denying your motion" suggests that it was not permitting
Nagamine to withdraw as Guity's counsel of record.  Nevertheless,
three days later, when the parties appeared for a hearing on
Guity's oral motion to withdraw his guilty pleas, the Circuit
Court, without further discussion, permitted Guity to appear pro
se with Nagamine as stand-by counsel.  Under these circumstances,
we cannot conclude that the record reflects a valid waiver by
Guity of his right to counsel.  See Phua, 135 Hawai #i at 512, 353
P.3d at 1054.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
18III.
After considering Minn's testimony and the other
evidence presented at the hearing on Guity's oral motion to
withdraw his guilty pleas, the Circuit Court denied Guity's
motion.  Guity contends that the Circuit Court erred in denying
his oral motion to withdraw his guilty pleas because his guilty
pleas were invalid due to Minn's ineffective assistance.  
Among other things, Guity contends that Minn provided
ineffective assistance by having him plead guilty to third-degree
sexual assault of his wife because it was a crime Guity could not
legally commit.  Although we have concluded that the Circuit
Court committed error under HRPP Rule 11(g) in accepting and
entering judgment on Guity's guilty plea to third-degree sexual
assault of his wife, that does not mean that Minn provided
ineffective assistance in having Guity plead guilty to third-
degree sexual assault.  There was a tactical basis for Guity to
plead guilty to third-degree assault of his wife as part of his
plea agreement.  By doing so, Guity obtained the State's
dismissal of two class A felonies, each carrying a possible
twenty-year term of imprisonment, and two class B felonies, each
carrying a possible ten-year term of imprisonment; reduced a
class A felony to a class C felony; avoided possible extended
terms of imprisonment; and limited his sentence to an agreed-upon
total term of imprisonment of eighteen months.  The record of
Guity's change of plea hearing indicates that he knew he was
pleading guilty to an offense he could not legally commit.  Based
on the existing record, we cannot conclude that Minn provided
ineffective assistance in having Guity plead guilty to third-
degree sexual assault of his wife.
The Circuit Court rejected Guity's other claims that
Minn's alleged ineffective assistance provided a fair and just
reason to permit Guity to withdraw his guilty pleas.  However,
the Circuit Court's rulings were based on a hearing at which
Guity appeared pro se without having validly waived his right to
counsel.  Because Guity did not validly waive his right to NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
19counsel prior to the hearing, the results of the hearing were
tainted and the Circuit Court's rulings cannot stand.
CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the Judgment in the
Circuit Court Case and the Amended Judgment in the Family Court
Case.  Pursuant to HRPP Rule 11(g), Guity's plea of guilty to
third-degree sexual assault of his wife cannot stand, and Guity
must be permitted to withdraw his guilty plea to this offense. 
However, because the State did not breach the plea agreement, it
retains the option of (1) foregoing prosecution on this count
(Count 4 in the Family Court Case) and the other counts dismissed
and seeking to enforce the remainder of the plea agreement or (2)
withdrawing from the plea agreement and pursuing prosecution on
all the original charges in both cases.  If the State selects the
first option, Guity shall be entitled to a new hearing on his
motion to withdraw his guilty plea to second-degree sexual
assault of CA, with further proceedings dependant on the outcome
of that motion.  If the State selects the second option, the
original charges in both cases shall be set for trial, and no new
hearing on Guity's motion to withdraw his guilty plea to second-
degree sexual assault will be necessary.  The Circuit Court Case
and the Family Court Case are remanded for further proceedings
consistent with this Memorandum Opinion.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 31, 2016.
On the briefs:
Brian A. Costa
(Costa & DeLacy, LLLC)
for Defendant-AppellantChief Judge
Stephen K. Tsushima
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-AppelleeAssociate Judge
Associate Judge