NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOS. CAAP-22-0000040 AND CAAP-22-0000263 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAIʻI 
 
 
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF ALII COVE, 
Plaintiff-Appellee, v. SUNSTONE REALTY PARTNERS X LLC, 
Defendant-Appellee, and DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; 
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-10; 
and DOE ASSOCIATIONS 1-10, Defendants. 
 
SUNSTONE REALTY PARTNERS X LLC, 
a Hawaii Limited Liability Company, 
Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellee, v. BODELL CONSTRUCTION COMPANY, 
Third-Party Defendant-Appellant, and 
BECERRA CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION; PACIFIC ATELIER 
INTERNATIONAL, LLC, fka PACIFIC ATELIER INTERNATIONAL, INC., 
Third-Party Defendants-Appellees, and 
DOE THIRD PARTY DEFENDANTS 1-100, Third-Party Defendants. 
 
PACIFIC ATELIER INTERNATIONAL, LLC, 
fka PACIFIC ATELIER INTERNATIONAL, INC., 
Additional Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellee, v. 
ALLISON IDE STRUCTURAL ENGINEERS, LLC; 
ENGINEERING DYNAMICS CORP., LANCE UCHIDA 
MECHANICAL ENGINEERS, LTD., ALBERT CHONG ASSOCIATES, INC., 
Additional Third-Party Defendants-Appellees. 
 
BODELL CONSTRUCTION COMPANY, 
Fourth-Party Plaintiff-Appellant, v. 
SIMPSON STRONG-TIE COMPANY, INC.; 
HONOLULU WOOD TREATING CO., LTD.; KC METAL PRODUCTS, INC.; 
TAMLYN; HAWAII PLANING MILL, LTD., dba HPM BUILDING SUPPLY; 
Electronically Filed
Intermediate Court of Appeals
CAAP-22-0000040
22-MAY-2025
08:10 AM
Dkt. 106 SONOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
2 
 
RAY NORTON, dba C CONNARY CONSTRUCTION; 
STEWART BUILDERS, LLC; DAVID LAYNE dba TITAN FRAMING; 
TRUE STYLE PACIFIC BUILDERS, LLC; E.M. RIVERA & SONS, INC.; 
RON & RAY, INC., dba RR ROOFING; SUMMIT PAINTING, INC.; 
SUNSET PLUMBING INC.; BIG ISLAND AIR CONDITIONING INCORPORATED, 
dba CUSTOM AIRE, INC.; P.A. HARRIS ELECTRIC, LLC; 
ACME PREHUNG DOORS, LTD., Fourth-Party Defendants-Appellees, 
and DOE ENTITIES 1-30, Fourth-Party Defendants. 
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 1CC151001616) 
 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.) 
 
Third-Party Defendant/Fourth-Party Plaintiff-Appellant 
Bodell
 Construction Company appeals from the Circuit Court of 
the First Circuit's (1) January 10, 2022 "Order Granting 
Defendant/Third-Party Plaintiff[-Appellee] SunStone Realty 
Partners X LLC's Motion to Confirm Arbitration Decision and 
Award" (Order Confirming Arbitration Award), (2) January 28, 
2022 Judgment,  and (3) February 9, 2023 "Order Granting 
[SunStone]'s Motion for Attorney's Fees, Costs and Other 
Reasonably Incurred Expenses" (Fees and Costs Order).  
2
1
The background of this case spans over 20 years.  
Briefly, in 2003, SunStone began developing a 200-unit 
condominium complex in Kona known as Alii Cove.  In November 
 
1  The Honorable James C. McWhinnie presided. 
2  The Honorable Kevin T. Morikone presided. 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
3 
 
2003, SunStone and Bodell entered into a construction contract 
for Alii Cove. 
Almost twelve years later, the Association of 
Apartment Owners of Alii Cove (
Association) sued SunStone for 
damages stemming from construction defects.  Sunstone asserted a 
third-party complaint against Bodell and others.  The matter was 
removed to arbitration and the court proceedings were stayed.  
Although SunStone made several attempts to have Bodell 
participate in the arbitration, Bodell opposed. 
In April 2020, SunStone and Association settled all 
claims related to Alii Cove for $15 million.  Insurance paid 
$14,301,916.30 and Towne Development of Alii Cove (a member of 
SunStone) paid $698,083.70. 
Turning to the arbitration between Sunstone and 
Bodell, SunStone sought contribution and indemnification for the 
$15 million paid to Association.  After nineteen days of 
hearings, SunStone was awarded $8,351,848 in damages and 
$1,252,777 in attorneys' fees related to the arbitration 
(Arbitration Decision and Award). 
The circuit court confirmed the Arbitration Decision 
and Award.  The circuit court also granted SunStone's request 
for attorneys' fees and costs related to confirmation of the 
award.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
4 
 
In separate appeals, Bodell challenges the 
confirmation of the award (CAAP-22-040) and the award of 
attorneys' fees and costs related to confirmation of the award 
(CAAP-22-263).  SunStone contests this court's jurisdiction over 
both appeals. 
  We consolidated the appeals, and upon careful review 
of the record and the briefs submitted by the parties and having 
given due consideration to the issues raised and the arguments 
advanced, we resolve the points of error as discussed below, and 
affirm the Order Confirming Arbitration Award and affirm in part 
and vacate in part the Fees and Costs Order. 
(1) Jurisdiction.
  We first address SunStone's 
contention this court lacks jurisdiction over the two appeals. 
(a)  CAAP-22-040
In its statement contesting jurisdiction, SunStone 
contends Bodell lacks standing to appeal because it "waived any 
further challenges to the Arbitration Award."  SunStone 
specifically maintains Bodell waived its right to move to vacate 
the Arbitration Decision and Award as it asked the Arbitrator to 
clarify her unambiguous award, and later filed an opposition to 
SunStone's motion to confirm rather than a motion to modify, 
correct, or vacate the Arbitration Decision and Award. 
As an initial matter, standing is prudential rather 
than jurisdictional.  See generally Tax Found. of 
Hawai‘i v. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
5 
 
State, 144 Hawai‘i 175, 188, 439 P.3d 127, 140 (2019).  Next, 
though Bodell asked the Arbitrator to clarify her award by 
deleting a typographical error and providing an item-by-item 
breakdown of the award, the clarification Bodell sought from the 
Arbitrator did not substantively change the amount awarded.  Cf. 
generally Mathewson v. Aloha Airlines, Inc., 82 Hawai‘i 57, 82, 
919 P.2d 969, 994 (1996) (indicating where the losing party 
sought a substantive change of the arbitration award as opposed 
to "mere clarification," the losing party was "precluded from 
challenging the trial court's confirmation order") (emphases 
omitted).  And, contrary to SunStone's claim, the record 
indicates Bodell filed a motion to vacate the Arbitration 
Decision and Award on September 16, 2021. 
But, more to the point, we have jurisdiction over this 
appeal because the circuit court entered a judgment pursuant to 
Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 658A-25 (2016).  See HRS § 658A-
28(a)(6) (2016) (indicating "[a]n appeal may be taken from . . . 
[a] final judgment entered pursuant to this chapter").  
(b) CAAP-22-263 
In its statement contesting jurisdiction, SunStone 
contends the minute order Bodell appeals from is not an 
appealable order. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
6 
 
"[A] minute order is not an appealable order."  Abrams 
v. Cades, Schutte, Fleming & Wright, 88 Hawai‘i 319, 321 n.3, 966 
P.2d 631, 633 n.3 (1998).  Nonetheless, a prematurely filed 
notice of appeal is considered timely after a judgment or order 
becomes final.  Hawai‘i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 
Rule 4(a)(2).  After Sunstone filed its statement of 
jurisdiction, the circuit court entered its Fees and Costs 
Order.  Thus, we construe Bodell's appeal as being from the Fees 
and Costs Order; we have jurisdiction over this appeal.  See 
Abrams, 88 Hawai‘i at 321 n.3, 966 P.2d at 633 n.3. 
(2) Appeal from Order Confirming Arbitration Award  
(CAAP-22-040) 
 
In challenging the confirmation of the arbitration 
award, Bodell contends the circuit court erred because (a) the 
award was "facially inconsistent," (b) the Arbitrator failed to 
clarify the award, and (c) evident partiality existed. 
(a) 
First, Bodell contends the circuit court erred in 
confirming the arbitration award because the award was facially 
inconsistent.     
Bodell argues the award was facially inconsistent 
because it awarded SunStone over $8 million even though the 
Arbitrator found SunStone sustained $698,083.70 in damages.  
According to Bodell, SunStone was "not entitled to recover from 
Bodell the amount that Steadfast Insurance Company paid to NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
7 
 
settle" Association's claims.  (Emphasis omitted.)  Bodell 
further argues this "conclusion is mandated by the clear and 
unambiguous waiver of subrogation clause in the [American 
Institute of Architects] contract between SunStone and Bodell."  
Bodell relies on HRS § 658A-23(a)(4) (2016) to support its 
arguments. 
HRS § 658A-23(a)(4) provides that an arbitration award 
shall be vacated if the arbitrator exceeded their powers.  "We 
review the circuit court's ruling on an arbitration award 
de 
novo, but we also are mindful that the circuit court's review of 
arbitral awards must be extremely narrow and exceedingly 
deferential."  Kona Vill. Realty, Inc. v. Sunstone Realty 
Partners, XIV, LLC, 121
 Hawai‘i 110, 112, 214 P.3d 1100, 1102 
(App. 2009) (citation omitted). 
Here, the Arbitrator determined the subrogation waiver 
did not apply to the arbitration award and "[a]n arbitrator's 
interpretation of a contract cannot be vacated by the reviewing 
court."  Tatibouet v. Ellsworth, 99 Hawai‘i 226, 241, 54 P.3d 
397, 412 (2002). 
Thus, HRS § 658A-23(a)(4) was not implicated.  
Bodell also argues the award was facially inconsistent 
because it awarded attorneys' fees without considering the 
reasonableness of those fees.  According to Bodell, the 
Arbitrator "did not even consider the issue of reasonableness."  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
8 
 
Bodell relies on HRS § 658A-21(b) (2016) and Kona Village 
Realty. 
HRS § 658A-21(b) allows an arbitrator to award 
reasonable attorney's fees: 
 (b)  An arbitrator may award reasonable 
attorney's fees and other reasonable expenses of 
arbitration if such an award is authorized by law 
in a civil action involving the same claim or by 
the agreement of the parties to the arbitration 
 proceeding.
 
In Kona Village Realty, this court determined because 
the parties' agreement included an attorneys' fees provision 
specifying reasonable attorneys' fees could be awarded, it could 
not vacate or modify the fees awarded and did not reach the 
issue of reasonableness of the fees.  121 
Hawai‘i at 114-16, 214 
P.3d at 1104-06.  However, the court opined that in cases where 
the parties "wage an expensive arbitration battle" by not 
limiting discovery and where the parties "expressly grant 
arbitrators broad authority to award attorneys' fees 'in such 
amounts as the majority of the arbitrators shall determine,' 
second-guessing of reasonableness determinations by reviewing 
courts would simply proliferate the battlegrounds and further 
undermine the purpose of alternative dispute resolution."  Id. 
at 115 n.7, 214 P.3d at 1105 n.7. 
Here, though the Arbitrator did not include findings 
related to reasonable rates or the amount of fees which would be NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
9 
 
reasonable, she noted "[t]estimony was extensive and examination 
of expert witnesses was vigorous" and that the "parties 
presented a substantial body of evidence and exhibits" over the 
roughly nineteen-day proceeding.  And, Bodell does not show the 
Arbitrator "intentionally and plainly disregarded the parties' 
agreement or clearly-established law."  121 Hawai‘i at 116, 214 
P.3d at 1106. 
Thus, we decline to second guess the circuit court's 
confirmation of the Arbitration Decision and Award. 
(b) Bodell next contends the circuit court erred in 
confirming the arbitration award because the Arbitrator's 
failure "to entertain Bodell's request to clarify" the award 
amounted to prejudicial misconduct preventing Bodell from 
seeking reimbursement from other parties.  Bodell relies on HRS 
§ 658A-23(a)(2)(C). 
HRS § 658A-23(a)(2)(C) requires the circuit court to 
vacate an award if there was "[m]isconduct by an arbitrator 
prejudicing the rights of a party to the arbitration 
proceeding."  Arbitrator misconduct may occur where the 
arbitrator "had any financial interest in the outcome of the 
decision; . . . identified with the interests, prejudices, and 
needs of either party; and . . . refused to hear testimony or 
refused to allow the presentation of evidence."  But see Gadd v. 
Kelley, 66 Haw. 431, 441-42, 667 P.2d 251, 258-59 (1983) 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
10 
 
(discussing trial court's findings regarding arbitration panel's 
conduct and behavior during arbitration proceeding). 
In the order granting in part and denying in part 
Bodell's motion for clarification of the arbitration decision 
and award, the Arbitrator declined to give an item-by-item 
breakdown of the award because the purpose of the arbitration 
was to determine Bodell's responsibility to SunStone: 
With respect to Bodell's request that the Decision be 
clarified to reflect an item by item breakdown of the total 
$8,351,848 awarded, the undersigned Arbitrator declines to 
do so. 
 
This arbitration hearing was to determine the 
reasonableness of SunStone's undertaking to settle 
underlying claims made by the Association . . . and the 
extent to which Bodell was responsible. 
 
(Emphases omitted.) 
Bodell does not show how declining to give an item-by-
item breakdown rises to the level of misconduct and only 
summarily maintains it is prejudiced as to pursuing 
indemnification and contribution claims against third parties. 
Without a showing of misconduct, we cannot say the 
circuit court erred in confirming the arbitration award. 
(c) Bodell also contends the circuit court "erred in 
confirming the arbitration award despite the Arbitrator's 
'evident partiality.'"  (Formatting altered.)  Relying on HRS 
§ 658A-12(d) to show evident partiality, Bodell points to the 
Arbitrator's use of the words "nonsense" and "poor witness," NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
11 
 
frustration with Bodell's counsel, and phone call with her 
doctor. 
Under HRS § 658A-12(d) (Supp. 2018), the court may 
vacate an arbitration award if the arbitrator failed to disclose 
certain facts: 
(d) If the court, upon timely objection by a party, 
determines that the arbitrator did not disclose a fact 
required by subsection (a) or (b) to be disclosed, the 
court may determine that such failure to disclose 
constituted evident partiality and vacate an award made by 
the arbitrator pursuant to section 658A-23(a)(2)
. 
 
Sections (a) and (b) of HRS § 658A-12 identify the following as 
facts to disclose:  "direct and material financial or personal 
interest in the outcome of the arbitration proceeding" and 
"existing or past substantial relationship with any of the 
parties to the agreement to arbitrate or the arbitration 
proceeding, their counsel or representatives, a witness, or 
another arbitrator."  "'The burden of proving facts which would 
establish a reasonable impression of partiality rests squarely 
on the party challenging the award.'"  Nordic PCL Constr., Inc. 
v. LPIHGC, LLC, 136 Hawai‘i 29, 51, 358 P.3d 1, 23 (2015) 
(internal brackets and citations omitted). 
In a request for supplemental disclosure, Bodell 
maintained "[o]n December 7, 2020, during a break, the 
Arbitrator told an individual with whom she had been talking 
off-camera that she needed to get back to this 'nonsense[.]'"  
In response, the Arbitrator stated she was "confident it was NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
12 
 
addressing the amount of time being taken to examine on cross-
examination of an issue, rather than the substance of the 
questioning."  The Arbitrator's use of the word "nonsense" was 
not reflected in transcripts. 
As to Bodell's argument that the Arbitrator made 
remarks indicating she pitied SunStone's expert, the arbitration 
transcript excerpts included in the record do not appear to 
reflect such remarks.  Bodell maintained that on January 11, 
2021 before Bodell resumed its cross-examination of SunStone's 
expert Colin Murphy (Murphy), "the Arbitrator related to the 
person off-camera that the 'poor witness' has been going on all 
day and going into tomorrow."  In her supplemental disclosure, 
the Arbitrator noted she "did express concern for the several 
days of examination that [SunStone's] expert [Murphy] had been 
subject to, not as a point of partiality, but to comment on the 
length of time he was being questioned." 
Without more, Bodell does not show that the 
Arbitrator's remarks of "nonsense" and "poor witness" were facts 
"that a reasonable person would consider likely to affect the 
impartiality of the arbitrator." 
Examining Bodell's claim that the Arbitrator expressed 
irritation with Bodell's counsel and SunStone's expert, Murphy, 
Bodell maintains the Arbitrator's "admitted frustration . . . 
was unwarranted" because Bodell was not objecting to Murphy NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
13 
 
being provided assistance in locating documents but rather to 
documents being pulled "which were not known to be marked as 
arbitration exhibits and obtaining factual information from non-
witnesses during his arbitration testimony." (Emphases omitted.)  
During Murphy's testimony on January 12, 2021, Murphy 
acknowledged he was receiving assistance in locating documents 
and later when asked a specific question he noted an assistant 
was pulling documents so Murphy could see them.  Bodell noted 
this "would be highly unusual in a binding arbitration in 
person" and the following exchange occurred: 
THE ARBITRATOR:  If you wish a break every time you 
ask a question we will take a break and I will instruct him 
not to have assistance.  I can do that. 
 
All the assistant is helping is to locate the 
response.  So I'm not seeing where the problem is.  If you 
think it's a problem, I will accommodate you and we will 
stop each time and we'll have Mr. Murphy look it up 
himself.  Is that what you want? 
 
MS. ARATANI:  Well, will Bodell similarly be able to 
have assistance with their witnesses as they testify? 
 
THE WITNESS:  If I had a full set of drawings in 
front of me and if I had all the project documents in boxes 
that are brought into an arbitration, I would have them and 
I would be able to find them. 
 
But I'm looking them up in computers and trying to 
find all of them.  Before in earlier parts of the testimony 
it's been challenging and it's taken time.  So I asked 
Anne-Marie to help me so I would have the documents.  
That's all I'm doing. 
 
THE ARBITRATOR:  We're not going to have her help 
you.  We're going to stop.  And each time there is an 
objection you will look it up yourself however long it 
takes.  We will be in recess and I'll give you ten minutes 
to look for the response.  Thank you. 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
14 
 
THE VIDEOGRAPHER:  We are going off the record at 
2:25 p.m. 
 
(Whereupon, a recess was taken from 2:25 p.m. to 2:35 
p.m.) 
 
  The following day, Bodell again objected to Murphy 
talking to his assistant off-the-record during his testimony: 
 MS. ARATANI:  Your Honor, again for the record, I'd 
like to have the witness state for the record who he was 
just talking to. 
 
 THE WITNESS:  I'm asking Ann Marie Zanelli to please 
call the office and get the listing that I have of the days 
that we were on site. 
  
 THE ARBITRATOR:  If we were doing a live case the 
same opportunity would be permitted to people.  Notes are 
passed between lawyers.  Notes are passed to their 
paralegals.  It's noted on the record that there was a 
verbal request.  Otherwise we'll be in recess so we can do 
this live to accommodate objections.  Proceed. 
 
 MS. ARATANI:  Your Honor, I disagree as to experts.   
There are notes passed between paralegals and associates 
and counsel for parties but not by experts normally. 
 
 THE ARBITRATOR:  We'll go off the record for 
Mr. Murphy to do this.  And then when you are ready, 
Mr. Murphy, we'll reconvene, okay?  So I'll turn everything 
off until we get word from Eamon that you're ready to 
respond to the question.  Go off the record.  Do your 
business and come back on the record.  Thank you. 
 
Though these exchanges suggest the Arbitrator may have 
been frustrated, they are not facts "that a reasonable person 
would consider likely to affect the impartiality of the 
arbitrator."  See HRS § 658A-12(b). 
Bodell also maintains the Arbitrator was "the very 
antithesis of a neutral factfinder" when she took a phone call 
from her doctor about a COVID-19 vaccination during direct 
examination of Bodell's president, without pausing the NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
15 
 
proceedings, apologizing, or later asking the witness to repeat 
his testimony.  However, the portion of the January 13, 2021 
transcript reflecting the purported phone call was not included 
as part of the record.  Thus, we cannot say Bodell established a 
reasonable impression of partiality. 
With no "facts" establishing partiality or bias on the 
part of the Arbitrator, the circuit court did not err in 
confirming the award. 
(3) Appeal from Fees and Costs Order (CAAP-22-263)   
In challenging the award of attorneys' fees and costs 
related to confirming the arbitration award, Bodell contends 
(a) the circuit court considered inadmissible hearsay, and 
SunStone failed to show (b) its rates reflected the prevailing 
community rates, (c) the hours claimed were reasonable, and 
(d) the requested costs were reasonable. 
(a) Pointing to the "billing records" and declaration 
of counsel appended to SunStone's fees and costs motion, Bodell 
contends the circuit court abused its discretion "in considering 
inadmissible hearsay evidence in granting Sun[S]tone's request 
for attorneys' fees."  (Formatting altered.) 
"If a motion requires the consideration of facts not 
appearing of record, it shall be supported by affidavit."  Rules 
of the Circuit Courts of the State of Hawai‘i (RCCH) Rule 7(a).  
"In lieu of an affidavit, an unsworn declaration may be made by NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
16 
 
a person, in writing, subscribed as true under penalty of law, 
and dated[.]"  RCCH Rule 7(g); see generally Stanford Carr Dev. 
Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111 Hawai‘i 286, 306, 141 P.3d 459, 
479 (2006) (explaining an attorney's declaration authenticated 
the fees and costs incurred).  We also note that Hawai‘i courts 
regularly examine billing records and declarations of counsel 
appended to requests for fees and costs to determine the amount 
of fees and costs to award.  See generally Kamaka v. Goodsill 
Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 
Hawai‘i 92, 122, 176 P.3d 91, 121 
(2008) (explaining there is no "bright line standard for 
adequacy of documentation in the trial court's determination of 
attorneys' fees[,]" instead the award of attorneys' fees is 
reviewed for an abuse of discretion).  
Here, SunStone's Exhibit 1 to its motion for fees and 
costs was an itemized, detailed billing spreadsheet indicating 
the amount of time attorneys and/or paralegals spent on various 
tasks.  Also appended to the fees and costs motion was the 
declaration of SunStone's attorney Cid H. Inouye (Inouye), who 
testified that the spreadsheet included as Exhibit 1 was "true 
and correct copies [sic] of itemized time and costs entries 
billed" while representing SunStone for matters related to 
confirmation of the arbitration award.  Inouye's declaration NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
17 
 
provided a sufficient foundation to authenticate Exhibit 1.  See 
Stanford Carr, 111 Hawai‘i at 306, 141 P.3d at 479. 
Thus, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion 
in considering Exhibit 1 and Inouye's declaration. 
(b) Bodell next contends the circuit court abused its 
discretion in awarding attorneys' fees as SunStone failed to 
show its rates reflected prevailing community rates. 
HRS § 658A-25  "allows a court to award attorney's fees 
incurred in judicial proceedings to confirm an arbitration award 
when a motion to confirm award under HRS § 658A-22 is 
contested."  RT Import, Inc. v. Torres, 139 Hawai‘i 445, 451, 393 
P.3d 997, 1003 (2017).  "Parties seeking attorneys' fees bear 
the burden of demonstrating that the fees requested are 
3
 
3  HRS § 658A-25 provides: 
 
(a) Upon granting an order confirming, vacating 
without directing a rehearing, modifying, or correcting an 
award, the court shall enter a judgment in conformity 
therewith.  The judgment may be recorded, docketed, and 
enforced as any other judgment in a civil action. 
 
(b) A court may allow reasonable costs of the 
motion and subsequent judicial proceedings. 
 
(c)  On application of a prevailing party to a 
contested judicial proceeding under section 658A-22, 658A-
23, or 658A-24, the court may add reasonable attorney's 
fees and other reasonable expenses of litigation incurred 
in a judicial proceeding after the award is made to a 
judgment confirming, vacating without directing a 
rehearing, modifying, or correcting an award. 
 
(Formatting altered.) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
18 
 
reasonable."  Gurrobat v. HTH Corp., 135 Hawai‘i 128, 135, 346 
P.3d 197, 204 (2015). 
In its reply in support of its fees and costs motion, 
SunStone noted the hourly rates the United States District Court 
for the District of Hawai‘i determined were reasonable for 
attorneys with over twenty years of experience ($280), eleven 
years of experience ($200), and seven to eight years of 
experience ($185), in a 2017 order awarding fees and costs as 
sanctions.  See Starr Adjustment Servs., Inc. v. Rucker, Misc. 
No. 17-00133 DKW-KSC, 2017 WL 4106075, at *3 (D. Haw. Sept. 15, 
2017) (Order). 
The hourly rates requested here were less than the 
hourly rates in Starr Adjustment.  Inouye, requesting $250.00 
per hour, testified he and the other partner in the case each 
had more than 35 years of legal experience.  Although Inouye did 
not provide the years of experience for the associates involved 
in the case, they requested a rate of $165.00 per hour, which 
was discounted from their usual billing rates of $310.00 and 
$270.00 per hour. 
Because the court "ha[s] personal knowledge of the 
complexity of the litigation and the nature and quality of the 
legal services rendered before it[,]" we conclude that under 
these circumstances the circuit court did not abuse its 
discretion in awarding reasonable attorneys' fees that reflect 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
19 
 
prevailing community rates.  See Stanford Carr Dev., 111 Hawai‘i 
at 306, 141 P.3d at 480. 
(c) Bodell also contends the circuit court abused its 
discretion in granting SunStone's request for attorney's fees 
because the hours claimed were unreasonable, duplicative, or 
beyond the scope of HRS § 658A-25.  Bodell argues the following 
were unreasonable or duplicative entries:  multiple entries 
billed on August 10, 2021 for multiple individuals to review 
Bodell's "one-page opposition to the motion to confirm"; entries 
by multiple attorneys to review the Arbitration Decision and 
Award; billing entries for scheduling; e-mails to clients 
regarding billing for arbitration; and "time billed regarding 
Bodell's 'appeal chances[.]'" 
As mentioned above, HRS § 658A-25 allows for 
reasonable attorneys' fees.  See HRS § 658A-25(c).  On appeal, 
Bodell bears the burden of showing the circuit court abused its 
discretion.  See generally DFS Grp. L.P. v. Paiea Props., 110 
Hawai‘i 217, 222, 131 P.3d 500, 505 (2006) (party requesting fees 
bears the burden of proving fees necessarily incurred); Kamaka, 
117 Hawaiʻi at 122, 176 P.3d at 121 (trial court's award of 
attorneys' fees reviewed for abuse of discretion). 
As to the multiple entries related to review of 
Bodell's opposition to the motion to confirm and review of the 
Arbitration Decision and Award, our case law does not NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
20 
 
categorically prohibit "billing for reasonable time spent by 
multiple attorneys from the same firm" and Bodell does not 
provide evidence indicating the amount of time spent reviewing 
these documents was excessive.  See Oahu Publ'ns, Inc. v. 
Abercrombie, 130 Hawai‘i 352, 310 P.3d 1053, No. CAAP-13-0000127, 
2013 WL 5676194, at *3 (App. Oct. 18, 2013) (SDO); In re 
Thomas H. Gentry Revocable Tr., Nos. 29727, 29728, 2013 WL 
376083, at *16 (Haw. App. Jan. 31, 2013) (mem. op.). 
The billing entry or entries related to scheduling 
that Bodell takes issue with are reviewing e-mails from the 
client's general counsel related to the motion to confirm, and 
attorneys' fees generally include fees related to client 
communication.  See generally HRAP Form 8a.  As to the "time 
billed regarding Bodell's 'appeal chances[,]'" these entries 
relate to client communication, stem from the motion to confirm, 
and were incurred before the Order Confirming Arbitration Award 
was entered. 
Turning to the entries related to e-mails to clients 
regarding billing for arbitration, Bodell points to page 9 of 
Exhibit 1.  One entry (reference number 21471) on page 9 for 
$9.50 appears to relate to billing stemming from the arbitration 
itself and, thus, was beyond the scope of HRS § 658A-25.   
To the extent the circuit court granted attorneys' 
fees incurred in conjunction with the arbitration itself, which 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
21 
 
are thus outside the scope of HRS § 658A-25, it abused its 
discretion. 
(d) Finally, Bodell contends the circuit court abused 
its discretion in granting SunStone's costs as SunStone failed 
to demonstrate the requested photocopying or duplication costs 
were reasonable and related to the motion to confirm or the 
motion to vacate the arbitration award. 
If a party opposes the reasonableness of certain costs 
requested, those costs are not presumed reasonable.  But see 
Blair v. Ing, 96 Hawai‘i 327, 335, 31 P.3d 184, 192 (2001) 
(indicating costs not objected to are allowed).  Additionally, 
when requesting photocopying costs, a party should indicate the 
costs of duplication, if photocopying occurred in-house, and 
provide information regarding each copy.  See Kikuchi v. Brown, 
110 Hawai
‘i 204, 211, 130 P.3d 1069, 1076 (App. 2006). 
Here, SunStone's reply in support of its fees and 
costs motion and documentation appended to its fees and costs 
motion suggest in-house photocopies were made, indicate the cost 
per page (2¢ for non-color copies, 10¢ for color), and only 
included photocopying costs from the date the Arbitrator issued 
the award.  As such, SunStone demonstrated the requested 
photocopying costs were reasonable. 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
22 
 
Thus, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion 
in awarding costs. 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the circuit court's 
January 10, 2022 Order Confirming Arbitration Award and 
January 28, 2022 Judgment.  We affirm in part and vacate in part 
the circuit court's February 9, 2023 Fees and Costs Order, and 
remand for proceedings consistent with this summary disposition 
order. 
  DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai‘i, May 22, 2025. 
 
On the briefs: 
 
Edward R. Hugo, 
for Third-Party Defendant/ 
Fourth-Party Plaintiff-
Appellant. 
 
Cid H. Inouye, 
Kelvin H. Kaneshiro, 
Michael G. Kozak, 
Rachel A. Zelman, 
Katherine B. Hughes, 
(O'Connor Playdon Guben & 
Inouye), 
for Defendant/Third-Party 
Plaintiff-Appellee. 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
Acting Chief Judge 
 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge 
 
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
Associate Judge 