NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000253
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE ESTATE OF
 
MRS. JOANNA LAU SULLIVAN aka
 
MRS. JOANNA NGIT CHO LAU SULLIVAN,
Deceased.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(LP. NO. 15-1-0698)
 
ORDER DISMISSING APPEAL FOR LACK OF APPELLATE JURISDICTION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Upon review of the record in CAAP-17-0000253, it
 
appears that we lack appellate jurisdiction. 
Respondent-
Appellant Colleen Sullivan (Appellant) appeals from the Judgment
 
on Order Denying Petition to Appoint a Special Administrator,
 Filed November 3, 2016, filed on February 27, 2017 in the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit. 
Generally, in probate proceedings "Appellate review, 
including the right to appellate review, interlocutory appeal, provisions as to time, manner, notice, appeal bond, stays, scope of review, record on appeal, briefs, arguments and power of the appellate court, is governed by the Hawai
'i rules of appellate 
procedure and the Hawai 'i rules of civil procedure." HRS 
§ 560:1-308. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The Judgment on Order Denying Petition to Appoint a
 
Special Administrator, Filed November 3, 2016 states that it is a
 
final judgment.  However, it is not a final judgment that closed
 
the entire probate proceeding. Thus, there is no final judgment
 
pursuant to Rule 34(c) of the Hawai 'i Probate Rules.1 "Appeals 
shall be allowed in civil matters from all final judgments,
 orders, or decrees of circuit and district courts and the land
 court to the intermediate appellate court, subject to chapter
 602." HRS § 641-1(a). Since final judgment within the meaning
 of HPR Rule 34(c) was not entered, there is no final judgment
 appealable pursuant to HRS § 641-1(a). 
Pursuant to HPR Rule 34(a), the Order Denying Petition
 
to Appoint a Special Administrator, Filed November 3, 2016 may be
 certified pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(b) or certified in accordance
 with HRS § 641-1(b) as an appeal from an interlocutory order,
 pursuant to HPR Rule 34(b). The finding necessary for
 certification under HRCP Rule 54(b) is "an express determination
 that there is no just reason for delay . . . for the entry of
 
1
 HPR Rule 34 states: 
RULE 34. ENTRY OF JUDGMENT, INTERLOCUTORY ORDERS, APPEALS
 
(a) Entry of Judgment. All formal testacy orders, orders of
intestacy and determination of heirs, orders establishing
conservatorship and/or guardianship, and orders establishing
protective arrangements shall be reduced to judgment and the
judgment shall be filed with the clerk of the court. Such
 judgments shall be final and immediately appealable as provided by
statute. Any other order that fully addresses all claims raised
in a petition to which it relates, but that does not finally end
the proceeding, may be certified for appeal in the manner provided
by Rule 54(b) of the Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure.
 
(b) Interlocutory Orders. In order to appeal from any other order
prior to the conclusion of the proceeding, the order must be
certified for appeal in accordance with Section 641-1(b) of the
Hawai'i Revised Statutes.
 
(c) Final Judgment Closing Proceeding. At the conclusion of the
 
proceeding, a final judgment closing the proceeding shall be
entered and filed with the clerk of the court, at which time all
prior uncertified interlocutory orders shall become immediately
appealable.
 
(d) Appeals. Final judgments as to all claims and parties,
certified judgments, certified orders, and other orders appealable
as provided by law may be appealed pursuant to the Hawai'i Rules
of Appellate Procedure applicable to civil actions.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
judgment." HRCP Rule 54(b). "If a judgment purports to be 
certified under HRCP Rule 54(b), the necessary finding of no just reason for delay must be included in the judgment." Jenkins v. 
Cades Schutte, 76 Hawai
'i 115, 120, 869 P.2d 1334, 1339 (1994) 
(internal citation omitted). 
The Judgment on Order Denying Petition to Appoint a
 
Special Administrator, Filed November 3, 2016 does not contain an
 express determination that there is no just reason for delay. 
Therefore, the judgment is not properly certified pursuant to
 HRCP Rule 54(b). 
"Following the analogy of the appointment of a
 
receiver, an order appointing a temporary administrator is to be
 regarded as interlocutory and not appealable." Estate of
 
Lutteds, 22 Haw. 712, 714 (1915). Thus, an order appointing a
 special administrator is not a final and appealable order. Id. 
"Orders appointing, removing, refusing to appoint, or refusing to
 remove receivers are generally deemed to be interlocutory and
 hence not appealable unless the statute authorizes an appeal." 
Id. Therefore, an order refusing to appoint a special
 
administrator is also interlocutory and not appealable unless
 certified pursuant to HRS § 641-1(b). "HRS § 641-1(b) allows an
 appeal of an interlocutory judgment, decree, or order but only
 (1) upon application and (2) the circuit court's determination
 that the appeal would result in the speedy termination of the
 litigation." TBS Pacific Inc. v. Tamura, 5 Haw. App. 222, 226,
 
686 P.2d 37, 42 (1984). If a party requests an interlocutory
 appeal pursuant to HRS § 641-1(b), "the trial court shall
 carefully consider the matter of whether it thinks an
 interlocutory appeal will more speedily determine the litigation,
 if it so concludes, will set forth, in the order allowing the
 appeal its reasons for that conclusion." Mason v. Water
 
Resources Int'l, 67 Haw. 510, 512, 694 P.2d 388, 389 (1985). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The record on appeal does not indicate that a party
 
requested an interlocutory appeal from the denial of appointment
 
of a Special Administrator. Even if a party did, neither the
 Order Denying Petition to Appoint a Special Administrator, Filed
 November 3, 2016 nor the Judgment on Order Denying Petition to
 Appoint a Special Administrator, Filed November 3, 2016 concluded
 that an interlocutory appeal will more speedily determine the
 litigation and the reasons for that conclusion. Therefore, the
 requirements of HRS § 641-1(b) were not satisfied.
 
Absent an appealable final judgment or order in this
 
case, the appeal is premature, and this court lacks appellate
 jurisdiction. When the court determines that it lacks
 jurisdiction, the only appropriate remedy is dismissal of the
 appellate case:
 
[J]urisdiction is the base requirement for any court
considering and resolving an appeal or original
action. Appellate courts, upon determining that they
lack jurisdiction shall not require anything other
than a dismissal of the appeal or action. Without
jurisdiction, a court is not in a position to consider
the case further. 
Thus, appellate courts have an obligation to insure
that they have jurisdiction to hear and determine each
case. The lack of subject matter jurisdiction can
never be waived by any party at any time. Accordingly,
when we perceive a jurisdictional defect in an appeal,
we must, sua sponte, dismiss that appeal.
 
Housing Fin. and Dev. Corp. v. Castle, 79 Hawai‘i 64, 76, 898
 
P.2d 576, 588 (1995) (citations, internal quotation marks, some
 brackets and ellipsis points omitted; emphasis added). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that appeal is dismissed for lack
 
of appellate jurisdiction.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 29, 2017. 
Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 
5
 