NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000916
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
RONALD S. FUJIYOSHI, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
HÂMÂKUA DIVISION
(CR. NO. 15-1-0808(4))
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Ronald S. Fujiyoshi ( Fujiyoshi ) 
appeals from the "Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment,"
(Judgment) filed on November 5, 2015, in the District Court of
the Third Circuit, H âmâkua Division ( district court ).1
On April 20, 2015 Fujiyoshi was charged by Complaint
with Obstructing under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS ) § 711-
1105(1)(a) and (5) (2014).2  Following a bench trial, Fujiyoshi
1  The Honorable Barbara Takase presided. 
2  HRS § 711-1105 provides:
§711-1105  Obstructing.  (1) A person commits the
offense of obstructing if, whether alone or with others and
having no legal privilege to do so, the person knowingly or
recklessly:
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
was found guilty of Obstructing in violation of HRS § 711-
1105(1).
On appeal, Fujiyoshi contends that: (1) the complaint
is defective for failing to allege an element of the offense
charged; (2) his conviction cannot stand because the evidence is
insufficient to sustain the charge; and (3) his conviction
violates due process because the other similarly situated
defendants were either acquitted or had their cases dismissed or 
subjected to motions of nolle prosequi by the prosecution.
I.  Background
On April 2, 2015, a number of individuals, including
Fujiyoshi, were present on Mauna Kea Access Road protesting the
construction of the Thirty Meter Telescope ( TMT) atop Mauna Kea
on the island of Hawai# i.  Captain Richard Sherlock ( Captain
Sherlock ) with the Hawai #i Police Department ( HPD) was assigned
to ensure safety due to the road possibly being blocked, and
Officer Christopher Fukumoto ( Officer Fukumoto ) was assigned to
go to the Visitors Center at the Mauna Kea access point on a
report of protesters obstructing traffic.  Captain Sherlock
(...continued)
(a)Obstructs any highway or public passage; or
(b) Provides less than thirty-six inches of space for    
passage on any paved public sidewalk.
(2) A person in a gathering commits the offense of
obstructing if the person refuses to obey a reasonable
request or order by a law enforcement officer:
(a) To move to prevent or to cease any activity
prohibited under subsection (1); or
(b) To move to maintain public safety by dispersing
those gathered in dangerous proximity to a
public hazard.
(3) An order to move under subsection (2)(a),
addressed to a person whose speech or other lawful behavior
attracts an obstructing audience, is not reasonable if the
obstruction can be readily remedied by police control.
(4)  A person is not guilty of violating subsection
(1) solely because persons gather to hear the person speak
or because the person is a member of such a gathering.
(5) 
 Obstructing is a petty misdemeanor if the person
persists in the conduct specified in subsection (1) after a
warning by a law enforcement officer; otherwise it is a
violation.  
(Emphasis added.)
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
warned individuals who were on the roadway that it is a public
roadway, that it had to be kept open for vehicles or those who
wanted to use it, and asked them to leave the roadway or they
would be arrested for obstructing.  Several of the protesters
moved, but Fujiyoshi and some others did not.  Fujiyoshi was
subsequently arrested. 
On April 20, 2015, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawaii
(State) filed a Complaint against Fujiyoshi which alleged:#
On or about the 2nd day of April, 2015, in Hamakua, County
and State of Hawai #i, RONALD FUJIYOSHI, acting alone or with
others and having no legal privilege to do so, did knowingly
or recklessly obstruct any highway or public passage and
persisted in said conduct after warning by a law enforcement
officer, thereby committing the offense of Obstructing, in
violation of Sections 711-1105(1)(a) and (5), Hawai #i
Revised Statutes, as amended.
On November 5, 2015, following a bench trial at which
Fujiyoshi represented himself pro se, the district court found
Fujiyoshi guilty of Obstructing under HRS § 711-1105(1).  The
district court entered its Judgment on the same day.
II.  Standard of Review
A.  Sufficiency of the Complaint
"Whether a charge sets forth all the essential elements
of a charged offense is a question of law which we review under
the de novo , or right/wrong, standard."  State v. Wheeler, 121
Hawai#i 383, 390, 219 P.3d 1170, 1177 (2009) (quoting State v.
Wells, 78 Hawai #i 373, 379, 894 P.2d 70, 76 (1995) (internal
brackets, citations, ellipses, and quotation marks omitted).
B.  Sufficiency of the Evidence
Evidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction. . . .  The test on appeal is not
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact.
State v. Nakamitsu, 140 Hawai #i 157, 164, 398 P.3d 746, 753
(2017) (quoting State v. Richie , 88 Hawai #i 19, 33, 960 P.2d  
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1227, 1241 (1998))(internal brackets omitted).  "'Substantial
evidence' as to every material element of the offense charged is
credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative
value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a
conclusion."  Richie, 88 Hawai #i at 33, 960 P.2d at 1241
(citation omitted).
C.  Due Process
"We answer questions of constitutional law by
exercising our own independent constitutional judgment based on
the facts of the case.  Thus, we review questions of
constitutional law under the right/wrong standard."  State v.
Vaimili, 135 Hawai# i 492, 499, 353 P.3d 1034, 1041 (2015)
(quoting State v. Pratt , 127 Hawai #i 206, 212, 277 P.3d 300, 306
(2012) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted)).
III.  Discussion
A.  Sufficiency of the charge
Fujiyoshi did not challenge the sufficiency of the
Complaint in the district court and instead raises this issue for
the first time on appeal.  The Hawai #i Supreme Court has adopted
the "Motta/ Wells post-conviction liberal construction rule"
(Motta/Wells rule) for cases in which the sufficiency of an oral
charge, complaint, or indictment is challenged for the first time
on appeal.  Wheeler , 121 Hawai #i at 399, 219 P.3d at 1186 (citing
State v. Motta , 66 Haw. 89, 90, 657 P.2d 1019, 1019-1020 (1983);
Wells, 78 Hawai #i at 381, 894 P.2d at 78).
In Motta, the supreme court explained that the
"adoption of this liberal construction standard for
post-conviction challenges to [complaints] means we will not
reverse a conviction based upon a defective [complaint] unless
the defendant can show prejudice or that the [complaint] cannot
within reason be construed to charge a crime."  66 Haw. at 91,
657 P.2d at 1020; see also State v. Mita , 124 Hawai #i 385, 390,
245 P.3d 458, 463 (2010) (stating that a charge "must be worded 
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
in a manner such that the nature and cause of the accusation
could be understood by a person of common understanding. . . . A
charge defective in this regard amounts to a failure to state an
offense, and a conviction based upon it cannot be sustained, for
that would constitute a denial of due process.") (internal
brackets, citations, and quotation marks omitted).  Put
differently, the sufficiency of the charging instrument is
measured, inter alia , by "whether it contains the elements of the
offense intended to be charged, and sufficiently apprises the
defendant of what he [or she] must be prepared to meet[.]" 
Wells, 78 Hawai #i at 379–80, 894 P.2d at 76–77 (citations and
internal quotation marks omitted) (brackets in original).
Here, we conclude that the Complaint was sufficient. 
HRS § 711-1100 (2014) provides the definitions for HRS Chapter
711 and defines "Obstructs" as follows: "renders impassable
without unreasonable inconvenience or hazard."  By comparison,
the definition of "obstruct," as provided by Black's Law
Dictionary, states:
1.  To block or stop up (a road, passageway, etc.); to close
up or close off, esp. by obstacle <obstruct the runway>.  2. 
To make difficult or impossible; to keep from happening;
hinder <to obstruct the peace process>.  3.  To cut off a
line of vision; to shut out <the new construction obstructs
our view of the road>.
Obstruct, Black's Law Dictionary 1246 (10th ed. 2014).
We disagree with Fujiyoshi's claim that the Complaint
was defective for failing to define "obstruct."  Rather, we
conclude that the term "obstruct" comports with its commonly
understood definition, and that its common meaning encompasses
the component parts of its statutory definition.  See Mita, 124
Hawai#i at 393, 245 P.3d at 466;3 cf. Wheeler , 121 Hawai #i at
3  In Mita, "animal nuisance" was defined by ordinance as:
includ[ing] but not... limited to any animal, farm animal or
poultry which:
(continued...)
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
394-96, 219 P.3d at 1181-83 (holding that the term "operate" has
been statutorily defined in a manner that does not comport with
its commonly understood definition, thereby rendering the
underlying oral charge, which did not define the term,
insufficient).4
B.  Sufficiency of the evidence
Fujiyoshi next argues that there was insufficient
evidence presented at trial to convict him of Obstructing
because: (1) there was no substantial evidence that his alleged
refusal to clear the roadway rendered the roadway "impassable
without unreasonable inconvenience or hazard" per the statutory
definition of "obstruct" under HRS § 711-1100; (2) he had a
"legal privilege" to gather in the roadway and listen to another
protester speak under HRS § 711-1105(4); (3) there was no
substantial evidence that he actually heard the warning given to
(...continued)
(a) Makes noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period
of 10 minutes or intermittently for one-half hour or more to
the disturbance of any person at any time of day or night
and regardless of whether the animal, farm animal or poultry
is physically situated in or upon private property;
(b) Barks, whines, howls, crows, cries or makes any other
unreasonable noise as described in Section 7–2.4(c) of this
article; or
(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of [Hawai #i Revised
Statutes (HRS)] Section 142–75 [governing the duties and
liabilities of an owner of a dog that has bitten another
person] or any other applicable law, bites or stings a
person.
124 Hawai #i at 387, 245 P.3d at 460 (citing Revised Ordinances of Honolulu §
7-2.2 (1990 & Supp. No. 6, 2–05)).  The supreme court held that this
definition was consistent with the term's commonly understood meaning, and
therefore the charge against the defendant provided her with fair notice of
the offense charged.  Id.  at 391, 245 P.3d at 464.
4  As discussed in Wheeler, "operate" was defined by statute as "to
drive or assume actual physical control of a vehicle upon a public way,
street, road, or highway or to navigate or otherwise use or assume physical
control of a vessel underway on or in the waters of the State."  121 Hawai i #
at 391, 219 P.3d at 1178 (citing HRS § 291E-1 (2007)).  The supreme court held
that the term was neither unmistakable nor readily comprehensible to persons
of common understanding because its statutory definition did not comport with
its commonly understood definition.  Id. at 394, 219 P.3d at 1181. 
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the protesters by the police to clear the roadway, and thus he
did not knowingly or recklessly persist in obstructing the
roadway; and (4) there was no substantial evidence that the
police could not have remedied the traffic blockage by simply
re-routing traffic through one lane of the Mauna Kea Access Road,
rather than arresting the protesters.
1.  "Impassable without unreasonable inconvenience or hazard"
At trial, Captain Sherlock testified that the
protesters blocked construction from happening at the TMT
construction site on top of Mauna Kea and that police were called
to the location of the protest to ensure that the road remains
safe.  Captain Sherlock further testified that, after he gave his
initial warning to the fifty to eighty protesters to get off the
road, the protesters who remained prevented cars from safely
traveling on Mauna Kea Access Road.  Captain Sherlock also
testified that those remaining in the public passage placed their
safety at risk.  
In turn, Officer Fukumoto testified that Fujiyoshi was
one of the protesters who did not exit the road following Captain
Sherlock's warning.  Officer Fukumoto testified that Fujiyoshi
"was located in the middle of the roadway on the side of the road
going towards the summit" and that Fujiyoshi's location in the
roadway prevented vehicles from traversing this part of Mauna Kea
Access Road.  During cross-examination, Officer Fukumoto stated
that he made contact with Fujiyoshi while Fujiyoshi was standing
"in the middle of the road."
Viewed in a light most favorable to the State, as is
required in reviewing sufficiency of the evidence to support a
conviction, see Nakamitsu , 140 Hawai #i at 164, 398 P.3d at 753,
there was substantial evidence to support a finding that
Fujiyoshi's presence in the roadway rendered it impassable
without unreasonable inconvenience or hazard.
2.  Defense under HRS § 711-1105(4)
Fujiyoshi argues that he had a "legal privilege . . .
[as] a member of a peaceful gathering . . . listening to Lanakila
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
explaining to [Captain] Sherlock the sacredness of Mauna Kea"
thereby precluding his conviction as a matter of law pursuant to
HRS § 711-1105(4), the United States Constitution, and the
Hawai#i Constitution.  The evidence adduced at trial shows that
Fujiyoshi was a participating member of a gathering on Mauna Kea,
but not that he was present solely to hear anyone speak as
required under HRS § 711-1105(4).
Both affirmative and non-affirmative defenses place an
"initial burden on the defendant to come forward with some
credible evidence of facts constituting the defense, unless, of
course, those facts are supplied by the prosecution's witnesses." 
HRS § 701-115 cmt (2014).5
The defense under HRS § 711-1105(4) provides that "[a]
person is not guilty of violating subsection (1) solely because
persons gather to hear the person speak or because the person is
a member of such a gathering." (Emphasis added). The commentary
to the Obstructing statute provides further clarity to this
exception:
5  HRS § 701-115 (2014) provides:
§701-115  Defenses.  (1)  A defense is a fact or set
of facts which negatives penal liability.
(2)   No defense may be considered by the trier of
fact unless evidence of the specified fact or facts has been
presented. If such evidence is presented, then:
(a) If the defense is not an affirmative defense,
the defendant is entitled to an acquittal if the
trier of fact finds that the evidence, when
considered in the light of any contrary
prosecution evidence, raises a reasonable doubt
as to the defendant's guilt; or
(b) If the defense is an affirmative defense, the
defendant is entitled to an acquittal if the
trier of fact finds that the evidence, when
considered in light of any contrary prosecution
evidence, proves by a preponderance of the
evidence the specified fact or facts which
negative penal liability.
(3) A defense is an affirmative defense if:
(a) It is specifically so designated by the Code or
another statute; or
(b) If the Code or another statute plainly requires
the defendant to prove the defense by a
preponderance of the evidence.
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Although obstructing was formerly covered by the disorderly
conduct statute, it raises certain important problems which
indicate that it should have separate treatment.  Primarily
the problems relate to free speech and types of expressive
conduct which, under the aegis of free speech, are
constitutionally protected.  Normally, the act of
obstructing a public highway presents a great public
inconvenience and serves no useful purpose.  However, where
the obstruction is caused by a crowd listening to a speaker,
or even by a crowd protesting some official action,
important goals are served by leaving the group as free from
restriction as possible.  
. . . .
Subsection (1) defines obstructing as knowing or reckless
obstruction of any highway or public passage.  "Obstructs"
is defined in § 711-1100 as "renders impassable without
unreasonable inconvenience or hazard."  This conduct
constitutes a violation, and if the defendant fails to heed
a warning by a peace officer, it may be treated as a petty
misdemeanor.  However, subsection (4) makes clear that a
person does not violate subsection (1) solely because of the
fact that people gather to hear the person speak, or because
the person is a member of such a gathering.
HRS § 711-1105 cmt. (Emphasis added).
Neither the penal code nor HRS § 711-1105 specifically
designate the defense under HRS § 711-1105(4) as an affirmative
defense or require that a defendant must prove by a preponderance
of the evidence that he or she was a speaker or listener in a
gathering in order to establish the defense.  Therefore, the
defense under HRS § 711-1105(4) is not an affirmative defense.
In the case of defenses which are not affirmative, the
defendant need only raise a reasonable doubt as to the
defendant's guilt. The other side of the coin is that the
prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt facts
negativing the defense.  The prosecution in fact does this
when the jury believes its case and disbelieves the defense.
HRS § 701-115 cmt.  On appeal, the question is thus whether there
is substantial evidence to support the district court's
determination that the HRS § 711-1105(4) defense did not apply in
this case.
At trial, Fujiyoshi cross-examined Captain Sherlock,
and asked:
[Fujioyshi]   Do you remember Lanakila6 explaining to you
the sacredness of Mauna Kea before you arrested people?  
6  Lanakila is not further identified in the record.
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
. . . . 
[Captain Sherlock]   Yes.
[Fujiyoshi]   And you -- okay.  Do you also remember hearing
the pu7 and the chanting and singing while you were --
before the arrests?
[Captain Sherlock]   Yes.
Additionally, Fujiyoshi's defense consisted of his
testimony read from a prepared written statement which was later
admitted into evidence.  Fujiyoshi testified, in relevant part:
I will attempt to argue that on April 2nd, 2015, I was
participating in a religious spiritual activity and that I'm
guaranteed the right to participate in this religious
spiritual activity, and my right is sanctioned by legal,
religious and more reasons.
. . . .
In my present capacity as the pastor of the Olaa First
Hawaiian Church, although we consider our church to be a
Hawaiian church, people of many different ethnic backgrounds
are members.  Everyone, whatever background or faith, is
welcome to attend.  We observe a number of religious
protocol during our services.  We recite the Lord's prayer
in Hawaiian.  We sing hymns.  We greet one another saying
the peace of God be with you.  We ring our bell to signal
the beginning of our service and to call the children back
into the church before we have holy communion.
The protocol I observed on Mauna Kea on April 2nd,
2015, seemed very similar.  There was a blowing of the pu,
chanting, singing and greeting each other with honi.8
 
In rendering its decision, the district court found
that, "[i]n this case nobody was being prohibited from practicing
religion.  If you had moved off of the roadway and done that, you
would not have been arrested."  Moreover, the evidence in the
record does not indicate that Fujiyoshi was on the roadway solely
as a member of a gathering to hear someone speak.  In short, the
evidence does not support a defense under HRS § 711-1105(4).
3.  Whether Fujiyoshi heard the warning
On direct examination, Captain Sherlock testified as
7  The word "p û" is defined as a "[l]arge triton conch or helmet shell
(Charonia tritonis ) as used for trumpets[.]"  Pukui & Elbert, Hawaiian
Dictionary 344 (rev. ed. 1986) ( Hawaiian Dictionary ).
8  "Honi" means "[t]o kiss; a kiss; formerly, to touch noses on the side
in greeting."  Hawaiian Dictionary at 79.
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
follows:
[The State]   On April 2nd, 2015, did you issue a warning to
persons on Mauna Kea Access Road?
[Captain Sherlock]   Yes, I did.
. . . .
[The State]   And can you please state for the court the
warning that you provided to individuals on Mauna Kea Access
Road at or near the Visitors Center?
[Captain Sherlock]   The warning was it's a public roadway. 
We have to keep it open for vehicles or people who wanted to
use it. We understood that they were demonstrating against
the telescope being built, but at a certain point we asked
them to leave the roadway, and if they did not, they would
be arrested for obstructing.
. . . . 
[The State]   Did it appear that the persons you gave the
warnings to heard you?
[Captain Sherlock]   Yes.
On cross-examination, Fujiyoshi did not question
Captain Sherlock about the warning or otherwise attempt to show
that Fujiyoshi did not hear Captain Sherlock's warning.
Viewed in a light most favorable to the State, there
was substantial evidence to support a finding that Fujiyoshi
heard Captain Sherlock's warning.  See Nakamitsu, 140 Hawai #i at
164, 398 P.3d at 753.
4.  Police remedy
Fujiyoshi's argument made pursuant to HRS § 711-1105(3)
is not pertinent insofar as subsection (3) applies to offenses
under HRS § 711-1105(2)(a).  Here, Fujiyoshi was charged and
convicted under HRS §§ 711-1105(1)(a) and (5).
C.  Due process  
Fujiyoshi alleges that he was denied due process
arguing as follows:
[i]n the instant case, the prosecutor has fulfilled her duty
as a minister of justice by seeking, and obtaining,
dismissals of the Obstructing charge against 16 similarly
situated defendants.  Had Mr. Fujiyoshi's trial occurred
after [Mauna Kea Anaina Hou v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 136
Hawai#i 376, 363 P.3d 224 (2015)], he surely would have
received the same disposition as all of the other defendants
that followed his trial.  Accordingly, in order to actualize
the fundamental concepts of due process, justice, fair play
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and decency, Mr. Fujiyoshi's judgment of conviction must be
vacated and set aside, and the matter remanded to the
district court for further proceedings.
(Footnote omitted). Fujiyoshi additionally requests that this
court take judicial notice of twenty-two cases originating from
the district court to support his contention of being a
"similarly situated" defendant.
The record in this case does not provide information
regarding the other district court cases for which Fujiyoshi
requests this court to take judicial notice.  In particular, it
is unclear why other cases may have been resolved differently
than this case.  Even if we could access the twenty-two other
cases, we deem it inappropriate to do so here.  See  29 Am. Jur.
2d Evidence  § 149 (2008) ("Judicial notice should be limited to
the fact of the record's existence, rather than to any facts
found or alleged within the record of another case, even though
the contents of those records may be known to the court, and even
though the causes are between the same parties, where each is an
independent and separate proceeding."). 
IV.  Conclusion
Based on the above, the "Judgment and Notice of Entry
of Judgment" entered on November 5, 2015, in the District Court
of the Third Circuit, Hamakua Division, is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, August 31, 2018.
On the briefs:
Hayden Aluli, 
James M. Dombroski,
for Defendant-Appellant.Chief Judge
Dale Yamada Ross,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
12