NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0003694
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
ROYNES JOSEPH DURAL, II, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Respondent-Appellee.
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(S.P.P. No. 09-1-0015 (CR. NO. 02-1-2791)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
Petitioner-Appellant Roynes Joseph Dural, II (Dural)
appeals from the order denying his second petition for post-
conviction relief.  Dural was convicted in 2003 of five counts of
sexual assault of a minor who was less than fourteen years old --
one count of first-degree sexual assault and four counts of
third-degree sexual assault.  The complaining witness (CW) was
twelve and thirteen years old at the time of the charged
offenses.
Dural was the CW's uncle by marriage.  In 1996, Dural
married the sister of the CW's stepfather.  In 1996 and in 1998,
Dural and his wife lived with the CW's family, which consisted of
the CW's mother, the CW's stepfather, and the CW's older brother
and younger sister.  Dural became close to the CW's family and
spent a lot of time with the children, taking them to the beach
and other outings.  Dural also became close friends with the CW'sNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
stepfather and with the CW's biological father.  Dural separated
from his wife and moved from the CW's home in 1998, but would
frequently visit the CW's home, often spending the night.  In
1999, while the CW's mother and her stepfather were having
marital difficulties, the CW's mother and the children stayed
with Dural at Dural's apartment.  During this time, Dural and the
CW's mother became involved in a romantic sexual relationship. 
This relationship ended in early 2000. 
In July 2001, when the CW was fourteen years old, the
CW disclosed to her mother that Dural had been engaging in sexual
intercourse with her.  The CW reported that the sexual
intercourse began in 1998, when she was twelve years old, and had
been ongoing since that time.  The CW said that during this time,
Dural had engaged in sexual intercourse with her more than twenty
times at various locations.  The CW's mother immediately reported
the CW's disclosures to the police.  In December 2002,
Respondent-Appellee State of Hawai #i (State) charged Dural by
indictment with five counts of sexual assault.  After a jury
trial, Dural was found guilty as charged on all counts.  His
Judgment of Conviction (Judgment) was entered on November 3,
2003.
Dural filed a direct appeal of his convictions.  This
court issued a summary disposition order which affirmed Dural's
convictions, and the supreme court denied Dural's application for
writ of certiorari.  State v. Dural , No. 26265, 2005 WL 1538971
(June 29, 2005).  On July 31, 2006, Dural filed his first
petition for post-conviction relief pursuant to Hawai# i Rules of
Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 (2006) (First Rule 40 Petition),
which the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)
denied.  On appeal, this court affirmed the Circuit Court's order
denying Dural's First Rule 40 Petition.  Dural v. State , No.
28533, 2008 WL 4195893 (Sept. 15, 2008).  The supreme court
denied Dural's application for writ of certiorari, but without
prejudice to his filing another HRPP Rule 40 petition based on
alleged newly discovered evidence that had been presented for the
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
first time in the appeal.  Dural v. State , No. 28533, 2009 WL
2051423 (Jan. 27, 2009).
Dural subsequently filed his second petition for post-
conviction relief pursuant to HRRP Rule 40 (Second Rule 40
Petition).  While the Second Rule 40 Petition was pending in the
Circuit Court, Dural was granted parole by the Hawai #i Paroling
Authority on December 1, 2011.  Dural's Second Rule 40 Petition
was based on alleged newly discovered evidence that the CW was
involved in a sexual relationship with C.K. during or near the
period of time that Dural was charged with sexually assaulting
the CW.  C.K. was more than ten years older than the CW.  The CW
married C.K. a month after Dural's trial was completed.  It was
Dural's theory that the CW had falsely accused him of sexual
assault to cover up or conceal her sexual relationship with C.K.
After holding evidentiary hearings, the Circuit Court
denied Dural's Second Rule 40 Petition.  The Circuit Court found
among other things that "[the CW] was not having sexual relations
with [C.K.] before or during the time period stated in the
indictment" for Dural's charged sexual assaults.  The Circuit
Court also concluded that Dural's asserted newly discovered
evidence would not probably change the result in a later trial. 
On appeal, Dural contends that the Circuit Court1 erred
in: (1) denying his request for a new trial; and (2) denying his  
request to reopen the proceedings to consider additional
evidence.  As explained below, we conclude that Dural presented
newly discovered evidence that warranted a new trial and that the
Circuit Court abused its discretion in denying his request for a
new trial.  We therefore vacate the Circuit Court's order denying
Dural's Second Rule 40 Petition and remand the case for further
proceedings.
1The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided over Dural's trial
and his Second Rule 40 Petition.  The Honorable Richard W.
Pollack presided over Dural's First Rule 40 Petition.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
BACKGROUND
The CW was born in late November 1986.  The indictment
charged Dural with sexually assaulting the CW between late
November 1998 and late November 2000, when the CW was 12 and 13
years old.  Dural was born in August 1974, and thus he was twenty
four to twenty six years old at the time of the charged offenses. 
At the time of the alleged sexual assaults, the age of consent in
Hawai#i was fourteen years old, and thus consensual sexual
activity with someone fourteen years or older was not a crime. 
See Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 707-730, 707-732 (1993).2   
Dural was charged in the indictment with first-degree
sexual assault for subjecting the CW to sexual penetration by
inserting his penis into her vaginal opening (Count 1).  He was
also charged with third-degree sexual assault for subjecting the
CW to sexual contact or causing her to have sexual contact by
placing his hand on her breast (Count 2), placing his hand on her
genitals (Count 3), placing his mouth on her breast (Count 4),
and causing her to place her hand on his penis (Count 5).  
I.
At Dural's trial, the CW's mother (Mother) testified
that at the end of December 1999, Mother and her children moved
into Dural's apartment while she was experiencing marital
difficulties.  While Mother was living with Dural, the two became
involved in a romantic and sexual relationship.  Mother's
relationship with Dural ended in early 2000, and she told Dural
to stay away from her family.  Dural, however, continued to see
the CW and her siblings through their visits with their
biological father (Father), who lived with Dural for a period of
time and was close friends with Dural.
According to Mother, she learned on July 13, 2001, that
the CW had been sexually assaulted by Dural.  Prior to the CW's
disclosure, the CW had been asking Mother about sex and
2Effective July 10, 2001, the age of consent for sexual
activity in Hawai# i was raised from fourteen years old to sixteen
years old.  See infra  note 7.  
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
pregnancy.  Mother saw that the CW "was troubled" and asked the
CW whether something was bothering her.  The CW eventually told
Mother that the CW was not a virgin.  The CW was crying when she
said this.  Mother asked the CW who it was, and Mother named
several people, but the CW did not respond with a name.  Mother
asked the CW if the person was an adult, and the CW said yes. 
Mother then asked if the person was Dural, and the CW responded
"yes[.]"  The next day, Mother reported the CW's disclosure to
the police.  Mother accompanied the CW to interviews with police
detectives and to a physical examination by a doctor.  Mother
never personally saw Dural having sex with or fondling the CW.  
The CW's stepfather (Stepfather) testified that Dural
was his former brother-in-law, having previously been married to
Stepfather's sister.  According to Stepfather, after Dural
separated from Stepfather's sister in 1999, Dural would come over
and sleep at Stepfather's house.  Stepfather would come out of
his room late at night and see Dural and the CW "sleeping
together in a cuddled position" "head by head, arms wrapped
around each other" on the living room couch.  Stepfather saw
Dural laying on the couch with the CW in this position about five
times, and it made Stepfather "feel kinda uneasy because [he]
didn't think that was proper[.]"  Stepfather and Dural were "real
close," and Stepfather considered Dural to be one of his best
friends.
The CW's older brother (Brother) testified that Dural
treated Brother and his sisters "good," taking them to the beach
and the arcade, and they liked "hanging out" with Dural.  Brother
stated that he saw Dural and the CW more than once "cuddled
together" on the couch.  He also stated that Dural and the CW
would leave together alone on store or food runs and take "longer
than necessary" to come back.
The CW testified that her sexual relationship with
Dural began when she was twelve.  According to the CW, she had
sexual intercourse with Dural more than twenty times while she
was twelve and thirteen years old.  Dural had sex with the CW in
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
various places in the CW's home, in the bathroom and bedroom at 
Dural's apartment, and in his car at night at Blaisdell Park
while they were out buying food.  The CW testified that her
sexual encounters with Dural were "consensual," that Dural said
that he loved her, and that she wanted to have sex with him. 
During their sexual encounters, Dural also touched her breast
with his hands and mouth and touched her genitals with his hand,
and she touched his penis with her hand.  The CW testified that
the last time she had sex with Dural was about the end of June or
beginning of July 2001, when she was fourteen years old.  This
was right before she disclosed her sexual relationship with Dural
to Mother. 
With respect to her disclosure to Mother, the CW
testified that she had asked Mother questions about sex and
pregnancy.  According to the CW, Mother then asked whether the CW
was having sex, and the CW said no.  The CW felt bad about lying
to Mother and eventually told Mother that she was no longer a
virgin.  Mother asked who the CW had sex with, first listing
names of boys the CW's age.  Mother then asked whether it was an
adult, and the CW said yes.  Mother asked whether it was Dural,
and the CW responded "Yeah." 
Dural testified in his own defense at trial.  Dural
denied that he had engaged in any sexual intercourse or sexual
contact with the CW.  Dural's theory of defense was that Mother
was upset that he had ended their relationship, and that Mother
had induced the CW to make false accusations against him.  
The jury found Dural guilty as charged on all counts. 
The Circuit Court sentenced Dural to twenty years of
incarceration on Count 1 and five years of incarceration on each
of Counts 2 through 5, with all terms to run concurrently.  On
November 3, 2003, the Circuit Court entered its Judgment.
II.
Dural filed a direct appeal from his Judgment.  On
appeal, Dural argued that: (1) evidence of Mother's attempted
suicide when she and Dural ended their relationship was
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
improperly excluded because it showed bias against Dural; (2)
evidence of prior allegations by Mother that Dural had sexually
assaulted Mother and that Dural's ex-wife had sexually assaulted
Mother's son were improperly excluded because the evidence showed
Mother's untruthfulness and Mother's bias against Dural; and (3)
the prosecutor had engaged in misconduct in cross-examining Dural
and in closing argument.  This court affirmed the Circuit Court's
Judgment by summary disposition order filed on June 29, 2005, and
the supreme court denied Dural's application for writ of
certiorari on August 8, 2005.
III.
On July 31, 2006, Dural filed his First Rule 40
Petition.  Among the other arguments, Dural asserted that: 
The trial court allowed the prosecution to make
representations that [the CW] was a virgin, and that I was
the person having sex with her, and did not allow me to
establish my innocence by showing that the person involved
with [the CW] was actually her stepfather's best friend, and
to show the personal reasons [the CW] and her mother had to
blame me instead.
In his supporting memorandum, Dural asserted that he had "[n]ewly
discovered evidence" that the CW had actually been involved with
a man named C.K., and that in exchange for accusing Dural in
C.K.'s place, the CW was "rewarded with new bedroom furniture"
and given parental consent to marry C.K. shortly after Dural's
conviction. 
The Circuit Court denied Dural's First Rule 40
Petition.  As to Dural's arguments about the evidence of the CW's
relationship with C.K., the Circuit Court found that this
evidence did not meet the legal standard to prevail on a motion
for new trial based on newly discovered evidence because, even
assuming it qualified as newly discovered evidence, it was
offered solely for impeachment purposes.  Dural appealed the
Circuit Court's order denying his First Rule 40 Petition.  This
court issued a summary disposition order affirming the Circuit
Court.  We concluded that the Circuit Court did not err in
finding that Dural's proffered evidence concerning C.K. failed to
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
meet the standard established for a new trial based on newly
discovered evidence.  Dural v. State , No. 28533, 2008 WL 4195893
at *6 (Hawai# i App. Sept. 15, 2008) (SDO).  During his appeal,
Dural referred to statements appearing on the CW's website that
had not been presented to the Circuit Court.  We declined to
consider this evidence in deciding Dural's appeal.  Id.  
Dural applied for a writ of certiorari from this
court's decision with the Hawai #i Supreme Court.  On January 27,
2009, the supreme court denied the application for certiorari,
but without prejudice to Dural "filing another Rule 40 petition
in the circuit court based on alleged website statements of [the
CW] and the declarations of [C.K.] and [Mother], referred to in
the Application [for certiorari]."
IV.
A.
On May 1, 2009, Dural filed his Second Rule 40
Petition.  Dural was represented by attorneys through the Hawai# i
Innocence Project.  In this petition, Dural alleged that C.K.,
and not Dural, had actually been involved in a sexual
relationship with the CW; the accusations against Dural had been
fabricated in order to protect this relationship; subsequent
statements by Mother, Stepfather, and C.K. himself supported
these claims; Dural's rights had been prejudiced by his inability
to present this evidence at trial; and therefore a new trial was
necessary.  In support of his Second Rule 40 Petition, Dural
submitted copies of postings on the CW's MySpace page; evidence
regarding the CW's marriage to and divorce from C.K.; reports
prepared by a polygraph examiner regarding examinations conducted
with Dural and the CW; and Declarations from Mother, Stepfather,
and C.K.
The evidence concerning the CW's MySpace page consisted
of a series of messages between the CW and another user that were
exchanged between December 2006 and December 2008.  During an
exchange on December 11, 2006, the CW mentioned that she was
going through a divorce with someone she had been together with
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
for six years.  When the other user asked the CW whether the
person she was divorcing had taken her virginity, the CW
responded "no he wuz not my first unfortunately[.]"  The CW also
stated that when she was with her husband, she was only with him
and not other people. 
Dural submitted reports of polygraph examinations that
were administered to Dural on February 9, 2009, and to the CW on
April 29, 2009, at the request of Dural's attorneys.  The
polygraph examiner opined that the results of Dural's examination
indicated that Dural was telling the truth when he answered "No"
to the questions: "Did you ever touch [the CW] for sexual
purposes?" and "Did you ever touch [the CW] sexually."  The
polygraph examiner also opined that the results of the CW's
examination indicated that the CW was not telling the truth when
she answered "Yes" to the questions: "Did you ever have sexual
intercourse with Dural?" and "Did you have sexual intercourse
with Dural before your 15th birthday?"  The Circuit Court
subsequently ruled that the polygraph evidence was inadmissible
and did not consider such evidence in ruling on the Second Rule
40 Petition.
With respect to the Declarations of Mother, Stepfather,
and C.K., significant disputes arose regarding the circumstances
under which the declarations had been obtained by representatives
of the Innocence Project, the declarant's intent in signing the
declaration, and the accuracy of the declarations.  These
disputes were addressed during the evidentiary hearings held by
the Circuit Court on the Second Rule 40 Petition.  Although the
CW did not sign a declaration, the CW told the police that she
met with representatives of the Innocence Project and D.D.,
Dural's ex-wife and Stepfather's sister, who the CW thought
wanted to remarry Dural.  The CW stated that she was handed a
pre-typed declaration, which stated that she never had sex with
Dural and that Mother had forced her to bring charges against
Dural.  The CW refused to sign the declaration and maintained
that her allegations against Dural were true.  When she refused
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to sign the declaration, the CW stated that the Innocence Project
representatives tried to get her to sign by telling her others
would be going against her if she refused.  The CW also stated
that she took the polygraph examination twice because she was
told that the first time she took it, the results were
inconclusive.  She did not know what the results of the second
test were. 
B.
The Circuit Court held a series of evidentiary hearings
on Dural's Second Rule 40 Petition.  Based on the testimony
presented, the following evidence was largely undisputed.  On
July 13, 2001, the CW told Mother that Dural had been engaging in
sexual intercourse with the CW, starting when the CW was twelve. 
A year later, in July or August 2002, Mother and Stepfather
returned home late at night and saw the CW and C.K. together in
the living room.  The CW was naked and C.K. was only wearing
shorts.  C.K. was a good friend of Stepfather, and he told
Stepfather he wanted to marry the CW.  C.K. and the CW were
married in mid-September 2003, a little over a month after the
jury had found Dural guilty.  The CW was required to and did
obtain Mother's permission to marry C.K. because the CW was two
months short of seventeen when she got married.  C.K. was twenty-
nine years old when he married the CW.  C.K. and the CW were
divorced in 2007.  C.K. was not called as a witness at Dural's
trial, and he was not specifically mentioned at trial. 
Although the existence of a sexual relationship between
the CW and C.K. as of August 2002 was undisputed, when the CW's
sexual relationship with C.K. began and whether the CW had been
in a sexual relationship with C.K. prior to July 13, 2001, when
the CW told Mother that Dural and the CW had been engaging in
sexual intercourse, was significantly contested.
1.
C.K. testified at a hearing on Dural's Second Rule 40
Petition.  C.K. testified that he first kissed and began dating 
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the CW on December 31, 2000, and they first had sex in August
2001.  C.K. denied that their romantic relationship preceded
December 31, 2000.  C.K. remembered the date of their first kiss
because it occurred at a housewarming party for one of his
neighbors.  The neighbor's prior residence had burned down and
members of their church, including the CW's family, had
volunteered to renovate a house next to C.K.'s house so the
neighbor could move in.  C.K. first kissed the CW, which is when
they began dating, after the renovations were completed at a
housewarming party when the neighbor moved in.  C.K.'s residence
and the neighbor's residence were owned by the same landlord. 
C.K. confirmed the date of his first kiss by calling the landlord
and finding out when the neighbor had moved into the renovated
residence.
C.K. acknowledged that in August of 2002, Stepfather
and Mother had discovered the CW, with no clothes on, and him
together.  Shortly after this incident, C.K. told Stepfather that
his sexual relationship with the CW had been going on for about a
year.  The incident was reported to C.K.'s church, which resulted
in his being disfellowshipped on August 15, 2002.  He was
reinstated to the Church in 2003.  He subsequently married the CW
in mid-September 2003, and they were divorced in 2007.
C.K. also testified about the circumstances under which
he signed the declaration, which Dural submitted in support of
his Second Rule 40 Petition.  C.K.'s declaration was signed and
dated November 12, 2008, contained a portion that had been
crossed out, and provided in relevant part as follows:
2. I am the person who had a consensual sexual
relationship with [the CW], the complaining witness in
Cr. No. 02-1-2791, from November 1998 to November 27,
2000, which is the time period in which Roynes Dural
is alleged to have committed the sexual assaults.
3. For my sexual relationship with [the CW], I was
disfellowshipped from my congregation.
4. After making the necessary amends, I was reinstated
into the congregation. 
 
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5. On September 18, 2003, shortly after Roynes Dural's
conviction, [the CW] and I married.
I, [C.K.] declare under penalty of perjury that the above is 
true and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief.
(Strikeout in original.)  C.K. initialed next to the text "from
November 1998 to November 27, 2000" that he had crossed out.  
According to C.K., he was contacted by Edward Hu (Hu)  
in December 2006 or January 2007 and the two met in C.K.'s home. 
Hu identified himself as a law student investigating Dural's
case.  Hu told C.K. that he believed that C.K., and not Dural,
had sex with the CW.  C.K. denied that this was the case.  The
first meeting with Hu lasted ten to fifteen minutes. 
C.K. met with Hu again on November 12, 2008.  This
time, Hu was accompanied by Virginia Hench (Hench), a law
professor with the Innocence Project, and D.D., Dural's ex-wife. 
C.K. testified that Hu told him that the CW was now stating that
C.K., and not Dural, was the person that the CW had a sexual
relationship with during the period charged in the indictment. 
(There is no indication in the record that the CW had made such a
statement).  Hu also told C.K. that Mother had recanted her
testimony and implicated him.  After being informed that Mother
and the CW had changed their statements and implicated him, C.K.
was provided with a pre-written declaration. 
C.K. testified that after reviewing the declaration, he
knew that the dates in Paragraph 2 were wrong.  This paragraph
stated: "I am the person who had a consensual sexual relationship
with [the CW], the complaining witness in Cr. No. 02-1-2791, from
November 1998 to November 27, 2000, which is the time period in
which Roynes Dural is alleged to have committed the sexual
assaults."  C.K. testified that he left the room and confirmed
the correct dates by calling his landlord.  He knew that he had
first kissed the CW at a New Year's Eve party celebrating the
completion of his neighbor's renovated home.  He talked to the
landlord and confirmed that the party was held on December 31,
2000.  C.K. testified that he informed Hu that the dates in the
declaration were incorrect and that he had the correct dates, to
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
which Hu responded that "the dates wasn't important, it didn't
matter."  Accordingly, C.K. did not write in the correct dates on
the declaration.  C.K. testified that Hu told him not to worry
about criminal liability for his conduct because the applicable
statute of limitations had already run out.  C.K. responded that
he was not worried about being prosecuted but "was concerned
about the truth, because [he] wasn't with her at these dates."  
C.K. crossed out the dates, "from November 1998 to
November 27, 2000" in Paragraph 2, but left the remainder of the
statement intact.  C.K. testified that he did not cross out the
statement "which is the time period in which Roynes Dural is
alleged to have committed the sexual assault" because he believed
by crossing out the specific dates, he had invalidated the
remainder of Paragraph 2.  Despite having reservations about
signing the declaration, C.K. ultimately signed the declaration. 
C.K. stated that during the meeting with Hu, Hench, and D.D., he
told them many times that he did not want to sign the
declaration.  However, Hu pressured C.K. into signing the
declaration by telling him that if he did not sign, they would
subpoena his church's congregation and the elders in his
congregation and would bring the matter "into the media . . . so
it would be exposed." 
Judy Kagawa (Kagawa), the real estate broker for the
residences of C.K. and his neighbor, corroborated aspects of
C.K.'s testimony.  Kagawa testified that she recalls receiving a
phone call from C.K. regarding the renovations that had been done
to his neighbor's house and when the neighbor had moved in. 
Kagawa stated that the neighbor's prior residence had burned
down, and members of the neighbor's congregation had approached
the landlord and volunteered to perform the labor if the landlord
would purchase the materials to renovate the residence so the
neighbor could move in.  Kagawa stated that the landlord agreed,
the renovations were made in November and December 2000, and the
neighbor moved in on January 1, 2001.  During her phone call with 
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
C.K., Kagawa provided him the information about when the neighbor
had moved in.   
2.
Hu testified that when he first contacted C.K., Hu was
a law student representing the Innocence Project.  When Hu
visited C.K. the second time on November 12, 2008, with Hench and
D.D., Hu was in a post-graduate fellowship with the Innocence
Project.  For the second meeting, Hu brought a declaration he had
typed for C.K.  According to Hu, during his first visit with
C.K., he had told C.K. that even if C.K. had engaged in sexual
intercourse with the CW during the period alleged in the
indictment, C.K. could not be prosecuted because the statute of
limitations had run.  Hu was worried that this information was
incorrect, and he asked Hench to explain to C.K. that the statute
of limitations had not run.  Hench did so at the beginning of the
interview.  Despite this explanation, C.K. said he would sign the
declaration.  
However, before signing, C.K. said he was unsure about
the dates in Paragraph 2.  C.K. left the room for what seemed
like a long time.  When he came back, C.K. said that his
relationship with the CW had begun on December 31, 2000, which
was after the CW turned fourteen.  
Hu said he told C.K. that C.K. could cross out the
dates.  Hu said that he asked C.K. whether it would still be
accurate to retain the remaining language in Paragraph 2. 
According to Hu, C.K. said yes, even though retaining the
remaining language in Paragraph 2 would indicate that C.K. was
admitting to having sex with the CW during the period charged in
the indictment, which was before the December 31, 2000, date that
C.K. said his relationship with the CW began.  C.K. crossed out
the specific dates, initialed the portion he crossed out, and
signed the declaration. 
The Circuit Court subsequently ruled that it "did not
find Edward Hu to be a credible witness."  
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3.
Mother testified that in the summer of 2002, she and
Stepfather returned home in the evening and found C.K. and the CW
"laying on the floor in the living room."  She stated that the CW
was completely nude, while C.K. only had shorts on.  When Mother
confronted C.K., he informed her that the relationship had been
going on for "about a year and a half."  Mother later testified
that C.K. had informed her that the relationship had been going
on "about a year and a half, two years.  I don't know exactly how
long."  Mother also testified that "they said the first time he
kissed her was in like December, and then it wasn't till March
till they actually had sex."  Shortly after Mother and Stepfather
discovered C.K. and the CW together, C.K. was disfellowshipped
from their church congregation.
Mother said she thought she told the prosecutor's
office about the sexual relationship between C.K. and the CW, but
then said, "I don't remember if I [told them]."  Mother asserted
that all of her testimony at Dural's trial was true and none of
it was incorrect. 
Mother described the circumstances surrounding the
declarations that she signed that had been prepared by the
Innocence Project.  Mother testified that there were several
errors in the first November 8, 2008, declaration that she
signed.  Paragraph 3 read: "I know the identity of the man,
'C.K.' who was actually sexually involved with my daughter, [the
CW], the complaining witness in Cr. No. 02-1-2791, during the
time Roynes Dural is alleged to have committed the sexual
assaults."  Mother stated that the time frame during which C.K.
was sexually involved with the CW and the time frame during which
Dural was sexually involved with the CW were different, although
Mother thought these time frames were overlapping.  Mother also
stated that C.K. and the CW said their sexual relationship began
after 1998 to 2000 -- the dates alleged in the indictment -- and
that Mother was unsure of what time period Paragraph 3
referenced.  
15NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Paragraph 4 of Mother's declaration read: "The man who
was sexually involved with [the CW] during the relevant time
period is not Roynes Dural."  Mother testified that Paragraph 4
was "not worded right[.]"  Specifically, Mother stated that she
did not mean to state that the CW was having sex with C.K. and
not with Dural, but rather, she believed that the CW was having
sex with both C.K. and Dural.  ("It wasn't an either/or kind of a
situation.").  Mother testified that she believed that both Dural
and C.K. had sex with the CW and that the periods of these sexual
relationships overlapped. 
Paragraph 5 of Mother's declaration read: "I know
'C.K.' is the man who committed the offenses for which Roynes
Dural is convicted because I personally witnessed it, first
hand."  Mother acknowledged that Paragraph 5 was incorrect
because she had only personally witnessed the CW and C.K.
together in a state of undress in the summer of 2002, not during
the period charged in the indictment.  Mother also stated that
she never saw C.K. and the CW having sex, and that she only knew
about their sexual relationship because C.K. admitted to it after
the 2002 incident.  Mother repeated that she believed that both
Dural and C.K. "had access" to the CW "at overlapping periods of
time."  
Paragraph 8 of Mother's declaration stated that: "My
prior accusation of sexual assault against Roynes Dural made
first on August 3, 2000, and as testified to during the pretrial
proceedings and trial was false."  This statement refers to
Mother's allegation, which she reported to the police on August
3, 2000, that Dural had sexually assaulted Mother.  Mother
testified that Paragraph 8 was incorrect and that Dural did
sexually assault her.  Mother stated that she told the attorneys
that her accusation that Dural had sexually assaulted her was
true.
 Although Mother asserted that there were inaccuracies
in her November 8, 2008, declaration, she testified that she
signed it anyway because "they said they would take care of it." 
16NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The second declaration Mother signed was very similar to the
first declaration, except the second declaration contained C.K.'s
full name rather than his initials and added a paragraph stating
that Mother had never seen "any inappropriate behavior from
Roynes Dural toward my daughter."  Mother testified that the
second declaration had been pre-written, the changes she
requested from her first declaration had not been made, and the
second declaration contained the same inaccuracies as the first
declaration.  Nevertheless, Mother admitted that she signed the
second declaration.
4.
Stepfather testified that he first noticed something
between the CW and C.K. when he observed the CW resting her head
in C.K.'s lap in late 2000.  Then, one evening at the end of July
2002, Stepfather and Mother returned home and discovered the CW
and C.K. together.  Stepfather stated that the CW was nude, and
C.K. was only wearing "a pair of shorts[.]"  Stepfather stated
that C.K. approached him about a week later to discuss the
incident.  During their discussion, C.K. admitted that he had
been carrying on a romantic and sexual relationship with the CW
for "about two years[.]"
Stepfather stated that he never told the prosecution or
its investigators about C.K. having a sexual relationship with
the CW.  Stepfather stated that he testified truthfully at
Dural's trial and that he had witnessed the conduct (Dural and
the CW sleeping cuddled together on the couch) that he testified
to at trial. 
Stepfather testified that there were a number of
inaccuracies in his declaration.  The declaration stated that
Stepfather walked in on C.K. and the CW in "early 2002
approximately January[.]"  Stepfather acknowledged at the hearing
that he had actually walked in on them in about July 2002.  He
was sure of the July date because this incident occurred a week
or two before C.K. was disfellowshipped from the congregation in
August 2002. (C.K. was disfellowshipped on August 15, 2002). 
17NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Stepfather's declaration also stated that "[C.K.] and [the CW]
admitted that they had been sexually involved since [the CW] was
appropriately 12 years of age."  However, in July of 2002, the CW
was fifteen years old, and in July of 2000, the CW was thirteen
years old.  Stepfather acknowledged that the statement in his
declaration that "[C.K.] and [the CW] admitted that they had been
sexually involved since [the CW] was appropriately 12" was not
correct.   
Stepfather clarified Paragraph 4 of his declaration,
which stated: "I know the identity of the man, [C.K.], who was
actually sexually involved with [the CW] when she was underage
and during the time Roynes Dural is alleged to have committed
sexual assaults against [the CW]."  Stepfather testified that his
statement did not mean that he believed that only C.K., and not
Dural, had engaged in a sexual relationship with the CW.  Rather,
it only meant that in hindsight, he was aware that the sexual
relationship between the CW and C.K. was ongoing on or around the
period of time Dural was charged in the indictment.  Stepfather
testified that he did not prepare his declaration and that it was
written before anyone had talked to him about its contents.
5.
The CW testified and explained the circumstances
leading to her disclosure to Mother of her sexual relationship
with Dural:
I skipped my period and [Mother] had asked me if anything
had happened, and I told her no. . . . And then I felt bad
lying to her about it because she kept asking me, so I
finally told her that something . . . . did happen.  I was
afraid to mention who it was, so she went through a list of
names. . . . And when she said Dural's name, then I said
yes, that it was him.
When asked specifically whether she was in a sexual
relationship with C.K. at the time she disclosed her sexual
relationship with Dural to Mother in July 2001, the CW repeatedly
said no.  The CW testified that she began having sex with C.K.
18NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
after her sexual encounters with Dural had ended,3 and there was
no overlap between the time during which she had sex with C.K.
and the time during which she had sex with Dural:
Q But at the time that this event [(the CW's disclosure
to Mother of the CW's sexual relationship with Dural)]
had happened, you were already in a sexual
relationship with [C.K.]; is that correct?
A No.  When she had asked me?
Q Correct.
A The very first time she had asked me if anything had
happened?
Q When you had missed your period.
A Was I with [C.K.]?
Q Yes.
A No.
Q You were not with [C.K.] at that time?
A No.
. . . .
Q During the time that there was a sexual relationship
going on between you and Roynes Dural, okay, during
that time, did you have sex with [C.K.] at all during
that time?
A No.
. . . .
Q Okay.  Before we go into the dates, without the dates,
okay, during the time that you had had sex with Roynes
Dural, were you having sex with [C.K.] during that
same time frame?
A No.
Q Okay.  Did you have sex with [C.K.] before that time
frame that you had sex with Roynes Dural?
A No.
Q Did you have sex with [C.K.] after the time frame that
you had sex with Roynes Dural?
A Yes.
3At Dural's trial, the CW testified that she last had sex
with Dural within about a month before she reported her sexual
relationship with Dural to Mother on July 13, 2001.
19NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Q Okay.  And so just so that we're clear, so there was no
overlap between the two?
A No.
However, the CW also testified that the first time she
kissed C.K. was during a housewarming party for a family after
the construction of their house was completed, which C.K. had
testified occurred on December 31, 2000.  When asked how long
after this first kiss did she have sex with C.K., the CW replied
"I would say a couple months."  Also, when again pressed by
Dural's counsel about whether she was in a sexual relationship
with C.K. when she reported the allegations against Dural to the
police, the CW replied that she did not know:
Q Now, you had told your mother about this -- having a
relationship with Roynes Dural, you told your mom
about that in July of 2001; is that correct?
A I'm not sure.
Q July 13th of 2001?  Do you remember that?
A No.
Q It was reported to police on July 14th of 2001;
correct?
A I don't know.
Q You don't remember that?
A No.  I don't know when.
Q But at the time it was reported to the police, July 14th of
2001, you had already had a relationship with [C.K.], is
that correct, a sexual relationship?
A I don't know.
Q Because that sexual relationship began in 2000 -- at
least 2000; is that correct?
A I don't know.  I guess.
Q You guess?
A I don't know.
Q But you said around ninth grade; is that correct?
A Yeah.
Q All right.  So at the time that this -- you reported 
-- just think about back to that time, the time that
20NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
you reported this allegation of sexual assault.  
You were already in a relationship with [C.K.] at that
point, isn't that correct?
A Can you repeat that.  I'm sorry.
Q Yes.  At the time that you went to the police to
report the sexual assault, you were already in a
relationship with [C.K.] at that time; is that
correct?
A I don't know.
Then, when asked whether she was in a "relationship" with C.K.
(without specifying whether it was a sexual relationship) when
she went to the police, the CW said "yes."
The CW acknowledged that prior to Dural's trial, she
did not tell police officers or the prosecution about her
relationship with C.K.
C.
The evidentiary hearings on Dural's Second Rule 40
Petition were completed on June 28, 2011.  The parties were given
time to prepare closing arguments and proposed findings of fact
and conclusions of law.  In the meantime, Dural had a parole
hearing before the Hawai #i Paroling Authority on October 5, 2011.
The Paroling Authority granted Dural parole and he was released
from custody on December 1, 2011.
In support of Dural's request for parole, Dural's
attorneys had submitted a letter from Mother dated August 20,
2011.  In the letter, Mother maintained that Dural was
"wrongful[ly] incarcerated" and stated that: 
I had been lied to and lead to believe that Dural was
responsible for a sexual relationship with [the CW]. 
However I now know for a fact, no doubts whatsoever that
Roynes Joseph Dural is innocent of all said claims and
charges.  [The CW] has admitted that it was NOT Dural but
[C.K.] that she was having a sexual relationship with. 
[C.K.] is the person responsible for the sexual crimes
against [the CW].  [C.K.] is the one who should be
incarcerated and should NOT be working at an elementary
school.  [C.K.] has admitted to me that he had a sexual
relationship with [the CW] while she was a minor and that he
told her not to tell anyone.  He also admitted to me that
they had been having sex for about a year and a half before
they got caught.  The evidence speaks for itself.
Dural's attorneys also took a sworn deposition of
21NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Mother on September 21, 2011.  In this deposition, Mother
explained that she had been "confused as to the timelines" about
certain events during hearings on the Second Rule 40 Petition and
that the facts and circumstances surrounding these events had
since become clearer.  Mother stated that when the discussion in
July 2001 about whom the CW was having sex with took place, the
CW did not actually name Dural.  Mother said that when the CW
disclosed she was not a virgin, Mother began to list off names. 
Mother asked whether it was Stepfather, and the CW responded
"no."  Mother then asked whether it was Dural, to which the CW
did not respond and "got quiet."  Mother asked again, and when
the CW did not respond, Mother "took [the CW's] silence as a
confirmation[.]"  Mother stated that the CW never affirmatively
told Mother that Dural had sex with the CW.  Mother did not ask
the CW about C.K. because Mother did not consider him to be a
possibility. 
In her deposition, Mother discussed discovering the CW
and C.K. together in August of 2002.  Mother said she spoke to
C.K. the next day and C.K. disclosed that the relationship had
"been going on for about a year and a half to two years."  Mother
stated that the CW said the same thing.  Mother stated that this
meant the sexual relationship between the CW and C.K. would have
begun while the CW was still thirteen years old.4  C.K. also told
Mother that "he told [the CW] not to say anything" about their
relationship.  Mother stated that she submitted the letter to the
Paroling Authority because she believed that C.K. had sex with
the CW while she was thirteen, and Dural did not. 
Mother stated in her deposition that she believed she
told the prosecuting attorney handling Dural's case about C.K.'s
sexual relationship with the CW prior to Dural's trial. 
Dural moved to supplement the record or reopen the HRPP
Rule 40 proceedings with Mother's letter to the Paroling
4The CW's birthday was in late November 1986, so she would
have been thirteen two years before August 2002, but fourteen one
and half years before August 2002.
22NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Authority and her deposition.  Dural later moved to supplement
the record or reopen the proceedings with another statement by
Stepfather dated March 21, 2013.  Stepfather's March 21, 2013,
statement included the following: 
During the trial my ex-wife at the time [Mother] and I
testified that [the CW] was not sexually involved with
anyone other than Mr. Dural.  This testimony was misleading
and inaccurate due to preparation by the [deputy]
prosecuting attorney [(DPA]) . . . . A question of [the
CW's] relationship history was asked, whether or not she had
a prior partners [sic] or was Mr. Dural the only one.  We
knew of her relationship with [C.K.] before the trial but
was told by [the DPA] that because the relationship between
[the CW] and [C.K.] was after the said relationship with Mr.
Dural that this information wasn't necessary to be brought
up and to bring it up wouldn't help the case, so it was best
to leave that information out.  So when I testified and was
asked if [the CW] had any other relationships I said no. 
The reason given to me by [the DPA] was not to think if she
"ever" had other relationships but to only consider what was
happening "at the time" of the original charges.  This was
misleading now that time and other critical information has
been brought forward.
(Format altered; internal correction markings omitted).  This
statement appears inconsistent with Stepfather's testimony at the
Rule 40 hearing that he did not tell the prosecution about C.K.
having a sexual relationship with the CW. 
The Circuit Court held a hearing on Dural's motion to
supplement the record or reopen the proceedings on March 25,
2013.  During the hearing, the Circuit Court noted that extensive
testimony had been presented during the evidentiary hearings on
the Second Rule 40 Petition; the parties had a full opportunity
examine the witnesses, including Mother and Stepfather; and it
was unclear from the proffered statements exactly what, if any,
new evidence was truly being offered.  Based on these
considerations, the Circuit Court denied Dural's motion to
supplement the record or reopen the proceedings.
D.
On August 29, 2013, the Circuit Court issued its Order
Denying Second Rule 40 Petition.  In its Order, the Circuit
found: 
18.  Based upon its observations of the witness and
his testimony, and upon the totality of the evidence, the
Court did not find Edward Hu to be a credible witness.
23NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
19.  [The CW] was not dating [C.K.] before or during the
time period stated in the indictment.  [The CW] was not having
sexual relations with [C.K.] before or during the time period
stated in the indictment.
The Circuit Court also made the following conclusions
of law:
2.  The declarations of [Mother] and [C.K.] and the
website statements of [the CW] are not material to the
issues at trial and hence are not of such a nature as would
probably change the result in a later trial.  See State v.
McNulty, 60 Haw. 259, 267-68 (1978).
3.  The Court is not reasonably satisfied that the
testimony at trial of [the CW] and [Mother] was false.  See
State v. Teves, 5 Haw. App. 90, 97 (1984).
4.  Pursuant to H.R.P.P. Rule 40, the petition is
patently frivolous, the issues have been previously raised
and ruled upon, or the issues raised have been waived, and
Petitioner has not shown the existence of extraordinary
circumstances that justify his failure to raise the issues.
5.  Moreover, the allegations and arguments contained
in the petition have no merit.
Accordingly, the Circuit Court denied Dural's Second
Rule 40 Petition. 
DISCUSSION
I.
On appeal, Dural argues that the Circuit Court erred in
denying his Second Rule 40 Petition, which was based on newly
discovered evidence of the previously undisclosed relationship
between the CW and C.K..  As explained below, we conclude that
the Circuit Court erred in denying Dural's request for a new
trial based on this newly discovered evidence.
We review the denial of a motion for a new trial under
the abuse of discretion standard.  State v. McNulty, 60 Haw. 259, 
268, 588 P.2d 438, 445 (1978).  HRPP Rule 40 authorizes a
defendant to seek post-conviction relief on the ground "that
there is newly discovered evidence[.]"  HRPP Rule 40(a)(1)(iv). 
In order for a new trial to be granted based on newly discovered
evidence, the defendant must show that
(1) the evidence has been discovered after trial; (2) such
evidence could not have been discovered before or at trial
through the exercise of due diligence; (3) the evidence is
material to the issues and not cumulative or offered solely
24NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
for purposes of impeachment; and (4) the evidence is of such
a nature as would probably change the result of a later
trial.
McNulty, 60 Haw. at 267-68, 588 P.2d at 445.   
The first two requirements have been met.  The
proffered evidence was discovered after trial.  The sources of
the new evidence were either prosecution witnesses at trial (the
CW, Mother, and Stepfather) or unknown to the defense (C.K.). 
They were not accessible to the defense before or at trial, and
thus the failure to discover the evidence before or at trial was
not attributable to the lack of due diligence by the defense.5  
We do not read the third requirement as establishing a
blanket prohibition against the grant of a new trial based on
impeachment evidence.6  Obviously there are situations where
newly discovered evidence offered solely for impeachment can
establish that the defendant was improperly convicted and that a
miscarriage of justice has occurred.  For example, if a defendant
was convicted based on the uncorroborated testimony of a single
witness and newly discovered evidence showed that the witness was
utterly unworthy of belief because he or she had lied
consistently in a series of prior cases, it would be unjust and
illogical to preclude a new trial because the new evidence was
solely offered for impeachment.  See United States v. Taglia , 922
F.2d 413, 415 (7th Cir. 1991).
5The supreme court denied certiorari on Dural's First Rule
40 Petition without prejudice to his filing another Rule 40
petition based on evidence referred to in the application for
certiorari.  Dural did not waive his newly discovered evidence
claim by failing to raise it in his First Rule 40 Petition.
6In McNulty, the supreme court upheld the trial court's
denial of McNulty's new trial motion on the grounds that: (1) the
proffered evidence was not newly discovered because it was known
by McNulty's trial counsel before trial; and (2) McNulty had not
demonstrated that due diligence had been exercised prior to the
conclusion of trial to procure any evidence not known by his
trial counsel.  McNulty , 60 Haw. at 267-68, 588 P.2d at 445.  The
decision in McNulty turned on the first two requirements for a
new trial based on newly discovered evidence.  McNulty  did not
address or apply the third requirement.
25NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Accordingly, courts have recognized that while
ordinarily a new trial will not be granted based on newly
discovered impeachment evidence, there may be impeachment
evidence that is "sufficiently important to the determination of
guilt or innocence that it could change the result on retrial." 
People v. Grissom, 821 N.W.2d 50, 60 (Mich. 2012).  Thus, the
general practice of denying new trials based on newly discovered
impeachment evidence "should not be taken to imply a rule that
even if the defendant proves that his conviction almost certainly
rests on a lie, the [trial] judge is helpless to grant a new
trial."  Taglia, 922 F.2d at 415.
In determining whether newly discovered impeachment
evidence is sufficient to warrant a new trial, courts have
focused on whether the defendant has established an exculpatory
connection between the impeachment evidence and the offense or
whether the impeachment evidence undermines critical inculpatory
evidence.  See Grissom , 821 N.W.2d at 60.  
Here, while the proffered impeachment evidence does not
prove that the CW testified falsely at trial, it was critical
evidence that the defense could have used to strongly attack the
CW's credibility.  The prosecution's case against Dural depended
almost entirely on the CW's testimony and the jury's belief in
her credibility.  The CW was the only witness who could provide
direct evidence of the charged sexual assaults.  No one else
witnessed the CW's alleged sexual encounters with Dural.
In its Order Denying Second Rule 40 Petition, the
Circuit Court did not address the crucial question of whether the
CW and C.K. were involved in a sexual relationship on July 13,
2001, when the CW reported her alleged sexual relationship with
Dural to Mother.  The CW's involvement in a sexual relationship
with C.K. on July 13, 2001, would provide a clear reason and
motive for the CW to falsely accuse Dural and thereby protect
C.K. and conceal their relationship.  The Circuit Court found
that the CW was not dating or having a sexual relationship with
C.K. before or during the period stated in the indictment, which
26NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
charged a period from November 1998 to November 27, 2000. 
However, this finding does not address the relationship between
the CW and C.K. on July 13, 2001, the crucial date for evaluating
whether the CW had an interest in and motive for falsely accusing 
Dural.
The newly discovered evidence shows that the CW was in
a romantic relationship with C.K. on July 13, 2001, when she
reported her alleged sexual relationship with Dural to Mother. 
The CW concealed her relationship with C.K., who was over ten
years older than the CW.  The CW did not tell her family, the
police, or the prosecution about this relationship.  Mother and
Stepfather only discovered the CW's relationship with C.K. when
they unexpectedly walked in on the CW and C.K. in July or August
2002.  At that time, C.K. disclosed that they had been engaged in
a sexual relationship for some time, up to about two years
according to Mother and Stepfather.  If C.K.'s sexual
relationship with the CW had begun before late November 2000 (the
CW's fourteenth birthday), C.K. could have been prosecuted for
first-degree sexual assault on July 13, 2001, when the CW
reported her alleged sexual relationship with Dural to Mother. 
And regardless of whether the CW's sexual relationship with C.K.
began before her fourteenth birthday, the CW plainly had a strong
interest in concealing any sexual relationship with C.K. from
Mother on July 13, 2001.  Dural presented evidence that the CW
had been in a sexual relationship with C.K. before July 13, 2001. 
This included the CW's testimony that she first had sex with C.K.
"a couple months" after their first kiss on December 31, 2000;
Mother's testimony that C.K. and the CW said they had sex in
March following their first kiss; and Mother and Stepfather's
testimony that C.K. admitted having been involved in a sexual
relationship with the CW up to about two years before Mother and
Stepfather found them together in July or August of 2002.  Dural
also presented undisputed evidence that the CW and C.K. were, at
minimum, involved a romantic relationship before July 13, 2001,
which the CW would have had an interest in concealing from
27NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Mother.    
Accordingly, Dural presented newly discovered evidence
that the CW had a clear motive for and interest in making a false
accusation against Dural to conceal her relationship with C.K. 
Such evidence, which was not disclosed or made available to the
defense prior to or during Dural's trial, was necessary to
provide Dural with a fair trial.  Without the newly discovered
evidence, Dural was not able to present a coherent theory or
plausible explanation of why the CW, his niece by marriage with
whom he ostensibly had a good relationship, would falsely accuse
him of sexual assault.  However, with the newly discovered
evidence, Dural would have a cogent basis for attacking the CW's
credibility and demonstrating a motive for lying.7  
For these reasons, we conclude that the impeaching
nature of the proffered evidence does not prevent it from
satisfying the third requirement.  We also conclude that because
the case against Dural is so heavily dependent on the CW's
credibility, and given the cogent basis for impeachment provided
by the newly discovered evidence, the Circuit Court abused its
discretion in concluding that the fourth requirement -- the
evidence is of such a nature as would probably change the result
7We also note that the age of consent for sexual activity in
Hawai#i was raised from fourteen years old to sixteen years old
effective July 10, 2001.  2001 Haw. Sess. Laws, Second Special
Session, Act 1, at 941-43.  On that date, it became a crime for a
person to engage in sexual penetration, or engage in or cause
sexual contact, with a minor who is at least fourteen but less
than sixteen years old, if the perpetrator is at least five years
older than the minor and is not legally married to the minor. 
Id.   Therefore while the age of consent was fourteen during the
period alleged in the indictment against Dural, it became sixteen
on July 10, 2001, three days before the CW reported her alleged
sexual relationship with Dural to Mother on July 13, 2001.  The
CW did not turn sixteen years old until November 2002.  Even if
C.K. had not been involved in a sexual relationship with the CW
before July 13, 2001, C.K.'s undisputed sexual relationship with
the CW before she turned sixteen could have been used at trial to
challenge the CW's interest and motives regarding actions she
took after July 13, 2001, as attempts to protect C.K. or conceal
their relationship.
28NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of a later trial -- had not been satisfied.
II.
In light of our decision that the Circuit Court erred
in denying Dural's request for a new trial based on newly
discovered evidence, we need not address the other arguments
raised by Dural on appeal.
CONCLUSION
We vacate the Order Denying Second Rule 40 Petition,
and we remand the case for further proceedings consistent with
this Memorandum Opinion.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 27, 2018.
On the briefs:
William A. Harrison
Brook Hart
Virginia E. Hench
The Hawai #i Innocence Project
The William S. Richardson School
    of Law
The University of Hawai #i at Mânoa
for Petitioner-AppellantChief Judge
Associate Judge
Stephen K. Tsushima
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Respondent-AppelleeAssociate Judge
29