NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided.1NO. CAAP-15-0000423
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
GREEN TREE SERVICING LLC, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
TIASAMO MALUELUE TUIONUU; TOEFOI FUIMAONO TUIONUU, Defendants-
Appellants, and JOHN DOES, 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS
1-50; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; DOE ENTITIES 1-50; and DOE
GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50, Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-2489)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
Defendants-Appellants Tiasamo Maluelue Tuionuu and
Toefoi Fuimaono Tuionuu (collectively, Tuionuus) appeal from the
"Order Denying Defendants [Tuionuus'] Motion (1) to Set Aside
Default and (2) for Relief from the Court's April 5, 2013 Decree
of Foreclosure and Judgment Thereon, and the Court's July 7, 2014
Order Confirming Foreclosure Sale and Judgment Thereon Filed
February 19, 2015," entered on April 22, 2015 in the Circuit
Court of the First Circuit1/ (Circuit Court).
On appeal, the Tuionuus contend that the Circuit Court
erred in denying the Tuionuus' motion requesting that the Circuit
Court set aside its decree of default and grant relief from its
decree of foreclosure order confirming the foreclosure sale and
judgment entered thereon because they were "victims of a mortgage
rescue scam."
After a careful review of the point raised andNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2Rule 55. Default.
. . . .
(c)  Setting aside default.  For good cause shown the
court may set aside an entry of default and, if a judgment
by default has been entered, may likewise set it side in
accordance with Rule 60(b).
3Rule 60. RELIEF FROM JUDGMENT OR ORDER.
. . . . 
(b) Mistakes; inadvertence; excusable neglect; newly
discovered evidence; fraud, etc. On motion and upon such
terms as are just, the court may relieve a party or a
party's legal representative from a final judgment, order,
or proceeding for the following reasons: (1) mistake,
inadvertence, surprise, or excusable neglect; (2) newly
discovered evidence which by due diligence could not have
been discovered in time to move for a new trial under Rule
59(b); (3) fraud (whether heretofore denominated intrinsic
or extrinsic), misrepresentation, or other misconduct of an
adverse party; (4) the judgment is void; (5) the judgment
has been satisfied, released, or discharged, or a prior
judgment upon which it is based has been reversed or
otherwise vacated, or it is no longer equitable that the
judgment should have prospective application; 
or (6) any
other reason justifying relief from the operation of the
judgment. The motion shall be made within a reasonable time,
and for reasons (1), (2), and (3) not more than one year
after the judgment, order, or proceeding was entered or
taken. A motion under this subdivision (b) does not affect
the finality of a judgment or suspend its operation. This
rule does not limit the power of a court to entertain an
independent action to relieve a party from a judgment,
order, or proceeding, or to set aside a judgment for fraud
upon the court. Writs of coram nobis, coram vobis, audita
querela, and bills of review and bills in the nature of a
bill of review, are abolished, and the procedure for
obtaining any relief from a judgment shall be by motion as
prescribed in these rules or by an independent action.
(Emphasis added).
2arguments made by the parties, the record, and the applicable
authority, we resolve the Tuionuus' appeal as follows and affirm.
The Tuionuu's Motion to Set Aside was based on Hawai# i
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 55(c),2/ which in turn
provides for relief under HRCP Rule 60(b).3/  We review decisions
under HRCP Rules 55(c) or 60(b) for abuse of discretion. Cty. of
Hawaii v. Ala Loop Homeowners, 123 Hawai #i 391, 404, 235 P.3d
1103, 1116 (2010); Beneficial Hawai #i, Inc. v. Casey, 98 Hawai# i
159, 164, 45 P.3d 359, 364 (2002).  Furthermore, the Hawai# i
Supreme Court has held that "[t]he burden is upon appellant in an
appeal to show error by reference to matters in the record, andNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3he or she has the responsibility of providing an adequate
transcript."  Bettencourt v. Bettencourt , 80 Hawai #i 225, 230,
909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995) (brackets omitted).  In addition, "[t]he
law is clear in this jurisdiction that the appellant has the
burden of furnishing the appellate court with a sufficient record
to positively show the alleged error."  Id.  The Tuionuus have
provided no transcripts of the proceedings below and we therefore
do not have an adequate record upon which to review their claimed
error.
Furthermore, taking their claim of error on its face,
that the judgments of foreclosure and confirmation of sale should
be set aside because they relied on a third party's advice, is
without merit.  The Tuionuus do not dispute that, at a minimum, 
they were served with the complaint in this foreclosure
proceeding.  The Tuionuus provide no authority for the
proposition that reliance on a "Homeowner Advocate" is a basis
for a claim of "mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or excusable
neglect."  Moreover, the authority they rely upon, United States
Bank Nat'l Ass'n. v. Salvacion, 125 Hawai #i 242, 257 P.3d 1219,
No. 30594, 2011 WL 1574585 (App. Apr. 26, 2011) (mem.) is
unavailing.  There, this court rejected Salvacion's timely
assertion that the gross negligence of her counsel constituted
"excusable neglect" under HRCP Rule 60(b)(1).  Id. at 6.  Here,
the Tuionuu's motion was filed after the one-year time limit for
motions under HRCP Rule 60(b)(1).
The Tuionuus' reliance on Salvacion , for their claim
under HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) is also misplaced.  Salvacion  involved
Salvacion's reliance on her counsel's "gross negligence" in his
representation to show the "exceptional circumstances" necessary
for relief under the rule.  This court concluded that, while
Salvacion's claim was properly brought under HRCP Rule 60(b)(6),
the trial court failed to apply the proper legal standard in
rejecting the claim and remanded for application for the proper
standard.  Here, the Tuionuus do not rely on the malfeasance or
nonfeasance of counsel, but rather upon the actions and inactions
of an alleged "Homeowner Advocate" who did not represent herself
to be an attorney.  Based on the limited record before us weNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4cannot conclude the Tuionuus have shown the Circuit Court abused
its discretion in denying their Motion to Set Aside.
For the foregoing reasons, the Order Denying Defendants
Tiasamo Maluelue Tuionuu and Toefoi Tuimaono Tuionuu's Motion (1)
to Set Aside Default and (2) for Relief from the Court's April 5,
2013 Decree of Foreclosure and Judgment Thereon, and the Court's
July 7, 2014 Order Confirming Foreclosure Sale and Judgment
Thereon Filed February 19, 2015," entered on April 22, 2015 in
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 30, 2017.
On the briefs:
Gary Victor Dubin
Frank J. Arensmeyer,
for Defendants-Appellants.
Charles R. Prather,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge