NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-25-0000393 29-DEC-2025 08:02 AM Dkt. 40 SO 
NO. CAAP-25-0000393 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI #I 
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
GIBRAN K. COPELAND, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CPC-24-0001172) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.) 
Gibran K. Copeland  appeals from the Circuit Court of 
the First Circuit's Order denying his motion for supervised 
release or to set bail.
1 We have jurisdiction under the 
collateral order exception.2 The law imposed a rebuttable 
presumption that there was a serious risk Copeland would flee or 
not appear as directed if he was released on bail. The issue presented is whether the trial court abused its discretion by finding that Copeland did not rebut the presumption. We conclude the trial court acted within its discretion. We affirm the Order. 
1 The Honorable Catherine H. Remigio presided. 
2 See State v. Johnson, 96 Hawai#i
al ord 462, 470 n.12, 32 P.3d 106, 114
n.12 (App. 2001) (noting the collater
er exception applies in criminal
cases to denials of pretrial motions to reduce bail).  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A grand jury indicted Copeland for Murder in the Second 
Degree and Carrying or Use of Firearm in the Commission of a 
Separate Felony. The grand jury bench warrant ordered him held without bail. He pleaded not guilty. He moved for supervised release or to set bail. The Order denying his motion was entered on April 25, 2025. This appeal followed. 
Bail may be denied if the defendant is charged with 
murder in the second degree and there is a serious risk they will flee. Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 804-3(b) (2014). If 
convicted, Copeland was possibly subject to imprisonment for life without the possibility of parole.
3 Under those circumstances: 
a rebuttable presumption arises that there is a serious risk
that the person will flee or will not appear as directed bythe court[.] 
HRS § 804-3(c) (2014). 
"The decision whether to grant a motion for release on 
bail requires a judgment call by the trial court; and decisions 
requiring a judgment call on the part of the trial court[] are reviewed for an abuse of discretion." State v. Carter, 154 Hawai#i 96, 101, 546 P.3d 1210, 1215 (App. 2024) (cleaned up). 
"The trial court abuses its discretion when it clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Id. 
Copeland's motion suggested he "can live with his 
parents while awaiting trial." The motion was heard on February 25, 2025. Copeland, his mother Naomi Copeland, and 
Honolulu Police Department detective Brent Sylvester  testified. 
Naomi is a 71-year old retiree. She "had passed out 
someplace" and "was undergoing a lot of tests" on her brain and 
3 Murder in the Second Degree is a felony for which the defendant is
sentenced under HRS § 706-656 (2014). HRS § 707-701.5(2) (2014). Under HRS 
§ 706-656(2) (2014), persons convicted of second degree murder shall besentenced to life imprisonment with the possibility of parole except asprovided in HRS § 706-657. HRS § 706-657 (2014) provides for an enhancedsentence of life imprisonment without the possibility of parole under certaincircumstances. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
heart. Sometimes, she hasn't felt well and had to sit down to 
avoid passing out. 
Naomi and her husband live in a rented one-bedroom 
apartment. Her husband is 78 years old. He "travels a lot" and is "gone, like, about six months out of the year." 
Naomi testified Copeland could live with her and "He 
can sleep on the living room." But she had not gotten her landlord's permission for Copeland to live in the apartment. 
When asked if she could help enforcing conditions of 
Copeland's bail, Naomi stated "I mean, physically, it is up to [Copeland]. I couldn't stop him if he wanted to [leave the apartment]. But it's his own actions, and he would have to suffer the consequences if he didn't follow it. I would tell him and report him if I had to." 
Detective Sylvester investigated Copeland's criminal 
record. Copeland had seventeen criminal contempt of court arrests. 
Copeland testified he served in the Army and had a "100 
percent service connected VA disability." He was discharged for "schizoaffective disorder." He hears voices, and sees "things that others don't see." He was told to take medication, but "decided that a balanced lifestyle is a better solution." He hasn't taken his medication for 10 years. When asked about his contempt-of-court arrests, Copeland stated "I used to get a lot of traffic tickets. So for some reason I didn't believe in buying car insurance, and so I accumulated a bunch of no car insurance tickets." Copeland said, "if I was written a ticket on the court date, yeah, I guess I was ignoring them, and I didn't take note of there being a court date on the ticket if there was one." 
When it announced its ruling, the trial court correctly 
acknowledged that the HRS § 804-3(c) rebuttable presumption applied. The court explained: 
Now, the Defense has provided witnesses to try to
rebut that presumption. The first witness, Ms. Copeland, 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Court agrees with the State, is not an appropriate
sponsor given her age, given her frailty, given the factthat she has no real knowledge or connection to thisdefendant, who is her son, herself has said that shebelieves that her son is houseless by choice, prefers livingon the streets, even though he has money, agrees he hasseveral storage units, that he once tried to store things ather house, and she put that to an end. She believes that he uses drugs. She apparently forgot that she knew who thisChristina person was and remembered later on. 
And also her husband is not there, not enough for him
to be of any help. 
The landlord is not a person that is
going to assist because he hasn't even been told and may notagree to Mr. Copeland living there with her. And we usuallyrequire landlord permission and knowledge before thatoccurs. 
But aside from her as a possible sponsor, in which
case we are left with no sponsor, and Hawaii [Intake ServiceCenter] is not an appropriate sponsor, the things thatMs. Copeland testified to indicates to the Court supportivetestimony to what the defendant himself has confirmed by histestimony, he lived in an abandoned property, so heconsider[s] himself houseless. That he was instructed by
professionals to take medications, but he decided on his own
that a balanced lifestyle is a better solution. He knew he had all of these tickets, but he was ignoring them. And so he didn't go to court. This is indicative to the Court of a person who is used to doing what he wants to do, notnecessarily what the law or what professionals tell him todo. He has lived outside of the boundaries of society,which is in itself not a crime. But I am identifyingwhether or not he is going to follow court rules. And I believe based on his testimony, based on his mother'stestimony, that he will not do so, certainly not when thereis inappropriate supervision. 
But going back to the part that the Court is making
is, does [sic] the Defense rebutted the presumption that hewill flee, whether it's a serious risk of flight based onthe fact that the offense is punishable by the possibilityof life without parole. And the Court answers, no, thedefense has not rebutted that presumption. 
The record contains substantial evidence of "a serious 
risk that [Copeland] will flee or will not appear as directed by 
the court" if he was released from custody. HRS § 804-3(c). The trial court acted within its discretion by denying Copeland's motion for supervised release or to set bail. 
We need not address Copeland's contention that the 
trial court erred by concluding he poses a danger to any person or the community, because the HRS § 804-3(b)(1)-(4) factors are alternative, not cumulative. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The April 25, 2025 Order Denying Defendant's Motion for 
Supervised Release to Oahu Intake Service Center and/or Set Bail 
is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai #i, December 29, 2025. 
On the briefs: 
Harrison L. Kiehm, 
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Loren J. Thomas, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu, for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Presiding Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate Judge 
5 