NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000122
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
ALEXA NITA RUSSELL, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
MILTON D. PAVAO, P.E., Manager, Hawai' i County Department of
Water Supply, ["DWS"], DOES 1-100, Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-183K)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Alexa Nita Russell (Russell),
 
appearing 
pro se, appeals from the Final Judgment, filed on
 
October 5, 2010, in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
 
(Circuit Court).1
 
On appeal, Russell asserts that the Circuit Court erred 
by granting summary judgment in favor of Defendant-Appellant 
Milton D. Pavao, P.E., Manager, Hawai' i County Department of 
Water Supply (DWS). Russell contends, among other things, that there are genuine issues of material fact that preclude granting 
summary judgment in favor of DWS. 
1 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. Case Background
 
Russell's Amended Complaint alleges that on or about 
August 1, 2008, without notice, Hawai' i County Department of 
Water Supply shut off water to her personal property and 
residence. Russell contends, inter alia, that: safe, potable 
water has come to her property for well over the twenty-three 
years she has resided there; the water has come to her property 
under the auspices of various water companies, most recently DWS; 
DWS took over the "reigns" of the County Water Commission; prior 
to August 2008, Russell was unaware of a 1982 Agreement between 
Grantor Kohala Corporation and Grantee Water Commission; water 
came to her property from DWS licensed facilities for over 
twenty-three years, and for at least a year from the Makapala 
Well site. Russell demands that water be restored to her 
property and that she be awarded damages from DWS. 
On July 8, 2010, DWS filed a Motion For Summary
 
Judgment, asserting that Russell was required to establish that
 
DWS had a duty to provide water service and there was no evidence
 
that Russell was ever a DWS customer or that DWS provided water
 
service to Russell's residence. DWS contended that "[t]he facts
 
show that the DWS was not providing service to Plaintiff, never
 
provided water service to Plaintiff and was not obligated to
 
maintain a water line it used along with Plaintiff at the time
 
service to Plaintiff's home ceased." DWS asserted that Russell's
 
property received water from the Murphy Tunnel, and that in 1982,
 
DWS's predecessor (the Water Commission) signed an Agreement with
 
the landowner of the Murphy Tunnel to use water from Murphy
 
Tunnel in exchange for DWS maintaining the water line.
 
The declarations submitted by DWS to support its motion
 
indicate that, pursuant to the 1982 Agreement, DWS took water
 
from the Murphy Tunnel source and maintained the water
 
transmission line. Under the Agreement, those like Russell who
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
were already taking water from the Murphy Tunnel transmission
 
line "could continue to take water at the same rates and amounts
 
as before the agreement." Initially, the transmission line ran
 
downhill past Russell's property, from which water was tapped,
 
and then to the DWS tank below. In 2000, DWS rerouted the
 
transmission line so that it first "passed the Makapala tank
 
before proceeding to supply water to those homes above the tank."
 
The declaration of Lawrence Beck (Beck), a civil
 
engineer and section head for a branch of DWS, was submitted in
 
support of DWS's summary judgment motion and states in relevant
 
part:
 
3. Plaintiff's property is located at a higher
elevation than the Department of Water Supply ("DWS")
pressure service zone serving DWS customers from the DWS
Makapala water system.
 
4. Plaintiff is not a customer of DWS nor has
 
Plaintiff ever received water service from the DWS to the
 subject property.
 
5. DWS records show there is no service contract
 
between the DWS and Plaintiff nor has there ever been a
 service contract between Plaintiff and the DWS with regard
to the subject property.
 
6. Plaintiff took water from a waterline which
 
extended makai from the Murphy Tunnel water source and
passed by her home. The DWS did not construct this
 waterline.
 
7. If an agreement to supply water to Plaintiff
existed, it was not made with the DWS.
 
8. In 1982, the DWS obtained the right to take and
did take water from a water source originating at the Murphy
Tunnel. The source water was already coming down the
mountainside through an existing water line. This water
 source at the Murphy Tunnel also provided water to Plaintiff
and others who were connected to the same water line from
 the Murphy Tunnel.
 
9. Water taken by the DWS from the water line
described in the preceding paragraph entered the DWS tank
through a connection to the water line. The tank is located
 at the very top of the DWS' Makapala water system.
 
10. Water from the DWS tank was then fed by gravity
into the DWS Makapala distribution pipeline system, which is
below the DWS tank.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
11. Water which entered the DWS Makapala Water
System served the DWS' Makapala customers. This water was
 
first sent water through [sic] the DWS tank, then left the
tank through a tank effluent pipeline into the distribution
pipeline system below the DWS tank.
 
12. DWS customers get their water service from
within the system's pressure service zone, which begins 100
feet in elevation below the elevation of the DWS tank.
 
13. DWS obtained the use of the line and began
taking water from the Murphy Tunnel source as the result of
an agreement between the owner of the property, upon which
this source of the supply was located, and the Water Board. 
(See Exhibit "1").
 
14. A condition of the Agreement, which permitted
the DWS to take water from the Murphy Tunnel via the subject
waterline, required the DWS to maintain the line from the
source of the water, high above the location of the DWS
tank.
 
15. DWS agreed that those persons, who were already
tapping off of and/or taking water from the water line
bringing Murphy Tunnel water to homes served by the water
line, including Plaintiff, could continue to take water at
the same rates and amounts as before the agreement. (See
 
Exhibit "1").
 
16. By the terms of the Agreement shown in Exhibit
"1", the DWS made repairs and partially reconstructed
sections of the water line coming down from the Murphy
Tunnel as necessary but, again, in no instance did the DWS
provide any water to Plaintiff's residence from a DWS tank,
well, or distribution line.
 
17. The DWS did not have a service arrangement to
deliver water to Plaintiff or any of the other persons who
were tapped into and taking water from the subject
waterline, which waterline was in place prior to the
Agreement shown in Exhibit "1".
 
18. On or about August 13, 2007, the Department of
Health ("DOH") of the State of Hawai' i notified the DWS 
that, due to a potential risk for surface contamination ofthe water, DOH would no longer permit the use of theuntreated Murphy Tunnel source to supply water to the DWS
Makapala water system. (See Exhibit "2"). 
19. On or about August 13, 2007, the DWS
disconnected its connection between the waterline from the
 
Murphy Tunnel and the DWS tank and ceased using the Murphy
Tunnel source water and waterline.
 
20. DWS was able to switch to a groundwater source
from a DWS well that had been newly outfitted. This well
 was meant to provide a redundant source of water supply as a
back-up for the Makapala Water System. But, instead of
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
acting as the back-up supply source as intended, the well
became the primary source of water for the DWS Makapala
Water System. The well is adjacent to the DWS tank and the
water is pumped directly from the well into the DWS tank.
 
21. On or about October 12, 2007, the DWS notified
 
Pacific Plains Company LLC, (See Exhibit "3") the owner and
successor signatory to the Agreement (Exhibit "1"), as well
as the current owner of the land on which the water source
 (Murphy Tunnel Source) was located. This notice provided
that the DWS was no longer using the water line and tunnel
source which was the subject of the Agreement referenced in
Exhibit "1".
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Also submitted in support of DWS's summary judgment
 
motion was the declaration of William Yamamoto (Yamamoto), the
 
Water Service District Supervisor for DWS, which states in
 
relevant part:
 
5. That in 1982 the DWS reached an agreement to
take water from a source known as the Murphy Tunnel.
 
6. That in 1982 a 2-inch water line extended from
 
the Murphy Tunnel to the Makapala area of the District of
North Kohala.
 
7. That the 2-inch water line passed by homes above
the Makapala tank and provided water to these homes which
were along the route of the 2-inch pipe from the Murphy
Tunnel.
 
8. That the DWS installed a 4-inch pipe connecting
the existing 2-inch line to the Makapala tank owned by DWS.
 
9. That the terms of the 1982 Agreement required
the DWS to maintain the existing 2-inch line from the Murphy
Tunnel to Makapala.
 
10. That from 1982 until 2000, the DWS made numerous
repairs to the 2-inch line.
 
11. That in 2000 it was determined that the 2-inch
 
line needed to be replaced and a new line was installed to
bring water from the Murphy Tunnel to the homes which were
supplied with water from the 2-inch line.
 
12. That the new water line was rerouted so that it
 
passed the Makapala tank before proceeding to supply water
to those homes above the tank.
 
13. That water to the homes above the tank came from
 
the Murphy Tunnel source and not from the DWS Makapala Water
System.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
14. That in the year 2007, the DWS received a notice
from the State of Hawai' i Department of Health to cease
using the Murphy Tunnel as a source for water to the DWS
Makapala Water System. 
15. That the DWS had completed an exploratory well
next to the Makapala tank. As a result, the connection to
the Murphy Tunnel line was closed so that the Makapala tank
received water from the well rather than the Murphy Tunnel.
 
16. That the line from the Murphy Tunnel continued
to provide water to the homes above the Makapala Tank.
 
17. That Plaintiff Alexa Nita Russell (hereinafter
"Plaintiff") is a resident of one of the homes above the
Makapala tank and continued to receive water from the Murphy
Tunnel via the line which was replaced in 2000.
 
18. That one year after the closure of the
connection from the Murphy Tunnel to the Makapala tank,
Plaintiff lost water from the Murphy Tunnel line.
 
19. That at the time Plaintiff lost her supply of
water, the DWS no longer had the right or obligation to
repair the water line from the Murphy Tunnel to the homes
above the Makapala tank.
 
20. That Plaintiff has never been a customer of the
 
DWS.
 
21. That Plaintiff never received water from the DWS
 
Makapala Water System.
 
22. That Plaintiff never received water from the DWS 
Makapala tank at any time before or after the S[t]ate ofHawai'i Department of Health required the DWS to cease using
the Murphy Tunnel as a source of water from the DWS MakapalaWater System. 
(Emphasis added.)
 
The 1982 Agreement, relied upon by DWS in its Motion
 
for Summary Judgment, provides in pertinent part:
 
1. That the Grantee shall repair and maintain
Grantor's Source and Transmission Lines;
2. That the Grantor hereby grants to Grantee an
irrevocable, exclusive license, except as hereinafter
provided, to draw water from Grantor's Source and
Transmission Lines for so long as the waters from Grantor's
Source and Transmission Lines are required by Grantee for
domestic use on the following terms:
 . . . 
d.	 The Grantor shall not be liable for
 loss or injury suffered by Grantee
or its customers due to insufficient
 or lack of water or any
contamination or foreign matter in
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the water or the failure of the
 
Licensed Facilities, provided that
those persons who were tapping off
of and/or taking waters from
Grantor's Source and Transmission
 Lines prior to the effective date of
this agreement may continue to take
water therefrom at the same rates
 and amounts as each takes at the
 time of the execution of this
 license agreement, and Grantee shall
not in any way be responsible for
the quality, quantity, availability,
potability, or suitability for
consumption of the water taken from
said Grantor's Source and
 Transmission Lines by persons other
than Grantee or Grantee's customer;
 
e.	 Grantee shall not be responsible in any manner
to any persons, other than Grantee or any of
Grantee's customers, who withdraw or take water
from the Licensed Facilities;
 
.  .  .
 i.	 In the event Grantee ceases to exercise its
 rights hereunder for a period of six (6)
consecutive calendar months, this license shall
terminate without any further action or notice;
j.	 Grantee may add, change, alter, or eliminate the
Licensed Facilities or any part thereof without
the consent of the Grantor;
 
. . .
 
(Emphasis added.) Review of the Agreement also indicates,
 
however, that there are portions of the Agreement that are not
 
readable and other parts that appear to be missing or cut-off.
 
In opposition to DWS's Motion for Summary Judgment,
 
Russell claimed, inter alia, that there were genuine issues of
 
material fact and that further discovery was necessary. In her
 
declaration, Russell attests that water came to her property from
 
the Makapala tank and that Yamamoto hand drew a map for her of
 
the transmission lines which shows that the line to her property
 
came from the Makapala tank. Her declaration states, in relevant
 
part:
 
2. That I have resided at the residence and property
located at 52-170 Makapala Road [TMK 3-5-2-11-2] since
November 14, 1986.
3. That I am currently and still residing at same
stated residence and property.
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
4. That I am the owner of the subject parcel, parcel
2.
 
5. That clean, clear, safe, drinkable, potable County
Water came to the subject parcel, parcel 2, in Makapala,
always, from the Makapala Water tank up until the date of
cessation by the HDWS, on or about August 1, 2007.
6. That on August 4, 2008, I went to the Waimea HDWS
office to speak to William Yamamoto. He disclosed that
 parcel 6 of the subject parcel was his family land.
7. That Mr. Yamamoto drew, by hand a map of the HDWS
County Water transmission lines and how they came to my home
and property on subject parcel 2 in Makapala. See
 
Plaintiff's EXHIBIT "II". This clearly shows drissco pipe
going to parcel 2 from the Makapala Water Tank site.
 
(Emphasis added.) The hand drawn map attached to Russell's
 
declaration appears to indicate that a water line enters the
 
Makapala water tank and another line from the tank then leads to
 
Russell's property.
 
II. Summary Judgment Analysis
 
We review the circuit court's grant or denial of
summary judgment de novo. Hawai'i [sic] Community Federal
 
Credit Union v. Keka, 94 Hawai' i 213, 221, 11 P.3d 1, 9
(2000). The standard for granting a motion for summary
judgment is settled:
 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material if
 proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party. In other
 words, we must view all of the evidence and the
inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable
to the party opposing the motion.
 
Id. (citations and internal quotation marks
omitted).
 
Coon v. City and County of Honolulu, 98 Hawai' i 233,
244-45, 47 P.3d 348, 359-60 (2002) (second alteration
in original). 
Kau v. City & County of Honolulu, 104 Hawai' i 468, 473-74,
92 P.3d 477, 482-83 (2004). We have further explained theburdens of the moving and non-moving parties on summaryjudgment as follows: 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The burden is on the party moving for summary
judgment (moving party) to show the absence of any
genuine issue as to all material facts, which, under
applicable principles of substantive law, entitles the
moving party to judgment as a matter of law. This
 burden has two components.
 
First, the moving party has the burden of
producing support for its claim that: (1) no genuine
issue of material fact exists with respect to the
essential elements of the claim or defense which the
 motion seeks to establish or which the motion
 questions; and (2) based on the undisputed facts, it
is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law.
Only when the moving party satisfies its initial
burden of production does the burden shift to the
non-moving party to respond to the motion for summary
judgment and demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to
general allegations, that present a genuine issue
worthy of trial.
 
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden
of persuasion. This burden always remains with the
moving party and requires the moving party to convince
the court that no genuine issue of material fact
exists and that the moving part is entitled to summary
judgment as a matter of law.
 
French v. Hawaii Pizza Hut, Inc., 105 Hawai' i 462, 470, 99 
P.3d 1046, 1054 (2004) (quoting GECC Fin. Corp. v. 
Jaffarian, 79 Hawai' i 516, 521, 904 P.2d 530, 535 (App.
1995)) (emphasis deleted). 
Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House Inc., 111 Hawai' i 286, 
295-96, 141 P.3d 459, 468-69 (2006).
 
In its summary judgment motion, DWS relied on the 1982
 
Agreement, and DWS asserts on appeal that: 
[A]ny responsibility to maintain the pipeline which provided
water both to Appellant and the DWS Makapala Tank water
system, existed during the term of the Agreement to use the
Murphy Tunnel as a water source . . . any responsibility to
continue to maintain the pipeline for the benefit of the
homeowners who received water from this source ceased on
 February 13, 2008, six (6) months after the termination of
the Agreement.
 
Based on our review of the record, DWS failed to carry its burden
 
to demonstrate that there is no genuine issue of material fact
 
under the terms of the Agreement.
 
"Where the terms of a contract are ambiguous, the
 
ambiguity raises the question of the parties' intent, which is a
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
question of fact that will often render summary judgment 
inappropriate." Wittig v. Allianz, A.G., 112 Hawai' i 195, 201, 
145 P.3d 738, 744 (App. 2006); see also Hanagami v. China Airlines, Ltd., 67 Haw. 357, 364, 688 P.2d 1139, 1145 (1984); 
Bishop Trust Co. v. Central Union Church of Honolulu, 3 Haw. App. 
624, 628-29, 656 P.2d 1353, 1356-57 (1983). Here, the 1982 
Agreement contains language limiting the Grantee's liability, but 
at the same time it states: 
those persons who were tapping off of and/or taking waters
from Grantor's Source and Transmission Lines prior to the
effective date of this agreement may continue to take water
therefrom at the same rates and amounts as each takes at the
 time of the execution of this license agreement, . . .
 
Moreover, although DWS was apparently authorized under the
 
Agreement to alter the water transmission line, the rerouting of
 
the line in 2000 completely moved the line so that it no longer
 
ran downhill past the Russell property. Rather, according to
 
Yamamoto's declaration, the transmission line first "passed" the
 
Makapala tank and then, somehow, water was supplied to the homes
 
above the tank. It is unclear how the water was able to reach
 
Russell's property above the tank after the rerouting of the line
 
in 2000 and whether that affected her inability to subsequently
 
receive water in August 2008. It is also ambiguous under the
 
Agreement whether DWS's right to alter the transmission line was
 
subject to the provision that those tapping off the line may
 
continue to do so.
 
Because the 1982 Agreement is ambiguous, we cannot
 
conclude as a matter of law that DWS's interpretation of the
 
Agreement is correct, genuine issues of material fact exist as to
 
the intent of the parties to the agreement, and the intent of the
 
parties to the agreement "may be shown by extrinsic evidence." 
Bishop Trust Co., 3 Haw. App. at 629, 656 P.2d at 1357; cf.
 
Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 124-25,
 
839 P.2d 10, 31 (1992) ("parol evidence regarding the parties'
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
intent as to the language used in a contract may be considered
 
only when the contract language is ambiguous.").
 
Additionally, even if we were to presume that DWS had
 
no obligation to Russell under the 1982 Agreement, summary
 
judgment was not appropriate under the current record. 
Considering the facts in the light most favorable to Russell as
 
the non-moving party, Russell's declaration and the map she
 
asserts was hand drawn by Yamamoto created a genuine issue of
 
material fact whether the water that came to her property was
 
provided via DWS's Makapala tank.
 
Russell's basic claim is that water to her property was
 
disrupted by DWS without notice or opportunity to be heard. 
Because Russell's declaration states facts which could prove her
 
claim and refutes DWS's contention that she was not provided
 
water by DWS, there is a genuine issue of material fact which
 
precludes summary judgment in favor of DWS.
 
III. Conclusion
 
Based on the above, the Final Judgment filed on
 
October 5, 2010, in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit, is
 
vacated and the case is remanded for further proceedings
 
consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 18, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Alexa Nita Russell 
Pro Se Plaintiff-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Michael J. Udovic Deputies CorporationCounty of Hawai' i 
for Defendant-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
11
 