 
         
               
              
           
      
            
     
  
        
           
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000701
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ANTHONY G. BEAUDET-CLOSE, Defendant-Appellant,
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 3PC16100368K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Anthony G. Beaudet-Close (Beaudet-
Close) appeals from the “Judgment of Conviction and Sentence”
 
(Judgment)1 entered on September 13, 2017 in the Circuit Court of
 
the Third Circuit (circuit court).2 The State of Hawai' i (State) 
charged Beaudet-Close with one count of Attempted Murder in the
 Second Degree pursuant to §§ 705-500(1)(b)
3 and 707-701.5(1)4 of
 
1
 The Judgment indicates that the “Defendant’s Plea” was “Guilty” and
that “Defendant Plead” as such to the charge, which is clearly an error. As a 
result, we remand the case to the circuit court to amend the Judgment to correcta clerical error under Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 36. 
2
 The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided.
 
3
 HRS § 705-500 provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 705-500 Criminal attempt. (1) A person is guilty of an attempt to
commit a crime if the person:
. . .
 (b) Intentionally engages in conduct which, under the circumstances
as the person believes them to be, constitutes a substantial step in
a course of conduct intended to culminate in the person's commission
   
           
          
         
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS), and one count for the lesser
 
included offense of Assault in the First Degree pursuant to HRS §
 707-710,
5 for an altercation that occurred on or about
 
October 28, 2016. Beaudet-Close was found guilty of Attempted
 Murder in the Second Degree and sentenced to imprisonment for
 Life with the Possibility of Parole.
 
On appeal, Beaudet-Close asserts that the circuit court
 
erred in allowing over objection: 1) the testimony of the
 victim’s brother; 2) the introduction and playing to the jury of
 the entire recording of Beaudet-Close’s police interview,
 including the portion where Defendant declined to participate in
 a recorded “walk through” re-enactment; and 3) the introduction
 of photographs showing pools of blood.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we affirm.
I. Testimony of Victim's Brother
 
The circuit court erred when it overruled Beaudet­
Close’s objection to the testimony of David Ault (David) because
 
Beaudet-Close failed to file a motion in limine to exclude this
 testimony. As the State concedes, there is no requirement that a
 motion in limine be filed to object to the testimony of a
 witness. See Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 103(a)(1)
 
(allowing error in the admission or exclusion of evidence to be
 based on an objection to the evidence).
 
of the crime.
 
4
 HRS § 707-701.5 provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 707-701.5 Murder in the second degree. (1) Except as provided in
section 707-701, a person commits the offense of murder in the
second degree if the person intentionally or knowingly causes the
death of another person.
 
5
 HRS § 707-710 provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 707-710. Assault in the first degree. (1) A person commits the
offense of assault in the first degree if the person intentionally
or knowingly causes serious bodily injury to another person.
 
2
    
     
         
           
           
 
         
            
        NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
In any event, the error was harmless, as the circuit
 
court’s decision to allow David’s testimony, over Beaudet-Close’s
 
specific objection on relevance grounds, was correct. See HRE
 
Rule 401.6 Beaudet-Close argues that David’s testimony was
 
irrelevant to the issue of guilt or innocence. The State charged
 Beaudet-Close with both Assault in the First Degree and Attempted
 Murder. Assault in the First Degree under HRS § 707-710 requires
 proof of “serious bodily injury,” which is defined by HRS §
 707-700 as “bodily injury which creates a substantial risk of
 death or which causes serious, permanent disfigurement, or
 protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily
 member or organ.” The State called David as a witness to prove
 an element of Assault in the First Degree by testifying as to the
 victim’s lengthy loss or impairment of his bodily functions and
 to serious permanent disfigurement of the victim’s face, namely
 his eyes. The State’s line of questioning included inquiries
 into the development of the victim’s mental and physical
 condition while he was at Queen’s Medical Center and after he was
 moved to a skilled nursing facility.
7 Upon review, we conclude
 
that David’s testimony was relevant to the proof of serious
 bodily injury.
 
Beaudet-Close also contends that David’s testimony was
 
highly prejudicial in that there was no dispute as to the extent
 of the victim’s injuries, of which there was ample other
 
6
 HRE Rule 401 provides:
 
Rule 401 Definition of "relevant evidence".
 
"Relevant evidence" means evidence having any tendency to make the
existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of
the action more probable or less probable than it would be without
the evidence.
 
7
 For example, some of the State’s questioning included the following:
 
The very first time that you went to visit Luke at the skilled
nursing facility can you describe for us his physical
appearance?
 
When  y
ou  speak  with  him,  um,  have  you  noticed  .  .  .  any  change
in  his,  um,  communication?
Does  -- does  Luke  look  the  same  facially  .  .  .  as  he  did
before  October  28th,  2016?
  
3
    
         
    
         
        
         
        
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence, and thus, that David’s testimony had nothing to add and
 
was cumulative to the extent of injury issue. He further asserts
 that the circuit court erred by admitting his testimony without
 weighing or balancing its probative value against its prejudicial
 effect. David’s testimony detailed the lasting effects of the
 incident subsequent to the victim’s hospitalization. As the
 surrogate medical decision maker for the victim, David had the
 personal knowledge to testify as to the victim’s condition,
 including his ability to carry out bodily functions and daily
 activities. He also had the personal knowledge to testify as to
 the changes in the victim’s facial structure due to the injuries
 sustained from the incident. Based on this record, we conclude
 that the probative value of his testimony was not substantially
 outweighed by undue prejudice and the circuit court did not abuse
 its discretion in allowing David’s testimony. HRE Rule 403.
8
 
II. Video of Defendant's Police Interview
 
On November 7, 2016, Beaudet-Close participated in a
 
recorded interview with Detective Walter Ah Mow to discuss the
 events that occurred on the night of the incident. Towards the
 end of the interview, Detective Ah Mow asked Beaudet-Close if he
 would like to participate in a reconstruction of the incident at
 the scene which would be video recorded. After a short
 discussion on what this would entail, and multiple assurances by
 Detective Ah Mow that it was entirely optional, Beaudet-Close
 responded by saying he was scared and did not want to return to
 the scene where the victim’s friends may be. He ultimately
 stated that he was not comfortable doing the reconstruction and
 declined to participate.
 
The recording had been received as Exhibit 2 during the
 
8
 HRE Rule 403 provides:
 
Rule 403 Exclusion of relevant evidence on grounds of prejudice,
confusion, or waste of time.
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value
is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice,
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless
presentation of cumulative evidence.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
hearing on Beaudet-Close’s voluntariness. On July 13, 2017, the
 
second day of jury trial, the same recording was admitted as
 Exhibit 13A, with objection by defense counsel. The circuit
 court overruled the objection and the recording was published to
 the jury. The following exchange occurred during the trial:
 
[Prosecutor]: State is gonna move into evidence 13A for
identification.
 
[Defense Counsel]: Uh, just as to foundation, Your Honor, I
don’t know -- I haven’t reviewed that disc but otherwise
 that’s my objection.
 
The Court: Court will receive 13A.
 . . .
 [Defense Counsel]: And if I could, Your Honor, I also object to
13A on 403 prior to publication.
 
The Court: Overruled.
 
On the same day, defense counsel filed a motion for
 
mistrial based on the court’s admission of the video recording,
 
arguing that the State intended to imply Beaudet-Close’s guilt by
 showing the jury a video of him declining to participate in the
 reconstruction, thus amounting to a violation of Beaudet-Close’s
 constitutional rights. At trial the next day, the circuit court
 heard defense counsel’s arguments for its motion for mistrial and
 subsequently denied the motion. The circuit court stated that,
 during the voluntariness hearing, defense counsel had not
 objected to any part of the recording nor was there any
 opposition stating that parts of the recording commented on
 Beaudet-Close’s right to remain silent. Regarding the content of
 the video recording, the circuit court explained that Beaudet-
Close had already waived his rights and stated his version of
 events that transpired on the night of the incident, and that
 when Detective Ah Mow asked to do the reconstruction, it was just
 to “physically show . . . his side of the story, meaning what he
 just told the Detective.”
 
Upon appeal, defense counsel reasserts that Beaudet­
Close’s statement of not being comfortable with a video
 reconstruction was a revocation of his agreement to cooperate and
 an invocation of his constitutional right to remain silent.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Thus, defense counsel argues, at least that portion of the video
 
beginning when Detective Ah Mow asked Beaudet-Close if he would
 like to participate in the reconstruction should have been
 redacted. Although this argument was not brought below as an
 objection when the video recording was offered into evidence, it
 was brought in his motion for mistrial. The circuit court ruled
 on the issue after both parties had the opportunity to raise and
 present arguments. Thus, the error was properly preserved for
 appeal.
 
To support his argument on appeal, Beaudet-Close cites 
to State v. Domingo, 69 Haw. 68, 733 P.2d 690 (1987), where the Hawai'i Supreme Court held that the trial court abused its 
discretion in admitting as evidence, over defendant’s objection, a warning of rights form with portions of it excised where defendant claimed his constitutional rights. In that case, the supreme court held that it was error to allow the inference of the invocation of a defendant’s constitutional rights. Id. at 
70, 733 P.2d at 692. Citing to Domingo, Beaudet-Close then takes it one step further by stating that the entire recording of the interview should not have been admitted because of the risk that a jury could infer that Beaudet-Close had invoked his constitutional rights if the recording were cut off suddenly. 
Upon review of the contents of the video recording, we 
conclude that Beaudet-Close’s decision to not participate in the reconstruction was not an invocation of his right to remain silent. In State v. Rodrigues, 113 Hawai' i 41, 147 P.3d 825 
(2006), the Hawai' i Supreme Court held that after having given a 
full and voluntary statement, defendant’s refusal to repeat the statement on tape was an invocation of his right to remain silent, “not because he refused to make a statement on tape, but because that refusal appears to have caused a termination of all questioning by the police and acted as a de facto invocation of his right to refrain from answering further questions.” Id. at 
49, 147 P.3d at 833 (emphasis in original). Here, Beaudet-Close was not refusing to speak further on the matter. See id. 
(“[w]hen the questioning of a suspect is otherwise complete, and 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the police request that the suspect reiterate his or her
 
statement in order to memorialize it electronically, the
 suspect’s refusal to do so amounts to an invocation of the right
 to remain silent precisely because the suspect is refusing to
 speak further on the matter.”). Indeed, after Beaudet-Close
 ultimately declined to participate in the reconstruction, rather
 than remain silent, he continued to speak and explain his fear of
 returning back to the scene and his ongoing discomfort with the
 situation. There was no indication that he was not willing to
 continue speaking with Detective Ah Mow, but only that he did not
 feel comfortable participating in a video reconstruction. In
 fact, even after Detective Ah Mow indicated that he had no
 further questions, Beaudet-Close initiated further discussion
 about his fear for the safety of his family. We therefore
 conclude that Beaudet-Close did not invoke his right to remain
 silent.
 
Accordingly, the circuit court did not err in admitting
 
the entirety of the video recording of Beaudet-Close’s interview
 with Detective Ah Mow.
 
III. Photos of Blood Pools
 
Relying on HRE Rule 403, Beaudet-Close next contends
 
that the circuit court abused its discretion by admitting colored
 
photographs showing pools of blood from the scene of the incident
 into evidence because the probative value of the photographs was
 substantially outweighed by their possible prejudicial effect.
 At trial, the circuit court overruled Beaudet-Close’s objection
 and admitted the photographs without requiring an offer of proof
 by the State. The State referenced these photographs during its
 direct examination of Officer Bradley Llanes, while questioning
 him on what he saw at the scene of the incident once the victim
 was transported away by ambulance.
 
The multiple distinct pools of blood shown in these
 
photographs support witness testimony that Beaudet-Close struck
 the victim more than once. The pools of blood also helped to
 corroborate eyewitness testimony that Beaudet-Close had grabbed
 the victim off the ground to hit him multiple times. These facts
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
were relevant to show the severity of the attack to establish
 
Beaudet-Close’s intent.
 
Upon review of the photographs in the record, it is our 
opinion that the photographs are not particularly gruesome. The pools of blood are only shown from a distance and are not of a particularly graphic nature. The photographs do not rise to the level of gruesomeness that would have the effect of overwhelming the jury’s ability to fairly decide the case, and are much less gruesome than photographs that Hawai' i courts have found to be 
admissible. See, e.g., State v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai' i 325, 329 n.7, 
966 P.2d 637, 641 n.7 (1998) (dismissing defendant’s objection that court erred in permitting display of fourteen color photographs depicting injuries inflicted with a broken vodka bottle to the face and head of an attempted murder victim, and noting that “[c]ourts, traditionally, have great discretion in admitting such evidence”); State v. Edwards, 81 Hawai' i 293, 916 
P.2d 703 (1996) (holding that photographs of injuries inflicted to decedent’s face and entire nude body were admittedly gruesome but not unfairly prejudicial); State v. Klafta, 73 Haw. 109, 831 P.2d 512 (1992) (upholding lower court’s admission of photographs of victim’s condition when found, where victim was an abandoned sixteen-month-old infant, dehydrated, dirty, bruised, and infested with maggots). 
Considering both the relatively mild nature of these 
photographs as well as their established relevance and probative value, this court concludes that the photographs were not unfairly prejudicial and, thus, were admissible. Accordingly, the circuit court’s decision to admit the photographs was not an abuse of discretion. See Edwards, 81 Hawai' i at 297, 916 P.2d at 
707 (“admission or rejection of photographs is a matter within the discretion of the trial court”). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the “Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence” filed on September 13, 2017 by the
 
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit. Furthermore, we remand the
 case for amendment of the Judgment to correct the clerical error
 regarding Beaudet-Close’s plea.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 29, 2018. 
On the briefs: 
Linda L. Walton,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Hawai' i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Presiding Judge 
Victor M. Cox,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
9
 