  
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-18-0000083 08-NOV-2023 07:49 AM Dkt. 216 MO 
NO. CAAP-18-0000083 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
STATE OF HAWAI‘I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
OLEG LEUS, Defendant-Appellant 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1PC151001754) 
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Oleg Leus (
Leus) appeals from the 
Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence, entered by the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit on February 6, 2018.1 Upon 
careful review of the record and the briefs submitted by the 
parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised, we affirm. 
1 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.   
 
  
 
  
 
   
   
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. Background 
On November 4, 2015, the Plaintiff-Appellee State of 
Hawaiʻi (State) charged Leus by criminal indictment with Assault 
Against a Law Enforcement Officer in the First Degree, in 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 707-712.5(1)(a) (2014) (Count 1), and Harassment, in violation of 711-1106(1)(a) 
(2014) (Count 2). Following a trial, at which Leus was self-
represented,
2 the jury found Leus guilty of the Count 1 included 
offense of Assault Against a Law Enforcement Officer in the Second Degree, and Harassment. On February 6, 2018, the circuit 
court sentenced Leus to a one-year term of probation for 
Count 1, and a six-month term of probation for Count 2, with both terms to run concurrently. 
Leus timely appealed.
3 His opening brief raises seven 
points of error on appeal, each of which this court considers in 
turn. 
2 Prior to trial, Leus was consecutively represented by four 
attorneys. These attorneys withdrew in turn from representing Leus with the 
circuit court's approval. Leus elected to represent himself at trial, with court-appointed counsel Walter J. Rodby (Rodby) appearing as standby counsel. 
3 Leus is represented on appeal by William K. Li. 
2   
 
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
II. Discussion 
A. Waiver of Counsel 
Leus contends that his waiver of counsel "was 
insufficient because the trial court did not adequately advise 
him of the pleas and defenses available, the punishments that 
may be imposed, and that a disruption of the trial could lead to 
vacation of the right to self-representation." "When a 
defendant elects to proceed pro se, the record must indicate 
that the defendant was offered counsel, but he or she 
voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently rejected the offer and 
waived that right." State v. Phua, 135 Hawaiʻ i 504, 512, 
353 P.3d 1046, 1054 (2015)(citation omitted). 
The waiver of 
counsel must be unequivocal, and voluntarily and freely made. 
Id. We review questions of constitutional law under the 
right/wrong standard. Id.
The Hawaiʻ i appellate courts have adopted three 
"specific waiver inquiry" factors for courts to consider when determining whether the right to counsel was properly waived, 
(1) the particular facts and circumstances relating to the 
defendant that indicate the defendant's level of 
comprehension; (2) the defendant's awareness of the risks of self- representation; and (3) the defendant's awareness 
of the disadvantages of self- representation
. 
Phua, 135 Hawaiʻ i at 512, 353 P.3d at 1054 (citing State v. 
3   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dickson, 4 Haw.App. 614, 619-20, 673 P.2d 1036, 1041-42 (1983)). 
Upon review of the record, we conclude that all three Dickson factors were satisfied, and that Leus voluntarily, knowingly, 
and intelligently waived his right to counsel. 
The first factor, "the particular facts and 
circumstances relating to the defendant that indicate the 
defendant's level of comprehension[,]" is established by the 
circuit court's inquiry into Leus's background, education, 
ability to understand English, and mental capacity. Phua, 
135 Hawaiʻ i at 513, 353 P.3d at 1055 (recognizing "circumstances" 
pertaining to a defendant's "level of comprehension" as 
including "age, education, English language skills, mental 
capacity, employment background, and prior experience with the criminal justice system"). 
Leus testified, in response to the 
circuit court's questions, that he was fifty-seven years old at the time of trial, originally from Ukraine, and that he had 
"college and four years of university" studying "[b]uilding 
engineering" and architecture. Leus also testified that he had 
been living in the United States for twenty years, acknowledged 
4   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that he had the ability to understand and speak English, and 
confirmed that he was "thinking clearly today."4 
4 Leus, by his own choice, responded to the circuit court primarily 
in English. The circuit court instructed Leus that he could utilize the 
assistance of the translator who had been provided for him as follows, 
All right. First things first for you, Mr. Leus. I 
know you understand a fair bit of English, and you have a 
tendency sometimes when we' re in court to communicate and 
respond in English. For purposes of our record, to make sure that we' re clear about everything, the Court' s going 
to instruct you to rely on Mr. Druker to translate any and all questions or matters that are occurring in court for you, and that if a response is required from you or you 
need to say something in response, then I' m going to ask 
that you allow Mr. Druker to translate for you. Is that all right with you?[]  
 
 You can be seated.  
MR. LEUS: I inability to speak myself in some 
periods?  
 
THE COURT: 
All right. So let me ask you this. It 
sounds like what you' re about to say –-  and you can correct 
me if I' m wrong –-  is that if you' re comfortable responding 
in English, you would rather do that, is that correct, and  
then  only use Mr. Druker when you' re not, when you need his 
assistance to understand what you' re hearing and also to 
respond. Is that what you would prefer?  
MR. LEUS: Yes, partially, yes, yes.  
THE COURT: Okay. All right. So in order to make 
sure that we' re able to get everything down on the record, 
it's going to be very important that we wait for the 
question or comment to be stated, and then if you feel 
comfortable, then please respond. If not, then indicate to Mr. Druker, and he will translate for you and then your 
response, okay. Alls [sic] I' m saying is that we need to 
go very sort of deliberately about this to make sure that we get an accurate record. Do you understand, Mr. Leus?  
MR. LEUS: (Through the interpreter) 
So does this 
mean that I have no right to speak at all or only --
THE COURT: No, not at all, Mr. Leus. Alls [sic] I' m 
saying is that because we have Mr. Druker
's assistance, 
generally my suggestion to people is that to make sure that they understand everything and are able to communicate  
(continued . . .) 
5   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The record reflects that the circuit court also 
satisfied the second and third Dickson factors — namely, "the 
defendant's awareness of the risks of self-representation," and 
"defendant's awareness of the disadvantages of self-
representation." Phua, 135 Hawaiʻ i at 514, 353 P.3d at 1056 
("The record must reflect that the defendant understands what he 
4(. . .continued) 
everything, that the services of the interpreter be used. 
If you would rather communicate in times when you' re able 
to understand what' s being said and then respond in 
English, you're free to do that. Is that all right? 
MR. LEUS: Yes, absolutely. 
At the end of the colloquy, the circuit court further  
instructed Leus,  
THE COURT: Okay. And you' ve had Mr. Druker I think 
help you once or twice. Do you feel like you' re able to 
understand what the Court was talking to you about? 
MR. LEUS: Absolutely. 
THE COURT: Have you felt like you could explain 
yourself or speak for yourself? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. THE COURT: And where you needed help, I think at 
least once, you looked to Mr. Druker, and he translated for 
you and then explained to the Court your answer, yes? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
THE COURT: So if we go ahead and proceed with you 
representing yourself, Mr. Druker will be here to help you. 
It's very important you know that he is here to assist you.  
Do you understand? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
6   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or she is doing and that the decision is made with eyes 
open.")(cleaned up). 
Leus was informed of the risks of self-representation 
through the following colloquy, 
THE COURT: And have you ever been charged with a 
felony offense before? I don' t think so, correct? 
MR. LEUS: Never. Never. 
THE COURT: All right. And so I need to make sure 
that you' re clear that because of the charge in Count 1 
against you, you have a right to an attorney to assist you. 
You know that, correct? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
. . . . THE COURT: Have you ever had to go to court being 
charged with any sort of offense ever in the United States? 
MR. LEUS: Never I was, judge. THE COURT: Okay. Very good. Now, you have decided you want to represent yourself, 
correct? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. THE COURT: And today, to help you, as he has for 
some time, is Mr. Rodby, correct? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. THE COURT: And so he is here to not represent you 
but simply to be a --
MR. LEUS: Consultant. 
THE COURT: -- a consultant or really just a reference 
for information for you. His job is not to essentially 
give you advice about what you should do. That' s your 
choice. You understand that? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
7   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: Okay. Now, I just want to make sure that 
you understand that representing yourself is a very serious 
decision. You understand? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
THE COURT: Okay. And so I' m going to talk to you 
about some rights that you have just to make sure that our 
record is clear, okay?  
MR. LEUS: 
Yeah. 
THE COURT: All right. You understand that today 
you're about to start trial before a jury in this case?  
MR. LEUS: Yes.  
THE COURT: And that you' re facing two charges, yes?  
MR. LEUS: 
Yes. 
THE COURT: One is Assault Against a Law Enforcement 
Officer in the First Degree, which is a serious felony; you understand?  
MR. LEUS: 
Yes. 
THE COURT: The other is a Harassment charge, which 
is a petty misdemeanor; do you understand?  
MR. LEUS: Yes.  
THE COURT: All right. Both of these are crimes; do 
you understand that?  
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
THE COURT: 
And you understand that the State is 
going to be required to prove all of the requirements 
necessary for each one of these charges; do you understand? 
MR. LEUS: Yes.  
THE COURT: And that each charge requires the State 
to prove beyond a reasonable doubt all of the elements of those offenses; do you understand?  
MR. LEUS: Absolutely.
 
THE COURT: And elements are like ingredients in a 
recipe that ends up being a crime; do you understand?  
MR. LEUS: 
Yes. 
8   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: Okay. And that in this particular case, 
the State has to prove in Count 1 that you intentionally or 
knowingly caused bodily injury to Masakazu Kurita, who was 
a police officer; do you understand?  
MR. LEUS: Yes.
 
THE COURT: And that at that time, that that person 
was a police officer that was on duty doing his job; do you 
understand?  
MR. LEUS: Yes.
 
THE COURT: And that the date that' s charged where 
they're saying you did something to assault this officer is 
October 5, 2015; do you understand?  
MR. LEUS: 
Yes. 
THE COURT: Okay. As to the second count, on that 
same day, the State would have to prove that you had the 
intent or purpose to harass, annoy, or alarm a person by 
the name of Jesse Takushi; do you understand?  
MR. LEUS: 
Yes. 
THE COURT: And that they would have to prove that 
you either struck, hit, shoved, or kicked or touched that 
person in an offensive manner, in other words, in a way 
that they found offensive; do you understand?  
MR. LEUS: 
Yes. 
THE COURT: And that it requires proof of physical 
contact; do you understand?  
MR. LEUS: 
Yes. 
THE COURT: Okay. And you understand the State has 
to prove those things to the highest standards of our law, which is proof beyond a reasonable doubt; do you understand 
that?  
MR. LEUS: 
Yes. 
THE COURT: Okay. Do you have any questions about 
what those elements or what those crimes are about? 
MR. LEUS: No. 
THE COURT: Very good. You understand that if the 
State does not prove all of those elements or requirements 
for each offense, then you cannot be found guilty of 
anything, yes?  
9   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
THE COURT: And the State has to prove every single 
one of those, right? 
MR. LEUS: Yes, without doubt. THE COURT: Okay. Very good. And that proof beyond 
a reasonable doubt means that you are presumed innocent of 
these charges; you know that, correct? 
MR. LEUS: Absolutely. 
THE COURT: And that remains with you unless the 
State brings in proof, evidence, witnesses to prove those 
elements; do you understand? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
THE COURT: And they have to satisfy the jury that 
they've proven it to the highest level of our legal system, 
proof beyond a reasonable doubt; do you understand that? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
THE COURT: Now, reasonable doubt is a doubt in a 
person's mind about your guilt which arises from the 
evidence presented or the lack of evidence; do you 
understand that? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
THE COURT: And that it has to be a doubt that' s 
based upon reason and common sense; do you understand? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. THE COURT: And that means you cannot be found guilty 
-- even if they think you're probably guilty, that's not 
enough; do you understand? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
THE COURT: And that even if they have a strong 
suspicion or think you did these crimes, that' s not enough 
to convict you; do you understand? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. THE COURT: Very good. Now, do you have any 
questions about what the term " proof beyond a reasonable 
doubt" means? No? 
10   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
MR. LEUS: I understand this. 
THE COURT: Okay. Very good.  
 
All right. 
You understand that if you are found 
guilty of the first charge -- and I believe that is a -- is 
that a Class B?  
MR. SOUSIE: I believe it
's a C, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: -- C, that' s punishable by up to five 
years in prison and/or a $10,000 fine for the first count, yes? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
THE COURT: And the second offense, Harassment, is 
punishable by up to 30 days in jail and/or a --
 I believe
it's a thousand- dollar fine.  You understand, Mr. Leus?   
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
THE COURT: Now, if you are convicted, it does not 
mean that those maximum penalties will be imposed; do you
understand?   
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
THE COURT: 
But each one of those carries with it the 
possibility of court supervision; do you understand? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
THE COURT: And that could be for a period of as much 
as four years for the first charge; do you understand? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. THE COURT: That you have to do certain things that 
the Court requires you to do; do you understand? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. THE COURT: Very good.  
 
Now, you understand that because of the consequences 
that these offenses carry, that you have an absolute right under our law, our constitutions, both the United States 
and Hawaii, to have an attorney represent you; you 
understand?  
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
11   
 
   
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As our case law establishes, "the trial court is not 
required to give the defendant a short course in criminal law 
and procedure," but the defendant must be sufficiently informed 
of the risks of self-representation in the context of the 
offenses for which he was being charged. Phua, 135 Hawaiʻ i 
at 514-15, 353 P.3d at 1056-57 (cleaned up). 
The record 
reflects that Leus, through the extensive colloquy set forth 
above, was informed of "the nature of the charge, the elements 
of the offense, the pleas and defenses available, the 
punishments which may be imposed, and all other facts essential 
to a broad understanding of the whole matter." Id. at 515, 
353 P.3d at 1057 (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
The information was not "mechanically provide[d]," 
but meant to "engage the defendant to ensure that the waiver 
[was] intelligently and voluntarily made." Id. at 514, 353 P.3d 
at 1056. 
Leus was also informed several times of the 
disadvantages of self-representation, including his right to the assistance of counsel, 
THE COURT: What I am telling you is the reason why 
I'm going through all this, Mr. Leus, what you' re doing, 
you have a right to represent yourself if that's what you 
want. 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
12   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 THE COURT: But the Court does not recommend that, 
and I told you several times I don' t think it' s a good 
idea. Do you understand? 
MR. LEUS: Absolutely. 
THE COURT: But that' s your choice. 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
THE COURT: And if that' s what you want to do, the 
Court will allow you to represent yourself. Do you 
understand?  
MR. LEUS: 
Yes. 
THE COURT: But make no mistake that Mr. Rodby, while 
he's there to provide information, he is not your lawyer, 
meaning that he is not here to represent you in this case. 
MR. LEUS: Absolutely understand this. 
THE COURT: Okay. 
 
. . . .  
 
Now, you understand that if you represent yourself, 
I, as the judge, the Court cannot help you at all; do you 
understand?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
MR. LEUS: 
Yes. 
THE COURT: Because my job is not to favor either 
side. I am just like a referee or umpire. You understand 
that? 
MR. LEUS: Absolutely. 
THE COURT: Very good.  
 
And if you represent yourself, Mr. Leus, you 
understand that you are going to be required to follow all of the rules of court.  
MR. LEUS: 
Yes. 
THE COURT: And that would be for rules of procedure, 
how to do certain things, as well as the substantive law 
like, for example, the rules of evidence, things like that. 
Do you unders tand? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
13   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: Now, you can ask Mr. Rodby about those, 
but it's going to be your responsibility to make sure you 
follow those. Do you understand? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
THE COURT: All right. Very good.  
 
And at trial, things sometimes can get a little bit 
complicated, not always, but sometimes they can, and it can 
be -- technically, there are some issues that can come up 
that are not even easy for lawyers and the Court to deal with. Do you understand?  
MR. LEUS: 
Yes. Psychology. 
THE COURT: Pardon me? 
THE INTEPRETER: Psychology. 
MR. LEUS: Psychology of people. I understand what 
you talking about. 
THE COURT: All right. Now, you do not have any 
formal training in the law, correct? 
MR. LEUS: No, but I' m, I have interest about law, 
about --
THE COURT: No, and that' s fine.  I' m not saying just 
because you don' t have any legal training, that you' re not 
someone who can represent themselves; I' m not saying that.  
It's just that you' re an engineer by education, yes? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
THE COURT: So if I were to go out and try to do 
something that involves --
MR. LEUS: To build house, for example. THE COURT: Correct. I probably would not be doing a 
very good job, so -- but for you, because you don' t have 
any legal training, it doesn't mean that you cannot learn 
and that you haven' t studied, but you are going to be on 
the other side from Mr. Sousie who is legally trained and 
experienced. Do you understand? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
THE COURT: Okay. And that even for the best of 
people, this can be very, very difficult and challenging, 
you understand, to represent yourself; do you understand? 
14   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
MR. LEUS: Absolutely. 
THE COURT: All right. And if you decide that you 
want to confirm you want to continue to represent yourself, 
the Court will let you do that, but you cannot later on, let's say, complain that you did not have a lawyer because 
that is your choice to make, okay. Do you understand that, Mr. Leus? 
MR. LEUS: Absolutely. 
THE COURT: And basically, as I have a couple 
different times previously encouraged you to strongly 
consider allowing a lawyer to represent you, all right. 
It's your choice, like I said, but it' s always better, I 
think, to have someone who is properly trained and 
experienced. Do you understand? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
THE COURT: Okay. But you still wish to represent 
yourself, Mr. Leus? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
THE COURT: All right. Very good.  
 
Now, instead of having the Court pay for a lawyer to 
represent you, if you wanted to and you could afford it, 
you could go out and hire your own lawyer, whoever he or she is, to come in and represent you; do you understand?  
MR. LEUS: 
Yeah. 
THE COURT: Okay. And I presume but I just want to 
be clear, you do not wish to do that, right? 
MR. LEUS: I don' t have money. 
THE COURT: Okay. And like I said before, if you 
don't have the money to pay for a lawyer, the Court would 
pay for a lawyer like Mr. Rodby to represent you if that' s 
what you wish; do you understand? 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
The Court: All right. Now, do you have any 
questions about what I' ve talked to you about, Mr. Leus? 
MR. LEUS: No. THE COURT: And you' re obviously a very intelligent 
person, and you' ve thought a lot about this decision, I 
imagine, right? 
15   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
MR. LEUS: Yes. 
THE COURT: Are you comfortable with your decision to 
represent yourself?  
MR. LEUS: 
Yes. 
THE COURT: Okay. Do you have any questions about 
anything that I have talked to you about?  
MR. LEUS: 
No. 
THE COURT: And the decision that you' ve made to 
represent yourself, whose choice is that?  
MR. LEUS: 
This is my choice. 
THE COURT: Your choice. Okay. All right. 
Leus acknowledged, throughout the colloquy, that he 
understood his right to be represented by an attorney, that it 
was his choice to represent himself, and that he was comfortable 
with his decision to represent himself. 
We conclude that the circuit court properly assessed 
Leus's background and comprehension, and informed Leus of the 
risks and disadvantages of self-representation. The record 
reflects that Leus's decision to proceed self-represented was 
knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently made. B. Alleged Prior Inconsistent Statement 
Leus contends that the circuit court erred "by 
precluding Leus from entering [testifying witness] [John] 
Hufana's (Hufana) prior inconsistent statement into evidence." 
At trial, Leus requested that the circuit court admit into 
16   
 
  
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence Defendant's Exhibit 4U (Exhibit 4U), a recording, 
during his direct examination of Hufana5 and pursuant to Hawaii 
Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rules 613 and 802.1,6 for the purpose of 
introducing Hufana's allegedly inconsistent statement. The State objected to the admission of Exhibit 4U on grounds that a 
proper foundation for admission of the exhibit had not been 
established; the circuit court sustained the objection, and 
denied the admission of the exhibit. 
We review the circuit court's denial of Exhibit 4U for 
abuse of discretion. "When a question arises regarding the 
necessary foundation for the introduction of evidence, the determination of whether proper foundation has been established 
lies within the discretion of the trial court, and its 
determination will not be overturned absent a showing of clear 
5 Hufana was called as a witness by both the State and Leus. 
Leus's attempt to introduce Exhibit 4U into evidence, as a prior inconsistent 
statement, occurred during his direct examination of Hufana on December 7, 
2017. Hufana had previously been called by the State to testify on 
December 6, 2017. 
6 HRE Rule 613(b) instructs, in pertinent part, 
Extrinsic evidence of a prior inconsistent statement by a 
witness is not admissible unless, on direct or cross-
examination, (1) the circumstances of the statement have been brought to the attention of the witness, and (2) the 
witness has been asked whether the witness made the 
statement. 
HRE Rule 613. HRE Rule 802.1 recognizes an inconsistent statement as an 
exception to the hearsay rule when, among other things, "the statement is 
offered in compliance with rule 613(b)[.]" HRE Rule 802.1 
17   
 
  
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
  abuse." State v. Eid, 126 Hawaiʻ i 430, 440, 272 P.3d 1197, 1207 
(2012) (quoting State v. Assaye, 121 Hawaiʻ i 204, 210, 216 P.3d 
1227, 1233 (2009)). 
Here, we conclude that the circuit court did not err. 
At trial, Leus attempted to introduce Exhibit 4U as follows, 
Q. (By Mr. Leus) John [Hufana], do you remember we 
were talking about this case, and everything is recorded, 
and we was talking about that. You was talking with me, 
with Bogden. It was good night, absolutely calm, speech good, bring good refrigerator, new one, beautiful. 
THE COURT: All right. Mr. Leus --
MR. LEUS: Yeah, and --
THE COURT: No. Ask a question. 
Q. (By Mr. Leus) Yeah, and question is in this 
conversation when we were speaking about police brutality, 
all this stuff, did you say that, Oleg, everything 
recorded? 
MR. SOUSIE: Objection. Leading. 
 THE COURT: 
 All right. I' ll overruled [sic] that.  
Go ahead. Do you understand the question?    
     
 
    
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE WITNESS: 
Yes, I understand the question. 
MR. LEUS: I' m not finished. 
THE COURT: No. 
MR. LEUS: Ah. Okay. THE COURT: Give the witness an opportunity. Go ahead. 
A. Being you guys started off the conversation with, 
you know, you guys wanted me to be your witness and so did 
the State, I wasn' t sure where to go, but you guys wanted 
me to say some things that wasn' t true, so being that said, 
I told you guys, Eh, the thing might be recorded, could 
have been recorded, and I don' t want to be in trouble for 
that, so that' s why I said it could have been recorded and 
18   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I don't want to get caught, because you guys wanted me to 
say things that never happened that night. 
Q. (By Mr. Leus) Okay, John. What things that never 
happened we were asking to say? 
A. That you weren' t -- that you weren' t resisting, 
that you were calm, you were doing what they were saying 
what they said you should do. There was a lot of things 
that you told me to say, you and your son. Everywhere at my apartment building, every chance you guys get, you guys 
bring that up. That day that we had that conversation, we 
even got into an argument. I told you guys I didn' t want 
to talk to you, I didn' t want to talk about this, and, 
yeah, it turned out that I told you it might be recorded and I don' t want to talk about it. 
Q. Okay. Understand we were talking. I' m not hear 
what you talking. Then why I' m asking.  People will think 
this is against myself, but I will exactly asking, please, I remind, what exactly you want -- what exactly I was 
asking you to change, to change, what exactly? You can 
speak absolutely freely. Don' t care about --
A. I'm not --
Q. Exactly. 
A. Not to mention you asked me not to talk about not 
seeing things. Like, if I saw you guys by the car, what happened at the car, you said, Did you really see this, did 
you really see that, and I said, yeah, I saw this, and you 
said, well, you know, that' s not going to – you said stuff 
that --
Q. No, exactly, exactly because --
A. This conversation is long ago, but out of the 
conversation, all I was trying to do that night was get you so that you' re not taking me as a witness because 
everything I saw you do goes against what you was trying to 
tell me to say. 
Q. Okay. What I say exactly, you cannot remember 
what I was asking you to talk in your testimony. It' s 
okay, it' s okay.  It' s whatever.  We recorded this 
conversation, and in this conversation, you talking that 
for sure, policemen showed you video even from two cameras, 
and Bogden asked, Are you sure, did you see this movie? 
Yes, you answered, I see this movie. 
MR. SOUSIE: Objection. 
Q. What do you see on --
19   
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE COURT: No, I don' t want further discussion.  
You're offering Defendant's 4U.  
 
Mr. Sousie, your response?  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: Hold on a second. 
Q. Is --
THE COURT: Hold on. Q. Did you see any --
THE COURT: No. Wait a minute. 
Sustained. 
Please just ask a question. Q. (By Mr. Leus) Did you see any police movie? 
A. 
I did not see any videos. 
MR. LEUS: 
Okay. I need consultation. 
THE COURT: Please. (Mr. Leus conferred with Mr. Rodby.) 
MR. LEUS: Your Honor, because what is recorded her
absolutely different what John said -- 
 e 
THE COURT: 
No, no, no, don' t make a statement.  Do 
you have a request to make? 
MR. LEUS: I want -- I finish this conversation with 
John. 
THE COURT: Hold on, please. You have something 
you'd like to request, is that right, regarding your 
exhibits?  
MR. LEUS: 
I want to request to listen this disk. 
THE COURT: And the designation is Defendant' s 4U; is 
that correct?  
MR. LEUS: 
Yes, this 4U. 
THE COURT: Okay, I understand. You're making that 
offer at this time.  
MR. LEUS: 
I was doing this --
20   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
MR. SOUSIE: Your Honor, the State objects on 
foundation. 
THE COURT: The objection is sustained. The exhibit 
is refused.7 
(Emphasis added.) 
As the record reflects, Leus did not bring the 
"circumstances of the statement" to the attention of Hufana, or 
establish whether Hufana "made the statement," as required 
pursuant to HRE Rule 613(b). State v. Kassebeer, 118 Hawaiʻ i 
493, 516, 193 P.3d 409, 432 (2008) ("In order to lay the 
foundation to introduce a prior inconsistent statement, HRE 
Rule 613(b) require[s] that [the introducer] bring the 
circumstances of the statement to the [testifying witness's] 
attention and ask [witness] whether [witness] made the 
statement.") 
While Leus referenced a "recording" and "police 
movie" during his questioning of Hufana, he did not establish 
that Hufana made any statement recorded on Exhibit 4U, or that 
Hufana made a statement to the police. The circuit court did 
not abuse its discretion by sustaining the State's objection to 
the admission of Exhibit 4U for lack of foundation. 
7 Following a brief bench conference, Leus again attempted to have 
Exhibit 4U entered into evidence, through the assistance of standby counsel 
Rodby.  Rodby addressed the circuit court as follows, "Mr. Leus has asked me 
to say that the exhibit should be admitted into evidence as a prior 
inconsistent statement." The State objected, and the circuit court sustained the objection, noting that, "the Court did construe the prior offers under 
613, and the Court will restate its prior ruling, which is to sustain the 
State's objection, refuse the exhibit, 4U." 
21   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
C. Requested Continuance 
Leus contends that the circuit court abused its 
discretion in denying his request, made midway through the 
trial, for a "continuance to secure his medical witnesses." We 
review for abuse of discretion. Sapp v. Wong, 62 Haw. 34, 41, 
609 P.2d 137, 142 (1980). 
As Leus acknowledges, the circuit court considers two 
factors with regard to a motion for continuance, "(1) whether counsel exercised due diligence in seeking to obtain the 
attendance of the witness; and (2) whether the witness provides 
relevant and material testimony that benefits the defendant." 
State v. Williander, 142 Hawaiʻ i 155, 163-64, 415 P.3d 897, 905-
06 (2018). Applying these two factors, we conclude that the 
circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying the 
continuance that Leus requested. 
As to the first factor, Leus fails to establish that 
he exercised due diligence in order to obtain the necessary 
witnesses for trial. At the time Leus requested a mid-trial 
continuance, his case had been pending for two years. Trial had 
commenced, and the circuit court noted that, 
This case was initiated soon after your arrest, which was 
on October 5, 2015. There have been I believe one, two, 
three, four prior attorneys of record. Mr. Rodby was 
appointed as standby counsel only. You have been acting as 
your own attorney since at least, at least April of this 
year, and it is now December, which is approximately seven 
22   
 
  
 
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or eight months after you took over representation of 
yourself in this case. 
The circuit court, in denying the request, took note 
of Leus's self-representation and non-legal background. The 
circuit court, however, also explained that, 
[W]hat I am doing is holding you essentially to the same 
standards and requirements of anyone else that appears in 
court, including attorneys and those individuals such as 
yourself that choose to represent yourself. As I told you 
as recently as Monday of this week, that trial proceedings can be complicated, and it is entirely your responsibility 
to be aware of all of the rules and all the legal 
requirements, and that the Court is not here to assist you, 
all right. 
The record supports the circuit court's determination that Leus 
did not exercise due diligence in subpoenaing his medical 
witnesses. 
With regard to the second factor, the circuit court 
did not err in concluding that Leus failed to demonstrate that the witnesses would have provided relevant and material 
evidence. At trial, Leus informed the circuit court that he 
needed a continuance to subpoena the medical witnesses "because 
you said we need doctor to receive this papers[.]" The record 
does not support that the medical witnesses Leus sought to 
subpoena would have testified as custodians of Leus's medical records, and/or that they would have provided testimony as to 
any injuries that Leus sustained. Indeed, Leus did not 
establish that the medical witnesses he sought to subpoena had 
23   
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
examined him or that they had personal knowledge of his alleged 
injuries. The circuit court did not err in determining that Leus had not established that the medical witnesses' testimony 
was relevant and material. 
The circuit court did not err in denying Leus's 
request to continue trial. D. Questions Related to a Witness's Alleged Bias, Interest, or 
Motive to Testify Falsely 
Leus contends that "the trial court erred in 
precluding Leus from confronting Hufana on a matter directly 
related to Hufana's bias, interest, or motive to testify 
falsely." Leus specifically contends that the circuit court 
erred in "limiting" Leus's questions with regard to Leus's 
attempt "to adduce evidence that Hufana was jealous of his 
interaction with [Leus's neighbor] Jessica." 
Pursuant to HRE Rule 609.1, "[t]he credibility of a 
witness may be attacked by evidence of bias, interest, or motive." "The trial court's determination that the proffered 
evidence is probative of bias, interest or motive is reviewed 
under the right/wrong standard." State v. Balisbisana, 83 Hawaiʻ i 
109, 114, 924 P.2d 1215, 1220 (1996) (citations omitted). 
From what we are able to discern, Leus contends that 
the circuit court erred in sustaining the State's objection to 
24   
 
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Leus's question to Hufana regarding Jessica's appearance. 
Leus's question, the State's objection, and the circuit court's ruling are reflected in the record as follows, 
Q. (By Mr. Leus) How you can describe Jessica? 
A. Jessica? 
MR. SOUSIE: Objection. 
THE COURT: Overruled. 
A. Jessica, she's my neighbor. She's been my 
neighbor long before you guys moved in. Four years, for 
the four years that she's lived there, they've always, 
police have always been called upon them because they drink 
a lot and they get really loud. Sometimes I drink with them because they're the neighbors and I like to make the 
relationship because they watch the apartment sometimes because they're always there. 
Q. My question is like person, person, personality. 
A. Her personality? 
Q. Yeah, her personality. 
A. She's very forgetful.  She' s a really bad 
alcoholic. At that time, she was going through depression because of the loss of her baby. You remember that one. 
She's a really good girl.  She graduated with -- in 
philosophy --
Q. Psychology. 
A. -- psychology, and, you know, she' s nice to my 
kids, so the relationship is good with her. 
Q. What about her appearance? 
MR. SOUSIE: Objection. 
Q. Her appearance? 
THE COURT: Hold on. Hold on. 
Q. (By Mr. Leus) What about her appearance? 
25   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: Hold on, Mr. Leus. When there' s an 
objection, you need to stop, okay. 
So I'll sustain the objection. 
(Emphasis added.) 
At that time, the circuit court called a brief recess 
and held a bench conference. The State objected to Leus's line 
of questioning on grounds of relevance, and the circuit court 
gave Leus the opportunity to respond. The following discussion 
took place outside the presence of the jury, 
MR. LEUS: I have two responses. First response, 
that I'm not very convenient because I start to continue 
with him and Mr. Sousie asked about consultation with his 
client. What will be right now, he understand what I' m 
going, what I' m going, because what I was talking about 
about jealousy on John, this only was t he reason why he 
call police on me, and right now he prepared, he prepared 
to speak with him, pay attention what Oleg doing right now, 
because I am asking so provocative questions that this questions looks like, in his eyes, looks like against me, 
and he is --  and right now he can speak exactly. After 
break, after work, this Mr. Sousie, he' ll speak absolutely 
different.  
THE COURT: Hold on a second, Mr. Leus. You are 
entitled to ask your questions of this witness that relate 
to what happened that night.   There have been several 
objections raised, many of which I have agreed with, and in part because your questions, sometimes it' s difficult to 
know what exactly it is that you're ultimately asking, so 
what I would suggest to you --  and it's up to you --  is if 
you can try to make your questions very short and clear, that will help everybody, all right.  
MR. LEUS: 
I will try. 
THE COURT: But I would also tell you that if you ask 
questions that call for answers that go beyond what may 
have happened that night or get into other --  
MR. LEUS: 
Speculation. 
THE COURT: Well, speculation is one thing, but what 
I'm concerned about is the jurors are not asked to decide 
this case based upon the characteristic of the people 
26   
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
  
    
  
  
  
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
involved. It doesn't matter. They simply need to 
understand what the information is about what happened or 
didn't, and the law is pretty clear that character evidence 
is extremely limited, so I just mention that to you. I' m 
not telling you what to do, but you need to be aware that you could ask questions that call for responses that could 
result in testimony that may not be helpful for this jury 
to know, okay. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The circuit court was not wrong in determining that 
Leus's question regarding Jessica's physical appearance was not 
relevant or probative of bias, interest, or motive. Leus was 
not foreclosed the opportunity to ask other questions that could 
potentially establish bias.8 The record reflects that the 
circuit court, by sustaining the State's objection to Leus's question regarding Jessica's physical appearance, was not improperly interfering with Leus's constitutional right to 
examine his witness. 
E. Allegation of Judicial Misconduct 
Leus contends that the circuit court "prejudicially 
deprived Leus of his right to a fair trial when it warned him, 
8 Specifically, the circuit court did not, as Leus asserts, tell 
him that "he was only 'entitled to ask questions of this witness that relate 
to what happened that night.'" (Emphasis added.) But even assuming the 
court erred in telling Leus he was entitled to ask questions of Hufana that relate to what happened that night, any such error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Hufana testified that he did not see the incidents supporting either charge against Leus. Thus, the convictions did not rest on 
Hufana's testimony. Rather, the convictions were overwhelmingly supported by 
the testimony of the three officers who witnessed the incidents and said they saw Leus commit both offenses. See infra Section G. 
27   
 
  
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in the presence of the jury, against any further outbursts and 
should have sua sponte declared a mistrial." In reviewing allegations of judicial misconduct, "[t]he question is whether 
the trial judge's conduct 'reveal[s] a deep and thorough-going 
bias against and contempt for the appellants' legal 
representation' that is 'fundamentally at odds with his [or her] 
judicial responsibilities.'" State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawaiʻ i 462, 
482, 946 P.2d 32, 52 (1997). 
Here, the record reflects a series of events at trial 
relating to Leus's attempt to introduce Exhibit 4U. The 
following proceedings occurred outside the presence of the 
jurors, 
Mr. Leus, I have told you many times -- no -- I have 
told you many times not to make statements to the jury. 
You have on several occasions disregarded that. I have 
simply viewed that as an inadvertent decision on your part 
each and every one of those times because you are certainly 
entitled to zealously represent yourself, but I am at the point where I have good reason to believe that you are 
intentionally doing this, Mr. Leus, in an attempt to 
communicate your own personal views to the jury[.]   
 . . . . 
When we were at the bench, I asked you at least two 
times to please lower your voice, and you refused. When I 
made a statement dealing with the exhibit, I believe, you 
turned to the jury with your arms raised and made some sort of statement as if you disagreed. You're entitled to have 
your opinions. You are not entitled to do whatever you 
wish in this courtroom. There are rules. There are 
procedures. We have to follow them.  
MR. LEUS: And he can steal this evidence? That the 
rules, he can steal part of evidence? 
28   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: All right. 
MR. LEUS: And you talking everything okay? 
THE COURT: You, as your own lawyer, are responsible 
for your own exhibits. Defendant' s Exhibit [4]U was 
offered and refused yesterday. I respect the fact you 
disagree. That' s fine.  I asked Mr. Sousie on the record 
whether or not he had your exhibit.  
 
 And again, for the record, Mr. Sousie, do you have 
that exhibit?  
MR. SOUSIE: 
No, Your Honor, the State does not. 
THE COURT: All right. 
MR. LEUS: He is liar, primitive liar, primitive, 
very primitive liar. Here, I have witness. He was, he 
was, and my son was, and to my son, I said, Oleg -- Bogden, it's here, I giving here this to him, and I told him, 
Everything okay, should we sign something? No. No, it' s 
okay. Same in my hands. Okay. And I told him here is 
witness is here. Oh, it' s okay, it' s okay, everything 
okay. Now he talking part of number 4, everything that in 
your table, number 4, the documents you received, yeah, he 
has, he has, but this, he don' t have, this video of the 
recording. 
 . . . . 
THE COURT: 
And Mr. Leus, I' m going to caution you, 
warn you, advise you, not to make further outbursts in front of the jury. This does not help this process, all 
right, and I' m explicitly telling you not to do that, and 
if you do, Mr. Leus, you need to be very, very clear that there are possible consequences to your choice to disregard 
the Court' s instruction.  I do not want that to happen. 
MR. LEUS: I have --
THE COURT: No, no, no. And what we will do is we' ll bring the jurors back 
in, we'll bring in Mr. Hufana.  If you have other questions 
for him, you may ask those questions. If you have anything 
else with regard to your exhibit, that is your 
responsibility, all right. 
  . . .. 
THE COURT: 
All right. Mr. Leus, what we will do is 
we will attempt to proceed in an orderly and a respectful 
29   
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
manner. If you have any further outbursts, I will take a 
recess all right.  
(Emphasis added.) 
After the jury was brought back into the courtroom, 
and court was reconvened, the circuit court stated, 
Mr. Leus, further Direct Examination. I will just 
simply remind you that you may ask questions. Please don' t 
make statements, and there will be no further outbursts by you, all right. 
Proceed, please. 
And before we resume, ladies and gentlemen, to the 
extent that there were certain statements or, as the Court 
has characterized it, outbursts by Mr. Leus, you will disregard those, okay. You' ll not consider them in any way 
when you deliberate this case, all right. Thank you. 
  Upon careful examination of the record, we conclude 
that the circuit court's above statements to Leus, including his 
reference to Leus's "outbursts" in the presence of the jury, 
were intended to maintain order and decorum during the trial 
proceedings. They did not reflect any "deep and thorough-going 
bias against and contempt for" Leus, nor were they 
"fundamentally at odds" with the circuit court's judicial 
responsibilities.  As such, they did not constitute judicial 9
9   The circuit court also later instructed the jury as follows,  
 
If I have said or done anything that has suggested to 
you that I favor either side or if any of my statements or 
facial expressions has seemed to indicate an opinion as to 
which witnesses are or are not worthy of belief, what facts 
are or are not proved, or what inferences should be drawn 
from the evidence, I instruct you to disregard it. You must also disregard any remark I may have made unless the 
remark was an instruction to you.   
(continued . . .) 
30   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
misconduct. The circuit court did not err by not sua sponte 
granting a mistrial. F. Motion to Strike Jury Pool 
  Leus contends that "the trial court abused its 
discretion in denying Leus's motion to strike the jury pool 
where it was unduly composed of persons related to or close 
friends with law enforcement." 
In order to establish a prima facie violation of the fair-
cross-section requirement, the defendant must show (1) that 
the group alleged to be excluded is a "distinctive" group in the community; (2) that the representation of this group 
in venires from which juries are selected is not fair and reasonable in relation to the number of such persons in the 
community; and (3) that this underrepresentation is due to 
systematic exclusion of the group in the jury- selection 
process
. 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawaiʻ i 19, 41, 960 P.2d 1227, 1249 (1998) 
(citing Duren v. Missouri, 439 U.S. 357 (1979)). 
On appeal, Leus specifically contends that the circuit 
court erred in denying his request to strike the jury pool 
because thirty of the seventy-two individuals in the jury pool 
indicated that they were close friends or related to "law 
enforcement personnel." Relying on Duren, Leus contends that 
the jury pool disproportionately consisted of individuals with a 
9(. . .continued) 
The jury is presumed to have followed the circuit court's instructions. 
State v. Hauge, 103 Hawaiʻ i 38, 59, 79 P.3d 131, 152 (2003) ("This court has 
repeatedly adhered to the construct that the jury is presumed to have 
followed the circuit court's instructions." (cleaned up)) .  
31   
 
   
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
connection to law enforcement, and for that reason did not 
comprise a reasonably representative cross-section of the community. 
We conclude that the circuit court did not err in 
denying Leus's request to strike the jury pool. From what we 
are able to discern, it appears Leus is challenging the 
"exclusion" of individuals who are not affiliated with the law 
enforcement community. Leus has not, however, shown that this 
"group" is a "'distinctive' group in the community," "that the 
representation of this group in venires from which juries are 
selected is not fair and reasonable in relation to the number of such persons in the community[,]" and "that this 
underrepresentation is due to systematic exclusion of the group 
in the jury-selection process." See Richie 88 Hawaiʻ i at 41, 960 
P.2d at 1249. 
G. Sufficiency of Evidence 
Leus contends that "[his] convictions must be reversed 
where the testimony of the State's witnesses failed to establish 
substantial evidence to support his convictions." In reviewing 
the sufficiency of evidence, "[t]he test on appeal is not 
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but 
whether there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion 
32   
 
   
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the trier of fact." Richie , 88 Hawaiʻi at 33, 960 P.2d at 
1241. "Substantial evidence as to every material element of the 
offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient 
quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable 
caution to support a conclusion." State v. Timoteo
, 87 Hawaiʻi 
108, 113, 952 P.2d 865, 870 (1997). We conclude that there was 
sufficient evidence to support Leus's conviction for both 
Assault Against a Law Enforcement Officer in the Second Degree and Harassment. 
With regard to Assault Against a Law Enforcement 
Officer in the Second Degree, the State must prove that a person 
"recklessly cause[d] bodily injury10 to a law enforcement officer 
who is engaged in the performance of duty." HRS § 707-712.6 (2014). During the State's case-in-chief, Officer Masakazu 
Kurita (Kurita) testified that, while engaged in his official 
duties as a Honolulu Police Department (HPD) officer on the 
evening of October 5, 2015, Leus kicked his "right cheek area." Kurita testified that the kick occurred while Leus was in the 
police vehicle, after Kurita opened the door of the car. Leus 
made eye contact with Kurita, stared at his face, "and out of 
nowhere, he [Leus] kicked me with his left foot." Kurita 
10 "Bodily injury" is defined in HRS § 707- 700 (2014) as "physical 
pain, illness, or any impairment of physical condition." 
33   
 
   
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testified that "he hit me straight, and I felt my neck snap back 
and I felt pain to the left side of my neck and also my right cheek area." Kurita rated the pain as an "8 or a 9" on a scale 
of one to ten. Two other police officers, Officers Jesse 
Takushi (Takushi) and Robert Salanoa (Salanoa), who had 
witnessed the incident, testified that they saw Leus kick Kurita 
in the face. 
With regard to harassment, "[a] person commits the 
offense of harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy, or alarm 
any other person, that person: (a) Strikes, shoves, kicks, or 
otherwise touches another person in an offensive manner or subjects the other person to offensive physical contact[.]" 
HRS § 711-1106 (2014). Takushi testified at trial that Leus 
grabbed his right shoulder. Takushi further testified that, 
after he warned Leus not to touch him, Leus grabbed the back of 
his neck. Takushi testified that he did not give Leus 
permission to touch him behind his neck, that he was offended by 
Leus's touch, and that Leus's touch caused him alarm. Kurita and Salanoa corroborated Takushi's account; they testified 
witnessing Leus grab Takushi after Takushi warned Leus not to 
touch him. 
The record contains sufficient evidence to support 
Leus's conviction. 
34   
 
  
  For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Judgment of 
Conviction and Probation Sentence entered by the circuit court 
on February 6, 2018.   
  
 
 
 
    /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
Presiding Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
Associate Judge 
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
Associate Judge On the briefs: 
William K. Li, 
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Chad M. Kumagai, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, 
City and County of Honolulu, for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. Conclusion 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai‘i, November 8, 2023.
 
35 