NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000737
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORPORATION,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
TIMOTHY J. COITO and ANN K. COITO,
Defendants-Appellants
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 3RC12-1-30H)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Timothy J. Coito and Ann K. Coito
 
(collectively, Coitos) appeal from several orders and a judgment
 
for possession entered in the District Court of the Third
 
1
Circuit  (district court) in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee Federal
Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC). The district court
 
granted FHLMC's motion for summary judgment, granted a judgment
 
for possession and writ of possession to FHLMC, and denied the
 
Coitos' motion for reconsideration.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On January 31, 2012, FHLMC filed a complaint for
 
ejectment in the district court against the Coitos. 
FHLMC
 
alleged it was the owner of the subject property (Property) by
 virtue of a non-judicial foreclosure sale held on April 11, 2011. 
1
 The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The complaint stated FHLMC had provided the Coitos written notice
 
to vacate, and FHLMC requested a judgment for possession and a
 
writ of possession The Coitos did not file a written answer to
 
the complaint but appeared at a hearing before the district
 
court. The hearing's minutes indicate the Coitos orally entered
 
a general denial.
 
FHLMC filed a motion for summary judgment (MSJ) on 
April 5, 2012. FHLMC's supporting documentation included a 
"Mortgagee's Affidavit of Foreclosure Under Power of Sale" and 
the resulting quitclaim deed issued in its favor, both recorded 
in the Land Court of the State of Hawaif i. 
The Coitos filed their opposition to FHLMC's MSJ on
 
April 17, 2012. In their opposition, the Coitos argued the
 
district court lacked jurisdiction pursuant to Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) 604-5 (Supp. 2012) because the Coitos challenged
 
FHLMC's title to the Property. The Coitos attached an affidavit
 
by Ann Coito in which she claimed to be the owner of the Property
 
and claimed the foreclosure sale was invalid. Specifically, the
 
affidavit stated the lender had failed to provide the Coitos with
 
a notice of acceleration as required by the power of sale clause
 
contained in the Coitos' mortgage. FHLMC did not file a response
 
to the Coitos' opposition.
 
The district court held a hearing on FHLMC's MSJ on
 
April 25, 2012. At the hearing's conclusion, the district court
 
orally granted FHLMC's MSJ. The district court entered its order
 
and a writ of possession and judgment for possession on
 
May 9, 2012.
 
On April 30, 2012, the Coitos filed a motion for
 
reconsideration pursuant to District Court Rules of Civil
 
Procedure (DCRCP) Rule 59. The Coitos again argued the district
 
court lacked jurisdiction and attached another affidavit by Ann
 
Coito, adding several details that were not in the first
 
affidavit. The court denied the Coitos' motion, concluding the
 
Coitos' evidence and arguments should have and could have been
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
presented earlier, and it entered its order denying the Coitos'
 
motion on July 26, 2012.
 
The Coitos filed a timely notice of appeal to this
 
court on August 24, 2012. On appeal, the Coitos argue the
 
district court lacked jurisdiction to grant FHLMC's MSJ and erred
 
in denying their motion for reconsideration.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
"The existence of jurisdiction is a question of law 
that [the appellate court reviews] de novo under the right/wrong 
standard." Captain Andy's Sailing, Inc., v. Dep't of Land & 
Natural Res., State of Hawaif i, 113 Hawaif i 184, 192, 150 P.3d 
833, 841 (2006) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
HRS § 604–5(d) ("Civil jurisdiction") states in
 
relevant part: "The district courts shall not have cognizance of
 
real actions, nor actions in which the title to real estate comes
 
in question[.]" Pursuant to DCRCP Rule 12.1, defendants may
 
assert, as a defense to the district court's jurisdiction, that
 
the action is one in which title to real estate will come in
 
question. DCRCP Rule 12.1 requires defendants raise this defense
 
by an affidavit of the defendant setting forth the "source,
 
nature, and extent of the title claimed[.]" 
We conclude the affidavit submitted with the Coitos'
 
opposition to FHLMC's MSJ satisfied the requirements of DCRCP
 
Rule 12.1 and sufficiently raised a question of title to divest
 
the district court of jurisdiction. In this case, FHLMC does not
 
dispute that the Coitos initially had title to the Property; both
 
parties agree the only issue is whether the Coitos retained title
 
after the non-judicial foreclosure sale. Therefore, although
 
"[t]he source, nature and extent of the title could have been
 
described more precisely[, the] failure to do so[] did not make
 
the affidavit deficient." Monette v. Benjamin, 52 Haw. 246, 248,
 
473 P.2d 864, 865 (1970).
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Moreover, the Coitos' affidavit sufficiently apprised
 
the court of the nature of their continuing claim of title to the
 
Property. HRS § 667-5(a)(3) (Supp. 2011) requires mortgagees to
 
"[g]ive any notices and do all acts as are authorized or required
 
by the power contained in the mortgage." The Coitos' affidavit
 
states they did not receive a notice of the loan acceleration or
 
an opportunity to cure their default, as required by their
 
mortgage's terms. The Coitos' mortgage contains a power of sale
 
clause, which states in relevant part:
 
22. Acceleration; Remedies. Lender shall give notice
to Borrower prior to acceleration following Borrower's
breach of any covenant or agreement in this Security
Instrument[.] . . . The notice shall specify: (a) the
default; (b) the action required to cure the default; (c) a
date, not less than 30 days from the date the notice is
given to Borrower, by which the default must be cured; and
(d) that failure to cure the default on or before the date
specified in the notice may result in acceleration of the
sums secured by this Security Instrument and sale of the
Property. The notice shall further inform Borrower of the
right to reinstate after acceleration and the right to bring
a court action to assert the non-existence of a default or
 any other defense of Borrower to acceleration and sale. If
the default is not cured on or before the date specified in
the notice, Lender at its option may require immediate
payment in full of all sums secured by this Security
Instrument without further demand and may invoke the power
of sale and any other remedies permitted by Applicable Law.
 
Pursuant to the mortgage, the Coitos must have received 
a notice of acceleration and must have failed to cure the default 
by the date specified in the notice before the mortgagee could 
validly invoke its power of sale. "[T]o effect a valid sale 
under power, all the directions of the power must be complied 
with[.]" Lee v. HSBC Bank USA, 121 Hawaif i 287, 291, 218 P.3d 
775, 779 (2009); see also In re Kekauoha-Alisa, 674 F.3d 1083, 1090 (9th Cir. 2012) (noting that Hawaif i law requires strict 
compliance with statutory non-judicial foreclosure procedures). In this case, the affidavit's assertion that the mortgagee failed 
to comply with the power of sale clause raised a sufficient 
question of title pursuant to DCRCP Rule 12.1. Cf. Deutsche Bank 
Nat. Trust Co. v. Peelua, 126 Hawaif i 32, 38, 265 P.3d 1128, 1134 
(2011) (concluding defendant's assertion of having been 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"defrauded, duped, coerced, and tricked" into transactions
 
involving his property was insufficient to establish that he
 
continued to maintain a claim to title).
 
We conclude the Coitos' affidavit raised a sufficient
 
question of title to divest the district court of jurisdiction. 
Where a question of title is raised, the district court cannot
 
pass upon the merits of that question, but rather is ousted of
 
jurisdiction. Monette, 52 Haw. at 249, 473 P.2d at 866. 
Therefore, the district court erred in granting summary judgment
 in favor of FHLMC, and the Coitos' points on appeal regarding the
 
district court's denial of their motion for reconsideration are
 
moot.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
We vacate the District Court of the Third Circuit's
 
(1) May 9, 2012 "Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion For Summary
 
Judgment, Filed Herein On April 5, 2012, Against All Defendants
 
On Complaint Filed January 31, 2012", (2) May 9, 2012 Judgment
 
For Possession; (3) May 9, 2012 Writ Of Possession; and (4) July
 
26, 2012 "Order Denying Defendant's Motion For Reconsideration Of
 
Granting Defendant's (Sic) Motion For Summary Judgment And For
 
Dismissal Of The Ejectment Complaint Filed On April 30, 2012" and
 
we remand this case with instructions to dismiss the case for
 
lack of jurisdiction.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, July 19, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Damon M. Senaha 
for Defendants-Appellants. Presiding Judge 
Robert E. ChapmanMary Martin(Clay Chapman Iwamura Pulice &Nervell)for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
5
 