 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
  
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000642 14-JUL-2026 09:04 AM Dkt. 58 SO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000642  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I  
TEOFANES Q. NATAVIO, JR., Petitioner-Appellant,   
v.  
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR OF THE COURTS, 
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻ I, Respondent-Appellee  
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT    
HONOLULU DIVISION  
(CASE NO. 1DAA-24-00002)   
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER   
(By: 
Nakasone, Chief Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.) 
Petitioner-Appellant Teofanes Q. Natavio, Jr. 
(Natavio
) takes this secondary appeal from the July 31, 2024 
"Decision and Order" (D&O), and August 2, 2024 "Judgment on 
Appeal" (Judgment), entered by the District Court of the First 
Circuit (district court).1 The D&O and Judgment affirmed the 
Administrative Driver's License Revocation Office's (ADLRO) March 30, 2023 Notice of Administrative Review Decision (ADLRO 
1 The Honorable Thomas A. Haia presided.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Decision), which administratively revoked Natavio's driver's 
license for two years, and the January 12, 2024 "Findings of 
Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision," which sustained the 
ADLRO Decision. 
Natavio raises four points of error on appeal, 
contending that the district court "was wrong in affirming the 
ADLRO's": (1) "denial of Natavio's Motion to Disqualify"; (2) 
"denial of Natavio's Motion to Rescind for Violation of Due Process"; (3) "conclusion that it was not collaterally estopped 
from finding reasonable suspicion for the stop of Natavio's 
vehicle"; and (4) "conclusion there was probable cause to 
believe that Natavio operated the vehicle while under the 
influence of an intoxicant." 
We review secondary appeals de novo, and apply the 
standards set forth in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-40 
(2020)
2 to determine whether the district court's determinations 
were right or wrong. Wolcott v. Admin. Dir. of the Cts., 148 
Hawaiʻi 407, 413, 477 P.3d 847, 853 (2020) (cleaned up). 
2 HRS § 291E- 40(c) (2020) provides: 
(c) The sole issues before the court shall be whether the 
[administrative director of the courts]: 
(1) Exceeded constitutional or statutory authority; 
(2) Erroneously interpreted the law; 
(3) Acted in an arbitrary or capricious manner; 
(4) Committed an abuse of discretion; or 
(5) Made a determination that was unsupported by the 
evidence in the record. 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 Upon careful review of the record, briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration 
to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, 
we address Natavio's points of error as follows:  
(1) 
Ex Parte Communication: Natavio contends that the 
ADLRO erred by not rescinding his driver's license revocation, 
or disqualifying itself, due to its alleged improper ex parte 
communication with Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Sergeant Jared Spiker (Sergeant Spiker) in unrelated cases. Natavio 
contends that the "procedures used by the ADLRO" in 
communicating ex parte with Sergeant Spiker "create[] a 
tremendous risk of erroneous deprivation" of Natavio's due 
process right to keep his driver's license, and ADLRO's failure 
to inform Natavio of the substance of the alleged ex parte 
communications denied Natavio an opportunity to be heard. 
"A driver's license is a constitutionally protected 
interest and due process must be provided before one can be deprived of his or her license." Kernan v. Tanaka, 75 Haw. 1, 
21, 856 P.2d 1207, 1218 (1993) (citation omitted).  As such, Natavio had a due process right "to be heard at a meaningful 
time and in a meaningful manner." Id. at 22, 856 P.2d at 1218 
(citations omitted). Determining the appropriate process due in a given situation: 
[R]equires consideration of three distinct factors: [1] the 
private interest that will be affected by the official 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
  
 action; [2] the risk of an erroneous deprivation of such 
interest through the procedures used, and the probable 
value, if any, of additional or substitute procedural 
safeguards; and [3] the government's interest, including 
the function involved and the fiscal or administrative 
burdens that the additional procedures would entail. 
Id. at 22-23, 856 P.2d at 1218-19 (emphasis added) (citations 
omitted). 
Here, Natavio points to no evidence in the record that 
the ADLRO engaged in any ex parte communications with Sergeant 
Spiker about Natavio or his case. And Natavio cites no authority to support the proposition that ex parte 
communications in separate and unrelated revocation proceedings 
create a blanket appearance of impropriety, such that the 
ADLRO's disqualification is necessary to protect Natavio's due 
process rights. Natavio's contention therefore lacks merit. 
(2) Expeditious Hearing: Natavio contends that he was 
denied his due process right to an expeditious hearing because the HPD did not fully comply with the subpoena duces tecum 
requesting Sergeant Spiker's personnel records.  Specifically, 
Natavio claims that HPD refused to produce an alleged 874-page 
Professional Standards Office (PSO) investigation document 
relating to Sergeant Spiker, and that HPD's refusal caused him 
to have "to choose between having a full and fair hearing and an 
expeditious one." 
HRS § 291E-38 (2020) "mandates that absent a 
continuance for good cause shown, an administrative hearing to 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
  
 
   
    
 
   
 
 review the revocation of a driver's license must be commenced 
within twenty-five days from the date the notice of 
administrative revocation was issued." Robinson v. Admin. Dir. 
of the Cts., 93 Hawaiʻ i 337, 341, 3 P.3d 503, 507 (App. 2000) 
(cleaned up). The record reflects that all continuances in this 
matter were granted at Natavio's request. Natavio "cannot by 
his own voluntary conduct invite error and then seek to profit 
thereby." State v. Jones
, No. 29301, 2010 WL 3133549, at *6 
(Haw. App. Aug. 5, 2010) (mem. op.) (citations omitted). 
Moreover, the record reflects that the ADLRO granted 
Natavio a subpoena duces tecum for Sergeant Spiker's records after Natavio filed a written request for the "Disciplinary Records regarding Sergeant [] Spiker" including "Form HPD-384 
for Sergeant [] Spiker's 2021 PSO investigation." The documents 
produced by HPD appear to be responsive to Natavio's request, 
and Natavio does not contend otherwise. 
Natavio argues that the HPD documents were 
incomplete, as they did not include the "HPD-384" form and the 
results of a "21-0649" PSO investigation against Sergeant Spiker.
3 Natavio represented below that he would submit 
3 HPD produced 127 pages of responsive documents. The cover page 
of the subpoenaed documents includes a letter from HPD Major Brandon Nakasato 
representing, inter alia, that "findings related to untruthfulness and veracity for HPD Sergeant [] Spiker do not exist. Additionally, HPD Sergeant 
[] Spiker did not and has never received an 'HPD- 384' for a 2021 PSO 
Investigation for untruthfulness and veracity." 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 transcripts establishing the existence of additional responsive 
documents not provided by the HPD, but Natavio never submitted 
this additional offer of proof.  On this record, we conclude 
that the ADLRO had no basis to determine that the documents 
produced by HPD were incomplete, false, or not responsive. 
(3) Reasonable Suspicion: Natavio contends that the 
ADLRO erred in determining that the district court's decision in 
a related case, case no. 1DTI-23-0533294 (Traffic Case), did not 
collaterally estop the ADLRO from finding reasonable suspicion 
in this case. In the Traffic Case, Natavio was charged with 
disregarding a red traffic signal, the act which precipitated 
Natavio's arrest for Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of 
an Intoxicant (OVUII).  The Traffic Case was subsequently 
dismissed with prejudice. Natavio contends that "[t]he issue 
decided [in the Traffic Case] is identical to the issue 
presented at the ADLRO hearing." 
An administrative revocation shall be affirmed only 
if, inter alia, there existed reasonable suspicion to stop the vehicle. HRS § 291E-38(f)(1) (Supp. 2026).
5 Collateral estoppel 
bars relitigation of an issue when the following factors are 
4 The Honorable Timothy E. Ho presided. 
5 The Supplemental Volume of the HRS for 2026 has not yet been 
issued. The portion of HRS § 291E- 38 which refers to the ADLRO's requirement 
to affirm the existence of reasonable suspicion was amended as subsection (f) 
by H.B. 2097, H.D. 1, S.D. 1, 33rd Leg., Reg. Sess. (2026). Therefore, the 
forthcoming 2026 Supplemental Volume is cited. 
6   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
    
  
 
 
 
 
   
 satisfied: (1) the issue decided in the prior suit is identical 
to the issue presented in the action in question; (2) there was 
a final judgment on the merits in the prior suit; (3) the party 
against whom collateral estoppel is asserted was a party or in 
privity with a party to the prior suit; and (4) the fact or 
issue decided in the prior action was actually litigated, 
finally decided, and essential to the earlier valid and final 
judgment. Smallwood v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 118 Hawaiʻ i 
139, 147, 185 P.3d 887, 895 (App. 2008) (citations omitted); Tradewind Ins. Co. v. Stout, 85 Hawaiʻ i 177, 184, 938 P.2d 1196, 
1203 (App. 1997) (citations omitted).  
The district court's dismissal of the Traffic Case, 
standing alone, does not compel our conclusion that the traffic 
stop was not supported by reasonable suspicion. Natavio introduced the district court's judgment that dismissed the 
Traffic Case with prejudice to support his collateral estoppel 
argument.  However, the Traffic Case judgment did not include an 
affirmative finding that Officer Alvin Koike (Officer Koike), 
the officer making the traffic stop, was not credible, nor that 
the traffic stop was not supported by reasonable suspicion. "To 
determine whether the officer indeed had specific and 
articulable facts to justify the investigative stop, we examine 
the totality of the circumstances measured by an objective 
7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  
 
  
 standard." State v. Prendergast, 103 Hawaiʻ i 451, 454, 83 P.3d 
714, 717 (2004). 
Here, Officer Koike's sworn statement in the arrest 
report states that he observed Natavio's vehicle "approach[] the 
traffic signal, which was red, and turn[] without coming to a 
complete stop." Officer Koike's report pointed to specific and 
articulable facts which, taken together with the rational 
inferences from those facts, reasonably warranted a stop for a 
suspected traffic infraction. ADLRO was not collaterally 
estopped from making its own assessment of reasonable suspicion 
for the traffic stop. 
(4) Probable Cause: Natavio contends that the ADLRO 
erred in finding probable cause that Natavio committed OVUII. "Probable cause is established by a state of facts as would lead 
a person of ordinary caution or prudence to believe and 
conscientiously entertain a strong suspicion of guilt of the 
accused."  State v. Ontai, 84 Hawaiʻ i 56, 63, 929 P.2d 69, 76 
(1996) (cleaned up). 
Probable cause requires more than a mere 
suspicion, but less than a certainty. State v. Maganis, 109 
Hawaiʻi 84, 86, 123 P.3d 679, 681 (2005) (citations omitted). 
Natavio disputes Sergeant Spiker's observation of his 
poor performance on the standardized field sobriety test (SFST
), 
and contends that he was unable to dispute Sergeant Spiker's 
credibility because he could not obtain impeachment materials. 
8   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
 
  
 In section (2), supra, we concluded that the ADLRO did not deny 
Natavio's due process right to conduct discovery of Sergeant 
Spiker's HPD records.  We therefore reject Natavio's contention 
that "he was not allowed to adequately challenge Sergeant 
Spiker's credibility." 
Sergeant Spiker testified that, during the SFST, 
Natavio could not keep his balance, stepped on his own feet, 
swayed during the one-leg stand test, and admitted to having "three drinks." In the arrest report, which was introduced into 
evidence, Sergeant Spiker also observed that Natavio had a 
strong odor of intoxicants, and red, watery, and glassy eyes. 
The arrest report also included sworn statements from 
Officer Koike and Officer Cheeravath Aphipunyo (Officer 
Aphipunyo), which corroborate Sergeant Spiker's observations of 
Natavio's intoxication. Officer Koike's observed that, 
After initiating the traffic stop, [Officer Koike] 
approached the driver's window to speak with [Natavio] and 
could smell a strong odor of an alcoholic type beverage 
coming from [Natavio's] breath as he spoke, and saw 
[Natavio's] eyes to be watery and glassy. [Officer Koike] confirmed that this odor of an alcoholic type beverage did 
indeed come from [ Natavio] when [Officer Koike] spoke with 
[Natavio] alone. [Natavio's] speech was slurred as well. 
(Emphasis added.)  Officer Aphipunyo represented that he arrived 
a few minutes after the traffic stop, Officer Spiker was at the 
scene, and "[u]pon [Officer Aphipunyo's] initial encounter with 
[Natavio], [Officer Aphipunyo] immediately detected a strong 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 odor of alcohol on [Natavio's] breath. [Natavio's] eyes were 
red, watery, and glassy." 
Officer Koike and Officer Aphipunyo's independent 
observations of Natavio's red, watery, and glassy eyes, his 
slurred words, and a strong odor of alcohol on his breath, 
support the ADLRO's determination of probable cause for OVUII.    
See State v. Wilson , 92 Hawaiʻ i 45, 54 n.14, 987 P.2d 268, 277   
n.14 (1999) ("[T]here is nothing to prevent the prosecution from 
relying on other relevant evidence of intoxication . . . e.g., 
the manner in which [driver] was observed to have driven his 
vehicle, his conduct in performing the requisite alcohol tests, 
his appearance, demeanor, and other valid police observations of signs of intoxication."); see also Bicalho v. Admin. Dir. of the   
Cts., No. CAAP-24-0000054, 2026 WL 1033119, at *2-3 (Haw. App.  
Apr. 16, 2026) (SDO).  
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the district 
court's D&O and Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻ i, July 14,  
  2026.  
On the briefs:  
Alen M.K. Kaneshiro,  
Christopher M. Phillips,  
for Petitioner-Appellant.  
 
Alyssa-Marie Y. Kau,  
Deputy Attorney General,  
for Respondent-Appellee.  /s/ Karen T. Nakasone  
Chief Judge  
 /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth  
Associate Judge  
 
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Associate Judge 
10 