 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000001
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
TEDDY MUNET, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 12-1-1114)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Teddy Munet (Munet) appeals from
 
the Judgement of Conviction and Sentence filed on December 3,
 
2014, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).1
  
Munet was convicted of: (1) Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver in
 
2
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 134-25 (2011);  (2)
1 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
2
 HRS § 134-25 provides:
 
[§134-25] Place to keep pistol or revolver; penalty.
(a) Except as provided in sections 134-5 and 134-9, all
firearms shall be confined to the possessor's place of
business, residence, or sojourn; provided that it shall be
lawful to carry unloaded firearms in an enclosed container
from the place of purchase to the purchaser's place of
business, residence, or sojourn, or between these places
upon change of place of business, residence, or sojourn, or
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Promoting Dangerous Drug in the Second Degree in violation of HRS
 
3
§ 712-1242(1)(b)(i) (2014);  and (3) Unlawful Use of Drug
Paraphernalia in violation of HRS § 329-43.5(a) (2010).4
 
Munet contends the circuit court erred: (1) because it
 
did not instruct the jury that it must unanimously agree on which
 act constituted the conduct element for the offense of Place to
 
2(...continued)
between these places and the following:

(1) A place of repair;
(2) A target range;
(3) A licensed dealer's place of business;
(4) An organized, scheduled firearms show
or exhibit;
(5) A place of formal hunter or firearm
use training or instruction; or
(6) A police station.
"Enclosed container" means a rigidly constructed
receptacle, or a commercially manufactured gun case,
or the equivalent thereof that completely encloses the
firearm.
 
(b) Any person violating this section by
carrying or possessing a loaded or unloaded pistol or
revolver shall be guilty of a class B felony.
3 HRS § 712-1242 provides in pertinent part:
 
§712-1242 Promoting a dangerous drug in the second

degree. (1) A person commits the offense of promoting a
dangerous drug in the second degree if the person knowingly:
. . . . 
(b)
 Possesses one or more preparations, compounds,
mixtures, or substances of an aggregate weight of:
(i) One-eighth ounce or more, containing
methamphetamine, heroin, morphine, or cocaine
or any of their respective salts, isomers, and salts
of isomers[.]
. . . . 
(2) Promoting a dangerous drug in the second degree is
a class B felony.
4 HRS § 329-43.5(a) provides:
 
[§329-43.5] Prohibited acts related to drug
paraphernalia.  (a) It is unlawful for any person to use, or
to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of this chapter. Any person who
violates this section is guilty of a class C felony and upon
conviction may be imprisoned pursuant to section 706-660
and, if appropriate as provided in section 706-641, fined
pursuant to section 706-640.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Keep Pistol or Revolver; and (2) by sentencing Munet to a
 
concurrent term of imprisonment for the three convicted crimes 
in this case to be served consecutively with a sentence Munet was
 serving from another case.
 
Upon careful review of the record and briefs submitted
 
by the parties and having given due consideration to the
 arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as well
 as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Munet's points
 of error as follows and affirm.
 
I. Background
 
On July 31, 2012, in this case, a grand jury indicted
 
Munet for Murder in the Second Degree in violation of HRS §§ 707­
701.5 (2014) and 706-656 (1993 & Supp. 2013) (Count I); Ownership
 or Possession Prohibited of Any Firearm or Ammunition by a Person
 Convicted of Certain Crimes, in violation of HRS § 134-7(b), (h)
 (2011) (Count II); Carrying or Use of a Firearm in the Commission
 of a Separate Felony, in violation of HRS § 134-21 (2011) (Count
 III); Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver, in violation of HRS
 § 134-25 (Count IV); Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Second
 Degree, in violation of HRS § 712-1242(1)(b)(i) (Count V); and
 Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia, in violation of HRS § 329­43.5(a) (Count VI).
 
On September 4, 2013, in a separate case (Cr. No. 13-1­
0325), and while this case was pending, Munet was convicted of
 Escape in the Second Degree (Count I) and Robbery in the Second
 Degree (Count II). He was sentenced to five (5) years of
 imprisonment for Count I and ten (10) years of imprisonment for
 Count II, to run concurrently with each other.
 
On July 16, 2014, in this case, the circuit court
 
entered Munet's no contest plea for Promoting Dangerous Drug in
 the Second Degree (Count V) and Unlawful Use of Drug
 Paraphernalia (Count VI).
 
On August 5, 2014, a jury trial commenced in this case. 
On the same day, after the State of Hawai
'i (State) gave its 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
opening statement to the jury, the circuit court sua sponte
 
orally entered a Judgment of Acquittal on Count II, Ownership or
 Possession Prohibited of Any Firearm or Ammunition by a Person
 Convicted of Certain Crimes. At trial, the State's witness,
 Kaipo Octubre (Octubre), and Munet gave conflicting testimony
 about the events that took place on July 19, 2012, the date that
 the remaining Counts (I, III, and IV), were alleged to have
 occurred. 
On August 21, 2014, after a six day jury trial, the
 
jury found Munet not guilty on Count I (Murder in the Second
 Degree), not guilty on Count III (Carrying or Use of Firearm in
 the Commission of a Separate Felony), and guilty on Count IV
 (Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver). 
On November 21, 2014, the State filed a Motion For
 
Consecutive Term Sentencing. On December 3, 2014, the circuit
 court held a hearing and determined that Munet would serve the
 terms of imprisonment for Counts IV, V, and VI concurrently, but
 consecutively with the sentence in Cr. No. 13-1-0325.
 
On December 3, 2014, the circuit court filed the
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence. On January 2, 2015, Munet
 timely filed his Notice of Appeal.
II. Unanimity Instruction
 
Munet contends that the circuit court violated his 
constitutional right to a unanimous jury verdict when it did not 
instruct the jury that it must unanimously agree on which act constituted the conduct element for Count IV Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver, under State v. Arceo, 84 Hawai
'i 1, 928 P.2d 843 
(1996). 
During the settling of jury instructions, the circuit
 
court stated that it did not think the standard unanimity
 
5
instruction  was necessary, but asked both the State and Munet if
5
 The circuit court's standard unanimity instruction reads as follows:
 
INSTRUCTION NO. 8.02
 
(continued...)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
they would prefer the circuit court to give it. The State
 
deferred to the court and Munet's counsel withdrew his initial
 request for the unanimity instruction. Given these
 circumstances, where a defendant challenges the trial court's
 jury instructions for the first time on appeal, the supreme court
 held in 
State v. Nichols , 111 Hawaii 327, 337, 141 P.3d 974
 
(2006), that "once instructional error is demonstrated, we will
 vacate, without regard to whether timely objection was made, if
 there is a reasonable possibility that the error contributed to
 the defendant's conviction, i.e., that the erroneous jury
 instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." 
In 
Arceo, the supreme court held
 
that when separate and distinct culpable acts are subsumed
within a single count charging a sexual assault—any one of
which could support a conviction thereunder—and the
defendant is ultimately convicted by a jury of the charged
offense, the defendant's constitutional right to a unanimous
verdict is violated unless one or both of the following
occurs: (1) at or before the close of its case-in-chief, the
prosecution is required to elect the specific act upon which
it is relying to establish the "conduct" element of the
charged offense; or (2) the trial court gives the jury a
specific unanimity instruction, i.e., an instruction that
advises the jury that all twelve of its members must agree
that the same underlying criminal act has been proved beyond
a reasonable doubt.
 
87 Hawai'i at 32-33, 928 P.2d at 874-75; see also State v.
 
Pecpec, 127 Hawai 'i 20, 35, 276 P.3d 589, 604 (2012) ("The 
purpose of a specific unanimity instruction is to protect a
 defendant's constitutional right to a unanimous verdict, where
 jurors otherwise would not know they are required to unanimously
 agree that the defendant had committed the same act."). In
 
5(...continued)
 
UNANIMITY INSTRUCTION

 
The law allows the introduction of evidence for the
 
purpose of showing that there is more than one [act]
[omission] [item] upon which proof of an element of an
offense may be based. In order for the prosecution to prove
an element, all twelve jurors must unanimously agree that
[the same act] [the same omission] [possession of the same
item] has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Arceo, the supreme court further concluded 
insofar as the circuit court erroneously failed to observe
either of the options mandated in the preceding paragraph,
Arceo's substantial constitutional right to unanimous jury
verdicts was prejudiced in such a manner as to give rise to
plain error. And inasmuch as we cannot say that there was no
reasonable possibility that the circuit court's error
contributed to Arceo's convictions, we hold that the error
was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
Arceo, 84 Hawai 'i at 33, 928 P.2d at 875. Thus, the supreme 
court vacated Arceo's convictions and remanded the matter for a
 
new trial. Id. Further, the supreme court has applied the
 
unanimity rule from Arceo beyond the context of sexual assault
 charges. See State v. Hironaka, 99 Hawai
'i 198, 207, 53 P.3d 
806, 815 (2002) (defendant found guilty of promoting a dangerous
 drug in the third degree).
 
In this case, unlike in Arceo, only one act could have
supported the underlying offense of Place to Keep Pistol or
 Revolver. The jury instruction for Place to Keep Pistol or
 Revolver read in pertinent part as follows:
 

 
In Count IV of the Indictment, the Defendant, Teddy
Munet, is charged with the offense of Place to Keep Pistol
or Revolver.
 
A person commits the offense of Place to Keep Pistol
or Revolver if he carries or possesses a pistol or revolver,
in a place other than his place of business, residence, or
sojourn, without a license to carry.
There are nine material elements of the offense of
 
Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver, each of which the
prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
These nine elements are:

 
1.	 That on or about the 19th day of July, 2012, in
the City and County of Honolulu, State of
Hawaii, the Defendant knowingly carried or
possessed the object in question; 
and
 
2.
	 That the object in question was a loaded or
unloaded pistol or revolver; and
3.	 That at the time he carried or possessed the
object in question, the Defendant believed,
knew, or recklessly disregarded the substantial
and unjustifiable risk, that the object was a
loaded or unloaded pistol or revolver; and
4.	 That at that time, the Defendant was in a place
other than his place of business, residence, or
sojourn; and
 
5.	 That at that time, the Defendant believed, knew,
or recklessly disregarded the substantial and
unjustifiable risk that he was in a place other
than his place of business, residence, or
sojourn; and
6.	 That at that time, the Defendant was not
carrying an unloaded firearm in an enclosed
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
container from the place of purchase to his
place of business, residence, or sojourn or
between those places and a place of repair,
target range, a licensed dealer's place of
business, an organized, scheduled firearms show
or exhibit, a place of formal hunter or firearm
use training or instruction, or a police
station; and
7.	 That at that time, the Defendant believed, knew,
or recklessly disregarded the substantial and
unjustifiable risk that he was not carrying an
unloaded firearm in an enclosed container from
 the place of purchase to his place of business,
residence, or sojourn or between those places
and a place of repair, target range, a licensed
dealer's place of business, an organized,
scheduled firearms show or exhibit, a place of
formal hunter or firearm use training or
instruction, or a police station; and
8.	 That at that time, the Defendant did not have a
license to carry; and
9.	 That at that time, the Defendant believed, knew,
or recklessly disregarded the substantial and
unjustifiable risk that he did not have a
license to carry.
 
(Emphasis added.) Thus, the jury was instructed that to find
 
Munet guilty of Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver, all the
 elements of the offense must have been satisfied on or about July
 19, 2012. 
Munet contends that Melia Vidal (Vidal) and Catherine
 
Zapata, also known as Nicky (Zapata), testified to multiple and
 distinct culpable acts that could have established the conduct
 element of the offense of Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver.
 However, neither Vidal's nor Zapata's testimony about Munet's
 possession of guns was specific to on or about the date of July
 19, 2012. 
Vidal testified that Munet owned two guns, that from
 
February of 2012, when she first met Munet, she saw him with a
 gun everyday, and he often kept the guns in his Durango and
 Honda. Vidal also testified that in April 2012, she fired one of
 Munet's guns towards the water at the beach. The State asked
 questions about, and Vidal gave detailed testimony regarding, her
 interactions with Munet on July 19, 2012. However, the State did
 not ask Vidal any questions about whether she saw Munet with a
 gun at any point on or about July 19, 2012, and Vidal did not
 
7

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testify specifically about Munet having a gun on or about July
 
19, 2012. Moreover, even though Vidal said she saw Munet with a
 gun everyday, the State made no effort to establish the location
 she saw Munet in possession of a gun on or about July 19, 2012,
 as would be necessary for the charged offense. Thus, the State
 did not attempt to develop facts through Vidal that would be
 necessary to establish required elements for the offense of Place
 to Keep Pistol or Revolver on or about July 19, 2012.
 
Zapata testified that, from the time she and Munet
 
renewed their relationship toward the end of April 2012, Munet
 owned two guns and she saw a black one almost every time she was
 with Munet. Zapata also saw Munet put the guns under the futon
 in the shed where he lived and in his Honda and Durango. In
 April 2012, Zapata saw Munet fire a gun into a tree while they
 were on a hike near the Old Pali Road. Zapata also testified
 that Munet locked Zapata in the tool shed where Munet resided
 and, sometime in June 2012, Munet threatened her with a silver
 gun while they were in the tool shed. However, Zapata's
 testimony only referenced the time period between February 2012
 and late June 2012. 
By contrast, Kaipo Octubre (Octubre), the State's 
witness, testified specifically about Munet handling a gun on July 19, 2012. Octubre testified that on July 19, 2012, he was with Munet and Billy Fallau (Fallau) at a State Park on Kappa
'a 
Quarry Road. After walking down a trail for about a minute, Octubre, Munet, and Fallau stopped at a clearing. Octubre testified that, after a period of time at the clearing, he saw Munet reach into Munet's pocket, pull out a gun, and shoot Fallau in the back of the head. Octubre did not testify to seeing Munet with a gun at any other point on or about July 19, 2012. 
When questioning the witnesses, the State focused its 
development of the facts to support the charge of Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver on Munet's conduct of taking a loaded firearm to a State Park on Kapa
'a Quarry Road and using it to shoot 
Fallau. The State made no attempt to develop facts to support 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Munet possessing a gun in any other instance on or about July 19, 
2012. See State v. Ortiz, 91 Hawai 'i 181, 198, 981 P.2d 1127, 
1145 (1999); State v. Maumalanga, 90 Hawai 'i 58, 63-64, 976 P.2d 
372, 377-78 (1998). Given the testimony in this case, Munet was only identified as possessing a gun at one time and in one location on or about July 19, 2012. Thus, there was only one specific act that the State relied on to establish the elements of the charged offense, Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver. Therefore, Munet's right to a unanimous jury verdict was not violated when the circuit court did not give the standard unanimity instruction in this case.
III. Consecutive Sentencing
 
Munet contends that the circuit court erred when it
 
imposed consecutive sentencing on Munet's term of imprisonment. 
"A sentencing judge generally has broad discretion in 
imposing a sentence.... And, 'generally to constitute an abuse it 
must appear that the court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.'" State v. Hussein, 122 Hawai
'i 495, 503, 229 P.3d 313, 321 (2010) (citation and 
brackets omitted). 
On appeal, Munet contends that a "sentencing court 
commits plain error where it relies on uncharged and unsubstantiated illegal conduct to justify the imposition of a consecutive sentence." Munet cites to State v. Vellina, 106 Hawai
'i 441, 106 P.3d 364 (2005) and State v. Nunes, 72 Haw. 521, 
824 P.2d 837 (1992) to support his contention. 
In Vellina, the circuit court relied on an 
unsubstantiated claim and in Nunes, the circuit court relied on an uncharged crime as support for imposing consecutive sentences. See Vellina, 106 Hawai
'i at 449, 106 P.3d at 372; Nunes, 72 Haw. 
at 525, 824 P.2d at 840. However, in this case, unlike in Vellina and Nunes, the circuit court based its decision to impose consecutive term sentencing on evidence and testimony in the record. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Munet contends that the circuit court "justified the
 
imposition of the consecutive sentence on the theory that [Munet]
 
was high on drugs and carrying guns with him 'every time he was
 driving his cars.'" Munet contends that "nothing in the record
 supported the finding that [Munet] was under the influence of
 illegal drugs when he was in possession of a gun." Munet also
 challenges the circuit court's use of the term "undisputed" when
 talking about the gun evidence because when Munet testified, he
 disputed ever owning a gun.
 
The circuit court stated the following on the record
 
with regard to consecutive sentencing:
 
Now, as to the State's motion for consecutive term
sentencing, I'm looking at 706-606 which are the factors.
The court is mandated to take into consideration both and
 imposed in the sentence period, and also in deciding on a
motion for consecutive term sentencing. One is the nature
and circumstances of the offense, in this case the offenses,
and the history and characteristics of the defendant. And
this court finds most compelling in that regard the historyand characteristics of the defendant. I mean, you know, the
PSI, when it comes to the prior criminal history of Mr.
Munet, I mean, it's -- it goes on page after page after
page, not surprisingly. It's a long and unfortunately varied
record of prior criminal activity ever since Mr. Munet was a

juvenile. Topped off by the convictions that I've already
handed down, and the sentences I've already handed down for
the most recent crimes except for these, and that is the –­those were all as a result of the escape.
Now, I understand Mr. Harada is doing his job in his
usually exemplary fashion, doing the best he can for his
client. But, with all due respect, I take complete issue
with your characterization, Mr. Harada, of the attempted
robbery. I mean, that woman must have been absolutely
terrified. I mean, she's, I think, just driving to work in
her own car, and along comes Mr. Munet and tries to pull her
out of her own car. I mean, that 
 conduct is just egregious
and inexcusable, and that's part of his prior record here.

So then I look at 2. "A" is to reflect the seriousness
 
of the offense, promote respect for law, to provide just
punishment for the offense. "B" is adequate deterrence. "C"
is to protect the public from further crimes. None of the
authority that I'm familiar with says that the court must
give equal weight to each -- to each of these factors, et
cetera. And, to me, 2C just jumps out at the court for the
reasons I've already -- for some of the reasons I've already
stated that that prior robbery, attempted robbery. And what
we got here is a place to keep pistol. 
And, basically, the
undisputed evidence at trial was that it wasn't a one-time
thing. I mean, he kept guns in his cars in special
compartments in his cars. Basically, you know, every time he
was driving his cars, he had these guns with him. I don't
think it takes a rocket scientist to figure out how
dangerous that is, and especially somebody with Mr. Munet's
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
criminal history. 
And then Count V is a drug offense, but he's in
possession of, you know, not negligible amounts of these
drugs. And, I mean, drugs and guns, you put them together
and he's already got a track record on this attempted
robbery. I think, to protect the public, I cannot, in good
faith, give Mr. Munet concurrent terms as far as this one
concurrent with the attempted robbery. That, I am not going
to do. I don't think it would be fair. I don't think it
 would be just. The open tens and the open fives for Counts
IV, V, and VI for this offense will all be served
concurrently, one with the other. But they will be served -­the concurrent ten, ten, and five will be served
consecutively with the open ten and the open five that I've
already given him for the attempted robbery and escape.
Those were concurrent. These are concurrent, but they will
be served consecutively, one with the other.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
In discussing HRS § 706-606(1) (1993), the "nature and
 
circumstances of the offense and the history and characteristics
 
of the defendant[,]" the circuit court found Munet's criminal
 history "most compelling[.]" The circuit court stated that
 Munet's criminal history is "a long and unfortunately varied
 record of prior criminal activity ever since Mr. Munet was a
 juvenile." In discussing HRS § 706-606(2), the circuit court
 stated that the factor in section (2)(c), "to protect the public
 from further crimes of the defendant," "jumps out at the court"
 because of the prior robbery for which Munet was already
 sentenced. The circuit court also referenced that it was
 undisputed that Munet carried a gun and also referenced that
 Munet was convicted of a drug offense as well.
 
Contrary to Munet's contention, the circuit court did
 
not state that Munet was "high on drugs and carrying guns with
 him 'every time he was driving his cars.'" Munet correctly
 points out that there was actually disputed evidence as to
 whether Munet carried a gun. At least one witness testified that
 he had never seen Munet with a gun and Munet himself testified
 that he did not own a gun. However, there was evidence in the
 record based on testimony from Vidal, Zapata, and Octubre that
 Munet owned at least one gun and that he often stored a gun in
 his Honda Accord and his Durango. Further, as noted previously,
 Vidal testified she saw Munet with a gun everyday, and Zapata
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testified she saw a gun almost every time she was with Munet. 
Thus, any error by the circuit court in stating that the evidence
 was "undisputed" that Munet carrying a gun "wasn't a one-time
 thing," was harmless. Given the record, the circuit court did
 not abuse its discretion in imposing consecutive sentences. 
Therefore, 
It IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence filed on December 3, 2014, in the Circuit Court of
 the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, July 29, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
William H. Jameson, Jr.,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Brandon H. Ito,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
12
 