NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000883
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I  
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
STACIE L. MENDEZ, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(1DTC-16-018453)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Stacie L. Mendez (Mendez) appeals
 
from the December 1, 2016 Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or
 
Order and Plea/Judgment entered by the District Court of the
 First Circuit, Honolulu Division (District Court).
1
 
The District Court convicted Mendez of Operating a
 
Vehicle After License and Privilege Have Been Suspended or
 Revoked for Operating A Vehicle Under the Influence of an
 Intoxicant, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E­62(a)(1) and/or (a)(2) (Supp. 2017) (OVLSR-OVUII).
2
 
1
 The Honorable Dyan K. Mitsuyama presided.
 
2
 HRS § 291E-62 states in relevant part:
 
§291E-62 Operating a vehicle after license and
privilege have been suspended or revoked for operating
a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant;
penalties.  (a) No person whose license and privilege
to operate a vehicle have been revoked, suspended, or
otherwise restricted pursuant to this section or to
part III or section 291E-61 or 291E-61.5, or to part
VII or part XIV of chapter 286 or section 200-81,
291-4, 291-4.4, 291-4.5, or 291-7 as those provisions
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Mendez contends (1) the District Court erred
 
by admitting Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i's (State) 
Exhibit 2, because it failed to meet the requirements of a self-
authenticating document under Rule 902 of the Hawaii Rules of
 Evidence (HRE) and violated her right to confrontation, and
 (2) there was insufficient evidence to convict her.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Mendez's points of error as follows:
 
2(...continued)
were in effect on December 31, 2001, shall operate or assume
actual physical control of any vehicle:
 
(1)	 In violation of any restrictions placed on
the person's license;
 
(2)	 While the person's license or privilege to
operate a vehicle remains suspended or
revoked;
 
. . . .
 
(b) No person who has been issued a notice of
administrative revocation that serves as a temporary permit
by a law enforcement officer, pursuant to section 291E-33,
shall operate or assume actual physical control of any
vehicle after the expiration of the temporary permit unless
that person has an otherwise valid driver's license. No
 person charged with violating this section shall be
convicted if the person produces in court, or proves from
the proper official or other records, that the person was
the holder of a valid driver's license at the time of the
 offense.
 
(c) Any person convicted of violating this section
shall be sentenced as follows without possibility of
probation or suspension of sentence:
 
(1)	 For a first offense, or any offense not preceded
within a five-year period by conviction for an
offense under this section, . . .
 
(A)	 A term of imprisonment of not less than
three consecutive days but not more than
thirty days;
 
(B)	 A fine of not less than $250 but not more
 than $1,000;
 
(C)	 Revocation of license and privilege to
operate a vehicle for an additional year;
and
 
(D)	 Loss of the privilege to operate a vehicle
equipped with an ignition interlock
device, if applicable[.]
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Assuming, arguendo, that State's Exhibit 2 was
 
erroneously admitted into evidence, it was harmless error because
 
when the evidence adduced at trial, without State's Exhibit 2, is
 considered in the strongest light for the prosecution, including
 all reasonable and rational inferences under the facts in
 evidence, including circumstantial evidence, there was sufficient
 evidence to convict Mendez. State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai' i 149, 
157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 (2007).
 
Mendez testified that, on February 28, 2016, she was
 
arrested for suspicion of driving under the influence of alcohol,
 the arresting officer confiscated her driver's license, and gave
 her a Notice of Administrative Revocation, which served as a
 temporary driver's permit.
3 Mendez further admitted that,
 
although she requested a reconsideration of the revocation of her
 license and had not received any response from the ADLRO, when
 police stopped her on April 24, 2016, she was driving a vehicle
 and provided the officer only with the temporary driver's permit
 that had expired thirty days after February 28, 2016. The
 testimony of the officers that confiscated Mendez's license and
 
3 A copy of the Notice was introduced as evidence at trial. The 
Notice stated, in pertinent part, that "if the Administrative Driver's License
Revocation Office ("ADLRO") administratively revokes your license andprivileges, your license and privilege to operate a vehicle in the State ofHawai'i or on or in the waters of the State will terminate: (1) thirty days
after the date this Notice of Administrative Revocation ("Notice") is issuedin the case of an alcohol related offense[.] The Notice indicates that Mendez consented to an alcohol test. The Notice also specified: 
TEMPORARY PERMIT
 
You must surrender your license to the arresting
officer who will then issue you a Temporary Permit. The
 Temporary Permit allows you to operate a vehicle for thirty
days in the case of an alcohol related offense and forty-
four days in the case of a drug-related offense or until
such time as the director may establish pursuant to HRS
§ 291E-38. . . . No person who has been issued a notice of
administrative revocation that serves as a temporary permit
by a law enforcement officer, pursuant to §291E-33 shall
operate or assume actual physical control of any vehicle
after the expiration of the temporary permit unless that
person has an otherwise valid driver's license. . . .
 
The following two boxes were checked:
 
D This IS a Temporary Permit
D Your license is forwarded to ADLRO

 
The Notice appears to be signed by the arresting officer and Mendez on
February 28, 2016.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
who issued the citation in the instant case was also presented at
 
trial and was consistent with the foregoing. Taking the evidence
 presented in the strongest light for the prosecution, there was
 substantial evidence to support Mendez's conviction for OVLSR­OVUII.
 
Mendez argues that there was no substantial evidence
 
that, inter alia, she disregarded a substantial and unjustifiable
 risk of driving while her license to operate a vehicle was
 suspended or revoked because "the language of the Notice . . .
 gave the distinct impression that the administrative revocation
 was equivocal and not final until Mendez received notice from the
 ADLRO." We disagree.
 
First of all, while the Notice states that "if" the
 
ADLRO administratively revokes the person's license, that
 "license and privilege to operate a vehicle" will terminate
 thirty days after the date of the Notice, also consistent with
 the Notice, Mendez surrendered her license to the arresting
 officer who issued her a thirty-day permit. The Notice states,
 under "Part II. TEMPORARY PERMIT," that the "Temporary Permit
 allows you to operate a vehicle for thirty days in the case of an
 alcohol related offense . . . or until such time as the director
 may establish pursuant to HRS § 291E-38." Thus, without her
 license, her temporary permit on its face was good for thirty
 days only, leaving her with no other documentation authorizing
 her to drive.
 
Mendez testified that she received nothing from the
 
ADLRO office between the time she was issued the temporary permit
 and when she was stopped, on April 24, 2016, and arrested for
 OVLSR-OVUII. Thus, when she was arrested for the instant
 offense, Mendez had no communication from the ADLRO at all, let
 alone one telling her that her temporary permit had been extended
 or that her revocation had been rescinded. Without more, Mendez
 disregarded the substantial and unjustifiable risk of driving
 while her license was revoked.
 
Nor does Mendez's Request to Reconsider Administrative
 
Revocation of License (Request) change this analysis. Although
 Mendez mailed this Request the day after her driver's license had
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
been revoked, she had not received any communication from the
 
ADLRO that they had received her request, let alone reinstated
 her license by the date of the instant offense.
4
 
Therefore, it is hereby ordered that the Notice of
 
Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, entered on
 December 1, 2016, in the District Court of the First Circuit,
 Honolulu Division, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 7, 2018. 
On the briefs:
 
Jon N. Ikenaga,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
 
Donn Fudo,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
4
 Neither does the incorrect address entered by the arresting
officer on her Request affect our conclusion. The fact remains that Mendez
 
had no communication by the ADLRO before she was arrested for the instant
offense that would have given her a factual basis to believe her temporary
permit had been extended or her driver's permit had been reinstated.
 
5
 