 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001180
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MARK DENNIS CAIRES, Defendant-Appellant
(CR. NO. 13-1-0955(2)) 
and

 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee v.
MARK D. CAIRES, Defendant-Appellant
(CR. NO. 14-1-0040(2)) 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Mark Dennis Caires (Caires) appeals
 
from the September 16, 2014 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
 
1
(Judgment)  entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit
(Circuit Court).2 Consistent with a plea agreement with the
 
State, in Cr. No. 13-1-0955(2), Caires entered no contest pleas
 
to two counts of Sexual Assault in the Second Degree in violation
 
3
of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-731 (2014)  and in Cr.
1
 Judgment was entered in two cases which were brought separately.
In Cr. No. 13-1-0955, Caires was charged with ten counts of Sexual Assault in
the First Degree. In Cr. No. 14-1-0040, Caires was charged with four counts
of Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree. The cases were heard together
for the change of plea and sentencing. 
2
 The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided.
 
3
 §707-731. Sexual assault in the second degree.
(1) A person commits the offense of sexual assault in
the second degree if:

 
(continued...)
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
No. 14-1-0040(2) entered a no contest plea to one count of
 
Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree in violation of HRS
 § 707-716 (2014).
4 In Cr. No. 13-1-0955(2), consecutive ten-year
 
terms of incarceration were imposed on each of the two counts of
 Sexual Assault in the Second Degree and in Cr. No. 14-1-0040(2) a
 five-year term of incarceration for Terroristic Threatening in
 the First Degree, to run concurrently with the sentence in Cr.
 No. 13-1-0955(2) was imposed.
 
On appeal, Caires maintains that his no contest plea
 
should be set aside and the Judgment vacated and remanded because

 
he received ineffective assistance of counsel.
 After a careful review of the issues raised, the
 
parties' arguments, the record on appeal, and applicable legal
 authority, we resolve Caires's point of error as follows and
 affirm.
 
When reviewing a claim of ineffective assistance of
counsel, [the appellate court] looks at whether defense
counsel's assistance was within the range of competence
demanded of attorneys in criminal cases. The defendant has
 the burden of establishing ineffective assistance of counsel
and must meet the following two-part test: 1) that there
were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack
of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or
omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial
 impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. To satisfy
this second prong, the defendant needs to show a possible
impairment, rather than a probable impairment, of a
potentially meritorious defense. A defendant need not prove
actual prejudice.
 
3(...continued)
 
(a)	 the person knowingly subjects another person to
an act of sexual penetration by compulsion; 
(b)	 the person knowingly subjects to sexual
penetration another person who is mentally
incapacitated or physically helpless[.]
 
4
 §707-716. Terroristic threatening in the first
degree.  (1) A person commits the offense of
terroristic threatening in the first degree if the
person commits terroristic threatening:
 
. . . . 
(b) 	By threats made in a common scheme against
different persons;
 
(c) 	Against a public servant arising out of the
performance of the public servant's official
duties.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai 'i 504, 513-14, 78 P.3d 317, 326-27 
(2003) (footnote, citations, and internal quotation marks 
omitted). 
Caires identifies the following examples of failures by 
his previous counsel in support of his point on appeal: (1)
 untimely and inadequate review of the evidence and discovery
 
in both cases; (2) no explanation that a no contest plea would
 lead to an adjudication of guilt; (3) untimely and inadequate
 review with Caires and explanation of, the change of plea form;
 and (4) incompetent advice in the plea negotiation with the
 State. As a result of this ineffective assistance, Caires
 contends that his plea was not entered into knowingly,
 intelligently and voluntarily.
 
1. Besides the relatively short tenure of his trial
 
counsel, Caires points to nothing that supports his claim that
 the discovery and evidence in these cases were not discussed with
 him prior to his plea. To the contrary, at the change of plea
 hearing, the Circuit Court explicitly asked Caires, "[h]ave you
 also had a chance to review with [defense counsel] whatever
 evidence the government provided in discovery in this case,
 statements, police reports, anything like that, with your
 attorney?" and "Did you get a chance to talk to [defense counsel]
 about what, if any possible defenses you might want to have or
 assert?" To both questions, Caires answered in the affirmative.
 
2. Similarly, Caires makes no showing that his
 
counsel failed to explain that his no contest plea would lead to
 an adjudication of guilt. Contradicting his position is the No
 Contest Plea form that he signed, which says, among other things,
 "I understand that the court may impose the following penalties
 for the offense(s) that I now plead . . . ." In addition,
 although the Circuit Court did not explicitly explain the nature
 of a no contest plea, the colloquy engaged in left no doubt that
 if accepted, Caires would be giving up the right to a trial and
 be sentenced consistent with a range of possible penalties.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3. Caires also argues that the change of plea form
 
was not adequately explained to him based on his assertion that
 
the form was not signed by him until the change of plea hearing. 
Even if he did not sign the document until the hearing, Caires
 does not explain why that precludes a prior discussion with
 counsel regarding its content. In any event, both Caires's
 
5
signature on the form  and his assertions at the change of plea
hearing that he understood the matters in the form, belie
 Caires's claim.
 
4. Caires's argument, in light of his extensive

 
criminal history, including prior sexual assault and terroristic
 threatening convictions; the facts of the instant cases,
 including that the complaining witness was Caires's step-daughter
 and was mentally disabled; the possibility of a twenty-five year
 sentence; his age; his serving the maximum five-year
 indeterminate sentence on his last case making it unlikely the
 paroling authority would set a low minimum; and counsel's
 proposed sentence of probation with 9 months' incarceration leads
 to the conclusion that "defense counsel's assistance was not
 skillful or diligent, its intrinsic quality was lacking and it
 was thus ineffective" fails to make the showing required. 
Caires's argument amounts to a disagreement with his counsel's
 advice. "Specific actions or omissions alleged to be error but
 which had an obvious tactical basis for benefitting the
 defendant's case will not be subject to further scrutiny." Dan
 
v. State, 76 Hawai
'i 423, 427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994) 
(citations omitted; emphasis in original). Caires was charged with fourteen counts (ten counts of Sexual Assault in the First Degree and four counts of Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree), but pleaded no contest to three counts (two reduced counts of Sexual Assault in the Second Degree and one count of Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree). Caires's counsel's efforts resulted in a substantial reduction in the number and 
5
 Caires also points to the fact that the No Contest Plea form in
Cr. No. 14-1-0040(2) bears only an electronic signature and not his wet ink
signature. However, this document is marked as a "Duplicate" and is
identical, except for the signatures, to the form filed in Cr. No. 13-1­0955(2), which he does not dispute bears his signature, and which contains all
the relevant charges and the terms of the plea for both cases. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
severity of the charges and consequently resulted in a
 
substantial reduction in the maximum possible sentence he faced. 
Caires has failed to show that this plea agreement did not
 benefit him and consequently has failed to show that his counsel
 was ineffective.
 
As we conclude Caires's counsel was not ineffective, we
 
need not reach Caires's argument that his plea was invalid due to
 ineffective assistance of counsel.
 
Therefore, the September 16, 2014 Judgments entered by
 
the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit in Cr. No. 13-1-0955(2)
 and Cr. No. 14-1-0040(2) respectively, are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 18, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
Lars Peterson,

for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Richard K. Minatoya,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
5
 