NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0001042
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
JAMES WELDON, also known as James William Weldon,
Defendant-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 13-1-1351)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellee James Weldon also known as James
William Weldon (Weldon) was charged in an amended complaint with
carrying a deadly or dangerous weapon, namely, a collapsible
metal baton or "billy," in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
(HRS) § 134-51(a) (2011).1  Weldon moved to suppress the metal
baton, arguing that the police lacked reasonable suspicion for an
investigative detention of him and that the metal baton should be
suppressed as the fruit of his unlawful detention.  The Circuit
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)2 found that the police
1HRS § 134-51(a) provides:
Any person, not authorized by law, who carries
concealed upon the person's self or within any vehicle used
or occupied by the person or who is found armed with any
dirk, dagger, blackjack, slug shot, billy, metal knuckles,
pistol, or other deadly or dangerous weapon shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and may be immediately arrested without
warrant by any sheriff, police officer, or other officer or
person.  Any weapon, above enumerated, upon conviction of
the one carrying or possessing it under this section, shall
be summarily destroyed by the chief of police or sheriff.
2The Honorable Lono J. Lee presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
had reasonable suspicion to approach and investigate Weldon.  The
Circuit Court, however, granted Weldon's motion to suppress on
the ground that "once [Weldon was] detained there was no
reasonable suspicion for the police officers to search [Weldon's]
backpack . . . ."
     Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai #i (State) appeals
from the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting
Defendant's Motion to Suppress Evidence" (Suppression Order).  On
appeal, the State argues that the Circuit Court erred in
suppressing the metal baton because it was discovered by the
police as a result of a valid protective search for weapons.  
As explained below, we conclude that the police had
reasonable suspicion for an investigative detention of Weldon. 
We also conclude that the investigating officers had a reasonable
basis to fear for their safety when Weldon appeared to grasp
something inside his backpack and refused the officers' repeated
requests to take his hand out of the backpack.  Accordingly, the
officers' concern for their safety justified one of them pulling
the backpack away from Weldon, during which time the metal baton
fell out and was exposed.  We hold that the police's recovery of
the metal baton was lawful and that the Circuit Court erred in
granting Weldon's suppression motion.
BACKGROUND
I.
The State called Officers Gavin Heyworth (Officer
Heyworth) and Officer Stanley Wilson (Officer Wilson) to testify
at the hearing on Weldon's motion to suppress evidence.  Weldon
did not call any witnesses.  The following evidence was adduced
at the hearing.
In response to multiple community complaints, including
complaints of a "high level of burglaries," the police routinely
patrolled beachfront property along Coconut Avenue in Waik îkî. 
At approximately 7:00 a.m., while conducting a routine check of
the area, Officer Heyworth walked along the beach side of the
Kainalu Apartments on Coconut Avenue.
Officer Heyworth testified that he observed "discarded
embers from a fire, . . . cooked meat strewn everywhere," and
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
empty beer bottles.3  Officer Heyworth testified that it was not
permissible to have open containers of alcohol or solid waste,
such as charcoal residue of an unextinguished fire, at that
location on the beach.  He also stated that open fires were not
allowed on the beach.
Weldon was about five to six feet away from the empty
beer bottles, cooked meet, and fire embers, and he was laying
down on a retaining/foundational wall that separated the
apartments from the beach.  Weldon was the only person in the
vicinity of these items.  When Officer Heyworth observed Weldon
on the wall, Weldon was not drinking alcohol, eating food, using
drugs, or defacing the wall with graffiti.
Officer Heyworth approached Weldon to investigate
whether he was responsible for the items on the beach.  Officer
Heyworth noticed that Weldon's eyes were a little red.  Officer
Heyworth asked Weldon for his name and identification.  Weldon
mumbled, was slow to respond, and appeared reluctant to provide
the information.  By this time, Officer Wilson had arrived and
joined Officer Heyworth.4  Weldon eventually reached into a
backpack that was next to him, and he produced an identification
card from the Veterans Administration.
After giving his identification card to the officers,
and while the officers were examining the card, Weldon placed his
hand back inside the backpack.  From the portion of Weldon's hand
that was visible, Officer Heyworth "could see that [Weldon] had
grasped something inside of that backpack."  Weldon's action of
grasping an unknown object in his backpack created an officer
safety issue.  Officer Heyworth repeatedly asked and then ordered
Weldon to take his hand out of the backpack and to "[s]how me
your hands."  Officer Wilson did the same thing.  Weldon,
however, did not comply and refused to take his hand out of the
backpack.  Officer Wilson "could see something dangerous was
3Officer Wilson, Officer Heyworth's patrol partner, testified that
he saw an "open . . . charcoal type grill," "food items that had been
barbecued," and several glass bottles.  Officer Wilson stated that the glass
bottles appeared to be "alcoholic type beverage [bottles] and maybe some soda
bottles."
4At some point, a third officer also arrived at the scene.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
happening[,]" and he pulled the backpack away from Weldon.  While
doing so, a collapsible metal baton fell out.5  Weldon picked up
the baton, which extended as he lifted it.  Weldon raised the
baton to his right ear, and "brandished it in a manner as if to
strike" Officers Heyworth and Wilson.
The baton was six to eight inches long when collapsed
and about 12 inches when extended, with a steel knob at the end.  
The baton is used to strike people, and both Officer Heyworth and
Officer Wilson recognized the baton as a deadly weapon.
Officer Heyworth told Weldon to drop the baton, but
Weldon refused to comply.  Officer Heyworth then advised Weldon
that he was under arrest.  The officers were able to take the
baton away from Weldon and to handcuff him.
II.
Weldon filed a motion to suppress evidence, arguing
that the officers' actions in approaching him and asking him for
information constituted a seizure; that the police lacked
reasonable suspicion to seize him to conduct an investigative
detention; and that, therefore, all evidence obtained by the
police, including the baton, should be suppressed as the fruit of
an unlawful investigative detention.
The Circuit Court found that the police had reasonable
suspicion to conduct an investigative detention of Weldon.  The
Circuit Court, however, granted Weldon's suppression motion on
the ground that the police lacked reasonable suspicion to search
Weldon's backpack.  The Circuit Court found and concluded as
follows:
1. Police officers may stop and detain an individual if
the officers have reasonable suspicion that the person
stopped was engaged in criminal conduct.
2. Police officers, in that situation, must be able to
point to specific articulable facts which, taken
together with rational inferences from those facts,
reasonably warrant the intrusion.
3. In this case, there was reasonable suspicion for the
police officers to approach Defendant and investigate
based upon past complaints of criminal activity in the
5Officer Wilson testified that when he pulled the backpack away
from Weldon, he saw the baton in Weldon's right hand, but then Weldon
"accidentally dropped it."
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
area and the proximity of bottles, cooked meat, and
extinguished fire to Defendant.
4. However[,] once detained there was no reasonable
suspicion for the police officers to search
Defendant's backpack based on the articulable facts
and circumstances known at that time.
5. Therefore, the Defendant's Motion to Suppress Evidence
is granted.
The Circuit Court filed its Suppression Order on
July 8, 2014, and the State timely appealed pursuant to HRS
§ 641-13(7) (2016).
DISCUSSION
I.
The State argues that the Circuit Court erred in
suppressing the metal baton on the ground that the police lacked
reasonable suspicion to search Weldon's backpack.  The State
asserts that given Weldon's conduct in grasping something in his
backpack and refusing the officers' repeated requests to take his
hand out of the backpack, the officers had a reasonable basis to
fear for their safety.  Therefore, Officer Wilson's action in
pulling the backpack away from Weldon, during which the metal
baton fell out and was discovered, was justified as an action
taken in pursuit of a valid protective search for weapons.
Weldon does not challenge the State's claim that the
police had a reasonable basis to conduct a protective search for
weapons and that the metal baton was discovered by the police
during actions directed at protecting their safety.  Instead,
Weldon argues that the Circuit Court erred in determining that
the police had reasonable suspicion to approach and question him
and thereby subject him to an investigative detention in the
first instance.  Weldon claims that because his investigative
detention was unlawful, the metal baton was properly suppressed
as the fruit of an unlawful detention.6
II.
We apply the following legal standards and principles
in evaluating the parties' arguments.
6For purposes of our analysis, we assume, but do not decide, that
Weldon was seized and detained when the police initially approached him and
asked him for identification.   
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
We review a trial court's ruling on a motion to
suppress evidence " de novo to determine whether the ruling was
'right' or 'wrong.'"  State v. Spillner , 116 Hawai #i 351, 357,
173 P.3d 498, 504 (2007) (citation omitted).
The proponent of the motion to suppress has the burden of
establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
statements or items sought to be excluded were unlawfully
secured and that his or her right to be free from
unreasonable searches or seizures was violated under the
fourth amendment to the United States Constitution and
article I, section 7 of the Hawai #i Constitution.
Id.  
With respect to investigative detentions, the Hawaii
Supreme Court has held: #
In the general interest of effective crime prevention and
law enforcement, "a police officer may in appropriate
circumstances and in an appropriate manner approach a person
for purposes of investigating possibly criminal behavior
even though there is no probable cause to make an arrest." 
Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 22, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 1880, 20
L.Ed.2d 889 (1968); State v. Barnes, supra, [58 Haw. 333, 
337, 568 P.2d 1207, 1211 (1977)].  Where, therefore, an
officer is in possession of information, the reliability of
which has been sufficiently established, or where he can
point to specific and articulable facts which would warrant
a man of reasonable caution to believe that criminal
activity involving the suspect is afoot, the officer is
authorized to make a temporary investigative stop.  Id.
State v. Madamba, 62 Haw. 453, 456, 617 P.2d 76, 78 (1980). 
Stated another way, the police may temporarily seize or detain an
individual to investigate possible criminal behavior "if they
have a reasonable suspicion based on specific and articulable
facts that criminal activity is afoot."  State v. Kearns, 75 Haw.
558, 569, 867 P.2d 903, 908 (1994); State v. Dawson , 120 Hawai #i
363, 369, 205 P.3d 628, 634 (App. 2009).
While engaging in an investigative detention, police
officers are entitled to take reasonable steps to protect their
safety.  
Police officers need not risk a shot in the back by
returning containers which they reasonably suspect contain a
dangerous weapon but may lack probable cause to seize.  See,
3 LaFave, Search and Seizure § 9.4(d) at 132–133 & n.128
(1978).  As the United States Supreme Court has noted, "the
policeman making a reasonable investigatory stop should not
be denied the opportunity to protect himself from attack by
a hostile suspect."  Adams v. Williams, 407 U.S. [407 U.S.
143, 146, 92 S.Ct. 1921, 1923 (1972)].
State v. Ortiz , 67 Haw. 181, 187, 683 P.2d 822, 827 (1984).
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Accordingly, during an investigative detention, police
officers are permitted to conduct a protective search for weapons
where such action is required for the protection of the officers
and others nearby.  Madamba, 62 Haw. at 457, 617 P.2d at 78.   
The hallmark of the protective weapons search
sanctioned in Terry is the probable presence of a dangerous
weapon.  Because a weapon is involved, the search need not
be preceded by probable cause and a warrant if, from the
specific conduct of the defendant, from reliable
information, or from attendant circumstances, the police
officer reasonably infers the person stopped is armed and
presently dangerous.
 
Ortiz, 67 Haw. at 185, 683 P.2d at 826 (footnote omitted).   "The
reasonableness of a weapons search is determined by balancing the
State's interest in searching against the individual's interest
in freedom from unreasonable government intrusions."  Id.  "[I]f
the police have an objectively reasonable belief a detainee is
armed, they may make a protective weapons search of the area or a
container reasonably within the detainee's conceivable grasp." 
Id. at 189, 683 P.2d at 828.
In analyzing whether there is reasonable suspicion for
an investigative detention and a reasonable basis for a
protective search for weapons, we consider the totality of the
circumstances and apply an objective standard of reasonableness. 
Spillner, 116 Hawai #i at 357, 173 P.3d at 504; Ortiz, 67 Haw. at
186, 683 P.2d at 826.
III.
Contrary to Weldon's contention, we conclude that the
Circuit Court did not err in finding that the police had
reasonable suspicion to approach Weldon and temporarily detain
him for questioning.  At 7:00 in the morning, Officer Heyworth
observed empty beer bottles, strewn cooked meat, and discarded
embers from a fire on the beach in front of the Kainalu
Apartments.  These items were in close proximity to Weldon, who
was the only person in the vicinity.  Officer Heyworth's
observations prompted him to approach Weldon to investigate
whether Weldon was responsible for the items on the beach. 
In general, it is a crime to possess an open container
of intoxicating liquor on the beach.  See  Revised Ordinances of
Honolulu §§ 40-1.2, 10-1.1 (1990).  It is also a crime to
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
knowingly drop, place, or throw litter on any public or private
property, except in designed locations and containers.  See HRS 
§ 708-829 (2014).7 
We conclude that Weldon's close proximity to the open
beer bottles, strewn cooked meat, and discarded fire embers on
the beach constituted specific and articulable facts that
provided the police with a reasonable suspicion that criminal
activity involving Weldon was afoot.  See Madamba , 62 Haw. at
456, 617 P.2d at 78.  Accordingly, the police were entitled to
approach Weldon and temporarily detain him for questioning.  See
State v. Melear, 63 Haw. 488, 493, 630 P.2d 619, 624 (1981) ("'A
brief stop of a suspicious individual, in order to determine his
identity or to maintain the status quo momentarily while
obtaining more information, may be most reasonable in light of
the facts known to the officer at that time.'") (quoting Adams v.
Williams, 407 U.S. 143, 146 (1972)); State v. Silva, 91 Hawai# i
111, 118, 979 P.2d 1137, 1144 (App. 1999) (noting that "a request
for identification and inquiry concerning the suspicious conduct
of the person detained" are common investigative techniques used
during an investigative detention) (citation omitted).
II.
The Circuit Court suppressed the metal baton based on
its determination that the officers lacked reasonable suspicion
to search Weldon's backpack.  The State argues that the Circuit
Court erred in this ruling, and we agree.
A.
Police officers may conduct a protective search for
weapons during an investigative detention if the officers can
reasonably infer from the detained person's specific conduct and
from attendant circumstances that the person is armed and
presently dangerous.  See Ortiz , 67 Haw. at 185, 683 P.2d at 826. 
Officers are entitled to take reasonable steps to ensure their
own safety and the safety of others:
7HRS § 708-829(2) defines litter to mean "rubbish, refuse, waste
material, garbage, trash, offal, or debris of whatever kind or description,
and whether or not it is of value, and includes improperly discarded paper,
metal, plastic, glass, or solid waste."
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
When an officer is justified in believing that the
individual whose suspicious behavior he is investigating at
close range is armed and presently dangerous to the officer
or to others, it would appear to be clearly unreasonable to
deny the officer the power to take necessary measures to
determine whether the person is in fact carrying a weapon
and to neutralize the threat of physical harm.
State v. Uddipa, 3 Haw. App. 415, 419, 651 P.2d 507, 510 (1982)
(quoting Terry, 392 U.S. at 24).
1.
In Uddipa , under circumstances similar to this case, we
held that a police officer was justified in conducting a
protective search for weapons.  Officer Sunada, who had been
dispatched to the scene of a reported fight, observed that Uddipa 
"appeared to be either 'trying to stuff something down' or trying
'to get something out from the waist band of his pants.'"  Id. at
416, 651 P.2d at 508-09.  Officer Sunada "'had an idea it was
possibly a weapon.'"  Id. , 651 P.2d at 509.  Officer Sunada
quickly approached Uddipa.  Id.   As Uddipa's hand was moving in
the area of his waist band, Officer Sunada grabbed Uddipa's arm
and pulled it away from the waist band.  Id.  Officer Sunada then
touched Uddipa's waistline area, felt a hard object, and pulled
Uddipa's pants away from his body, which caused a pistol to fall
to the floor through Uddipa's pants leg.  Id. 
This court held that Officer Sunada's actions were
proper and justified as a necessary measure to determine whether
Uddipa was in fact carrying a weapon and to neutralize the threat
of physical harm.  Id. at 418-19, 651 P.2d at 510.  We concluded
that Officer Sunada "should not be denied the opportunity to
protect himself and [another officer] from attack by a person
suspected of carrying a weapon."  Id. at 419, 651 P.2d at 511. 
We further concluded that Officer Sunada "was not required to
await the 'glint of steel' to protect his safety."  Id.  
2.
In Ortiz, Officer Bennett observed Ortiz at 2:00 in the
morning carrying a knapsack across a parking lot next to business
establishments.  67 Haw. at 182, 683 P.2d at 824.  When Ortiz saw
Officer Bennett's police car, he ran to the side of one of the
buildings.  Id.   Officer Bennett found Ortiz hiding next to some
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
trash cans and boxes, with the knapsack next to Ortiz.  Id. 
Officer Bennett asked Ortiz what he was doing there, and Ortiz
said he didn't know.  Id.  When asked whose knapsack it was,
Ortiz said it was his.  Id.  When Officer Bennett asked what was
inside the knapsack, Ortiz responded, "Nothing" and grabbed for
the knapsack with his right hand.  Id.  "Feeling 'something was
wrong,' [Officer] Bennett reached down and took the sack away
from Ortiz, immediately feeling 'what seemed like a butt of a
handgun' through the thin fabric."  Id.  Officer Bennett unzipped
the knapsack and discovered a handgun, which was later determined
to be loaded.  Id.  The State subsequently charged Ortiz with
being a felon in possession of a firearm.  Id.  
The supreme court overturned the trial court's
suppression of the gun, holding that Officer Bennett had lawfully
recovered the gun pursuant to a protective search for weapons
incident to a valid investigative stop.  Id. at 184-90, 683 P.2d
at 825-30.  The supreme court stated that there was "no question
that the initial stop of Ortiz and seizure of his knapsack were
valid."  Id.  at 184, 683 P.2d at 825-26.  Ortiz had conceded in
his appellate brief that Officer Bennett's initial stop of Ortiz
and the seizure of the knapsack were valid, but attempted to
repudiate this concession in oral argument.  Id. at 184 n.3, 683
P.2d at 825 n.3.  The supreme court held that regardless of
Ortiz's concession, "Officer Bennett properly stopped Ortiz to
question him and subsequently was justified in seizing the
knapsack."  Id.   The supreme court reasoned: 
Here, Ortiz was in a business district at two o'clock in the
morning and ran away after seeing Officer Bennett's police
car.  Officer Bennett was therefore entitled to stop and
question Ortiz.  When Ortiz grabbed for his knapsack after
denying it contained anything, Officer Bennett's suspicion
of criminal activity was justifiably heightened and he
properly seized the knapsack.  We would not require him to
wait until Ortiz pulled the gun out of the knapsack and
perhaps fired it before acting to protect himself.
Id. (emphasis added).
With respect to whether Officer Bennett was entitled to
search the knapsack once he had removed it from Ortiz's immediate
control, the supreme court held that Officer Bennett's 
warrantless search of the knapsack was reasonable and
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
permissible.  Id. at 185-90, 683 P.2d at 826-30.  The supreme
court concluded that Officer Bennett "had a legitimate interest
in searching the knapsack" to protect himself from the risk of
being shot or attacked which "greatly outweighed Ortiz's rights
in preventing the intrusion."  Id.  at 187-88, 683 P.2d at 827. 
The supreme court ruled that "if the police have an objectively
reasonable belief a detainee is armed, they may make a protective
weapons search of the area or a container reasonably within the
detainee's conceivable grasp," but "may not search an area or
container within their exclusive control or outside the
detainee's reach."  Id. at 189, 683 P.2d at 828-29.  The supreme
court concluded that the knapsack, although "outside Ortiz's
immediate control, remained within his conceivable reach" and was
not within Officer Bennett's exclusive control.  Id. at 189, 683
P.2d at 829.  It therefore held that Officer Bennett did not act
unreasonably in immediately searching the knapsack.  Id. 
B.
"The State has a legitimate and weighty interest in the
safety of its police officers," State v. Barrett, 67 Haw. 650,
656, 701 P.2d 1277, 1282 (1985), and "it would be unreasonable to
require that police officers take unnecessary risks in the
performance of their duties."  Terry, 392 U.S. at 23.  Here,
Officer Heyworth saw Weldon grasp something in his backpack, and
Weldon refused to comply with Officer Heyworth's and Officer
Wilson's repeated requests and demands to remove his hands from
the backpack.  Based on Weldon's conduct, the officers had a
reasonable basis to infer that Weldon was armed and presently
dangerous.  See Barrett, 67 Haw. at 656, 701 P.2d at 1282
(concluding that if an arrested prostitute were "to make a move
for [her] purse," the officers "would have an articulable
suspicion that she may be armed").
The officers were not required to wait until Weldon
pulled a weapon from his backpack before taking action to protect
themselves.  See Ortiz, 67 Haw. at 184 n.3, 683 P.2d at 825 n.3. 
They were not required "to await the 'glint of steel'" before
taking action to protect their safety and neutralize the threat
of physical harm.  See Uddipa , 3 Haw. App. at 419, 651 P.2d at
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
511.  We conclude that Officer Wilson's action in seizing the
backpack from Weldon was a reasonable measure taken to ensure the
officers' safety and was justified as an action taken in pursuit
of a valid protective search for weapons.  See id. ; Ortiz, 67
Haw. at 184 & n.3, 683 P.2d at 825 & n.3.  
In the course of Officer Wilson's lawful seizure of 
Weldon's backpack, the baton fell out of the backpack and was
revealed.  Weldon then picked up the baton and brandished it at
Officers Heyworth and Wilson.  Contrary to the Circuit Court's
suggestion, the baton was not discovered during a search of
Weldon's backpack by the officers, but was discovered in the
course of Officer Wilson's lawful seizure of the backpack.  Given
the totality of circumstances, we conclude that the officers'
recovery of the metal baton did not violate Weldon's
constitutional rights and that the Circuit Court erred in
granting Weldon's suppression motion and in suppressing the
baton.
CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the Suppression
Order, and we remand the case for further proceedings.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 25, 2018.
On the briefs:
Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Phyllis J. Hironaka,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
12