NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000383
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
BRIAN M. YOSHII, Claimant/Appellee-Appellant, v. STATE OF
HAWAI'I, UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI 'I, Employer/Appellant-Appellee, Self-
Insured, and FIRST INSURANCE COMPANY OF HAWAII, LTD., Third-Party
Administrator/Appellant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. AB 2010-169 (2-08-46774))

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge and Fujise, J.,
with Ginoza, J., dissenting)
 
Claimant/Appellee-Appellant Brian M. Yoshii (Yoshii)

 
appeals from the March 21, 2012 Labor and Industrial Relations
 
1
Appeals Board (Board)  Decision and Order (D&O) in favor of
Yoshii's employer, Employer/Appellant-Appellee State of Hawai 'i, 
University of Hawai 'i (State), and Third-Party Administrator/ 
Appellant-Appellee First Insurance Company (First Insurance), 
finding Yoshii did not sustain a compensable injury to his right 
knee on October 30, 2008 at his place of employment, the 
University of Hawai 'i's Leeward Community College (LCC). The D&O 
reversed, in part, the May 13, 2010 Decision (Decision) by the Director of the Department of Labor and Industrial Relations 
(Director) in favor of Yoshii. On appeal, Yoshii requests that 
1
 The Board was composed of Roland Q.F. Thom, Chairman, Melanie S.
Matsui, and David A. Pendleton, Members.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
this court reverse the D&O and allow the Director's Decision to
 
stand.
 
BACKGROUND
 
On October 30, 2008, the date of the incident giving
 
rise to this claim, Yoshii was employed by LCC as a Cook II. 
Yoshii's workday was between 6:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. The
 
incident occurred at 3:30 p.m.
 
Yoshii orally reported this incident to his employer
 
and followed up with a written "Report of Work-Related
 
Injury/Illness," (Report) completed on November 18, 2008. In
 
this written Report, he listed the "Date of Injury" as "10-30­
08," the "Time of injury" as "3:30 p.m.," and described the event
 
leading to the injury as follows:
 
Walking down the loading dock stairway [ ] and I steped
[sic] on my right foot the wrong way hurting my right calf.
I had very sharp pain and couldn't move for about 2-3
minutes. Then I had a very hard time getting in to our
vehicle.
 
Yoshii identified the body part involved and extent of injury as
 
"Right calf muscle strain." First Insurance denied the claim
 
pending investigation.
 
On or about December 15, 2008, a notice of First
 
Insurance's denial was sent to Yoshii, along with the instruction
 
that if he wished to "protect [his] benefit rights," the enclosed
 
Form WC-5, "Employee's Claim for Workers' Compensation Benefits,"
 
(Form WC-5) should be returned within thirty days.2
 
On March 11, 2009, Yoshii filed his Form WC-5 for the
 
October 30, 2008 injury. Yoshii again listed the "Date of
 
Accident" as "10-30-08" and "Time of Injury" as "3:30 p.m." and
 
described how the accident occurred as "Walking down loading dock
 
stair stepped on my right foot and felt sharp pain in my leg" and
 
2
 It appears that Yoshii received an extension of time to file his
claim until February 2, 2009. It is unclear from this record when Yoshii
 
received representation, but his March 11, 2009 Form WC-5 states that Yoshii
was represented by John Riddel, a Union of Public Workers (UPW) Business
Agent. On or before July 29, 2009, UPW withdrew from representation and
Danny J. Vasconcellos of Takahashi Vasconcellos and Covert assumed
representation.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the injury/illness as "Torn ligament on right knee both inside
 
and outside." No amendment of this claim appears of record.3
 
A hearing on Yoshii's claim was had on March 23, 2010. 
4
On May 13, 2010, the Director  issued his Decision, determining
way: 3 In his Decision, the Director summarized Yoshii's position this 
The claimant contends he suffered a compensable injury
to the right knee on 10/30/2008 when he stepped on his right
foot and felt a sharp pain in his leg while walking down theloading dock stairs. The claimant explained he soughtmedical treatment at the emergency room of Kapiolani MedicalCenter on 10/30/2008, and then followed-up with Dr. Raguntonon 11/3/2008. Dr. Ragunton proceeded to evaluate theclaimant, obtained a CT scan of the right leg and adjustedclaimant's medications, which resulted in decreased swellingand pain. Dr. Ragunton then referred the claimant toDr. Oishi because the claimant continued to complain ofupper calf and knee pain. Claimant first treated with Dr. Oishi on 12/29/2008. An MRI obtained on 12/29/2008revealed chondromalacia and a tear of the medial meniscus,for which the claimant underwent surgery on 1/17/2009(performed by Dr. Oishi). The claimant contends that although the medical records initially investigated hisright leg pain complaints, more specifically, the rightcalf, his industrial injury is to the right knee, for whichclaimant filed a Employee's Claim For Workers' CompensationBenefits (WC-5), on 3/11/2009. The claimant also relies upon Dr. Ragunton's report dated 3/30/2009, Dr. Oishi'sreport dated 3/5/2010, and the CT scan dated 11/3/2008. 
The claimant contends he is entitled to temporary
total disability (TTD) benefits beginning 10/31/2008 through7/22/2009 as he was disabled from work due to the right kneeinjury. The claimant relies upon disability slips fromDr. Ragunton, Calvin Oishi, M.D., and Alan Oki, M.D. 
4 The Director summarized the issues presented as follows: 
Did the claimant suffer an injury arising out of in
the course of employment on 10/30/2008? 
Is the claimant entitled to temporary disability as a
result of the industrial injury? If so, what is the periodof temporary disability resulting from the industrialinjury? 
Should disability certifications from Luis Ragunton,
M.D. [Dr. Ragunton], Calvin Oishi, M.D. [Dr. Oishi], andAlan Oki, M.D. [Dr. Oki], be stricken from the recordpursuant to Section 12-10-75, Workers' CompensationAdministrative Rules (WCAR)? 
Should the report of Calvin Oishi, M.D., dated
3/5/2010, be stricken from the record pursuant to Section12-10-75, WCAR? 
(continued...) 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Yoshii suffered a compensable injury to his right knee on
 
October 30, 2008 and awarding "such medical care, services and
 
supplies as the nature of the injury may require."5 The Director
 
based his determination on Yoshii's March 11, 2009 Claim and
 Yoshii's treating physician, Dr. Ragunton's, reports dated
 
March 30, 2009, and disregarded the reports of Drs. Mihara and
 
Davenport. Although the Director recognized in his "Principles
 
of Law" that workers compensation benefits can be awarded for an
 
"employee who suffers a personal injury either by accident
 
arising out of and in the course of employment or by disease
 
proximately caused by or resulting from the nature of the
 
employment," (emphasis added), the Director made no findings of
 
fact regarding any disease caused or resulting from the nature of
 
Yoshii's employment and appears to have based his award to Yoshii
 
solely on Yoshii's claim of injury on October 30, 2008.
 
Yoshii initially appealed from the Director's Decision
 
to the Board on May 19, 2010, but in light of his notice of
 
intent to withdraw his appeal, the Board eventually dismissed his
 
appeal and designated the State as Appellant on October 5, 2010. 
In its October 5, 2010 First Amended Pretrial Order, the Board
 
summarized the issues presented as follows:
 
4(...continued)
Should the report of Kent Davenport, M.D. [Dr.
Davenport], dated 6/4/2009 be stricken from the record
pursuant to Section 12-10-75, WCAR?
 

5 The Director also (1) awarded temporary total disability (TTD)
benefits beginning on January 2, 2009 through June 24, 2009, less the three-
day waiting period; (2) disallowed TTD benefits for the period between October
31, 2008 through December 31, 2008 and June 25 through July 22, 2009; (the
denial of benefits was based on the disability certifications of Drs. Ragunton
and Oki and Director's determination that Yoshii's "disability from work for
the aforementioned period was due to conditions unrelated to claimant's right
knee injury."); (3) denied the request to strike the challenged disability
certifications (deciding the administrative rules did not authorize him to do
so); and (4) struck the March 5, 2010 report of Dr. Oishi and the June 4, 2009
report of Dr. Davenport (under Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) 12-10-75
because they were not timely provided to all parties.).
 
Determination of benefits for permanent disability and
disfigurement were reserved.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
a. Whether [Yoshii] sustained a personal injury to the
right knee on October 30, 2008, arising out of and inthe course of employment. 
b. Whether the disability certifications from [Drs.Ragunton, Oishi, and Oki] should be stricken from therecord pursuant to Section 12-10-75 [HAR]. 
c. Whether the report of [Dr. Davenport] dated June 4,2009 should be stricken from the record pursuant toSection 12-10-75, [HAR]. 
No objections to, nor further amendments of this order appear of
 
record.
 
A hearing de novo was had on May 11, 2011 upon the
 
submissions of the parties and the testimony of Yoshii. Of note
 
6
is Yoshii's testimony regarding the events of October 27  and 30,
2008:

 
CHAIRMAN THOM: You know, on October 27, '08 [sic], you
stood up in the theaters at Kapolei and you felt pain in

your right leg. Is that right?
 
THE WITNESS: Correct.

 
CHAIRMAN THOM:  And this has been described as right

calf pain. Is that right?
 
THE WITNESS:  Correct.

 
CHAIRMAN THOM:  Can you show me now by using your hands

where that pain was located?
 
So, it is below the big part of your knee, but above

the -- at the top of the calf muscle. Is that right?
 
Okay. All right. You may be seated.
 
Now, on October 30, which is when you were walking
down the loading dock staircase, where was the pain symptoms
mostly that caused you to cry out and wait for two to three
minutes?
 
THE WITNESS:
 The same area.

 
CHAIRMAN THOM:  Did it go into the big part of your leg

where your knee bends?
 
THE WITNESS: Well, to tell you the truth, you know, I

felt it was like my calf. Because that’s what was bothering
me earlier and that’s what I went to see the doctor for.
 
. . . .

 
6
 It appears that the date of the incident at the movie theater
occurred on October 26, 2008. See Form WC-2 dated March 30, 2009.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
CHAIRMAN THOM: Yeah, you have to answer audibly. So,
the question was whether or not it was in the big part of 
your knee or at the top of the calf muscle.
 
THE WITNESS: My answer was that because of my earlier
injury, thinking that it was my calf, I thought it was my
calf.
 
CHAIRMAN THOM: Okay.
 
MR. PENDLETON: So, Mr. Yoshii, would it be correct to
say that the pain experienced was in the same location on
your leg?
 
THE WITNESS: Around about, yes.
 
MR. PENDLETON:
 But the intensity between the theater
accident and -- or the theater situation and the date of
 
accident at work, the intensity of pain was different?

 
THE WITNESS: Yes. Correct.
 
MR. PENDLETON:
 And on the date of accident, was it
more intense or less -­
THE WITNESS: Yes.
 
MR. PENDLETON: It was more intense on the date -­THE WITNESS: Yes.
 MR. PENDLETON: -- of accident at work?
 
THE WITNESS: I know something happened. For me to put
it that way, you know. I know something was really wrong,

you know?
 
On March 21, 2012, the Board issued its D&O, ultimately
 
concluding that Yoshii "did not sustain a personal injury to his
 
right knee on October 30, 2008, arising out of and in the course
 
of employment" and concluding that the other issues were moot. 
This timely appeal followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
Yoshii presents seven points of error and three main
 
arguments in support of his challenge to the Board's
 
determination. We reorder these points and arguments and address
 
them as follows:
 
I.
 
In his first Point of Error and argument C, Yoshii
 
takes issue with the Board's observation, in its Finding of
 
Fact 3, that Yoshii's supervisor noted that Yoshii was "off the
 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
clock" when the claimed injury occurred. While Yoshii himself
 
reported that the injury occurred about an hour after he
 
completed his shift for the day, he argues that this fact cannot
 
serve as an independent basis for the Board's conclusion that his
 
October 30, 2008 injury did not arise out of and in the course of
 
his employment. Thus, Finding of Fact 3 is not clearly erroneous
 
and as we find no indication in the Board's D&O that it based its
 
decision in any way on the time of the injury and thus reject
 
Yoshii's first point and argument C as without merit. 
II.
 
In Points of Error two through four, Yoshii faults the
 
Board's Findings of Fact 8, 10, 11, 16, and 17. However, the
 
parts quoted by Yoshii are merely the Board's statements of the
 
observations and opinions actually made by Drs. Mihara,
 
Davenport, Oki, and Ragunton. As Yoshii does not argue that
 
these statements are clearly erroneous, we conclude that these
 
designations of error have been abandoned and, in any event are
 
without merit. 
We also reject Yoshii's challenge, in Points of Error
 
two, three, and six, to Finding of Fact 16. This challenge
 
consists of argument, contained in these points as well as in
 
arguments A and B, to the Board's assessment that it would credit
 
certain doctor's opinions and reports over others.7
 
7 On this point, we note that Yoshii challenges Dr. Mihara's opinion
"that the medical records neither suggested a work related injury or
aggravation nor a meniscal tear or a knee joint injury that occurred at work
on October 30, 2008," on the basis that Dr. Mihara did not "seek to obtain
either the MRI or the surgery operation records, which were available." In
 fact, Dr. Mihara did review the MRI of Yoshii's right knee. In any event,
Yoshii does not argue how review of either of these documents would have
changed Dr. Mihara's opinion. 
Yoshii also takes issue with the Board's Finding of Fact 16
insofar as it called Dr. Ragunton's opinions "inconsistent." The record
 contains Dr. Ragunton's reports which describe Yoshii's injury, as, on
October 27, 2008: "pain in the right leg . . . after getting off the chair
after watching a movie on Sunday [October 26, 2008;]" on November 3, 2008:
Yoshii "re-injured his calf on 10/30/08. . . . Evaluation in the emergency
room revealed no significant pathology. The patient is concerned of possible
muscle injury since he stands all day at work[;]" and in his March 30, 2009
Form WC-2 Physician's Report: that he did not originally pursue a work
(continued...)
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Board conducts a de novo review of the record and 
takes evidence and testimony presented by the parties. See HRS 
§ 386-87 (1993); HRS § 91-10 (2012). Credibility is a matter 
left to the trier of fact. The Board is not required "to 
reconcile conflicting expert testimony in favor of the claimant; 
that proposition would eviscerate the well established rule that 
the Board's determinations of credibility and weight are entitled 
to deference." Nakamura v. State, 98 Hawai 'i 263, 270, 47 P.3d 
730, 737 (2002). 
Yoshii's challenge to Finding of Fact 17 in point of
 
error four is based on his argument that, based on
 Dr. Mitsunaga's opinion that Yoshii "had osteoarthritis that was
 
aggravated by his work activities"--an opinion the Board
 
acknowledged by accepting Yoshii's Proposed Finding of Fact 44-­
the Board should have concluded that 
the nature of the injury included the aggravation to the
degenerative condition and the tear in his right knee from
[Yoshii's] work activities and that the progression of the
arthritis and the effect of the work activities on the knee
 caused the tear of the posterior horn of the lateral
meniscus that in turn required the surgery.
 
However, Yoshii's claim for the injury in this case-­
reported soon after the event and after Yoshii's knee surgery had
 
been performed--was not based on cumulative injury stemming from
 
work activity, but upon the stair-stepping event occurring on
 
October 30, 2008. See November 18, 2008 Report and March 11,
 
2009 Form WC-5. Consistent with Yoshii's Report and Form WC-5,
 the Director and the Board based their ruling on the merits of a
 
workers compensation claim for an injury occurring on October 30,
 
2008 and did not decide a cumulative injury claim. Thus,
 
7(...continued)
related claim, because Yoshii's initial presentation was "unclear." 
He
 
concludes by providing the following explanation: 
However the patient feels certain that his knee pain and
subsequent torn meniscus was related to the injury at work
on October 27, 2008. I am in agreement with this because the
patient had no significant problems with his knee until
after his injury. I also excluded and treated medical causes
for pain and swelling of his right knee. 
8
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
whatever merit there might be to a cumulative injury claim by
 
Yoshii--upon which we do not opine--this case does not involve
 
that claim.
 
Yoshii also challenges Finding of Fact 17 in point of
 
error six, on the basis that, the Board erred in rejecting his
 
experts' opinions by finding that the pain Yoshii experienced on
 
October 30, 2008 was related to the edema he experienced on
 
October 26, 2008. We cannot say that the Board's finding was
 
clearly erroneous. Yoshii testified that the pain he felt when
 
getting up in the movie theater was in the right upper part of
 
the calf muscle and the pain when he took the misstep on
 
October 30, 2008 was in the "same area." Yoshii's own expert,
 
Dr. Ragunton, noted that it appeared, upon examination on
 
October 27, 2008, that Yoshii's "leg pain was caused by leg
 
swelling and fluid retention" and we cannot say that the Board's
 
finding was clearly erroneous.
 
III.
 
Yoshii's fifth point of error and part of his argument 
B is that the Board erred in its Findings of Fact 15 and 18 that 
Yoshii's testimony describing his injury was not credible because 
it was inconsistent, inconsistent with the medical records, and, 
as to Yoshii's self-described claim of torn ligaments, was not 
supported by any evidence. Again, matters of credibility are for 
the trier of fact.8 Nakamura, 98 Hawai 'i at 270, 47 P.3d at 737. 
IV.
 
In point of error seven, Yoshii challenges the Board's
 
determination that the State overcame the presumption of
 
compensability in Finding of Fact 19 and Conclusion of Law 1.9
 
8
 We do note that Dr. Mihara relied on the medical records rather
 
than on Yoshii's verbal medical history for this same reason. We further note
 
that, although Yoshii points out that the surgeon performed a partial medial
and lateral meniscectomy for the meniscus tear, menisci are not ligaments, but
cartilage of the knee. http://encyclopedia.thefreedictionary.com/
Meniscus+(knee) last accessed March 19, 2015.
 
9
 As previously stated, we do not address Yoshii's argument
regarding cumulative injury as it was not included in the claim before us. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Yoshii is correct that the State is obligated to provide
 
substantial evidence that his claim is not compensable to
 
overcome the statutory presumption afforded to employees pursuant
 
to HRS § 386-85(1) (1993).10 To overcome the presumption, the
 
employer must carry the burden of production and the burden of
 persuasion. The evidence must be substantial, and at a minimum,
 
be "credible and relevant." Akamine v. Hawaiian Packing &
 
Crating Co., 53 Haw. 406, 409, 495 P.2d 1164, 1167 (1972). 
In this case, there was substantial evidence overcoming
 
the presumption of compensability. Yoshii's claim was based on
 an event occurring on October 30, 2008. See Form WC-5. On that
 
date, through the reports of his treating physician,
 Dr. Ragunton, Yoshii complained of right leg pain that Yoshii
 
confirmed in his testimony was to the upper part of his calf
 
muscle. It was undisputed that the incidents leading up to the
 
pain for which this claim was made were (1) getting out of a
 
chair on October 26, 2008 and (2) taking a step down stairs on
 
October 30, 2008, neither in fact occurring while performing his
 
work duties or during work hours. Dr. Ragunton's notes document
 
that Yoshii was initially treated by him with diuretics. A CT
 
scan and ultrasound was performed on November 3, 2008, revealing
 
no phlebitis (inflamed veins) or clots; nor was any torn muscle
 
found; as of November 24, 2008, Yoshii reported that the pain in
 
his right leg had improved; and that reduced edema and no calf
 
tenderness in Yoshii's right calf was observed. None of these
 
records indicate pain involving Yoshii's right knee.
 
10
 Yoshii's first point of error is that the Board erred in its FOF 3
that Yoshii was off the clock when the alleged injury occurred on October 30,
2008. Yoshii submitted a "Report of Work-Related Injury/Illness" to his
supervisor, Travis Kono, on November 18, 2008, wherein Yoshii reported his
work hours on October 30, 2008 as being from 6:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m., one hour
before he suffered a "right calf muscle strain." Yoshii states that the
 "Board did not appear to decide non-compensability based on these findings,
having discussed the crediting of employer medical opinions at length[.]"
Yoshii does not argue the point in his argument section.
 
Because Yoshii does not present an argument that the Board erred
in this FOF, we conclude that Yoshii has abandoned this point. 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On December 29, 2008, Yoshii saw Dr. Oishi, an
 
orthopedic surgeon, to whom he reported "persistent knee pain
 
going on for several weeks." Based on medial tenderness and an
 
effusion on examination and the persistence of the pain,
 
Dr. Oishi obtained an MRI. The MRI revealed "a moderate knee
 
joint effusion, moderate chondromalacia of the tibiofemoral joint
 
[and] lateral patellofemoral joint as well as possible
 
degenerative tear of the medial meniscus." Based on the
 
persistent pain, Dr. Oishi operated on Yoshii on January 17,
 
2009, performing "a partial medial and lateral meniscectomy, as
 
well as an arthroscopic lateral release with chrondomalacia
 
patella." Yoshii received physical therapy until May 27, 2009.
 
The State also presented the report of Dr. Mihara, who
 
performed an independent medical examination on February 9, 2009. 
Again, Yoshii reported to Dr. Mihara of pain to his right calf. 
After a physical examination of Yoshii and a review of his
 
medical records, including the MRI, Dr. Mihara provided a summary
 
of his findings and concluded, 
It is my opinion that the claimant's pain experienced on
10/30/08 was likely radicular in origin. This was a
 preexisting condition documented in the medical record
dating back a number of years. It had been more frequent in
recent years and in particular, it flared up just several
days prior to 10/30/08 after the claimant stood up after
watching a movie. This suggests the possibility of a nerve
root irritation. The medical record available to me does
 not suggest any work related link, and the medical record
does not indicate any gastrocnermius tear or meniscal tear
due to work injury. In other words, I can find no evidence
in the medical record to suggest that this was a work
related trauma or problem. I am forced to rely on the
medical record given the inconsistencies in the claimant's
verbal history.
 
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the Board did
 
not err in concluding the State overcame the presumption of
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
compensability and therefore did not err in reaching Finding of
 
Fact 19 or Conclusion of Law 1.
 
CONCLUSION
 
The March 21, 2012 Labor and Industrial Relations
 
Appeals Board Decision and Order is affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, April 24, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Herbert R. Takahashi 
Rebecca L. Covert Davina W. Lam (Takahashi & Covert)for Claimant/Appellee-Appellant Brian M. Yoshii. Presiding Judge 
A
Paul A. Brooke (Leong Kunihiro Lezy & Benton)for Self-Insured Employer/Appellant-AppelleeState of Hawai
'i, University of
Hawai'i, and Third-Party
Administrator/Appellant-Appellee First InsuranceCompany of Hawaii, Ltd. ssociate Judge 
12

 