NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001141
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
PAYTON RAPOZO, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P.
 NO. 13-1-0002 (CR. NO. 08-1-0252))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
  
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Payton Rapozo (Rapozo) appeals
 
from the "Findings of Fact; Conclusions of Law; Order Denying
 
Petitioner's Rule 40, [Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP)], 
Petition, Filed May 23, 2013," entered on August 29, 2014 in the
 Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit
1
 (circuit court).
 
On appeal, Rapozo contends the circuit court erred in
 
"failing to afford Rapozo a hearing on his [HRPP] Rule 40
 Petition
[2] and abused its discretion by ignoring his Motion for
 
1 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.
 
2 Rapozo filed his petition pursuant to HRPP Rule 40, which provides, in
pertinent part:
 
Rule 40. POST-CONVICTION PROCEEDING.
 
(a) Proceedings and grounds. The post-conviction
proceeding established by this rule shall encompass all
common law and statutory procedures for the same purpose,
including habeas corpus and coram nobis; provided that the
foregoing shall not be construed to limit the availability
of remedies in the trial court or on direct appeal. Said
 proceeding shall be applicable to judgments of conviction
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appointment of Counsel. In addition to its procedural errors,
 
the [circuit] court erred in its denial of [Rapozo's] substantive
 defenses."
 
Appointment of Counsel for HRPP Rule 40 Petition
 
Rapozo argues that he "was wrongfully denied the
 
assistance of counsel to help him with his [HRPP] Rule 40
 
Petition. Had he been granted counsel prior to the denial of his
 HRPP Rule 40 Petition, his counsel could have provided legal
 expertise and expounded on the points raised within this after-
the-fact appeal . . . ." Rapozo contends the circuit court
 denied Rapozo's HRPP Rule 40 Petition without appointing counsel
 and "failed altogether to even address [Rapozo's] May 23, 2013 Ex
 Parte Motion for Appointment of Counsel."
 
The record does not support Rapozo's contention on 
appeal that the circuit court failed to address Rapozo's Motion for Appointment of Counsel. The record indicates that the circuit court approved and ordered the appointment of counsel for Rapozo's HRPP Rule 40 Petition. However, it seems that no attorney was ever provided to Rapozo. All of the documents Rapozo filed in support of his HRPP Rule 40 Petition were filed on his own behalf. Respondent-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) 
concedes on appeal that the circuit court failed to appoint 
2(...continued)
and to custody based on judgments of convictions, as
follows:
 
(1) FROM JUDGMENT. At any time but not prior to final
judgment, any person may seek relief under the procedure set
forth in this rule from the judgment of conviction, on the
following grounds:
 
(i) that the judgment was obtained or sentence imposed
in violation of the constitution of the United States or the State of Hawai' i; 
(ii) that the court which rendered the judgment was
without jurisdiction over the person or the subject matter;
 
(iii) that the sentence is illegal;
 
(iv) that there is newly discovered evidence; or 
(v) any ground which is a basis for collateral attack
on the judgment.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel for Rapozo's HRPP Rule 40 Petition and notes in its
 
answering brief that "the State does not object to a remand of
 the instant case with instructions to appoint counsel to
 supplement [Rapozo's] original [HRPP] Rule 40 Petition." The
 State argues that the circuit court's error in failing to appoint
 counsel for Rapozo was harmless "because [Rapozo's] appellate
 counsel does not raise anything on appeal that [Rapozo] did not
 raise himself in his [HRPP] Rule 40 Petition."
 
We disagree with the State's position that the circuit 
court's error was harmless. Rapozo contends his trial counsel failed "to properly advise [Rapozo] of his right to raise certain defenses at trial." Specifically, Rapozo alleged in his HRPP Rule 40 Petition that his trial counsel told Rapozo the law in Hawai
'i on self-defense and defense of others where lethal force 
is used requires that "lethal force must first be used against [a defendant]." Rapozo alleges that when he pled guilty, he relied on his attorney's erroneous statement of law and did not understand the defenses available to him. The assistance of counsel for his HRPP Rule 40 Petition would have helped Rapozo identify the specific errors or omissions by his trial counsel and the facts in his case that could have established a potentially meritorious defense at trial. See State v. Silva, 75 
Haw. 419, 440, 864 P.2d 583, 593 (1993) ("The defendant has the burden of establishing ineffective assistance of counsel and must meet the following two-part test: 1) that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." (brackets omitted)) (quoting State v. Aplaca, 74 Haw. 54, 66-67 837 P.2d 1298, 1305 (1992)). 
We hold that the circuit court erred in its failure to
 
provide Rapozo with counsel once it approved his Motion for the
 Appointment of Counsel on his HRPP Rule 40 Petition. Because we
 vacate the circuit court's decision and remand this case for
 further proceedings, we do not address Rapozo's other arguments
 on appeal.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, the "Findings of Fact; Conclusions of Law;
 
Order Denying Petitioner's Rule 40, HRPP, Petition" entered on
 
August 29, 2014 in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit is
 vacated and this case is remanded for proceedings consistent with
 this Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 30, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Gregory H. Meyers
(De Costa Hempey Meyers)for Petitioner-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Sinclair Salas-FergusonDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Kaua
'i 
for Respondent-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
4
 