NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000760
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JAMES HOOVER, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 2DCW-14-0000009)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant James Hoover (Hoover) appeals from
 
the (first and second) First Amended Judgment and Notice of Entry
 
of Judgment, entered on September 23 and 25, 2015, in the
 District Court of the Second Circuit, Wailuku Division (District
 
Court).
1
 
On August 20, 2014, after a bench trial, Hoover was
 
convicted of Assault in the Third Degree (Count 1), Assault in
 
the Third Degree (Count 2), and Harassment (Count 4). Hoover was
 sentenced to a one year term of probation, with fourteen days
 jail as a special condition of probation, for each count of
 
1
 The Honorable Blaine Kobayashi presided.
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Assault in the Third Degree, and fourteen days in jail for
 
Harassment. 
On September 23, 2015, a (first) First Amended Judgment
 
was entered. Hoover's probation was revoked and he was
 resentenced to one year of probation, with sixty days in jail as
 a special condition of probation for each count of Assault in the
 Third Degree, and six months of probation, with thirty days in
 jail as a special condition of probation for Harassment, all
 sentenced to run concurrently. 
On September 25, 2015, a (second) First Amended
 
Judgment was entered, which changed Hoover's thirty day jail term
 that was a special condition of probation associated with his
 Harassment conviction to a five day jail term special condition.
 On appeal, Hoover contends the District Court erred by: (1)
 revoking his probation, because the evidence failed to
 demonstrate that he wilfully failed to comply with the terms of
 probation; (2) sentencing him to sixty days in jail; and (3)
 resentencing him for his Harassment conviction. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Hoover's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Hoover's convictions were based upon his punching
 
the complaining witness in the face several times after he
 angrily grabbed her young child and picked him up and the
 complaining witness tried to pull the child from his grasp. In
 initially sentencing Hoover to probation on the counts for
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Assault in the Third Degree, the District Court noted that anger
 
management treatment would address Hoover's Post Traumatic Stress
 Disorder (PTSD). The District Court further ordered that, if
 
Hoover was unable to pay for an anger management program, then
 
the State would pay for the service. Hoover admits that he was
 aware that the completion of an anger management program was a
 condition of his probation. Hoover does not dispute that he did
 not complete an anger management program by August 19, 2015, the
 end of his probationary period.
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (
HRS) § 706-625(3) (2014)
 
provides:
 
The court shall revoke probation if the defendant has
inexcusably failed to comply with a substantial requirement
imposed as a condition of the order or has been convicted of
a felony. The court may revoke the suspension of sentence
or probation if the defendant has been convicted of another
crime other than a felony.
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has held that the term 
"inexcusably," in the context of HRS § 706-625(3), means a wilful 
and deliberate attempt to circumvent the order of the court. 
State v. Villiarimo , 132 Hawai 'i 209, 222, 320 P.3d 874, 887 
(2014). "This standard requires both an intentional act on the part of the defendant ('willful'), and a deliberate attempt by him or her to circumvent the probation order, taking into consideration the significance of the defendant's action with respect to the court's order and goals of probation ('to circumvent the order of the court')." Id. (citations and 
footnote omitted). "Given the difficulty of proving the requisite state of mind by direct evidence, proof by circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences arising from 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
circumstances surrounding the [defendant's conduct] is 
sufficient". State v. Stocker, 90 Hawai 'i 85, 92, 976 P.3d 399, 
406 (1999) (quoting State v. Mitsuda, 86 Hawai 'i 37, 44, 947 P.2d 
349, 356 (1997). "Thus, the mind of an alleged offender may be read from his acts, conduct and inferences fairly drawn from all the circumstances." Id. 
Here, Hoover's probation officer testified that,
 
although no financial assessment was completed, Hoover informed
 her in May of 2015 that he would look into obtaining a private
 therapist. Hoover had further stated that his insurance would
 pay for the private therapist. In July of 2015, Hoover's
 probation officer told Hoover that his probation was about to
 expire, and Hoover responded that he was willing to go to the
 Family Peace Center, even if he had to pay for it himself. 
However, in August of 2015, the Family Peace Center informed
 Hoover's probation officer that Hoover had not stopped by to fill
 out an application. It was not until August of 2015 that Hoover
 told his probation officer that he could not afford the Family
 Peace Center.
 
We conclude that the District Court did not err when it
 
determined that Hoover "essentially strung probation along in
 this case," in light of the District Court's assessment that
 anger management was probably one of the most significant
 conditions of probation, because the case involved a crime of
 violence. Anger management was a substantial condition of
 Hoover's probation. Hoover asserted during sentencing that his
 psychological history was a factor in favor of not sentencing him
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to prison, and thus, the District Court required him to address
 
the issue as part of his probation because his crimes involved
 violence. It appears from the record that the probationary
 condition was a substantial requirement, as evidenced, inter
 alia, by the District Court's order that the State pay for the
 service if Hoover could not afford to. Hoover knew that he was
 required to complete an anger management program and he told his
 probation officer that he would obtain and pay for a private
 therapist, only to later claim that he could not afford to do so
 shortly before the expiration of his probationary period. 
Drawing from all the circumstances, the District Court reasonably
 concluded from Hoover's actions that he intended to not complete
 an anger management program prior to the expiration of his
 probationary period and that Hoover deliberately attempted to
 evade the condition of probation by misleading his probation
 officer about completing an anger management program. 
(2) Hoover contends that the District Court abused its
 
discretion by resentencing him to sixty days in jail and argues
 that the District Court did not resentence him in accordance with
 HRS §§ 706-606 (2014) and 707-621 (2014). Hoover claims the
 District Court only considered one factor in resentencing him ­the fact that he did not complete an anger management program. 
Hoover also argues that the sixty day jail term was unduly harsh
 and not commensurate with justice.
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In resentencing Hoover, the District Court was required
 
2	to consider the factors stated in HRS §§ 706-606  and 706-6213
 to
2
 HRS § 706-606 states:
 
§ 706-606 Factors to be considered in imposing a
sentence. The court, in determining the particular sentence
to be imposed, shall consider:
(1) 	The nature and circumstances of the offense and 
the history and characteristics of the defendant;
(2) 	The need for the sentence imposed:
(a)	 To reflect the seriousness of the offense,
to promote respect for law, and to provide
just punishment for the offense;
(b)	 To afford adequate deterrence to criminal
conduct;
(c) 	 To protect the public from further crimes
of the defendant; and
(d)	 To provide the defendant with needed
educational or vocational training,
medical care, or other correctional
treatment in the most effective manner;
(3) 	The kinds of sentences available; and
(4) 	The need to avoid unwarranted sentence 
disparities among defendants with similar records
who have been found guilty of similar conduct.
 
3 HRS § 706-621 states:
 
§ 706-621 Factors to be considered in imposing a term
of probation.  The court, in determining whether to impose a
term of probation, shall consider:
(1) 	The factors set forth in section 706-606 to the 
extent that they are applicable;
(2) 	The following factors, to be accorded weight in
favor of withholding a sentence of imprisonment:
(a) 	 The defendant's criminal conduct neither
 caused nor threatened serious harm;
(b) 	 The defendant acted under a strong
provocation;
(c) 	 There were substantial grounds tending to
excuse or justify the defendant's criminal
conduct, though failing to establish a
defense;
(d) 	 The victim of the defendant's criminal
 conduct induced or facilitated its
 commission;
(e) 	 The defendant has no history of prior
delinquency or criminal activity or has
led a law-abiding life for a substantial
period of time before the commission of
the present crime;
(f) 	 The defendant's criminal conduct was the
 result of circumstances unlikely to recur;
(g) 	 The character and attitudes of the
 defendant indicate that the defendant is
 unlikely to commit another crime;
 
(continued...)
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the extent they were applicable. State v. Rauch, 94 Hawai 'i 315, 
328, 13 P.3d 324, 337 (2000). During resentencing, the State 
noted that Hoover punched the complaining witness in the face and lifted up a small child and threw him down, the offenses were committed against persons, Hoover failed to benefit from his past encounters with the law, Hoover had a prior felony conviction for abuse, and that he displayed deception in the current case. In response, Hoover argued that there were mitigating factors in the case, he attended all probation meetings, he could not attend anger management because of financial issues, the amount of time he already spent in jail was adequate, and that probation with financial assistance to attend anger management would solve the problem.  Prior to resentencing Hoover, the District Court noted 
that it considered the arguments of the State and his counsel, as 
well as reviewed a pre-sentence report. The District Court was not required to expressly make findings of fact with regard to each of the factors listed in HRS § 706-606. Rauch, 94 Hawai
'i 
at 328, 13 P.3d at 337. There is a presumption that all factors under HRS § 706-606 were considered, absent clear evidence to the contrary. State v. Hussein, 122 Hawai
'i 495, 519, 229 P.3d 313, 
337 (2010). The State's arguments during resentencing touched 
3(...continued)
 (h) 	 The defendant is particularly likely to
respond affirmatively to a program of
restitution or a probationary program or
both;
(i) 	 The imprisonment of the defendant would
entail excessive hardship to the defendant
or the defendant's dependents; and
(j) 	 The expedited sentencing program set forth
in section 706-606.3, if the defendant has
qualified for that sentencing program.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
upon several factors listed in HRS § 706-621, such as Hoover's
 
criminal conduct causing harm, substantial grounds tending to
 excuse or justify Hoover's criminal conduct, Hoover's history of
 criminal conduct, and whether Hoover was likely to respond
 affirmatively to a program. Hoover cites no clear evidence to
 rebut the presumption that the District Court considered all of
 the relevant factors. A sixty day jail term as a special
 condition of probation is far shorter than the maximum jail term
 of one year. Hoover initially served a fourteen day jail term as
 a special condition of probation. Thus, it does not appear that
 the sixty day jail term was unduly harsh given Hoover's conduct
 subsequent to the imposition of the fourteen day jail term.
 
(3) We conclude that the District Court erred when it
 
purportedly revoked Hoover's probation for the Harassment
 conviction. Hoover was sentenced to fourteen days in jail, not
 probation, for Harassment. Thus, probation could not be revoked
 for that offense.
 
For these reasons, the District Court's First Amended
 
Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment, as filed on September
 23, 2015 and refiled with modification on September 25, 2015, is
 affirmed in part and vacated in part. Hoover's probation
 revocation and resentencing for the two counts of Assault in the
 Third Degree are affirmed. Hoover's probation revocation and
 resentencing for Harassment is vacated. The case is remanded for 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
entry of an amended judgment in accordance with this summary
 
disposition order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 22, 2016. 
On the briefs: Jason M. Onishi,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Artemio C. Baxa,Special Deputy Prosecuting
Attorney,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9
 