NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-002023
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
GENOA KUUIPO MEDEIROS, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KEVIN FRANCIS MEDEIROS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 11-1-6577)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Kevin Francis Medeiros (Kevin)
 
appeals from the June 17, 2013 "Order Denying Post-Decree Relief
 
filed March 12, 2013" (Order Denying Motion) entered in the
1
Family Court of the First Circuit  (family court).
2
On appeal, Kevin  contends the family court erred by: 
(1)
 receiving Plaintiff-Appellee Genoa Kuuipo
 
Medeiros's (Genoa) Exhibits "1" through "14" into evidence over
 
his objections;
 
(2) refusing to allow him to present oral testimonies
 
and requiring offers of proof;
 
(3) refusing to allow him to present evidence from a
 
medical doctor regarding Genoa's alleged failure to provide
 
1 
The Honorable Frances Q.F. Wong presided unless otherwise noted.
 
2 
Kevin's opening brief does not comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(7). The majority of the "Argument" section of
his opening brief failed to support contentions with record references orcitations to legal authorities. Kevin's counsel is warned that future noncompliance with this rule may result in sanctions. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
medical care for one of the parties' children;
 
(4) finding he had not shown a prima facie case for a
 
material change in circumstances regarding custody of the
 
parties' children; 
(5) ruling on his motion before allowing and
 
considering all evidence that was to be moved into evidence; 
(6) receiving evidence before the hearing commenced and
 
before moving it into evidence; and
 
(7) allowing Genoa to cross-examine him regarding her
 
offer of proof and not affording him the opportunity to cross-
examine Genoa.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On April 13, 2011, Genoa filed a complaint for divorce. 
The parties had three minor children (collectively, children).
 
On January 18, 2013, the family court entered a divorce
 
decree that: (1) dissolved the marriage between Kevin and Genoa;
 (2) awarded the parties joint physical custody of the children;
 
(3) awarded sole legal custody of the children to Genoa; (4)
 
awarded child support payments of $12 per month from Genoa to
 
Kevin; and (5) divided and distributed the parties' assets,
 
property, and debts.
3 The divorce decree provided that Kevin was
 
to have the children from Monday afternoon until Friday morning
 while school was in session.
 
On March 12, 2013, Kevin filed a "Motion And
 
Declaration For Post-Decree Relief," (Motion for Post-Decree
 
Relief) requesting sole legal and physical custody of the
 
children. Kevin alleged that Genoa "did not provide medical care
 
for the daughter which put the child at risk of causing permanent
 
damage to the minor child's hearing and "failed to pay her share
 
of the school expense."
 
On June 17, 2013, the family court held a hearing on
 
Kevin's Motion for Post-Decree Relief. In response to the family
 
court's request that the parties agree that Genoa's exhibits
 
would be received subject to cross-examination, Kevin's counsel,
 
Scot Brower (Brower) asserted that a lot of Genoa's exhibits were
 
3 
The Honorable Judge Catherine H. Remigio presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
cumulative, unauthenticated, and hearsay. The family court
 
responded with, "actually the court has received the face sheet
 
of this exhibit list, and everything that has been proffered by
 
[Genoa] is either a filed court document or a statement by
 
[Genoa] . . . ."
 
When Brower indicated he would call Kevin to testify,
 
the family court stated it first required an offer of proof.
 
Brower stated Kevin would testify that on October 13, 2012, Genoa
 
took one of the children to a pediatrician who prescribed a
 
medication, and that Genoa did not inform Kevin of the child's
 
medical condition or provide the medication to Kevin when he
 
received the child for her regular visit with him. Kevin also
 
would testify to being contacted by the children's school and
 
teacher numerous times "with regard to the children not being
 
properly prepared for school after visitation with
 
[Genoa] . . . ." The family court interjected: "[t]his is an
 
offer of proof just with respect to your client, and this is
 
about material change in circumstance. So don't – you needn't
 
argue the case because there's no . . . rule that allows you to
 
argue the case at this juncture anyway."
 
Genoa, proceeding pro se, testified the medication in
 
question was the child's ear drops, which were used to clear
 
mucous from the child's ears. In light of the temporary
 
restraining order (TRO) against Kevin, Genoa left the medication
 
with his mother, a third party. Genoa testified that "I text[ed]
 
him, you know, your mom has the medication. And so he just went
 
and said I didn't give him the medication." Genoa further
 
testified that the child's ear infections were not caused by a
 
lack of medical attention, but because of the way her ear is
 
physically formed. Genoa also stated: 
So, my daughter's ear infections are not physically
caused because I don't give her medication which I do. I
 
have all the documents showing that I take her to doctors, I
always get the medication for her. Um, it's just that one
time I didn't give him the drops because I asked the doctor
for extra drops so that they could have – he could have one,
his mom could have one, and we have our set so we don't have
to keep switching the drops and taking it off – taking it to
school and whatnot.
 
After Genoa's testimony, the family court indicated
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that it would follow an "important rule" that "previous orders do
 
not even get looked at unless there's a finding of material
 
change in circumstance. No. The court does not find that. The
 
[Motion for Post-Decree Relief] is denied."
 
The family court asked Genoa to prepare a handwritten
 
order that Kevin's Motion for Post-Decree Relief would be denied
 
for failure to show a material change in circumstance. Brower
 
then asked to "make a record for the purposes of appeal" and
 
proceeded to argue that the family court erred by refusing to
 
admit Kevin's Exhibits "A" and "B" into evidence. The following
 
colloquy occurred: 
THE COURT: I didn't -- whoa. I didn't refuse to allow
 
it. I just forgot to get to it.
 
[Brower]: Well, then I don't know how the court could
make a ruling if -- because we were going to put these into
evidence and -­
THE COURT: I received them.
 
[Brower]: Yeah. So everything is received except C and
D; is that correct?
 
THE COURT: No. I received A and B. And by the way I
read A and B --
[Brower]: All right.
 THE COURT: -- already.
 [Brower]: And –
 THE COURT: C and D is in and read.
 [Brower]: Okay.
 THE COURT: You want to speak to E?
 [Brower]: E is the photographs of the minor showing
the injuries she sustained at the hands of [Genoa]. We think
that that's material to the case.
 
THE COURT: Well, um, your, uh -- it's material. The
 
problem is that there was a failure of proof about that
after I listened to both your offer of the testimony of your
client and, um, the, uh, defendants testimony -- yes,
defendant's testimony. The court will receive it –
 
[Brower]: Well, Your Honor –
 
THE COURT: -- E and F.
 [Brower]: -- you didn't give me an opportunity to
examine my client –
 
THE COURT: And I read it.
 [Brower]: -- as a witness which I wanted to do. 
I
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
wanted to ask questions of my client and I was going to lay
a foundation with regard to the photographs.
 
THE COURT: I received D and F.
 
[Brower]: All right. E – F is received.
 THE COURT: E is received. F is received. And -­
The family court also received Kevin's Exhibits G, H,
 
and I. The family court then reiterated that Kevin's Motion for
 
Post-Decree Relief was dismissed.
 
On June 17, 2013, the family court entered the Order
 
Denying Motion denying Kevin's Motion for Post-Decree Relief "due
 
to no material change in circumstance found."
 
On July 16, 2013, Kevin filed a notice of appeal from
 
the family court's Order Denying Motion.
 
On July 17, 2013, Genoa and Kevin filed their
 
respective exhibit lists. Genoa's exhibits consisted of the
 
following: 
1. medical records for the children's visits with
 
Jason Ninomiya M.D. (Dr. Ninomiya) for 2008-2013;
 
2. Custody Investigation Report dated September 13,
 
2011;
 
3. an "Amended Extended Order for Protection" expiring
 
on September 27, 2014;
 
4. a letter from the Department of the Prosecuting
 
Attorney, City and County of Honolulu, indicating Kevin violated
 
the TRO on March 22, 2011;
 
5. an "Order for Protection," which expired on October
 
1, 2011;
 
6. a "Petition for an Order for Protection on Behalf
 
of a Family or Household Member," filed by Genoa on November 2,
 
2012;
 
7. a letter dated August 8, 2011 from Cheryl Y. Yamaki
 
(Yamaki), Staff Attorney for the Domestic Violence Action Center
 
(DVAC), to Brower indicating Kevin had faxed the Complaint for
 
Divorce to the children's school and stated the document gave him
 
full custody of the children;
 
8. a letter dated June 21, 2011 from Yamaki to Brower,
 
indicating Kevin called DVAC's helpline twice and stated DVAC was
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"helping the wrong person";
 
9. letters from two of her children;
 
10. her paystubs;
 
11. her 2012 Individual Income Tax Return; and
 
12. her 2012 Wage and Tax Statement.
 
Kevin's exhibits consisted of the following: 
A. Dr. Ninomiya's declaration including a November 2,
 
2012 report from his medical examination of the child to "recheck
 ears";
 
B. Wilson T. Murakami, M.D.'s declaration indicating he
 
had examined the child on October 27, 2012;
 
C. Genoa's November 2, 2012 "Petition For An Order For
 
Protection On Behalf Of A Family Or Household Member;"(id. at
 
838);
 
D. the family court's "Order Dissolving the [TRO]
 
Filed on November 2, 2012," (Order Dissolving TRO)
 
E. a photograph of one of the children with a bruised
 
arm;
 
F. a Honolulu Police Department Incident Report, for
 
an incident that occurred on December 7, 2012;
 
G. a summary of educational expenses paid by Kevin;
 
H. receipts from educational expenses paid by Kevin;
 
and
 
I. a mobile phone screenshot of text messages from
 
Genoa to Kevin, dated June 12 and 13, 2013.
 
II. DISCUSSION
 
Kevin's March 12, 2013 "Motion For Declaration For
 
Post-Decree Relief" was apparently made pursuant to Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571-46(a)(6) (Supp. 2013). He used a
 
family court post-decree motion-form, part A of which required
 
the movant to identify ways "the circumstances of the subject
 
child(ren) have changed since the last custody order . . . [.]" 
In relevant part, HRS § 571-46 provides:
§571-46  "Criteria and procedure in awarding custody
and visitation; best interest of the child.  (a) In actions
for divorce, separation, annulment, separate maintenance, or
any other proceeding where there is at issue a dispute as to
the custody of a minor child, the court, during the pendency
of the action, at the final hearing, or any time during the
minority of the child, may make an order for the custody of
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the minor child as may seem necessary or proper. In awarding
the custody, the court shall be guided by the following
standards, considerations, and procedures:
 
. . . .
 
(6) Any custody award shall be subject to modification or
change whenever the best interests of the child require or justify
the modification or change and, wherever practicable, the same
person who made the original order shall hear the motion or
petition for modification of the prior award[.]
 
(Emphasis added.) 
For a motion to modify custody to prevail, the movant
 
"must show a material change of circumstances since the previous
 
custody order, and must show that such a change of custody is in
 
the best interest of the child." Nadeau v. Nadeau, 10 Haw. App.
 
111, 121, 861 P.2d 754, 759 (1993), citing HRS § 571-46; see also
 Turoff v. Turoff, 56 Haw. 51, 55–56, 527 P.2d 1275, 1278 (1974)
 
("[T]he question is whether substantial change has occurred since
 
the initial Decision and Order requiring modification or change
 
in the award of custody of the minor child.").
 
Kevin's first, second, third, fifth, sixth, and seventh 
contentions of error concern the family court's evidentiary 
rulings at the June 17, 2013 hearing. "The family court has 
broad discretion to determine appropriate evidence for trial, and 
this court reviews such rulings under the abuse of discretion 
standard." Baker v. Bielski, 124 Hawai
'i 455, 458, 248 P.3d 221, 
224 (App. 2011), citing Miyamoto v. Lum, 104 Hawai 'i 1, 7, 84 
P.3d 509, 515 (2004) (the lower court's grant or denial of a 
motion in limine is reviewed for abuse of discretion). 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion
in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus,
we will not disturb the family court's decisions on appeal
unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of
reason.
 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006). 
"Furthermore, the burden of establishing abuse of 
discretion is on appellant, and a strong showing is required to 
establish it." Ek v. Boggs, 102 Hawai 'i 289, 294-95, 75 P.3d 
1180, 1185-86 (2003) (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Kevin's first contention is that the family court
 
abused its discretion by receiving Genoa's Exhibits "1" through
 
"14" into evidence. "An appellate court will not reverse a
 
judgment in a nonjury case because of the admission of
 
incompetent evidence, unless all of the competent evidence is
 
insufficient to support the judgment or unless it affirmatively
 
appears that the incompetent evidence induced the court to make
 
an essential finding which would not otherwise have been made." 
Associated Eng'rs & Contractors, Inc. v. State, 58 Haw. 187, 213,
 
567 P.2d 397, 414 (1977) (internal quotation marks and citation
 
omitted). "[A]n error in admission of evidence is not reversible
 
unless the appellant is able to show that the alleged
 
inadmissible evidence influenced the decision of the trial judge
 
and the decision therein was insupportable by other evidence." 
Lennen & Newell, Inc. v. Clark Enterprises, Inc., 51 Haw. 233,
 
238, 456 P.2d 231, 235 (1969) (rejecting appellant's objection to
 
twelve exhibits, made on grounds of hearsay, immateriality and
 
irrelevancy, and improper foundation, due to appellant's failure
 
to show prejudicial error). 
Kevin alleges that Genoa's exhibits were cumulative,
 
unauthenticated, and inadmissible hearsay, but he does not show
 
how their admission resulted in prejudicial error. Kevin does
 
not indicate how the allegedly incompetent evidence induced the
 
family court to make an essential finding it would not otherwise
 
have made.
 
Kevin's sixth contention that the family court abused
 
its discretion by receiving evidence before the hearing commenced
 
lacks merit. Kevin contends, without citing to the record, that
 
the family court "claimed it had read evidence, that had not been
 
admitted into evidence, presumably before the hearing commenced,
 
and outside the presence of the parties. The lower court was
 
wrong to have reviewed evidence before the evidence was
 
admitted." Presumably, Kevin is referring to the family court's
 
statement: "actually the court has received the face sheet of
 
[Genoa's] exhibit list, and everything that has been proffered by
 
[Genoa] is either a filed court document or a statement by
 
[Genoa] . . . ." Kevin indicates no authority for the
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
proposition that the family court abused its discretion by
 
reviewing the face sheet of Genoa's exhibit list. The family
 
court indicated that it had "already" read Kevin's Exhibits A and
 
B, but Kevin does not explain how the family court committed
 
reversible error by doing so, nor does he cite to this instance
 
in support of his contention.
 
Kevin's second, third, and fifth contentions concern
 
the family court's refusal to allow Kevin to present oral
 
testimonies and evidence from the children's doctors, and ruling
 
on Kevin's motion before considering his evidence. "The trial
 
court is afforded broad discretion in determining the order and
 
mode of interrogating witnesses and presenting evidence." State
 
v. Maddox, 116 Hawai 'i 445, 458, 173 P.3d 592, 605 (App. 2007), 
citing Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 611(a) (1993).4 
Kevin contends his proffered evidence and testimony
 
regarding Genoa's alleged failure to provide the child medication
 
showed facts that "cry out for the lower court to protect the
 
child, and change [Genoa's] legal and physical custodial rights." 
He contends his evidence showed, "[t]he doctor memorialized that
 
he had a conversation with [Genoa], in which the doctor confirmed
 
[Genoa] never gave [Kevin] medications[.]" Kevin's Exhibits A
 
and B, consist of declarations and medical reports from the
 
children's doctors. Exhibit A shows that on November 1, 2012,
 
Dr. Ninomiya spoke with Kevin saying that he was required to add
 
to a Child Protective Services (CPS) report being prepared by
 
Kevin's attorney. Dr. Ninomiya wrote, "I told dad that I would
 
like to hear mom's side of the story before talking with CPS, if
 
that was OK with him . . . ." On November 2, 2012, Dr. Ninomiya
 
wrote: "I called CPS to add on to the lawyers report. I told the
 
4 
HRE Rule 611 provides in relevant part:
 
Rule 611  Mode and order of interrogation and
 
presentation.  (a) Control by court. The court shall
 
exercise reasonable control over the mode and order of
 
interrogating witnesses and presenting evidence so as to (1)
make the interrogation and presentation effective for the
ascertainment of the truth, (2) avoid needless consumption
of time, and (3) protect witnesses from harassment or undue
embarrassment.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
social worker about my conversation with [Genoa] and that she
 
confirmed that she did not give [Kevin] any medications to
 
administer to [the minor child] while [she] was with him between
 
10/15-10/19. I also conveyed her reasoning for this decision."
 
On its face, Dr. Ninomiya's report is not inconsistent 
with Genoa's testimony that she did not give the medication to 
Kevin for reasons relating to the parties' TRO, and we cannot 
weigh Genoa's credibility. See Inoue v. Inoue, 118 Hawai 'i 86, 
101, 185 P.3d 834, 849 (App. 2008) ("[I]t is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the 
credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence[.]"). 
Furthermore, any inconsistency would not establish that the 
family court's alleged failure to properly consider Kevin's 
evidence affected his substantial rights or caused a substantial 
detriment to Kevin's case for a modification of custody because 
it would not show a material change of circumstances. See HRE 
Rule 103(a) (1993) ("Effect of erroneous ruling. Error may not be predicated upon a ruling which admits or excludes evidence unless 
a substantial right of the party is affected[.]"). 
The family court's alleged failure to properly consider
 
Kevin's Exhibit D, the Order Dissolving TRO, also does not
 
constitute reversible error. Kevin alleges Genoa filed a TRO in
 
retaliation against him, and that it contained false information. 
Genoa alleged that Kevin neglected the children's medical care. 
Genoa testified that she has filed numerous protective orders
 
against Kevin because he "physically, mentally, and verbally
 
abused me since 2002, and he's doing it to my children now that
 
I'm not there to physically protect them from him." The family
 
court heard Genoa's testimony on the reasons why she filed for
 
the TRO. Exhibit D did not show a material change in
 
circumstances or demonstrate reasons why Genoa filed for a TRO. 
Kevin's fourth contention is that the family court
 
erred by finding Kevin "had not shown a prima facie case for a
 
material change in circumstances regarding legal and/or physical
 
custody" of the children. Brower's offer of proof was that
 
Kevin's testimony would show Genoa was "not providing appropriate
 
medication[;]" failed to properly prepare the children for
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
school; and had "severely beaten" their child.
 
Genoa testified: (1) Kevin was aware that she had
 
provided the medication to Kevin's mother in compliance with the
 
TRO Genoa had against Kevin; (2) the children's schoolwork was up
 
to date, but "since they've been staying with Kevin Monday
 
through Friday, I don't even know if my daughter's going to be
 
going on to the fourth grade"; and (3) Kevin had "physically,
 
mentally, and verbally abused [Genoa] since 2002, and he's doing
 
it to [her] children now that [she is] not there to physically to
 
protect them from him."
 
The family court apparently found Genoa's testimony
 
credible and her testimony alone provided sufficient support for
 
the family court's determination that Kevin's testimony and
 
evidence would not establish a material change in circumstance
 
warranting a modification of the custody order. The parties'
 
exhibits corroborate Genoa's testimony that a TRO was in place at
 
the time in question, which would require her to contact Kevin's
 
mother and not Kevin in regard to the child's ear drops and that
 
the children had been receiving regular medical care.
 
An allegation that a custodial parent was severely
 
beating a child would constitute a material change in
 
circumstances that would warrant revisiting custody arrangements
 
in the best interests of the child. See Nadeau, 10 Haw. App. at
 
121, 861 P.2d at 759. "Exhibit A" attached to Kevin's Motion for
 Pose-Decree Relief alleged that modification was warranted
 
because, "[o]ne of the minor children, the male, does not want to
 
be with the mother, because she assaulted him, and the injuries
 
he suffered are serious." Brower sought to admit Exhibit E,
 
"photographs of the minor showing injuries she sustained at the
 
hands of [Genoa]." Genoa testified however, that the bruises on
 
the child's arm, were caused by a private detective hired by
 
Kevin to follow Genoa to find out where she lives, works, and if
 
she's dating anyone. Brower asserted Exhibit E was "material to
 
the case." The family court agreed that they were "material" and
 
further explained, "[t]he problem is that there was a failure of
 
proof about that after I listened to both your offer of the
 
testimony of your client and . . . [Genoa's] testimony . . . ."
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kevin's seventh contention is that the family court 
erred in allowing Genoa to cross-examine him while not allowing 
him to cross-examine Genoa. "The appellate courts of this 
jurisdiction have, in other settings, applied procedural due 
process protection only where an individual's rights are 
substantially affected." In re Doe, 99 Hawai 'i 522, 534 n.18, 57 
P.3d 447, 459 n.18 (2002). "A parent's right to the care, custody and control of his or her child is a fundamental liberty 
interest" protected by the United States Constitution and the 
Hawai
'i Constitution. Doe v. Doe, 120 Hawai 'i 149, 168, 202 P.3d 
610, 629 (App. 2009) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). "Furthermore, the Supreme Court has said that parental 
rights cannot be denied without an opportunity for them to be 
heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner." In re 
Doe, 99 Hawai
'i at 533, 57 P.3d at 458 (quoting Brokaw v. Mercer 
County, 235 F.3d 1000, 1020 (7th Cir. 2000) (emphasis omitted)). 
We conclude the family court's failure to allow Kevin 
to testify or cross-examine Genoa regarding her alleged "severe" 
beatings of the child could have established a material change in 
circumstances and therefore this failure substantially affected 
Kevin's parental rights. See Doe, 120 Hawai 'i at 154, 202 P.3d 
at 615 (failure to exclude inadmissible polygraph results substantially affected the outcome of the custody proceedings).
III. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, the June 17, 2013 "Order
 
Denying Post-Decree Relief" entered in the Family Court of the
 First Circuit is vacated and this case is remanded for further
 
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 14, 2014. 
On the brief:
 
Scot Stuart Brower
 
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 
13
 