FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
O
F THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
---o0o---
CARMELA S. SALAS, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
EMP MEDICAL GROUP, LTD., A OHIO LIMITED PARTNERSHIP;
EMERGENCY MEDICINE PHYSICIANS OF HONOLULU PALI MOMI, PLLC,
A FOREIGN LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY; LILY L. GALLAGHER, MD;
EDWARD A. SWENSEN, PA-C, Defendants-Appellees,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10;
and DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants. 
NO. CAAP-19-0000616 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(
CIVIL NO. 19-1-0014 ) 
JANUARY 31, 2023 
LEONARD, PRESIDING JUDGE, WADSWORTH AND MCCULLEN, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J. 
Plaintiff-Appellant Carmela S. Salas (Salas) appeals 
from the Final Judgment (Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the First Circuit (Circuit Court) on June 9, 2020.1 Salas 
also challenges the Circuit Court's Findings of Fact and 
Conclusions of Law (FOFs & COLs) filed on August 5, 2019. 
The Circuit Court concluded, inter alia, that Salas's 
medical tort claims are barred by the applicable statute of limitations, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 657-7.3 (2016).
2 
Salas contends that this action is not time-barred because any 
statute of limitations was tolled when she submitted an inquiry to the State of Hawai# i Medical Inquiry and Conciliation Panel 
(MICP 
). Defendants-Appellees EMP Medical Group, Ltd., Emergency 
Medicine Physicians of Honolulu Pali Momi (EMP Pali Momi), PLLC, 
Dr. Lily L. Gallagher (Dr. Gallagher), and Edward A. Swensen PA-C (PA Swensen) (Appellees) successfully argued in the Circuit Court 
that the statute of limitations was not tolled in this case 
because they were not named as parties to the MICP inquiry filed by Salas. However, the Circuit Court did not find that Appellees were known to Salas at the time that the inquiry was filed. We thus conclude that Salas's lawsuit is not time-barred based on the record before the Circuit Court, because Appellees did not 
1 The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai presided. 
2 HRS § 657-7.3 provides, in pertinent part: 
§ 657-7.3 Medical torts; limitation of actions; time.
(a) No action for injury or death against a . . . physician
. . . duly licensed or registered under the laws of theState, or a licensed hospital as the employer of any suchperson, based upon such person's alleged professionalnegligence . . . shall be brought more than two years afterthe plaintiff discovers, or through use of reasonablediligence should have discovered, the injury[.] 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
establish that Salas failed to meet HRS § 671-12(a) (2016) 
requirements  to submit an inquiry to the MICP sufficient to 
trigger the HRS § 671-18 (2016) tolling provision  with respect 
to claims against Appellees. We further conclude that the Circuit Court did not lack subject matter jurisdiction on the grounds that Salas did not file an MICP inquiry specifically naming Appellees prior to commencing this lawsuit. 
The Circuit 
Court's Judgment is vacated and this case is remanded. 43
I. BACKGROUND 
Salas suffered a ruptured appendix in late March 2016. 
She was treated with antibiotics at the Pali Momi Medical Center 
(Pali Momi) from approximately March 26, 2016, to April 15, 2016. 
On May 4, 2016, Salas went to the Emergency Department at Pali 
Momi with abdominal pain, where she was examined, treated, and 
3 HRS § 671-12(a) provides: 
§ 671-12 Review by panel required; notice;
presentation of inquiry; request for a more definite
statement of the inquiry . (a) Any person or the person's
representative having concerns regarding the existence of a
medical tort shall submit an inquiry to the medical inquiryand conciliation panel before a suit based on thecircumstances of the inquiry may be commenced in any courtof this State. Inquiries shall be submitted to the medicalinquiry and conciliation panel in writing and shall includethe facts upon which the inquiry is based and the names ofall parties against whom the inquiry is or may be made whoare then known to the person or the person's representative. 
4 HRS § 671-18 provides, in relevant part: 
§ 671-18 Statute of limitations tolled.  The filing
of the inquiry with the medical inquiry and conciliationpanel . . . shall toll any applicable statute oflimitations, and the statute of limitations shall remaintolled until sixty days after the termination of thepanel[.] 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
then discharged the same day. 
Two days later, Salas was admitted 
to the Honolulu Straub Clinic and Hospital for emergency 
treatment of intra-abdominal abscesses and sepsis. In this suit, Salas alleges that the emergency treatment of her intra-abdominal abscesses and sepsis starting on May 6, 2016 – which included exploratory abdominal surgery, debridement of pelvic abscesses, removal of both fallopian tubes, and removal of her appendix, as well as a prolonged course of intravenous antibiotics after she was discharged on May 16, 2016, incapacitation for several months, and great suffering in body and mind, loss of income, and incurred medical costs – would have been avoided had the health care providers who examined, diagnosed, and treated her at Pali Momi on May 4, 2016, Dr. Gallagher and PA Swensen, properly diagnosed Salas's condition and immediately treated her. 
On March 22, 2018, Salas submitted an Inquiry Regarding 
Rendering of Professional Services (Inquiry) to the MICP, on the 
form provided by the MICP. The two-page form has four sections 
in which the inquiring party is to provide their name and address, the name and address of the health care provider(s), a description of the professional services that are the subject of the inquiry, and the alleged negligent acts or omissions that fell below the applicable standard of care. Salas identified Pali Momi as the health care provider(s) and/or health care facilities believed responsible for the alleged negligence. 
4  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On July 26, 2018, Salas submitted a letter to the MICP 
stating that Dr. Stacey L. Woodruff (
Dr. Woodruff) and US Acute 
Care Solutions would need to be added as additional health care 
providers.   On October 16, 2018, Salas submitted Inquiring 
Party's Expert Testimony by Letter to the MICP. Dr. Christopher Van Tilburg (Dr. Van Tilburg) opined, in part, that: 5
Ms. Salas presented to the Pali Momi Medical Center
emergency department on 5/4/2016 with generalized abdominalpain. She was evaluated, treated and discharged to home byEdward A. Swensen PA-C and Lily L. Gallagher MD. It was noted that she had been an inpatient at Pali Momi MedicalCenter from 3/26/16 to 4/5/16 for a ruptured appendix thatwas treated with percutaneous drainage and intravenousantibiotics. On 5/4/2016, Ms. Salas was having recurrenceof abdominal pain, two weeks after finishing antibiotics. 
On 5/4/18 [sic], Ms. Salas's temperature was elevated to
39.3, her pulse was elevated to 109, and her respiratoryrate was elevated to 24. Ms. Salas had abdominal tenderness, cervical motion tenderness and purulent cervicaldischarge. Her lab tests were notable for a WBC elevated to 17.9. Ms. Salas has an abdominal pelvic CT scan which
showed a worsening inflammatory process compared with a scanfrom 3/26/16, and the radiologist noted that the findingswere suggestive of pelvic inflammatory disease with multipletubo-ovarian abscesses. In summary, on 5/4/2016 Ms. Salaswas having an intra-abdominal infection with sepsis.However, she was discharged to home. 
Regarding the emergency medicine visit to Pali Momi Medical
Center on 5/4/2016, Edward A. Swensen PA-C and Lily L.Gallagher MD, working at Pali Momi Medical Center andemployed by US Acute Care Solutions, did not meet thestandard of care. 
• According to the chart note, sepsis and
intra-abdominal abscesses were not considered by Mr.Swensen in his differential diagnosis, despite theadmission from 3/26/16 and the physical exam andlaboratory findings noted above, which included threeabnormal vital signs, an elevated white blood cellcount, a positive abdominal-pelvic CT Scan. Mr. Swensen and Dr. Gallagher failed to recognize, or evenconsider, sepsis, a common life-threatening condition.
• Consultation with the patient's gynecologist or theon-call gynecologist did not occur. 
5 Salas did not include US Acute Care Solutions or Dr. Woodruff in 
the Complaint. 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
• Ms. Salas was discharged to home. She should have 
been admitted to the hospital. 
Ms. Salas returned to a different medical center two dayslater on 5/6/16 and was admitted for 10 days forintraabdominal abscesses and sepsis. Treatment included an exploratory abdominal surgery, debridement of pelvicabscesses, removal of both fallopian tubes, and removal ofthe appendix. She had a prolonged course of intravenousantibiotics even after being discharged. It is medicallyprobably [sic] that if she had been admitted on 5/4/18 [sic]and treated, she would not have needed surgery and possiblycould have avoided the need for prolonged antibiotics. 
The Inquiry was heard on October 25, 2018, and MICP 
issued a letter dated November 5, 2018, advising that the 
proceeding had been terminated, the inquiring party could institute litigation, and noting and quoting the tolling provision in HRS § 671-18. 
On January 3, 2019, Salas filed a complaint against 
Appellees (Complaint). On March 8, 2019, EMP Pali Momi, Dr. 
Gallagher, and PA Swensen filed a motion to dismiss the claims 
against them, asserting that Salas had failed to file an MICP inquiry against them, and therefore, the Circuit Court lacked subject matter jurisdiction. Salas filed an opposition, arguing, 
inter alia, that she satisfied the prerequisite requirements of HRS § 671-12(a) because, at the time she filed her inquiry with 
the MICP, she named other parties who were then known to her. EMP Pali Momi, Dr. Gallagher, and PA Swensen filed a reply, 
arguing, inter alia, that Salas's failure to name them as parties to the MICP proceeding was inexcusable, prejudicial, and in 
violation of the language and purpose of HRS § 671-12(a). 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On June 7, 2019, Appellees filed a motion for summary 
judgment, arguing that the applicable statute of limitations had 
expired on Salas's claims, Salas had failed to file a claim against the Appellees with the MICP prior to filing the Complaint, and therefore, the Circuit Court lacked jurisdiction and the Complaint should be dismissed. Salas filed an opposition, again arguing that she met the requirements of HRS § 671-12(a), and that the Complaint was filed within the tolled statute of limitations. A reply memorandum was filed. 
A hearing was held on July 3, 2019.
6 The Circuit 
Court's minutes indicate that the court found that the statute of limitations ran as of January 6, 2019, but none of the Appellees were subject to the MICP, so that as to them, the statute ran out on May 5, 2018, seven months prior to the filing of the Complaint. The FOFs & COLs were entered on August 5, 2019. 
A notice of appeal was filed on September 4, 2019. 
After a temporary remand by this court, the Circuit Court entered the Judgment on June 9, 2020. II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Salas raises two points of error on appeal, contending 
that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) concluding that the statute of limitations had expired (Salas challenges COLS C-H, which addressed the statute of limitations); and (2) concluding that the court did not have jurisdiction over Salas's claims based on 
6 No transcript was provided to this court. 
7 III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
her failure to file an MICP inquiry against the Appellees (Salas 
challenges COLS I and J, which addressed the HRS § 671-12(a) prerequisites to filing suit). 
The appellate court reviews "the circuit court's grant 
or denial of summary judgment 
de novo." Querubin v. Thronas, 107 
Hawai# i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005) (citation omitted). 
Statutory interpretation is reviewed de novo  by [the
appellate] court. When construing a statute, our foremost
obligation is to ascertain and give effect to the intentionof the legislature, which is to be obtained primarily fromthe language contained in the statute itself. Moreover, itis a cardinal rule of statutory interpretation that, wherethe terms of a statute are plain, unambiguous and explicit,we are not at liberty to look beyond that language for adifferent meaning. Instead, our sole duty is to give effectto the statute's plain and obvious meaning. 
Bhakta v. Cnty. of Maui, 109 Hawai# i 198, 208, 124 P.3d 943, 953 
(2005) (citations, internal quotation marks, and original 
brackets omitted). 
"Whether a court possesses subject matter jurisdiction 
is a question of law reviewable de novo." State v. Milne, 149 
Hawai# i 329, 334, 489 P.3d 433, 438 (2021) (quoting Kakinami v. 
Kakinami, 127 Hawai# i 126, 136, 276 P.3d 695, 705 (2012)). 
IV. DISCUSSION A. The Statute of Limitations Salas argues that this action is not time-barred 
because any statute of limitations was tolled when she submitted the Inquiry to the MICP. We hold that the record does not 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
support the Circuit Court's conclusion that Salas's medical-tort 
claims are barred by HRS § 657-7.3. 
HRS § 657-7.3 bars any action for medical torts that is 
brought more than two years after the plaintiff discovers or should have discovered the injury. 
HRS § 671-12(a) requires any 
person "having concerns regarding the existence of a medical tort" to submit an inquiry to MICP before filing suit. HRS § 671-18 provides that the filing of an inquiry "shall toll any applicable statute of limitations" until sixty days after the termination of the MICP proceedings. (Emphasis added). 
The Circuit Court found and concluded that the statute 
of limitations began to run, at the latest, on May 6, 2016. Salas does not argue that the statute accrued at a later date. It is undisputed that if the filing of the Inquiry did not toll the running of the two-year period, the January 3, 2019 Complaint was untimely. However, pursuant to HRS § 671-18, the statute of limitations remained tolled for sixty days after the November 5, 2018 MICP termination date, if the tolling provision was triggered. 
The Circuit Court concluded that the tolling provision 
was not applicable to Salas's claims against Appellees because she did not name Appellees as parties to the MICP Inquiry. Appellees argue, and the Circuit Court essentially concluded, that HRS § 671-12(a) mandates that all parties be specifically 
9  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
named in an inquiry filed with the MICP before a lawsuit can be 
filed against them. 
It is undisputed that HRS § 671-12(a) requires the 
submission of an inquiry to the MICP, when a person has concerns 
regarding the existence of a medical tort, and that the inquiry must be submitted before a lawsuit can be filed based on the circumstances that are the subject of the inquiry. Although satisfaction of this requirement is jurisdictional, the Hawai# i 
Supreme Court has held that the requirement is intended to be relatively simple, informal, and undemanding. Estate of Frey v. 
Mastroianni, 146 Hawai# i 540, 544-45, 556, 463 P.3d 1197, 1200-
01, 1213 (2020). The supreme court observed, even before the HRS chapter 671 filing requirements were softened in 2012, that they were not intended as a high hurdle: 
The MCCP—now MICP—statute requires a medical tort
claimant to "submit a statement of the claim" [now just an
inquiry] before a suit can be commenced on the claim. HRS § 671-12(a) (1993). The statute sets three simplerequirements for these claim statements [now inquiries]:they must be submitted "in writing," they must "set forthfacts upon which the claim [now inquiry] is based," and theymust "include the names of all parties against whom theclaim [now inquiry] is or may be made who are then known tothe claimant [now person or person's representative]." Id.
These requirements are informal and undemanding, and thehistory of the MCCP process shows that they areintentionally so. 
Id. at 555, 463 P.3d at 1212 (original brackets omitted; 
bracketed language reflects amendments to the requirements of HRS § 671-12(a)).
7 
7 The claims at issue in Estate of Frey stemmed from alleged medical
torts and a death that occurred in 2004. As the MCCP letter at issue was 
filed in 2006, the amendments to HRS chapter 671 codified in Act 296 of 2012
(continued...) 
10 7(...continued)FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The plain language of HRS § 671-12(a) simply does not 
require that the person submitting the inquiry include all 
potential parties or potential defendants in a future law suit. On the contrary, it provides only that the names of the parties known, at the time the inquiry is filed, to the inquiry-filing person or the person's representative, must be included. HRS § 671-12(a) ("Inquiries shall be submitted to the [MICP] in writing and shall include the facts upon which the inquiry is based and the names of all parties against whom the inquiry is or may be made who are then known to the person or the person's representative.") (emphasis added). 
Moreover, as observed by the United States District 
Court for the District of Hawai# i (U.S. District Court): 
The [Hawai #i] legislature did not intend the MICP process to
be used to present actual claims, but rather to permit a
person or the person's representative to seek informationabout medical treatment and adverse consequences from thattreatment. 
In 2012, Hawaii Session Laws Act 296 ("Act 296")
made significant changes to how the panels (then called theMedical Claims Conciliation Panel) functioned, so as to"delet[e] the decision-making function of the panels, andinstead emphasiz[e] the use by panels of conciliation andmediation to resolve matters before them." [Campos v.Marrhey Care Home, LLC, 128 Hawai #i 405, 408 n.5, 289 P.3d
1041, 1044 n.5 (App. 2012)]; see also
 2012 Haw. Sess. Laws
Act 296. Act 296 provided that: 
The legislature finds that many claims now filed withmedical claim conciliation panels tend to function asinquiries rather than actual claims, and patients ortheir families tend to use these proceedings to seekinformation regarding adverse events that theyassociate with medical treatment. . . . The legislature further finds that provisions in theHawaii Revised Statutes relating to medical claimsconciliation should be amended to reflect that many 
were not yet in effect. See Estate of Frey
, 146 Hawai #i at 544-45, 463 P.3d
at 1200-01. 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
filings, particularly by pro se parties, are
inquisitive in nature and are based on a lack ofinformation rather than claims based on substantive analysis or the applicable standard of care.Proceedings with medical claim conciliation panelsshould be conducted in a non-adversarial way andstructured to facilitate the conveying of informationrather than assigning blame. 
2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 296 § 1 (emphases added). And it follows that in this non-adversarial inquiry, a person orperson's representative might seek very basic information,including the names or roles of various treating physicians.A harsh rule that requires naming all potential parties inthe MICP inquiry (or else running the risk of being time-barred later) runs counter to the legislature's finding thatmany persons or person's representatives simply seekinformation through the MICP based on a lack knowledge aboutadverse medical events. In short, it would be inconsistentwith legislative intent to toll the statute of limitationsto specifically named individuals but not others when abasic purpose of the MICP is "to seek information regardingadverse events [associated] with medical treatment." 
Krizek v. Queens Med. Ctr., Civ. No. 18-00293, 2019 WL 3646567, 
*6 (D. Hawai# i Aug. 6, 2019) (footnote omitted). 
We agree with the U.S. District Court's assessment that 
a rule requiring naming of 
all potential parties in the MICP 
inquiry runs counter to the legislature's finding that the MICP process is a means through which a person can get information about an adverse event associated with medical treatment, including the names or roles of treating physicians. 
Here, Salas named Pali Momi as the health care provider 
and/or health care facility in the Inquiry she filed with MICP. This is consistent with the inquisitive nature of the MICP process. She sought care for her abdominal pain at the Pali Momi Emergency Room and she was examined and diagnosed by the health care professionals that were on duty at the time. Pali Momi was clearly known to her and naming Pali Momi was a rational way to 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
initiate an informal inquiry into whether she received less than 
the applicable standard of care. The Circuit Court did not find that Appellees were known to Salas at the time the Inquiry was filed. 
We recognize that failing to name Appellees as parties 
in the MICP process may have undercut the possibility of a global conciliation and mediation, which is a further goal of the MICP process. However, we reject a reading of the statute that would so harshly penalize an inquiring person by, in effect, foreclosing them from seeking relief against a health care provider not known to them at the time an inquiry is filed. While the statute permits a health-care-provider party named in an MICP inquiry to seek a more definite statement of the inquiry (see HRS §671-12(c) (2016)),
8 there is no statutory requirement 
to name additional parties or to otherwise amend an inquiry as such information comes to light during the course of the MICP proceedings. 
Finally, HRS § 671-18 provides that the filing of an 
MICP inquiry "shall toll any applicable statute of limitations." (Emphasis added). HRS § 671-18 does not limit the application of 
8 HRS § 671-12(c) provides, in part: 
(c) If the statement of the inquiry in the notice is
so vague or ambiguous that any party receiving notice of the
inquiry cannot reasonably be required to frame a writtenresponse, the party may submit a written request to thedirector of commerce and consumer affairs for a more definite statement before filing the written response. 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the tolling period to claims against the specific persons or 
entities named in the HRS § 671-12(a) inquiry. 
For these reasons, we conclude that the Circuit Court 
erred when it ruled that the tolling provision in HRS § 671-18 is not applicable to Salas's claims against Appellees because she did not file an MICP inquiry against them and that Salas's claims against Appellees are therefore time-barred by the applicable statute of limitations. 
B. The MICP Inquiry Requirement Salas also challenges the Circuit Court's conclusion 
that, because she failed to file an MICP inquiry against the Appellees themselves, the Circuit Court lacked subject matter jurisdiction over Salas's claims against Appellees notwithstanding her submission of the Inquiry, which did not identify any of the Appellees. 
In addition to the simple and informal requirements set 
forth in HRS § 671-12(a), HRS § 671-16 (2016) states that "[t]he party initiating the inquiry may institute litigation based upon the circumstances of the inquiry in an appropriate court only after [MICP] proceedings were terminated[.]" As noted above, the HRS chapter 671 prerequisites to litigation are jurisdictional. However, as discussed above, the Circuit Court did not find that Appellees were known to Salas at the time the Inquiry was filed or otherwise find that Salas failed to satisfy the informal and undemanding requirements of HRS § 671-12(a). 
Therefore, the 
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit Court erred when it concluded that it lacked subject 
matter jurisdiction due to Salas's failure to file an MICP inquiry specifically naming the Appellees. V. CONCLUSION 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's June 9, 2020 
Judgment is vacated, and this case is remanded for further proceedings. On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate JudgePablo P. Quiban,for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Thomas E. Cook,
Bradford F.K. Bliss, Malia E. Schreck, (Lyons Brandt Cook & Hiramatsu),for Defendants-Appellees. 
15 