NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0001076
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
LAURA LEVI, Petitioner-Appellee,
v.
 
JOSHUA GORDON, Respondent-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(FC-DA NO. 13-1-0195)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Respondent-Appellant Joshua Gordon (Gordon) appeals
 
from the Order of Protection (Protective Order) entered on May 1,
 
2013 in the Family Court of the Second Circuit (family court).1
 
On April 17, 2013, Petitioner-Appellee Laura Levi (Levi) filed an
 ex parte petition for a temporary restraining order (TRO) against
 her ex-boyfriend, Gordon, pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
2
(HRS) Chapter 586. The family court issued a TRO,  and conducted
an evidentiary hearing on May 1, 2013. 
The family court entered
 
the Protective Order which ordered Gordon, inter alia, to refrain
 from contacting or threatening Levi, and from coming within 100
 yards of her residence.
3 On July 22, 2013, the family court
 
1
 The Honorable Douglas J. Sameshima presided, unless otherwise noted.
 
2
 The Honorable Keith E. Tanaka presided.
 
3
 HRS § 586-5.5 (2006) provides in relevant part:
 
§ 586-5.5 Protective order; additional orders.
(a) If, after hearing all relevant evidence, the court finds
that the respondent has failed to show cause why the order

(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
entered its Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (Findings and
 
Conclusions).
 
On appeal, Gordon contends the family court erred by:
 
(1) finding "physical harm which constitutes family violence
 under the definition of HRS § 571-2 [(2006)]" as the domestic
 abuse supporting the Protective Order; (2) determining in
 Conclusion of Law (COL) 2 that "the imminent threat of physical
 harm, bodily injury, or assault" was the domestic abuse
 supporting the Protective Order; (3) finding that the basis for
 the Protective Order was physical harm, but then relying on a
 determination of "imminent threat of physical harm" in its COL 2;
 (4) concluding in COL 2 that there was a past act of domestic
 abuse; (5) concluding in COL 3 that a protective order was
 necessary to prevent a recurrence of domestic abuse; (6) relying
 partially on text messages sent by Gordon to John Hurley (Hurley)
 in determining there was domestic abuse of Levi;
 (7) misconstruing Hurley's testimony in its finding of fact (FOF)
 11 regarding someone being at Levi's gate area; (8) failing to
 act fairly in violation of the Revised Code of Judicial Conduct
 Rule 2.2 by not addressing that Gordon must live at his auto
 detailing shop due to the Protective Order; (9) failing to act
 fairly and impartially, and showing bias in favor of Levi; and
 (10) issuing the Protective Order.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs

 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Gordon's
 points on appeal as follows and affirm.
Points of error 1-7 and 10. The family court's
 
determination that there was a threat of imminent physical harm,
 bodily injury or assault is supported by substantial evidence in
 
3(...continued)
should not be continued and that a protective order is

necessary to prevent domestic abuse or a recurrence of
abuse, the court may order that a protective order be issued
for a further fixed reasonable period as the court deems
appropriate.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the record, and its conclusion that there was past domestic abuse
 
was therefore correct.
 
The family court's FOFs are reviewed on appeal under the
"clearly erroneous" standard. . . .
 
On the other hand, the family court's COLs are reviewed on
appeal de novo, under the right/wrong standard. . . .
 
[T]he question on appeal is whether the record contains
"substantial evidence" supporting the family court's
determinations, and appellate review is thereby limited to
assessing whether those determinations are supported by
"credible evidence of sufficient quality and probative
value." In this regard, the testimony of a single witness,
if found by the trier of fact to have been credible, will
suffice.
 
In re Doe, 95 Hawai 'i 183, 190, 196-97, 20 P.3d 616, 623, 629-30 
(2001) (citations omitted). 
"Domestic abuse" is defined, in part, as "[p]hysical
 
harm, bodily injury, assault, or the threat of imminent physical
 
harm, bodily injury, or assault, extreme psychological abuse or
 malicious property damage between family or household members[.]"
 HRS § 586-1 (2006) (emphasis added).
4 In its COL 2, the family
 
court determined that the past act of domestic abuse forming the
 basis of the Protective Order was "the imminent threat of
 physical harm, bodily injury or assault." The record supports
 this conclusion.
5
 
The evidence shows that Levi and Gordon dated for
 
several years, and that Gordon moved out of Levi's home when they
 broke up. Gordon then moved into a house across the street from
 Levi. In her initial TRO petition, filed on April 17, 2013, Levi
 asserted two recent incidents of domestic abuse: 
[(1)] 4/16/2013 - I was walking my dog last night right
outside of my residence. [Gordon] came up on his motorcycle
to turn into the driveway of the house he is staying (right
across the street). He sees me and says "I will fuck you up
sooner than later." 
4
 Levi and Gordon fall within the definition of a "family or household
member" under HRS § 586-1, which includes persons "formerly residing in the
same dwelling unit, and persons who have or have had a dating relationship."
5
 Gordon properly notes that the family court's COL 2 slightly
misstates the relevant part of the definition for domestic abuse by misplacing
the word "imminent" before the word "threat." However, the family court's
ruling is otherwise clear from its Findings and Conclusions, and we see no
error in this regard.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Prior to the police arriving last night, my friend, Johnny,
(whom I've asked to please come stay with me) and a
neighbor, Donna, we were in the backyard waiting for the
police to arrive and he was coming into my side gate, down
the pathway to the backyard. Johnny said, "Hey man, what
are you doing?" He ran back across the street to the house
he is staying when police came. Police went and spoke to him
and said he was obviously intoxicated and suggested I file a
TRO.
 
[(2)] 2/16/2013 - I received a threatening e-mail from
[Gordon] and called the police. . . . 
. . . .
 The e-mail reads as [follows]: "The shit is about to begin.
We should not speak to each other at all forever" etc. and
ended with "This is not over. You should reconsider before I
 take steps I'm intending."
 
She also asserted that since Gordon had moved across the street:
 
"I am living in fear of running into him on a daily basis. I feel
 as though I am being stalked. I have to live with all windows
 closed and doors locked."
 
At the May 1, 2013 evidentiary hearing, the family
 
court heard testimony from Levi, Gordon, and Hurley and also
 received into evidence certain documents, including three email
 exchanges between Levi and Gordon.
6 Levi testified inter alia
 
about Gordon's behavior, stating that although he never hit her,
 his anger was "extremely, extremely frightening." Levi testified
 that, with Gordon living across the street, she has a general
 sense of anxiety and fear and feels uncomfortable going to her
 mailbox and walking her dog.
 
Regarding the April 16, 2013 motorcycle incident, Levi
 
testified that she was walking her dog alone at night when Gordon
 came up to her on his motorcycle and said "I will fuck you up
 sooner than later." Hurley testified that right after Gordon
 accosted Levi on the street, Levi came into the house "shaking
 and sweating" and they immediately called the police. Levi and
 Hurley testified that, while waiting for the police to arrive,
 they heard the gate on the side of Levi's residence open. Hurley
 testified he could not exactly say if it was Gordon, it was dark,
 
6
 Hurley also read two text messages from Gordon out loud during the
hearing that are contained in the hearing transcript.
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
but "there was a body" and Hurley yelled out "hey, what do you
 
want?" Hurley noted that Gordon lived across the street and by
 the time Hurley got to the gate, Hurley could see someone going
 up the driveway of Gordon's house, and no one else was around.
7
 
Gordon, in turn, claimed he was talking to himself out loud when
 he made a remark on April 16, 2013 while riding his motorcycle up
 
8
the street,  and that no one else was around.  However, the family court specifically found that Gordon's account of the incident was not credible and that the testimony of Levi and Hurley was credible. "It is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai
'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 
355, 360 (2006) (citation and quotation marks omitted). 
Gordon's verbal threat to Levi on April 16, 2013
 
occurred the same day that he had earlier sent threatening text
 messages to Hurley.
9 Gordon testified he had learned that
 
morning that Hurley, who he considered a good friend, was now in
 a relationship with Levi and was moving in with her. Gordon
 admitted that he sent the texts to Hurley because he was furious
 at Hurley's betrayal. We reject Gordon's argument that the
 family court should not have relied on the text messages he sent
 to Hurley. In FOF 17, the family court found that the text
 messages to Hurley was evidence that Gordon was angry with Levi
 and that she was reasonably frightened of him. Gordon does not
 
7
 Gordon contends that there is a significant difference between
Hurley's testimony and the family court's FOF 11. Our review of the record
 
establishes that the finding is supported by Hurley's testimony, and thus
Gordon's argument is without merit.
8
 Gordon claims that he did not see anyone, but that he saw Hurley's
van and said "sooner or later you're going to fuck up." 
9
 The first text message sent from Gordon to Hurley on April 16, 2013
read: "You're a fucking piece of shit and I will not let up on this. Stay out
of my fucking way. Traitorist self-serving fucking punk. That's you. Come
 near me . . . ."
 
The second text message sent from Gordon to Hurley at 8:10 p.m. on that
same day read: "You're fucking lucky I don't come over there and drag your
fucking ass into the fucking street and give you what you deserve. No
 threats, promises."
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
challenge FOF 17 and we are thus bound by it. See In re Doe, 99 
Hawai'i 522, 538, 57 P.3d 447, 463 (2002). Moreover, in the 
context of this case, the text messages sent by Gordon to Hurley 
are relevant to show that Gordon's verbal remarks to Levi on the same date were intended as a threat of physical harm. 
As for the February 16, 2013 email, Gordon argues that
 
when he wrote "[t]he shit is about to begin[,]" both he and Levi
 understood that to mean a lawsuit for compensation due him, and
 that it was not meant as a threat of physical harm. During the
 hearing, the family court noted that "[r]egardless of what
 [Gordon] thinks it's about, petitioner took it in the context
 that she was being threatened." Moreover, again, the credibility
 of the parties is within the province of the family court.
 
Finally, although we agree with Gordon that in the 
Protective Order the family court erred in finding "physical harm which constitutes family violence under the definition of HRS § 571-2," the family court ultimately relied on the proper standard under HRS Chapter 586 in its Findings and Conclusions. Thus, any error was harmless. Rule 61 of the Hawai
'i Family 
Court Rules states: 
Rule 61 Harmless Error. No error in either the admission or
 
the exclusion of evidence and no error or defect in any
ruling or order or in anything done or omitted by the court
or by any of the parties is ground for granting a new trial
or for setting aside a verdict or for vacating, modifying,
or otherwise disturbing a judgment or order, unless refusal
to take such action appears to the court inconsistent with
substantial justice. The court at every stage of the
proceeding must disregard any error or defect in the
proceeding that does not affect the substantial rights of
the parties.
 
(Emphasis added.) In the May 1, 2013 Protective Order, the
 
family court made a finding of physical harm and appears to have
 relied on standards set forth in HRS § 571-2 under the definition
 of "family violence." However, the relevant definition of
 "domestic abuse" under HRS § 586-1 includes "the threat of
 imminent physical harm, bodily injury, or assault[.]" (Emphasis
 added.) The family court cited the wrong statute and erroneously
 made a finding of physical harm in the initial order, but then
 corrected this error in its subsequent Findings and Conclusions
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by relying on the relevant portion of the definition for 
"domestic abuse" in HRS § 586-1. Because there does not appear to be substantial prejudice to Gordon, see In re Doe, 100 Hawai
'i 
335, 343, 60 P.3d 285, 293 (2002), the family court's error was harmless.
 In sum, we conclude there was substantial evidence
 
that Gordon's conduct constituted an act of domestic abuse. The
 family court's conclusion that a protective order was necessary
 to prevent future acts of domestic abuse was supported by its
 findings, and therefore was not in error.
Points of error 8 and 9. Based on our review of the
 
record, we conclude that Gordon's arguments that the family court
 acted unfairly or showed bias in favor of Levi are without merit. 
Levi appeared at the evidentiary hearing pro se and the
 
commentary to Rule 2.2 of the Revised Code of Judicial Conduct
 clearly states that "[it] is not a violation of this Rule for a
 judge to make reasonable accommodations to ensure pro se
 litigants the opportunity to have their matters fairly heard." 
Rule 2.2 cmt. [4]. The family court asked certain questions, but
 did not do so in an unfair or biased manner.
 
As to Gordon's argument that the family court
 
terminated Gordon's time to present evidence before he had the
 opportunity to call a witness, this argument is waived because he
 did not object when the family court ended the testimony and
 announced it was ready to rule. Indeed, Gordon's counsel only
 made brief mention during the evidentiary hearing that Gordon had
 a witness to testify. Moreover, Gordon's counsel only asserted
 that the witness could speak to Gordon's character, and there is
 no indication that the witness could provide evidence about the
 relevant incidents.
 
Lastly, Gordon contends that the 100-yard restriction
 
in the Protective Order precludes him from returning to his
 current residence (across the street from Levi) and that the
 family court should have at least addressed his housing
 situation. Gordon does not cite any legal authority indicating
 that the family court's 100-yard restriction was in error, and we
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclude the family court's ruling was not an abuse of its 
discretion and was not biased. HRS § 586-5.5(a) provides that a protective order may "include all orders stated in the temporary restraining order and may provide for further relief as the court deems necessary to prevent domestic abuse or a recurrence of abuse[.]" (Emphasis added.) See Coyle v. Compton, 85 Hawai
'i 
197, 207, 940 P.2d 404, 414 (App. 1997) (concluding that HRS Chapter 586 does not unreasonably infringe on a person's freedom of movement); Fisher, 111 Hawai
'i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360 
("Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion in making its decisions and those decision will not be set aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion." (citation omitted)). 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order for Protection
 
entered on May 1, 2013 in the Family Court of the Second Circuit
 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, July 28, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Valentina Stewart Watson 
(Law Office of
Valentina Stewart Watson, Inc.)
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
8

 