NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-20-0000689 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
CHANSE HIRATA, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CRIMINAL NO. 1FFC-18-0000756) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
A jury found Defendant-Appellant Chanse Hirata
 guilty 
of Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen 
Years. Hirata appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and 
Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit on 
August 5, 2019.1 For the reasons explained below, we affirm the 
Judgment. 
Hirata was indicted by an O# ahu grand jury on June 29, 
2018. 
He was charged with Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor 
Under the Age of Fourteen Years, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 707-733.6. He pleaded not guilty. 
Trial began on May 9, 2019. The complaining witness 
(
CW) was 11 years old at the time of trial. CW's mother (Mother) 
and Hirata's girlfriend (CW's Aunt) are sisters. CW called 
Hirata "Uncle Makani." Hirata and Aunt lived with Hirata's 
1 The Honorable Catherine H. Remigio presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
parents and brother. Hirata and Aunt began watching CW when CW 
was a baby, while Mother was finishing high school. CW would stay overnight at Hirata's and Aunt's house once a week from the time she was five or six years old until she turned ten. 
CW testified that Hirata began touching her when she 
was around seven years old. Hirata kissed CW and put his tongue in her mouth more than 10 times, on different days. Hirata put his penis in CW's mouth more than 10 times, on different days. Hirata touched CW's breasts with his hands or mouth more than 10 times, on different days. Hirata put his fingers in CW's vagina more than 10 times, on different days. Hirata put his tongue inside CW's vagina more than 10 times, on different days. Hirata put his finger in CW's anus more than 10 times, on different days. Hirata put his tongue in CW's anus more than 10 times, on different days. Hirata put his penis in CW's anus one or two times. Hirata grabbed CW's hands and moved them "up and down" on his penis more than 10 times, on different days. CW described several of the incidents in more detail in response to further questions. 
Hirata testified in his own defense. He denied all of 
CW's allegations. 
On May 16, 2019, the jury found Hirata guilty as 
charged. The Judgment was entered on August 5, 2019. Hirata was sentenced to 20 years in prison with credit for time served. This appeal followed. 
Hirata contends that he was denied a fair trial because 
the deputy prosecuting attorney (DPA) committed misconduct during 
closing argument. Hirata did not object to any part of the 
State's closing or rebuttal arguments. 
Normally, an issue not preserved at trial is deemed to be
waived. But where plain errors were committed andsubstantial rights were affected thereby, the errors may benoticed although they were not brought to the attention ofthe trial court. Accordingly, an alleged error may becorrected on appeal unless it was harmless beyond areasonable doubt. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Salavea, 147 Hawai# i 564, 601, 465 P.3d 1011, 1048 
(2020) (Nakayama, J., dissenting) (cleaned up). 
"A defendant's contention . . . that prosecutorial 
misconduct resulted in the denial of the defendant's right to a 
fair trial is a question of constitutional law, which we review de novo." Salavea, 147 Hawai# i at 575, 465 P.3d at 1022 
(citation omitted). 
"When reviewing allegations of prosecutorial 
misconduct, the following factors are considered: (1) the nature of the conduct; (2) the promptness of a curative instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant." Id.
 at 581, 465 P.3d at 1028 (citation omitted). 
1. Nature of the conduct. 
Hirata argues that the DPA improperly offered her 
personal opinions about the witnesses' credibility. It is "well-established under Hawai# i case law that prosecutors are 
bound to refrain from expressing their personal views as to a defendant's guilt or the credibility of witnesses." Salavea, 147 
Hawai# i at 582, 465 P.3d at 1029 (quoting State v. Basham, 132 
Hawai# i 97, 115, 319 P.3d 1105, 1123 (2014)) (additional 
citations omitted). 
"Prosecutors may, however, cite to specific 
facts or evidence
 indicating the lack of trustworthiness of the 
witness or defendant when discussing a witness or defendant's testimony during summation." Id. (underscoring added) (citing 
State v. Walsh, 125 Hawai# i 271, 295, 260 P.3d 350, 374 (2011) 
("[T]he prosecution is free to refer to the specific inconsistencies and contradictions in a defendant's testimony or with other evidence.") (underscoring added)). 
In closing argument the DPA told the jury: 
Now, at the beginning of this trial I told you you
were not gonna hear about DNA evidence. You weren't gonna
see surveillance videos. You weren't gonna hear fromeyewitnesses because in a case like this, there is [sic]none. But you would hear from the one person that livedthrough it, and at the end of this, it comes down to thatone person, comes down to [CW]. And it also comes down to one question, is [CW] believable? 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Now, the Court gave you the jury instructions that you
all have in front of you, and on page 8, there are [sic] a
list of factors that you can consider when you deliberate todetermine if a witness is credible. So you look at theirdemeanor, their candor, lack of motive, and if what they saymakes sense. 
So when you look at the factors -- and I'll go through
them with you, ladies and gentlemen -- the answer is clearto this question. Yes, [CW] is believable. And because [CW] is believable, it's -- it is the testimony that has aconvincing force upon you that counts, and the testimony ofeven a single witness, if believed, can be sufficient toprove a fact. 
So let's go through the factors of [CW]'s credibility. 
The DPA then argued about specific facts and evidence supporting
the credibility of CW's testimony. She cited testimony by CW, Mother, CW's father, a police officer and police detective who separately interviewed CW, a physician who examined CW, and the clinical psychologist who was qualified as an expert in clinicalpsychology with an expertise in the dynamics of child sexual abuse. The DPA did not simply express her personal view about  
 
CW's credibility. The argument was not improper. Salavea, 147 
Hawai# i at 582, 465 P.3d at 1029. 
However, the DPA also argued: 
Now, in a few moments, the defense is gonna get the
opportunity to speak to you, and you heard from the
defense's witnesses, his mom, his dad, his girlfriend. And you have to gauge their credibility with the same factors aswe discussed earlier that are on page 8 of your juryinstructions. 
Additionally, the defendant also testified, and the
jury instructions say that when a defendant testifies, hiscredibility is to be tested in the same manner as any otherwitness. So we still need to use -- or you still need touse those factors on page 8. 
So is the defense's story believable? We look at the
same factors. They have bias. They have a motive to lie . 
What they said doesn't make sense, and at times, they evencontradicted each other. The defense's story is notbelievable, and this is what their story is.  
They never saw anything, none of them. His mom, his
dad, his girlfriend never saw anything. 
Never. So because
they didn't see anything, it never happened. But we know that this happened at night when they were sleeping. His mom and dad were in a separate room. They didn't even knowwhere [Hirata], [CW], [Aunt] were. They couldn't have seenanything.  
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Emphasis added.) In State v. Austin, 143 Hawai# i 18, 422 P.3d 
18 (2018), a majority of the supreme court held that "a 
prosecutor's assertion that a defendant or witness lied to the jury is improper and should not be permitted." Id. at 56, 422 
P.3d at 56.
2 The DPA's argument about Hirata's parents and his 
girlfriend's (Aunt's) not having the ability to perceive Hirata's alleged misconduct was supported by reference to specific evidence.
3 However, it was improper to argue they had "a motive 
to lie." 
As to Hirata's credibility, the DPA did not refer to 
any specific facts or evidence showing that Hirata had a motive to lie. "A statement about a witness's credibility that is made without reference to the evidence or facts supporting the assertion amounts to an expression of personal opinion." Salavea, 147 Hawai# i at 582, 465 P.3d at 1029 (citation omitted). 
The DPA's argument suggested to the jury that Hirata had a motive to lie simply because he was the defendant. 
"[A] prosecutor 
cannot ask the jury to infer a defendant's lack of credibility based solely on the fact that [they are] a defendant." Basham, 
132 Hawai# i at 117, 319 P.3d at 1125. Prosecutors are prohibited 
from making "generic arguments regarding a defendant's credibility"; that is, "arguments that are uncoupled from evidence showing the defendant has a particular interest in the outcome separate from the generic interest shared by all defendants in criminal cases." Salavea, 147 Hawai# i at 585 n.29, 
465 P.3d at 1032 n.29. 
A categorical "suggestion that defendants 
have no reason to tell the truth impinges upon fundamental principles of our system of justice, including the presumption of 
2 Austin was decided on June 29, 2018, almost one year before the
DPA gave her closing argument in Hirata's case. 
3 The DPA argued, "we know that this happened at night when
[Hirata's parents] were sleeping. His mom and dad were in a separate room.
They didn't even know where [Hirata, CW, and Aunt] were. They couldn't haveseen anything." The DPA also cited the conflict in testimony between Hirataand Aunt (who said "they were [both] there every night") and Hirata's parents(who said Aunt "wasn't there -- around all the time"). 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
innocence, the burden of proof upon the government, the right to 
testify without penalty, and the right to a fair trial with an unbiased jury." Basham, 132 Hawai# i at 116, 319 P.3d at 1124. 
2. Curative instruction. 
No curative instruction was given because Hirata did 
not object to the DPA's argument. 
3. Evidence against the defendant. 
The evidence against Hirata was overwhelming. The 
trial was more than a swearing contest between the complaining witness and the defendant, as was the case in State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai# i 405, 415, 984 P.2d 1231, 1241 (1999) ("There were no 
independent eyewitnesses or conclusive forensic evidence[.] . . . [T]his case was based on the Complainant's version of the events against Rogan's version."). 
In this case, the testimony by CW, 
Mother, CW's father, the police officer and police detective who separately interviewed CW, the physician who examined CW, and the clinical psychologist who testified as an expert in the dynamics of child sexual abuse was consistent and compelling. The witnesses who testified for Hirata (his parents and girlfriend) were subject to impeachment for lack of opportunity to perceive. "Where evidence of guilt is so overwhelming as to outweigh the inflammatory effect of improper comments, [the supreme] court has held the error harmless beyond a reasonable doubt and has declined to vacate the defendant's conviction." Austin, 143 
Hawai# i at 56, 422 P.3d at 56 (Pollock, J., concurring in part) 
(citation omitted). 
Here, the DPA's misconduct was limited and was not 
repeated. Thus, "[g]iven the strength of the evidentiary record in this case . . . there is not a reasonable possibility that the jury would have reached a different verdict in the absence of the prosecutor's improper comment[]. 
The misconduct was therefore 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." See Austin, 143 Hawai# i at 
56-57, 422 P.3d at 56-57 (Pollock, J., concurring in part). 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment entered by the
circuit court on August 5, 2019, is affirmed.  
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 12, 2021. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate JudgeJon N. Ikenaga, Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Brian R. Vincent,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, City and County of Honolulu, for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
7 