 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000683 23-SEP-2024 08:17 AM Dkt. 88 SO 
NO. CAAP-21-0000683  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI  
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF NAURU TOWER,  
Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
DAWN CAROL SMITH,  Defendant-Appellant  
APPEAL FROM THE  CIRCUIT  COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
(CASE  NO. 1CCV-21-0000131)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Wadsworth, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.)  
Self-represented Defendant -Appellant Dawn Carol Smith 
(Smith) appeals from the (1) Final Judgment, entered on June 10, 
2021, (2) Order Granting Plaintiff Association of Apartment 
Owners of Nauru Tower's [ the AOAO ] Motion for Summary Judgment, 
Filed April 7, 2021, (Summary Judgment Order ) entered on June 8, 
2021, and (3) Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Attorneys'   
 
   
 
  
   
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Fees and Costs Filed on June 21, 2021 (Attorneys' Fees Order ) 
entered on November 4, 2021 , all entered by the Circuit Court of 
the First Circuit ( circuit court ). 1 
On appeal, Smith raises four points of error: (1) 
"Erroneous Ruling of Eligibility Issue -Direct Contravention of 
§501-101 Voluntary dealing with registered lands"; (2) "Court 
erred in Granting Attorney's Fees to prevailing party as ruling 
is erroneous"; ( 3) "Court erred in awarding attorney's fees more 
than 90 days after the filing of a post -judgment motion in 
contravention of [Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP)] 
Rule 4(a)(3)"; and (4) "Ex Parte Order Filed with Forged 
Signature Voidable/Sanctionable."2 
Upon careful review of the record and relevant legal 
authorities, and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve 
Smith's points of error as follows: 
(1) Smith contends that the circuit court erred by 
granting the AOAO's motion for summary judgment. The circuit 
court granted summary judgment, concluding as a matter of law 
1 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided. 
2   Various sections of Smith's opening brief, including the 
"statement of points on appeal," fail to comply with  HRAP  Rule 28(b). We 
nevertheless address Smith's contentions of error to the extent discernible, 
in the interest of affording "litigants the opportunity to have their cases 
heard on the merits, where possible." Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 Hawai ʻi 490, 
496, 280 P.3d 88, 94 (2012) (cleaned up).  
2   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Smith was not entitled to continue as a sitting member of 
the AOAO Board because, 
. . . in order to qualify under 514B -107(a) to become a 
board member an individual must be an owner of a unit at 
the Nauru Tower condominium. In this case , [Smith] owned 
unit 1303 by virtue of a warranty deed that transferred 
ownership of that unit to her, and on November 6th, 2020, 
[Smith] transferred her ownership in apartment 1303 to a 
third party. That terminated her ownership in a unit at 
Nauru Tower and therefore she was no longer qualified to 
serve as a board member. 
So this court determines that because [Smith] was no 
longer qualified to sit as a board member after November 
6th, 2020, when her title ceased, that she cannot serve as 
a member of the board.  
"On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is 
reviewed de novo." Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawaiʻi 46, 55, 292 P.3d  
1276, 1285 (2013) (citations omitted). The court applies the 
following standard,  
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A 
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the 
effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential 
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the 
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the non -moving party. In other words, we must 
view all of the evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in 
the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion
.  
Id., at 55-56, 292 P.3d at 1285 -86 (cleaned up) . 
The record reflects that the AOAO satisfied its 
initial burden of production through its declarations and 
attached exhibits, specifically Exhibit F  of the motion for 
summary judgment, which was the deed by which Smith transferred 
3   
 
    
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
title to her Nauru Tower condominium unit to a third party.3 Id. 
at 60, 292 P.3d at 1290 ("a summary judgment movant may satisfy 
his or her initial burden of production by either (1) presenting 
evidence negating an element of the non -movant's claim, or (2) 
demonstrating that the nonmovant will be unable to carry his or 
her burden of proof at trial ."). 
The burden then shifted to Smith, and Smith did not 
meet her burden of establishing that there is a genuine question 
of material fact for trial. The only evidence in the record 
establishes that Smith signed and executed the deed on 
November 6, 2020, and that Smith therefore relinquished her 
ownership of her condominium unit on that day. Smith did not 
provide any legal authority in support of her contention that 
November 16, 2020, the date on which the deed was recorded by 
the Bureau of Conve yances, was the date on which title 
officially transferred. Smith does not provide any evidence to 
3 Regarding Exhibit F, the circuit court noted, 
. . . the deed that is attached to the motion as Exhibit F 
in which [Smith] transferred title to unit 1303 to a third 
party was not recorded until November 16th, 2020. However, 
in looking at the deed itself, page 2, it recites that the 
deed is dated November 6, 2020, and when we look at the 
notary, the grantor, [Smith] executed this document on 
November 6, 2020. 
 . . . . 
The recording date only binds the rest of the world. But 
the parties to the apartment deed are bound when the document is 
fully executed, and it appears to have been fully executed on 
November 6, 2020. 
4   
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
establish a genuine question as to her entitlement to remain a 
member of the AOAO Board after she executed the deed on 
November 6, 2020. 
Smith argues, for the first time on appeal, that the 
circuit court erred by excluding a "Key Statute [Regarding] Land 
Court Ownership," namely Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS)  § 501-101 
(2018), which "codifies the recording date as dispositive of 
ownership." "Legal issues not raised in the trial court are 
ordinarily deemed waived on appeal." Ass'n of Apartment Owners 
of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawaiʻi 97, 107, 58 P.3d 
608, 618 (2002) (citations  omitted). Smith's argument regarding 
the application of HRS § 501-101 is thus waived.  
The circuit court did not err in granting summary 
judgment. 
(2) Smith contends that the circuit court erred in 
granting attorney s' fees to the AOAO because, inter alia , the 
circuit court lacked jurisdiction to enter the Attorney s' Fees 
Order.4 We conclude that Smith's contention has merit. 
Smith correctly notes that the circuit court entered 
its Attorney s' Fees Order more than 90 days after the AOAO filed 
its June 21, 2021 Motion for Attorney s' Fees and Costs. "Per 
HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) an order entered after 90 days 'shall be a 
4 We resolve Smith's second and third points of error, relating to 
attorneys ' fees, in section (2) herein. 
5   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
nullity.'" Cole v. City and Cnty.  of Honolulu, 154 Hawaiʻi  28,  
29,  543 P.3d 460, 461  (2024). HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) provides, in 
pertinent part, that  
The presiding court or agency in which [a post -judgment 
motion for, inter alia , attorney's fees] was filed shall 
dispose of any such post -judgment motion by entering an 
order upon the record within 90 days after the date the 
motion was filed. If the court or agency fails to enter an 
order on the record, then, within 5 days after th e 90th 
day, the clerk of the relevant court or agency shall notify 
the parties that, by operation of this Rule, the post -
judgment motion is denied and that any orders entered 
thereafter shall be a nullity. 
The Hawaiʻi Supreme Court has recognized that the language of 
these clauses is "plain," and "requires the court to enter [a] 
post-judgment order within 90 days after the party files the 
motion." Cole, 154 Hawaiʻi at 31, 543 P.3d at 463. 
Here, the record reflects that the AOAO's motion was 
deemed denied because the circuit court did not enter its 
Attorney s' Fees Order within 90 days of the AOAO's post -judgment 
fees motion, and the untimely filed Attorney s' Fees Order was 
therefore a "nullity." We vacate the circuit court's award of 
attorney s' fees.5 
(3) From what we are able to discern, Smith appears to 
contend that the Summary Judgment Order should be "voided, 
invalidated and vacated" because the circuit court stamped 
5   We note that, even though the circuit court's Attorneys'  Fees 
Order was a nullity, Smith's appeal was nevertheless timely filed. Although 
"[c]ourts have no power to rule on a post -judgment motion after the 90 -day 
period[,]" "[t]he court's belated action . . . provides notice regarding the 
time to appeal[,]" and starts the appeal clock. Cole, 154 Hawai‛ i at 32, 543 
P.3d at 464.  
6   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Please Note Changes," and incorporated corresponding changes 
into that order, after she had approved it as to form. The 
record reflects Smith " approved as to form" the proposed Summary 
Judgment Order that was submitted to the circuit court on 
May 21, 2021. Smith contends that the subsequent addition of 
the "Please Note Changes" stamp "would appear to mean that [the 
circuit court] wanted all parties to be aware of said changes" 
and "may not have veered from the original Proposed Order, had 
[the circuit co urt] not been made to believe that [Smith] had 
seen it and signed it." 
The circuit court has discretion to revise an order, 
such that the order is consistent with its decision. See Rules 
of the Circuit Courts of the State of Hawaiʻi Rule 23( d) ("If a 
proposed judgment, decree, or order is consistent with the 
verdict of the jury or the decision of the court, the court 
shall cause the judgment, decree, or order to be entered 
forthwith."). A circuit court's modification of a proposed 
order that has been " approved as to form" does not void or 
invalidate the order, nor does it re nder the signature of the 
person who " approved as to form" a "forgery." 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the circuit 
court's Order Granting Plaintiff Association of Apartment Owners 
of Nauru Tower's Motion for Summary Judgment and Final Judgment . 
We further vacate the Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for 
7   
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Attorneys' Fees and Costs , and remand for further proceedings 
consistent with this summary disposition order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, September 23, 2024 . 
On the briefs:  /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth,  
 Presiding Judge  
Dawn Smith,   
Self-represented  /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen,  
Defendant-Appellant.  Associate Judge  
  
Sharon Paris,  /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry,  
for Plaintiff-Appellee.   Associate Judge 
8 