NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-13-0000045
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
McNEIL A. VALENCIA, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-1576)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant McNeil A. Valencia (Valencia) with attempted 
second-degree murder. Valencia and the complaining witness, Patrick Domingo (Domingo), were friends. The State's theory of the case was that Valencia became angry and attacked Domingo with a machete after Domingo publically accused Valencia of stealing or selling Domingo's toolbox.
1 Domingo sustained significant 
lacerations to the right side of his face, left ear, left collar bone, and right palm. Valencia's theory was that he acted in self-defense after Domingo attacked and cut him with a broken beer bottle. 
The charged incident occurred during a barbecue held at
 
the home of Romeo Ordonez (Romeo). Romeo, Domingo, and others
 present at the barbecue, including several of those present who
 
1Domingo believed that Valencia had been involved in the theft or sale
of Domingo's toolbox because Domingo saw a third-party with his toolbox and
the third-party said that Valencia had sold the toolbox to him. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
testified at trial, were friends with Valencia. Except for
 
Valencia, all the eye-witnesses to the incident called at trial
 testified that Valencia initiated the assault, that Domingo did
 not possess any weapon, and that Valencia swung at and struck
 Domingo multiple times with a machete. None of these eye­witnesses supported Valencia's testimony that Domingo attacked
 and cut him with a broken beer bottle. In addition, no broken
 glass was observed by these eye-witnesses or by the police who
 arrived at the scene, Valencia did not complain of injuries at
 the time of his arrest, and Valencia's arrest photograph did not
 appear to show any tear in or blood on his shirt or clothing.
 
During the trial, the Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
 
(DPA), without objection, asked two witnesses whether they had
 ever observed Domingo to be violent or aggressive. Both
 witnesses answered no. At the completion of trial, the jury
 found Valencia guilty of the lesser included offense of first-
degree assault. The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 
2
Court) sentenced Valencia to ten years of imprisonment, and it
filed its Judgement on January 15, 2013. 
On appeal, Valencia raises only one point of error. 
Valencia argues that his first-degree assault conviction must be
 vacated because his trial counsel provided ineffective assistance
 by failing to object to the DPA's questions regarding Domingo's
 non-violent or non-aggressive character. 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment. 
Based on the
 
other evidence presented of Valencia's guilt at trial, we
 conclude that the brief testimony relating to Domingo's non­violent or non-aggressive character did not affect the outcome of
 this case. Valencia failed to meet his burden of showing that
 the alleged error or omission of his trial counsel resulted in
 the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a meritorious
 defense. We therefore hold that Valencia failed to demonstrate 
2The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
his entitlement to relief on his ineffective assistance of
 
counsel claim.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
Romeo Ordonez was a friend and former neighbor of
 
Valencia. Romeo had known Valencia for about ten years, and they
 were neighbors when they both lived on Colburn Street. Romeo was
 a car stereo installer and also worked as a DJ at weddings and
 parties. Valencia sometimes helped Romeo DJ at parties.
 
Romeo was also friends with Domingo, whose aunt lived
 
on Colburn Street. Romeo had known Domingo for about ten years, 
and they first met when Domingo would come down to Colburn Street
 and "cruise with everybody." Romeo, Valencia, and Domingo all
 knew each other from Colburn Street, they were "all good
 friends," and they began "cruising" together after meeting on
 Colburn Street.
 
At the time relevant to this case, Romeo was living 
with his parents on 
'Eluwene Street. Valencia also at some point 
in time lived on 'Eluwene Street, and while living there, he 
occasionally hung out with Romeo. Romeo would often invite people over to his 
'Eluwene Street house for barbeques, which he 
would sometimes hold twice a week. 
In the evening on October 26, 2011, Romeo held a
 
barbecue at his house. Although Romeo had invited Valencia and
 Valencia had attended barbeques at Romeo's house on prior
 occasions, Valencia was not among the people invited to this
 particular barbecue. Among the people present were Romeo's
 cousin, Randall Ordonez, Jr. (Randall), Domingo, Domingo's
 girlfriend, Mary Ann Urbano (Mary Ann), Mary Ann's cousin, Dennis
 Urbano (Dennis), and Romeo's co-worker, Kevin Arucan (Arucan).
 
The barbecue began at about 6:30 p.m. At about 11:00
 
p.m., Valencia unexpectedly pulled up in front of Romeo's house
 driving a black Nissan truck. Romeo testified that Valencia
 stopped in the middle of the road, called Romeo over, and showed
 him a text on Valencia's phone. Valencia then proceeded to park
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
his truck parallel to Mary Ann's car, a white Camry. In the
 
process, he almost hit Randall's car. When Valencia finished
 parking, there was a short distance, which Romeo estimated to be
 about four feet, between Valencia's truck and Mary Ann's car.
 
According to Romeo, Valencia exited his truck with a
 
beer bottle in his hand. Domingo got up and asked Valencia,
 "Where's my toolbox?" Valencia responded that he did not know. 
Valencia, who was standing between his truck and the white Camry,
 then called Domingo to come over. Domingo, without anything in
 his hands, went over to Valencia. Romeo heard Valencia say, "You
 think you like act bad," and then Romeo saw Valencia bring out a
 machete and start swinging at Domingo.
 
Romeo testified that Valencia swung the machete at
 
Domingo four or five times. Valencia hit Domingo with the first
 swing, which struck Domingo on the right side of his face and
 caused Domingo to drop to the ground. Valencia kept swinging the
 machete when Domingo was on the ground. The additional swings
 included those striking Domingo on the left side of his shoulder,
 striking Domingo on the ear, and missing Domingo and hitting the
 road, which left a mark on the roadway. Domingo crawled away
 from Valencia and ran into Romeo's house. Romeo's father came
 out of the house and told Valencia, "Enough already, go home[.]" 
Valencia then went back to his truck and drove away.
 
Romeo did not see any broken glass in the driveway in
 
front of his house or in the area where Mary Ann's car was
 parked.
 
II.
 
Randall, who was 28 at the time of trial, testified
 
that he had known Valencia for thirteen years and considered
 Valencia to be "a good friend." Before the incident on October
 26, 2011, Randall used to hang out with Valencia, had invited
 Valencia over to his house for barbecues, and had no problems
 with Valencia. Randall had known Domingo for about two years and
 was friends with Domingo.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Randall testified that when Valencia arrived at Romeo's
 
barbecue at about 11:00 p.m., Randall took a picture of Valencia
 
because he had not seen Valencia for a while. Randall knew a lot
 of people who knew Valencia and wanted to post a picture of his
 friend Valencia on his Facebook page. Randall greeted Valencia,
 but Valencia did not reply and just ignored Randall. To Randall,
 Valencia "looked like he was not all there" because normally
 Valencia would greet Randall.
 
According to Randall, Domingo asked Valencia, "Where's
 
my tools?" Valencia said he did not know, and Domongo said,
 "Don't lie, I know you know where my tools are. I'll call the
 guy that you sold the tools to. You know, just tell me the
 truth." Valencia responded, "You want to act bad in front of
 everybody, huh?"
 
Randall testified that Valencia then pulled out a
 
weapon. Randall stated:
 
At first I didn't know what it was. Then he swung
down towards [Domingo], and [Domingo] tried to take it away
from him the first time and failed doing so. So [Domingo]
fell down to the floor, and then while on the floor,
[Valencia] brought it up again, swinged [sic] it back down,
but missed. The second shot missed. It caused a clang on
the floor, a spark, and that's when I realized that that's
not just a stick that he was trying to hit him with, it was
a machete, because then I looked clearly at the weapon. I
 was like, Oh, my God, it's a machete.
 
Then he went back up again, struck him for the third
and fourth time, actually got him.
 
Domingo crawled away from Valencia and went into the house.
 
Randall testified that Domingo was not armed in any way
 
with a weapon when Valencia swung the machete at Domingo. 
Romeo's father told Valencia to leave and Valencia got into his
 truck and drove away.
 
III.
 
On direct examination in the State's case-in-chief, the
 
DPA asked Romeo and Randall whether they had observed Domingo to
 be violent or aggressive. Valencia's counsel did not object to
 the DPA's questions or the answers given by Romeo and Randall.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
With respect to Romeo, the DPA elicited the following
 
testimony:
 
Q. Okay. You've known [Domingo] for about ten years?
 
A. Yes, sir.
 
Q. In those ten years have you ever seen [Domingo] to
be physically aggressive towards anyone?
 
A. No.
 
Q. Have you ever seen [Domingo] to be violent towards
anyone?
 
A. No.
 
With respect to Randall, the DPA elicited the following
 
testimony.
 
Q. . . . [H]ow long have you known [Domingo]?
 
A. Known [Domingo] almost two years now.
 
Q. So you've known [Valencia] much longer than you've
known [Domingo]; right?
 
A. Yes, sir.
 
Q. In the two years that you've known of [Domingo],
have you ever seen him to be violent?
 
A. No, sir.
 
Q. What about aggressive?
 
A. No.
 
On cross-examination of Randall, Valencia's counsel
 
elicited Randall's opinion that Valencia was not violent:
 
Q. Do you think [Valencia] is a violent kind of guy?
 
A. No, honestly I don't think so.
 
Q. Why is that?
 
A. Since I've known him, he's always been happy-go­
lucky. He's always -- he just never seemed to me to be
violent.
 
IV.
 
Domingo testified that he had known Valencia for over
 
ten years, that he knew Valencia from Colburn Street where his
 
aunt used to live, and that he was thirteen years old when he
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
first met Valencia. Valencia was part of Domingo's core group of
 
friends, and Domingo would see Valencia about once a month.
 
At the time of trial, Domingo was 24 years old. He
 
worked as a laborer for the Laborer's Union and was required to
 have his own tools. According to Domingo, prior to the incident,
 he sold his truck to "Ronald" who asked if he could borrow
 Domingo's toolbox. Domingo allowed Ronald to borrow his toolbox,
 but Ronald never returned the toolbox. Domingo later saw his
 toolbox in the possession of a person named "Boy," who was
 Domingo's friend. Domingo asked Boy how he got the toolbox, and
 Boy said that Valencia sold it to him.
 
According to Domingo, when Valencia arrived at Romeo's
 
house, Valencia parked his truck and "came down" with a beer. 
Valencia was giggling when he greeted Domingo and asked, "Oh, how
 you been [?]" Domingo asked Valencia whether he had sold
 Domingo's toolbox, and Valencia said no. Valencia then went 
back to his truck and called Domingo to come over. Domingo
 thought Valencia was going to show him something because Valencia
 had just returned from the Philippines. Domingo placed a beer
 bottle he had been holding on the trunk of Mary Ann's car and
 walked over to Valencia. Domingo did not have anything in his
 hands as he approached Valencia, and Domingo denied smashing a
 beer bottle at any time.
 
When Domingo got close, Valencia pulled out what
 
Domingo described as a "butcher knife" and swung it at Domingo,
 cutting the right side of his face. Domingo recalled being
 struck three additional times by Valencia, while Domingo was on
 the ground. The additional blows struck Domingo on his left ear,
 his collar bone, and on his right hand as he tried to block the
 knife. Valencia stopped "chopping" at Domingo when someone threw
 a bottle, which distracted Valencia and allowed Domingo to run to
 the house. At trial, Domingo displayed to the jury the scars he
 sustained to his face, left ear, left chest, and right hand.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
V.
 
Domingo's girlfriend, Mary Ann, testified that she knew
 
Valencia as "[her] boyfriend's friend" and had known Valencia for
 
seven years. Mary Ann testified that Domingo did not have any
 weapon in his hands when Valencia brought out a knife and started
 "chopping [Domingo]." Domingo also had not threatened Valencia
 or challenged him to a fight before Valencia's attack. Mary Ann
 stated that after the assault, she observed that Domingo's "left
 ear was half off," his left collar bone was open, and he was
 covering the right side of his face with a t-shirt because he
 could not stop the blood.
 
VI.
 
Dr. Fredrick Yost, M.D., a trauma surgeon, testified
 
that he treated Domingo after Domingo was taken by ambulance to
 the emergency room at Queen's Medical Center. Dr. Yost observed
 lacerations to Domingo's right face, left ear, left chest, and
 right hand. According to Dr. Yost, the laceration to Domingo's
 face was about 8 inches long, penetrated to the muscle layers,
 and constituted a major laceration. Dr. Yost indicated that the
 scar to Domingo's face would result in permanent disfigurement. 
Domingo's left ear was severed down to the cartilage, which left
 it "kind of flopping." The laceration to Domingo's left chest in
 the area of the left clavicle was about two inches long. It
 penetrated down to the bone and caused a little chip in the bone. 
The laceration to Domingo's right hand went down through the
 muscles.
 
VII.
 
Officer Sheldon Watts (Officer Watts) was dispatched to 
Romeo's residence on 
'Eluwene Street at approximately 11:07 p.m. 
on October 26, 2011. Officer Watts arrived at the scene at about 11:10 p.m. Officer Watts testified that Domingo was bleeding
 profusely and that a group of six to eight people at the scene
 were "all hysterical." Domingo gave Officer Watts Valencia's
 name and described the truck he was driving. Vehicle
 registration checks revealed that Valencia had a black Nissan
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Frontier pickup truck registered to him and also disclosed the
 
truck's license plate number.
 
On October 26, 2011, at about 11:10 p.m., Officer
 
Kimberly Chaney (Officer Chaney) while on duty received an APB
 (all points bulletin) for Valencia's truck. A short time later,
 she saw Valencia's truck drive past her location. Officer Chaney
 activated her blue light and the truck stopped. However, as
 Officer Chaney got out of her vehicle and approached the truck,
 the truck "took off." Officer Chaney pursued the truck and found
 it abandoned in the parking lot of an apartment complex. Officer
 Chaney's beat partner, Officer Terrance Hibbert (Officer
 Hibbert), arrived at the scene, and they began searching for the
 truck's driver. 
Officer Hibbert, who was wearing his police uniform,
 
saw Valencia. Officer Hibbert identified himself as a police
 officer and told Valencia to stop. Valenicia did not comply, but
 began walking in the other direction. Officer Hibbert grabbed
 Valencia and placed him on the ground. Officer Hibbert attempted
 to handcuff Valencia, who was not compliant. Eventually, Officer
 Hibbert, with the assistance of Officer Chaney, was able to
 handcuff Valencia.
 
Valencia was placed under arrest. Officer Hibbert
 
testified that he did not see any injuries to Valencia and that
 Valencia did not complain of any injuries or ask for any medical
 treatment. Officer Chaney testified that she did not observe any
 injuries to Valencia. At the police station, Officer Chaney
 administered a breath alcohol test to Valencia. The test results
 revealed that Valencia's breath was 0.115 grams of alcohol per
 210 liters of breath, which exceeded the legal limit of .08 for
 driving.
 
A photograph taken of Valencia at the police station
 
after his arrest was introduced at trial. The photograph did not
 appear to show any blood stains or a rip on Valencia's shirt or
 clothing. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A machete was recovered from Valencia's truck and was
 
introduced at trial. A photograph of the machete next to a ruler
 
was also introduced which showed that the machete had a handle
 approximately six inches long and a blade approximately twelve
 inches long. The tip of the machete was bent.
 
VIII.
 
Valencia called Dennis Urbano (Dennis) and Kevin Arucan
 
(Arucan), who were both present at the October 26, 2011,
 barbecue, as witnesses in the defense case. Dennis testified
 that he was twenty-two years old, that he had known Valencia for
 at least ten years from "Dole Middle School days," and that prior
 to October 26, 2011, he considered Valencia to be a friend. 
According to Dennis, Valencia pulled out a machete and swung it
 at Domingo numerous times. Domingo appeared dazed and fell to
 the ground, but Valencia "kept on bashing" Domingo. Dennis saw
 Valencia hit Domingo with the machete in the face, ear, hand, and
 collarbone. Dennis testified that "[Domingo] was all bloody. At
 that point I wanted to cry because he was near death. He was all
 bloody man[.]"
 
Dennis testified that in an attempt to stop Valencia's
 
attack on Domingo, Dennis threw a beer bottle which hit Valencia
 in the back. Dennis then tried to attract Valencia's attention
 away from Domingo by calling Valencia out and telling him to
 "[c]ome on, come here[.]" As a result of Dennis's actions,
 Domingo managed to crawl away and go into the house.
 
Dennis testified that Domingo did not have anything in
 
his hands when he was struck by Valencia. The bottle Dennis
 threw at Valencia did not break, and there were no broken bottles
 on the ground.
 
Arucan testified that he worked with Romeo. He did not
 
personally know either Valencia or Domingo. Arucan did not have
 a clear view of the incident between Valencia and Domingo because
 his view was blocked by a car. From what he could see, Domingo
 did not have a weapon in his hands. Arucan did not see any
 broken glass on the ground.
 
10
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IX.
 
Valencia testified in his own defense. At the time of
 
trial, Valencia was 26 years old. Valencia testified that he had
 
known Domingo and Romeo for ten years, having met them while he
 lived on Colburn Street. At that time, the relationship between
 the three of them was good. Both Valencia and Domingo helped
 Romeo in his DJ business. Valencia admitted that Domingo and
 Romeo were his friends. He also admitted that others who were
 present at the October 26, 2011, barbecue, in particular,
 Randall, Randall's girlfriend, Dennis, and Valentine Ordonez,
 were his friends.
 
According to Valencia, in the evening on October 26,
 
2011, he was drinking beer at the house of his friend, Vincent
 Nosis (Nosis), in Waipahu. After leaving Nosis's house, Valencia
 drove to Romeo's house and got out of the truck. Domingo
 approached Valencia and accused Valencia of stealing Domingo's
 toolbox and selling it. Valencia was surprised by the
 accusations because he "didn't do it." Domingo then broke a beer
 bottle in front of Valencia, and Valencia noticed that Romeo,
 Randall, and Dennis were approaching him. Valencia was scared
 and went to his truck and grabbed a machete or bolo knife from
 his truck.
 
Valencia testified that Domingo swung the broken beer
 
bottle at him and demonstrated by moving his hand at chest level. 
Valencia testified that Domingo cut him with the beer bottle and
 that he was bleeding. However, he did not bleed a lot and his
 clothes were not torn. In response to Domingo's attack, Valencia
 raised the bolo knife and Domingo grabbed the sharp edge of the
 knife. Valencia swung the bolo knife at Domingo, hitting
 Domingo. They struggled over the knife and both fell to the
 ground. During the struggle, the bolo knife "dropped to the
 ground." Domingo's friends attacked Valencia and threw bottles
 at him, which hit Valencia. Valencia stood up, tried to grab the
 keys from his pocket, heard Romeo's father tell him to go home, 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
got into his truck, and took off. There was no car parked next
 
to Valencia's truck that blocked him from leaving.
 
Valencia admitted that he tried to run from the police. 
Valencia explained that he tried to run because he thought there
 was another friend of Domingo that was chasing him. Valencia
 also admitted that he told the police that he was not injured. 
Valencia testified that the specs of blood on his feet and legs
 when the police took his picture at the police station was
 Domingo's blood.
 
X.
 
The State called Officer Watts in rebuttal. Officer
 
Watts arrived at Romeo's residence at 11:10 p.m. on October 26,
 2011. It was Officer Watts' job to secure the scene. He did not
 see anyone sweeping the area or any broken bottles in the area. 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Valencia's sole contention on appeal is that his
 
conviction must be vacated and a new trial granted because his
 trial counsel provided ineffective assistance. Valencia bears
 the burden of establishing that his trial counsel provided
 ineffective assistance of counsel. State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346,
 
348, 615 P.2d 101, 104 (1980). To meet this burden, Valencia
 must satisfy the following two-part test: (1) Valencia "must
 establish specific errors or omissions of [his trial] counsel
 reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment or diligence"; and
 (2) Valencia "must establish that these errors or omissions
 resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a
 potentially meritorious defense." Id. at 348-49; 615 P.2d at
 
104.
 
Valencia argues that his trial counsel provided
 
ineffective assistance by failing to object when the DPA asked
 Romeo and Randall whether they had ever observed Domingo to be
 violent or aggressive and both witnesses answered no. Citing
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(a)(2) (Supp. 2014),3
 
Valencia asserts that evidence of Domingo's non-violent or non-
aggressive character was inadmissible. He argues that his
 counsel's failure to object to such evidence deprived him of the
 right to effective assistance of counsel and entitles him to have
 his conviction overturned and a new trial.
 
Citing the commentary to HRE Rule 404 (1993), the State
 
contends that Romeo's and Randall's testimony regarding Domingo's
 non-violent or non-aggressive character would have been
 admissible in rebuttal after Valencia testified that Domingo was
 the first aggressor. The State therefore contends that defense
 counsel's failure to object to Romeo's and Randall's testimony
 during the State's case-in-chief did not constitute ineffective
 assistance.
 
II.
 
We need not decide whether evidence of Domingo's non­
violent or non-aggressive character was inadmissible. Assuming
 that such evidence was inadmissible in the State's case-in-chief
 and in rebuttal, we conclude that given the overwhelming evidence
 that Valencia was the first aggressor and did not act in self-
defense, the failure of Valencia's counsel to object to this
 character evidence had no effect on the outcome of this case. 
Valencia has not established that he is entitled to relief on his
 ineffective assistance of counsel claim. 
3HRE Rule 404(a)(2) provides: 
(a) Character evidence generally. Evidence of a person's
character or a trait of a person's character is not admissible for
the purpose of proving action in conformity therewith on a
particular occasion, except:
 
. . . .
 
(2)	 Character of victim. Evidence of a pertinent trait of
character of the victim of the crime offered by an
accused, or by the prosecution to rebut the same, or
evidence of a character trait of peacefulness of the
victim offered by the prosecution in a homicide case
to rebut evidence that the victim was the first
 aggressor[.]
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
There was overwhelming evidence that Valencia was the
 
first aggressor and did not act in self-defense. Except for
 
Valencia, all the eye-witnesses to the incident called at trial
 testified consistently that Valencia was the first aggressor,
 that Domingo was not carrying or armed with any weapon, and that
 Valencia struck Domingo several times with a machete, including
 while Domingo was down on the ground. Romeo, Randall, Dennis,
 and Domingo were all long-time friends of Valencia. Indeed, even
 Valencia testified that these individuals were his friends. Yet
 they all testified that Valencia initiated the assault by
 grabbing a machete and striking Domingo; they all refuted
 Valencia's claim that Domingo swung at Valencia with a broken
 beer bottle by testifying that Domingo did not have any weapon or
 thing in his hands when he approached Valencia. 
In addition to the eye-witness testimony, Valencia's
 
claim of self-defense was refuted by the objective evidence. 
Valencia claimed that Domingo swung a broken bottle at him at
 chest level and opened a cut which was bleeding. However, the 
arrest photograph of Valencia introduced at trial did not appear
 to show any blood stain or tear in his shirt or clothing. 
Officers Hibbert and Chaney, who arrested Valencia, testified
 that they did not observe any injuries on Valencia, and Officer
 Hibbert testified that Valencia did not complain of any injuries. 
Valencia also admitted that he told the police he was not
 injured. Officer Watts, who was responsible for securing the
 scene, did not see any broken bottles and other eye-witnesses
 also denied seeing any broken bottles or glass. 
The use of deadly force in self-defense is not
 
justified if the "actor knows that he can avoid the necessity of
 using such force with complete safety by retreating[,]" except
 that generally the "actor is not obliged to retreat from his
 dwelling or place of work[.]" Hawaii Revised Statutes § 703­304(5) (2014). In this case, it was undisputed that there was
 nothing blocking Valencia's truck from leaving and that the
 incident did not take place at Valencia's dwelling or work place.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State also presented evidence that Valencia was
 
drunk and that he displayed consciousness of guilt by attempting
 
to flee from the police. Valencia's explanation for fleeing -­that he thought a friend of Domingo was chasing him -- made no
 sense and did not provide a rational reason for him to run from
 the police.
 
The testimony elicited by the State of Domingo's non­
violent and non-aggressive character was brief, and the State did
 not rely on this character evidence in its closing argument.
 
Under these circumstances, we conclude that there is no
 
reasonable possibility that the brief testimony relating to
 Domingo's non-violent or non-aggressive character contributed to
 Valencia's conviction or had any bearing on the outcome of this
 case. We conclude that even without this character evidence, the
 jury would have found Valencia guilty of first-degree assault. 
Accordingly, Valencia failed to meet his burden of showing that
 the alleged error or omission of his trial counsel in failing to
 object to this evidence resulted in the withdrawal or substantial
 impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. See Antone, 62
 
Haw. at 348-49, 615 P.2d at 104. We therefore hold that Valencia
 has failed to demonstrate his entitlement to relief on his
 ineffective assistance of counsel claim.
 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit 
Court's Judgment. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 30, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
William H. Jameson, Jr.
Deputy Public DefenderAttorney for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
15
 