   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000805
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE INTEREST OF K CHILDREN
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-NOS. 10-0050; 10-0051; 10-0052; and 10-0053)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
In this Child Protective Act case, Father-Appellant
 
(Father) appeals from the "Order RE: Chapter 587A, H.R.S., as
 
Amended," (Custody Order) entered by the Family Court of the
 Third Circuit (Family Court).
1 The Custody Order awarded the
 
Department of Human Services (DHS) foster custody over Father's
 three biological children, DK, TK, and KK (collectively,
 "Children"), finding that "[c]ontinuation in the family home
 would be contrary to the immediate welfare and best interests of
 the children[.]" In a separate order, not subject to this
 appeal, the Family Court ordered the continued foster custody of
 Father's three older step-children, RF, JF, and JA (collectively,
 "Step-Children"). Children and Step-Children were removed from
 Father's custody after the DHS learned of allegations by RF that
 Father had been sexually abusing her. 
1/ The Honorable Lloyd Van De Car presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Father argues that the Family Court erred
 
in: (1) denying his request to produce RF to testify at the
 
custody hearing; and (2) relying on Father's refusal to comply
 with its order that he undergo a psychosexual evaluation in
 awarding foster custody over Children to the DHS. We affirm.
 
I.
 A.
 
The DHS was contacted after officials at RF's school
 
learned that RF had disclosed to a friend that Father had been
 sexually abusing her. RF's mother had left the family home
 several years earlier after alleged physical abuse inflicted by
 Father and Father's mother. When initially questioned by school
 officials and a police detective, RF denied the alleged sexual
 abuse. However, short time later, RF reported that she had been
 pressured by Father's mother and the girlfriend (Girlfriend) of
 Father's brother (Brother 1) to deny being abused, and RF asked
 for another interview. Brother 1 and Girlfriend lived in the
 same dwelling unit as Father. 
The subsequent interview was conducted by a DHS social
 
worker. At this interview, RF reported that Father began
 sexually abusing her about a month after her mother moved from
 the family home, when RF was eleven years old. Father would come
 into RF's bedroom and touch her vaginal area over her clothes,
 and later, he began touching RF under her clothing. Within two
 months, the abuse progressed to sexual intercourse and continued
 for years, with the last incident occurring a couple months
 before RF was removed from Father's custody. A year before RF
 was removed, she had informed Girlfriend and Father's mother
 about the abuse, but the abuse continued. 
About a month after RF was removed from Father's
 
custody, Brother 1 boarded a bus RF was taking to school. 
Brother 1 told RF that she was the only one who could "fix all of
 this" and bring the family back together. They got off the bus
 and met with Girlfriend, who told RF that Father would go to jail
 for 25 years and that Girlfriend and Father's mother would also
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
go to jail because they knew about the abuse and did nothing
 
about it. RF also reported being hit, choked, and slammed
 against a wall while living in Father's household.
 
JA, one of the Step-Children, reported that he had been
 
sexually abused by another of Father's brothers (Brother 2). JA
 reported the abuse to adult members of Father's family, but they
 told him not to say anything to anyone else. When JA told
 Girlfriend about the abuse, she slammed him against a wall. 
Children reported that they had received "dirty lickings" from
 adults other than Father in the family. Two of the Children also
 engaged in sexualized behaviors while in foster custody. 
Father denied sexually abusing RF. Girlfriend denied
 
that RF disclosed any sexual abuse to her, and Girlfriend denied
 that she has physically abused Step-Children or Children.
 
B.
 
Prior to the custody hearing, the Family Court ordered
 
Father to undergo a psychosexual evaluation. The Family Court
 also ordered that the protections of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 (HRS) § 578A-20 (Supp. 2012) would apply.
2 Under these
 
protections, evidence from the psychosexual evaluation would be
 inadmissible in any state criminal or civil action or proceeding. 
Nevertheless, Father refused to undergo a psychosexual
 evaluation.
 
Father filed a motion requesting that the Family Court
 
order the DHS to produce the Step-Children, including RF, to
 testify in court, and to produce Children for an in camera
 interview by the Family Court in chambers. The Family Court
 denied Father's motion to produce the Step-Children and Children. 
As to RF, the Family Court found that RF was afraid of Father and
 
2/ HRS § 587A-20 provides:
 
The court may order that testimony or other evidence
produced by a party in a proceeding under this chapter shall be
inadmissible as evidence in any other state civil or criminal
action or proceeding if the court deems such an order to be in the
best interests of the child.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
his family. The Family Court also found that RF had been
 
diagnosed with Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder and suffers from
 panic attacks. RF's Guardian Ad Litem did not believe it would
 be in RF's best interest to testify. RF's therapist also opined
 that testifying at the hearing would be very stressful for RF. 
Father at one time indicated that he wanted to hire an
 
expert to interview RF, but failed to do so. Video recordings
 were made of the forensic interviews of Step-Children conducted
 at the Children's Justice Center. At the custody hearing, Father
 did not object to the admission of the video recordings of the
 interviews, and he requested the introduction of the video
 recordings of RF's interviews, which were admitted into evidence. 
Father also conducted a direct examination of the police
 detective who interviewed RF, but did not attempt to call the DHS
 social worker who interviewed RF. 
Based on the evidence presented at the hearing, the
 
Family Court found that RF was sexually abused by Father; that JA
 was sexually abused by Brother 2; that Children and Step-Children
 were physically abused by Girlfriend and Father's father; and
 that Father, Brother 2, and Girlfriend all remained in Father's
 family home.
 
The Court concluded that on account of the physical
 
abuse suffered by Children and
 
the presence of two (2) identified and untreated sex
offenders in [Father's family] home, and on account of the
demonstrated unwillingness of other adult members of
[Father's family] home to act to protect the children from
harm when informed of the sex abuse, the Court concludes
that [Children] have been harmed, are subject to imminent
threatened harm, and that the home is unsafe for [Children]
even with a service plan.
 
The Family Court further concluded that "[i]t is not in
 
[Chidren's] best interests to return to [Father's] family home
 unless and until the perpetrators of abuse in that home
 acknowledge the abuse they have committed and address this abuse
 adequately through services." 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Family Court issued the Custody Order on 
October 20, 2011, and its "Amended Findings of Fact and
 
Conclusions of Law" on December 13, 2011.3
 
II.
 
We resolve the issues raised by Father on appeal as
 
follows.
 
A.
 
At the outset, we note that the DHS contends that this
 
appeal is moot because after Father filed his appeal, he was
 convicted of sexual abuse perpetrated on RF, sentenced, and is
 currently incarcerated. The DHS cites to portions of the record
 which show that Father was sentenced to incarceration for 20
 years. The DHS argues that in light of his conviction, Father
 cannot provide a safe family home to Children. However, it
 appears that Father's appeal of his conviction has not been
 resolved, and we therefore decline to resolve this appeal on
 mootness grounds. 
B.
 
Father contends that the Family Court erred in denying
 
his request to produce RF to testify at the custody hearing. We
 disagree. 
Parents have a substantive liberty interest in the 
care, custody, and control of their children that is protected by the due process clause of Article I, Section 5 of the Hawai
'i 
Constitution. In re Doe, 99 Hawai 'i 522, 533, 57 P.3d 447, 458 
(2002). In determining whether limitations on a child testifying violates a parent's due process rights, the Family Court must balance competing interests, including the interest of the parent at stake, the parent's need for the child's testimony, and the best interests of the child. See In re Doe Children, 85 Hawai
'i 
119, 123, 938 P.2d 178, 182 (App. 1997); HRS § 587A-21(d) (Supp. 
3/ We note that this appeal was significantly delayed by the failure of
Father's original appellate counsel to pursue Father's appeal and file
Father's opening brief, which necessitated the appointment of new appellate
counsel. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2012). In general, "when the rights of parents and the welfare 
of their children are in conflict, the welfare of the minor children must prevail." In re Doe Children, 85 Hawai
'i at 125, 
938 P.2d at 184 (citation omitted; format altered). 
HRS § 587A-21(d) provides: 
A child may be directed by the court to testify under
circumstances deemed by the court to be in the best
interests of the child and the furtherance of justice.
These circumstances may include an on-the-record interview
of the child in chambers, with only those parties present
during the interview as the court deems to be in the best
interests of the child.
 
Unlike Father's motion regarding Children, which
 
requested an in camera chambers interview, Father's motion
 
regarding RF requested that she be produced to testify in court. 
The record does not indicate the Father was interested in
 examining RF under conditions more restrictive and less
 intimidating than examining and confronting RF in court. We
 therefore limit our review to whether the Family Court erred in
 denying Father's request to confront and examine RF in court.
 
We conclude that the Family Court did not err in
 
denying Father's motion to produce RF to testify in court. 
Father does not challenge the Family Court's findings that RF was
 afraid of Father and his family; that she had been diagnosed with
 Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder and suffers from panic attacks;
 that RF's guardian ad litem believed that requiring RF to testify
 would not be in RF's best interests; and that RF's therapist
 believed it would be very stressful for RF to testify at the
 hearing. Father was permitted to offer RF's video-recorded
 interviews into evidence, including the police interview in which
 she denied being sexually abused by Father, and Father had the
 opportunity to call and examine the people who conducted the
 interviews. In addition, Father's criminal case for sexually
 abusing RF was still pending at the time of the custody hearing. 
Under these circumstances, we conclude that the Family Court did
 not err in determining that what might be gained by RF's
 testimony in court was outweighed by the harm to her.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C.
 
We reject Father's claim that the Family Court erred in
 
relying on Father's refusal to comply with its order that he
 
undergo a psychosexual evaluation in awarding foster custody over
 Children to the DHS. Father contends that he was justified in
 refusing to undergo a psychosexual evaluation because of his
 concern that it would require him to take a polygraph examination
 and his concern regarding self-incrimination. Father concedes,
 however, that there was no direct evidence that the court-ordered
 psychosexual evaluation necessarily included polygraph tests. In
 addition, the Family Court ordered that the protections provided
 by HRS § 587A-20 would apply to Father's psychosexual evaluation. 
This meant that any evidence resulting from the evaluation would
 not be admissible in Father's criminal prosecution. See HRS 
§ 587A-20. Under these circumstances, Father's refusal to
 undergo a psychosexual evaluation was not justified and the
 Family Court did not err in relying on Father's refusal in
 rendering its custody decision. 
III. 
We affirm the Family Court's Custody Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaii, November 29, 2013. '
On the briefs: 
Mirtha Oliveros 
(Oliveros Law, LLLC)for Appellant Chief Judge 
Audrey L. WhitehurstMary Anne MagnierDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7
 