NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000842 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
MARGARET L. ALCOS, Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CRIMINAL NO. 16-1-1411)
  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellee Margaret L. Alcos (Alcos) by felony
 
information with unauthorized possession of confidential personal
information (UPCPI), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 (HRS) § 708-839.55 (2014).
1/  The felony information alleged that
  
1/ HRS § 708-839.55 provides, in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of unauthorized possession
of confidential personal information if that person intentionally
or knowingly possesses, without authorization, any confidential
personal information of another in any form, including but not
limited to mail, physical documents, identification cards, or
information stored in digital form.
 
HRS § 708-800 (2014) defines the term "confidential personal information" as
follows:
 
"Confidential personal information" means information in
which an individual has a significant privacy interest, including
but not limited to a driver's license number, a social security
number, an identifying number of a depository account, a bank
account number, a password or other information that is used for
accessing information, or any other name, number, or code that is
used, alone or in conjunction with other information, to confirm
the identity of a person.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Alcos did intentionally or knowingly, without authorization,
 
possess the confidential personal information of JD.
 
Alcos moved to dismiss the felony information on the
 
grounds that: (1) HRS § 708-839.55 and the HRS § 708-800
 definition of "confidential personal information" incorporated
 into HRS § 708-839.55 (collectively, the UPCPI statutes) are
 unconstitutionally overbroad and vague; (2) the UPCPI statutes
 impose excessive punishment of up to five years of imprisonment;
 and (3) the UPCPI charge was defective for failing to define the
 term "confidential personal information." On November 3, 2016,
 the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)
2/ issued
 
an order which dismissed the felony information with prejudice
 (Order Dismissing Felony Information). The Circuit Court ruled:
 "In granting [Alcos's] Motion, the Court hereby finds that HRS 
§ 708-8839.55 [sic] is unconstitutionally overbroad and
 unconstitutionally vague; as well as a violation of due process. 
THEREFORE, the Motion is hereby granted with respect to those
 arguments and the charge is dismissed with prejudice."
 
On appeal, the State argues that based on the Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court's recent decision in State v. Pacquing, 139 Hawai 'i 
302, 389 P.3d 897 (2016), the Circuit Court erred in dismissing the felony information with prejudice.
3/ We agree. We vacate 
the Order Dismissing Felony Information and remand the case for further proceedings. 
I.
 
The record includes the following information. On 
August 17, 2016, JD discovered that the rear window of her parked car had been shattered and that her purse, which contained her wallet and Hawai
'i driver's license, had been taken. On 
September 2, 2016, Alcos was driving a car that a police officer stopped for speeding. In response to the officer's request for her driver's license, the vehicle's registration, and proof of 
2/ The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
3/ The supreme court's decision in Pacquing  was issued a month after the
Circuit Court filed its Order Dismissing Felony Information.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
insurance, Alcos gave the officer JD's driver's license and said
 
she did not have documents for the vehicle. Upon further inquiry
 by the officer, Alcos provided responses that did not match the
 information on the driver's license. JD was later contacted by
 the police and stated that she does not know Alcos and that Alcos
 did not have permission to be in possession of JD's driver's
 license.
 
II.
 
The State argues that based on Pacquing, the Circuit
 
Court erred in concluding that the UPCPI statutes are
 unconstitutionally overbroad and unconstitutionally vague. We
 agree. 
A.
 
In Pacquing the supreme court held that "the UPCPI 
statues are not facially and unconstitutionally overbroad." Pacquing, 139 Hawai
'i at 313, 389 P.3d 897 at 908. We therefore 
reject the Circuit Court's conclusion that the UPCPI statutes are unconstitutionally overbroad. 
B.
 
The supreme court concluded that the UPCPI statutes
 
were unconstitutionally vague as applied to certain aspects of
 Pacquing's conduct, but were not unconstitutionally vague as
 applied to other aspects of Pacquing's conduct. Id. at 317-18,
 
389 P.3d at 912-13. As relevant to this case, the supreme court
 concluded that the UPCPI statues were not vague as applied to the
 unauthorized possession of a driver's license number because a
 driver's license number was among the specific examples of
 "confidential personal information" set forth in the term's
 statutory definition. Id. 
The supreme court further concluded that the portions
 
of the UPCPI statues that were unconstitutionally vague could be
 excised in a manner that would render the remaining portions
 constitutional. Id. at 318-20, 389 P.3d at 913-15. To eliminate
 
the unconstitutional aspects of the UPCPI statute, the supreme
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court excised the HRS § 708-800 definition of "confidential
 
personal information" as follows:
 
"Confidential personal information" means information in
which an individual has a significant privacy interest,
including but not limited to a driver's license number, a
social security number, an identifying number of a
depository account, [or] a bank account number, a password
or other information that is used for accessing information,
or any other name, number, or code that is used, alone or in
conjunction with other information, to confirm the identity
of a person.
 
Id. at 319, 389 P.3d at 914.
 
The supreme court concluded that "[a]fter the deletion
 
of the unconstitutional portions of HRS § 708-800's definition of
 
'confidential personal information,' its meaning would be
 circumscribed to the enumerated classes of information preceded
 by 'including' and information similar to those already
 enumerated." Id. The supreme court explained that "[t]his means
 
that a non-enumerated item of 'information in which an individual
 has a significant privacy interest' would qualify as
 'confidential personal information' only if that non-enumerated
 item is similar in nature and character to those already
 enumerated in HRS § 708-800." Id. at 319-20, 389 P.3d at 914-15. 
The supreme court held that after the unconstitutional portions
 of the definition of "confidential personal information" were
 excised, the remaining portions of the UPCPI statutes were
 constitutional and could be enforced. Id. at 319-20, 389 P.3d at
 
914-15. 
Based on the supreme court's analysis in Pacquing, we
 
conclude that the Circuit Court erred in dismissing the UPCPI
 charge against Alcos on the ground that the UPCPI statutes were
 unconstitutionally vague. The UPCPI statutes are not
 unconstitutionally vague as applied to Alcos's purported conduct
 of unauthorized possession of JD's driver's license number. 
III.
 
In her motion to dismiss, Alcos raised the claim that
 
the UPCPI statutes, "which impose[] the penalty of up to five
 years imprisonment based on the mere possession of information
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
absent any malicious intent to misuse that information[,] [are] 
invalid under the Due Process Clauses" of the United States and Hawai
'i Constitutions. However, Alcos did not present any 
argument or authority to support her excessive punishment claim before the Circuit Court, and it is not clear whether the Circuit Court relied on this ground in dismissing the UPCPI charge. 
In any event, we conclude that this claim, which 
appears to assert that the UPCPI statutes are unconstitutional for imposing cruel and unusual punishment, is without merit. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has stated that "[t]he question of what 
constitutes an adequate penalty necessary for the prevention of crime is addressed to the sound judgment of the legislature and the courts will not interfere with its exercise, unless the punishment prescribed appears clearly and manifestly to be cruel and unusual." State v. Freitas, 61 Haw. 262, 267, 602 P.2d 914, 
919 (1979), overruled on other grounds by State v. Auld, 136 Hawai
'i 244, 361 P.3d 471 (2015). 
"(P)rominence is given to the power of the legislature
to define crimes and their punishment. We concede the
 power in most of its exercises. We disclaim the right
to assert a judgment against that of the legislature,
of the expediency of the laws, or the right to oppose
the judicial power to the legislative power to define
crimes and fix their punishment, unless that power
encounters in its exercise a constitutional
 prohibition. . . . The function of the legislature is
primary, its exercise fortified by presumptions of
right and legality, and is not to be interfered with
lightly, nor by any judicial conception of its wisdom
or propriety. . . ."
 
Id. at 267, 602 P.2d at 919-20 (parentheses and ellipsis points
 
in original) (quoting Weems v. United States, 217 U.S. 349,
 378-79 (1910)). 
The standard under both the United States and Hawai
'i 
Constitutions for determining whether the punishment prescribed by a statute is cruel and unusual is "whether, in the light of developing concepts of decency and fairness, the prescribed punishment is so disproportionate to the conduct proscribed and is of such duration as to shock the conscience of reasonable 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
persons or to outrage the moral sense of the community." Id. at
 
267-68, 602 P.2d at 920.4/
 
The Hawai 'i Legislature's clear purpose in enacting the 
UPCPI statutes was "to address and deter identity theft by
 
targeting and criminalizing conduct that precedes identity theft
-- the possession of confidential personal information." 
 
Pacquing
, 139 Hawai 'i at 320, 389 P.3d at 915. The Legislature 
enacted the UPCPI statutes
 
to increase the protection of personal information by making
it a class C felony to intentionally or knowingly possess
the confidential information of another without
 authorization. Hawaii law enforcement has found it
 difficult to curb the rise in identity theft-related crimes
when identity thieves in possession of personal information
who have not yet caused a monetary loss to the victim cannot
be prosecuted for crimes other than petty misdemeanor
thefts. The legislature found that adding a law to make
intentionally or knowingly possessing the confidential
information of another without authorization a class C
 felony would help to deter identity theft crimes.
 
Commentary on HRS § 708-839.55. 
"Identity theft is a very serious and growing crime.
 
The Bureau of Justice Statistics at the Department of Justice has
shown that between 2005 and 2010, the percentage of U.S.
 households with at least one member who experienced identity
  
theft increased from 5.5% to 7.0%." United States v. Dooley, No.
 
11-CR-20010, 2013 WL 105198, at *3 (C.D. Ill. Jan. 8, 2013). In
 addition to monetary loss, identity theft can create significant
 and long-lasting problems for its victims. 
Here, Alcos has yet to be convicted or sentenced, and
 
thus it is unknown what actual punishment she will receive if she
 
4/ In determining whether the punishment prescribed by a statute is
cruel and unusual, courts have considered:
 
(1) the nature of the offense and/or the offender, with
particular regard to the degree of danger posed by both to
society; (2) the extent of the challenged penalty as
compared to the punishments prescribed for more serious
crimes within the same jurisdiction; and (3) the extent of
the challenged penalty as compared to the punishment
prescribed for the same offense in other jurisdictions.
 
Freitas, 61 Haw. at 268, 602 P.2d at 920. "[T]he nature of the offense and
the danger the offender poses to society are the key factors in this
determination." Id. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is convicted of UPCPI. Given the purpose of the UPCPI statutes
 
to address and deter the serious and growing crime of identity
 theft, we conclude that the punishment prescribed by the UPCPI
 statutes -- up to five years of imprisonment -- is not manifestly
 cruel and unusual or excessive. The prescribed punishment does
 not "shock the conscience of reasonable persons" or "outrage the
 moral sense of the community." 
IV.
 
In Pacquing, the supreme court held that the UPCPI 
charge was insufficient for failing to include the statutory definition of the term "confidential personal information." Pacquing, 139 Hawai
'i at 308-09, 389 P.3d at 903-04. The UPCPI 
charge in this case is virtually identical to the charge in Pacquing. We therefore conclude that the UPCPI charge against Pacquing was insufficient.
5/ 
The State does not dispute that its UPCPI charge 
against Alcos was deficient, but argues that it should be given the opportunity on remand to seek to amend the felony information pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 7(f) 
(2012).6/ We agree. 
In State v. Kam, 134 Hawai 'i 280, 286, 339 P.3d 1081, 
1087 (App. 2014), this court held that HRPP Rule 7(f)(1) grants the trial court the discretion to permit the State to amend a legally insufficient charge before trial if substantial rights of 
5/ The Circuit Court's Order Dismissing Felony Information was based on
its finding that the UPCPI statues were unconstitutional, and not on Alcos's
claim that the UPCPI charge was deficient for failing to define the term
"confidential personal information." The Circuit Court's dismissal with prejudice was not an appropriate remedy for a deficient UPCPI charge. In 
Pacquing, the trial court granted Pacquing's motion to dismiss the UPCPI
charge as defective, concluding that the failure of the charge to define theterm "confidential personal information" deprived Pacquing of fair notice ofthe accusation against him. Pacquing, 139 Hawai' i at 306-07, 389 P.3d at
901-02. The supreme court agreed with this conclusion and dismissed the UPCPIcharge without prejudice. Id. at 308-09, 389 P.3d at 903-04. 
6/ HRPP Rule 7(f) provides in relevant part:
 
(1) The court may permit a charge other than an indictment
to be amended at any time before trial commences if substantial
rights of the defendant are not prejudiced.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the defendant are not prejudiced. The Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
affirmed our decision in Kam. State v. Kam, SCWC-12-0000897, 
2016 WL 770253 (Hawai 'i Feb. 25, 2106) (SDO). In affirming our 
decision, the supreme court cited its decision in Schwartz v. 
State, 136 Hawai 'i 258, 282, 361 P.3d 1161, 1185 (2015), which 
held that "the failure of a charging instrument to allege an element of an offense does not constitute a jurisdictional defect that fails to confer subject-matter jurisdiction to the [trial] court." Based on Kam and Schwartz, we conclude that the State should be given the opportunity on remand to move to amend the UPCPI charge pursuant to HRPP Rule 7(f)(1). 
V.
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the Order Dismissing
 
Felony Information and remand the case for further proceedings
 consistent with this Summary Disposition Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 29, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Brian R. Vincent 
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellant. 
James S. Tabe 
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellee. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
8
 