NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001151
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
RYAN NAKAMITSU, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(1DTA-14-02783)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Ryan Nakamitsu (Nakamitsu) appeals
 
from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
 
Plea/Judgment (Judgment), entered on September 12, 2014, in the
 District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (District
 Court).
1 The District Court convicted Nakamitsu of one count of
 
Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII),
 in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1) and
 (3) (Supp. 2015)
2
 
1	 The Honorable David W. Lo presided.
 
2
 HRS § 291E-61 provides in relevant part:
 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the person
operates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
 
(1)	 While under the influence of alcohol in an
 amount sufficient to impair the person's normal
mental faculties or ability to care for the
person and guard against casualty; [or]
 
. . . .
 
(3)	 With .08 or more grams of alcohol per two
hundred ten liters of breath[.]
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Nakamitsu argues that the District Court
 
wrongly convicted him (1) after failing to ensure that he waived
 
his constitutional right to testify knowingly, intelligently, and
 voluntarily; (2) where the OVUII charge was fatally defective for
 failing to define the term "alcohol"; (3) after erroneously
 denying Nakamitsu's "Motion in Limine to Preclude Evidence of Any
 Measurement Purporting to Measure [Nakamitsu's] Alcohol Content
 and Any Statements Made by [Nakamitsu]" (Motion to Suppress BAC)
 where his decision to submit to the test was not voluntary,
 knowing, or intelligent; (4) after wrongly denying Nakamitsu's
 motion to strike the testimony of Officer Chester Desiderio
 (Officer Desiderio) regarding Nakamitsu's performance on the
 standardized field sobriety test (SFST), which was not based on
 the officer's present recollection; (5) after wrongly denying
 Nakamitsu's motion to re-call Officer Edward Tabanera (Officer
 Tabanera) to rebut Officer Desiderio's testimony regarding the
 administration and grading of the SFST; and (6) after erroneously
 denying Nakamitsu's motions for judgment of acquittal where the
 evidence was insufficient to support a conviction under HRS
 § 291E-61(a)(1) or (3).
 
For the reasons set forth below, we vacate the
 
conviction for OVUII in violation of HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) and
 remand for proceedings on that count consistent with this
 opinion, and we reverse the conviction for OVUII in violation of
 § 291E-61(a)(3).
 
I.
 
On June 20, 2014, the State charged Nakamitsu by
 
Complaint, in relevant part, as follows:
 
COUNT 1: On or about June 1, 2014, in the City and
County of Honolulu, State of Hawai' i, [Nakamitsu] did
intentionally, knowingly or recklessly operate or assume
actual physical control of a vehicle upon a public way,street, road, or highway while under the influence ofalcohol in an amount sufficient to impair his normal mentalfaculties or ability to care for himself and guard againstcasualty; and/or did operate or assume actual physicalcontrol of a vehicle upon a public way, street, road, orhighway with .08 or more grams of alcohol per two hundredten liters of breath, thereby committing the offense of[OVUII], in violation of Section 291E-61(a)(1) and/or (a)(3)of the [HRS]. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On September 5, 2014, Nakamitsu filed "[Nakamitsu's] 
Motion to Dismiss Count 1 for Failure to State an Offense" 
(Motion to Dismiss). He argued that the OVUII charge in Count 1 was insufficient for failing to include the definition of "alcohol" set forth in HRS § 291E-1. Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) opposed the motion, arguing that the reference to 
"alcohol" was consistent with its commonly-understood meaning. At a September 10, 2014 hearing, the court summarily denied the Motion to Dismiss. 
On September 5, 2014, Nakamitsu filed his Motion to 
Suppress BAC. He moved the District Court to suppress his BAC result on the ground that Hawai
'i's implied consent law and the 
related provisions of HRS Chapter 291E criminalizing the refusal to submit to BAC testing were unconstitutional. The State opposed the motion, and at trial, the court summarily denied it. 
On the first day of trial, on September 10, 2014, the
 
District Court gave Nakamitsu the following advisement:
 
THE COURT: All right. Mr. Nakamitsu, first of all,
you have the right to remain silent, and if you remain
silent I will not hold that against you, and that if you
testify, the prosecutor has the opportunity to cross-examine
you.
 
You understand?
 
[Nakamitsu]: 
Yes, Your Honor.
 
Officer Desiderio testified that he responded to a
 
vehicular accident on June 1, 2014, at around 4:50 a.m. When he
 
arrived, he saw a vehicle on the side of the road, in front of a
 light post that had fallen down. A man (later identified as
 Nakamitsu) walked from the vehicle and knelt down.
 
Nakamitsu told Officer Desiderio that he had been
 
driving the vehicle, and began crying. The officer detected the
 smell of alcohol coming from Nakamitsu's body and breath. 
Nakamitsu was trying to balance himself and uttered something
 along the lines of "I'm fucked, I'm fucked."
 
Officer Desiderio conducted the SFST. Nakamitsu
 
exhibited six clues on and failed the Horizontal Gaze Nystagmus
 (HGN) test. During the instructional phase of the Walk-and-Turn
 test, Nakamitsu kept trying to keep his balance.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On direct-examination of Officer Desiderio regarding
 
the Walk-and-Turn and One-Leg Stand tests, the State refreshed
 
the officer's recollection with a copy of his SFST report:
 
[State]. Do you remember what -- any clues exhibited
during the instructional portion of the . . . [Walk-and-
Turn] test?
 
[Officer Desiderio]. Can't recall it. I have it in
 
my report that I submitted.
 
Q. Would anything refresh your recollection?
 
A. Yes, my report that I submitted.
 
[State's counsel]. May I approach, Your Honor?
 
. . . . 
[State]. Officer, is -- you recognize this document?
 [Officer Desiderio]. 
Yes, ma'am.
 
Q. What is this?
 
A. This is . . . what we use for [sic] SFST sheet,
the standard –­
Q. Is this the –­
A. -- [SFST]
 
Q. -- FST sheet that you used that night?
 
A. Yes, ma'am.
 
Q. Can you refresh your recollection.
 
A. Okay.
 . . . . 
[State]. 
May the record reflect I'm
taking back the [SFST] [form].
 Q. Officer, so can you tell us about the
instructional portion of the walk-and-turn.
 
[Officer Desiderio]. Okay.
 Q. Now, were the -- any clues exhibited?
 
A. Yes, his balance.
 
Q. So he couldn't keep his balance[.]
 
A. Yes, couldn't keep –­
Q. -- what you're telling us?
 
A. -- balance.
 
Q. Was there anything else?
 
A. Starts early.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q. Okay. Are those both clues, Officer?
 
A. Yes.
 
. . . . 
[State]. Okay. . . . [G]oing on to the walking
portion of the test, did you observe any clues?
 
[Officer Desiderio]. Yes. Misses heel and toe. He .
 
. . basically walk [sic] off the line. Tried to -- I guess,
the turn.
 
Q. Uh-huh.
 
A. Okay. The turn is not exactly as instructed. And
 
also the number of steps that was taken.
 
Q. Okay. Basically -- so you're saying the turn
wasn't as instructed?
 
A. Wasn't as instructed. The pivot -- I believe the
pivot was too fast. And if I can recall, it would be, like,
the other way, like on a . . . different step, just because
that he made several more steps than the nine that . . . was
[sic] instructed.
 
. . . .
 
[State]. So how many clues did you observe in this
walk-and-turn?
 
[Officer Desiderio]: I believe around eight.
 Q. And how many clues does it take to fail this test?
 
A. Four.
 
The State asked Officer Desiderio about Nakamitsu's
 
performance on the One-Leg Stand test:
 
[State]. And do you recall what you observed?
 
[Officer Desiderio]. 
Yes. Everything is recorded in
the report I submitted.
 
Q. All right. . . . [H]ow many clues can be
exhibited? 
Do you remember?
 
A. No, I don't. I –­
Q. Would you like to –­. . . . 
[State]. -- refresh your memory –­. . . . .
 [State]. -- with your report?
 [Officer Desiderio]. -- yes.
 . . . .
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[State]. May I approach, Your Honor?
 
THE COURT: You may.
 
. . . . 
[State]. May the record reflect I'm
taking the report away.
 . . . .
 [State]. . . . 
Do you independently remember this, once you looked at
your report? Do you remember how [Nakamitsu] did on the
test?
 
[Officer Desiderio]. Yeah, somewhat remember.
 
Q. Okay. And do you remember what you observed about
how he did the test?
 
A. Basically, he hops. I . . . do remember [sic]
putting his foot down at 19 seconds and [sic] kind of swayed
sideways. And then -- yeah, he wasn't able to keep his
balance during that time.
 
. . . . 
[State]. Officer, how many clues did he exhibit on
the one-leg stand, do you remember?
 
[Officer Desiderio]. At least -- I would say four or
more.
 
On cross-examination, Officer Desiderio testified about
 
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's (NHTSA's)
 
standards for administering and grading various aspects of the
 SFST. He testified that the SFST had to be administered and
 graded in accordance with the NHTSA to be valid.
 
On the second day of trial, on September 12, 2014,
 
Nakamitsu's counsel continued to ask Officer Desiderio about
 Nakamitsu's performance on the SFST:
 
[Nakamitsu's counsel]. Now, on Wednesday you
testified that [Nakamitsu] took several more steps than
instructed on the walk-and-turn.
 
But isn't it true that he only took one extra step?
 
[Officer Desiderio]. 
Whatever is in my report, that I
wrote in there, that's basically what it –­
Q. If I showed you a copy of your report would . . .
it refresh your recollection.
 
A. Yes.
 
Yes. 
So on the first nine step, took an additional
one. And I believe that's the reason why I -- I did put
that made the turn, not as instructed.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q. Okay. But not several extra steps, just one;
correct?
 
A. 	I believe so.
 
Q. 	I'm sorry.
 A. 	Oh, whatever I wrote in there.
 Q. 	Okay.
 A. 	Yeah.
 Q. And do you remember, Officer Desiderio, that
actually when he took that one extra step he said, Oops, I'm
sorry, and, I took an extra step, and then he turned?
 
A. 	I could not recall if –­
Q. 	You cannot recall that?
 A. 	-- he did or not.
 No.
 
Q. 	Okay. And that's not in your report?
 A. 	No.
 Q. Where were you standing when the walk-and-turn was
conducted? Where were you standing in relation to . . .
[Nakamitsu]?
 
Officer Desiderio went on to testify without the aid of
 
his SFST report that while Nakamitsu performed the Walk-and Turn
 
test, the officer was facing the sidewalk, standing mid-way
 between the starting and turn points of the imaginary line used
 for the test. When asked if Nakamitsu walked off the line during
 the first set of steps, the officer stated he would need his
 report to refresh his memory.
 
Nakamitsu's counsel asked Officer Desiderio if he had
 
any independent recollection of the SFST or was his testimony
 solely based on his reading of the SFST report:
 
[Nakamitsu's counsel]. Okay. Now, when the
prosecutor was asking you questions and when I'm asking you
questions . . . you need to refer to your report to testify
about what your recollection is of . . . this particular
[SFST]; correct?
 
[Officer Desiderio]. Yes.
 
Q. Do you have any independent recollection of . . .
[Nakamitsu's] performance on the test? Or is it, basically,
just reading from your report?
 
A. I do have [sic] independent recollection, not
necessarily of the -– when he was taking the test.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q. Okay. So you remember the incident?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. You remember [Nakamitsu]?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. You remember administering the test to him?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. But the details of the results you don't remember?
 
A. Whatever I wrote in there -– because while I was
 
testing, okay, I'll be, like, making tick marks, either when
I was (indiscernible) if I have a glove or right on my hand.
 
. . . . 
[Nakamitsu's counsel]. Without looking at your
writing or your notes or the -– your report, you're not able
to testify about his performance on the [SFST]?
 
[Officer Desiderio]. Well, I would need my report.
 
Nakamitsu's counsel moved to strike Officer Desiderio's
 
testimony regarding Nakamitsu's performance on the SFST on the
 
basis that the officer could not testify without his report,
 which was impermissible. The State disagreed, arguing that the
 officer could recall aspects of the SFST and was not expected to
 have absolute, total recall as to every single clue. The
 District Court summarily denied the motion.
 
Officer Desiderio testified that based on the overall
 
circumstances, including the accident and Nakamitsu's performance
 on the SFST, he arrested Nakamitsu for OVUII.
 
At the police station, Officer Desiderio read to
 
Nakamitsu, verbatim, an implied consent form admitted into
 evidence at State's Exhibit 1. The form stated, among other
 things, that if the defendant refused to take a BAC test, he or
 she would be charged with refusal to submit to testing, a petty
 misdemeanor, and subject to up to thirty days in prison and/or a
 fine of up to $1,000, or the sanctions in HRS § 291E-65 if
 applicable.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nakamitsu agreed to take a breath test. The officer
 
indicated in a sworn statement, admitted into evidence as State's
 
Exhibit 2, that Nakamitsu's BAC was 0.145 grams of alcohol per
 two hundred ten liters of breath.
 
Officer Tabanera testified that on June 1, 2014, at
 
approximately 4:15 a.m., he arrived at the scene and observed
 Nakamitsu's eyes were kind of red and glassy and he emitted the
 odor of an intoxicant.
 
Officer Tabanera investigated the accident and saw that
 
Nakamitsu's vehicle had come to a rest at the base of a street­light pole, which was dislodged and lying on the ground. The
 vehicle's front bumper and engine area were severely damaged. 
The officer did not see any marks that would have resulted from
 the application of a vehicle's brakes, and he did not see any
 other vehicles or obstructions in the roadway.
 
On cross-examination, Nakamitsu's counsel asked Officer
 
Tabanera if he had been in the Traffic Division and trained to
 investigate DUIs in accordance with the NHTSA, and the officer
 responded that he had been. The State objected on the ground
 that the questions went beyond the scope of direct examination,
 which concerned Officer Tabanera's investigation into the
 vehicular accident and not the OVUII. The District Court
 overruled the objection, stating that sustaining it would "not
 really matter" because Nakamitsu could call Officer Tabanera as
 his witness in Nakamitsu's case-in-chief.
 
Nakamitsu's counsel continued to cross-examine Officer
 
Tabanera regarding his qualifications to conduct OVUII
 investigations. The officer testified that he was qualified to
 administer an SFST. When counsel asked the officer if he was
 familiar with the HGN test, the State objected on relevancy
 grounds because the officer had not conducted the HGN test in
 this case. Without explanation, the District Court sustained the
 objection. Nakamitsu's counsel moved to make an offer of proof,
 and the court denied the motion. The State rested its case.
 
After the State rested its case, the District Court
 
engaged Nakamitsu in the following colloquy:
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: All right. Mr. Nakamitsu, as I said at
the outset, you have the right to remain silent. If you
remain silent I will not hold that against you. If you
testify, the prosecutor has the opportunity to cross-examine
you.
 
You understand that?
 
[Nakamitsu]: Yes, Your Honor.
 THE COURT: Have you, yourself, made a decision to
remain silent or take the stand?
 
[Nakamitsu]: Silent.
 THE COURT: And that is your decision?
 [Nakamitsu]: Yes, Your Honor.
 
Nakamitsu's counsel moved for judgment of acquittal on
 
the basis that the SFST evidence should be stricken because
 
Officer Desiderio could not testify about the particulars without
 reading his report, and without that evidence there was
 insufficient evidence to support the charge of OVUII in violation
 of HRS § 291E-61(a)(1). Counsel also moved for judgment of
 acquittal on the ground that the State failed to elicit testimony
 as to an essential element of OVUII, i.e., whether the alcohol
 Nakamitsu allegedly consumed was distilled or denatured. The
 District Court summarily denied the motions.
 
After Nakamitsu rested his case, he renewed the motion
 
for judgment of acquittal. The District Court denied the renewed
 motion.
 
Nakamitsu's counsel moved to re-call Officer Tabanera
 
to the stand, and the District Court denied the motion. The
 court permitted counsel to make an offer of proof that Officer
 Tabanera's testimony regarding the NHTSA's standards for grading
 the SFST would rebut Officer Desiderio's testimony that a
 defendant must show four clues of impairment to fail the Walk-
and-Turn test; every step of the Walk-and-Turn required a heel­to-toe connection; any nystagmus, not just a sustained nystagmus,
 constituted a "clue" on the HGN test; a sway of any width
 constituted a clue of impairment on the One-Leg Stand test; and
 raising the arms any distance away from the body constituted
 "raising arms" on the One-Leg Stand. Nakamitsu's counsel
 asserted that Officer Tabanera's testimony would be relevant
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
because he graduated from the Police Academy and was NHTSA-
qualified.
 
The District Court orally ruled as follows:
 
THE COURT: Court finds the evidence beyond a
reasonable doubt to find [Nakamitsu] guilty on both the
291E-61(a)(1) as well as the [291E]-61(a)(3) charge. And
 the court finds [Nakamitsu] guilty based on what happened.
 
And Court also finds that the evidence concerning the
[SFST], while there is some questions as to the weight or .
. . the manner in which Officer Desiderio gave his testimony
that it was not even necessary to convict the defendant,
find the defendant guilty on the (a)(1) charge.
 
II.
 
A. Constitutional Questions
 
"We answer questions of constitutional law by
 
exercising our own independent constitutional judgment based on
 
the facts of the case. Thus, we review questions of
 constitutional law under the right/wrong standard." State v.
 
Gomez-Lobato
, 130 Hawai 'i 465, 469, 312 P.3d 897, 901 (2013) 
(citation omitted).
B. Plain Error
 
"We may recognize plain error when the
error committed affects substantial rights of
the defendant." State v. Cullen, 86 Hawai' i 1,
8, 946 P.2d 955, 962 (1997) (citations andinternal quotation signals omitted). See also 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule
52(b) (1993) ("Plain error or defects affectingsubstantial rights may be noticed although theywere not brought to the attention of thecourt."). 
State v. Maumalanga, 90 Hawai' i 58, 63, 976 P.2d 372, 377,
reconsideration denied (1999) (quoting [State v. Davia, 87Hawai'i 249, 253, 953 P.2d 1347, 1351 (1998)]). 
State v. Staley, 91 Hawai 'i 275, 282, 982 P.2d 904, 911 (1999). 
C. Statutory Interpretation
 
When construing a statute, this court's foremost
obligation is to ascertain and give effect to the intention
of the legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from
the language contained in the statute itself. In addition,
we must read statutory language in the context of the entire
statute and construe it in a manner consistent with its
 purpose.
 
State v. McKnight , 131 Hawai 'i 379, 388, 319 P.3d 298, 307 (2013) 
(citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted).
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D. Evidentiary Rulings
 
The standard of review on appeals from evidentiary
rulings depends on the particular rule of evidence at issue.
Errors on evidentiary rulings are subject to the abuse of
discretion standard unless the application of the rule can
produce only one correct answer, in which case, then, the
review falls under a right/wrong standard.
 
State v. Dibenedetto, 80 Hawai 'i 138, 145, 906 P.2d 624, 631 
(App. 1995) (citations and quotation marks omitted).
E. Grant/Denial of Motion to Re-Call Witness
 
The latitude permitted counsel in offering testimony and the
order of that testimony rests completely within the
discretion of the trial court, and an abuse of that
discretion must be established before reversal of a
 conviction based on the testimony or a new trial may be
warranted.
 
State v. Alfonso, 65 Haw. 95, 99, 648 P.2d 696, 700 (1982).
F. Sufficiency of the Evidence
 
The courts have long held that evidence adduced in the
trial court must be considered in the strongest light for
the prosecution when the appellate court passes on the legal
sufficiency of such evidence to support a conviction; the
same standard applies whether the case was before a judge or
a jury. Substantial evidence is evidence which a reasonable
 mind might accept as adequate to support the conclusion of
the fact finder. Matters related to the credibility of
witnesses and the weight to be given to the evidence are
generally left to the factfinder. The appellate court will
neither reconcile conflicting evidence nor interfere with
the decision of the trier of fact based on the witnesses'
 credibility or the weight of the evidence. Thus, we need
not necessarily concur with a trial court's particular
finding in order to sustain a conviction.
 
State v. Mitchell , 94 Hawai 'i 388, 393, 15 P.3d 314, 319 (App. 
2000) (citations, internal block quotation format, internal
 
quotation marks omitted).
 
III.
 
A. Right-to-Testify Colloquy
 
Nakamitsu argues that the District Court wrongly
 
convicted him (1) after failing to ensure that he waived his
 constitutional right to testify knowingly, intelligently, and
 voluntarily. Because Nakamitsu did not raise this argument
 below, we review it for plain error. 
See Staley , 91 Hawai 'i at 
282, 982 P.2d at 911.
 
The State concedes that the District Court's  Tachibana
  
colloquy was insufficient and argues that the Judgment should be
 vacated and the case remanded for a new trial. Notwithstanding
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the State's concession that the District Court's colloquy 
regarding Nakamitsu's right to testify was deficient and the Judgment should be vacated, "appellate courts have an independent duty 'first to ascertain that the confession of error is supported by the record and well-founded in law and second to determine that such error is properly preserved and prejudicial.'" State v. Veikoso, 102 Hawai
'i 219, 221–22, 74 
P.3d 575, 577–78 (2003) (quoting State v. Hoang, 93 Hawai 'i 333, 
336, 3 P.3d 499, 502 (2000). In other words, the State's concession of error "is not binding upon an appellate court[.]" Hoang, 93 Hawai
'i at 336, 3 P.3d at 502 (quoting Territory v. 
Kogami, 37 Haw. 174, 175 (Haw. Terr. 1945)) (internal quotation marks omitted).
1. Pre-Trial Colloquy
 
In State v. Lewis, 94 Hawai
'i 292, 297, 12 P.3d 1233, 
1238 (2000) (quoting Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai 'i 226, 237 n.9, 
900 P.2d 1293, 1304 n.9 (1995)), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held 
that prior to trial, trial courts must "(1) inform the defendant of his or her personal right to testify or not to testify and (2) alert the defendant that, if he or she has not testified by the end of trial, the court will briefly question the defendant to ensure that the decision not to testify is the defendant's own decision." In addition, "the trial courts when informing the defendant of the right not to testify during the pretrial advisement must also advise the defendant that the exercise of this right may not be used by the fact finder to decide the case." State v. Monteil, 134 Hawai
'i 361, 373, 341 P.3d 567, 579 
(2014). 
Prior to trial, the District Court engaged Nakamitsu in
 
the following colloquy:
 
THE COURT: All right. Mr. Nakamitsu, first of all,
you have the right to remain silent, and if you remain
silent I will not hold that against you, and that if you
testify, the prosecutor has the opportunity to cross-examine
you.
 
You understand?
 
[Nakamitsu]: 
Yes, Your Honor.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The District Court's pre-trial colloquy was deficient 
because it failed to advise Nakamitsu that if he did not testify 
by the end of trial, the court would briefly question him to ensure that his decision not to testify was his own. See Lewis, 
94 Hawai
'i at 297, 12 P.3d at 1238. 
On appeal, the pre-trial advisement is reviewed for
 
"actual prejudice." Id. ("Because we view this prior-to-trial
 
advisement as incidental to the ultimate colloquy, any claim of
 prejudice resulting from the failure of the trial court to give
 it must meet the same actual prejudice standard applied to
 violations of the colloquy requirement.") (citations, internal
 quotation marks, and brackets omitted). Because we hold that the
 failure to properly conduct the "ultimate colloquy" was harmful
 error, infra, we need not address the issue of whether Nakamitsu
 could demonstrate "actual prejudice" with respect to the pre­trial colloquy.
2. "Ultimate" Colloquy
 
In Tachibana, 79 Hawai
'i at 236, 900 P.2d at 1303, the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court held that "in order to protect the right to 
testify under the Hawai 'i Constitution,[] trial courts must 
advise criminal defendants of their right to testify and must obtain an on-the-record waiver of that right in every case in which the defendant does not testify." Further, a trial court should limit the colloquy to advising the defendant that "he or she has a right to testify, that if he or she wants to testify that no one can prevent him or her from doing so, and that if he or she testifies the prosecution will be allowed to cross-examine him or her." 79 Hawai
'i at 236 n.7, 900 P.2d at 1303 n.7 
(citation, internal block quotation format, and brackets omitted). Last, "[i]n connection with the privilege against self-incrimination, the defendant should also be advised that he or she has a right not to testify and that if he or she does not testify then the jury can be instructed about that right." Id. 
(citation, block quotation format, and brackets omitted). 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The District Court gave Nakamitsu the following
 
"ultimate" colloquy:
 
THE COURT: All right. Mr. Nakamitsu, as I said at
the outset, you have the right to remain silent. If you
remain silent I will not hold that against you. If you
testify, the prosecutor has the opportunity to cross-examine
you.
 
You understand that?
 
[Nakamitsu]: Yes, Your Honor.
 THE COURT: Have you, yourself, made a decision to
remain silent or take the stand?
 
[Nakamitsu]: Silent.
 THE COURT: And that is your decision?
 [Nakamitsu]: Yes, Your Honor.
 
The "ultimate colloquy" was deficient for failing to
 
advise Nakamitsu that he had the right to testify and that no one
 
could prevent him from testifying.
 
In Tachibana, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that 
"[o]nce a violation of the constitutional right to testify is established, the conviction must be vacated unless the State can prove that the violation was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." Id. at 240, 900 P.2d at 1307. It cannot be said that the District Court's violation was "harmless beyond a reasonable doubt," because it is unknowable from the record whether any testimony by Nakamitsu would have established reasonable doubt that he committed OVUII. State v. Hoang, 94 Hawai
'i 271, 279, 12 
P.3d 371, 379 (App. 2000). See State v. Pomroy, 132 Hawai 'i 85, 
94, 319 P.3d 1093, 1102 (2014) as corrected (Jan. 29, 2015) (district court's Tachibana violation was not harmless where the court could not know "from [the] record whether Pomroy's testimony, had he given it, could have established reasonable doubt that he committed [the offense]"). 
With regard to the "ultimate colloquy," the District
 
Court plainly erred by failing to obtain a valid on-the-record
 waiver from Nakamitsu of his right to testify.
B. Motion to Dismiss
 
Nakamitsu argues that the District Court erred and
 
deprived him of his right to due process in denying the Motion to
 Dismiss, where the OVUII charge was fatally defective for failing
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to define the term "alcohol" and, thus, did not inform him of the
 
nature of the charges against him.
 
In State v. Turping, 136 Hawai 'i 333, 361 P.3d 1236 
(2015), as corrected (Mar. 19, 2015) cert. rejected (May 20, 2015), this court rejected the argument that a charge was deficient for failing to include the definition of alcohol. Moreover, we have rejected the argument that alcohol, as defined by HRS § 291E-1, is limited to distilled forms. State v. 
Tsujimura, CAAP-14-0001302, slip. op. at 4 (App. Jan. 27, 2016). 
The District Court did not err by denying the Motion to
 
Dismiss.
 
C. Motion to Suppress BAC
 
Nakamitsu argues that the District Court erred in 
denying his Motion to Suppress BAC because, among other things, Hawai
'i's implied consent law and the related provisions of HRS 
Chapter 291E criminalizing the refusal to submit to BAC testing are unconstitutional. 
At trial, Officer Desiderio testified that he read the
 
implied consent form verbatim to Nakamitsu. The form stated that
 if a defendant refused to take a test, he would be charged with
 refusal to submit to testing, a petty misdemeanor, and subject to
 up to thirty days in prison and/or a fine of up to $1,000, or the
 sanctions in HRS § 291E-65 if applicable. After the officer read
 the form, Nakamitsu opted to take the breath test.
 
In State v. Won, 136 Hawai
'i 292, 361 P.3d 1195 (2015), 
a police officer stopped Won for speeding, and noticed that Won's breath had an odor of alcohol and his eyes were red and watery. Id. at 297, 361 P.3d at 1200. The officer concluded that Won was likely intoxicated and administered to him an SFST and Preliminary Alcohol Screening, both of which Won failed. Id. at 
297-98, 361 P.3d at 1200-01. The officer arrested Won for OVUII in violation of HRS § 291E-61(a)(3). 
At the police station, a police officer read Won an
 
implied consent form, which informed Won, among other things,
 that if he refused to submit to a breath, blood, or urine test,
 he would be subject to up to thirty days in prison and/or a fine
 of up to $1,000 or the sanctions of 291E-65, if applicable. Id.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 297-98, 361 P.3d at 1200-01. Won assented to a breath test. 
Id. at 298, 361 P.3d at 1201.
 
The breath test measured Won's BAC at 0.17 grams of
 
alcohol per two hundred ten liters of breath. Id. The State
 
charged Won in an amended complaint with OVUII, in violation of
 HRS § 291E-61(a)(3). Id. 
At trial, Won filed a motion to suppress statements and
 
evidence of his breath test. Id. The State opposed the motion,
 
and the district court denied it. Id. at 298-99, 361 P.3d at
 
1201-02. The court convicted Won as charged. Id. at 299, 361
 
P.3d at 1202.
 
Won appealed to this court, arguing that the State 
obtained his BAC in violation of his constitutional right to refuse to consent to the breath test because the State coerced his consent by the threat of criminal prosecution and penalties. Id. This court affirmed Won's conviction and sentence. Id. Won 
applied for a writ of certiorari, which the Hawai
'i Supreme Court 
granted. Id. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that under the totality 
of the circumstances, Won's election to submit to the BAC test was not voluntary. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that the 
district court erred in not suppressing the result of Won's breath test. Id. at 318, 361 P.3d at 1221. Accordingly, the 
supreme court vacated the judgment on appeal and amended judgment of conviction and remanded the case to the district court for further proceedings consistent with the opinion. Id. In a 
footnote, the supreme court indicated that its holding would apply to Won and cases pending on direct appeal or not yet final at the time Won was rendered. Id. at 318 n.49, 361 P.3d at 1221 
n.49.
 
Here, as in Won, Nakamitsu assented to a breath test
 
after being informed that if he exercised his right to refuse to
 submit to a BAC test, his refusal would constitute the commission
 of a crime. Pursuant to Won, Nakamitsu's election to submit to
 the BAC test was not voluntary.
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D.	 Motion to Strike Officer Desiderio's SFST
 
Testimony
 
Nakamitsu argues that the District Court wrongly denied 
his motion to strike the testimony of Officer Desiderio, where 
the officer had no present recollection of Nakamitsu's performance on the SFST and his testimony on that point was based only on what he read in his report. Nakamitsu cites to State v. Dibenedetto, 80 Hawai
'i 138, 906 P.2d 624 (App. 1995), to support 
this argument. 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 602 generally 
requires that a witness have personal knowledge of matters to which he or she testifies. Rule 612 allows for the use of writings to refresh the memory of a witness, thus bringing the matters within the realm of the witness's personal knowledge. In State v. Ferrer, 95 Hawai
'i 409, 432, 23 P.3d 744, 767 (App. 
2001), this court explained: 
The purpose of [Federal Rules of Evidence] Rule 612,
upon which HRE Rule 612 is based, is
 
to "refresh memory" when it enables a witness
who suffers from loss of memory to recall at the
time of his [or her] testimony matters he [or
she] perceived in the past. In other words,
when a writing is used for these purposes, it
simply facilitates the witness' [sic] testimony
and is not itself offered into evidence. Thus,
where a witness never perceived the matters
described or where the writing does not reawaken
recollection of past perception, Rule 612 does
not permit a witness to simply read into
evidence the contents of the writing.
 
28 C. Wright & V. Gold, Federal Practice and Procedure:
Evidence § 6183, at 446 (1993) (footnotes omitted).
 
In Dibenedetto, 80 Hawai 'i at 140, 906 P.2d at 626, 
Dibenedetto was charged with committing OVUII in violation of HRS 
§ 291-4(a)(1) or (2) (Supp. 1992).3 At trial, the arresting 
officer testified that Dibenedetto failed the field sobriety tests. Id. at 141, 906 P.2d at 627. On cross-examination, the 
officer testified that his testimony regarding an aspect of the Walk-and-Turn test was based on his report and not his memory of what actually happened. Id. He testified that his memory of the 
3
 HRS § 291-4 was repealed and replaced by HRS § 291E-61 in 2000.
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
events was pretty cloudy and what he did remember was from his
 
recent review of the report. Id.
 
Counsel for Dibenedetto moved to strike the officer's
 
testimony on the ground that he was not testifying from his
 "independent recollection" but based on his report. Id. The
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court) denied the
 motion. Id. at 142, 906 P.2d at 628. After a trial, the circuit
 
court convicted Dibenedetto as charged. Id. at 140-41, 906 P.2d
 
at 626-27.
 
Dibenedetto appealed, arguing that the circuit court
 
erred in convicting him of OVUII, where the officer who conducted
 the field sobriety test lacked a present recollection of it. Id.
 
at 144, 906 P.2d at 630. This court agreed, holding that the
 circuit court wrongly admitted the officer's testimony:
 
[T]he officer's candid testimony leads us to the conclusion
that the officer did not have a "present recollection" of
the test at the time he testified. . . . [T]he officer
indicated that his testimony was based on what he had
recently read in his report. . . . . 
[HRE] Rule 612 indicates that a witness may use a
writing to refresh his memory for the purpose of testifying.
A writing, such as a police report, used to refresh a
witness's memory is ordinarily not submitted into evidence.
When used to refresh the witness's present recollection, a
writing is solely employed to jog the memory of the
testifying witness. Accordingly, when a writing is used to
refresh a witness's recollection, the witness should testify
from a memory thus revived, resulting in testimony from
present recollection, not a memory of the writing itself. A
 witness's recollection must be revived after he or she
 consults the particular writing or object offered as a
stimulus so that the resulting testimony relates to a
present recollection. If the writing fails to rekindle the
witness's memory, the witness cannot be permitted to testify
as to the contents of the writing unless the writing is
otherwise admitted into evidence.
 
Dibenedetto, 80 Hawai 'i at 144, 906 P.2d at 630 (quotation marks, 
ellipses, and brackets in original omitted). 
Here, although Officer Desiderio's recollection of 
Nakamitsu's performance on the SFST had to be repeatedly 
refreshed, his testimony was not based on his memory of the report only. Unlike Dibenedetto, Officer Desiderio did not testify that his testimony was based solely on his report, and it appears that the report stimulated his present memory of numerous details. See State v. Keohokapu, 127 Hawai
'i 91, 105, 276 P.3d 
660, 674 (2012). 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Further, as the State argues in its Answering Brief, 
given that prior to having his recollection refreshed, Officer 
Desiderio remembered significant details about the incident, such as what he observed when he arrived on the scene and talked to Nakamitsu, it is reasonable to infer that the SFST report merely jogged his memory. See State v. Espiritu, 117 Hawai
'i 127, 137­
38, 176 P.3d 885, 895-96 (2008) ("[T}hat the Complainant could recall substantial details about the messages prior to reading the report suggests that the Complainant in fact possessed a memory of the messages that only need refreshment via the report."). 
The District Court did not err in denying Nakamitsu's
 
motion to strike Officer Desiderio's testimony.
E. Motion to Re-Call Officer Tabanera
 
Nakamtisu argues that the District Court wrongly denied
 
his motion to re-call Officer Tabanera as a witness to rebut
 Officer Desiderio's testimony regarding the NHTSA's standards for
 administration and grading of the SFST.
 
HRE Rule 401 defines relevant evidence as "evidence
 
having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of
 consequence to the determination of the action more probable or
 less probable than it would be without the evidence." All
 relevant evidence is admissible unless a rule compels its
 exclusion. See HRE Rule 402.
 
The court abused its discretion, see HRE Rule 611
 
(trial court has discretion to "exercise reasonable control over
 the mode and order of interrogating witnesses and presenting
 evidence") in denying the motion to re-call Officer Tabanera to
 rebut Officer Desiderio's testimony regarding Nakamitsu's
 performance on the SFST. Testimony by Officer Tabanera regarding
 the NHTSA's standards for administering and grading the SFST was
 relevant to whether Officer Desiderio properly graded Nakamitsu's
 performance on the SFST, and Nakamitsu's performance on the SFST
 was a factor in the court's decision to find Nakamitsu guilty of
 OVUII in violation of HRS § 291E-61(a)(1). No rule compelled
 exclusion of this relevant evidence.
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
F. Motions for Judgment of Acquittal
 
Nakamitsu argues that the District Court erroneously
 
denied his motions for judgment of acquittal where the evidence
 
was insufficient to support the conviction under HRS § 291E­61(a)(1) or (3).
1. Substantial Evidence to Support HRS §291-61(a)(1)
 
Nakamitsu maintains that without Officer Desiderio's
 
testimony regarding Nakamitsu's performance on the SFST, which
 should have been stricken, and given the absence of any evidence
 as to how Nakamitsu's vehicular accident occurred, there was
 insufficient evidence that he committed OVUII in violation of HRS
 § 291E-61(a)(1).
 
As discussed, see Part III.D., the District Court did
 
not err by denying Nakamitsu's motion to strike Officer
 Desiderio's testimony regarding Nakamitsu's performance on the
 SFST. In addition, the officer testified that Nakamitsu walked
 away from a vehicle on the side of the road, in front of a light
 post that had fallen, knelt down, said he had been driving the
 vehicle, began crying, emitted the smell of alcohol from his body
 and breath, tried to balance himself, said something like "I'm
 fucked, I'm fucked," and failed the SFST. Officer Tabanera
 testified that Nakamitsu had kind of red and glassy eyes and
 emitted the smell of an intoxicant.
 
The State adduced substantial evidence regarding how
 
the vehicle accident occurred. Officer Tabanera testified that
 his investigation showed Nakamitsu's vehicle had come to a rest
 at the base of a street-light pole, which was dislodged and lying
 on the ground. The vehicle's front bumper and engine area were
 severely damaged. There were no marks that would have resulted
 from the application of a vehicle's brakes, or any other vehicles
 or obstructions in the roadway.
 
Given the prerogative of the finder of fact to 
determine the credibility of the witnesses and the weight of the evidence, Mitchell, 94 Hawai
'i at 393, 15 P.3d at 319, and "to 
make all reasonable and rational inferences under the facts in evidence, including circumstantial evidence[,]" see State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai
'i 131, 135, 913 P.2d 57, 61 (1996) (citation 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and internal quotation marks omitted), there was substantial
 
evidence that Nakamitsu operated his vehicle under the influence
 of alcohol in violation of HRS § 291E-61(a)(1).
2. Insubstantial Evidence for HRS § 291E-61(a)(3)
 
As Nakamitsu argues, without the BAC evidence, which
 
was inadmissible because Nakamitsu did not submit to the BAC test
 voluntarily, there is insufficient evidence to support the
 conviction for OVUII under HRS § 291E-61(a)(3).
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Accordingly, for the reasons set forth in this opinion,
 
Nakamitsu's conviction for OVUII in violation of HRS § 291E­61(a)(1) is vacated and the case is remanded for proceedings on
 that count consistent with this opinion, and the conviction for
 OVUII in violation of § 291E-61(a)(3) is reversed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 29, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Alen M. Kaneshiro,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Sonja P. McCullen,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
22
 