FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAI# I  
---o0o---
JW, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
RJ, Defendant-Appellee 
NO. CAAP-19-0000328 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-D NO. 07-1-3195) 
MARCH 16, 2020 
G
INOZA, CHIEF JUDGE, CHAN AND HIRAOKA, JJ.
OPINION OF THE COURT BY HIRAOKA, J.  
In this divorce case, Plaintiff-Appellant JW (Mother) 
appeals from two post-decree orders entered by the Family Court 
of the First Circuit:1 (1) the Decision and Order entered on 
February 7, 2019; and (2) the Reconsideration Order entered on 
March 14, 2019. For the reasons explained below, we vacate 
paragraphs 3 ("Child Support") and 5 ("Post High School Education Expenses") of the Decision and Order and remand to the family court for further proceedings. That disposition moots Mother's procedural appeal from the Reconsideration Order, except that the paragraph in the Reconsideration Order dealing with the 529 accounts is vacated. The family court's "Supplemental Record on 
1 The Honorable Jessi L.K. Hall presided. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appeal [Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law]" entered on 
May 20, 2019, is vacated to the extent it is inconsistent withthis opinion.  
I. Procedural History 
Mother and Defendant-Appellee RJ (
Father) were married.
They had three children, NJ, LJ, and CJ (collectively, the
Children). Mother filed for divorce on October 3, 2007. A 
stipulated divorce decree was entered on October 26, 2007. 
Mother and Father agreed to joint legal custody of the Children. Mother had sole physical custody of the Children, subject to Father's rights of reasonable visitation.  
On August 30, 2018, Father filed a motion for post-
decree relief. By that time the oldest of the Children, NJ, was over the age of 18 and attending college in another state. Father sought to modify his child support obligations and collegeexpense provisions in the divorce decree, among other things. 
On
the latter issue, Father's motion stated:   
HIGHER EDUCATION EXPENSES 
16. Pursuant to the Decree, in the event an adult
child of the parties is enrolled post high school on a full
time basis at an accredited college or university, or in avocational or trade school, [Mother] and [Father] shall eachprovide to said adult child as and for [their] educationalsupport a sum to be determined each year. 
17. The higher education provision should be modi-
fied to state that should a child continue [their] educationpost high school on a full-time basis at an accreditedcollege or university, or in a vocational or trade school,each parent shall each assume and pay one-half (l/2) of allpost high school, higher education expenses, less any finan-cial aid awarded to the child, until said child's graduationor attainment of the age of 23 years, whichever event shallfirst occur. The child shall reasonably explore and applyfor financial aid for the higher education expenses wheneverpossible. Such financial aid may be in the form of scholar-ships, tuition waivers, grants, student loans, and the like.The child shall accept any and all financial aid includingstudent loans awarded. Both parents shall fully cooperateand assist their child in the application process andprovide appropriate documentation as may be required. 
On October 1, 2018, Mother filed her own motion for 
post-decree relief. Mother sought relief on a number of issues,
including child support obligations, Father's non-payment of hisportion of the Children's extra-curricular, school-related, and   
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
non-insurance medical expenses, and Father's non-payment of his 
portion of NJ's college expenses. 
Both motions were heard by the family court on 
January 2, 2019. The parties had participated in mediation and had reached agreement on some of the issues. Counsel placed the agreements on the record, and a written stipulation was eventually filed. The family court scheduled an extended hearing for January 22, 2019, to deal with the outstanding issues. 
Father and Mother each testified during the January 22, 
2019 extended hearing, and the family court received a number of exhibits into evidence. The parties submitted written closing arguments. The family court entered the Decision and Order on February 7, 2019. Both parties filed motions for reconsideration or clarification. The family court entered the Reconsideration Order on March 14, 2019. Mother filed a notice of appeal on April 8, 2019. The family court filed its "Supplemental Record on Appeal [Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law]" on May 20, 2019.
2 At issue in this appeal are the family court's 
calculation of Father's gross monthly income and resultant child support obligations, and the use of three 529 savings plan accounts
3 owned by Mother to pay the Children's higher education 
expenses. 
II. Standards of Review 
[T]he family court possesses wide discretion in making its
decisions and those decision[s] will not be set aside unlessthere is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus, we will not 
2 Hawai #i Family Court Rules ( HFCR ) Rule 52(a) (2015) provides, in
relevant part: 
[U]pon notice of appeal filed with the court, the courtshall enter its findings of fact and conclusions of lawwhere none have been entered, unless the written decision ofthe court contains findings of fact and conclusions of law. 
3 "A 529 Savings Plan gets its name from Section 529 of the Internal
Revenue Code, which permits states to establish 'qualified tuition programs.'"Berens v. Berens, 818 S.E.2d 155, 157 (N.C. Ct. App. 2018) (citing 26 U.S.C.§ 529). "All fifty states and the District of Columbia sponsor at least onetype of 529 [savings] plan." In re Bourguignon, 416 B.R. 745, 749 (Bankr.
D. Idaho 2009) (citation omitted). There is no requirement that a personparticipate in the plan sponsored by the state in which the person, or theplan beneficiary, resides. The record does not indicate which state — or states — sponsor the plans at issue in this case. 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
disturb the family court's decisions on appeal unless the
family court disregarded rules or principles of law orpractice to the substantial detriment of a party litigantand its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of reason. 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai# i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(citation omitted). 
The family court's findings of fact are reviewed under 
the "clearly erroneous" standard. Fisher, 111 Hawai# i at 46, 137 
P.3d at 360. A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when the 
record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding, or despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, we are nonetheless left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. Id. "Substantial evidence" is credible 
evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion. Id. "It is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass 
upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." Id.
 (citation omitted). 
The family court's conclusions of law are ordinarily 
reviewed de novo, under the right/wrong standard, "and are freely reviewable for their correctness." Fisher, 111 Hawai# i at 46, 
137 P.3d at 360. However, when a conclusion of law presents mixed questions of fact and law, we review it under the "clearly erroneous" standard because the court's conclusions are dependent on the facts and circumstances of each individual case. Estate 
of Klink ex rel. Klink v. State
, 113 Hawai# i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 
504, 523 (2007). A conclusion of law that is supported by the trial court's findings of fact and reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be overturned. Id. 
III. 
Discussion 
A. The family court did not make findings of
fact that enable us to determine whether its calculation of Father's gross monthly incomewas supported by substantial evidence. 
Mother's first point of error is: "Whether the Family 
Court erred in its calculation of [Father]'s income for purposes 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of child support and therefore erred in the amount of child 
support [Father] is obligated to pay." 
The family court must utilize the current Hawai# i Child 
Support Guidelines (
Guidelines) to set or modify child support 
orders unless exceptional circumstances warrant departure. PO v. JS, 139 Hawai# i 434, 442, 393 P.3d 986, 994 (2017). The 
Guidelines are promulgated by the 
Hawai# i family courts, contain 
substantive rules and principles relating to calculation of support, and include various appendices; Appendix A includes the "Child Support Guidelines Worksheet" (CSG Worksheet), which is 
used to determine the initial calculation of a parent's monthly 
support obligation. Id. at 441-42, 393 P.3d at 993-94. 
Father is self-employed. 
In the case of a self-
employed parent, the family court should carefully scrutinize the reasonableness and appropriateness of business decisions that lessen the amount of income available for child support; a self-employed parent's business deductions should be carefully scrutinized to avoid the sheltering of income at the expense of lessening income available for child support. Doe v. Child 
Support Enf't Agency of Hawaii, 87 Hawai# i 178, 182, 953 P.2d 
209, 213 (App. 1998). 
Tax returns alone do not always provide an 
accurate determination of a self-employed parent's income; it is the disposable income of the parent, and not their income tax returns alone, which must be considered by the family court. Id.
It is necessary to examine the total financial situation of a self-employed parent, rather than to merely rely on tax returns for a determination of income. Id. 
For a self-employed parent, the Guidelines (2014) 
provide, in relevant part: 
III. OTHER CHILD SUPPORT CONSIDERATIONS 
. . . . 
E. SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS 
1. SELF-EMPLOYED  individuals with gross
incomes under $13,000 per month may
calculate Monthly Net Income (Line 2)using either the automated version of theCSG WORKSHEET or the manual steps in§III.E.2. below. 
Self-employed indi-
viduals must report gross income minus 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. ordinary, necessary and reasonable busi-
ness/operating expenses, and may include areasonable amount for ordinary wear andtear of capital assets (calculated on astraight line basis over the useful lifeof the asset), minus one-half of self-employment taxes (refer to tax returns).The Court or [the Office of Child SupportHearings] may determine what (if any)depreciation may be subtracted. 
SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS WITH INCOME OVER 
$13,000 PER MONTH  may calculate Monthly
Net Income (Line 2) by using either theautomated version of the CSG WORKSHEET (ongross income up to $999,999.00 per month)or by using the manual steps below. A worksheet for Self-Employed IndividualsWith Income Over $13,000 Per Month isattached as Appendix E. 
a. STEP ONE 
Add the gross monthly earned income from
all sources 
Deduct any allowable ordinary and
necessary expenses (see §III.E.1.) 
Calculate net self-employment income
(gross less allowed expenses) 
Multiply the net self-employment income by
92.35% (.9235) to calculate the amountsubject to Self-Employment Tax 
Calculate the self-employment tax on
92.35% of net self-employment income,15.3% on net earned income up to $9,475per month, and 2.9% on net earned incomeabove that amount 
b. STEP TWO 
Use the net self-employment income as
calculated above. 
Add all other remaining non-earned income
for Total Income Subject to Tax 
Deduct ½ of the Self-Employment Tax Calculate State and Federal Tax on the 
result using the applicable tables (see§III.D.2.(b)(c)). 
c. STEP THREE 
Use the Total Income Subject To Tax from
Step 2 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Subtract 
Self-Employment Tax
State Income Tax Federal Income Tax Self-Support of $840 (after taxpoverty level self-support in[Hawai #i]) 
The result is the Net Income for CSG WORKSHEET. 
Guidelines at 11, 16-17 (footnotes omitted) (some underscoring
added).  
Father referred to his income and expense statement and
asset and debt statement, both filed on December 28, 2018, and tohis 2017 federal and state tax returns, and argued for a finding that his gross income was $8,333.00 per month. Mother questionedthe sources and amounts of Father's stated income and business/operating expenses, and argued for a finding that Father's gross monthly income was "anywhere from $22,994.33/mo. to $33,862.48/mo." The family court's Decision and Order stated,in relevant part:   
 
 
3. Child Support. The Court determines . . . 
[Father]'s income for child support purposes to be
$10,591.60. 
Pursuant to the attached Child Support Guidelines
Worksheet, commencing February 1, 2019, [Father] shall pay[Mother] as and for the support, maintenance, and educationof the parties' minor children the sum of $249.00 per childper month for a total of $498.00 per month. 
Mother challenges findings of fact (FOF) nos. 9 and 10: 
9. For child support purposes [Father]'s gross
monthly income is determined to be $10,591.60, based on[Father]'s Exhibits A, D, and F.[
4] 
10. Pursuant to the Child Support Guidelines Work-
sheet attached to the Decision and Order, equal timesharingcalculation, [Father] shall pay [Mother] as and for thesupport, maintenance, and education of the parties' two (2)minor children the sum of $249.00 per child per month for atotal of $498.00 per month. 
4 Exhibit A was Father's income and expense statement and asset and
debt statement, both filed on December 28, 2018. Exhibit D was Father's W-2 earnings summary for tax years 2016 and 2017. Exhibit F consisted of Father's 2017 federal and state tax returns. 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Footnote added.) 
Mother also challenges conclusion of law (COL) 
no. 13: 
13. Based on the Child Support Guidelines Worksheet
(attached to the Decision and Order), commencing February 1,
2019, [Father] shall pay to [Mother] as and for the support,maintenance, and education of the parties' two (2) minorchildren the sum of $249.00 per child per month for a totalof $498.00 per month, through Child Support EnforcementAgency by way of an income assignment. 
The family court accepted neither Mother's nor Father's 
calculations of Father's gross income, and made its own calculation. Other than the mention of Father's Exhibits A, D, and F, the family court did not explain how it calculated Father's gross monthly income. Father made no attempt, either in the proposed findings of fact he submitted to the family court or in his answering brief in this appeal, to reconcile the family court's findings with the evidence in the record. We cannot determine, based on the record, whether or not the family court's finding that Father's gross monthly income was $10,591.60 is supported by substantial evidence. Accordingly, we vacate paragraph no. 3 of the Decision and Order and the related FOFs and COLs, and remand for the family court to either (a) enter specific findings of fact explaining its calculation of Father's gross monthly income, or (b) recalculate the amount of Father's monthly gross income and child support obligation. 
B. The 529 savings plan accounts are Mother's
separate property; they should not have beenallocated to pay a portion of Father's shareof the Children's higher education expenses. 
Mother's second point of error is: "Whether the Family 
[Court] erred in its interpretation and allocation of [Mother]'s 
529 plan contrary to either the language and/or understanding or intent of the parties' Divorce Decree, and given the testimony and evidence received related [sic] to the 529 plan being owned by [Mother], and based on the law governing and interpreting such plans." 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mother's asset and debt statement identified a 529 
savings plan account with a market value of $227,474.5 The 
Decision and Order states, in relevant part: 
5. Post High [sic] School Education Expenses. 
[Mother] and [Father] shall each assume and pay a pro rata
share of any and all costs of higher education expenses inwhich the child of the parties may enroll. . . . Commencingwith school year 2019-2020, the 529 accounts for each childshall be applied directly to tuition, fees, and books,before determining each parties [sic] pro rata share. 
Said pro rata share shall be defined as the percentage
which that parent's monthly net income (i.e., form [sic]Child Support Guidelines Worksheet Table) bears to thecombined total of the parent's monthly net incomes (i.e.,from Child Support Guidelines Worksheet Table), all as isreflected on the Child Support Guidelines Worksheet orequivalent (i.e., currently depicted on line 3 of the ChildSupport Guidelines Worksheet). Currently said percentagesare thirty-eight percent (38%) by [Mother] and sixty-twopercent (62%) by [Father]. 
(Some underscoring added.) The Reconsideration Order states: 
As for clarification of the 529 accounts, this Court
clarifies its order such that the 529 accounts shall be usedto pay post-high school tuition, fees, and books each yearcommencing school year 2019-2020, for the child whose nameis on the account until the funds are depleted. All other expenses detailed in paragraph 5 of the Decision and Orderentitled "Post-High School Educational Expenses" shall besplit between the parties as provided in said paragraph.Once the 529 funds are depleted, the tuition, fees and booksshall be paid by the parties as provided in paragraph 5 ofthe Decision and Order.  
Mother challenges the following FOFs: 
23. The 529 accounts for each child shall be applied
directly to tuition, fees, and books, before determiningeach parties' [sic] pro rata share. All other expensesshall be paid by the parties per the pro rata share. 
. . . . 
25. On [Mother]'s Asset and Debt Statement filed
September 19, 2018, paragraph 4, [Mother] states that thereare 529 accounts for the children in a total amount of $
227,474.00. 
26. Per [Mother]'s testimony, [NJ] has approximately
$47,000.00, [LJ] has approximately $97,000.00, and [CJ] hasapproximately $74,000.00 in their respective 529 accounts. 
5 There were actually three 529 savings plan accounts — one for each
of the Children — with a total value of $227,474. 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
27. [Mother] . . . lists the title[] of . . . the
. . . 529 to be in her name. 
. . . . 
29. The 529 plans were established for each child
during the marriage and [Mother]'s family contributed monies
to the 529 plans. 
30. [Mother] provided no proof that she was the sole
owner of the 529 accounts and that they were not held forthe benefit of each child. 
FOF no. 23 is actually a conclusion of law, which we review de 
novo. Mother also challenges the following COLs: 
9. The "529 Qualified Tuition Program" was enacted
through 26 U.S.C. Section 529 . In general, any contribu-
tions to a qualified tuition program (529 Plan) on behalf of
any designated beneficiaries (minor child) shall be treatedas a complete gift to such beneficiaries, which is not afuture interest in property. 
10. Any 529 Plans are considered completed gifts to
the minor child, and do not belong to the parent. Althougha parent may be designated as the custodian of the 529 Plan,the ownership is that of the designated beneficiary, in thiscase the minor child. 
11. This Court has the authority to make a ruling
affecting the 529 Plans since it is one of the stipulatedissues before the court. 
Mother first contends that the family court should not 
have addressed the 529 savings plan accounts because "allocation 
of the parties [sic] 529 plans was not included in either party’s Motions [sic] for Post-Decree Relief." We disagree. Father's post-decree motion put payment of the Children's higher education expenses at issue. "A 529 plan is a tax-advantaged savings plan designed to encourage saving for future education costs." U.S. Sec. & Exch. Comm'n, Investor Bulletin: An Introduction to 529 Plans (May 29, 2018), https://www.investor.gov/introduction-investing/general-resources/news-alerts/alerts-bulletins/investor-bulletins-11 (SEC Publication).  Accordingly, 
it was appropriate for the family court to address the potential 
use of the 529 savings plan accounts when deciding the parties' respective obligations for payment of the Children's higher education expenses. 
Mother next contends, and we agree, that the family 
court erred by concluding that the 529 savings plan accounts were 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
property of the Children. 
Mother testified that the accounts
were opened during the marriage, because:  
My parents and my grandmother were gifting money and
they didn't wanna give it to me. They gave it to the
[Children] and they established those accounts for them. 
. . . . 
They're securities held in my name and I am -- the way
I understand it is that if I want to use it for anythingother than the [Children's] expenses, I will get a taxpenalty, but they are technically my . . . securities. 
Father's brief argues, without citing authority, that "The funds 
of [sic] the 529 accounts were gifts from [Mother]'s parents and grandparents [sic] or from the children's maternal grandparents [sic] with the specific intent to be used for higher educational [sic] purposes." On that issue, 26 U.S.C. § 529 provides, in part: 
(c) Tax treatment of designated beneficiaries and
contributors .--
. . . . 
(2) Gift tax treatment of contributions .--For 
purposes of chapters 12 and 13-
-
(A) In general .--Any contribution to a
qualified tuition program on behalf of any
designated beneficiary--
(i) shall be treated as a completed gift
to such beneficiary which is not a futureinterest in property[.] 
However, "§ 529(c) deals with the 'tax treatment' of contribu-
tions to Section 529 accounts, not ownership of the accounts." In re Addison, 540 F.3d 805, 819 (8th Cir. 2008). "[T]he treat-ment of these [529] plans for tax purposes does not control the determination of ownership[.]" Berens v. Berens, 818 S.E.2d 155,158 (applying North Carolina equitable distribution statute).  
Mother testified on cross-examination: 
Q So . . . you agree that these funds are in a
529, that you're the custodian for them. 
A I agree that I am the owner of the 529
securities. 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q Okay. With each [child] listed as the
beneficiary, if you will, for those 529 plans. Because it
has to be a minor associated with each plan.  
A Yes. 
Q Okay. Do you have any objection in applying
those funds towards their higher education expenses? That's
what they're for.  
A 
I would like to determine how those funds are
spent for their . . . higher education. . . . Which mayinclude graduate school.  
Q Well, but my -- my question to you is do you
have any objection in applying the 529 plans for theirundergraduate education? 
A Yes, I do. 
Q And what would that -- what would your
objections be? 
A If I can cover their . . . education on my own,
then -- with my own resources, then I would like to do so sothat money is there for their graduate school, or if they dowant to purchase real estate down the road. 
And I . . . 
just wanna keep that for them as their . . . resources fordown the road as much as possible. 
Mother's understanding of her ownership of, and ability to use, 
the funds in her 529 savings plan accounts is correct. Accordingto the federal Securities and Exchange Commission:  
If you use 529 account withdrawals for qualified higher
education expenses or tuition for elementary or secondaryschools, earnings in the 529 account are not subject tofederal income tax and, in many cases, state income tax.However, if 529 account withdrawals are not used forqualified higher education expenses or tuition forelementary or secondary schools, they will be subject tostate and federal income taxes and an additional 10% federal tax penalty on earnings. 
SEC Publication (underscoring added). "The beneficiaries of 529 
Savings Plans do not have any ownership or control of the funds; the plan participants can choose not to spend the money on their child’s education and (after paying a penalty) spend the money onsomething else entirely." Berens, 818 S.E.2d at 156.  
[P]arents are under no obligation to spend the money in a
529 Savings Plan on the educational expenses of the childrenlisted as the plan beneficiaries. For example, a familywith four 529 Savings Plans, one for each of their fourchildren, could later choose to use all the money for asingle child with particularly high college expenses. Or those same parents could withdraw all the money, pay a taxpenalty, and buy a vacation home. Whether these are wise 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
decisions, or ones that parents likely would make, is
irrelevant — parents could do so if they wanted, and this isproof that 529 Savings Plan contributions are not gifts tothe plan beneficiaries. Thus, absent some additionalactions by the parents to restrict the use of the 529Savings Plan funds, those funds are solely the property ofthe parents. 
Id. at 158 (citation and footnote omitted); accord In re 
Hennessy, 526 B.R. 806, 809 (Bankr. D. Minn. 2015) (noting that debtor, as the owner of 529 plans benefitting his minor children,could make decisions regarding each account, including withdrawing from the account and changing the beneficiary).  
In this case, the parties' stipulated divorce decree
states, in relevant part:  
b. Bank Accounts . . . . 
Any and all other . . . savings . . . accounts which
are currently maintained in the sole and separate name of
[Mother] or [Father] are awarded as the sole and separateproperty of the respective party who so maintains saidaccount or accounts. Specifically, [Mother] is awarded asher sole and separate property any and all of her bankaccounts, if any, and [Father] hereby waives any claim hemay have thereto. 
[Father] is awarded as his sole and
separate property any and all of his bank accounts, if any,and [Mother] hereby waives any claim she may have thereto. 
Mother testified: 
Q And . . . why were you awarded those [accounts]
in the decree? 
A Because . . . the securities were just whoever
had whatever in their name. And when we split . . . we eachhad assets that . . . came from our families. 
Like, for
example, [Father] had the Four K's Corporation that he hadstarted with his . . . siblings. He had some familyproperty. I had some family property that came with myfamily. And . . . so it seemed reasonable to just kind oflet each of us -- like rather than try and argue over thatkinda thing when it was clearly this is from his family,this is from my family, just do it that way and then make itless . . . difficult . . . a divorce. 
Q Okay. And so because the 529s had been funded 
by money from your family, that's why it [sic] went to you. 
A 
Yes. 
Father agreed that he did not contribute any money to the 529 
savings plan accounts at issue. Thus, under the divorce decreeand the facts of this case, the 529 savings plan accounts are Mother's separate property, to use as she desires — even for  
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
other than "qualified higher education expenses." The family 
court erred in its Decision and Order by requiring that "the 529 accounts for each child shall be applied directly to tuition, fees, and books, before determining each parties [sic] pro rata share." We vacate paragraph no. 5 of the Decision and Order
6 the 
related FOFs and COLs, and the paragraph in the Reconsideration Order dealing with the 529 accounts. 
C. Mother's third point of error is moot. 
Finally, Mother contends that the family court erred by 
denying her motion for reconsideration on the basis that it was untimely. The motion asked that the family court reconsider (1) its determination of Father's gross monthly income and (2) its allocation of the 529 savings plan accounts. Because we are vacating paragraphs 3 and 5 of the Decision and Order and the paragraph in the Reconsideration Order dealing with the 529 accounts, Mother's procedural appeal from the Reconsideration Order is moot. 
IV. Conclusion 
Based upon the foregoing, paragraphs 3 and 5 of the 
family court's Decision and Order, the related FOFs and COLs, and 
the paragraph in the Reconsideration Order dealing with the 529 accounts, are vacated, and this case is remanded to the family court for proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
On the briefs: 
Rebecca A. Copeland,
for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Blake T. Okimoto,
for Defendant-Appellee. 
6 The provisions in paragraph no. 5 dealing with the parties'
respective pro rata shares are also vacated because the percentages may changedepending upon the family court's calculation of Father's gross monthly incomeon remand. 
14 