
 

 

 




 

 

 




 

 




 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000675
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE INTEREST OF JM
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
 
(FC-S NO. 13-00164)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Father-Appellant/Cross-Appellee CM and Mother­
Appellee/Cross-Appellant TB appeal separately from the "Order

 
 
Terminating Parental Rights" entered on September 11, 2015 in the
 
 
1

Family Court of the First Circuit  (family court). CM also
 
 
appeals from the "Letters of Permanent Custody" entered on
 
 
September 11, 2015 in the family court.
 
 
2
On appeal, CM contends  the family court "clearly erred
 
1 The Honorable Frances Q.F. Wong presided.
 
2 CM's opening brief fails to comply with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4), which provides, in pertinent part: 
Rule 28. BRIEFS
 
. . . .
 
(b) Opening brief. Within 40 days after the filing of
the record on appeal, the appellant shall file an opening
brief, containing the following sections in the order here
indicated:
 
. . . .
 
(4) A concise statement of the points of error set
forth in separately numbered paragraphs. Each point shall
state: (i) the alleged error committed by the court or
(continued...)
 


 

 

 

 
	 
 








 
 



4 HRS § 587A-16(b)(1) provides: 
 
 
§587A-16 Guardian ad litem. 
 
 
. . . . 
 
 
(b) 
The court may appoint a guardian ad litem for an 

incapacitated adult party, as set forth below: 
 
 
(1) 	 	 Upon the request of any party or sua sponte, the 

court may order a professional evaluation of an 

adult party to determine the party's capacity to 

substantially: 
 
 
(A) 	 	 Comprehend the legal significance of the 

issues and nature of the proceedings under 

this chapter; 
 
 
(B) 		  Consult with counsel; and 
 
 
(C) 	 	 Assist in preparing the party's case or 

strategy[.] 
 
 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in finding clear and convincing evidence that [CM] was not
 
 
willing and able to provide the Child with a safe family home and
 
 
that it was not reasonably foreseeable that [CM] will become
 
 
willing and able to provide the Child with a safe family home."
 
 
TB argues3 on appeal that the family court erred in
 
failing to provide TB with an appointed guardian ad litem
 
pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 587A-16 (Supp.
 
2015).4
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve CM and
 
 
TB's points raised on appeal as follows and affirm.
 

 
I.	 Termination of CM's Parental Rights
 
On appeal, CM argues, "The evidence shows that [CM] was
 
 
willing and making an effort to provide a safe family home for
 
 
2(...continued)
 
agency; (ii) where in the record the alleged error occurred;
and (iii) where in the record the alleged error was objected
to or the manner in which the alleged error was brought to
the attention of the court or agency. 
CM's counsel is warned that future violations of HRAP Rule 28 may result in
sanctions. Because of the nature of this case, we address all of the
arguments presented in CM's opening brief. 
3 TB's opening brief fails to comply with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4). TB's
 
counsel is warned that future violations of HRAP Rule 28 may result in
sanctions. Because of the nature of this case, we address all of the
arguments presented in TB's opening brief. 
2
 
 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 




 






 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Child. Had [CM] been able to contact [the Department of
 
Human Services (DHS)] and if DHS had provided additional support
 
to [CM], it is reasonably foreseeable that [CM] may have become
 
willing and able to provide the Child with a safe family home." 
CM cites to instances in which he "made efforts to
 
satisfy the service plan" and his medical issues in an attempt to
 counterbalance the family court's findings of "several instances
 where [CM] failed to comply with the recommended services."
 Specifically, CM cites to evidence showing that he tried to
 contact his social worker in attempts to find programs in Arizona
 to satisfy the requirements of the service plan, but was
 unsuccessful.
5
 
CM's argument is insufficient to overcome the 
overwhelming evidence in the record, and the numerous unchallenged findings of fact, supporting the family court's determination that CM was not presently willing and able to provide the child with a safe family home and that it was not reasonably foreseeable that CM would become willing and able to do so in the future. Therefore, the family court's findings and conclusions are not clearly erroneous. See In re Doe, 95 Hawai
'i 
183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001) ("The family court's [findings of fact] are reviewed on appeal under the 'clearly erroneous' standard." (citing In Interest of Doe, 84 Hawai
'i 41, 46, 928 
P.2d 883, 888 (1996)).
II. Appointment of Guardian ad Litem for TB
 
TB's sole argument on appeal is that the family court
 
erred by failing to appoint a guardian ad litem under HRS § 587A­
16 because TB was an "incapacitated adult party."6
 
[T]he purpose of appointing a guardian ad litem is to
protect the person under disability. Indeed, courts should
appoint guardians ad litem for parties litigant when
 
5 In a Family Service Plan dated July 31, 2014, the DHS recommended
random drug monitoring/screening, sex abuse assessment and counseling,
parenting education, cooperation with the DHS social worker, and work in
partnership with the DHS social worker.
 
6 An "incapacitated person" under HRS § 587A-4 (Supp. 2015) is defined
as "a person who, even with appropriate and reasonably available assistance,
is unable to substantially: (1) Comprehend the legal significance of the
issues or nature of the proceedings under this chapter; (2) Consult with
counsel; and (3) Assist in preparing the person's case or strategy." (Format
altered.)
 
3
 




 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasonably convinced that a party litigant is not competent,
understandingly and intelligently, to comprehend the
significance of legal proceedings and the effect and
relationship of such proceedings in terms of the best
interests of such party litigant.
 
In re Doe , 108 Hawai 'i 144, 154, 118 P.3d 54, 64 (2005) (emphases 
and internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Leslie v. Estate
 
 
of Tavares, 91 Hawai 'i 394, 400, 984 P.2d 1220, 1226 (1999). 
A psychological evaluation of TB dated January 13, 2014
 
 
explained and summarized TB's presenting problems, stating: 
 
[TB] presents with clear mental health concerns that
 
are pertinent to an assessment of her day-to-day functioning
 
as a parent. Her general presentation and the findings on
 
the personality aspects of the testing are reflective of an
 
individual with a mood disorder with marked hypomanic
 
features evident today. She was hyper-verbal, spoke in a
 
fast manner, was impulsive in her responding and evidenced
 
no insight into how her mental condition impacts on her
 
functioning much less her ability to parent. There are
 
 
indications of [TB] having difficulties viewing her own
 
limitations and she appears to overuse denial to avoid self-
 
examination. She might not utilize energy very wisely and
 
might not see projects or responsibilities through to
 
completion. She may become bored and restless easily and
 
have little interest in details or routines. She might tend
 
to have a low tolerance for frustration. While she has an
 
 
adequate knowledge and understanding about basic parenting
 
skills and information, it is questionable as to the degree
 
to which she would be capable of applying these in an
 
orderly and systematic manner. Accordingly, she is regarded
 
as at increased risk for physical and psychological neglect.
 
Prognostically, taking into consideration her long-standing
 
history of mental disorder, past failures in treatment
 
services, current denial of a mental disorder and lack of
 
understanding or appreciation as to how her behavior [sic]
 
on her ability to parent, [TB] would be expected to evidence
 
little or no significant positive change.
 
 
The evaluation also stated, "The mental status examination and
 
 
findings from the personality measures did not reveal indications
 
 
of impairment of reality contact or psychotic related
 
 
symptomatology. There were no indications of hallucinations,
 
 
delusions, paranoia or other marked disturbances in [TB's] basic
 
 
thinking or perceptual processes." The assessment did not
 
 
indicate that TB would have difficulty understanding or
 
 
participating in the proceedings involving the termination of her
 
 
parental rights.
 
 
A behavioral health initial evaluation dated August 21,
 
 
2013 assessed TB's functioning, stating: 
 
[TB] is currently experiencing symptoms of Mania
 
associated with her diagnosis of Bipolar disorder, and is
 
facing [Child Protective Services] involvement with her
 
newborn given poor follow through with her psychiatric
 
 
4
 






 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
concerns. [TB] demonstrates limited insight and motivation
into addressing the issues associated with her mood
disorder, and minimizes the appropriateness of on-going
psychiatric treatment. In addition, [TB] has significant
psychosocial stressors that are contributory to her current
symptoms and which need to be addressed in anticipation of
her continued parenting role.
 
The need for both behavioral and medical interventions 
 
 
for addressing her depression, mania, and anxiety were 

discussed with [TB], particularly in light of CPS 

involvement with her family. It was strongly recommended to
 
[TB] and her boyfriend that they initiate Behavioral Health 

services at the earliest opportunity as part of her 

postpartum management. 
 
 
The evaluation did not indicate that TB would have difficulty
 
 
understanding or participating in a termination of parental
 
 
rights hearing.
 
 
A substance abuse assessment dated September 26, 2014
 
 
stated:
 
 
This client reported no suicidal/homicidal ideations.
 
There was no evidence of delusions, obsessions, compulsions,
 
or a bizarre belief system. The client's intelligence
 
appeared to be average. She seemed focused and was able to
 
 
concentrate throughout the entire interview. Her immediate
 
 
memory was intact and her remote memory appeared to be fair.
 
Her impulse control was good. She has good judgment and
 
insight. She appears to be motivated to comply with her
 
service plan.
 
 
The assessment did not indicate that TB would have difficulty
 
 
understanding or participating in a termination of parental
 
 
rights hearing.
 
 
TB's manic presentation at trial and the psychological
 
 
evaluations evidencing TB's struggle with symptoms related to her

 
 
diagnosis of Bipolar disorder do not conclusively demonstrate
 
 
that TB was unable to comprehend the legal significance of the
 
 
termination of parental rights hearing, to consult with counsel,
 
 
or to assist in the preparation of her case or strategy. See HRS
 
 
§ 587A-16. Additionally, there is no indication in the record
 
 
that any party requested an evaluation of TB related to
 
 
appointing a guardian ad litem for her or that the court
 
 
considered appointing a guardian ad litem for TB. In sum, the
 
 
family court's failure to appoint a guardian ad litem for TB was
 
 
not an abuse of discretion. See Doe, 108 Hawai 'i at 153, 118 
P.3d at 63 (noting that a family court's decision to appoint a
 
 
guardian ad litem is reviewed for abuse of discretion).
 
 
5
 
 


 

 



 


 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the September 11, 2015 "Order
 
 
Terminating Parental Rights" and September 11, 2015 "Letters of
 
 
Permanent Custody" both entered in the Family Court of the First
 
 
Circuit are affirmed.
 
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 20, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Jason Z. Say
 
for Father-Appellant/Cross-
Appellee.
 
 Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
 
Associate Judge
 
Herbert Y. Hamada

 
for Mother-Appellee/Cross-
Appellant. 
Mary Anne Magnier
Kurt Jamie Shimamoto
 Deputy Attorneys General
for Appellee/Cross-Appellee Department of Human Services.
 
6
 