 
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000754 22-JAN-2026 07:50 AM Dkt. 49 SO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000754 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
FRIENDS OF MĀHĀ‘ ULEPŪ, a nonprofit corporation, and  
SAVE KŌLOA, a nonprofit corporation,  
Petitioners/Appellants-Appellants,
  
v. 
KAUA‘I PLANNING COMMISSION, County of Kaua‘ i, 5425 PAU A LAKA, 
LLC, a limited liability corporation, and MERIDIAN PACIFIC, (fka 
Kiahuna Po‘ ipū Golf Resort, LLC), Respondents/Appellees-Appellees  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 5CCV-23-0000146)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.) 
Petitioners/Appellants-Appellants Friends of Māhā
ʻulepū 
and Save Kōloa (collectively, Appellants) appeal from the 
Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit's1 (circuit court): (1) 
October 10, 2024 "Respondent/Appellee[-Appellee] Kauaʻ i Planning 
Commission, County of Kauaʻ i's [(the Commission)] Findings of 
Fact [(FOFs)], Conclusions of Law [(COLs)], Decision and Order 
1 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
 Re: Agency Appeal, Filed December 28, 2023" (Order), and (2) 
October 22, 2024 "Final Judgment." The Order and Final Judgment 
affirmed the Commission's December 22, 2023 "Decision and Order
 
of the [Commission]" (Commission's Decision and Order) approving 
Defendants/Appellees-Appellees 5425 Pau A Laka, LLC and Meridian Pacific's (collectively, Pau A Laka) master drainage plan (MDP). 
Pau A Laka is building a residential resort (the 
Development Project) on land it owns in Kōloa,  Kauaʻi
 . The land 
once belonged to Kiahuna Poipu Golf Resort LLC. In 2006, the Commission granted
 Kiahuna Poipu Golf Resort LLC's application 
for a Class IV Zoning Permit Z-IV-2006-27, Use Permit U-2006-26, and Project Development Use Permit P.D.U.-2006-25 (collectively, the Permits). The Permits applied to the land where the 
Development Project is being constructed, plus adjoining land 
then owned by Kiahuna Poipu Golf Resort LLC and currently owned 
by others. 
Relevant here, the Permits included Permit Condition 
26, which provided that, 
Prior to building permit approval, [Pau A Laka] shall 
submit a[n]  [MDP]  for all lands mauka of [ Poʻipū]  Road 
rezoned under Moana Corporation Ordinance No. PM
-31-79 for 
[Commission]  review and approval, including [ Kāneiʻolouma]  
Heiau.  
(Emphasis added.) 
In 2023, Pau A Laka retained Esaki Surveying and 
Mapping, Inc. to prepare an MDP that would comply with Permit 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
     
  
 
 
 
   
 Condition 26. Pau A Laka submitted the MDP for the Commission's 
"review and approval."2 Appellants filed a petition to intervene 
(Petition to Intervene), in which they sought a contested case 
on the matter of the MDP's compliance with Permit Condition 26. 
Appellants alternatively requested that the Commission deny Pau 
A Laka's request for approval of its MDP. At its December 12, 
2023 meeting, the Commission heard testimony from the public and 
parties, and reviewed Appellants' Petition to Intervene and the opposing papers, the Planning Department Director's report, and 
the recommendation and comments from DPW. The Commission denied 
Appellants' Petition to Intervene, and found the MDP satisfied Permit Condition 26. 
Appellants appealed the Commission's Decision and 
Order to the circuit court. The circuit court affirmed. 
Appellants raise the following points of error on 
secondary appeal, contending that the circuit court erred in 
affirming the Commission's Decision and Order because: (1) 
Appellants were entitled to a contested case on the "review and 
approval" of the MDP; (2) Appellants had standing to intervene 
as to the Commission's "review and approval" of the MDP; and (3) 
the requirements of Permit Condition 26 were not met. 
2 Prior to the submission of the MDP to the Commission, Pau A Laka 
submitted a draft MDP to the Kauaʻ i County Department of Public Works (DPW). 
The draft MDP was revised several times in response to comments by DPW. 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
   
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We review secondary appeals de novo, and apply the 
standards set forth in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 91-14(g) 
(Supp. 2016)3 to determine whether the circuit court's 
determinations were right or wrong. Flores v. Bd. of Land &
Nat. Res., 143 Hawaiʻ i 114, 120, 424 P.3d 469, 475 (2018).  Upon 
careful review of the record, briefs, and relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve 
Appellants' points of error as follows. 
(1) Appellants contend that they were entitled to a 
contested case because the Commission's review and approval of 
the MDP
 implicated their asserted constitutional rights to a 
3 HRS § 91- 14(g) provides, in relevant part: 
Upon review of the record, the court may affirm the 
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions 
for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the 
decision and order if the substantial rights of the 
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders 
are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions; 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction of 
the agency; 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; 
(4) Affected by other error of law; 
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on the whole record; or 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of 
discretion. 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
 
  
 
  
   
 
 
      
     
  
 
 clean and healthful environment, and to engage in traditional 
and customary Native Hawaiian practices.4 In their Petition to 
Intervene, Appellants assert their right to "utilize areas within, adjacent, and near to the subject property" for the 
exercise of traditional and customary practices, the "protection 
of endangered species endemic to the South Shore of Kauaʻ i," and 
"support[] and protect[] historic and culturally significant sites, including Kānei[ʻ ]olouma [Heiau]."  Appellants contend 
that their "cultural practices could be adversely impacted by 
improper drainage precautions and other uses of the property," 
and "[f]urther blasting on the property, including to create 
detention or retention basins, may further impair underground 
hydrogeological flows to Kānei[ʻ ]olouma." 
A contested case is statutorily defined as "a 
proceeding in which the legal rights, duties, or privileges of 
specific parties are required by law to be determined after an 
opportunity for agency hearing." HRS § 91-1 (Supp. 2017). "A 
contested case hearing is required by law when it is required 
by: (1) statute; (2) administrative rule; or (3) constitutional 
4 Haw. Const. art. XI, § 9 ("Each person has the right to a clean 
and healthful environment, as defined by laws relating to environmental 
quality, including control of pollution and conservation, protection and 
enhancement of natural resources."); Haw. Const. art. XII, § 7; Kiaʻi Wai 
o 
Waiʻaleʻale v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 157 Hawaiʻi 303, 323, 576 P.3d 816, 836 
(2025) ("[T]he right to exercise native Hawaiian customs and traditions under 
article XII, section 7 [is] a property interest for which due process 
protections applie[s]. ") (citations omitted). 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 due process." Flores, 143 Hawaiʻ i at 124, 424 P.3d at 479 
(citation omitted). "If a party demonstrates a constitutionally 
protected property interest affected by a government agency's 
decision, that party has a due process right to notice and an 
opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful 
manner." Sierra Club v. Bd. of Land & Nat
. Res., 156 
Hawaiʻi 
382, 394-95, 575 P.3d 472, 484
-85 (2025) (citation omitted). 
In determining whether a constitutional due process 
right exists, 
First, 
which claimant seeks to protect by a hearing is "property"  
within the meaning of the due process clauses of the 
federal and state constitutions. Second, if this court 
concludes that the interest is "property," this court 
analyzes what specific procedures are required to protect 
it.  this court considers whether the particular interest 
Flores, 143 Hawaiʻ i  at 125, 424 P. 3d at 480 (emphasis added) 
(cleaned up).  
With regard to the second step of the above test, 
[D]etermination of the specific procedures required to 
satisfy due process requires an additional balancing of three factors: (1) the private interest which will be 
affected; (2) the risk of an erroneous deprivation of such interest through the procedures actually used, and the probable value, if any, of additional or alternative 
procedural safeguards; and (3) the governmental interest, 
including the burden that additional procedural safeguards 
would entail. 
Kiaʻi Wai o  Waiʻaleʻale, 157 Hawai ʻi at 322, 576 P.3d at  835  
(emphasis added) (cleaned up).  
Our review  of Appellants' contention  is informed by 
what the MDP is. The MDP is a compilation of drainage 
6   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
 
 information for, as Permit Condition 26 specifies, "all lands 
mauka of [Po ipū ʻ] Road rezoned under Moana Corporation Ordinance 
No. PM-31-
79." These lands include the Development Project and 
six other projects to which Pau A Laka asserts no ownership 
and/or development interest. For these developments, the MDP 
sets forth the following information: location, project 
description, zoning, project status, engineer, runoff, and 
detention/retention basins. 
The MDP evaluates  the impact of "existing drainage 
conditions" and "the existing and proposed drainage facilities"  
for all the land included in Moana Corporation Ordinance No. PM
-
31-79, explaining  that, "[t]he existing and proposed 
detention/retention features are built and designed to detain 
proposed development runoff to the existing and pre-development 
flow rates for both a 2-year, 24-hour storm event and a 100-
year, 24-hour storm event." Consequently, "there would be no 
adverse impact to . . . Kānei[ʻ ]olouma  Heiau, which is contained 
outside of the Petition area."    
The MDP also "summarizes the mitigative measures 
already completed or measures that should be implemented to comply with the County of Kaua
ʻi Storm Water Runoff
 System 
Manual." The MDP observes that the "flooding problem [within 
Kānei olouma ʻ Heiau]" is likely caused by the drainage of water 
from the mauka subdivision -- i.e., Weliweli Houselots 
7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
   
 
 subdivision, a development that is not owned by Pau A Laka. The 
MDP suggests that "[o]ne option to mitigate runoff from Weliweli 
Houselots subdivision is to expand the detention basin(s) that 
would need to be constructed as part of development on [Tax Map 
Key] (4) 2-8-14: 19." In presenting that option, the MDP 
clarifies that, "the final design of the detention basin is 
subject to County review and approval before any development in this area can commence." 
The MDP's treatment of potential mitigation measures 
illustrates what the MDP is not. The MDP is not a permit 
application, nor does it seek approval for Pau A Laka to take 
any action related to drainage. Simply put, the MDP does not 
change the status quo. The MDP integrated, within a single 
document, the existing drainage for all land subject to Moana 
Corporation Ordinance No. PM-31-79, including Pau A Laka's Development Project. As such, the Commission's review and 
approval of the MDP did not affect the "legal rights, duties, or 
privileges" asserted by the Appellants. 
(2) Appellants contend that they have standing to 
intervene as to the Commission's "review and approval" of Pau A 
Laka's MDP. They assert standing to intervene based on alleged 
injuries caused by Pau A Laka's alleged environmental harm and 
interference with their right to engage in Native Hawaiian 
8   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 traditional and customary practices. As the Hawaiʻ i Supreme 
Court has noted,
 
Establishing that a contested case took place does not end 
the inquiry into justiciability. [Plaintiff]  must also 
show that it is entitled to request a review of the agency determination. In order to establish standing, a plaintiff 
must have suffered an actual or threatened injury; the injury must be fairly traceable to the defendant's actions; and a favorable decision would likely provide relief for 
the plaintiff's injury. Environmental plaintiffs must meet 
this three- part standing test but need not assert an injury 
that is different in kind from an injury to the public generally.  
In re Maui Elec. Co., 141 Hawaiʻi 249, 270, 408 P.3d 1, 22 (2017) 
(emphasis added) (cleaned up). 
Appellants have not
 demonstrated that they suffered an 
"actual or threatened injury" that is "fairly traceable" to the 
Commission's review and approval of the MDP, such that "a 
favorable decision would likely provide relief for [Appellants'] 
injury." As we concluded in section (1), supra, the 
constitutional rights that Appellants assert were not implicated 
by the Commission's review and approval of the MDP. We 
therefore conclude that the Commission was not wrong in 
determining that Appellants lacked standing to intervene. 
(3) Appellants contend that the circuit court erred in 
affirming the Commission's Decision and Order on the merits --
i.e., the Commission's approval of the MDP as compliant with 
Permit Condition 26, and its dismissal on mootness grounds of 
the contested case on Pau A Laka's request to modify Permit 
Condition 26. 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
     
 In section  (1), supra, we concluded that the 
Appellants were not entitled to a contested case over the 
Commission's review and approval of the MDP. We therefore  
conclude that the circuit court lacked  jurisdiction over 
Appellants' HRS § 91-14 appeal of  the  Commission's Decision and 
Order  because there was no decision and order in a contested 
case, or what should have been a contested case, from which to 
appeal. See Sierra Club, 156 Hawaiʻ i at 398, 575 P.3d at 488; 
see also
 Pub. Access Shoreline Haw. v. Haw. Cnty. Plan. Comm'n, 
79 Hawaiʻ i 425,  431, 903 P.2d 1246, 1252 (1995)  (to meet the 
requirements of HRS § 91-14, "the proceeding that resulted in 
the unfavorable agency action must have been a 'contested case'  
hearing") (citation omitted). 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the circuit 
court's Order and Final Judgment, and remand with instructions 
for the circuit court to dismiss Appellants' appeal for lack of 
jurisdiction.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi,  January 22, 2026. 
On the briefs:  
Bianca K. Isaki,  
Ryan D. Hurley,  
Lance D. Collins,  
for  Petitioners/Appellants-
Appellants.  
 
Chris Donahoe, 
for Respondent/Appellee-Appellee.  /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka  
Presiding Judge  
 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen  
Associate Judge  
 /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Associate Judge 
10 