NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000009
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MATTHEW K. CHUNG, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 14-1-0769)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Matthew K. Chung (Chung) appeals 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) entered 
against him and in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee the State of 
Hawai'i (State) on December 9, 2015, in the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 After a jury trial, the Circuit 
Court entered the Judgment convicting Chung of: (1) Attempted Murder in the Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 705-500 (2014)
2, 707-701.5 (2014)3, and 706-656 
1
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 
2
 HRS § 705-500 provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 705-500 Criminal attempt. (1) A person is guilty of
an attempt to commit a crime if the person:
. . . 
(continued...)
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Supp. 1993 and 2013)4; (2) Carrying or Use of Firearm in the
 
Commission of a Separate Felony in violation of HRS § 134-21
 
(2011)5; and (3) Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver in violation of
 
§ 134-25 (2011).6
 
2(...continued)
(b)	 Intentionally engages in conduct which, under
the circumstances as the person believes them to
be, constitutes a substantial step in a course
of conduct intended to culminate in the person's
commission of the crime.
 
(2)When causing a particular result is an element of
the crime, a person is guilty of an attempt to commit the
crime if, acting with the state of mind required to
establish liability with respect to the attendant
circumstances specified in the definition of the crime, the
person intentionally engages in conduct which is a
substantial step in a course of conduct intended or known to
cause such a result.
 
(3)Conduct shall not be considered a substantial step
under this section unless it is strongly corroborative of
the defendant's criminal intent.
 
3	 HRS § 707-701.5 provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 707-701.5 Murder in the second degree.  (1) [A]
person commits the offense of murder in the second degree if
the person intentionally or knowingly causes the death of
another person.
(2) Murder in the second degree is a felony for which
the defendant shall be sentenced to imprisonment as provided
in section 706-656.
 
4	 HRS § 706-656 provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 706-656 Terms of imprisonment for first and second
degree murder and attempted first and second degree murder. 
. . . .
 (2) Except as provided in section 706-657, pertaining
to enhanced sentence for second degree murder, persons
convicted of second degree murder and attempted second
degree murder shall be sentenced to life imprisonment with
possibility of parole.
 
5	 HRS § 134-21 provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 134-21 Carrying or use of firearm in the commission
of a separate felony; penalty. (a) It shall be unlawful for
a person to knowingly carry on the person or have within the
person's immediate control or intentionally use or threaten
to use a firearm while engaged in the commission of a
separate felony, whether the firearm was loaded or not, and
whether operable or not[.]
 
6
 HRS § 134-25 provides, in relevant part:
 
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On May 8, 2014, Chung was indicted by grand jury on one
 
count of Attempted Murder in the Second Degree, one count of
 
Carrying or Using a Firearm in the Commission of a Separate
 Felony, to wit, Attempted Murder in the Second Degree, and one
 count of Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver, arising out of an
 incident on April 26, 2014, in which the complainant suffered
 gunshot wounds to the chest and arm purportedly while riding as a
 passenger in Chung's vehicle.
 
HPD Criminalist Rebecca Bryant (Bryant) testified first
 
for the State. In April 2014, Bryant worked as an HPD evidence
 specialist, whose duties included responding to the scene of an
 investigation, photographing and diagraming the scene, recovering
 evidence, processing for latent fingerprints, and recovering
 biological evidence. 
On April 26, 2014, she was called out to Pali Momi
 
Hospital, to the emergency room valet area, to take photographs
 and accept further direction from the detective on scene. When
 she arrived at approximately 5:50 p.m., she noted an orange cone
 placed over "an absorbent material with something that appeared
 to be blood-like." She photographed the material where it lay on
 the ground and swabbed it for processing. She also photographed
 
6(...continued)
§ 134-25 Place to keep pistol or revolver; penalty.
(a) Except as provided in sections 134-5 and 134-9, all
firearms shall be confined to the possessor's place of
business, residence, or sojourn . . . . 
(b) Any person violating this section by carrying or
possessing a loaded or unloaded pistol or revolver shall be
guilty of a class B felony.
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the area.7 She also received clothing from an officer on the
 
scene, consisting of a shirt, a pair of shorts, and a pair of
 
shoes, all of which showed a blood-like substance on them. She
 photographed the clothing and sealed the items for processing. 
Later that day, Bryant reported to the Kapolei police
 
station and photographed the exterior and interior of a white Kia
 Rio. Bryant collected gunshot residue samples from the Kia, and
 she tested the ceiling of the car and the driver's side seat,
 focusing on the head rest and the arm rest, the front, right
 passenger seat, and the backseat. Also at the Kapolei police
 station, on April 27, 2014, Bryant collected gunshot residue
 samples from Chung. Finally, Bryant reported to Queen's Hospital
 to photograph the complainant, Shylo Quemado-Moniz (Shylo). She
 
photographed Shylo's left side, where he showed wounds to his
 
torso and left arm. 
Bryson Galicinao (Galicinao) testified next. On April
 
26, 2014, Galicinao was working as a valet at the Pali Momi
 Hospital, where his duties included assisting the emergency room
 patients when they arrived at the entrance. While standing
 behind the podium, a white car "going pretty quick down the ramp"
 entered the valet area. Galicinao witnessed one man driving and
 one sitting in the backseat.
8 Upon parking in the valet area,
 
the driver exited the vehicle and said, "Guys, I need help. My
 
7
 The jury was shown the video footage from surveillance cameras.
Bryant's photographs were also shown to the jury and admitted into evidence.
 
8
 When asked to describe the driver, Galicinao testified that he was
male, of thin build, probably 5'6" or 5'7" but when asked if he would be able
to recognize the driver again, Galicinao responded, "Maybe. Maybe not." He
 did not identify Chung at trial; however, it is undisputed that Chung was the
individual Galicinao witnessed.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
friend is hurt." The driver then opened the door and assisted
 
the valets in taking the injured man from the backseat. The
 injured man was bleeding "everywhere" so Galicinao assisted him
 quickly. The valets took the injured man directly to the
 emergency room for treatment, at which time the driver left. 
Galicinao described the driver's demeanor as "scared." 
During cross-examination, Galicinao described that the driver of
 the car seemed to be in a hurry but observed that he parked in
 the correct place in the valet area. 
Emergency Room Doctor Misha Kassel (Dr. Kassel)
 
testified that he is an emergency medical physician at Pali Momi
 and Kapiolani. On April 26, 2014, Dr. Kassel treated Shylo at
 approximately 4:15 p.m. Dr. Kassel observed that Shylo was
 conscious and breathing but that there were gunshot wounds to his
 chest and his left arm. He appeared to Dr. Kassel to be coherent
 and able to communicate. 
Dr. Kassel testified that the wounds on Shylo's left
 
chest initially caught his attention, as "the location is
 concerning because on the left-side of your chest you have your
 heart." He checked Shylo for "airway, breathing, and
 circulation, checking the pulses and stuff [and] all those things
 were intact." Dr. Kassel ordered an X-ray to check for bullet
 fragments or whether there was possibly a small lung collapse he
 was unable to hear. He requested an ultrasound to check for
 fluid collecting around the heart.
 
He assessed Shylo further for any other urgent
 
operating needs but most of his preliminary bedside findings were
 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
negative. The X-ray, however, was not normal, showing several
 
little bullets or "BBs . . . kind of like a bird shot" near
 Shylo's heart, inside the chest cavity. Shylo did not require
 immediate surgery, but Dr. Kassel transferred Shylo to a higher
 level of care at Queen's Hospital, "since they're a trauma
 hospital." 
In his physician's report, Dr. Kassel indicated that
 
Shylo's wounds created a substantial risk of death. When asked
 
to explain his reasons for doing so, Dr. Kassel testified that
 
"with gunshot wounds to the chest cavity, there's always a
 significant chance of death happening. . . . [H]aving a bunch of
 small bullets inside the chest cavity posed a risk to life, in my
 opinion." Dr. Kassel acknowledged writing on Shylo's form that
 there was "no active bleeding" from Shylo at the time he was
 treated. 
During cross-examination, Dr. Kassel was asked to
 
further explain the factors attributing to a conclusion of
 whether a wound carried a substantial risk of death. In the case
 of two gunshot wounds affecting the left side of the chest, near
 the heart, Dr. Kassel believed that "any ER physician" would say
 it poses a substantial chance of death. However, he explained
 certain exceptions to that conclusion, depending on how deep the
 wound has entered into the chest cavity, if at all, the size of
 the ammunition that penetrated the chest, whether the bullet(s)
 hit the heart or a major artery, and the physical condition of
 the individual, including his or her age. Nonetheless, Dr.
 Kassel noted that even if the victim is younger, "[i]t doesn't
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
mean that a gunshot wound to your chest does not pose a threat to
 
your life." "[I]f you have . . . a gunshot wound to the chest
 and it enters the chest cavity, I'm going to check that same box
 whether you're two years old or you're 90 years old."
 
In assessing the wound to the left arm, Dr. Kassel
 
noted that no major artery was hit and that those injuries did
 not create a substantial risk of death. Dr. Kassel also ordered
 an X-ray of the arm and recalled that it did not appear to have
 any broken bones. Dr. Kassel was not certain whether there were
 similar pellets in Shylo's arm as there were in his chest.
 
Joshua Arakawa (Josh) also testified for the State. 
Josh and Chung became friends after high school, approximately
 three or four years prior to the shooting. Josh also knew Shylo. 
Josh would hang out with Chung and Shylo on a regular basis in
 April 2014 and had considered them both to be his good friends. 
When questioned about the incident on April 26, 2014,
 
Josh testified that he could not recall whether he was hanging
 out with Shylo and Chung. He was able to identify Chung in the
 courtroom but denied hanging out with him "every day." He
 testified that he did not know if he was in the car when Shylo
 was shot and that he did not remember Chung shooting Shylo. He
 did not remember speaking with Detective Kalahui about the
 incident. When presented with his statement to the police, Josh
 acknowledged he had seen it, but he forgot having made the
 statement. He said he was "doing choke drugs," including
 methamphetamine, marijuana, "crack," and cocaine, and "was just
 saying stuff." He testified that he was not paying attention to
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the days he would hang out with Chung in April 2014 and did not
 
remember the names of the other boys he used to hang out with in
 Kapolei. 
During cross-examination, Josh testified that he did
 
not know Hunter Reed-Young (Hunter) and that he did not actually
 
know Shylo back in April 2014 but only met him recently. At the
 
time of trial, Josh was living at Shylo's grandmother's house. 
Hunter also testified for the State. He had known
 
Chung since high school, although they were in different years. 
He also knew Shylo as his "friend's friend" and had known him for
 a couple of years prior to April 2014. He had known Chung for
 about a year longer than he had known Shylo.
 
Hunter described a group of about fourteen individuals
 
that he would see on a daily basis in April 2014, including
 Chung, Shylo, and Josh, as well as other boys known only by their
 nicknames. Some of the boys were homeless and would gather
 behind the Walmart in Kapolei in an area they referred to as the
 "tunnels" to smoke marijuana and methamphetamine. Of the group,
 Shylo and Chung were the only ones who had their own cars. 
When asked whether Chung's behavior and demeanor began
 
to change in April 2014, Hunter testified that he could not
 remember but that they all changed because "when you do that
 drug, everybody acts differently." Hunter testified that he
 often felt paranoid himself because he did not want his parents
 knowing that he was abusing drugs, and that they were all
 paranoid of cops. 
8
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hunter recalled speaking to the detective in May 2014. 
When shown his statement, Hunter testified, "I can tell I was
 
high on this. I really don't remember all of this." He
 acknowledged telling the detective that he was "kind of moving
 away from riding with [Chung]" but that he was on drugs when he
 spoke to the detective and could not remember. He did not
 remember telling the detective that it bothered Chung that the
 "guys were choosing to ride with Shylo" or that Chung was "kind
 of weirding out." He did not remember seeing Chung talking to
 people who were not there or answer questions that none of them
 had asked him. 
On the morning of the incident, Hunter remembered
 
meeting at the McDonald's in Kapolei with some of the boys from
 the group, including Shylo, Josh, and Chung. Shylo, Chung, and
 Josh all left in Chung's car. Hunter did not remember any
 fighting going on between any of them. Hunter never told Chung
 to shoot Shylo but remembered the detective discussing that with
 him. He confirmed that he had no reason to want to shoot Shylo. 
Hunter did not witness Shylo being shot but remembered his
 friend, "Noods" (also known as Raymond Tasaka), telling him that
 Josh had come down the hill to the Walmart saying that Chung shot
 Shylo. 
Hunter did not recall ever observing Chung in
 
possession of a gun. He recalled reading in the police report
 that he had seen him with a gun multiple times but did not
 remember this fact while testifying. He explained that he was
 high and "it was dumb" for him to tell that to the detective but
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that "now, in a sober mindset," it was not true and he had never
 
seen Chung with a gun. 
Shylo testified next for the State. He testified that,
 
in 2008, he and Chung had been classmates at Kapolei High School
 but were not close friends. After high school, by about 2013, he
 and Chung were pretty good friends and began hanging out more in
 
the same "close circle." By April 2014, he was also friends with
 
Hunter, Josh, "Noodles", and some other boys, who would see each
 other almost every day. During April 2014, Shylo was living with
 his grandparents in Makakilo. Some of the other boys, though,
 were homeless because they "basically chose not to go home." 
Instead, they spent much of their time behind Walmart in a place
 they referred to as the "tunnels." 
Shylo described his relationship with Chung at the time
 
as "like normal friends" but that Chung had started to "act a
 little odd." He would act as though someone was talking to him
 or answering questions but no one had said anything. Some of the
 other boys had begun to act strange as well, "but not like
 answering questions that haven't been asked or anything like
 that." Chung, along with Shylo and the other boys, were smoking
 methamphetamine at that time. At some point, the boys in the
 group seemed to want to "go with" Shylo rather than Chung. 
The night before the incident, Shylo had slept at the
 
tunnels. He had smoked methamphetamine that night but, at trial,
 Shylo denied smoking that morning.
9 Shylo did not have his car
 
9
 Shylo acknowledged that he told a detective that he had smoked
marijuana and methamphetamine that morning. While he did not disagree with
(continued...) 
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that day and met up with Chung and Josh at the McDonald's that
 
was located across from the tunnels. From there, Shylo, Josh,
 and Chung left in Chung's car and began driving up Makakilo. 
Shylo was seated in the backseat, behind the passenger seat.
 
Shylo testified that, at that point, he fell asleep. 
The next thing he remembered was waking up to the sound of two
 gunshots. He felt a vibrating sensation in his arm and on his
 upper left torso. He then looked at his arm and noticed there
 was some blood. Then he saw the bullet entry wound in his arm
 and realized he had been shot. Immediately after this, Chung
 pulled over the car across from Makakilo Gardens. Josh jumped
 out of the car, saying, "What the fuck? Why did you do that?" and
 told Chung to get Shylo to the hospital. Shylo testified that
 Josh looked "puzzled." Chung and Shylo drove away, Chung drove
 first to Saint Francis Medical Center, but it was closed, so he
 drove to Pali Momi.
 
While they were driving to the hospital, Shylo heard
 
Chung say that he did not know why they had him do this. Shylo
 also heard Chung say he was sorry, that he did not know why he
 did it, and that Hunter had said to do it. Shylo also heard
 Chung say something like, "Hang in there. Don't die on me." 
Shylo did not remember Chung saying anything else. Once they
 arrived at Pali Momi, Chung helped Shylo out of the car and into
 a wheelchair. 
9(...continued) 
having made the statement, he also testified that he was not under the
influence in the morning.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
While at the hospital, a detective spoke to Shylo about
 
the incident. Shylo did not want to speak to the detective
 
initially because Chung was a friend. He told the detective that
 he did not know who shot him and that he did not want to pursue
 charges. Shylo testified that he was not "completely upfront" at
 first with the detective but that about three or four days later,
 after he spoke with his family and close friends, he was willing
 to speak honestly with the detective. 
Shylo testified that he suffered four gunshot wounds
 
from the incident. He experiences difficulty breathing sometimes
 and cannot lift weights or anything heavy as much as he once
 could. There are still bullet fragments in his chest and arm. 
He does not like being around too many people any more. 
Shylo testified that he did not know why this happened. 
There was no "bad blood" between him and Chung. He did not owe
 him money or drugs and there had been no arguments between them
 prior to the incident. They were very good friends at the time
 and even knew each other's families. However, at the time of the
 incident, Shylo had told the detective that he thought Chung was
 possibly jealous and explained that the boys all wanted to get in
 Shylo's car instead of going with Chung, because of the way Chung
 would behave sometimes. Shylo testified that he "didn't know why
 [he] said that" to the detective but that it was the only thing
 he could think of at the time.
 
Shylo testified that he had maybe once seen Chung in
 
possession of a "revolver type gun." He did not see a gun at all
 during the incident when he was shot. 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Detective Derrick Kalahui (Detective Kalahui) testified
 
next. In April 2014, Detective Kalahui was a detective with the
 
HPD Criminal Investigation Division. He interviewed Shylo at
 Queen's Hospital the day following the shooting. Based on the
 information he learned from Shylo, he subsequently interviewed
 Hunter and Josh. While Hunter was considered a possible suspect,
 Josh was not. Both Josh and Hunter appeared coherent at the time
 Detective Kalahui questioned them. 
Chung testified in his defense. In April 2014, Chung
 
was living with his parents and his sister. On the morning of
 April 26, 2014, he left his home in his car and picked up Josh on
 the way into Kapolei. They met with their other friends,
 including Hunter and Shylo, at the McDonald's in Kapolei and from
 there, Josh, Shylo, and Chung left in Chung's car. 
Chung remembered driving up Makakilo Drive and stopping
 
at the Makakilo Gardens. There, Josh got out of the car and left
 for a while before returning to the car. While Josh was away,
 Chung and Shylo stayed in the car to smoke methamphetamine. 
Chung could not remember exactly what happened after
 
that. He testified that when he smokes methamphetamine he is
 "kind of out of it" and "mix[es] up one thing with another," so
 he "forgets things a lot." 
Chung remembered seeing Shylo bleeding and taking him
 
to the hospital but did not "remember that Shylo appeared to have
 been shot in [his] car." Chung testified that when he saw Shylo
 bleeding, he panicked because his friend had been hurt. Chung
 did not remember driving back down Makakilo Drive but he
 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
remembered driving Shylo to the hospital, first to Saint Francis
 
and then to Pali Momi. He did not recall having said anything to
 
Shylo during the drive. He remembered taking Shylo out of the
 
car and helping him at the hospital.
 
Chung did not remember shooting Shylo and denied that
 
he had shot him. Chung did not know who shot Shylo and did not
 want to testify that Josh was the one who shot Shylo; but he
 acknowledged that only the three of them were in the car at the
 time he discovered Shylo was bleeding. He remembered the "major
 points in that day" but testified that "everything else is kind
 of a blur."
 
Chung testified that as soon as he dropped off Shylo at
 
the hospital, he left because he did not know what else to do. 
He did not know whether he thought he was in trouble but he just
 thought he should not stay there. He did not remember where he
 went after that.
 
Chung testified initially that he did not have a gun at
 
all that day, but then clarified that he remembered shooting a
 .22, long-shot rifle, earlier in the day while he was "playing"
 and shooting birds with it, using real bullets. He testified
 that he had held a pistol at one time but that he did not have a
 handgun in his car at any time that day. 
In addition to this testimony, the parties stipulated
 
to the following facts, and the Circuit Court admitted them into
 evidence:
 
1.	 That on April 26, 2014, in the City and County of
Honolulu, State of Hawai 'i, [Chung] did not have a
license to carry a pistol or revolver and ammunition 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
issued by the Chief of Police of the City and County
of Honolulu, State of Hawai 'i. 
2.	 That Kaleo Kaluhiokalani is a Criminalist for the
 Honolulu Police Department Scientific Investigation
Section and is an expert in the area of trace evidence
with a specialty in gunshot residue analysis. Gunshot
 residue consists of microscopic particles that are
expelled from open areas of a gun or firearm when it
is fired. The examiner looks for the elements of
 lead, barium, and antimony in a single particle.
Gunshot resid[u]e is usually referred to as "GSR".
 
3.	 On August 6, 2015, at 1200 hours, Kaleo Kaluhiokalani
received two sealed GSR kits from [the] evidence
custodian . . . . The GSR kits consisted of two
 separate samples of gunshot residue obtained by
evidence custodian Rebecca Bryant on April 26th and
April 27th, 2014, respectively. The first sample was
GSR or gunshot residue, collected from the front,
rear, and ceiling of a Kia Rio vehicle. . . The
 second GSR or gunshot residue sample was collected
from the back and palm of both hands of Matthew Chung.
 
4.	 With respect to the GSR samples collected from the
surface areas of the Kia Rio vehicle, a total of 20
particles characteristic of Gunshot Residue were
confirmed. Kaluhiokalani concluded that 1) a firearm
was discharged in close proximity to those surface
areas of the Kia Rio; and/or 2) an item contained –­contaminated with GSR came into contact with those
 surface areas of the Kia Rio. 
5.	 With respect to the second gunshot residue sample
collected from [Chung's] hands, Kaleo Kaluhiokalani
found three particles characteristic of gunshot
residue [on Chung's] hands. Kaluhiokalani concluded
 that 1) [Chung] may have discharged the gun; 2)
[Chung] may have been in the vicinity of a gun when it
was discharged; and 3) [Chung] may have come into
contact with an item with gunshot residue on him.
 
On August 27, 2014, the jury returned a verdict finding
 
Chung guilty as charged on all counts. On December 9, 2015,
 
Chung was sentenced to life in prison with the possibility of
 parole for count one, a twenty-year term of incarceration for
 count two, and a ten-year term of incarceration for count three,
 to be served concurrently. 
On January 7, 2016, Chung filed a notice of appeal. 
II.	 
POINTS OF ERROR
 
On appeal, Chung asserts three points of error,
 
contending that: (1) there was no substantial evidence to
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
support Chung's convictions; (2) the deputy prosecuting attorney
 
(DPA) committed prosecutorial misconduct by asserting in his
 
closing argument that Chung lied; and (3) the Circuit Court erred
 
in failing to instruct the jury on the lesser-included offense of
 Reckless Endangering in the Second Degree. 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
The court reviews the sufficiency of the evidence for
 
whether,
 
upon the evidence viewed in the light most favorable to the
prosecution and in full recognition of the province of the
trier of fact, the evidence is sufficient to support a prima
facie case so that a reasonable mind might fairly conclude
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Sufficient evidence to
 
support a prima facie case requires substantial evidence as
to every material element of the offense charged. 
Substantial evidence as to every material element of
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of
reasonable caution to support a conclusion. Under such a
 review, we give full play to the right of the fact finder to
determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw
justifiable inferences of fact. 
State v. Grace, 107 Hawai' i 133, 139, 111 P.3d 28, 34 (App. 2005) 
(citation omitted; format altered). 
In the absence of a defense counsel objection at trial 
to prosecutorial misconduct, this court "may nevertheless 
recognize such misconduct if plainly erroneous." State v. 
Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i 504, 513, 78 P.3d 317, 326 (2003). "We may 
recognize plain error when the error committed affects substantial rights of the defendant." State v. Cordeiro, 99 
Hawai'i 390, 405, 56 P.3d 692, 707 (2002) (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted). However, the court will not overturn a defendant's conviction on the basis of plainly erroneous prosecutorial misconduct, unless "there is a reasonable 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
possibility that the misconduct complained of might have
 
contributed to the conviction." State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai' i 405, 
412, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238 (1999). In assessing whether
 prosecutorial misconduct warrants a new trial, the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court has set forth three factors to consider: 
"(1) the
 
nature of the conduct; (2) the promptness of a curative
 instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of the evidence
 against the defendant." State v. Pacheco, 96 Hawai' i 83, 93, 26 
P.3d 572, 582 (2001). 
Finally, with respect to jury instructions:
 
When jury instructions or the omission thereof are at
issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when
read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
misleading.
 
Erroneous instructions are presumptively harmful and
are a ground for reversal unless it affirmatively appears
from the record as a whole that the error was not
 prejudicial.
 
Error is not to be viewed in isolation and considered
 
purely in the abstract. It must be examined in the light of
the entire proceedings and given the effect which the whole
record shows it to be entitled. In that context, the real
question becomes whether there is a reasonable possibility
that error may have contributed to conviction. 
If there is such a reasonable possibility in a
criminal case, then the error is not harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt, and the judgment of conviction on which it
may have been based must be set aside.
 
State v. Gonsalves, 108 Hawai' i 289, 292-93, 119 P.3d 597, 600-01 
(2005) (citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets
 
omitted; format altered) overrules on other grounds 
State v.
 
Auld, 136 Hawai' i 244, 361 P.3d 471 (2015). 
[W]ith respect to instructions on lesser-included
offenses, it is axiomatic that providing instructions on all
lesser-included offenses with a rational basis in the
 evidence is essential to the performance of the jury's
function. Thus, pursuant to this court's precedent, jury
instructions on lesser-included offenses must be given where
there is a rational basis in the evidence for a verdict 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and
convicting the defendant of the included offense. 
State v. Flores, 131 Hawai' i 43, 51, 314 P.3d 120, 128 (2013) 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. Sufficiency of the Evidence
 Chung asserts that the State presented insufficient
 
evidence to convict him of any of the offenses for which he was
 charged. Chung first asserts that the State presented
 insufficient evidence of the requisite criminal conduct for
 attempted murder in the second degree, i.e., that Chung fired the
 gun that caused Shylo's injuries. In support, Chung points to: 
(1) the absence of any witnesses who saw Chung shoot Shylo; (2)
 Josh's failure to recall or testify regarding any details of the
 incident; (3) the testimony from Shylo that he never saw a gun in
 the car and never saw Chung fire a gun; (4) HPD Criminalist
 Kaluhiokalani's findings that the gunshot residue on Chung's
 hands could have resulted from Chung being in the vicinity of a
 gun being discharged or Chung coming into contact with an item
 with gunshot residue on it; (5) Chung's testimony that he fired a
 rifle earlier in the day; (6) Chung's denial of making any
 inculpatory statements; and (7) Chung's denial that he shot
 Shylo. 
In order to convict Chung of Attempted Murder in the
 
Second Degree, the State was required to present substantial
 evidence that he intentionally engaged in conduct that is a
 substantial step in a course of conduct intended or known to 
18
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
cause the death of Shylo. See HRS §§ 705-500, 707-701.5, 706­
656; see also HRS § 702-206 (2014).10
 
Despite testifying that he did not see a gun or who 
shot him, Shylo did testify that: he was in the car with only 
two other individuals (including Chung); he woke up to the sound of gunshots; he observed a gunshot wound in his arm; and he heard Chung say that he was "sorry" and did not know why he did it. Although Chung did not recall having made such statements, it is evident from the verdict that the jury did not believe Chung's testimony in this regard. This court will not "pass upon" issues dependent on witness credibility. See State v. Jhun, 83 Hawai' i 
472, 483, 927 P.2d 1355, 1366 (1996). 
As to the forensic stipulations regarding the gunshot
 
residue, a reasonable conclusion was that Chung had discharged
 
10	 HRS § 702-206 provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 702-206 Definitions of states of mind . (1)
"Intentionally."
(a)	 A person acts intentionally with respect to his
conduct when it is his conscious object to engage in
such conduct.
 
(b)	 A person acts intentionally with respect to attendant
circumstances when he is aware of the existence of
 such circumstances or believes or hopes that they
exist.
 
(c)	 A person acts intentionally with respect to a result
of his conduct when it is his conscious object to
cause such a result.
 
(2) 	"Knowingly."
(a)	 A person acts knowingly with respect to his conduct
when he is aware that his conduct is of that nature
 
(b)	 A person acts knowingly with respect to attendant
circumstances when he is aware that such circumstances
 exist.
 
(c)	 A person acts knowingly with respect to a result of
his conduct when he is aware that it is practically
certain that his conduct will cause such a result.
 
19
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the gun.11 Additionally, gunshot residue was found in the car in 
which Shylo was riding at the time he heard the sound of gunshots 
and discovered he had gunshot wounds. From this it can be 
reasonably inferred that a gun was fired in the car at the time 
Shylo heard the shots and that Chung was the individual who fired it. Combined with Shylo's testimony that Chung made inculpatory statements as they drove to the hospital, there is evidence of "sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution" to conclude that Chung fired the gun that caused Shylo's injuries. See State v. Agard, 113 Hawai' i 321, 
324, 151 P.3d 802, 805 (2007). 
Chung further asserts that even if the State presented
 
sufficient evidence that Chung had shot Shylo, there was
 insufficient evidence that Chung "had taken a substantial step in
 a course of conduct that he intended or knew was practically
 certain to cause Shylo's death" because: (1) the ammunition used
 was not the type that would be expected to cause death; (2) no
 fragments hit Shylo's heart, major arteries or veins, or his
 lungs; (3) Chung's statement, "Hang in there. Don't die on me,"
 evinces that Chung did not intend to cause Shylo's death by
 shooting him; and (4) Chung's conduct in driving Shylo to the
 hospital and assisting him once at the hospital "bespeak a lack
 of intent to cause Shylo's death." 
11
 Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the
prosecution, Chung's testimony that he fired a rifle earlier in the day, even
if credible, does not necessarily negate the reasonableness of a finding that
he fired a gun at Shylo while driving in his car. Accordingly, Chung's
argument in this regard is without merit.
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has recognized that "[g]iven 
the difficulty of proving the requisite state of mind by direct 
evidence in criminal cases, proof of circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences arising from circumstances surrounding the defendant's conduct is sufficient." State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai' i 
131, 141, 913 P.2d 57, 67 (1996) (citation omitted). "The mind of an alleged offender may be read from his acts, conduct and inferences fairly drawn from all the circumstances." Id. It is 
"not necessary for the prosecution to introduce direct evidence of a defendant's state of mind in order to prove that the defendant acted intentionally[.]" Id. at 140-41, 913 P.2d at 66­
67 (citation omitted). 
We conclude that there is sufficient evidence that
 
Chung had taken a substantial step in a course of conduct that he
 intended or knew was practically certain to cause Shylo's death. 
Shylo's testimony, corroborated by the forensic stipulations
 regarding the presence of gunshot residue in the car, allow for
 the conclusion that Shylo was shot at close range. As Chung was
 driving the car and Shylo was seated in the backseat, it is a
 reasonable inference that Chung pointed the gun toward the
 backseat where Shylo was sitting, if not directly at Shylo's
 body. While the bullets did not in fact hit a major artery,
 vein, or lung, Chung's conduct did result in a "major"
 penetration of bullet fragments into the chest cavity. 
Notwithstanding the smaller size of the fragments, Dr. Kassel
 testified that, "with gunshot wounds to the chest cavity, there's
 always a significant chance of death happening. . . . [H]aving a
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
bunch of small bullets inside the chest cavity posed a risk to
 
life, in my opinion." Based on the evidence, a jury could
 reasonably infer that Chung was, at a minimum, "aware that it
 [was] practically certain that his conduct" could cause Shylo's
 death. See HRS § 702-206(2)(c). 
Finally, Chung's argument that his remarks and conduct 
following the shooting "bespeak a lack of intent to cause Shylo's death" is without merit. Showing remorse and aiding in mitigating the effects of criminal conduct does not necessarily preclude a finding that Chung acted with the requisite intent in the first instance. See Grace, 107 Hawai' i at 139, 111 P.3d at 
34. Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the
 
prosecution and giving deference to the credibility
 determinations of the jury, the court concludes there was
 substantial evidence to convict Chung of Attempted Murder in the
 Second Degree.
 
Chung also asserts that the State failed to produce
 
substantial evidence that Chung possessed the gun that was used
 to shoot Shylo and thus his convictions for use of a firearm
 during the course of committing a felony or knowing possession of
 a pistol or revolver in a place other than his place of business,
 residence or sojourn must be reversed. 
In order to convict Chung for Use of a Firearm While
 
Engaged in the Commission of a Separate Felony, the State was
 required to present substantial evidence that he knowingly
 carried on his person or had within his immediate control or did
 intentionally use or threaten to use a firearm while engaged in
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the commission of a separate felony, in this case, attempted
 
murder in the second degree, regardless of whether the weapon was
 loaded or operable. HRS § 134-21(a). In order to convict Chung
 for violating Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver, the State was
 required to present substantial evidence that he failed to
 confine a firearm to his place of business, residence, or that he
 failed to carry the firearm unloaded and in an enclosed container
 between certain prescribed locations. HRS § 134-25. 
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the
 
prosecution, the court finds that the prosecution produced
 substantial evidence to sustain the convictions. As stated
 above, the forensic stipulations allow for the inference that
 Chung possessed a firearm in his vehicle at the time of the
 shooting. Taken together with Shylo's testimony of Chung's
 remarks and the severity of Shylo's injuries, there was
 substantial evidence that Chung used the firearm to take a
 substantial step in a course of conduct that he intended or knew
 was practically certain to cause Shylo's death, i.e., in the
 commission of the crime of attempted murder in the second degree
 in violation of HRS § 134-21. From the evidence presented,
 including the forensic stipulations, the court finds there was
 substantial evidence to sustain this conviction. We also
 conclude that there was substantial evidence to conclude that
 Chung committed the separate offense of Place to Keep Pistol or
 Revolver in violation of HRS § 134-25.
 
Accordingly, we reject Chung's first point of error.
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B. Prosecutorial Misconduct
 
Chung asserts that the DPA committed prosecutorial
 
misconduct during closing argument when he argued that Chung lied
 because his testimony was not consistent with defense counsel's
 opening statement. He further contends that these statements
 were an improper expression of the DPA's personal view as to
 Chung's credibility. 
Chung did not object to these remarks at trial. 
Therefore, we review each of Chung's allegations of prosecutorial misconduct for plain error. See, e.g., Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i at 
513, 78 P.3d at 326. This requires an examination of the record and a determination of "whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of might have contributed to the conviction." Id. (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). The factors that must be considered in conjunction with this determination are: (1) the nature of the conduct; (2) the promptness of a curative instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant. Id. 
The challenged statements made by the DPA during
 
closing argument are as follows:
 
[Y]ou saw [defense counsel] . . . stand up and tell you this
is what the evidence [is] going to show: The defendant shot
 Shylo; that it was a mistake that turned out –- that went
wrong. Do not consider that statement because that's not
 what the evidence shows. The evidence shows it's
 defendant's own testimony, "I never shot 'em." And whether
 you believe that or not, that's up to you. But it's pretty
apparent that the defendant shot Shylo, and that he's now
lying on the stand about this, making excuse[s]. 
He says –- [defense counsel] said in opening statement,
"Well, the evidence will show that there's a .22 caliber gun
on his lap." Defendant says, "I never had a gun that day."
Another lie. 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Recently, the Hawai' i Supreme Court specifically 
addressed the propriety of a prosecutor's statements to a jury 
that a defendant lied while testifying. State v. Austin, 143 
Hawai'i 18, 422 P.3d 18 (2018). In Austin, the prosecutor 
asserted during closing argument that the defendant had "lied" to the police in his prior recorded statement and "lied" to the jury while testifying at trial. Id. at 27, 422 P.3d at 27. In a 3-2 
decision, the majority characterized these statements as "functionally equivalent" to the prosecutor stating, "I think [defendant] lied to you," because it "inherently involved a degree of personal, judgmental evaluation." Id. at 51, 422 P.3d 
at 51. The court reiterated the rule that "counsel are prohibited from expressing personal opinions . . ., inferential or otherwise, as to the veracity of a witness's testimony," as it "impermissibly 'invades the province of the jury by usurping its power to make credibility determinations.'" Id. at 51-52, 422 
P.3d at 51-52. (citation omitted). This is particularly concerning where a prosecutor "stresses to the jurors that the defendant lied to them." Id. at 53, 422 P.3d at 53 (emphasis in 
original). Citing the "extremely minimal utility the term 'lie' and its derivatives have over more neutral alternatives," the court held "that a prosecutor's assertion that a defendant or witness lied to the jury is improper and should not be permitted." Id. at 56, 422 P.3d at 56. 
Accordingly, based on the majority's holding in Austin,
 
we conclude that the prosecutor's remarks during closing 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argument, that Chung was "lying on the stand" and that he had
 
proffered "[a]nother lie" while testifying, were improper. 
Next, we consider the extent to which a trial court's 
instruction to the jury minimized or eliminated the prejudicial effect of misconduct as well as the evidence outweighing this impropriety. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i at 513, 78 P.3d at 326; State 
v. Underwood, 142 Hawai' i 317, 325, 418 P.3d 658, 666 (2018) 
(citing Rogan, 91 Hawai' i at 412, 984 P.2d at 1238). "[A] 
prosecutor's improper remarks are [generally] considered cured by the court's [curative] instructions to the jury, because it is presumed that the jury abided by the court's admonition to disregard the statement." Underwood, 142 Hawai' i at 327, 418 
P.3d at 668 (citation omitted). However, where the instruction does not specifically address the problematic nature of the prosecutor's statements and is merely a general instruction delivered to the jury before closing arguments begin, it is unlikely to cure the prejudice created by the prosecutor's improper remarks. Id. at 327-28, 418 P.3d at 668-69. 
Here, the court delivered the following instructions to
 
the jury before closing arguments began: 
Ladies and gentlemen, shortly, you'll be receiving closing
arguments of the attorneys. Again, what you must remember
is that the closing arguments by the lawyers are not
evidence. It's what the lawyers believe the evidence has
shown in the case. You may consider their arguments to you,
but you are not bound by their interpretation or their
recollection of the evidence. 
No other curative instructions were given and defense
 
made no objection at trial to prompt the court to take any other
 
curative measure. As there are no "specific curative
 instruction" relating to the improper remarks, this factor weighs
 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in favor of vacating Chung's conviction. See, e.g., Underwood, 
142 Hawai' i at 328, 418 P.3d at 669; Rogan, 91 Hawai' i at 415, 984 
P.2d at 1241; State v. Basham, 132 Hawai' i 97, 111, 319 P.3d 
1105, 1119 (2014). 
As to the final factor, the court weighs the evidence 
supporting Chung's conviction to determine whether it is "so 
overwhelming as to outweigh the inflammatory effect" of the improper comments. If so, we regard the impropriety as ultimately harmless. Rogan, 91 Hawai' i at 415, 984 P.2d at 1241. 
Conversely, "[w]hen it cannot be said beyond a reasonable doubt that the same result would have been reached absent the improper conduct, however, the defendant's conviction must be vacated." Underwood, 142 Hawai' i at 328, 418 P.3d at 669. 
In cases where the prosecutor's improper remarks relate 
to the credibility of a witness, the supreme court has assessed the relative significance of the particular witness's credibility to the case in light of other evidence in the record supporting a guilty verdict. For example, in Austin, the record contained evidence of the defendant's DNA inside the murder victim. 143 Hawai'i at 24, 422 P.3d at 24. Additionally, the defendant 
testified inconsistently with his previous statement to police. Id. at 25, 422 P.3d at 25. Despite the prosecutor's comments to the jury that defendant had "lied to the police" and "lied to you," the court found these improper remarks harmless "[g]iven the strength of the evidentiary record in this case, particularly the DNA evidence conclusively tying [defendant] to the deceased and to the scene of the crime near the time the crime was 
27
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
committed." Id. at 56, 422 P.3d at 56; see also State v. Ganal, 
81 Hawai' i 358, 362-65, 367-68 917 P.2d 370, 374-77, 379-80 
(1996) (finding prosecutor's challenged remarks harmless in light 
of the number of other witnesses that testified and the abundant forensic evidence). 
Conversely, "[w]hen a conviction is largely dependent 
on a jury's determination as to the credibility of [the witness]'s testimony," such evidence may not sufficiently outweigh the improper statements that directly degrade the credibility of the witness. Underwood, 142 Hawai' i at 329, 418 
P.3d at 670. In Underwood, the court found improper the prosecutor's insinuations that defense counsel had attempted to induce the complaining witness to perjure herself during cross-examination. Id. at 325-27, 418 P.3d at 666-68. In reviewing 
the weight of the evidence in support of the defendant's conviction, the court noted that while testimony from other witnesses and the physical evidence in the record "indicated the surrounding circumstances were generally consistent with [complaining witness]'s account of events, only the statements of [complaining witness] herself directly described the actual acts constituting the two offenses." Id. at 328-29, 418 P.3d at 669­
70. Moreover, the potential for prejudice was "particularly 
evident" where the improper comments specifically regarded the credibility of the testimony "on which the case turned." Id. at 
329, 418 P.3d at 670; see also Rogan, 91 Hawai' i at 415, 984 P.2d 
at 1241 ("There were no independent eyewitnesses or conclusive forensic evidence in this case. . . . Under these circumstances, 
28
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
we cannot say that the evidence of criminal conduct against
 
[defendant] was overwhelming."); State v. Marsh, 68 Haw. 659,
 661, 728 P.2d 1301, 1302 (1986) ("The pivotal issue was the
 credibility of the witnesses. The jury had to decide whether to
 believe the victim or the alibi witnesses. We cannot conclude
 beyond a reasonable doubt that the prosecutor's remarks [that
 defendant lied] had little likelihood of influencing this
 critical choice."). 
While the evidence in this case is sufficient to
 
sustain the convictions, see supra Section III.A., it is not
 "overwhelming." There was no witness testimony, including from
 the complaining witness himself, directly describing the shooting
 in this case or Chung's possession of a pistol or revolver in or
 near his vehicle on the day in question. Shylo testified to
 waking up to the sound of two gunshots but did not see who fired
 those shots and initially told police he did not know who had
 shot him. The other passenger in the car and only other
 potential eyewitness, Josh, declined to testify regarding any
 details of the incident. Chung, on the other hand, specifically
 denied shooting Shylo. Chung also denied possessing a pistol or
 revolver in his car that day and there was no contradictory
 testimony from any witnesses having seen such a gun in Chung's
 vehicle or possession. The prosecutor's attack on Chung's
 credibility undermines the testimonial evidence on which his
 defense primarily rests.
 
There is also a lack of conclusive forensic evidence on
 
which the jury could have relied in finding Chung guilty. The
 
29
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
gun used to shoot Shylo was never recovered, and thus no
 
ballistic testing was conducted, and the forensic stipulations
 regarding the gunshot residue on Chung's hands are not conclusive
 as to whether Chung fired the gun. Another possible conclusion
 to which the parties stipulated was that Chung "may have come
 into contact with an item with gunshot residue on [it]," which
 does nothing more than corroborate the undisputed fact that Chung
 came into contact with Shylo while helping him out of the car at
 the hospital after he had been shot. While the video
 surveillance evidence and Chung's own testimony tie him to the
 scene near the time of the shooting, only Shylo's testimony that
 Chung made inculpatory statements provides further evidence that
 Chung discharged the gun and injured Shylo. 
The case therefore "largely hinges" on the credibility
 
of Chung's testimony. If credible, the jury could have
 essentially had an entirely different version of the day's
 events, to wit: that they stopped at Makakilo Gardens not as a
 result of Shylo having been shot, but as a place to smoke
 methamphetamine during their drive for the day; that Chung got
 gunshot residue on his hands from helping Shylo or when he fired
 a gun previously in the day; that Shylo's reporting of Chung's
 
statements was insufficient to overcome reasonable doubt; that
 
Chung did not possess a pistol or revolver in his car or at any
 time on the day in question; and, ultimately, that Chung did not
 cause Shylo's injuries or discharge a firearm at him. Chung's
 testimony, in the context of the inconclusive forensic evidence
 and lack of witnesses to the shooting, could therefore have given
 
30
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rise to reasonable doubt as to each of the charges. Finally, 
because the prosecutor's remarks "specifically concerned" Chung's credibility, the "potential for prejudice is particularly evident." See Underwood, 142 Hawai' i at 329, 418 P.3d at 670. 
The court concludes that, had the prosecutor not improperly remarked on Chung's credibility, there is at least "a reasonable possibility that the jury would have reached a different verdict." See Austin, 143 Hawai' i at 56-57, 422 P.3d at 56-57. 
Accordingly, we conclude that Chung's conviction must
 
be vacated and this case must be remanded for a new trial.
 
C. Jury Instructions
 Chung contends that the Circuit Court erred in failing
 
to instruct the jury on the lesser-included offense of Reckless
 Endangering in the Second Degree and that the error was not
 harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. The State counters that
 regardless of whether Reckless Endangering in the Second Degree
 is a lesser-included offense of Attempted Murder in the Second
 Degree, there was no rational basis for the jury to convict Chung
 of reckless endangerment under the facts of the case. The State
 further asserts that any purported error was harmless, because
 the Court instructed the jury for Assault in the Second Degree,
 and the jury opted to convict Chung of Attempted Murder in the
 Second Degree instead.
 
To be sufficient, "jury instructions on lesser-included
 
offenses must be given where there is a rational basis in the
 evidence for a verdict acquitting the defendant of the offense 
31
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
charged and convicting the defendant of the included offense." 
Flores, 131 Hawai' i at 51, 314 P.3d at 128. 
Reckless Endangering in the Second Degree is considered 
a lesser included offense of Attempted Murder in the Second Degree. See State v. Feliciano, 62 Haw. 637, 638, 618 P.2d 306, 
308 (1980) ("[w]e believe that reckless endangering in the second degree is a lesser included offense of attempted murder under HRS § 701-109(4)(a)"), superseded by statute on other grounds as stated in State v. Rumbawa, 94 Hawai' i 513, 516-21, 17 P.3d 862, 
865-70 (App. 2001); State v. Samonte, 83 Hawai' i 507, 541, 928 
P.2d 1, 35 (1996) (relying on Feliciano, 62 Haw. at 640, 618 P.2d at 308); State v. Smith, 91 Hawai' i 450, 464-65, 984 P.2d 1276, 
1290-91 (App. 1999). Thus, the inquiry shifts to "whether any view of the evidence in this case presented a rational basis for the jury to acquit [Chung of Attempted Murder in the Second Degree] and, alternatively, to convict him of [Reckless Endangering in the Second Degree]." Flores, 131 Hawai' i at 53, 
314 P.3d at 130 (emphasis added). 
Although it is undisputed that Shylo was injured by
 
having been shot, the record allows for a conclusion that this
 injury was not in fact caused by intentional behavior. None of
 the witnesses, including the defendant or the complainant,
 testified as to the actual events surrounding the shooting and
 Shylo testified that he was "puzzled" as to why this had
 happened. Chung denied having shot Shylo and, if believed, that
 testimony could have allowed a reasonable juror to acquit Chung
 for Attempted Murder in the Second Degree. Thus, it must be
 
32
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
determined whether a jury could have convicted Chung of reckless 
endangering for having "[e]ngage[d] in conduct that recklessly place[d] [Shylo] in danger of death or serious bodily injury." HRS § 707-714 (2014)
12; Flores, 131 Hawai' i at 55, 314 P.3d at 
132. "'The law permits an inference of the requisite intent from 
evidence of the words or conduct of the defendant.'" Flores, 131 
Hawai'i at 54, 314 P.3d at 131 (quoting State v. Stuart, 51 Haw. 
656, 657, 466 P.2d 444, 445 (1970)). Here, there is testimony that Chung, upon noticing Shylo's injuries, remarked, "Hang in there. Don't die on me." Additionally, Chung did not make any further attempts to injure or kill Shylo and he affirmatively aided Shylo in obtaining medical treatment, driving him to two hospitals and helping him out of the car into a wheelchair. See, 
e.g., Smith, 91 Hawai' i at 467, 984 P.2d at 1293 (relying on the 
defendant's similar conduct following a shooting to establish reckless, and not intentional, conduct). Assuming a finding that Chung fired the gun, these words and conduct could be indicative of an unintended result, rather than an intent to cause death. 
Therefore, we conclude that there was a rational basis
 
for a verdict acquitting Chung of Attempted Murder in the Second
 Degree and convicting him of the included offense of Reckless
 Endangering in the Second Degree. The Circuit Court erred in
 failing to give the requested jury instruction on the lesser­
12
 HRS § 707-714 provides, in relevant part:
 § 707-714 Reckless endangering in the second degree. (1) A
person commits the offense of reckless endangering in the second
degree if the person:
(a)	 Engages in conduct that recklessly places another
person in danger of death or serious bodily injury[.]
 
33
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
included offense of Reckless Endangering in the second Degree. 
See Flores, 131 Hawai' i at 55, 314 P.3d at 132. 
As we have already determined that Chung's conviction
 
must be vacated, we need not reach the issue of whether the
 instructional error was harmless.
 IV. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Circuit
 
Court's December 9, 2015 Judgment and remand this case for a new
 trial.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 31, 2018. 
On the briefs: Jon N. Ikenaga,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Donn Fudo,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
34
 