NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000422 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
STEVEN M. HAUGE, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 13-1-1032)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
The instant appeal arises from a family dispute
 
involving an estranged family member who took temporary
 
possession of his family's mail without authorization. 
Defendant-Appellant Steven M. Hauge (Hauge) appeals from the
 
1
Circuit Court of the First Circuit's  (circuit court) "Judgment
 
of Conviction and Sentence" (Judgment) filed January 15, 2014.
 
The Judgment convicted Hauge of three counts of unauthorized
 
possession of confidential personal information (UPCPI) in
 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-839.55 (2014
 
2
Repl.),  and sentenced Hauge to three terms of five years of
1
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 
2
 HRS § 708-839.55 provides:
 
§708-839.55 Unauthorized possession of confidential
personal information. (1) A person commits the offense of
unauthorized possession of confidential personal information
if that person intentionally or knowingly possesses, without
authorization, any confidential personal information of
another in any form, including but not limited to mail[.]
. . . .
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
imprisonment to be served concurrently.
 
On appeal, Hauge contends that the circuit court erred
 
in concluding that his temporary possession of his family's mail
 
did not constitute a de minimis violation of HRS § 708-839.55
 under HRS § 702-236(1)(b) (2014 Repl.).
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude that
 Hauge's appeal is without merit.
 
Hauge contends that the circuit court abused its
 
discretion in not finding that under HRS § 702-236(1)(b), his
 "conduct did not cause or threaten the harm or evil sought to be
 prevented by HRS § 708-839.55." Hauge argues that in enacting
 HRS § 708-839.55, the legislature "sought to deter identity
 theft-related crimes, which cause monetary loss to victims."
 Hauge argues that he did not intend "to commit identity theft,
 but rather to curry favor with his father, in attempt to get his
 father to add him onto his father's medical insurance plan."
 Hauge argues that "the facts in the matter at hand lead to the
 conclusion that [Hauge's] possession of [his family's]
 confidential personal information was not going to lead to
 identify theft or any other crimes."
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) contends 
that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying Hauge's motion to dismiss the charges against him as de minimis because Hauge's "conduct threatened the harm or evil sought to be prevented by the UPCPI statute and [Hauge] failed to establish that his conduct was too trivial to warrant the condemnation of conviction." 
2(...continued)
(2) It is an affirmative defense that the person who
possessed the confidential personal information of another
did so under the reasonable belief that the person in
possession was authorized by law or by the consent of the
other person to possess the confidential personal
information.
 
(3) Unauthorized possession of confidential personal
information is a class C felony.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
HRS § 702-236(1)(b) provides:
 
§702-236 De minimis infractions.  (1) The court may
dismiss a prosecution if, having regard to the nature of the
conduct alleged and the nature of the attendant
circumstances, it finds that the defendant's conduct:
 
. . . .
 
(b)	 Did not actually cause or threaten the harm or
evil sought to be prevented by the law defining
the offense or did so only to an extent too
trivial to warrant the condemnation of
 conviction[.]
 
A defendant who argues that the charge against him 
under HRS § 708-839.55 should be dismissed as de minimis under 
HRS § 702-236(1)(b) "bears the burden of establishing why dismissal . . . is warranted in light of [the relevant attendant] circumstances." State v. Pacquing, 129 Hawai
'i 172, 180, 297 
P.3d 188, 196 (2013). Because "the resulting harm or evil [that HRS § 708-839.55] seeks to prevent is not immediately apparent" from a plain language reading of the statute itself, it is necessary to consider the legislative history of HRS § 708­839.55. Pacquing, 129 Hawai
'i at 181, 297 P.3d at 197. After 
analyzing the legislative history of HRS § 708-839.55, the
 Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that 
neither the plain language of the statute nor its
legislative history establishes that the legislature
intended to allow prosecution only where the defendant
intended to commit identity theft. . . .
 
Rather, HRS § 708–839.55 does not require that the
defendant have any specific purpose in possessing the
confidential personal information, provided that the
defendant possesses the information "without authorization."
 
Pacquing, 129 Hawai 'i at 182-83, 297 P.3d at 198-99 (footnote and 
brackets omitted). 
In the instant case, the State established that Hauge
 
possessed his family's confidential personal information without
 
authorization because several family members and Hauge testified
 and it was undisputed that over the years, the family had
 repeatedly communicated to Hauge that he was not welcome on the
 family property; Hauge had never been given permission to pick up
 the family's mail; and on July 15, 2013, Hauge temporarily
 possessed his family's mail containing confidential personal
 information. We therefore hold that Hauge caused or threatened
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"the harm or evil sought to be prevented by" HRS § 708-839.55. 
We now turn to whether the circuit court abused its discretion in
 finding that Hauge's conduct was not "too trivial to warrant the
 condemnation of conviction" under HRS § 702-236(1)(b).
 
The defendant "bears the burden of providing evidence 
to support a finding that his or her conduct implicated the harm or evil sought to be prevented by the statute only to an extent too trivial to warrant the condemnation of conviction." Pacquing, 129 Hawai
'i at 184, 297 P.3d at 200. 
Hauge did not meet his burden of providing evidence to
 
support a finding that his conduct was "too trivial" under HRS
 § 702-236(1)(b) because his testimony was inconsistent with the
 testimonies of the other witnesses in several respects. First,
 Hauge testified that he was not tense or upset when he interacted
 with witnessess, Sean Hayworth (Sean) and Darren Evangelista
 
(Darren), but Darren testified that Hauge's demeanor was
 
"confrontational" and Sean testified that Hauge was immature and
 
aggressive. Second, Hauge testified that Sean did not touch any
 of Hauge's stuff, but Sean and Darren both testified that Sean
 took Hauge's bag to prevent him from leaving without first
 returning the mail. Third, Hauge testified that there was "[n]o
 questions about the mail[,]" "no discussion about the mail, no
 argument about the mail[,]" and that he immediately handed over
 the mail to Darren without Darren asking for the mail, but Sean
 testified that he contacted Darren after asking Hauge for the
 mail and Hauge refusing, and Darren testified that Hauge returned
 the mail only after Darren demanded he do so. Darren also
 testified that he felt "like if Sean wasn't there [holding
 Hauge's bag, Hauge] would have just took off with our mail." And
 fourth, Hauge testified that in the past, his father Harold
 Hauge, had mentioned to him that Hauge was still on the family
 insurance plan and that Hague should go to Straub Hospital to get
 treatment for his liver disease. However, Harold Hauge,
 testified that Hauge had not been on the family insurance plan
 since he was a minor in 1967 and that Hauge never asked to be put
 back on the insurance plan.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Considering the conflicting testimonies, it is
 
reasonable to conclude that Hauge was not credible and therefore
 
may have kept the family's mail if he had not been confronted by
 Sean and Darren, conduct that can not be considered "too trivial"
 under HRS § 702-236(1)(b). Therefore, the circuit court did not
 abuse its discretion in denying Hauge's request to find that
 Hauge's conduct was de minimis under HRS § 702-236(1)(b).
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Judgment of

 
Conviction and Sentence" entered in the Circuit Court of the
 First Circuit on January 15, 2014 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 13, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Walter J. Rodby
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge 
Loren J. Thomas

 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
5

 