NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000505
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS, AFSCME, LOCAL 646, AFL-CIO,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
LINDA LINGLE, GOVERNOR, STATE OF HAWAI' I;
LINDA SMITH, CHIEF POLICY ADVISER TO LINDA LINGLE,
STATE OF HAWAI' I; GEORGIANA KAWAMURA, DIRECTOR,
DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND FINANCE, STATE OF HAWAI' I;
MARIE LADERTA, DIRECTOR, DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES
DEVELOPMENT, STATE OF HAWAI' I; CLAYTON FRANK, DIRECTOR,
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY, STATE OF HAWAI' I;
STATE OF HAWAI' I; AND DOE DEFENDANTS 1-10 (2009-045),
Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-2145-09 PWB)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant United Public Workers, AFSCME,
 
Local 646, AFL-CIO (UPW) appeals from the May 15, 2012 "Order
 
Granting Defendants' Second Motion To Dismiss Plaintiff's
 
Complaint Filed September 16, 2009" (Order) and the May 15, 2012
 
Final Judgment entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1
 
(circuit court) in favor of Defendants-Appellees Linda Lingle,
 Governor, State of Hawai' i; Linda Smith, Chief Policy Adviser 
1
 The Honorable Patrick W. Border was assigned to this case from
January 11, 2010 and presided over the portion of the proceedings on appeal.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to Linda Lingle, State Of Hawai' i; Georgina Kawamura, Director, 
Department of Budget and Finance, State of Hawai' i; Marie 
Laderta, Director, Department of Human Resources Development, 
State of Hawai' i; Clayton Frank, Director, Department of Public 
Safety, State of Hawai' i; State of Hawai' i (collectively, State 
Defendants). 
I. BACKGROUND
 
UPW is the bargaining representative of employees in 
bargaining units 1 and 10. In June 2009, UPW and the Hawai' i 
State Teacher Association filed civil complaints in the circuit court, on the unions' behalf and on behalf of the bargaining unit 
employees they represent, challenging then-Governor Linda 
Lingle's decision to furlough all state employees (furlough 
suit). On September 16, 2009, UPW filed the instant complaint, 
alleging the State Defendants had threatened and implemented mass 
layoffs and privatization efforts not out of economic necessity 
but rather in retaliation against UPW and its members for filing 
the furlough suit. Around the same time, UPW also filed (1) a 
prohibited practice complaint with the Hawai' i Labor Relations 
Board (HLRB) and (2) individual and class grievances, challenging the layoffs and privatization efforts. 
On September 27, 2011, the State Defendants filed in 
the circuit court a motion to dismiss UPW's complaint for lack of 
subject matter jurisdiction. The State Defendants argued for 
dismissal based on Hawai' i Gov't Employees Ass'n, AFSCME Local 
152, AFL-CIO v. Lingle (HGEA), 124 Hawai' i 197, 239 P.3d 1 (2010) 
and Hawai' i State Teachers Ass'n v. Abercrombie (HSTA), 126 
Hawai'i 318, 271 P.3d 613 (2012). On May 15, 2012, the circuit 
court entered its Order concluding: 
[T]he underlying facts and allegations set forth in the
instant complaint mirror those alleged by UPW in its case
before the HLRB as constituting alleged prohibited
practices. [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)] Section 89-14
[(2012 Repl.)] provides that the HLRB shall have exclusive,
original jurisdiction over controversies implicating
prohibited practices, and it would be wholly inconsistent
with the HLRB's exclusive, original jurisdiction for this
Court to hear the same underlying factual disputes and
allegations and create the possibility of inconsistent
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judgments. On the contrary, the Court finds that the
statutory scheme mandates that those facts, allegations and
claims raised by UPW in its prohibited practice complaint be
heard to conclusion by the HLRB first and subject to
judicial review by a court of competent jurisdiction
operating in its appellate capacity.
 
2
The circuit court's Order dismissed without prejudice  all claims
for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. On May 16, 2012, the
 
circuit court entered its Final Judgment in favor of the State
 
Defendants.
 
UPW filed a timely notice of appeal on May 21, 2012. 
On appeal, UPW contends the circuit court erred in concluding the
 
complaint's claims lay within the HLRB's exclusive original
 
jurisdiction and in concluding the pending HLRB jurisdiction
 
divested the circuit court of jurisdiction.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
The existence of jurisdiction is a question of law
that we review de novo under the right/wrong standard.
Questions regarding subject matter jurisdiction may be
raised at any stage of a cause of action. When reviewing a
case where the circuit court lacked subject matter
jurisdiction, the appellate court retains jurisdiction, not
on the merits, but for the purpose of correcting the error
in jurisdiction. A judgment rendered by a circuit court
without subject matter jurisdiction is void.
 
Lingle v. Hawai' i Gov't Employees Ass'n, AFSCME, Local 152, AFL­
CIO, 107 Hawai' i 178, 182, 111 P.3d 587, 591 (2005) (quoting 
Amantiad v. Odum, 90 Hawai' i 152, 158-59, 977 P.2d 160, 166-67 
(1999)). 
2
 Contrary to UPW's arguments, it is clear the circuit court
dismissed the case without prejudice, although its Order and Final Judgmentdid not explicitly state so. A dismissal with prejudice is "an adjudicationon the merits of all the issues that were raised or could have been raised in the pleadings." Standard Mgmt., Inc. v. Kekona, 99 Hawai' i 125, 136, 53 P.3d
264, 275 (App. 2001) (internal brackets and quotation marks omitted, emphasisadded). Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 41(b)(3) ("Involuntary
dismissal: Effect thereof") states, in relevant part: "[A] dismissal underthis subdivision and any dismissal not provided for in this rule, other than adismissal for lack of jurisdiction, . . . operates as an adjudication upon themerits." (Emphasis added.) Here, the circuit court's order specified itdismissed all claims for lack of jurisdiction. Therefore, the dismissal wasnot an adjudication upon the merits and was without prejudice. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 89-14 states: "Any 
controversy concerning prohibited practices may be submitted to 
the board in the same manner and with the same effect as provided 
in section 377–9; provided that the board shall have exclusive 
original jurisdiction over such a controversy[.]" (Emphasis 
added.) The existence of an interrelated constitutional issue 
does not automatically remove the controversy from the HLRB's 
primary consideration if the complaint essentially presents a 
"controversy concerning prohibited practices." HSTA, 126 Hawai' i 
at 322, 271 P.3d at 617. We conclude this case raises issues within the HLRB's exclusive jurisdiction over prohibited practice 
controversies. Therefore, although UPW's statutory claims could 
be raised directly in the circuit court, the matter should be 
referred to the HLRB under the doctrine of primary jurisdiction. 
We further conclude that a stay, rather than dismissal without 
prejudice, was appropriate under the circumstances presented 
here, and the circuit court erred in dismissing the action. See 
Pavsek v. Sandvold, 127 Hawai' i 390, 402, 279 P.3d 55, 67 (App. 
2012). 
Counts I and II of UPW's complaint alleged the State 
Defendants violated the Hawai' i Whistleblowers' Protection Act
3 
3
 HRS § 378-62 (Supp. 2012) states, in relevant part:
 
§ 378-62. Discharge of, threats to, or discrimination
against employee for reporting violations of law.  An
 
employer shall not discharge, threaten, or otherwise
discriminate against an employee regarding the employee's
compensation, terms, conditions, location, or privileges of
employment because:
 
(1) The employee, or a person acting on behalf of the
employee, reports or is about to report to the
employer, or reports or is about to report to a
public body, verbally or in writing, a violation or
a suspected violation of:
 (A) A law, rule, ordinance, or regulation, adopted
pursuant to law of this State, a political
subdivision of this State, or the United States[.]
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
4
and article I, section 4 of the Hawai' i Constitution  by
threatening and implementing layoffs. Counts III and IV alleged 
the State Defendants violated constitutionally mandated merit 
5 6
principles  and civil service statutes  by privatizing or
otherwise contracting out services performed by employees of
 
bargaining units 1 and 10 under the merit system.
 
In 
HSTA and HGEA, the supreme court noted the 
legislative purpose of having the administrative agency with 
expertise decide the predicate issues is frustrated if plaintiffs 
could simply recast HRS Chapter 89 complaints and thereby address 
them directly to the circuit court. HSTA, 126 Hawai' i at 322, 
4
 Article I, section 4 of the Hawai' i Constitution states: 
FREEDOM OF RELIGION, SPEECH, PRESS, ASSEMBLY AND PETITION
 
Section 4. No law shall be enacted respecting an
establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise
thereof, or abridging the freedom of speech or of the press
or the right of the people peaceably to assemble and to
petition the government for a redress of grievances.
 
5
 Article XVI, section 1 of the Hawai' i Constitution states: 
CIVIL SERVICE 
Section 1.  The employment of persons in the civil service, as
defined by law, of or under the State, shall be governed by the
merit principle.
 
6
 HRS § 76-16 (2012 Repl.) states, in relevant part:
 
§ 76-16. Civil service and exemptions
.
 
. . . 
(b)
 The civil service to which this chapter applies
shall comprise all positions in the State now existing or
hereafter established and embrace all personal services
performed for the State, except the following:
 
.  .  .
 
(2) Positions filled by persons employed by contract
where the director of human resources development
has certified that the service is special or unique or
is essential to the public interest and that, because of
circumstances surrounding its fulfillment, personnel to
perform the service cannot be obtained through normal
civil service recruitment procedures. Any such contract
may be for any period not exceeding one year[.]
 
UPW's complaint alleged the services the State Defendants
privatized or contracted out did not fall within HRS § 76-16(b)(2)'s
exemption.
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
271 P.3d at 617; HGEA, 124 Hawai' i at 208, 239 P.3d at 12. Here, 
as in HSTA, although the UPW's complaint did not expressly assert 
an HRS Chapter 89 claim, the controversy presented to the circuit 
court was identical to the issues that were raised or should have 
been raised in UPW's prohibited practice complaint to the HLRB. 
HRS § 89-13(a) (2012 Repl.) defines the term prohibited practice 
as follows: 
§89-13 Prohibited practices; evidence of bad faith.  (a) It
shall be a prohibited practice for a public employer or its
designated representative wilfully to:
 
(1) Interfere, restrain, or coerce any employee in the
exercise of any right guaranteed under this
chapter;
 
.  .  .
 
(3) Discriminate in regard to hiring, tenure, or
any term or condition of employment to encourage or
discourage membership in any employee organization;
 
(4) Discharge or otherwise discriminate against
an employee because the employee has signed or filed an
affidavit, petition, or complaint or given any
information or testimony under this chapter, or because
the employee has informed, joined, or chosen to be
represented by any employee organization;
 
(5) Refuse to bargain collectively in good faith
with the exclusive representative as required in
section 89-9[.]
 
Id. 
The complaint raised the following allegations in
 
support of the claims:
 
53. On July 17, 2009 Defendants notified various
public employees that their names would be included on
layoff lists, and on July 20, 2009 Defendant Laderta
provided a list to UPW of approximately 123 bargaining unit
1 employees, and 93 bargaining unit 10 employees for
impending layoffs.
 
54. On July 22, 2009 UPW requested that Defendant
Laderta negotiate over the impending layoff criteria and
procedure under Section 76-43, HRS, and Section 89-9 (a),
HRS, and to cease and desist from unilaterally implementing
layoffs pending compliance with the duty to bargain over
wages, hours, and other conditions of employment.
 
55. On July 23, 2009 Defendant Frank notified the UPW
of an impending layoff due to the closure of the Kulani
Correctional Facility on or about October 26, 2009.
Although civil servants would be subject to layoff, no
similar action would be taken with respect to employees
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
performing the substantial amount of corrections work that
has been privatized by the Department of Public Safety.
 
56. On July 29, 2009 the UPW requested that Defendant
Frank negotiate over the decision to close the Kulani
Correctional Facility, and requested Defendants to cease and
desist from retaliating against employees represented by UPW
for challenging Defendant Lingle's decision of June 1, 2009
to furlough state employees for three days each month for
the next two years.
 
. . . 
63. Defendants' decision to repeatedly threaten and to
implement mass layoffs of bargaining unit 1 and 10 employees
were made to retaliate against UPW and its members for
exercising their right to report and challenge illegal
government conduct by filing and pursuing a lawsuit in the
circuit court against Defendants' unconstitutional furlough
plan, and to engage in collective bargaining over furloughs.
 
64. Other public employers covered by the unit 1 and
10 agreements have not implemented layoffs, reductions in
force, discharges, or engaged in such discriminatory and
adverse actions which have been undertaken by Defendants.
 
65. Employees of the State of Hawaii who are excluded
from collective bargaining have not been notified of mass
layoffs in the same manner as implemented against employees
represented by UPW (or other unions) who challenged Lingle's
furlough plan.
 
.  .  .
 
68. All persons employed in unit 1 and 10 positions
within the Department of Public Safety, State of Hawaii,
have historically and customarily been recruited, hired,
retained, assigned, and employed in accordance with the
merit principles mandated by Article XVI, Section 1 of the
Hawaii State Constitution and HRS Chapters 76 and 77.
 
69. Civil servants of the State of Hawaii in units 1
 
and 10 have also historically and customarily been
responsible for corrections work for inmates incarcerated by
the State of Hawaii. The contracting out and privatization
of corrections work by Defendants cannot be justified when
there are public employees available to perform such work
who are being subject to layoffs, reductions in force,
discrimination and other adverse actions.
 
70. Defendants' decision to lay-off public employees
in the Department of Public Safety, State of Hawaii, while
maintaining thousands of inmates in facilities on the
mainland, staffed by private-sector workers, discriminates
against civil servants and contravenes the merit principles
mandated by Article XVI, Section 1 of the Hawaii State
Constitution and HRS Chapters 76 and 77.
 
.  .  .
 
102. Defendants violated the rights of employees under
Section 76-43, HRS, by refusing to negotiate the criteria,
procedures, timing, and manner of handling mass layoffs for
reasons other than "lack of work" or lack of "funds" with
 UPW prior to unilateral implementation of the layoffs,
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
reductions in force, and discharges of unit 1 and 10
employees.
 
103. Defendants, by the foregoing acts, have abrogated
the Civil Service Laws of the State of Hawaii.
 
In summary, UPW's challenges to the legality of the
 
State Defendants' layoffs and privatization efforts were based on
 
allegations that the State Defendants discriminated against UPW
 
members by laying off employees of bargaining units 1 and 10 in
 
retaliation for engaging in protected union activities and filing
 
the furlough suit, discriminated against UPW members by failing
 
to take corrective action to terminate current private
 
contractors while implementing the layoff of UPW members, and
 
refused to bargain collectively regarding the layoff procedures
 
and the privatization.
 
HRS § 89-13(a) specifically defines all of the above 
alleged actions as prohibited practices. We therefore disagree 
with UPW's assertion that its complaint alleged separate 
violations of law that were "entirely independent" of HRS Chapter 
89 and the prohibited practice controversy. Viewing the 
complaint's assertions in light of HRS § 89-13(a), it appears UPW 
alleged the State Defendants essentially engaged in prohibited 
practices by implementing the layoffs and privatization. See 
HSTA, 126 Hawai' i at 322, 271 P.3d at 617; HGEA, 124 Hawai' i at 
205, 239 P.3d at 9. HGEA and HSTA reflect a concern that, when a 
plaintiff presents to the circuit court a controversy that is identical to one which could have and should have been presented 
to the HLRB, the circuit court's exercise of jurisdiction 
necessarily involves a risk of interfering with the HLRB's 
exclusive jurisdiction over prohibited practice controversies. 
However, UPW correctly asserts its statutory claims 
could be raised directly in the circuit court. See Konno v. 
Cnty. of Hawai' i, 85 Hawai' i 61, 937 P.2d 397 (1997) (discussing 
claim for violation of HRS § 76-77 (2012 Repl.)); HRS § 378-63 
(Supp. 2012). When a court and an agency have concurrent 
8
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
original jurisdiction to decide issues which have been placed 
within the special competence of an administrative agency, the 
primary jurisdiction doctrine applies and a court should refer 
the issues to the agency before proceeding. Fratinardo v. 
Employees' Ret. Sys. of State of Hawai'i, 121 Hawai' i 462, 468, 
220 P.3d 1043, 1049 (App. 2009). Where the doctrine of primary 
jurisdiction applies, however, "dismissal is an appropriate 
remedy only if the parties would not be unfairly disadvantaged." 
Jou v. Nat'l Interstate Ins. Co. of Hawaii, 114 Hawai' i 122, 129, 
157 P.3d 561, 568 (App. 2007) (emphasis added). 
In this case, UPW argues dismissal was inappropriate
 
because the statute of limitations may prevent it from refiling
 its claims if necessary at the conclusion of the HLRB
 
proceedings, and we agree.
7 See Id. at 128, 157 P.3d at 567 (a
 
stay "avoids the danger that the statute of limitations on the
 [court] claim may run before the administrative agency decides
 
the predicate issues"). Accordingly, we conclude the circuit
 
court erred in dismissing the case, and not staying the
 
proceedings pending the outcome of the administrative process.
8
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the May 15, 2012
 
"Order Granting Defendants' Second Motion To Dismiss Plaintiff's
 
Complaint Filed September 16, 2009" and the May 15, 2012 Final
 
Judgment entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, and
 
we remand with instructions to stay the action pursuant to the
 
primary jurisdiction doctrine so that the parties may pursue
 
7
 HRS § 378-63(a) sets forth the statute of limitations for alleged
violations of the Hawai' i Whistleblowers' Protection Act and states: "A person
who alleges a violation of this part may bring a civil action for appropriate
injunctive relief, or actual damages, or both within two years after theoccurrence of the alleged violation of this part." 
8
 Cf. HGEA, 124 Hawai' i at 210 n.22, 239 P.3d at 14 n.22 (declining
to decide whether upon remand the circuit court should dismiss or stay becausethe issue was not argued on appeal); see also, e.g., TON Servs., Inc. v. QwestCorp., 493 F.3d 1225, 1243-44 (10th Cir. 2007) (vacating dismissal and
remanding with order to stay because of two-year statute of limitations).
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
appropriate administrative remedies before the Hawai' i Labor 
Relations Board. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 18, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Herbert R. Takahashi 
Rebecca L. Covert Davina W. Kam (Takahashi and Covert)for Plaintiff-Appellant. Chief Judge 
James E. Halvorson Richard H. Thomason Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Defendants-Appellees. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
10
 