NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000660 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
REGGIE LAUTALO, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CR NO. 1CPC-17-0000815) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(
By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Chan and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Reggie Lautalo (Lautalo
) appeals 
from the "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" (Judgment), 
entered on July 3, 2018, and the "Amended Judgment of Conviction 
and Sentence" (Amended Judgment), entered on August 21, 2018, 
both entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit 
Court).1 Following a jury trial, Lautalo was found guilty of 
Assault in the Second Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 707-711 (2014)2 and Robbery in the Second Degree 
1 The Honorable Todd W. Eddins presided. 
2 At the time of the offense, HRS § 707-711 provided in relevant part: 
§707-711 Assault in the second degree.  (1) A person commits
the offense of assault in the second degree if:
(a) The person intentionally or knowingly causes
substantial bodily injury to another;
(b) The person recklessly causes serious or substantialbodily injury to another[.]   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in violation of HRS § 708-841(1)(a) (2014).3 The Circuit Court 
subsequently dismissed the assault conviction with prejudice and 
sentenced Lautalo to a ten-year term of incarceration for the robbery conviction, to run concurrently with any other sentence that Lautalo was then serving.
4 
On appeal, Lautalo raises the following points of 
error: (1) the Circuit Court abused its discretion in failing to investigate whether any prospective jurors heard an excused prospective juror say "good luck, Uso" to Lautalo as the excused juror walked out of the courtroom; (2) Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i (State) committed prosecutorial misconduct during its 
rebuttal closing argument; and (3) the Circuit Court erred in giving Instruction No. 1.2 to the jury regarding the presumption of innocence and reasonable doubt because it fails to include critical language contained in 
Hawai# i Standard Jury Instruction 
Criminal (HAWJIC) 3.02. 
We conclude that the statement by the excused juror 
could have substantially prejudiced Lautalo's right to a fair trial by an impartial jury, and thus, further investigation by the Circuit Court was required. We therefore vacate Lautalo's conviction and remand for further proceedings.
I. Prospective Juror 46's statement was of a nature that it
could have substantially prejudiced Lautalo's right to afair trial 
Jury trial in this case commenced on April 19, 2018. 
During jury selection, prospective juror number 46 (
Prospective
Juror 46) was excused by the Circuit Court. Upon being excused, 
3 HRS § 708-841(1)(a) provides: 
§708-841 Robbery in the second degree. (1) A person commits
the offense of robbery in the second degree if, in the course ofcommitting theft or non-consensual taking of a motor vehicle:
(a) The person uses force against the person of anyonepresent with the intent to overcome that person'sphysical resistance or physical power of resistance[.] 
4 The Circuit Court originally sentenced Lautalo to the open term of
incarceration in both counts, each to run concurrently with each other. On August 21, 2018, the Circuit Court entered an order dismissing the assaultcount with prejudice, apparently based on merger of the offenses. On the same day, the Circuit Court entered its Amended Judgment reflecting the dismissal. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Prospective Juror 46 stated "Good luck, Uso," which was 
apparently directed at Lautalo. After a recess, Lautalo's counsel brought the statement to the Circuit Court's attention, where the following exchange occurred: 
[Lautalo's counsel]: Your Honor, I have a grave
concern. Apparently -- I didn't realize this when ithappened, but it was brought to my attention, and Iconfirmed it with a couple members of Mr. Lautalo'sfamily who were in the area where it was said; butapparently when [Prospective Juror 46] was excused andwalking in this area, directing his comment to -- toMr. Lautalo, said, "Good luck, Uso." And I haveconcerns -- now, many people might not know what thatmeans, the significance of it. But for the people thatdo know what it means, I have a concern that they may-- it may affect them. And because we're at this pointwhere it's still -- we have a big panel. And I don'tknow who heard. 
THE COURT: All right. [Lautalo's counsel]: I would like to address it
somehow. 
THE COURT: [Deputy Prosecuting Attorney], what's your
position? 
[Deputy Prosecuting Attorney]: I can confirm. I did
hear those exact words. 
THE COURT: Well, I'm not asking about that, because I
heard those words. 
[Deputy Prosecuting Attorney]: I mean, if anything --
if anything, my understanding is "uso" means brother.So, if anything, I thought it was detrimental to me.So -- I mean, I'll defer to the Court on this. Butbeyond that, I don't really have an opinion. 
I'd prefer -- I mean, I -- it would be nice not to
bring it up again. 
THE COURT: I strike that as a comment that can be 
taken many different ways, based on the definition of"uso." Perhaps [Lautalo's counsel] is thinking that"uso" means some sort of a prison gang situation. Butit could also mean an individual of Samoan ethnicity.It could mean brother, as [Deputy ProsecutingAttorney] says it. But irrespective of what themeaning happens to be, the jury has been instructedand will be instructed to consider the case solely onthe evidence presented in this court and the law thatI give to you. 
So I see no prejudice to this jury panel if there's a
request by the Defense to excuse this jury panel andsomehow [sic] another panel. I don't see the need forany kind of instruction on this case. I wish theindividual hadn't made that statement. But I don't see any substantial prejudice to the Defense on this. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 But, [Lautalo's counsel], do you want to add anything
further? 
[Lautalo's counsel]: No, Your Honor. 
Lautalo contends that the Circuit Court abused its 
discretion in concluding that Prospective Juror 46's statement 
was not substantially prejudicial and for failing to investigate whether other prospective jurors heard the statement. Lautalo thus asserts that he was denied his constitutional right to a fair trial by an impartial jury because the statement was an outside influence that may have infected other jurors. 
It is well settled that "[t]he sixth amendment to the 
United States Constitution and article I, section 14 of the Hawai# i Constitution  guarantee the criminally accused a fair 
trial by an impartial jury." State v. Bailey, 126 Hawai# i 383, 
399, 271 P.3d 1142, 1158 (2012) (citation omitted). 
"Inherent in 
this requirement is that a defendant receive a trial by an impartial jury free from outside influences." State v. 
Keliiholokai, 58 Haw. 356, 357, 569 P.2d 891, 893 (1977) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Where the 
existence of an outside influence on a jury is brought to the attention of the trial court, the court must ascertain the extent of the influence and then, in its sound discretion, take appropriate measures to assure a fair trial. Id. at 358, 569 
P.2d at 894. 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has recognized that "[t]he 
defendant bears the initial burden of making a prima facie showing of a deprivation that 'could substantially prejudice his 
or her right to a fair trial' by an impartial jury." State v. 
Chin, 135 Hawai# i 437, 443, 353 P.3d 979, 985 (2015) (emphasis in 
original) (brackets, footnote, and citations omitted). 
"Once the 
defendant makes a prima facie showing of a deprivation, 'a rebuttable presumption of prejudice is raised.'" Id. (citation 
omitted). 
This analysis "initially focuses on the general nature 
of the outside influence and whether it 'could' substantially prejudice a defendant; if the court so finds, then a rebuttable presumption of prejudice is raised that triggers the court's 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
obligation to investigate the totality of the circumstances." 
Id. (citation omitted). The determination of whether the outside influence does rise to the level of substantial prejudice is ordinarily a question committed to the trial court's discretion. Keliiholokai, 58 Haw. at 359, 569 P.2d at 895. 
In Chin, the supreme court reiterated the following 
procedure should be followed in the trial court when an improperinfluence on a jury has been raised:  
[W]hen a defendant in a criminal case claims a deprivation
of the right to a fair trial by an impartial jury, theinitial step for the trial court to take is to determinewhether the nature of the alleged deprivation rises to thelevel of being substantially prejudicial. If it does notrise to such a level, the trial court is under no duty tointerrogate the jury. And whether it does rise to the levelof substantial prejudice is ordinarily a question committedto the trial court's discretion. 
Where the trial court does determine that such alleged
deprivation is of a nature which could substantiallyprejudice the defendant's right to a fair trial, arebuttable presumption of prejudice is raised. The trialjudge is then duty bound to further investigate the totalityof circumstances surrounding the alleged deprivation todetermine its impact on jury impartiality. The standard tobe applied in overcoming such a presumption is that thealleged deprivation must be proved harmless beyond areasonable doubt. 
The defendant bears the initial burden of making a prima
facie showing of a deprivation that could substantiallyprejudice his or her right to a fair trial by an impartialjury. But once a rebuttable presumption of prejudice israised, the burden of proving harmlessness falls squarely onthe prosecution. 
Chin, 135 Hawai# i at 445, 353 P.3d at 987 (emphases and brackets 
in original) (citations omitted). 
In this case, the Circuit Court recognized that the 
statement by Prospective Juror 46 could be taken many different 
ways, noting: 
Perhaps [Lautalo's counsel] is thinking that "uso" means
some sort of a prison gang situation. But it could also meanan individual of Samoan ethnicity. It could mean brother, as[Deputy Prosecuting Attorney] says it. But irrespective ofwhat the meaning happens to be, the jury has been instructedand will be instructed to consider the case solely on theevidence presented in this court and the law that I give toyou. 
(Emphases added). Moreover, the record reflects that the deputy 
prosecutor and the Circuit Court heard the statement by 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Prospective Juror 46, such that it was likely at least some of 
the prospective jurors heard the statement as well. Given this record, and particularly the recognition that Prospective Juror 46's statement could refer to "some sort of a prison gang situation[,]" we must conclude that the statement was of a nature that it could substantially prejudice Lautalo's right to an impartial jury, and a rebuttable presumption of prejudice was raised. Chin, 135 Hawai# i at 443, 353 P.3d at 985. Thus, under 
the procedure recognized by the 
Hawai# i Supreme Court, it was 
incumbent on the Circuit Court to "further investigate the totality of circumstances surrounding the alleged deprivation to determine its impact on jury impartiality." Id. at 445, 353 P.3d 
at 987 (citation omitted). 
The Circuit Court relied on the fact that it had 
instructed the jury, and would instruct the jury, to consider the case solely on the evidence presented and the law that would be given. However, Hawai# i Supreme Court cases addressing whether a 
jury has been tainted by an outside influence, and whether a defendant's right to an impartial jury has been impacted, have not indicated that a jury instruction alone can remedy the potential for substantial prejudice. See id. at 443-49, 353 P.3d 
at 985-91; 
Keliiholokai, 58 Haw. at 357-60, 569 P.2d at 893-96. 
In Bailey, a juror made statements during jury 
deliberation about the defendant previously being in trouble for a murder charge. Bailey, 126 Hawai# i at 393, 271 P.3d at 1152. 
After investigating the matter by proceeding to voir dire each juror, the trial court denied the defendant's motion for a mistrial, dismissed the juror who had made the comments, and seated an alternate juror. Id. at 395, 271 P.3d at 1154. The 
trial court then instructed the original eleven jurors to "not consider [Juror Nine's] statements during your deliberations for any reason or purpose[,]" and instructed the entire reconstituted jury "to disregard [its] prior deliberations and to start [its] deliberations anew." Id. (some brackets in original) (internal 
quotation marks omitted). On appeal, the Hawai# i Supreme Court 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
recognized that "erroneous admission of prior criminal conduct 
may be harmless if the trial court gives a cautionary instruction and the evidence against the defendant is overwhelming," but that "such an instruction may be insufficient to cure the effect of improper evidence that is highly prejudicial[.]" Id. at 401, 271 
P.3d at 1160 (citations omitted). The Hawai# i Supreme Court 
ultimately concluded that the evidence produced at trial was not strong enough to overcome the substantial prejudice created by the dismissed juror's statements, even with the trial court's specific instruction to the jurors to disregard the dismissed juror's statements in resuming deliberations. Id. at 401-02, 271 
P.3d at 1160-61. 
Here, the Circuit Court did not engage in a further 
investigation regarding Prospective Juror 46's statement. Moreover, the Circuit Court's instructions to the jury did not specifically address Prospective Juror 46's statement, but rather generally instructed the jurors to only consider the evidence presented and the law that would be given. Given the lack of further investigation about Prospective Juror 46's statement, and without knowing its impact on the jurors who ultimately were selected, the Circuit Court's general instructions were not sufficient to negate the potentially prejudicial statement made by Prospective Juror 46. 
We therefore conclude that the Circuit Court erred in 
failing to investigate the statement by Prospective Juror 46 and by not determining whether Lautalo's right to an impartial jury was impacted.
II. Other points of error 
Given that we vacate based on Lautalo's first point of 
error, we need not reach his remaining asserted points of error.III. Conclusion 
Based on the foregoing, the "Judgment of Conviction and 
Sentence" filed on July 3, 2018, and the "Amended Judgment of 
Conviction and Sentence" filed on August 21, 2018, both entered 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, are vacated. This 
case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further proceedings. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 29, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
William H. Jameson, Jr.
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Donn Fudo,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge 
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
Associate Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
8 