NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0001033
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ELDON GARDNER, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
MARY M. LICHOTA, Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
KO'OLAUPOKO DIVISION
 
(CIVIL NO. 1RC11-1-02280)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellant Eldon Gardner (Gardner) appeals 
from the Judgment entered on November 1, 2011 and also challenges 
the denial of Plaintiff's Motion to Alter Or Amend Judgment entered on November 9, 2011, in the District Court of the First Circuit, Ko
'olaupoko Division (district court).1 The district 
court entered Judgment in favor of Defendant-Appellee Mary M. Lichota (Lichota) and awarded Lichota attorney's fees of $5,000. Gardner also challenges the district court's Memorandum of Decision filed on December 30, 2011, which provides the court's findings and conclusions supporting the Judgment. 
On appeal, Gardner contends that the district court
 
erred by (1) concluding that Lichota was the prevailing party on
 the issue of summary possession; (2) failing to enter judgment in
 Gardner's favor for damages, fees, and costs; (3) entering an
 
1
 The Honorable Hilary B. Gangnes presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
award of $5,000 for attorneys' fees to Lichota under Hawai 'i 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 666-14 (1993); (4) holding that the fee 
for late rental payments was $20 per month, rather than $20 per day; (5) applying new theories of the case sua sponte; (6) ruling that Gardner's deductions of funds from Lichota's security deposit were improper; and (7) denying Gardner's Motion to Alter or Amend Judgment. 
Gardner requests judgment in his favor for damages, an
 
award of attorney's fees and costs, and additionally asks that
 upon remand, the case be assigned to a different judge.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant legal authorities, we resolve Gardner's
 appeal as follows.
 
I. Background
 
Gardner, as landlord, and Lichota, as tenant, entered 
into a Residential Tenancy Agreement (lease) dated November 30, 2009. The lease for the subject premises (the Property), which was located in Kaneohe, Hawai
'i, was for a two-year period 
beginning on January 1, 2010, at a rental amount of $1,950 per month. On March 17, 2011, after Lichota paid her rent late on multiple instances, Gardner filed a Complaint in district court alleging that Lichota had broken the rental agreement and owed unpaid rent in the amount of $1,950.00 and late fees in the amount of $860. Gardner requested a judgment for possession of the Property, a writ of possession, and judgment against Lichota for $2,810.00. Gardner attached the lease and a letter from Gardner to Lichota, dated March 4, 2011. In the March 4, 2011 letter, Gardner requested that Lichota pay fees in the amount of 
2
$680 within five days, and stated that if he did not receive the
$680, he would "file for termination of [her] tenancy[.]" 
When
 
2
 This amount was based on $100 for two bounced checks and late fees
 
computed at $20 a day for each day that Gardner asserted Lichota had failed to
pay rent when it was due.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Gardner filed his Complaint on March 17, 2011, Lichota had also
 
failed to pay the rent for March and thus Gardner's Complaint
 sought the outstanding rent and late fees he asserted had been
 incurred up to that point.
 
A bench trial was held on June 13, 2011. The main
 
issues at trial were whether Gardner was entitled to possession
 of the Property, Lichota's late rental payments, Lichota's
 bounced checks, and also the proper computation of late fees. 
Lichota admitted that she owed $100 in nonsufficient funds (NSF)
 fees for two bounced checks, and that she had paid rent late on
 four occasions. Prior to trial, Lichota paid the outstanding
 rent for March 2011. 
Following the trial, the district court determined that
 
(1) Gardner "failed to meet his burden of showing by the
 preponderance of the credible evidence that he is entitled to
 possession" of the Property, and (2) the lease required a "$20
 flat fee" for a late rent payment, not $20 per day as Gardner had
 asserted. The district court further determined that Lichota was
 entitled to reasonable attorney's fees pursuant to HRS § 666-14
 and awarded $5,000 in fees.
 
II. Prevailing Party for Summary Possession
 
Although Gardner's first point of error is that the
 
circuit court erred in determining that Lichota was the
 prevailing party on the summary possession issue, Gardner notes
 that "[t]he issue of possession is now moot as the lease expired
 on December 31, 2011 and Lichota has vacated the premises." 
Lichota does not dispute that she has vacated the premises. 
Thus, given Gardner's own assertion that possession is moot, we
 will not address the merits of that issue. See Queen Emma Found.
 
v. Tatibouet, 123 Hawai
'i 500, 506, 236 P.3d 1236, 1242 (App. 
2010). However, we can still address Gardner's challenge to the award of attorney's fees to Lichota, which was based on the summary possession issue. Id. at 510-11, 236 P.3d at 1246-47. 
In doing so, infra, we will not inquire into the correctness of 
3
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the district court's ruling on the underlying summary possession
 
issue. Id. 
However, we first address some of Gardner's other
 
points of error. 
III. Late Rental Charges
 
We next consider the question whether the district
 
court correctly interpreted the lease to require a $20 flat fee
 for late rental payments.
 
While a lease is both a conveyance and a contract, its
essence is contractual; accordingly, we review the lease
under principles of contract law. Generally, the
construction and legal effect to be given a contract is a
question of law freely reviewable by an appellate court. 
Pancakes of Hawaii, Inc. v. Pomare Props. Corp., 85 Hawai 'i 300, 
304, 944 P.2d 97, 101 (App. 1997) (citations and internal 
quotation marks omitted). "[T]erms of a contract should be interpreted according to their plain, ordinary and accepted use in common speech, unless the contract indicates a different meaning." Id. at 305, 944 P.2d at 102 (quoting Amfac, Inc. v. 
Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 108-09, 839 P.2d 10, 24 (1992)) (internal quotation marks omitted). "The intention of the parties is to be gathered from the whole instrument, and if this cannot be discovered, but there exists an ambiguity, then such construction must prevail as is most strong against the covenanter [sic], for he or she might have expressed himself or herself more clearly." Id. (quoting Coney v. Dowsett, 3 Haw. 
685, 686 (Haw. Kingdom 1876)) (internal quotation marks and some brackets omitted). 
Section III of the lease, entitled "Rent," states that
 
"[i]f rent is paid after the 5th of the month, there will be a
 
late charge of $20.00 assessed." (Some emphasis added.) Gardner
 
contends inter alia that another section in the lease also
 
applies, specifically Section XVI, entitled "Additional
 
Provisions" which provides: "Lost keys replaced at cost plus $25. 
Tenants agree to follow all house rules and requests from
 
building management. Tenants will promptly pay any fines incured
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
[sic] from association. Late fees will be $20.00 per day." 
(Emphasis added.) Gardner thus argues that the late charge for
 
unpaid rent is $20 per day.
 
Lichota, on the other hand, argues that fees for late
 
rent payments are to be computed at $20 for each time rent is
 paid late, based on Section III. 
The district court agreed with Lichota's interpretation
 
of the lease. Upon de novo review, we agree with the district
 court's conclusion, although we more precisely determine that the
 lease provides for a late rent charge at $20.00 per instance rent
 is paid late. Under Section III, late rent payment incurs "a
 late charge of $20.00[.]" (Emphasis added.) The sentence
 referring to "late fees" of "$20.00 per day" under section XVI
 does not purport to alter Section III and we cannot interpret the
 lease in that way. Rather, under the plain language of Section
 III, late rental payments incur a $20.00 charge per late payment.
 
Even if we assumed Section XVI somehow applied to late 
rent, it would render the lease ambiguous and any ambiguity would be resolved against Gardner as the drafter of the lease.
3 See 
Pancakes of Hawaii, 85 Hawai 'i at 305, 944 P.2d at 102. 
IV. Judgment in Favor of Gardner
 
Gardner argues that the district court erred in failing
 
to enter judgment in his favor as to damages. He contends it was
 undisputed that there were insufficient funds for two of
 Lichota's rental checks and that she paid rent late for four
 months. Moreover, the rent for March 2011 was outstanding when
 the Complaint was filed and was only paid after Lichota was
 served with the lawsuit.
 
We agree with Gardner that the district court erred by
 
failing to enter judgment in his favor for damages on his breach
 of contract claim. Although Gardner incorrectly sought $20 per
 day in late rent charges, Lichota did not contest that she paid
 
3
 Gardner does not object to the district court's Finding of Fact that
"[o]n December 5, 2009, tenant Mary Lichota entered into a written
'Residential Tenancy Agreement' that was drafted by landlord Eldon Gardner[.]" 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
rent late on four occasions.4 Under our ruling above, that each
 
late rent payment incurred a $20 charge, Lichota owed $80 in late
 
rent charges. The district court also determined that
 "Ms. Lichota did not dispute that she owed Mr. Gardner $100 for
 the two N.S.F. checks she wrote that were returned to
 Mr. Gardner's bank[.]" At the time of trial, the fact that
 Lichota had not paid any money for late rent charges or NSF fees
 was uncontested. 
Relatedly, however, Gardner asserted before the
 
district court that he was entitled to deduct amounts owed to him
 from Lichota's security deposit. Gardner contends the district
 
5
court erred in determining  that his deduction of money from
Lichota's security deposit was improper. The district court,
 however, did not address the propriety of Gardner's deduction
 from Lichota's security deposit in its Memorandum of Decision,
 which is the subject of this appeal. Gardner also states that
 "[t]he matter of Lichota's security deposit will be decided in
 future pending litigation[.]" Thus, we need not address the
 district court's statements regarding deductions from the
 security deposit to resolve this appeal.
 
Given the above, the district court should have entered
 
judgment in favor of Gardner in the amount of $180 ($100 for NSF
 fees and $80 for late rent charges).
V. Attorney's Fees
 
The district court awarded Lichota attorney's fees in
 
the amount of $5,000 and relied on HRS § 666-14 as the basis for
 the award. Gardner contends this was error and we agree.
 
4
 In the Memorandum of Decision, the district court calculated the
amount owed by Lichota for late rent charges as $60 based on three months of
late rental payments. However, Gardner correctly challenges this finding
because at trial it was uncontested that Lichota paid rent late on four
occasions and thus owed $80.
5
 The district court made an oral ruling in this regard, but did not
address the propriety of Gardner's deduction from Lichota's security deposit
in its Memorandum of Decision.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[The appellate] court reviews the denial and granting
of attorney's fees under the abuse of discretion standard.
The same standard applies to [the appellate] court's review
of the amount of a trial court's award of attorney's fees.
An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has clearly
exceeded the bounds of reason or has disregarded rules or
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment
of a party litigant.
 
Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of Emps. Ret. Sys. of the State of Hawai 'i, 
106 Hawai 'i 416, 431, 106 P.3d 339, 354 (2005) (internal 
quotation marks, citations, original brackets, and ellipses
 
omitted). 
As a general rule, each party is responsible for
paying his or her own litigation expenses. This "American
 
Rule" is subject to several exceptions that allow
fee-shifting wherein the losing party pays the fees of the
prevailing party when so authorized by statute, rule of
court, agreement, stipulation, or precedent.
 
Taomae v. Lingle, 110 Hawai 'i 327, 331, 132 P.3d 1238, 1242 
(2006) (citations and some internal quotation marks omitted).
 
Even though we do not inquire into the correctness of
 
the district court's ruling on summary possession, the court

 
abused its discretion in awarding attorney's fees to Lichota
 
under HRS § 666-14 because that statute does not provide a basis
 to award fees to a tenant in a summary possession action. 
HRS § 666-14 provides:
 
§666-14 Writ stayed how, in proceedings for nonpayment
of rent.  The issuing of the writ of possession shall be
stayed in the case of a proceeding for the nonpayment of
rent, if the person owing the rent, before the writ is
actually issued, pays the rent due and interest thereon at
the rate of eight per cent a year and all costs and charges
of the proceedings, and all expenses incurred by plaintiff,
including a reasonable fee for the plaintiff's attorney.
 
HRS § 666-14 specifically applies to a stay of a writ of
 
possession and provides only for payment of plaintiff's
 (landlord's) reasonable attorney's fees. 
See HRS § 666-14. We
 
disagree with Lichota's contention that HRS § 666-14 can be
 extended to allow an award of attorney's fees to a tenant who is
 defending against a summary possession action. Lichota's
 reliance on Forbes v. Hawaii Culinary Corporation, 85 Hawai
'i 
501, 511, 946 P.2d 609, 619 (App. 1997) is misplaced.
 
7

   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Moreover, although Lichota further contends that the
 
district court's award of attorney's fees was proper under
 
6
Section XI  of the lease and also HRS § 607-14 (2013 Supp.), we
disagree. First, the district court did not address fees under
 
Section XI of the lease and, moreover, under our ruling Gardner
 is entitled to judgment in his favor as to part of his Complaint. 
Thus, upon remand, the district court may address fees under
 Section XI if so moved by the parties, but its analysis will need
 to take into account our ruling. Second, HRS § 607-14 applies to
 actions in the nature of assumpsit, which in this case would
 encompass Gardner's claim for breach of the lease agreement.
7 As
 
to this claim, Gardner's Complaint sought recovery of $1,950 in
 unpaid rent (for the month of March 2011) and $860 in late fees. 
Gardner did not prevail to the full extent of the fees he sought,
 but as noted above, he is entitled to a judgment for some of the
 fees he sought and, moreover, he did recover the rent for March
 2011 when Lichota paid it after the filing of the lawsuit. Given
 these circumstances, we conclude that as to the assumpsit claims
 in this case, Gardner is the prevailing party and thus an award
 of fees to Lichota under HRS § 607-14 would not be appropriate. 
Therefore, we vacate the district court's award of
 
$5,000 in attorney's fees to Lichota.
VI. Other Issues On Appeal
 
In light of our rulings above, we agree with Gardner
 
that the district court erred in denying his motion to alter or
 amend the Judgment. However, we reject Gardner's remaining
 
6 Section XI of the lease provides:
 
Attorney Fees
1.	 In the event that any action is filed in relation to this
Lease, the unsuccessful party in the action will pay to the
successful party, in addition to all the sums that either
party may be called on to pay, a reasonable sum for the
successful party's attorney fees.
7
 Gardner's claim for summary possession is distinct from, and not part
of, his assumpsit action for breach of contract. Forbes 85 Hawai' i at 510,
946 P.2d at 618-619. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
points of error, including his request to have the case assigned
 
to a different district court judge upon remand.
VII. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the Judgment entered 
on November 1, 2011, and the denial of Plaintiff's Motion to Alter Or Amend Judgment entered on November 9, 2011, both filed in the District Court of the First Circuit, Ko
'olaupoko Division. 
We also vacate the district court's Memorandum of Decision filed on December 30, 2011, to the extent that it is inconsistent with this opinion. 
The case is remanded to the district court for further
 
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 30, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Jack C. Morse

 
for Plaintiff-Appellant Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Gary Victor Dubin

Peter T. Stone
 
(Dubin Law Offices) for Defendant-Appellee
 
9
 