  
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-22-0000272 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I  
IN THE INTEREST OF QH 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-S NO. 19-00164) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(
By: Ginoza, C.J., and Wadsworth and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Appellant Father (Father) appeals from the Order 
Terminating Parental Rights, entered on April 4, 2022, in the 
Family Court of the First Circuit (
Family Court).  Father 
appears to contend that the Family Court erred in finding that Father would not be able to provide a safe family home for his daughter (QH)
  within a reasonable period of time.  Father also 
challenges findings of fact (FOFs) 57, 79, 90, 91, and 92, in the 
Family Court's May 12, 2002 Findings of Fact and Conclusions of 
Law. 3/ 2/1/
1
/ The Honorable Andrew T. Park presided. 
2/ At the time of trial in March 2022, QH was two years and eight
months old and had entered foster custody ten days after birth. 
3/ Father's opening brief fails to comply in material respects with
Rules Expediting Child Protective Appeals Rule 11(a)(3) and Hawai #i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4) and (7). For example, the brief does not
state how the Family Court erred and does not present any argument regardingthe challenged FOFs. Nevertheless, we have "consistently adhered to thepolicy of affording litigants the opportunity 'to have their cases heard onthe merits, where possible.'" 
Morgan v. Planning Dep't Cty. of Kauai
, 104
Hawai #i 173, 180-81, 86 P.3d 982, 989-90 (2004) (quoting O'Connor v. Diocese
of Honolulu
, 77 Hawai #i 383, 386, 885 P.2d 361, 364 (1994
)). We thus address 
Father's arguments to the extent discernible. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Father's points of error as follows and affirm. 
I. 
We review Father's challenges to the Family Court's 
FOFs for clear error. In re Doe, 95 Hawai# i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 
616, 623 (2001). 
A FOF "is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks
substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) despitesubstantial evidence in support of the finding, theappellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firmconviction that a mistake has been made." "'Substantial evidence' is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable
caution to support a conclusion.
" 
Id. (citations and ellipsis omitted). Unchallenged findings of 
fact are binding on appeal. In re Doe, 99 Hawai# i 522, 538, 57 
P.3d 447, 463 (2002) (quoting Poe v. Haw. Labor Rels. Bd., 97 Hawai#i 528, 536, 40 P.3d 930, 938 (2002)). 
We likewise review conclusions of law that present 
mixed questions of fact and law for clear error. See In re JM, 
150 Hawai# i 125, 137, 497 P.3d 140, 152 (App. 2021). 
Accordingly: 
[T]he family court's determinations . . . with respect to
(1) whether a child's parent is willing and able to providea safe family home for the child and (2) whether it isreasonably foreseeable that a child's parent will becomewilling and able to provide a safe family home within areasonable period of time present mixed questions of law andfact; . . . they are reviewed on appeal under the clearlyerroneous standard. Likewise, the family court'sdetermination of what is or is not in a child's best interests is reviewed on appeal for clear error. 
Moreover, the family court is given much leeway in its
examination of the reports concerning a child's care,custody, and welfare, and its conclusions in this regard, ifsupported by the record and not clearly erroneous, muststand on appeal. 
Id. (quoting Doe, 95 Hawai# i at 190, 20 P.3d at 623). 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
II. 
Father contests FOFs 57, 79, and 90-92. Each is 
addressed below. 
A. FOF 57 
FOF 57 states: 
Father never completely acquired the basic parenting
skills that would keep a child safe. Since the beginning of
this case, Father could not grasp all of a baby's needs likefeeding, consoling, or age-appropriate milestones. 
FOF 57 is supported by FOFs 61, 65-78, and 80-83, which 
are unchallenged and thus binding on appeal. Specifically, these 
unchallenged FOFs provide examples of Father's failures to acquire basic parenting skills, which include: numerous no-shows to visitations with QH, failure to bring QH diapers, snacks, and drinks during visits, and twice leaving QH unsupervised at a playground. 
FOF 57 is also supported by the following testimony of 
Department of Human Services (DHS) social worker Bruce Wallace 
(Wallace): 
Q. So given all of these services and education
given to [Father] . . . why do you still have concerns about
his parenting as a safety issue? 
A. Well, just the recent incidents and also the
reports that I have discussed with Dr. Choy, that departmentis -- already has exhausted everything that we could give[Father]. 
Q. Then given this -- the time that's elapsed and
the services provided, what were your expectations of aparent who could provide a safe family home at this point? 
A. That he would be a parent that asked questions
about his daughter, that innate ability that . . . drivesparents to, one, to understand their child's daily life;about what is school like; what . . . time does she go tobed; what is her sleep patterns; what is -- she like to do;who are her friends; what she likes, what she dislikes.These are the things that -- innate ability that [Father]does not possess of being a parent. 
Thus, the record contains substantial evidence from 
which a reasonable factfinder could have found it highly probable 
that FOF 57 was true. See In re JK, 149 Hawai# i 400, 409-10, 491 
P.3d 1179, 1188-89 (App. 2021). 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
B. FOF 79 
FOF 79 states: 
On March 21, 2022, Father gave [QH] two little balls
during a [Parent-Child Interactive Therapy ( PCIT)] session
against the therapist's advice. [QH] put the balls in her
mouth and almost choked on them. Fortunately, the resourcecaregiver noticed [QH]'s distress and intervened. 
FOF 79 is supported by substantial evidence in the 
record. Specifically, at trial, Wallace testified that the 
resource caregiver had reported this incident to him, and that he(Wallace) had discussed the incident with Father and PCIT staff. Additionally, Dr. Choy testified that the choking incident occurred in his office; Dr. Choy's staff told Father not to give QH anything small that she could choke on; QH got two small objects from the toy box in the office; and Dr. Choy's staff tookaway the objects and made it clear to Father that QH should not have the small objects on her own. Father also admitted giving the two balls to QH and that he should not have done it.  
 
Thus, the record contains substantial evidence from 
which a reasonable factfinder could have found it highly probable 
that FOF 79 was true. See JK, 149 Hawai# i at 409-10, 491 P.3d at 
1188-89. 
C. FOFs 90-92 
FOFs 90-92 state: 
90. Under the circumstances presented by the instant
case, the DHS has exerted reasonable and active efforts to
avoid foster placement of [QH] and she has been in the sameplacement since she was released from the hospital. 
91. Under the circumstances presented by the instant
case, the DHS has exerted reasonable and active efforts toreunify the Child with [Father] and [Mother] by identifyingnecessary, appropriate, and reasonable services to addresstheir identified safety issues, and making the appropriateand timely referrals for these services. 
92. Under the circumstances presented by the instant
case, the DHS gave Parents every reasonable opportunity tosucceed in remedying the problems which subjected the Childto substantial risk of being harmed in the family home, andto reunify with the Child. The DHS actively encouraged[Father] and [Mother] to participate in necessary andreasonable services to allow them to reunify with the child. 
4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
FOFs 90-92 are also supported by substantial evidence 
in the record. Specifically, Father does not contest FOFs 93 and 
94, which state: 
93. Each of the service plans offered by the DHS and
ordered by the court were fair, appropriate, and
comprehensive. 
94. None of the underlying facts and data upon which
the DHS based its opinions, assessments, and recommendationswas shown to be untrustworthy. The DHS' continuingassessment in this case was conducted in an appropriatemanner. 
FOFs 90-92 are also supported by Wallace's trial 
testimony. Wallace testified as follows regarding DHS's efforts 
to reunify QH and Father: 
Q. What types of services has [the] department put
into place to address [parenting] issues? 
A. Sure. At . . . the beginning of the case we
have hands-on parenting. We've referred him to hands-on 
parenting, Strong Families Home Visiting. He was doingthat. He was inconsistent with that and they closed himout. 
Also, he had the opportunity to do the ABC
Program, which is evidence-based program, which he did not-- he was inconsistent with that and he was closed out of that. 
We also did parenting education with
[Comprehensive Counseling and Support Services], withParents Inc. 
He did complete that. 
We also did another hands-on parenting with
Catholic Charities. We did that. And also we -- right nowcurrently we are doing PCIT. 
Wallace further testified that DHS had exhausted all of its 
services that would help Father resolve safety issues; Father had not shown any improvement on these issues; Father was still not providing for all of QH's needs during their visits; and, because of Father's inconsistency, Wallace was concerned that Father "may forget her at some place, maybe at school[.]" Wallace also expressed concern that: 
[Father] doesn't know his child. He has never asked 
about her schooling, . . . her schooling schedule, her sleep
time, her -- what's it like to be at the resourcecaregiver's home, who she plays with. That drive that wants to know everything about your child, or everything that's --might be wrong about . . . what we're doing wrong, oranything that he has concerns about during, say, if she went 
5  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
to a water park and he didn't know about it or something
like that. Or disagreed with something. He . . . has never asked us anything about that. 
Thus, the record contains substantial evidence from 
which a reasonable factfinder could have found it highly probable 
that FOFs 90-92 were true. See JK, 149 Hawai# i at 409-10, 491 
P.3d at 1188-89. 
III.
 Father's primary contention appears to be that the 
Family Court erred in determining that he would not be able to provide a safe family home for QH within a reasonable period of time. 
HRS ยง 587A-33(a) (2018) provides, in relevant part: 
(a) At a termination of parental rights hearing, the court
shall determine whether there exists clear and convincingevidence that: 
(1) A child's parent whose rights are subject totermination is not presently willing and able toprovide the parent's child with a safe familyhome, even with the assistance of a serviceplan; [and] 
(2) It is not reasonably foreseeable that thechild's parent whose rights are subject totermination will become willing and able toprovide the child with a safe family home, evenwith the assistance of a service plan, within areasonable period of time, which shall notexceed two years from the child's date of entryinto foster care[.] 
HRS ยง 587A-7(a) (2018) sets forth numerous factors that the 
Family Court must consider "when determining whether a child's family is willing and able to provide the child with a safe family home[.]" 
Here, the Family Court entered extensive findings of 
fact related to Father's willingness and ability to provide QH a safe family home. The FOFs describe, among other things, QH's age and vulnerability; the reports of harm and threatened harm to QH; the results of Father's psychological evaluation; Father's failure to completely acquire the basic parenting skills to keep a young child safe; Father's inconsistency in demonstrating an understanding of and involvement in services recommended by DHS as necessary to provide QH with a safe family home; Father's 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
failure to resolve safety issues within a reasonable period of 
time; and DHS's assessment of Father's ability to provide QH with a safe family home. In addition, uncontested witness testimony established that DHS provided Father with reasonable opportunities to demonstrate his ability to provide a safe family home for QH, but Father inconsistently participated in visitations with QH (missing at least thirty-one scheduled visits), family training courses, and psychiatric sessions, which ultimately led DHS to seek to terminate Father's parental rights. 
Based on the entire record, we conclude that the Family 
Court did not clearly err in determining that Father was not presently willing and able to provide QH with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan. 
IV. 
For the reasons discussed above, the Order Terminating 
Parental Rights, entered on April 4, 2022, in the Family Court of the First Circuit, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 10, 2022. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge 
Herbert Y. Hamada for Father-Appellant. 
Gay M. Tanaka and Julio C. Herrera, Deputy Attorneys General,for Petitioner-Appellee. 
7 