NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of AppealsCAAP-16-0000890 15-APR-2020 10:30 AM  
NO. CAAP-16-0000890 and CAAP-17-0000216
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I  
CAAP-16-0000890 
PRUDENTIAL LOCATIONS, LLC, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
LORNA GAGNON, PRESTIGE REALTY GROUP LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY,
Defendants/Cross-Claim Defendants-Appellees, and RE/MAX LLC,
LORRAINE CLAWSON, Defendants/Cross-Claimants/Third-Party
Plaintiffs-Appellees, and KEVIN TENGAN, Third-Party
Defendant-Appellee, and DOES 1-15, Defendants 
 and 
CAAP-17-0000216 
PRUDENTIAL LOCATIONS, LLC, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
LORNA GAGNON, PRESTIGE REALTY GROUP LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY,
Defendants/Cross-Claim Defendants-Appellees, and RE/MAX LLC,
LORRAINE CLAWSON, Defendants/Cross-Claimants/Third-Party
Plaintiffs-Appellees, and KEVIN TENGAN, Third-Party
Defendant-Appellee, and DOES 1-15, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-2328) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(
By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Hiraoka, JJ.)
I. 
In this consolidated appeal,  Plaintiff-Appellant 
Prudential Locations LLC (Locations), appeals from the following 
orders entered by the First Circuit Court (Circuit Court): 21
1 On May 2, 2017, this court consolidated CAAP-17-0000216 into CAAP-
16-0000890. 
2 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided. The Honorable Virginia
Lea Crandall entered an order addressing the renewed motion for attorneys'
fees and costs and Final Judgment. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In CAAP-16-0000890, 
(1) the August 25, 2016 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions
of Law, and Order [(FFCLO)] Denying [Locations's]
Motion for Partial Summary Judgment [(MPSJ)] Against[Defendant-Appellee] Lorna Gagnon [(Gagnon)]"; 
(2) the August 25, 2016 "[FFCLO] Granting Defendants
[Appellees Gagnon] and Prestige Realty Group Limited
Liability Company's [(Prestige)] Cross-Motion for
Summary Judgment [(XMSJ)] on the First AmendedComplaint of [Locations]"; 
(3) the August 25, 2016 "[FFCLO] Granting [Defendants-
Appellees RE/MAX LLC (RE/MAX)] and Lorraine Clawson's 
[(Clawson)] [XMSJ] Against [Locations]"; 
(4) the November 1, 2016 "Order Denying [Locations's]
Motion for Leave to File Second Amended Complaint"
(SAC); 
(5) the November 7, 2016 "Order Granting Defendant
[RE/MAX's] Motion for Protective Order as to the
Deposition of Tim Burns [(Burns)] Noticed for
September 14, 2016, Filed September 2, 2016"; 
(6) the November 15, 2016 "Order Denying [Locations's]
Motion to Compel";
3 
(7) the December 9, 2016 Judgment; 
(8) the December 28, 2016 "Order Granting in Part and
Denying in Part [Gagnon and Prestige's] Motion for
Award of Attorney's Fees and Costs [(MFC)] Against
[Locations]"; and 
(9) the December 28, 2016 "Order Denying [RE/MAX and
Clawson's] Motion to Recover Attorneys' Fees and Costs
Pursuant to [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)] §§ 607-9,
607-14, and 607-14.5". 
In CAAP-17-0000216, Locations appealed from (1) the March 3, 2017 "Order Granting in Part and
Denying in Part [RE/MAX and Clawson's] Renewed Motion
for Award of Attorneys' Fees and Costs Against[Locations]"; and 
(2) the March 22 2017 "Final Judgment". 
3 The order also denied Locations's Hawai #i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP ) Rule 56(f) request for discovery continuance. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Locations contends that the Circuit Court erroneously 
determined that the Agreement Not to Compete (Non-Compete Clause) 
contained as Paragraph 3 of the Confidentiality and Non-
Competition Agreement (CNA) signed by Gagnon was invalid and 
unenforceable; improperly denied Locations leave to file a second 
amended complaint; abused its discretion in denying discovery; and abused its discretion in awarding attorneys' fees to RE/MAX and Clawson. 
II. 
A. 
Locations is a real estate brokerage firm in Hawai
#i. 
Gagnon started working in real estate in 1989, as a sales person, in New Hampshire. In 1999 she became a licensed real estate broker. From 2003 to 2008, Gagnon owned and operated a RE/MAX franchise in New Hampshire. Gagnon and her five children moved to 
Hawai# i from New Hampshire on July 1, 2008. 
Locations offered and Gagnon accepted a "Sales Coach" 
position by letter dated August 6, 2008. 
As a Sales Coach, 
Gagnon mentored and monitored Locations's agents' engagement with the company, discussed Locations's agents' plans for business and personal challenges and assisted Locations's agents' growth as real estate sales professionals by developing sales skills, role playing, and setting sales goals and ways to achieve those goals. On August 8, 2008, Gagnon signed the CNA
4 that is at issue here. 
4 CONFIDENTIALITY AND NON-COMPETITION AGREEMENT 
THIS CONFIDENTIALITY AND NON-COMPETITION AGREEMENT 
(the "Agreement"), is made and entered into as of the date
set forth below, by and between Prudential Locations RealEstate LLC, a [
Hawai #i] limited liability company, the
employer described below ("Company") and the employeedescribed below ("Employee"). 
1. Recitals. 
1.1
 The primary business of the Company is to
provide real estate brokerage and/or property management
services in the State of [ Hawai #i], hereinafter collectively
referred to as the "Business". 
1.2
 The Business involves confidential and 
proprietary information and procedures and trade secrets ofthe Company and its subsidiaries, and such Information is aspecial, valuable and unique asset of the Business. 
(continued...) 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4(...continued) 
1.3 Employee is employed by the Company and will
have access to such confidential and proprietary
information, procedures and trade secrets of the Company. 
1.4 Employee, in consideration of future
employment, agrees to enter into this Agreement for theprotection of the Business. 
NOW, THEREFORE, the parties hereto, intending to be
legally bound hereby, do promise and agree as follows: 
2. Confidentiality and Proprietary Rights. 
Employee acknowledges and agrees that he or she will haveaccess to confidential and proprietary information andprocedures and trade secrets of the Company and itssubsidiaries, and that such information is a special,valuable and unique asset of the business of the Company andits subsidiaries. Employee further acknowledges and agreesthat such confidential and proprietary Information andprocedures and trade secrets belonging exclusively to theCompany includes, without limitation, the following:(i) any information which is not generally known to thepublic which was or is used, developed, made or obtained bythe Company or any of its subsidiaries or which otherwisecame into possession of the Company or any of itssubsidiaries or which relates to the Company or any of itssubsidiaries, (ii) all memoranda, files, books, papers,letters, drawings, documents, formulas, specifications,investigations, and other processes data, and all copiesthereof and therefrom, in any way relating to the Company orany of its subsidiaries, whether used, developed, made orobtained by the Company or any of its subsidiaries or whichotherwise came into the possession of the Company or any ofits subsidiaries; (iii) all information related to clientsand customers, including without limitation, clients andcustomer lists, the identities of existing, past andprospective clients and customers, prices charged orproposed to be charged to any existing, past or prospectiveclient or customer, client or customer contacts, specialcustomer requirements, and all related information;(iv) sales and marketing strategies, plans, materials andtechniques, research and development information, tradesecrets and other know-how or other information pertainingto the financial condition, business, research anddevelopment or prospects of the Company or any of itssubsidiaries; and (v) patterns, devices, compilations ofinformation, copyrightable material and technicalinformation, if any, in any way relating to the Company orany of its subsidiaries (hereinafter collectively referredto as the "Confidential Information"). 
2.1 Restriction on Use of Confidential 
Information. Employee agrees that, except in performance ofduties under an employment arrangement with the Company,Employee shall not  directly or indirectly, at any time or
place, during his or her employment and at anytime afterEmployee ceases to be an employee for any reason whatsoever,use for his or her own benefit or for the benefit of anythird party, or disclose to any third party, anyConfidential Information acquired by reason of his or herstatus as an employee or former employee of the Company,including without limitation, Confidential Informationbelonging or relating to the Company or Its subsidiaries,
(continued..
4 .) 4(...continued)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
affiliates and customers. 
Employee agrees that the
duration, geographic area and scope of this provision is
reasonably necessary for the protection of the Company anddoes not and will not impose undue hardship on Employee. 
3. Agreement Not To Compete. Employee agrees that
Employee shall not, directly or indirectly, within the Stateof [Hawai #i] where the Company conducts or has conducted
business, during his or her employment and for a period ofone (1) year after Employee ceases to be an employee for anyreason whatsoever, (i) represent, furnish consultingservices to, be employed by, or engage or participate in thesame or similar business or businesses conducted by theCompany, including without limitation, the Business, orperform services for third parties which are generallycomparable or competitive with those performed by theCompany with respect to the Business ("ComparableServices"), (ii) own or operate, or become proprietor,partner, principal, agent, consultant, employee, trustee,director, officer, stockholder or Investor, of any person,firm or business which engages or participates in the sameor similar business or businesses conducted by the Company,including without limitation, the Business, or whichperforms Comparable Services, (iii) engage in any activityor conduct adverse to the Business or interests of the Company, or (iv) induce or encourage any other personsemployed or affiliated with the Company to terminate theirrelationship with the Company. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, Company agrees that the Employee may,independently or as an employee or independent contractor ofan existing real estate brokerage company act as a realestate salesperson or broker/salesperson, and such conductshall not constitute a violation of this paragraph (the"Permitted Activities"). Permitted Activities however shall not include (i) Employee's formation of a real estatebrokerage company with other real estate salesperson(s),(ii) Employee's solicitation of other persons employed oraffiliated with the Company. 
4. Remedies of Company
. Employee and Company hereby
acknowledge and agree that the duration, scope andgeographic area applicable to the restrictions set forth inthis Agreement are fair, reasonable and necessary, andrepresent the area in which the goodwill associated with theconduct of the Business has been or will be developed by theCompany. It is the intent of the parties that theprovisions of this Agreement shall be enforced to thefullest extent permissible under the laws and publicpolicies of the State of [
Hawai #i]. Employee and Company
agree that (i} a monetary remedy for a breach of thisAgreement will be inadequate, and will be impracticable andextremely difficult to prove, and further agrees that such abreach would cause the Company irreparable harm, and thatthe Company shall be entitled to temporary and permanentinjunctive relief without the necessity of proving actualdamages, and (ii) the Company shall be entitled to such
injunctive relief, including temporary restraining orders,
preliminary injunctions and permanent injunctions, withoutthe necessity of posting bond or other undertaking inconnection therewith. 
(Emphasis in original). 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On June 28, 2013, Gagnon submitted a resignation letter 
to Locations's Executive Vice President of Sales, Scott Higashi 
(Higashi). Gagnon's letter stated that her last day of 
employment would be July 3, 2013. According to Gagnon, she 
discussed her resignation with Higashi, who asked her to remain with Locations until August 15, 2013. 
At some point in time, Gagnon and Clawson began 
discussing Gagnon opening a new RE/MAX franchise in Hawai# i. On 
July 3, 2013, Gagnon formally acknowledged receipt of a RE/MAX franchise disclosure document as a prospective RE/MAX franchisee. 
On July 15, 2013, Gagnon and Kevin Tengan, who was the 
manager of Locations's technology department, entered into a RE/MAX franchise partnership agreement. 
On July 18, 2013, 
Gagnon, as registered agent and organizer, submitted Prestige's articles of organization to the 
Hawai# i Department of Commerce 
and Consumer Affairs (DCCA). On July 22, 2013, Gagnon, as a 
managing member of Prestige, submitted to DCCA an Application for 
Registration of Trade Name. Several days later, Tengan purchased several domain names for Prestige to develop websites for Oahu and Maui. On August 8, 2013, Gagnon and Tengan executed a RE/MAX franchise agreement. 
On August 13, 2013, Gagnon informed Higashi that Sherri 
Au (
Au), a Locations agent who had been one of Gagnon's mentees, 
was terminating her agency relationship with Locations. Gagnon's last day at Locations was August 15, 2013. On August 26, 2013, the Real Estate Commission of DCCA issued to Prestige a Notice of Licensure, authorizing "RE/MAX Prestige" to act as a real estate broker, effective August 15, 2013. Au was listed as the Principal Broker for Prestige in the application for licensure submitted on August 15, 2013. On September 1, 2013, Prestige opened its sole office in 
Hawai# i Kai. 
B. 
On August 23, 2013, Locations filed a complaint against 
Gagnon and Prestige, alleging breach of the CNA and tortious 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interference with contract by forming Prestige and encouraging 
others to leave Locations. On May 23, 2014, Locations filed its First Amended Complaint (FAC), which added tortious interference 
with contract claims against RE/MAX and Clawson. 
On August 7, 2015, Locations filed a motion for leave 
to file the SAC to add an unfair method of competition claim 
against RE/MAX. On October 22, 2015, RE/MAX and Clawson filed their answer and cross-claim against Gagnon and Prestige.
5 
Following discovery, the parties filed MPSJs: on 
December 22, 2014, Locations filed an MPSJ against RE/MAX and Clawson for a determination that they tortiously interfered with Gagnon and Locations's CNA;
6 on November 17, 2015, Locations 
filed an MPSJ against Gagnon seeking enforcement of the Non-Compete Clause, a finding that she was in breach of the Non-Compete Clause, and damages; on July 11, 2016, Gagnon and Prestige filed their XMSJ for a determination that the Non-Compete Clause was invalid and unreasonable and that the Non-Solicitation Clause did not apply to agents or independent contractors; and on July 15, 2016, RE/MAX and Clawson filed a XMSJ for a determination that there was no tortious interference with Gagnon's CNA. At the hearing on August 3, 2016, the Circuit Court took these matters under advisement. 
On August 23, 2016, Locations filed a notice of taking 
deposition upon oral examination of Burns (to whom Clawson reported) for September 14, 2016, in Merrillville, Indiana. 
On August 25, 2016, the Circuit Court issued the 
FFCLOs. The court ruled that the Non-Compete Clause was illegal and unenforceable as a matter of law, and that the Non-Solicitation Clause was an illegal restraint on trade or commerce.
7 Locations then filed a motion to compel RE/MAX and 
5 RE/MAX and Clawson also filed a third-party complaint against
Tengan, which was later dismissed by stipulation. 
6 This motion was denied on March 2, 2015 but has not been included
in this appeal. 
7 On September 8, 2016, seeking to vacate the FFCLOs, Locations
filed a petition for writ of mandamus against Judge Sakamoto, which the
Hawai #i Supreme Court denied. 
7    
             
             
            
              
        NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Clawson to produce discovery and to produce for deposition Burns, 
Garrett Matthews (a RE/MAX consultant), and HRCP Rule 30(b)(6)8 
designated witness(es). 
On September 2, 2016, RE/MAX filed a motion for 
protective order, arguing that after the Circuit Court's ruling on the MPSJs and XMSJs, no claim remained against RE/MAX and Locations's motion for leave to file a SAC to add an unfair method of competition claim against RE/MAX had not been decided, making discovery on this claim moot. 
On November 1, 2016, the Circuit Court denied 
Plaintiff's motion for leave to file the SAC, explaining that the proposed SAC sought to reassert and relitigate claims identical to those asserted in the FAC, all of which had been dispositively adjudicated through the FFCLOs and, as a result, no claims or parties remained. As Locations's proposed claim for unfair method of competition against RE/MAX was predicated on the validity of the CNA between Locations and Gagnon and having already determined that the Non-Compete Clause was not reasonable and invalid and unenforceable, the Circuit Court ruled that any attempt to add an unfair method of competition claim would be futile and thus, moot. 
On November 7, 2016, the Circuit Court granted RE/MAX's 
motion for protective order and consequently denied Locations's motion to compel. 
On November 18, 2016, Gagnon and Prestige filed a MFC. 
RE/MAX and Clawson filed a MFC pursuant to HRS §§ 607-9, 607-14 and 607-14.5.
9 
8 HRCP Rule 30(b)(6) covers subpoenas to persons designated by an
organization to testify as to matters known or reasonably available to the
organization. 
9 HRS § 607-9 provides for taxable costs; HRS § 607-14 provides for
attorneys' fees to the prevailing party in all actions (1) in the nature of
assumpsit, (2) on a promissory note, and (3) contract in writing, not to exceed
25 percent of the judgment; HRS § 607-14.5 provides for attorneys' fees and costs
to be paid by either party upon the court's specific finding that all or a
portion of the party's claim or defense was frivolous. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Judgment in favor of Defendants Gagnon, Prestige, 
RE/MAX, and Clawson and against Locations on all claims was 
entered on December 9, 2016. 
On December 28, 2016, the Circuit Court denied without 
prejudice RE/MAX and Clawson's MFC. The court agreed that they were entitled to reasonable attorneys' fees pursuant to HRS § 607-14 because the tortious interference claims asserted against them were derived from the breach of contract action against Gagnon and Prestige. However, the court found the requested amount was excessive and unreasonable, and there was insufficient evidence to establish that Locations's claims were frivolous under HRS § 607-14.5. The Circuit Court granted in part and denied in part Gagnon and Prestige's MFC, due to, inter alia, insufficient evidence to establish that Locations's claims were frivolous under HRS § 607-14.5. 
Locations filed a timely notice of appeal from the 
Judgment on December 29, 2016. 
On January 9, 2017, RE/MAX and Clawson filed a renewed 
MFC. A Final Judgment was entered on March 22, 2017, which incorporated the December 9, 2016 Judgment, the December 28, 2016 orders on fees and costs, and added a March 3, 2017 order granting in part and denying in part RE/MAX and Clawson's renewed request for fees and costs. 
On March 23, 2017, Locations filed a notice of appeal 
from the March 22, 2017 Final Judgment.
III.
 
Locations asserts that the Circuit Court: (A)
 erred in granting summary judgment against 
Locations in ruling that the Non-Compete Clause: (1) is greater than required for the protection of Locations and that Locations lacks a legitimate interest in enforcing it; (2) imposes an undue hardship on Gagnon; (3) the harm to the public is outweighed by the benefit; and (4) the clause did not fit any of the exceptions listed in HRS §480-4(c) (Supp. 2019)
10 and is an illegal 
restraint on trade or commerce; 
10 HRS §480-4(c) is set forth infra p. 10 n.11. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(B) erred in determining that all non-solicitation 
clauses are per se against public policy and illegal under HRS 
§ 480-4; 
(C) abused its discretion: (1) in delaying decision on 
Locations's motion for leave to file SAC over fourteen months and then denying it after ruling against Locations on summary judgment; (2) refusing to consider Locations's motions to compel; (3) instructing the parties that it would rule on the validity of the Non-Compete Clause on summary judgment prior to allowing discovery of RE/MAX; (4) granting RE/MAX's motion for protective order; (5) considering RE/MAX's untimely renewed MFC; (6) ruling that RE/MAX, who is the target of a tort claim, is entitled to attorney's fees under HRS § 607-14; (7) awarding uncapped attorney's fees to Defendants; and (8) denying Locations's HRCP Rule 56(f) request. 
IV. 
A. The Motions for Summary Judgment to Determine the Validity
and Enforceability of the Non-Compete Clause 
1. 
In this case, the parties' motions for summary judgment 
turned on a single, legal determination: Whether the Non-Compete 
Clause was reasonable and enforceable, or whether it was an illegal restraint on trade, prohibited by HRS § 480-4.
11 
11 HRS § 480-4(a) through (c) provides: 
§480-4 Combinations in restraint of trade,
price-fixing and limitation of production prohibited.
(a) Every contract, combination in the form of trust orotherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint of trade or commercein the State, or in any section of this State is illegal. 
(b) Without limiting the generality of subsection
(a), no person, exclusive of members of a single businessentity consisting of a sole proprietorship, partnership,trust, or corporation, shall agree, combine, or conspirewith any other person or persons, or enter into, become amember of, or participate in, any understanding,arrangement, pool, or trust, to do, directly or indirectly,any of the following acts, in the State or any section ofthe State: 
(1) Fix, control, or maintain the price of anycommodity; 
(2) 
Limit, control, or discontinue, the production,
(continued...) 
10 11(...continued) 
     
     
     
     
     
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On review of a summary judgment proceeding, the
standard to be applied by this court is identical to that
employed by the trial court. Wright & Miller, FederalPractice and Procedure: Civil § 2716. This means that "the inferences to be drawn from the underlying facts alleged inthe materials (such as depositions, answers tointerrogatories, admissions and affidavits) considered bythe court in making its determination must be viewed in thelight most favorable to the party opposing the motion." Gum 
v. Nakamura, 57 Haw. 39, 549 P.2d 471 (1976); Aku v. Lewis,52 Haw. 366, 477 P.2d 162 (1970); Abraham v. OnoratoGarages, 50 Haw. 628, 446 P.2d 821 (1968). Further, in 
manufacture, or sale of any commodity for thepurpose or with the result of fixing,controlling or maintaining its price; 
(3) Fix, control, or maintain, any standard ofquality of any commodity for the purpose or withthe result of fixing, controlling, ormaintaining its price; 
(4) Refuse to deal with any other person or personsfor the purpose of effecting any of the actsdescribed in paragraphs (1) to (3). 
(c) Notwithstanding subsection (b) and without
limiting the application of subsection (a), it shall belawful for a person to enter into any of the followingrestrictive covenants or agreements ancillary to alegitimate purpose not violative of this chapter, unless theeffect thereof may be substantially to lessen competition orto tend to create a monopoly in any line of commerce in anysection of the State: 
(1) A covenant or agreement by the transferor of abusiness not to compete within a reasonable areaand within a reasonable period of time inconnection with the sale of the business; 
(2) A covenant or agreement between partners not tocompete with the partnership within a reasonablearea and for a reasonable period of time uponthe withdrawal of a partner from thepartnership; 
(3) A covenant or agreement of the lessee to berestricted in the use of the leased premises tocertain business or agricultural uses, orcovenant or agreement of the lessee to berestricted in the use of the leased premises tocertain business uses and of the lessor to be restricted in the use of premises reasonablyproximate to any such leased premises to certainbusiness uses; 
(4) A covenant or agreement by an employee or agentnot to use the trade secrets of the employer orprincipal in competition with the employee's oragent's employer or principal, during the termof the agency or thereafter, or after thetermination of employment, within such time asmay be reasonably necessary for the protectionof the employer or principal, without imposingundue hardship on the employee or agent. 
11  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
considering the validity of the granting of summary judgment
under H.R.C.P. Rule 56(c), the appellate court mustdetermine whether any genuine issue as to a material factwas raised and, if not raised, whether the moving party wasentitled to judgment as a matter of law. Abrahm v. Onorato 
Garages, supra. 
Technicolor, Inc. v. Traeger, 57 Haw. 113, 118-19, 551 P.2d 163, 
168 (1976) (ellipsis omitted). 
The Non-Compete Clause was part of the CNA drafted by 
Locations and signed by Gagnon, as a condition of her employment with Locations. 
As quoted, supra at n.4, the Non-Compete Clause 
forbade Gagnon, for one year after her employment with Locations ceased, in the State of 
Hawai# i, from performing the Business12 or 
"Comparable Services"13 of Locations for third parties; having 
virtually any relationship with a "person, firm or business" engaged in the same or similar Business or Comparable Services of Locations; engaging in any conduct adverse to Locations's interests; or inducing or encouraging anyone employed or affiliated with Locations to terminate their relationship with Locations. However, the Non-Compete Clause explicitly allowed Gagnon to act as a real estate salesperson or broker/salesperson for an existing company, so long as she did not form a brokerage company with other real estate salespersons or solicit other persons from Locations. Id. 
As a general rule, and as pertinent here, any contract 
that is in restraint of trade or commerce, is illegal. HRS § 480-4(a). HRS § 480-4 is a remedial statute, Cieri v. Leticia Query Realty, Inc.
, 80 Hawai# i 54, 68, 905 P.2d 29, 43 
(1995), and as such "should be liberally construed to suppress the perceived evil and advance the enacted remedy." 
Kalima v. 
State
, 111 Hawai# i 84, 100, 137 P.3d 990, 1006 (2006) (internal 
quotation marks omitted). However, HRS 480-4(c) contains 
12 Defined in the CNA as "real estate brokerage and/or property
management services." 
13 Defined in the Non-Compete Clause as services "which are generally
comparable or competitive with those performed by [Locations] with respect to
the Business." 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exceptions to the general rule. See n.11 supra. "Exceptions or 
exclusions to a remedial law are narrowly construed." 73 Am. 
Jur. 2d Statutes § 176. 
In Technicolor, relying primarily on the legislative 
history of HRS § 480-4,14 the Hawai# i Supreme Court concluded that 
the exceptions listed in HRS § 480-4(c) were not exclusive. Rather, restrictive covenants should be evaluated, "in much the same way that federal courts would, in Section 1[] Sherman Act Cases,[
15] analyze such covenants." Technicolor, 57 Haw. at 121-
22, 551 P.2d at 170. Thus, the Technicolor court adopted federal case analysis which applied a "rule of reason" test to determine the validity of restrictive covenants, which in turn considered three factors: 
Generally courts will find a restrictive covenant "not
reasonable", and therefore invalid, if: 
(i) it is greater than required for theprotection of the person for whose benefit it isimposed; (ii) it imposes undue hardship on theperson restricted; or (iii) its benefit to the
covenantee is outweighed by injury to thepublic. . . . 
This "reasonableness analysis" is done by the court,
as a matter of law[.] 
Technicolor, 57 Haw. at 122, 551 P.2d at 170 (citation omitted, 
emphasis added). 
2. 
Taking these concepts in hand, we review the Non-
Compete Clause at issue here. 
The Non-Compete Clause prevents Gagnon from engaging in 
the types of business or services as that of Locations for third parties, for the duration of her employment through one year 
14 See Conf Comm. Report No. 16 on H.B. 27, reprinted in 1961 House
Journal at 1067, 1075 (advising that comparable provisions of federal anti-
trust laws would guide the interpretation and application in light of theeconomic and business conditions in this State). 
15 The Sherman Antitrust Act provides that "[e]very contract,
combination in the form of trust or otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint oftrade or commerce among the several States, or with foreign nations, isdeclared to be illegal[.]" Ch. 647, 26 Stat. 209 (1890), as amended, 15U.S.C. § 1 (1970). 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
after leaving Locations, in the State of Hawai# i. Such an 
agreement not to compete is generally considered a restraint on 
trade which is prohibited by HRS § 480-4 unless it qualifies for an exception under HRS § 480(c), or it is considered "reasonable" as determined by the court. 
See Technicolor
, 57 Haw. at 120-22, 
551 P.2d at 169-70 (the "'reasonableness analysis' is done by the court, as a matter of law."). 
We conclude that the Non-Complete Clause is reasonable. 
First, it is not "greater than required for the protection" of Locations. Its geographical scope is limited to the State of 
Hawai# i, and then only where Locations conducts, or has 
conducted, business. Its one-year duration is no longer than other such covenants approved by Hawai# i courts. See 7's 
Enters., Inc. v. Del Rosario, 111 Hawai# i 484, 486, 143 P.3d 23, 
25 (2006) (three years); Technicolor, 57 Haw. at 115, 551 P.2d at 166 (three years); see also Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith v. McClafferty, 287 F. Supp. 2d 1244 (D. Haw. 2003) (one-year restriction was valid under Hawai# i law); UARCO Inc. v. Lam, 18 
F. Supp. 2d 1116 (D. Haw. 1998) (two-year restriction was valid under Hawai# i law). Most importantly, the breadth of the 
services prohibited, which initially appears co-terminus with the services provided by Locations, was limited as it did not prevent Gagnon from acting as a real estate salesperson or broker/salesperson in Hawai# i, independently or as an employee or 
independent contractor for an existing real estate firm. 
The Non-Compete Clause does not impose undue hardship. 
Gagnon was not prevented from earning a living -- as an independent broker/salesperson or an independent contractor for an established real estate firm -- from real estate sales or brokerage, beginning immediately after leaving Locations, so long as she did not solicit others affiliated with Locations. 
Finally, the benefit to Locations does not appear to be 
outweighed by injury to the public. 
The terms of the Non-Compete 
Clause do not deprive the public of Gagnon's services and expertise. 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B. The Non-Solicitation Clause Is Valid 
Locations argues that the Circuit Court erred in ruling 
the "Non-Solicitation Clause" contained within the Non-Compete 
Clause was illegal. 
As quoted above, supra at n.4, Gagnon was prohibited, 
without exception, from inducing or encouraging persons employed or affiliated with Locations to terminate their association with Locations. Non-solicitation agreements can be lawful even under statutes which forbid non-compete covenants. 3 R. Callmann on Unfair Competition, Trademarks & Monopolies § 16.44 (4th ed. 1983). A non-solicitation clause is not a per se violation of federal antitrust law, id. (citing Aydin Corp. v. Loral Corp., 718 F.2d 897 (9th Cir. 1983)). 
In any event, under Technicolor, the non-solicitation 
clause is reasonable. Like the Non-Compete Clause, its geographic and temporal terms are no more than the anti-
competitive provisions evaluated in other Hawai# i cases. Nor 
does the benefit of the Non-Solicitation Clause to Locations appear to deprive the public of these employees' or associates' services or expertise, which remain available to the public for the time they maintain their relationship with Locations, or if they choose to leave Locations without being solicited by Gagnon. 
Thus, we conclude that the anti-solicitation clause was 
not prohibited by HRS § 480-4. 
V. 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the findings of 
fact, conclusions of law, and orders on the parties' motions for summary judgment, and remand this case to the Circuit Court for further proceedings. 
Because we hold that the CNA is valid and 
enforceable, the defendants are no longer the prevailing parties and we vacate the orders granting the defendants' respective motions for attorneys' fees and costs, without prejudice to any party moving for an award of attorneys' fees and/or costs at the appropriate time. We vacate the order denying Locations's motion to file a second amended complaint, without expressing any opinion on whether such a motion should be granted if renewed on 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
remand. We vacate the discovery orders, without expressing any 
opinion on what discovery should be allowed or not allowed on remand. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 15, 2020. 
On the briefs:  /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
Paul Alston Kristin L. Holland John Rhee (Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing)for Plaintiff-Appellant. /s/ Alexa D.M. FujiseAssociate Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
Matt A. Tsukazaki for Defendants-Appellees LornaGagnon & Prestige RealtyGroup, LLC. 
Duane R. Miyashiro
(Cox, Wootton, Lerner,Griffin, & Hansen)and William J. Kelly(Kelly & Walker)for Defendants-AppelleesRE/MAX, LLC and LorraineClawson. 
16 