  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000780
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE INTEREST OF P CHILDREN
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 11-00098)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Mother-Appellant (Mother) appeals from the Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights, entered July 19, 2012 in the Family
 
1
Court of the First Circuit  (family court).
On appeal, Mother claims the family court erred by
 
finding that she was not currently willing and able to provide a
 
safe family home for her three children. 
Mother contends that
 
social worker, Laura Bailey (Bailey), should not have been
 allowed to testify at trial; and that another social worker,
 
Debbie Yoshizumi (Yoshizumi), should not have been allowed to
 
testify by telephone on July 19, 2012 after the court continued
 
her testimony until August 31, 2012. Mother specifically
 
challenges Findings of Fact (FOFs) 32, 50, 53, 54, 63, 67, 71,
 
73, 82, 83, 84, and 96. Lastly, Mother argues there was no FOF
 
1
 The Honorable Sherri-Ann L. Iha presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
indicating the Permanent Plan dated December 27, 2011 is in the
 
best interest of the children, as required by Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 587A-33(a)(3) (Supp. 2012).
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
conclude Mother's appeal is without merit. 
The Department of Human Services (DHS) adduced clear
 
and convincing evidence that Mother was not currently willing and
 
able to provide a safe family home to the children, even with the
 
assistance of a service plan. As part of Mother's service plan,
 
she underwent an substance abuse assessment which recommended
 
intensive outpatient treatment. Mother elected not to
 
participate in the recommended intensive outpatient treatment in
 
favor of meetings with her own therapist, Craig T. Twentyman, PhD
 
(Dr. Twentyman.) Dr. Twentyman was not aware of the Mother's
 
substance abuse assessment that recommended intensive outpatient
 
treatment. Dr. Twentyman was also not aware that Mother had ever
 
tested positive for drugs despite Mother testing positive for
 
opiates on April 12 and 14, 2011, and testing positive for
 
methamphetamine on April 28, May 3, and August 16, 2011. At the
 
time of the July 2012 trial, Dr. Twentyman had not drug tested
 
mother since 2011. During the pendency of this case, Mother
 
failed to appear for at least 12 scheduled drug testings, which
 
were considered to be presumptive positive drug test results.
 
Mother was removed from the Hina Mauka random drug testing
 
program in February 2012. Mother's substance abuse issues were
 
clearly not resolved and Mother was not likely to address the
 
issue after discontinuing random drug testing. Yet, Dr.
 
Twentyman did not believe that Mother was a regular user of
 
drugs.
 
Dr. Twentyman clinically discharged Mother after she
 
completed her anger management and domestic violence counseling. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
However, Bailey opined that Mother could not provide a safe
 
family home because of unresolved domestic and substance abuse
 
issues, as evidenced by Mother's neighbors reporting that police
 
were called to Mother's residence due to her fighting with her
 
husband. Mother's fighting with her husband was one of the
 
primary issues upon which this case was initiated.
 
Bailey was called and qualified as an expert witness in
 
the area of social work and child protective services. As an
 
expert witness, Bailey was not required to have personal
 
knowledge of the case, could rely upon hearsay testimony as the
 
basis for her opinions, and could rely upon the record that was
 
already in evidence. Mother presents no specific argument as to
 
why cross-examination of Bailey was not meaningful. In addition,
 
Mother claims that Yoshizumi, and not Bailey, should have
 
testified at trial. Yoshizumi did testify at trial. 
Furthermore, Mother does not specify any error that resulted from
 
Yoshizumi testifying as planned on July 19, 2012 instead of
 
August 31, 2012. Yoshizumi was called as an expert witness in
 
the area of social work and was to provide her opinion in this
 
area. She was not required to have personal knowledge of the
 
case. Yoshizumi also testified as a lay witness to the events
 
that she participated in as a social worker assigned to this
 
case.
 
Mother argues FOFs 32, 50, 53, 54, 63, 67, 71, 73, 82, 
83, 84, and 96 are clearly erroneous. Mother's opening brief 
fails to comply with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 
28(b)(4) by failing to (1) contain in its points of error section, a concise statement that sets forth in separately 
numbered paragraphs the alleged error committed by the court; (2) 
indicate where in the record the alleged error occurred; and (3) 
indicate where in the record the alleged error was objected to or 
the manner in which the alleged error was brought to the 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attention of the court. Therefore, the challenges to specific
 
FOFs are waived. In any event, the FOFs are without merit. 
Mother objects to FOFs 32, 82, 83, and 84 on the basis
 
that Mother is willing and able to provide a safe family home. 
As explained above, the family court did not err by concluding
 
that Mother was not willing and able to provide a safe family
 
home, even with the assistance of a service plan. Therefore,
 
FOFs 32, 82, 83, and 84 are not clearly erroneous.
 
FOF 50 states "Mother subjected the Children to
 
imminent and threatened harm by using illegal drugs and failing
 
to resolve domestic violence issues in the family home[,]" and is
 
not clearly erroneous because Mother did use illegal drugs. 
Furthermore, Mother also failed to resolve domestic violence
 
issues in the family home despite receiving counseling for that
 
issue from Dr. Twentyman.
 
FOF 53 states "Mother also smoked a '$20 paper' once a
 
week and at times daily from the end of 2010 to September 2011,
 
and was unsuccessful efforts [sic] to cease or control use[,]"
 
and is not clearly erroneous given the unchallenged FOF 52 that
 
states "Mother started using methamphetamine at age 18, smoking a
 
'$20 paper' everyday [sic] increasing to smoking a '$50 paper' on
 
a daily basis."
 
Mother challenges FOFs 54, 63, and 67 on the basis that
 
she participated in drug treatment with Dr. Twentyman. The FOFs
 
state in relevant part:
 
54.	 The substance abuse assessment recommended that
 
Mother participate in an Intensive Outpatient
Substance Abuse Treatment Program until
clinically discharged, and participate with the
DHS random drug monitoring program. 
Despite
this recommendation, Mother has failed to
participate in any substance abuse treatment
 program.
 
. . . .
 
63.	 Mother discontinued participation in random
urinalysis in February 2012 and has not
addressed her substance abuse issues since then.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
67.	 Throughout the pendency of this case, Mother has
failed to participate in and complete a
substance abuse treatment program.
 
Dr. Twentyman testified that Mother participated in
 
anger management, parenting, individual, and couples counseling
 
with him. In addition, he had Mother tested for drugs. However,
 
Dr. Twentyman did not testify that he provided Mother with drug
 
treatment services, even though he is also a certified substance
 
abuse counselor. Therefore, FOF 54 is not clearly erroneous. 
Dr. Twentyman testified that he did not drug test Mother after
 
December 2011. Therefore, the drug testing with Dr. Twentyman
 
that ended in 2011 does not refute Finding of Fact No. 63 which
 
found that Mother discontinued random urinalysis testing in
 
February 2012 and did not address her substance abuse issues any
 
further. Since Dr. Twentyman did not testify to providing
 
substance abuse treatment to Mother, and there was no other
 
evidence that Mother completed any other substance abuse
 
treatment program, FOF 67 is not clearly erroneous.
 
Mother claims FOF 71, which found "Mother was aware
 
that it was her responsibility to obtain and distribute progress
 
reports and completion certificates from her therapists[,]" is
 
clearly erroneous, is without merit. Yoshizumi testified that it
 
was explained to Mother that if she was going to her own provider
 
then she should obtain the reports and distribute it to all
 
parties. Yoshizumi testified that Mother did not attend the
 
scheduled ohana conference and therefore, Mother did not submit
 
any reports or completion certificates to her at that conference. 
Yoshizumi's testimony was not indicative of her inability to
 
recall facts of the case and the family court found Yoshizumi's
 
testimony credible in FOF 103.
 
Mother challenges FOF 72 that found "[o]n May 3, 2012
 
and again on June 4, 2012, DHS received reports that the Honolulu
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Police Department was called due to a domestic dispute between
 
Mother and Stepfather." Mother objects to the FOF because
 
Yoshizumi testified that she did not know who called the police
 
and who was fighting at Mother's residence. However, it was
 
Mother's neighbors who reported to DHS that Mother and Stepfather
 
were involved in domestic disputes. Therefore, FOF 73 accurately
 
reflects that DHS received reports that the police were called to
 
domestic disputes between Mother and Stepfather. 
Lastly, Mother disputes FOF 96 which found that DHS
 
gave Mother every reasonable opportunity to remedy the problems
 
that put her children at substantial risk of being harmed in the
 
family home and to then reunify with her children. Mother points
 
to the service plan which specified "treatment by Dr. Twentyman
 
and Dr. Twentyman did not provide appropriate treatment services
 
and his expert opinion was not credible." Mother's service plan
 
called for Dr. Twentyman and Comprehensive Counseling & Support
 
Services of Catholic Charities to both provide domestic violence
 
and anger management education to Mother. The service plan also
 
called for Mother to participate in individual and marriage
 
counseling with Dr. Twentyman. Mother was clinically discharged
 
by Dr. Twentyman after completing anger management and domestic
 
violence counseling. DHS did not allege that Dr. Twentyman's
 
services with respect to providing anger management and domestic
 
violence counseling was inappropriate. Rather, DHS faulted
 
Mother for failing to demonstrate appropriate behavior despite
 
completing the counseling with Dr. Twentyman. The family court
 
did find that Dr. Twentyman's testimony was not credible based on
 
(1) his opinion that Mother did not have a substance abuse issue,
 
even though Mother had tested positive numerous times and failed
 
to submit to drug testing which is presumed to be a positive test
 
result; (2) his failure to know that Mother attempted to submit a
 
non-human testing sample; (3) his failure to be informed about
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mother's substance abuse assessment; and (4) his opinion that
 
Mother's drug use was an isolated incident.
 
Mother argues that "[t]here is no finding of fact that
 
the permanent plan is in the best interest of the three children
 
as required by section 587A-33(a)(3), [HRS]."
 
HRS § 587A-33(a) (Supp. 2012) states in relevant part:
 
§587A-33 Termination of parental rights
hearing. (a) At a termination of parental rights
hearing, the court shall determine whether there
exists clear and convincing evidence that:
 (1) A child's parent whose rights are subject totermination is not presently willing andable to provide the parent's child with a safefamily home, even with the assistance of a serviceplan;
 (2) It is not reasonably foreseeable that thechild's parent whose rights are subject totermination will become willing and able to providethe child with a safe family home, even with theassistance of a service plan, within a reasonableperiod of time, which shall not exceed two yearsfrom the child's date of entry into foster care;
 (3) The proposed permanent plan is in the bestinterests of the child. In reaching thisdetermination, the court shall:
 (A) 	Presume that it is in the best interests
 of the child to be promptly and
permanently placed with responsible and
competent substitute parents and family
in a safe and secure home; and
 (B) 	Give greater weight to the presumption
that the permanent plan is in the child's
best interest, the younger the child is upon
the child's date of entry into foster care; and
 (4) 	The child consents to the permanent plan if
the child is at least fourteen years old,
unless the court consults with the child in
 camera and finds that it is in the best interest
 of the child to proceed without the child's consent.
 
HRS § 587A-33(a)(3) only requires the family court to "determine"
 
that the proposed permanent plan is in the best interest of the
 
child. Conclusion of Law 13 states "[t]he Permanent Plan dated 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
December 27, 2011 is in the best interest of the Children." The
 
family court satisfied HRS § 587A-33(a)(3).
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order Terminating
 
Parental Rights, entered July 19, 2012 in the Family Court of the 
First Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 29, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Herbert Y. Hamada
 
for Mother-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
Mary Anne Magnier
Asami M. Williams
 Deputy Attorneys General,
for Petitioner-Appellee
Department of Human Services. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
8
 