NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000599 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
MAKOA K.F. WILSON, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CPC-18-0001593) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Chan, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Makoa K.F. Wilson (
Wilson) appeals 
from the "Order Denying Defendant's Second HRPP Rule 35 Motion 
for Reduction of Sentence" (
Order) entered by the Circuit Court 
of the First Circuit1 on July 25, 2019. For the reasons 
explained below, we affirm the Order. 
On December 12, 2017, in a related case, a grand jury 
indicted Wilson for Robbery in the First Degree.  A bench 
warrant was issued. He was arrested on March 20, 2018, and confined in the Oahu Community Correctional Center. 
His motion 
for supervised release was granted on July 24, 2018, and he was released to his mother.  He violated the terms of supervised 
release. A warrant for his arrest was issued on August 29, 2018. 32
1 The Honorable Todd W. Eddins presided. 
2 We take judicial notice, pursuant to Rule 201 of the Hawaii Rules
of Evidence, of the case file for State v. Wilson, 1CPC-17-0001729, Circuit
Court of the First Circuit, State of Hawai #i . 
3 The Honorable Todd W. Eddins presided and signed the order. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On October 9, 2018, a Honolulu Police Department patrol 
officer spotted a minivan that was described in an all points 
broadcast concerning a burglary in progress involving three armed males. The minivan was parked in a parking lot. The officer approached the minivan, recognized Wilson sitting in the driver's seat, and was aware of Wilson's outstanding warrant. The officer saw Wilson reach down and toss a silver revolver toward the rear of the minivan. The officer arrested Wilson and recovered the gun, which was loaded with six rounds. 
On October 11, 2018, Wilson was charged with (1) Place 
to Keep Pistol or Revolver, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 134-25; and (2) Ownership or Possession 
Prohibited of Any Firearm or Ammunition by a Person Indicted for 
Certain Crimes, in violation of HRS § 134-7(b) and (h). The felony information alleged that Wilson may be subject to sentencing in accordance with HRS §§ 706-661 and 706-662(4)(a) by reason of being sentenced for two or more felonies, and that an extended term of imprisonment may be necessary for the protection of the public. On January 11, 2019, Wilson pled no contest to each charge. 
Wilson's sentencing hearing took place on March 29, 
2019. The State requested an indeterminate 10-year term for possessing a firearm while under indictment and attempting to rob two illegal gambling rooms. Before imposing sentence the circuit court heard Wilson's allocution and testimony from Wilson's father, Elua Henry Wilson: 
I would like to say that I ask the Court that please
give my son a second chance, you know. We all, nobody's
perfect, we all make mistakes, some of us learn from ourmistakes and I hope and pray my son will, you know. He's not getting any younger, he's getting older and he's gettingwiser and I hope this will make him open his eyes andrealize that the law is the law, and obey the law it's thebest thing that he can do. And he also know that his familyis behind him and me and my wife and our siblings going totry our best to guide him in the direction that we all wantour kids to go. So a second chance will help us help himinstead of staying in there wasting time. 
That's it, sir. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court then stated: 
For sentencing I reviewed the Hawai #i [sic] Revised
Statutes Section 706-606 factors ["to be considered in
imposing a sentence"], 706-621 factors ["to be considered inimposing a term of probation"] and in this particular caseChapter 853 ["Criminal Procedure: Deferred Acceptance ofGuilty Plea, Nolo Contendere Plea"]. 
What that really
means, Mr. Wilson, I looked at what happened, the nature ofthe offense, your history and characteristics, and asentence that promotes respect for the law and reflects theseriousness of the crimes. 
So if we start from the nature of this offense, [the
State] has highlighted certain things. I'm intimately
familiar with the nature of this offense because we had a motion to suppress the evidence on January 8th, 2019, and Ialso reviewed the presentence report, which also mentionssome of the things that I already knew about. 
What's concerning in this case is there was a prior
charge in which you were pending, and that was case 17-1729.Ultimately, that case was dismissed due to the inability ofthe prosecution to serve the complaining witness.[
4] But 
this crime was committed while you were pending the other case. And, in fact, Count 2 reflects that[,] becauseanybody who is pending a felony case is not to possess afirearm . 
In this case there was not one, but two, attempts to
rob gaming establishments . First, the Samoan House, then
the second place, the Spicy House restaurant, both onFarrington [Highway]. Fortunately for innocent people as
well as probably yourself is that these attempts to robgaming establishments were thwarted by anonymous callers andalso the rapid response by the Honolulu Police Department.They prevented what could have been an extremely violentsituation. You were found with a firearm. You were not to have possessed firearms at that point . 
This is your first offense and your father asks for a
second chance. As I mentioned, they've been in this court,it's not your second chance. You were given an opportunityfor supervised release in this case and a verified applica-tion [for revocation of supervised release]  was filed 
because you violated the terms of your supervised release.I heard the same things, I want another chance, I'm going toaddress my drug problems, I'm going to follow all the terms . 
At the time of your arrest here, there was an out-
standing bench warrant because you violated your supervisedrelease . There was also talk before about your family
moving to the Big Island and you getting into the BISACprogram. That didn't happen. 
And I look at all of this, Mr. Wilson, and I cannot
make the finding pursuant to Chapter 853 you are unlikely toengage in further criminality and the ends of justice andwelfare of society require you to not suffer the penaltyimposed by law. The prosecution is requesting that youserve basically a ten-year jail term. While that position 
4 The robbery case had been dismissed without prejudice on
January 14, 2019. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is not far-fetched based on the facts of this case, I am not
going to sentence you to an indeterminate term ofincarceration. 
In looking at everything, your history and character-
istics, the fact that this was committed while you werepending another case, and to reflect the seriousness of theoffense which involve[d] firearms which, as I mentioned,could have really caused a lot of harm to other individuals.You didn't get it. 
You didn't get it throughout the course
of this case, maybe you get it now, I'm not convinced bythat . 
But I'm also not convinced that [a] ten-year jail
term, based on your age, is warranted in this case. You will be placed on probation for a period of four years. You are to follow all conditions of your probation officer,which means being present when your probation officerdirects you to be present. You apparently have a drugproblem though you've minimized your drug problem. You said you only meth a little bit to the probation officer, but thereports reflect something else. 
You are not to the [sic] commit any further crimes.
You are not to possess any firearms. You are to notify yourPO about any of your changes of address or contactinformation. 
As far as the discretionary conditions of probation,
you are to obtain a substance abuse assessment and treatmentuntil clinically discharged. If you really are, indeed,serious about addressing your drug problem, and [sic] youneed to complete that program. Also, mental healthassessment and treatment if necessary. You will be drugtested randomly, you are not to use drugs. I'll find an inability to pay the various fees associated with this case. 
To reflect the seriousness of this offense, which I
find quite serious, a further discretionary condition ofprobation will be that you serve an 18-month term of incar-ceration . 
When you get out of jail you should immediately,
within 24 hours, report to the probation department. 
Those are the terms and conditions of your probation,
Mr. Wilson. You should also be aware that if you violatethe terms and conditions of your violation [sic], theprosecution will likely be filing a motion to revoke yourprobation and a ten-year term of incarceration will probablybe well-founded at that point. 
So the ball is in your court, you either comply or
you'll find yourself, in all likelihood, at the HalawaCorrectional Facility. 
(footnote and emphasis added). 
A "Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence" was 
entered on March 29, 2019. On April 16, 2019, Wilson moved for 
reduction of his sentence based upon his acceptance into the Hina Mauka Residential Treatment program. The motion was heard on May 14, 2019. Wilson's mother, Freddielynn Wilson, testified: 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I just want to say I understand that my son did have that
piece. But how is he going to learn anything staying injail? He did have a drug problem. So now the -- it was anhonor that we were able to get him into Hina Mauka. The bed space has been open for over a month for him. 
So I believe that if my son is given this chance to go
into a program and learn that drugs is not -- you know, heneed to learn that he was on -- when he did get intotrouble, he was using drugs. So now if he get a chance togo into the program, he may be able to understand that drugsis not the way to live his life. 
So he may be able to have
a chance to clean up and help others, you know. So he can't be staying in jail for the rest of the 18 months and justcome out to society and be thrown out. I believe he needs to be in a program to help him to understand the drugs. And he's going to be in residential. Even go day treatmentafter. I mean, there's program that he need to be in. And I want my son to be by court order to be in a program. 
So staying in jail, he's not learning nothing. He's 
not learning anything. And I visit my son every week. And I just can't see him sitting there learning nothing. So I believe that the program is going to help him. And if he comes out and he mess up, okay. I don't know what else to say. But I'm just saying we all deserve second chances. 
In response, the circuit court explained: 
When we sentence -- when I sentenced Mr. Wilson on 
March 29th, I detailed extensively the reasons why I wassentencing Mr. Wilson. And part of those reasons -- and theprimary reason was to reflect the seriousness of theconduct. 
As [the State] pointed out then, pointed out now, this
offense inherently -- because one of the crimes was 
possessing a firearm after he was under indictment onanother offense . 
I remember from that first case Ms. Wilson was in 
court. 
Initially there wasn't a desire to have a supervised
release. Then there was [sic] attempts that maybe we'regoing to move him to the Big Island and get him in BISAC. I 
granted a supervised release motion to Mr. Wilson. That motion -- subsequently there was a verified applicationfiled where he was revoked . 
The circumstances of this offense warranted the 
sentence. The seriousness of the conduct provided justpunishment for this offense . I think any person who has a
significant jail time, perhaps their family members would besaying this is a waste of time, they should be in treatment.And probably they're correct. Maybe it's not good forsomebody to be in jail versus being in treatment. 
But that type of mindset undermines the seriousness of
this offense. And the reason why Mr. Wilson received the
term of probation and 18 months was due to the nature andcircumstances of the offense and his history andcharacteristics of not complying with court orders . 
There was [sic] multiple opportunities for Mr. Wilson
to get into a treatment program before sentencing, which 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
would have enhanced his position at sentencing. That didn't 
happen. The offense was particularly egregious since he wasunder indictment for the other offense, and it could haveresulted in an incredibly dangerous situation . 
The reasons that I imposed the sentence originally
have not changed. And Mr. Wilson as part of his probation
will be required to get substance abuse assessment andtreatment . 
But that's not going to happen at this point.
The traditional cornerstones of sentencing on retributionand deterrence for this conduct in my view is warranted.The prosecution asked for a ten-year jail term, which wasnot far[-]fetched in this case based on this conduct . 
I hope you are sincere in your desire to get
treatment, Mr. Wilson, because you are a young man, you havethe family back supporting you. And I hope this is a hugewake-up call as far as not engaging in criminality andaddressing whatever problems you have because when you getplaced out back into the community after you served yourtime, there's going to be some strict requirements. 
And if you don't follow those requirements, [the
State] is going to come in and argue for the ten-year jailterm. And then I can say, well, he's going to be sitting inHalawa, what a waste. And it would be a waste. Because you're a young man. You seem to have -- at least from the presentence report, you're not an idiot. You're a sharpguy. But using drugs, running around with firearms, and
engaging in activities which really could jeopardize thelives and -- and public safety of others was why you got thesentence you did . 
So for all those reasons, the Rule 35 motion is
denied. 
(Emphasis added.) A written order denying the motion was entered 
on May 16, 2019. 
Wilson did not appeal from the May 16, 2019 order. 
Instead, on June 27, 2019, he filed a second motion for reduction of sentence.  The second motion was supported by a one-page 
letter signed by Wilson's parents, but offered no new evidence and made no legal arguments that could not have been made in the first motion. The second motion was denied with prejudice by Order entered on July 25, 2019. 
This appeal followed. 5
A trial court has the discretion to, within the time
limits set forth by HRPP Rule 35, reduce a sentence.
Therefore, orders on HRPP Rule 35 motions for reduction ofsentence are reviewed for an abuse of discretion. Factors which indicate a plain and manifest abuse of discretion arearbitrary or capricious action by the judge and a rigidrefusal to consider the defendant's contentions. Generally,to constitute an abuse it must appear that the court clearly 
5 Wilson's second motion for reduction of sentence was filed on the 
last day possible under Rule 35 of the Hawai #i Rules of Penal Procedure. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or
principles of law or practice to the substantial detrimentof a party litigant. 
State v. Kong, 140 Hawai# i 103, 109, 398 P.3d 692, 698 (2017) 
(cleaned up). 
The circuit court did not abuse its discretion by 
denying Wilson's first motion for reduction of sentence; the 
circuit court applied the proper law and its decision was sup-ported by substantial evidence in the record. Wilson's second motion for reduction of sentence was in effect a motion for reconsideration of the circuit court's denial of his first motion for reduction of sentence. "[T]he purpose of a motion for recon-sideration is to allow the parties to present new evidence and/or arguments that could not have [been] presented during the earlier adjudicated motion." State v. Oughterson, 99 Hawai# i 244, 255, 
54 P.3d 415, 426 (2002) (citation omitted). 
Because the circuit 
court did not abuse its discretion by denying Wilson's first motion for reduction of sentence, and because Wilson's second motion for reduction of sentence presented no new evidence and made no arguments that could not have been made by the first motion, the circuit court did not err by denying Wilson's second motion. 
The "Order Denying Defendant's Second HRPP Rule 35 
Motion for Reduction of Sentence" entered by the circuit court on July 25, 2019, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 16, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
Loren J. Thomas, 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Derrick H.M. ChanPresiding Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge Walter J. Rodby, for Defendant-Appellant. 
7 