 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-21-0000681 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI#I  
JOHN CLINTON EASTERWOOD, Petitioner-Appellant,
v. 
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Respondent-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(S.P.P. NO. 1CPN-20-0000007) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Guidry, JJ.) 
Petitioner-Appellant John Clinton Easterwood 
(
Easterwood) appeals from the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of 
Law and Order Denying Petitioner Easterwood's Hawai#i Rules of 
Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 Petition for Post-Conviction 
Relief" (Order Denying Rule 40 Petition) entered on November 4, 
2021, by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 
Easterwood's HRPP Rule 40 Petition sought relief from 
his no contest plea and sentence in Criminal No. 1CPC-18-0001444 
(criminal case).2 In the criminal case, Easterwood plead no 
1 The Honorable James S. Kawashima presided in the evidentiary hearing
on the HRPP Rule 40 Petition and issued the Order Denying Rule 40 Petition. 
2 The Honorable Todd W. Eddins presided in the criminal case. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contest to Unauthorized Entry into Motor Vehicle in the First 
Degree (count 1), Assault Against a Law Enforcement Officer in 
the First Degree (count 2), and Resisting Arrest (count 4). He 
was sentenced to five-year terms of imprisonment for counts 1 and 
2, and one-year of imprisonment for count 4, with the sentences to run concurrently. 
Easterwood's HRPP Rule 40 Petition asserts three 
grounds: he was told by his criminal case counsel, Jason Burks (Burks), that Burks spoke with the trial judge who agreed to 
sentence Easterwood to probation, not prison, in return for a 
guilty plea; the judge relied on police action unrelated to Easterwood's case in his reasoning for a maximum sentence; and Burks mislead Easterwood into believing the judge had agreed to sentence Easterwood to probation in return for a guilty plea. In an order issued on September 4, 2020, the Circuit Court determined that Easterwood's petition presented a colorable claim for ineffective assistance of counsel for which a hearing would be held, but that his other assertions did not raise valid claims warranting a hearing.
3 
The Circuit Court held an evidentiary hearing on 
Easterwood's claim of ineffective assistance of counsel. At the HRPP Rule 40 hearing, the Circuit Court heard testimony from Easterwood and Burks. The Circuit Court then issued its Order Denying Rule 40 Petition. This appeal follows. 
On appeal, Easterwood contends that "[t]he Circuit 
Court erred when it found Easterwood non-credible, found Burks credible, concluded that [Easterwood's] claim of ineffective assistance of counsel was unfounded, and ordered that no relief would be granted under HRPP Rule 40." Easterwood challenges: the Circuit Court's findings of fact (FOF) 13, 14, and 15, which 
relate to the Circuit Court's assessment of Easterwood's 
3 The Honorable Todd W. Eddins issued the September 4, 2020 order. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
credibility; FOFs 16(b), (d), (e), and (f), relating to the 
Circuit Court's assessment of Burks' credibility as to specified facts; FOFs 17 and 18; and conclusions of law (COL) 4, 8, 9, and 
12. 
Upon careful consideration of the arguments by the 
parties, the legal authorities cited, and the record, we resolve 
Easterwood's appeal as set forth below and affirm. 
The Hawai#i Supreme Court has stated that: 
"The proper standard for claims of ineffective assistance of
counsel on appeal is whether, 'viewed as a whole, theassistance provided was within the range of competencedemanded of attorneys in criminal cases.'" State v. DeLeon
,
131 Hawai #i 463, 479, 319 P.3d 382, 398 (2014) (quoting 
Dan
v. State
, 76 Hawai #i 423, 427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994)). 
The defendant has the burden of establishingineffective assistance of counsel and must meet the following two-part test: 1) that there werespecific errors or omissions reflectingcounsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence;and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted ineither the withdrawal or substantial impairmentof a potentially meritorious defense. 
Araiza v. State , 149 Hawai#i 7, 14, 481 P.3d 14, 21 (2021) 
(citations omitted). 
The challenged findings and conclusions state as 
follows: 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
13. As finder of fact, the Court is unconvinced byEasterwood's contention that he only changed his pleasbecause he was promised probation. Instead, it appearsmore likely that denial of the very existence of anyagreement with the state whatsoever, howevernon-credible such denial may be, is herein offeredsimply to bolster the claims supporting the instantpetition. 
14. Among the reasons why Easterwood's denial of anyagreement with the state is non-credible, the Courtnotes Easterwood's own sworn adoption of the change ofplea form K and the plain understanding of the word"agreement." 
15. As an issue of fact, Easterwood's non-credible denialactually refutes his assertion that he only changedhis pleas because he was promised probation. ThatEasterwood's petition should depend to such a degreeupon so implausible a denial suggests that thepetition itself lacks any other factual support. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
16. The Court does find credible the testimony from Jason
Burks ("Burks"), specifically: 
. . . 
b. That Burks never told Defendant that probationwould be anything other than a possibility; 
. . . 
d. That Burks told Easterwood, absent an agreementwith the State under which the Court could bind itself under HRPP Rule 11, "nothing is set instone"; 
e. That Burks himself never personally promisedprobation, but told Easterwood that he mighthave a "decent shot" at probation; 
f. That Burks did explain to Easterwood that thelikelihood of receiving probation would dependon Easterwood taking responsibility for hisactions, and further that Easterwood's failureto take responsibility would also carry its ownconsequences[.] 
. . . 
17. Easterwood's current position, that he changed hispleas only because he believed he had an enforceablecontract guaranteeing him two or four years probation,has no factual support anywhere else in the record,and is as a matter of fact is [sic] strongly refutedby the evidence that has been adduced herein. 
18. Finally, whatever representations may have been made,the Court does not find it credible that someone with Easterwood's criminal history (as reflected in thebail and pre-sentence reports) could reasonably expecta guarantee of probation for punching a uniformedpolice officer without provocation. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
. . . 
4. As adduced herein, Easterwood's pleas were fullyinformed and entered knowingly, intelligently andvoluntarily. Easterwood's summary claims to thecontrary in his supplement filed on July 4, 2021, arepatently frivolous and without trace of support in therecord. 
. . . 
8. The defense of involuntary intoxication under H.R.S. ยง702-230(2) could not be potentially meritorious, giventhat its sole basis is Easterwood's speculationregarding a "cigarette laced with LSD," absent anycorroborative evidence whatsoever. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
9. Absent any trace of support for any legally cognizable
defense that could also have been potentiallymeritorious, Easterwood's complaint of ineffectiveassistance of counsel remains unfounded. 
. . . 
12. Accordingly, for the reasons stated above, the Courtfinds no basis by which relief can be granted underHRPP Rule 40. 
Nothing presented or adduced suggests
that Easterwood's sentence was unconstitutional,without jurisdiction or in any manner illegal. 
Easterwood does not set out particular arguments in 
challenging the specified findings and conclusions of the Circuit 
Court. Rather, he makes generalized arguments. His challenge to FOFs 13, 14, 15, and 16(b), (d), (e), and (f), are based on his assertion that his testimony was credible and the Circuit Court clearly erred in its assessment of Easterwood and Burks' respective credibility at the HRPP Rule 40 hearing. Easterwood's challenge to FOFs 17 and 18 also contests the Circuit Court's credibility assessments and its weighing of the evidence. All of these issues are within the province of the Circuit Court and will not be disturbed on appeal. State v. Jenkins
, 93 Hawai#i 
87, 101, 997 P.2d 13, 27 (2000) ("[I]t is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the [trier of fact].") (citations omitted) (alterations in original); 
State v. Aplaca
, 96 Hawai#i 17, 23, 25 
P.3d 792, 798 (2001) (citations omitted). 
Additionally, given that the challenged findings will 
not be disturbed and that the Circuit Court's unchallenged findings are binding on appeal, Easterwood's challenge to COLs 4, 8, 9, and 12 are without merit. 
The findings by the Circuit 
Court and the record in this case support COLs 4, 8, 9, and 12, and Easterwood fails to show that they were wrong. 
Given the above, Easterwood did not establish his claim 
of ineffective assistance of counsel and the Circuit Court did not err in denying his HRPP Rule 40 Petition. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law 
and Order Denying Petitioner Easterwood's [HRPP] Rule 40 Petition 
for Post-Conviction Relief," filed on November 4, 2021, by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, is affirmed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai#i, June 23, 2023. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
 /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry
Associate Judge William K. Li,for Petitioner-Appellant 
Loren J. Thomas,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Respondent-Appellee 
6 