NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000801
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI fI 
STATE OF HAWAI fI, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KEKOA J.K. KRUEGER, Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
LURGUIAL M. COUNTS, NIQUITTA KILMER, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 11-1-0149)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Kekoa J. K. Krueger (Krueger)
 
appeals from the "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" entered
 
August 27, 2012 in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit1
 
(circuit court). Krueger was convicted of Robbery in the Second
 Degree, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-841(1)(a) (1993 &
 Supp. 2012) (Robbery 2).
 
On appeal, Krueger contends:
 (1) the Deputy Prosecuting Attorney (Prosecutor)
 
engaged in a continuing course of misconduct, warranting
 reversal; and
 
(2) the circuit court erred when it amended the charge
 
of Robbery in the First Degree, HRS § 708-840(1)(a) (1993 & Supp.
 2012) (Robbery 1) to Robbery 2 and denied his motion for judgment
 of acquittal.
 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N. A. Watanabe presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On April 28, 2011, Krueger was charged with Robbery 1
 
and Attempted Assault in the First Degree, pursuant to HRS
 
§§ 705-500 (1993) and 707-710 (1993). The charges arose from an
 incident that occurred in the early morning hours of April 6,
 2011, in which Krueger and co-defendant Lurguial M. Counts
 (Counts) allegedly beat and robbed the Complaining Witness (CW).
 Counts pled guilty to Robbery 1 and Credit Card Theft. A third
 defendant, Niquitta Kilmer (Kilmer), testified for the state in
 exchange for total immunity.
 
Krueger went to trial on May 7, 2012. Four days later,
 
the state rested its case and Krueger moved for judgment of
 acquittal. The circuit court denied the motion but amended the
 charges down to Robbery 2 and Attempted Assault in the Second
 Degree, HRS §§ 705-500 and 707-711 (Supp. 2012). On May 15,
 2012, a jury found Krueger guilty of Robbery 2 and Attempted
 Assault in the Third Degree. The circuit court merged the
 Attempted Assault charge into the Robbery 2 charge and sentenced
 Krueger to ten years' imprisonment with a mandatory minimum term
 of six years and eight months.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
A. Prosecutorial Misconduct
 
We review allegations of prosecutorial misconduct under 
the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard. See State v. 
Rogan, 91 Hawai
fi 405, 412, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238 (1999). Under 
this standard, we examine the record and determine "whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of might have contributed to the conviction." Id. (internal quotation 
marks omitted.)
B. Included Offense
 
A trial court's determination of whether one offense is 
included in another is a question of law, reviewed de novo, under the right or wrong standard. See State v. Rumbawa, 94 Hawai
fi 
513, 515, 17 P.3d 862, 864 (2001). Trial courts must provide juries with instructions for any included offenses if the evidence provides a rational basis for a verdict acquitting the defendant of the charged offense and convicting the defendant of 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the included offense. See State v. Haanio, 94 Hawai fi 405, 413, 
16 P.3d 246, 254 (2001).
C. Judgment of Acquittal
 
We review motions for judgment of acquittal to 
determine whether, viewing the evidence in the light most 
favorable to the prosecution and recognizing the province of the trier-of-fact, a reasonable person might fairly conclude guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. See State v. Hicks, 113 Hawai
fi 60, 
69, 148 P.3d 493, 502 (2006).
III. DISCUSSION
 
Krueger contends the Prosecutor engaged in a continuing
 
course of misconduct by: (1) failing to timely provide the
 defense with discovery; (2) posing improper questions to
 witnesses and mishandling evidence, compelling defense counsel to
 object numerous times, which cast him in a negative light; (3)
 rolling her eyes; and (4) expressing her personal opinion about a
 witness's truthfulness. OB 8-18, 30
 
A. Failure to provide discovery in a timely fashion
 
Krueger contends the Prosecutor failed to provide the 
defense with a copy of a diagram and incident report in violation of Hawai
fi Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 16(b)(1)(iii), 
depriving him of the opportunity to fully prepare for trial. HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(iii) provides: 
(b) Disclosure by the Prosecution.
 
(1) Disclosure of Matters Within Prosecution's
Possession. The prosecutor shall disclose to the defendant
or the defendant's attorney the following material and
information within the prosecutor's possession or control:
 
. . . . 
(iii) any reports or statements of experts, which were
made in connection with the particular case or which the
prosecutor intends to introduce, or which are material to
the preparation of the defense and are specifically
designated in writing by defense counsel, including results
of physical or mental examinations and of scientific tests,
experiments, or comparisons[.]
 
(Emphasis added.) 
The diagram was prepared by the manager of the bar
 
patronized by CW before the incident. The incident report was
 
prepared by the security guard of the hotel where CW lodged. 
Neither document is a report or statement of an expert. Neither
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
document was entered into evidence. Therefore, the prosecutor
 
did not violate HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(iii) and we discern no
 prosecutorial misconduct.
B. Improper questions and mishandling evidence
 
"[A]lthough no single misstatement or other erroneous
 
remark standing alone [may] have sufficient prejudicial weight to
 
deprive the defendant of a fair trial, the cumulative weight of
 such errors may create 'an atmosphere of bias and prejudice which
 no remarks by the trial court could erase.'" State v. Pemberton,
 
71 Haw. 466, 475, 796 P.2d 80, 84 (citation and internal
 quotation marks omitted). 
Assuming arguendo there was prosecutor misconduct, we
 
consider "whether the cumulative effect of prejudicial conduct
 going to the issue of guilt is so strong that it overcomes the
 presumption that the curative remarks of the court have rendered
 the prejudicial remarks harmless." Id. at 476, 796 P.2d at 85
 
(citation and internal quotation mark omitted). While it is
 difficult to assess misconduct based on a series of actions, "the
 number of instances and the tenor of the exchange between judge
 and counsel [may] evince a premeditated pattern of improper
 questioning and an effort to alert the jury to the existence of
 inadmissible evidence." Id.
 
The following exchange occurred while the Prosecutor
 
was questioning Thomas Hemingway, M.D. (Dr. Hemingway), the
 doctor who treated CW's injuries:
 
[Prosecutor]: [Dr. Hemingway] does the type of wound
that you treated in observed with regards to [CW] on his
head area, is that consistent with being shoved into a
wooden structure with an edge to it? 
[Dr. Hemingway]: Yes, it is.
 
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, I would object.
Foundation.
 
THE COURT: Sustained.
 [Defense Counsel]: And I would move to strike the
question as well as the answer.
 
THE COURT: All right. The Court is striking the
question and the response. The jurors are to disregard the
last question by the attorney and the response by the
witness.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Prosecutor]: Your Honor, at this time, I move to have
the doctor declared as an expert in the field of medicine
with a specialty of emergency room.
 
. . . . 
THE COURT: There being no objection, the Court here by
qualifies Dr. Hemingway as an expert in the area of
emergency medicine.
 
. . . . 
[Prosecutor]: May I ask the question again now?
 THE COURT: You can. And then we'll see what happens.
 [Prosecutor]: Very well.
 [Prosecutor]: [Dr. Hemingway], with regards to the
head injury that you observed in this case, is it consistent
with being an injury that was received from being shoved
into a wooden structure?
 
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, again, I would object
on foundation.
 
THE COURT: Sustained.
 
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, I would again move to
strike the prosecuting attorney's same question that was
previously stricken.
 
[Prosecutor]: Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: So ordered. The Court is striking the last
question. The jurors are to disregard that question.
 
. . . .
 (The following was held at the bench out of the hearing of
the jury.)
 
[Prosecutor]: Your Honor, I'm at a loss as to what it
is that is a lack of foundation.
 
THE COURT: [Prosecutor] just because he's qualified in
the area of emergency medicine doesn't make him qualified to
testify as to whether falling into a structure resolved
[sic] in that laceration.
 
[Prosecutor]: If he's a doctor and I have him testify
as to the type of injuries people would receive, also under
Rule I believe 702 are qualified and it goes to the weight
of evidence.
 
THE COURT: Lay the proper foundation. Lay the proper
foundation. Leave it at that. Thank you. Thank you.
 
(At which time the bench conference concluded.)
 
THE COURT: Thank you, Dr. Hemingway.
 [Prosecutor]: [Dr. Hemingway], how many times
approximately have you treated injuries to -- lacerations to
the head?
 
[Dr. Hemingway]: Hundreds of times.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Prosecutor]: And in those experiences, have you as
part of making an assessment and diagnosis as to how the
injury was received, do you attempt to find out what it is
that caused the instrument -- that caused the injury?
 
[Dr. Hemingway]: I typically would ask that question
of the patient.
 
. . . .
 
[Prosecutor]: Yes. Have you received training and/or
experience in the types of instruments that can cause
injuries to the forehead?
 
[Dr. Hemingway]: Yes.
 
[Prosecutor]: And does that include lacerations
sustained to the forehead?
 
[Dr. Hemingway]: Yes.
 [Prosecutor]: And based upon your training and
experience, are you able to answer whether this injury is
consistent with having been received by being shoved into a
wooden structure with an edge to it?
 
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, I would object. Same
 
grounds. I would ask that it be stricken. And I would ask
 to approach.
 
THE COURT: Granted. And I'll request, [Defense
Counsel], the Court is striking that last question by the
[P]rosecutor. The jury is to disregard it. Dr. Hemingway,
thank you.
 
(The following was held at the bench out of the
hearing of the jury.)
 
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, I move for a mistrial
based on cumulative prosecutory misconduct. Your Honor, the
prosecutor has stated that three times now, three times she
has asked the same questions that the damage to the head was
caused by the -- by the planter. Your Honor, it is -- you
cannot unring the bell three times now.
 
[Prosecutor]: Your Honor, this is a foundational
question. If you look at the question that was asked by me,
it was are you able to answer the question. Because Your
 Honor said that I lacked foundation. This is an attempt to
gain foundation. I've asked that question in order to
attempt to do such.
 
THE COURT: Not by asking leading questions and telling
the doctor is this consistent with someone falling into a
planter, not to mention your last two questions to the
doctor, they're not relevant.
 
. . . . 
[Prosecutor]: Your Honor, I am attempting to lay the
foundation in asking the question. If you look at the last
question I asked, the last question had to do with based
upon his training and experience, is he able to answer the
question as to whether this was consistent with having been
caused by a wooden structure with a sharp edge. That's what
 the question was. It was a foundational question.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: You have not laid the proper foundation.
That's the Court's ruling.
 
[Prosecutor]: But that's the foundational question.
 
THE COURT: Don't argue, [Prosecutor]. Lay the proper
foundation.
 
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, I would move for a
mistrial, Your Honor. We're getting to the point, judge, if
we start from the beginning, I'm not -- I'm going to start
from the beginning and end here. We're not going in
between. My opening statement, I was stopped at the first
minute. It was here at the bench approximately five minutes
-- forget about all that. Three times she told the jury
three times the guy was struck in the head. The guy's gash
was from the -- from the planter basically.
 
Your Honor, I would ask for a mistrial. There's just
too much, too much at this point.
 
THE COURT: I'm denying that, [Defense Counsel]. I'll
 
just state, this is on the record, cumulatively you have
moved in that direction.
 
. . . .
 
(At which time the bench conference concluded.)
 THE COURT: Thank you, Doctor.
 [Prosecutor]: [Dr. Hemingway], based upon your
training and experience, what is that laceration that was
sustained to [CW's] head consistent with?
 
[Dr. Hemingway]: By the nature of the laceration, it
appears to be from some blunt object.
 
[Prosecutor] In the opinions that you expressed today,
do you hold them to a reasonable degree of medical certainty
or probability?
 
[Dr. Hemingway]: Yes.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
Krueger has not overcome the presumption that the
 
curative remarks of the circuit court render any prejudice
 
harmless. Defense Counsel's objections were sustained, the
 questions were struck, and the jury was instructed to disregard
 the answers. Assuming the substance of the struck questions was
 prejudicial, surveillance footage, admitted as evidence, depicts
 the CW being shoved into the planter that caused his head
 laceration. The jury was thus able to see first hand how the
 injury occurred, alleviating any prejudicial impact. 
The following exchange occurred while the Prosecutor
 
was questioning a police detective:
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[Prosecutor]: What is in those exhibits?
 
[Police Detective]: These are photographs for [CW's]
prescription glasses.
 
[Prosecutor]: Did there appear to be some type of -­
what looked like some type of substance on the glasses?
 
[Police Detective]: Yes, it appeared to me that it has
blood spots on the lens and frames of the glasses.
 
[Defense Counsel]: Judge, move to strike. Foundation.
 [Prosecutor]: Your Honor, a layman can testify to
what --
THE COURT: Counsel, approach. Detective, once again,
if you would please step down. Thank you.
 
(The following was held at the bench out of the
hearing of the jury.)
 
[Defense Counsel]: Judge, he can testify as to what he
saw, but to say that it's blood. I haven't objected
actually previously. I'm trying to make this go as fast as
we can. But there's no evidence that the officer knows that
 it's blood, so I don't think he should say it's blood.
 
[Prosecutor]: He didn't say that. He said it looks
 
like blood, and that's what I was asking him.
 
THE COURT: Actually, he didn't. He said it's blood.
 
[Defense Counsel]: He said it's blood.
 [Prosecutor]: He said blood?
 THE COURT: Yes. He didn't say it appeared or –
 [Defense Counsel]: Yeah, I mean, judge.
 [Prosecutor]: Actually, I think my question was what
did it appear to look like. That was my question.
 
THE COURT: No. Is there a substance on the glasses,
that's what you asked. And he said, yes, blood.
 
[Prosecutor]: I think if you have access to it, I
think what you will see is I said what it appeared like.
 
THE COURT: No.
 [Prosecutor]: Very well.
 THE COURT: And then [Prosecutor], on top of that for
you to go make a commentary on the record about even a
layman could tell is inappropriate and unprofessional.
 
[Defense Counsel]: Hang on, judge. Let me tell you
something, Your Honor. I haven't said anything now in a
while, because I'm calmed down. You know, the State versus
Torres, Genora Torres, that's the last case.
 
THE COURT: I'm familiar with that case.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Defense Counsel]: With respect to layman evidence on
being an expert, I know that case, because that's my case.
I'm kind of holding back over here about the witness'
testimony about making conclusions as to items of evidence.
But for her to say that everybody knows it, I don't know.
 
[Prosecutor]: Your Honor, I was responding to the
Court's question at the time of, counsel, you were asking me
from my position I believe at that time, and I was
responding to what my position was with regards to that. He
 objected, and I was responding to it.
 
THE COURT: Right. But making a commentary on the
record even a layman could tell that it's blood is
inappropriate, unprofessional bordering on unethical.
 
[Prosecutor]: Your Honor, I disagree with that, but I
accept the Court's response.
 
THE COURT: You disagree? You disagree with the Court?
 
[Prosecutor]: I disagree that that is correct, but I
accept the Court's response.
 
THE COURT: Wait. You disagree with what, that you
said it?
 
[Prosecutor]: No, I -­THE COURT: Or the Court's ruling?
 [Prosecutor]: I disagree that that is borderline
unethical. I disagree that it's inappropriate for me to say
that, because I believe that a layman, we all believe that a
layman can testify that something looks like blood.
 
THE COURT: Not when the question is was there a
substance on the glasses and the answer is yes.
 
[Prosecutor]: 
I believe and I would believe that the
record will bear out that what I asked was was there a
 substance that appeared to look like something.
 
THE COURT: 
You didn't use the word appear.
 
[Prosecutor]: I would ask if the -­
THE COURT: I'm sustaining the objection. I am going
to strike the last question and the answer. And you
rephrase your question.
 
. . . .
 
[Defense Counsel]: Judge, I'm sorry, I move for
mistrial again. All of this unnecessary delay tactics,
being cautioned and warned many times about asking the
proper questions. And then when confronted, [Prosecutor]
simply cannot accept the Court's ruling. And I'm left
 standing here after I make an objection, a proper objection,
I'm left standing here and the jury sees me standing here
biting my tongue for approximately this time another three
minutes. It gives a very, very bad impression on
[Krueger's] right to a fair trial.
 
THE COURT: All right. Motion denied.
 
[Defense Counsel]: Thank you.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(At which time the bench conference concluded.)
 
(Emphases added.) This record does not reflect prosecutorial
 
misconduct. The circuit court misheard the Prosecutor's question
 and the response. 
While questioning the same detective, the following
 
transpired:
 
[Prosecutor]: On May 5th, 2011, was [Krueger] placed
under arrest for this incident?
 
[Police Detective]: Yes, he was.
 
[Prosecutor]: And did you see him on May 5th, 2011,
while he was under arrest?
 
[Police Detective]: Yes, I did.
 [Prosecutor]: And I show you what's marked as State's
Exhibit 5. Do you recognize what -- who this is a
photograph of?
 
[Police Detective]: Yes, I do.
 
[Prosecutor]: Can you tell us is this how Mr. -­[Defense Counsel] Your Honor, again I would object
foundation. And now -­
THE COURT: All right. Sustained.
 
[Defense Counsel]: I would ask that it all be
stricken, judge.
 
THE COURT: I'm not going to strike anything. But
 
[Prosecutor], you may attempt to lay the proper foundation.
 
[Prosecutor]: Do you recognize –
 
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, may I ask that
[Prosecutor] put that exhibit away until she lays the proper
foundation.
 
THE COURT: Yes.
 
[Prosecutor]: Your Honor, this is the proper
foundation as part of laying it.
 
THE COURT: 
Ms. Mendes, step back to the podium. Place
 
that document down, and you may proceed to attempt -- place
it down, face down.
 
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, may we approach?
 
THE COURT: Yes. Thank you, Detective.
 (The following was held at the bench out of the
hearing of the jury.)
 
[Defense Counsel]: 
Your Honor, I'm -- I'm pretty
certain it was not purposeful what [the Prosecutor] just did
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with the photograph. But you told her to put it down. I
 
didn't say anything. You told her to put it down, and she
turned it over in such a way that the jurors could see it.
 
[Prosecutor]: I did not. She said flip it over, and
I -­
THE COURT: [Prosecutor] the reason I told you the flip
it over is you have to remember the proximity of the podium
and the jurors who are in the back.
 
[Prosecutor]: And Your Honor, I was close to the
podium.
 
THE COURT: Jurors 11 and 12.
 
[Prosecutor]: And Your Honor, I was close to the
podium. And when Your Honor said flip it over, I immediately
flipped it over and I did it very fast. And I did not raise
 it above the podium side. And I would say part of laying a
foundation in entering evidence is you ask the witness do
they recognize that individual. How do they recognize it.
So I'm at a loss as to how it is -­
[Defense Counsel]: Judge, I believe you've already
ruled on that. My objection is that you told her not to
publish it.
 
[Prosecutor]: I did not.
 
[Defense Counsel]: You know let me finish. I let you
finish.
 
THE COURT: All right. [Defense Counsel].
 
[Defense Counsel]: Please. I didn't say anything. But
 
I saw her, the way she -- first, she comes up walking with
it face fronting face. When she gets to the podium, judge,
she flips it over with the picture showing towards the jury.
 
[Prosecutor]: Let's look at the cameras.
 
THE COURT: All right. [Prosecutor], leave it on the
podium face down until you lay the proper foundation. And
then I'll make a ruling.
 
[Prosecutor]: Thank you.
 
(At which time the bench conference concluded.)
 . . . . 
(At which time the jury was escorted out of the courtroom.)
 . . . .
 THE COURT: Okay. Counsel, first of all, [Prosecutor],
throughout the trial, you have taken great caution to inform
whoever the witness was on the stand to be very careful when
they were looking at evidence, excuse me, looking at
exhibits that were not in evidence. You took great pains to
tell them it's not in evidence, don't show it. Again great
pains, witnesses time and time again, put it off to the
side, look into the envelope without showing it to the
jurors. 
Now, despite your instructions to the witnesses,
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Prosecutor],  the concern that this Court had is you walked
forward with the photograph to the witness, okay. You walked back
 
with the photograph. I'm not saying that you were waiving it at
the jurors, but the proximity of the podium and this is where you
placed the podium, keep in mind that, and this Court's /SRAPBT
acknowledge view of where jurors number -- this would be 7, 8, 9,
10 -- 11 and 12 are sitting. This Court was concerned that they
could see what's on the podium given their proximity to the podium
and the design of the podium.
 
That's why I cautioned you, [Prosecutor], to be careful and
to place it face down on the podium
.
 
[Prosecutor]: And Your Honor, I would note that when I
came back to the podium, that was covered like that already,
because counsel saw first. And I also if I may sit here for
a moment is in sitting down here, the angle of the podium,
you cannot see what's in the corner here. It was -- the
 photograph was in the extreme corner, and when I approached
the witness with it, I approached the photograph like this.
I never approached it like this.
 
THE COURT: Yes, and [Prosecutor], what I told you at
the bench was lay the proper foundation before you approach
the witness with any exhibit.
 
[Prosecutor]: Part of laying a proper foundation for a
photograph is to show a witness an exhibit and ask if you
recognize what this depicts.
 
THE COURT: [Prosecutor], the Court made rulings on
that very issue at the bench. If you disagree, deal with
it. But don't argue with the Court, okay. Now, again the
reason why I told you be careful is I cannot fathom why you
would have witnesses take such extreme cautions, but you
yourself appear to be rather laxed about taking those
cautions yourself.
 
[Prosecutor]: And how would –
 
THE COURT: I already made a ruling, [Prosecutor], that
that does not come in until you lay the appropriate
foundation.
 
[Prosecutor]: And for the record, I would like to know
how is it that I was laxed in handing that photograph off
when I've never shown it to, because your clerk would have
mentioned it if I had been showing it to the jury. At any
time when I approached with that exhibit, I did not show it
to the jury. When I came back, Your Honor asked me to flip
it over. I did. The last time we were here -­
THE COURT: [Prosecutor], I don't want a mistrial,
okay. I don't want to do this trial again if I can help it.
 
[Prosecutor]: I agree. I agree.
 
THE COURT: So the reason why I cautioned you about
being more careful is so that we can avoid any prejudice. I
also made my ruling very, very clear repeatedly at the bench
as to the lack of foundation on this exhibit coming in. I
 also made it very clear unless you lay the proper -­appropriate foundation, the Court is not going to receive
it. Okay. So over the lunch hour, you think about the
Court's ruling. You figure it out. But I'm not going to
tell you how to do your job.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, I have to ask for a
mistrial once more. You know what, judge, as an officer of
the Court, there's cameras here. What occurred prior to my
-- the last time I approached the bench with my concern of
the photograph being seen by the jury, which is an arrest
photograph of [Krueger], prior to that, judge, the cameras
will show after you admonished [the Prosecutor], she came
back to the podium. She flipped the photograph over in such
a way that the photos were in clean view of the jury. 
I'm sure she didn't do that purposefully. I have no doubt 
of that. I don't think she would do something like that.
Nevertheless, I have some -- I think maybe perhaps some of the
jurors saw it. And I would beg to think that they probably did.
Compound that, judge, compound that. And I came up after that.
Compound that, when I came back, I'm not sure if the sequence was
then, but when I came back, the photograph was face up. And I did
 not say [the Prosecutor] lied.
 
Because after I came up walking this way, I hope the video
is seeing it, yes, [the Prosecutor] covered it with her yellow
pad. But it was -- it was up. And as an officer of this Court, I
can tell you right now I'm pretty certain that the jurors saw it,
and that prejudice cannot be undone. The issue we've mentioned
 many, many times is identification. We already had the Detective
testify yes, [Krueger] didn't have a tattoo. Why even go there? I
don't understand the logic. What, overkill for circumstantial
evidence? They have the Detective saying he didn't have a tattoo. 
Judge, there has to be accountability. There has to be
 
accountability. I think it is now -- you know, judge, it's over.
Now, whether if you grant my mistrial, whether or not we have
another trial, whether or not they can refile, then it will be
subject to different types of motion at the appropriate time. But
 in this trial, enough is enough. Enough, judge. I mean how much
 more? I also played the game. I got to tell you I played the
game. 
Because I got irritated and I got upset. And now you can
tell by my voice and you can tell by the way I'm up here. And
 also, many, many times when I was interrupted, but it's okay, you
can tell. But I'm not trying to be unfair. We're not trying to
be unfair here, but enough is enough, judge.
 
He cannot get a fair shake. It's done. [Krueger] cannot get
a fair shake. It's done. And it's through no fault of [Krueger].
It's through no fault of the Court. It's through no fault of the
panel. And it is what it is. I'm sorry, judge, I think this
Court has to -- this Court, this Court has to stop it already.
 
THE COURT: All right. Thank you, [Defense Counsel]. I
am not going to grant that motion for a mistrial.   I'm not
 
convinced that there's been prejudice. I'm not convinced
 that if there has been prejudice that it's something that
the Court cannot cure. But let me just state, [Defense
Counsel], that I do agree with the statement that you just
made on the record about trying to understand the
persistence of the prosecutor with respect to this
particular exhibit.
 
As I recall, [Defense Counsel], you did not object when the
question was asked and answered about the arrest of [Krueger], I
think it was on May 5th, 2011. You did not object when the
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
question was asked and answered about whether the witness was
aware of any tattoo that he had in court today and then at the
time of the arrest. 
There was no objection to the request for the Detective to
identify [Krueger].
 
[Defense Counsel]: [Krueger] even stood up, Your
Honor.
 
THE COURT: So that is part and parcel of the Court's
sustaining the objection. I'm going to leave it at that, so
both of you have homework to do over the lunch hour.
[Defense Counsel], go address the issue of Counts.
[Prosecutor], go figure out what your next step is going to
be.
 
(Emphases added.) 
There does not appear to be any improper motive to
 
alert the jury to the existence of inadmissible evidence. 
Defense Counsel acknowledged the alleged mishandling was not
 purposeful and the circuit court found any potential prejudice
 was curable. We cannot conclude that the inadvertent display of
 this photograph was part of a premeditated effort to alert the
 jury to the existence of inadmissable evidence.
C. Inappropriate Gestures
 
Following the exchange regarding the photograph and
 
foundation issues, the circuit court warned the Prosecutor:
 
Now, also, [Prosecutor], and I'm going to state this
on the record, I do not appreciate the looks that you're
making in response to the Court's admonishment of you. Let
 me warn you again as I did earlier, [Prosecutor], continued
behavior, rolling your eyes, shaking your head when the
Court is talking, this is all on the record may very well
lead to the Court holding you in contempt. 
So be very mindful of that, [Prosecutor]. You have 
tried my patience repeatedly throughout this trial. And it's
 wearing thin. And I just want the record to be very clear about
that. I do not appreciate and I think it's very disrespectful
for you to question the Court's rulings as you have and then to
be making physical gestures and faces on the record.
 
[Prosecutor]: Very well, Your Honor.
 
(Emphasis added.) Krueger contends the Prosecutor's "antics in
 
the courtroom was [sic] so extreme as to justify the court's
 admonishment." Krueger reasons that because the Prosecutor
 "rolled her eyes and shook her head at the court's rulings, in
 all likelihood, the [Prosecutor] was doing the same to the
 defense, resulting in a denigration of the defense as a whole." 
This speculative argument is not supported by the record.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
D. Expressing personal opinion about witness candor 
Prosecutors must refrain from expressing personal views
 
about a defendant's guilt or credibility of witnesses. See State
 
v. Marsh, 68 Haw. 659, 660, 728 P.2d 1301, 1302 (1986). Krueger
 
contends the Prosecutor "vouched for the credibility of [Kilmer]
 during both opening remarks and closing arguments[.]" During
 opening remarks the Prosecutor stated: 
And you will hear from [Kilmer]. She was granted
what's called transactional immunity to make her testify.
She had been charged, and she's charged with the offenses of
robbery in the first degree as well as attempted assault in
the first degree as an accomplice to what took place by the
[Krueger] as well as [Counts]. 
And she will come in here
 
under this grant of immunity to testify as truthfully, and
she doesn't get prosecuted for perjury.
 
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, may we approach. I do
apologize.
 
THE COURT: Yes, yes.
 
(The following was held at the bench out of the
hearing of the jury.)
 
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, that's improper
opening. It's vouching for the anticipated witness.
Whether she testifies truthfully or not, that remains to be
seen.
 
[Prosecutor]: Your Honor, I didn't say she's
testifying -- I said that she's testifying under a grant of
immunity, that though if -
- as long as she testifies
truthfully, which is as part of that, she doesn't get
prosecuted for perjury. He's already stated on the record
that he plans to bring in the fact of what she could face
and why she's saying this. This is in anticipation of what
he has said.
 
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, the trier of facts
makes a determination as to whether the witness has
 testified truthfully or not. I would move for a mistrial at
 this time based on prosecutorial misconduct. The witness
 has yet to testify, and the [Prosecutor] is now saying that
we granted her immunity because she's going to testify
truthfully. 
Your Honor, the penalty if she testifies untruthfully is
perjury. That's it, nothing else.
 
THE COURT: First of all, motion denied. [ The
Prosecutor] did state that if she doesn't, she did reference
the perjury. So objection noted. Overruled. Objection
noted. Let's move on.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
During closing arguments, the Prosecutor stated: 
Then [Defense Counsel] tells you, well, geez, she got
this immunity grant. Remember though what does that say?
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The minute she got -- he himself said it. She got up there.
The minute she testified, her charges went away. Why is she
still saying it's him? Because like any other witness who
testifies and swears to tell the truth, she told the
truth. That's what happened.
 
[Defense Counsel]: Objection, Your Honor. Improper.
 
THE COURT: All right. Counsel, approach.
 (The following was held at the bench out of the
hearing of the jury.)
 
[Defense Counsel]: She said it's a personal opinion.
She said she told the truth.
 
THE COURT: This is argument. So I'm overruling.
 [Defense Counsel]: Okay.
 [Prosecutor]: Thank you.
 (At which time the bench conference concluded.)
 [Prosecutor]: The evidence shows so. She told the
 
truth. And last but not least, she's corroborated by a
video that she had no -- never seen. Take a look at that
 video again if you need to. What you will see is you will
witness that man participate as a full-blown participate -­participant in robbery in the second degree. They used force
during the committing of that incident.
 
(Emphases added.) 
We review the Prosecutor's remarks in context. See
 
State v. Moore, No. 30001, (App. May 10, 2010) (SDO). In Moore,
 
the defendant contended the prosecutor's statement that two
 witnesses "told the truth, the honest truth," made during the
 rebuttal argument, was improper and constituted prosecutorial
 misconduct. Id. at 1. This court concluded in Moore that the
 
statement recharacterizing and responding to defense counsel's
 closing argument, was proper, and did not deprive the defendant
 of a fair trial.
 
In this case, the Prosecutor's alleged personal opinion
 
during closing remarks responded to Defense Counsel's argument
 that the witness was biased from her grant of immunity. 
Moreover, this statement was ultimately tethered to evidence and
 proper in context.
 
E. The circuit court did not err in allowing the case
to proceed as to Robbery 2.
 
Krueger contends the circuit court erred in denying his
 
motion for judgment of acquittal on the Robbery 1 charge and
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
amending the charge to Robbery 2, and he bases his challenge on
 
the contention that Robbery 2 is not an included offense of
 Robbery 1.
 
Krueger cites to State v. Kroll, 106 Hawai
fi 528, 107 
P.3d 1201 (App. 2005) regarding the standards for amending a charge under HRPP Rule 7(f). We note that Kroll was based on a prior version of HRPP Rule 7(f) and that the rule was subsequently amended in 2005. HRPP Rule 7(f) now reads: 
Rule 7. Indictment, Information, or Complaint
 
. . .
 
(f) Amendment.
 (1) The court may permit a charge other than an
indictment to be amended at any time before trial commences
if substantial rights of the defendant are not prejudiced.
 
(2) The court may permit a charge other than an
indictment to be amended after trial commences and before
 verdict or finding if the defendant personally, knowingly,
and voluntarily agrees to the amendment on the record.
 
Even under the amended rule, however, the key question
 
is whether Robbery 2 is an included offense of Robbery 1. 
Pursuant to HRS § 701-109(4) (1993), "[a] defendant may be
 convicted of an offense included in an offense charged in the
 indictment or the information." Therefore, if Robbery 2 is an
 included offense to the original charge of Robbery 1, there would
 be no amended charge and HRPP Rule 7(f) would not apply. See,
 
e.g. United States v. Martinez, 430 F.3d 317, 340 (6th Cir. 2005)
 ("[T]his results in neither a prejudicial variance from, nor a
 constructive amendment to the indictment because [the defendant]
 was merely convicted of a lesser-included offense and all the
 elements of the former necessarily include those of the latter");
 United States v. Cabrera-Beltran, 660 F.3d 742, 753 (4th Cir.
 2011), cert. denied, 132 S.Ct. 1935 (2012); United States v.
 Solorio, 337 F.3d 580, 590 (6th Cir. 2003); People v. Kincaid,
 316 N.E.2d 220, 224 (Ill. App. Ct. 1974).
 
Krueger argues that Robbery 2 is not an included
 
offense of Robbery 1 pursuant to HRS § 701-109(4) because the
 requisite intent for each offense is different, and because
 Robbery 2 requires an "additional element" that force be used
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
against another person that is "present" during the offense. 
Krueger was indicted for Robbery 1, specifically, for violating
 HRS § 708-840(1)(a), which proscribes, in relevant part, the act
 of "intentionally or knowingly inflict[ing] . . . serious bodily
 injury upon another" while "in the course of committing theft." 
The trial court, at the State's request, instructed the jury to
 consider whether Krueger was guilty of HRS § 708-841(1)(a), which
 proscribes, in relevant part, the act of "us[ing] force against
 the person of anyone present with the intent to overcome that
 person's physical resistance or physical power of resistance"
 while "in the course of committing theft."
 
HRS § 701-109(4) provides that:
 
(4) A defendant may be convicted of an offense
included in an offense charged in the indictment or the
information. An offense is so included when:
 
(a) It is established by proof of the same or less
than all the facts required to establish the
commission of the offense charged; or
 
. . . .
 (c) It differs from the offense charged only in the
respect that a less serious injury or risk of
injury to the same person, property, or public
interest or a different state of mind indicating
lesser degree of culpability suffices to establish
its commission.
 
HRS § 701-109(4). 
Pursuant to HRS § 701–109(4)(a), the general rule is that
"an offense is included if it is impossible to commit the
greater without also committing the lesser." State v.
 
Burdett, 70 Haw. 85, 87–88, 762 P.2d 164, 166 (1988). In
 applying HRS § 701–109(4)(a), we have previously held that
several factors may be considered in determining whether an
offense is a lesser included offense of another: (1) the
degree of culpability; (2) the legislative statutory scheme;
and (3) the end result.
 
State v. Friedman, 93 Hawai fi 63, 72, 996 P.2d 268, 277 (2000) 
(citations omitted). 
"Regarding the degree of culpability, the rule is that
 
the lesser included offense cannot have a mental state greater
 
than or different from that which is required for the charged
 offense." Id. (quoting State v. Alston, 75 Haw. 517, 534, 865
 
P.2d 157, 166 (1994)). Yet, even where the requisite mental
 state differs between the two offenses, if the legislature
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
clearly intended one offense to be a lesser included offense of 
another, such intent prevails. See Rumbawa, 94 Hawai fi at 519­
20, 17 P.3d at 868-69 (citing State v. Smythe, 72 Haw. 217, 811 P.2d 1100 (1991), in holding first degree reckless endangerment to be a lesser-included offense of second degree attempted murder despite the difference in attendant mental states). This may also obtain even where it is possible to commit the greater offense without necessarily committing the lesser offense. Id. 
Here, the mental states described by the two statutes
 
differ; the greater offense requires that the person
 "intentionally or knowingly inflict[] . . . serious bodily
 injury" upon another, while the lesser offense requires that the
 person "use[] force against the person of anyone present with the
 intent to overcome that person's physical resistance or physical
 power of resistance." Here too, a person might commit the former
 in such a way that he does not commit the latter. Yet, the
 relation of the two statutes within the legislative scheme makes
 it clear that the legislature intended one to be included within
 
2
the other. The accompanying commentary  and related legislative
history reinforces that conclusion:
 
When the Legislature adopted the Code in 1972, it
consolidated the Proposed Draft's three degrees of robbery
into two degrees. The simple threat or use of force or the
reckless infliction of serious bodily injury in the
commission of a theft constitutes robbery in the second
degree and carries a class B felony sanction. Where the
 
person committing the above acts is armed with a dangerous
instrument, or intentionally inflicts serious bodily harm,
or attempts to kill, the offense is increased to the first
degree and its sanction to a class A felony. 
HRS § 708-841 cmt. (1993) (emphases added). The legislative
 
intent is no less clear here than in Rumbawa; pursuant to HRS
 § 701-109(4), second degree robbery is a lesser included offense
 
2
 "The Commentary accompanying the Hawaii Penal Code . . . may be
used as an aid in understanding the provisions of the Code, even though it was
not intended as evidence of legislative intent." State v. Aluli, 78 Hawaif i 
317, 321 n. 5, 893 P.2d 168, 172 n. 5 (1995) (citation omitted); see also HRS § 701–105 (1993). Furthermore, the legislative history of the statutes andtheir amendments do not indicate any intent to separate the two offenses inthe legislative statutory scheme. See Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 2, in 1972 House
Journal, at 1045, 1972 Senate Journal, at 744; H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1231­98, in 1998 House Journal, at 1551; S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2596, in 1998Senate Journal, at 1051. 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of first degree robbery. See Rumbawa, 94 Hawai fi at 520-21, 17 
P.3d at 869-70. 
It is well-settled that trial courts must "instruct 
juries as to any included offenses having a rational basis in the 
evidence without regard to whether the prosecution requests, or the defense objects to, such an instruction." Haanio, 94 Hawai
fi 
at 407, 16 P.3d at 248. 
Here, like Haanio, the evidence provided a rational 
basis for the included offense of Robbery 2.
 See Haanio, 94 
Hawaifi at 413-17, 16 P.3d at 254-58 (rational basis for Robbery 
2 instruction because the evidence showed the defendant was intoxicated and therefore, the defendant "may have possessed a reckless, rather than an intentional, state of mind with respect to his conduct[.]") Witness testimony identified Krueger and surveillance footage showed Krueger using force to restrain the CW. The circuit court subsequently "made the decision following the evidentiary portion of the trial to reduce the charges against [Krueger]." 
In State v. Matautia, 81 Hawai
fi 76, 912 P.2d 573, 
(App. 1996), we held that the trial court's amending the charge to a non-included offense, minutes before trial, prejudiced the defendant's right to prepare an adequate defense because the elements of the original charge and amended charge differed. The instant case is distinguishable because the evidence adduced at trial provided a rational basis for Robbery 2. We conclude that Robbery 2 is an included offense of Robbery 1, that HRPP Rule 7(f) is not applicable, that Krueger's right to prepare an adequate defense was unaffected by the circuit court's amending the Robbery 1 charge to an included offense, and thus the circuit court did not err in allowing the Robbery 2 charge to reach the jury. 
F. Judgment of Acquittal
 
The circuit court found the evidence, viewed in the
 
light most favorable to the Prosecution, was not sufficient to
 
enable a reasonable person to fairly conclude Krueger was guilty
 of Robbery 1 beyond a reasonable doubt, but was sufficient to
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
enable a reasonable person to fairly conclude Krueger was guilty
 
of Robbery 2 beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
Viewing the witness testimony and surveillance footage
 
in the light most favorable to the prosecution, we agree with the
 circuit court that Krueger, while in the course of a theft, used
 force to restrain and overcome the resistance of CW. See State
 
v. Clemmer, No. 30197 (App. Sept. 9, 2010) (SDO) (Credible
 witness testimony was sufficient for person of reasonable caution
 to conclude defendant committed Robbery 2.). The circuit court
 properly denied Krueger's motion for judgment of acquittal.
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Accordingly, the "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence"
 
entered August 27, 2012 in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit
 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
fi, November 29, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Emmanuel G. Guerrero
 
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
Tracy MurakamiDeputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Kaua
fi 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
21
 