NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1/ HRS ยง 586-11(a) provides in relevant part: "Whenever an order for
protection is granted pursuant to this chapter, a respondent or person to be
restrained who knowingly or intentionally violates the order for protection is
guilty of a misdemeanor." NO. CAAP-16-0000809
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JAMEEL RICHARD DOWLING, Defendant-Appellant.
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(FC-CR NOS. 15-1-2075, 15-1-2087 and 16-1-1608)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i (State) charged
Defendant-Appellant Jameel Richard Dowling (Dowling) with
violating an order for protection, in violation of Hawaii Revised
Statutes (HRS) ยง 586-11(a) (Supp. 2016).1/  At the time of the
charged offense, Dowling was on probation in two prior cases for
violating the same order for protection.  The order for
protection had been issued to protect Dowling's wife (Wife) and
their three children (collectively, the Children).
A jury found Dowling guilty as charged.  Dowling
subsequently stipulated to, and waived his right to a hearing on,
the State's motion to revoke his probation in the two prior
cases, which motion was based on the jury's guilty verdict in the
most recent prosecution.  The Family Court of the First CircuitNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2/ The Honorable Fa# auuga L. To# oto#o presided.
2(Family Court)2/ sentenced Dowling to one year of imprisonment
for his conviction in the pending case (FC-CR No. 16-1-1608) and
for each of his probation revocations in the two prior cases (FC-
CR No. 15-1-2075 and FC-CR No. 15-1-2087), all terms to be served
concurrently.  The Family Court filed its Judgment in FC-CR No.
16-1-1608 and its orders of revocation of probation and
resentencing in FC-CR No. 15-1-2075 and FC-CR No. 15-1-2087 on
October 21, 2016.
On appeal, Dowling contends that there was insufficient
evidence to support his conviction in FC-CR No. 16-1-1608.  He
further contends that because there was insufficient evidence to
support his conviction in FC-CR No. 16-1-1608, the revocation of
his probations in FC-CR No. 15-1-2075 and FC-CR No. 15-1-2087,
which was based on his conviction in FC-CR No. 16-1-1608, must be
overturned.  As explained below, we conclude that there was
sufficient evidence to support Dowling's conviction in FC-CR No.
16-1-1608.  We therefore affirm the Family Court's Judgment and
its orders of revocation of probation and resentencing.
I.
When viewed in the light most favorable to the
prosecution, State v. Richie, 88 Hawai# i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227,
1241 (1998), the trial evidence showed as follows.
Wife and Dowling were married in about 2010 and
separated in about 2014.  On October 14, 2015, the Family Court
issued an order for protection in favor of Wife and against
Dowling.  The order for protection provided in relevant part that
"[Dowling] is prohibited from coming or passing within 100 feet
of [Wife] at all other neutral locations unless allowed by this
order.  If the parties run into each other, [Dowling] must leave
immediately."  Dowling was present at the hearing at which the
Family Court granted Wife's petition for an order for protection,
and he was served with the order for protection.  The order forNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3protection that was issued on October 14, 2015, remained in
effect for one year, until October 14, 2016. 
On April 22, 2016, at about 10:30 p.m., Wife was
visiting her mother (Mother) at Mother's residence along with the
Children.  Mother lived on the second floor of a two-story house. 
Wife had parked her silver Chevy TrailBlazer in Mother's
driveway.  In order to reach the steps that led to Mother's front
door, it was necessary to walk past Wife's Chevy TrailBlazer. 
Dowling was present when Wife purchased the Chevy TrailBlazer in
April 2015, and Dowling had previously driven the Chevy
TrailBlazer.
Wife testified that on the night in question, she and
Mother were in the living room talking, approximately ten feet
from the entrance to Mother's residence.  Mother had a screen
door and a "regular" door at the entrance to her residence.  The
"regular" door was open and the screen door was closed. 
According to Wife, while she was talking to Mother, she heard a
soft knocking "off and on for like three minutes."  Wife was not
able to discern the source of the soft knocking and thought it
was coming from cartoons that were playing on the television.
After hearing the three minutes of soft knocking, Wife heard her
husband's voice say, "Can I talk to you?"  Wife's "heart sank to
[her] stomach," the Children "freaked out," and Wife gathered the
Children and left the room.  She also called the police.
Mother testified that she and Wife were sitting in the
living room watching television.  Mother was sitting on the
couch, which was about three to four feet from the door.  Mother
started to hear a sound she described as "some light knocking." 
She heard this sound off and on for "a good five minutes or
more."  Mother thought the sound might be coming from her
grandson or the cat outside.  After hearing the intermittent
light knocking, Mother heard Dowling's voice saying, "Can we
talk?"  Mother got off the couch and went over to the door and
told Dowling that he needed to leave.  Mother could see Dowling
through the screen door.  Mother had to ask Dowling to leaveNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4twice.  After the second time, Dowling walked away from Mother's
house.  Mother testified that someone standing outside her house 
and looking through the screen door would be able to clearly see
the couch where Mother, Wife, and the Children were sitting.
II.
The jury found Dowling guilty as charged.  After the
jury returned its guilty verdict, Dowling stipulated to, and
waived his right to a hearing on, the State's motion to revoke
the probations imposed in his prior separate convictions for
violating the same order for protection.  The State's revocation
motion was based on the jury's guilty verdict in FC-CR No. 16-1-
1608.  The Family Court held a consolidated sentencing hearing to
sentence Dowling on the jury's guilty verdict and the revocation
of his two probationary terms.  At the sentencing hearing, Wife
stated that she and the Children were terrified of Dowling; that
Dowling continued to use drugs; that Dowling had repeatedly
violated orders for protection she obtained against him; that
Dowling had made threats; that she was concerned about her safety
and the safety of the Children; and that nobody wanted to help
her because they were scared of Dowling.  The Family Court
sentenced Dowling to imprisonment for one year in each of the
consolidated cases, all terms to run concurrently.  
III.
We resolve the issues Dowling raises on appeal as
follows.
1.  Dowling contends that there was insufficient
evidence to support his conviction in FC-CR No. 16-1-1608.  We
disagree.  When viewed in the light most favorable to the State,
the evidence showed that Dowling knew that Wife was at Mother's
house when he knocked intermittently for several minutes and then
called out, "Can I talk to you?"  We conclude that there was
sufficient evidence to establish that Dowling knowingly or
intentionally violated the order for protection which prohibited
him from coming or passing within 100 feet of Wife at neutral
locations.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
52.  Our conclusion that there was sufficient evidence
to support Dowling's conviction in FC-CR No. 16-1-1608 also
disposes of Dowling's claim that the Family Court erred in
revoking his probations in FC-CR No. 15-1-2075 and FC-CR No. 15-
1-2087.  
IV.
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Family Court's
Judgment in FC-CR No. 16-1-1608 and its orders of revocation of
probation and resentencing in FC-CR No. 15-1-2075 and FC-CR No.
15-1-2087.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, September 28, 2017.
On the briefs:
Jon N. Ikenaga
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant.Chief Judge
Jonathan K.D. Tungpalan
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge