NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000914
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
MUKADIN GORDON, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
JODIE F. MAESAKA-HIRATA; FRANCIS SEQUIERA;
WILLIAM RUSHING; FAATUILA PULA; PETRA CHO;
MICHAEL TAAMILO; AARON MIRAFUENTES; GENE POMEROY;
STATE OF HAWAII, Defendants-Appellees, and
JOHN AND/OR JANE DOES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-2482-10 (ECN))

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant Mukadin Gordon (Gordon or 
Plaintiff) appeals from the June 19, 2014 Judgment in favor of 
Defendants-Appellees the State of Hawai 'i (the State), Jodie F. 
Maesaka-Hirata (Maesaka-Hirata), and Petra Cho (Cho) (collectively, Defendants) and against Gordon (Judgment), and challenges the April 23, 2014 Findings of Fact and Conclusions of 
Law (FOFs/COLs), both entered in the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 
1
 The Honorable Edwin C. Nacino presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Gordon filed suit alleging violation of his 
constitutional rights, as well as tort claims, against the State 
and employees of the Department of Public Safety, State of Hawai
'i (DPS), contending that he was unfairly confined to 
maximum security imprisonment (Max Custody) for an extended 
period of time during his pre-trial detention, due to a 
misclassification of his security level. After a bench trial, the Circuit Court held, inter alia, that the conditions imposed on Gordon did not amount to punishment, and that the DPS officials acted within their discretion. We affirm. 
I. BACKGROUND FACTS

 
A. Gordon's Pre-Trial Detainment
 On August 22, 2010, Gordon was arrested and detained at
 
Oahu Community Correctional Center (OCCC) on charges of seven
 
counts of Sexual Assault in the First Degree, Attempted Sexual
 
Assault in the First Degree, four counts of Sexual Assault in the
 Third Degree, Promoting Prostitution, and Kidnapping in the First
 Degree. On August 26, 2010, DPS employee Faatuila Pula (Pula)
 
completed Gordon's Jail Initial Custody Classification, which
 
determines an inmate's custody classification. Pula later
 
2
testified that she calculated Gordon's "points"  at nineteen,
which classifies an inmate as Max Custody. Pula testified that,
 in completing the Jail Initial Custody instrument, she
 interviewed Gordon and used information from the Hawaii Criminal
 Justice Information System (CJIS), as well as the National Crime
 
2
 It appears that Pula's testimony concerning "points" refers to a
scoring system used for recommendations concerning security levels applicable
to persons when they come into custody at OCCC.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Information Center (NCIC) records. Pula testified that CJIS 
showed that Gordon had a "pending" Hawai 'i charge for Sexual 
Assault in the First Degree from 2006, for an unrelated matter, 
and that Pula factored in this pending charge in calculating Gordon's points. Pula testified that factoring in this pending charge would have affected the number of points in Gordon's classification. Gordon testified that, during the interview, he told Pula that he had no pending charges at that time. Pula testified that a failure to appear at a hearing would have shown up in the CJIS as a pending charge and that the CJIS is something that she ordinarily relies on in calculating detainees' custody levels when they come in to OCCC. 
It appears, however, from the testimony of Correction
 
Supervisor and DPS employee Cho, that the 2006 sexual assault
 charge had in fact been resolved at the time the initial
 classification was completed. Thus, the initial classification
 was based, in part, on information that was later determined to
 be incorrect. Pursuant to Pula's initial classification, Gordon
 was held in the OCCC Holding Unit at Max Custody for thirty days. 
Gordon testified that under the conditions of Max Custody, he was
 locked in his cell for twenty-three hours a day, had limited
 access to showers, and had limited access to reading material.
 
Cho testified that on September 22, 2010, a month after
 
Gordon's arrest and detention, an administrative program
 committee (the Committee) conducted a hearing to further
 
determine Gordon's security custody classification, programming
 
needs, and the appropriateness of his housing. Cho testified
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the Committee took into consideration several aspects of 
Gordon's history, including the pending criminal charges, prior convictions, Gordon's statements, as well as the information that Gordon had "absconded" to Washington while he was on probation in Hawai
'i. The Committee memorialized its decision in a Notice of 
Programing Results (Classification Notice). The Classification 
Notice recommended that Gordon remain in Max Custody due to the 
nature and seriousness of his current charges, the number and kind of his prior convictions, his extensive criminal history and numerous periods of incarceration, his failure to comply with two residential drug treatment programs, his leaving the state without permission while on probation and subsequest extradition to Hawai
'i, the fact that Gordon was on probation when charged 
with his current offenses, and the $1,000,000.00 bail amount. The Classification Notice also stated: 
The Committee concurs with OISC Jail Initial Custody
instrument that classified Mr. GORDON as MAX and also
 recommends that he be housed accordingly at Halawa High
Security. The Committee deems MR. GORDON a high-risk inmate
and also, a high flight risk. OCCC is inappropriate housing
for Mr. GORDON because OCCC is not able to provide MR.
GORDON with the high degree of direct supervision that he
requires.
 
Cho testified that an inmate who has been classified as
 
Max Custody needs more supervision by the security staff,
 
especially when he is out of his cell, and the Committee felt
 that the level of supervision needed for Gordon could not be
 provided at OCCC. Cho further testified that, at the time she
 signed the Classification Notice, she was aware that the 2006 sex
 assault charge was no longer pending, but that the Committee
 nonetheless decided that Gordon should remain at Max Custody. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On September 29, 2010, Gordon filed an Inmate
 
Complaint/Grievance with DPS, disputing his pretrial detention in
 
Max Custody. On October 5, 2010, Cho received a memorandum
 regarding the custody and classification of Max Custody inmates
 at OCCC from her supervisor, Lance M. Rabacal (Rabacal),
 
administrator for the residency section at OCCC (the Rabacal
 Memo). The Rabacal Memo directed Cho to "adhere to the directive
 process that has been consistently utilized at our facility
 
pertaining to MAX custody inmates" as "[t]he concern of
 constitutional matters may come into play," and that they should
 assure "fairness and consistency" when making decisions. The
 Rabacal Memo referred to a November 1996 directive that set out a
 process that had been set up, through arrangement with the
 American Civil Liberties Union, regarding OCCC Max Custody
 inmates (ACLU Arrangement). Rabacal testified that the ACLU
 
Arrangement is a "practice" that OCCC had been following "for
 
quite a while," that they understood its terms to be a
 "recommendation," and that classification decisions may still be
 "determinant upon [an inmate's] . . . behavior or his record[.]" 
The ACLU Arrangement provided, in relevant part:
 
1) Any Max Custody inmate entering through the Intake
process shall be housed in the Holding Unit for 30 days.

 
a) If the inmate remains misconduct free and is not a

management problem, OCCC shall then reduce the
inmate's custody to Medium and re-house in general
population.
 
b) Contrastingly, if the inmate incurs misconducts during

the 30-day period, and/or is a management problem, he shall
be transferred to [Halawa Correctional Facility (HCF)] as a
Max custody.
. . . . 
Jail inmates who come in scoring MAX are not to be shipped

directly to HCF. Follow this process.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On October 12, 2010, an Exception Case Form3 was
 
submitted for Gordon under Cho's name, recommending a custody
 
classification of "Medium" for Gordon. The reasons stated for
 the recommendation included the Rabacal Memo and that Gordon "has
 not shown nor accrued any institutional behavioral misconducts
 within OCCC holding unit." Linda Chun (Chun), the DPS
 
Classification Officer at that time, testified that she had
 
received the Exception Case Form, and that she disapproved it on
 October 19, 2010, as noted on the form. The reasons given for
 disapproval were as follows: 
[Gordon]'s behavior in the [Holding Unit] has been
satisfactory thus far. However this case still presents a
number of risk factors. Current charges are serious &
violent in nature. As a result, subject has a high bail
amount. Subject has an extensive criminal his[tory] & also
has had numerous periods of incarceration. Subject has
failed to profit from previous experience [with] probation &
incarceration. Substance abuse issues have not been
 addressed due [to] subject's discharge from programs for
non-compliance [with] program rules.
 
Chun testified that a pretrial detainee can be held in
 
Max Custody based solely on their past behavior and criminal
 
history. Chun testified that, based on her training and
 experience, it is "reasonable" to house an inmate as a Max
 Custody pretrial detainee based on the reasons stated in the
 disapproval section of the Exception Case Form. She also
 testified that, by policy, if the Classification Office
 disapproves a request for an exception case, the matter is
 submitted to the deputy director for review. The Deputy Director
 of Corrections, Tommy Johnson (Johnson), testified that on
 
3
 Cho testified at trial that erroneous classifications are
 
corrected through an Exception Case Form process, and that the Inmate
Classification Office makes a decision based on the Exception Case request.
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
October 21, 2010, he reviewed Gordon's Exception Case Form and
 
determined that Gordon was to remain in Max Custody. He
 testified that he did not have any personal knowledge of any of
 the factors on the Exception Case Form, but that he "signed the
 document because of the statement written above it" which he
 "believed . . . to be true[.]" Johnson further testified that he
 did not perceive Gordon's custody level as punishment.
 
On October 25, 2010, Gordon was transported from OCCC
 
to HCF where he was placed in Max Custody. Gordon testified
 that, during this time, he was locked in his cell for twenty-
three hours a day, had limited access to showers, and was subject
 to daily strip searches. Gordon submitted grievances to DPS
 regarding his classification as Max Custody on October 26, 2010,
 December 21, 2010, February 21, 2011, February 25, 2011, March 8,
 2011, and on March 24, 2011. On June 14, 2011, Corrections
 Supervisor Monica Lortz (Lortz) completed a Jail Inmate Custody
 
Review Instrument.
4 Based on Lortz's testimony at trial, the
 
classifications for inmates in Max Custody are evaluated once a
 
year. However, according to Lortz's testimony, in Gordon's case,
 this review was conducted after only eight months, and was done
 per instructions from the deputy warden, rather than pursuant to
 a periodic review. Lortz arrived at a Comprehensive Total Point
 Score of thirteen, making Gordon's computed custody level
 "Medium." Due to the decrease in Gordon's custody level, Gordon
 
4
 Gordon also asserts that, prior to the completion of Lortz's
review, on February 23, 2011, DPS employee Earl Pomeroy also "completed" a
Jail Initial Custody Instrument (Amended) for Gordon that calculated a
"Minimum" custody level. However, the last page of this custody instrument
shows that it is saved only as a draft, and it does not appear to have been
"completed" as Gordon contends. 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was returned to OCCC in June of 2011. Following Gordon's felony
 
convictions and sentencing, he was returned to HCF in September
 of 2011, where he remains. In total, Gordon spent over nine
 months in Max Custody due to his classification.
 
B. The Circuit Court Proceedings
 Gordon filed a complaint on October 19, 2011, alleging 
claims against Defendants Clayton Frank (Frank), Francis Sequiera 
(Sequiera), William Rushing (Rushing), Pula, Cho, Michael Taamilo (Taamilo), Aaron Mirafuentes (Mirafuentes), Gene Pomeroy (Pomeroy), and the State, arguing, inter alia, that he was misclassified by the Defendants and, therefore, housed in more 
restrictive areas of OCCC and HCF than he should have been. Gordon's complaint alleged violations of civil rights guaranteed to him as a pretrial detainee under the Fourth, Fifth, Eighth, Ninth, and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983, and under Article I, §§ 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 12 of the Hawai
'i Constitution. The 
complaint included claims of intentional infliction of emotional distress, negligence, and respondeat superior negligence against individually named Defendants Sequiera, Rushing, Pula, Cho, Taamilo, Mirafuentes, and Pomeroy, as well as alleged negligent training, supervision and discipline claims against Defendants Frank and the State. On November 29, 2011, Gordon filed a first amended complaint, replacing Defendant Frank with Defendant Jodie F. Maesaka-Hirata. Defendants answered on December 19, 2011. 
On December 23, 2013, Defendants filed a motion for

 
summary judgment (MSJ), arguing that no constitutional right was
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
violated, as prisoners have no right to receive a particular
 
security classification, that the claims are barred by sovereign
 immunity, and that Defendants, in their individual capacities,
 have qualified immunity. In support of the qualified immunity
 defense, Defendants argued that Gordon's initial classification
 was calculated correctly, that subsequent classification
 decisions were within the prison administrators' discretion, and
 that Defendants have qualified immunity from the state-law tort
 claims. On December 12, 2013, the parties filed a Stipulation
 for Dismissal with Prejudice of All Claims Against Defendant
 Faatuila Pula. 
On January 8, 2014, Gordon filed an opposition to the
 
MSJ and a cross-motion for partial summary judgment as to
 Defendants' liability for Gordon's state law claim for
 negligence. Gordon argued that, as a pre-trial detainee, he had
 a constitutional right to be free from punishment, and that his
 negligence claims against the State are based on the failure of
 DPS employees to follow standard classification practices. He
 further argued that Defendants, in their individual capacities,
 are not entitled to sovereign or qualified immunity for the
 constitutional and state-law tort claims because "sufficient
 evidence has been presented to demonstrate that Defendants[]
 deliberately disregarded their own directives and failed to
 address 'constitutional matters' and 'assure fairness and
 consistency.'"
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A hearing on the motions appears to have been held on
 
January 16, 2014.5 On January 27, 2014, the Circuit Court filed
 
its Order (1) Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendants'
 
Motion for Summary Judgment, and (2) Denying Plaintiff's
 Cross-Motion for Partial Summary Judgment as to Defendants'
 Liability for Plaintiff's State Law Claim for Negligence. 
Regarding Defendants' MSJ, the order: (1) granted it as to the
 42 U.S.C. § 1983 claims alleging federal constitutional
 violations against the State and the individual Defendants in
 their official capacities; (2) denied it as to the 42 U.S.C.
 § 1983 claims alleging federal constitutional violations against
 individual Defendants in their individual capacities; and (3)
 denied it as to the state-law tort claims. The order also denied
 Gordon's partial summary judgment motion as to Defendants'
 liability for Gordon's state law negligence claim. 
On February 10 and 11, 2014, a jury-waived trial was
 
conducted. The Circuit Court heard testimony from Gordon, Pula,
 Cho, Chun, Johnson, Lortz, and Rabacal. After Gordon rested his
 case, Defendants filed a motion for judgment as a matter of law
 (Motion for JMOL), arguing that Gordon failed to prove by clear
 
and convincing evidence that the government officials were
 
motivated by malice, failed to show that Defendants breached any
 duty, and failed to prove that he has a constitutional right to
 any particular security classification. In response to the
 Motion for JMOL, Gordon orally moved to dismiss from the lawsuit
 Sequiera, Rushing, Taamilo, Mirafuentes, and Pomeroy, conceding
 
5
 A transcript of this hearing is not found in the record.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that there is "insufficient evidence to assert that any of these 
individuals acted improperly or there's sufficient merit for them
 to be responsible." The Circuit Court then noted that the
 remaining parties in the lawsuit were the State, Maesaka-Hirata,
 in her official capacity, and Cho, in her individual and official
 capacities. The court then heard argument on the Motion for
 JMOL. After hearing argument, the court orally denied
 Defendants' Motion for JMOL. Defendants then orally moved for
 reconsideration, and, after hearing argument, the court denied
 the motion. 
On February 18, 2014, the Circuit Court filed an Order
 
Granting Plaintiff's Motion to Dismiss with Prejudice All Claims
 Against Defendants Francis Sequiera, William Rushing, Michael
 Taamilo, Aaron Mirafuentes, and Gene Pomeroy. On February 19,
 2014, the court filed an Order Denying Defendants' Motion for
 JMOL and Motion for Reconsideration of Order Denying Defendants'
 Motion for JMOL.
 
On April 23, 2014, the court issued its FOFs/COLs. 
The FOFs/COLs include, inter alia, the following findings:
 
13. State of Hawai' i Department of Public Safety
employee, Faatuila Pula, testified credibly that on August
26, 2010 she calculated Plaintiff's points at 19 for holdingpurposes and Ms. Pula classified him to be held in MaximumCustody. 
14. Ms. Pula further testified that in completing
the Jail Initial Custody Instrument, she interviewed
Plaintiff, and used the Hawaii Criminal Justice Inquiry
System or CJIS, as well as NCIC records.
 
15. Ms. Pula testified that CJIS showed that
 
Plaintiff had a pending Hawaii charge for sex assault one.
 
16. Ms. Pula also testified that a failure to appear
at a hearing is counted as a pending or no-show appearance.
 
17. The Court finds that Plaintiff's initial custody
level was calculated correctly by Faatuila Pula pursuant to
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the State's policy for calculating initial custody
classification.
 
. . . .
 
21. Lance M. Rabacal testified credibly that [the
ACLU Arrangement] is used as a guideline to determine when a
recommendation to reduce custody shall be considered.
 
22. Defendant Petra Cho testified credibly that on
September 22, 2010, an administrative committee comprised of
Defendants CHO, MICHAEL TAAMILO, and AARON MIRAFUENTES
conducted a hearing to determine Plaintiff's
security/custody classification, programming needs, and
appropriateness of housing.
 
23. Defendant Cho testified credibly that the
committee took into consideration all aspects of Plaintiff's
history, including his current offenses, prior convictions,
and Plaintiff's statements.
 
24. Defendant Cho further testified that she and the
 
committee were aware that the Hawaii sex assault charge
referred to in paragraph 15 above was no longer pending, but
still came to the determination that Plaintiff should remain
 at maximum custody for the reasons cited in the following
paragraph.
 
25. The committee found and concluded that Plaintiff
 
should remain at the classification of maximum custody due
to:
 
-
The nature and seriousness of his current
 
charges;
-The number and kind of his prior convictions;
-His extensive criminal history and numerous
periods of incarceration;

-His failure to comply with two residential drug
treatment programs;
-Leaving the state without permission while on
probation;
-His extradition to Hawaii; 
-The fact that [Gordon] was on probation when
charged with his current offenses;

-His $1,000,000.00 bail amount; and
 
-other factors identified in the committee's
 
Amended Notice of Programming Results.
 
26. The committee wrote further:

 
Comments:
 The Committee concurs with OISC Jail Initial Custody
instrument that classified Mr. GORDON as MAX and also
 recommends that he be housed accordingly at Halawa
High Security. The Committee deems MR. GORDON a
 high-risk inmate and also, a high flight risk. OCCC is
inappropriate housing for Mr. GORDON because OCCC is
not able to provide MR. GORDON with the high degree of
direct supervision that he requires.
 
27. Defendant Cho explained that an inmate who has
been classified as maximum custody needs more supervision by
the security staff, especially when he is out of his cell,
and the committee felt that that level of supervision for
Plaintiff could not be provided at OCCC.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
28. Defendant Cho testified credibly that she has
never had any malice or ill-will towards Plaintiff or would
knowingly violate Plaintiff's constitutional rights and
Plaintiff produced no evidence to the contrary.
 
. . . .
 
36. The [DPS] Classification Office makes the
definitive decision whether to reduce an inmate's custody
level.
 
37. In making this definitive decision, the [DPS]
Classification Office looks at the totality of the
circumstances. 
38. Linda Chun, retired [DPS] Classification
Officer, testified that on October 19, 2010, she disapproved
Plaintiff's Exception Case Form that would have reduced
Plaintiff to Medium custody.
 
39. Ms. Chun testified credibly that the reasons
provided for disapproval were that although Plaintiff's
behavior in the Holding Unit has been satisfactory thus far
this case still presents a number of risk factors. Current
charges are serious & violent in nature. As a result,
subject has a high bail amount. Subject has an extensive
criminal history & also has had numerous periods of
incarceration. Subject has failed to profit from previous
experience with probation and incarceration. Substance abuse
issues have not been addressed due to subject's discharge
from program for non-compliance with program rules. 
40. The Court found that Ms. Chun testified credibly
that a pretrial detainee can be held as maximum custody
based solely on their past behavior and criminal history.
 
41. Ms. Chun, based on her training and experience,
believed it is reasonable to house an inmate as a maximum
 security pretrial detainee based on the kinds of reasons and
considerations in paragraph 39 above and the Plaintiff
produced no evidence to the contrary.
 
42. By policy, if the Classification Office
disapproves a request for an exception case, the matter is
submitted to the deputy director for review.
 
43. Deputy Director of Corrections, Tommy Johnson,
testified that on October 21, 2010, he denied Plaintiff's
Exception Case Form that had been submitted on October 12,
2010, and stated that Plaintiff was to remain in Max
Custody.
 
44. Mr. Johnson testified that he did not perceive
Plaintiff's custody level as punishment.
 
. . . .

 
50. Defendants presented evidence that all MAX

Custody inmates, whether pretrial or not, are treated under
the same conditions as Plaintiff.
 
51. Defendant[s] also presented evidence that
Plaintiff was afforded additional benefits such as personal
calls that were not given to other inmates on the same
floor.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
55. The Court finds no evidence of any kind was
presented by Plaintiff in support of his claims against
Defendant Maesaka-Hirata.
 
(Circuit Court's record cites and internal quotation marks
 
omitted).
 
The FOFs/COLs include, inter alia, the following
 
conclusions of law:
 
15. The Court concludes that Plaintiff was subjected
to the same restrictions and conditions of the other maximum
 
custody inmates, whether pre-trial detainee or sentenced.
 
16. Based on the lack of substantive evidence
 
produced by the Plaintiff showing that Defendants
categorized him as a maximum custody pre-trial detainee
purely to impose punishment upon him, the Court concludes
that there was no infringement of his constitutional rights.
 
17. The Court further concludes that the Defendants'
 
conditions imposed upon individuals categorized as maximum
custody and, experienced by Plaintiff, is reasonably related
to a legitimate government objective which is to maintain a
safe and secure correctional facility.
 
18. The Court concludes that there was no evidence
 
produced by Plaintiff to prove by a preponderance of the
evidence that the conditions of maximum custody imposed by
Defendants to maintain a safe and secure correctional
 facility were excessive to accomplish such objective nor
expressly intended as punishment.
 
19. Based upon the credible testimony of Defendant
Cho and Mr. Rabacal, by submitting the Exception Form, the
Court concludes that Defendant Cho did comply with the
guidelines of the MAX Custody Memo.
 
20. Based on the totality of the facts, various
documents in evidence and credible trial testimony, and the
lack of any evidence to the contrary, the Court concludes
that the restrictions and conditions Plaintiff was subjected
to did not amount to punishment. Compare Bell v. Wolfish,
441 U.S. 520 (U.S. 1979) (holding that double-bunking,
body-cavity searches, the prohibition against the receipt of
packages, or the room search only rule did not amount to
punishment under the facts of the case), and Block v.
Rutherford, 468 U.S. 576 (U.S. 1984) (holding that a blanket
prohibition on contact visits with pretrial detainees and
shakedown searches of pretrial detainees' cells outside
their presence does not amount to punishment), with Anela v.
Wildwood, 790 F.2d 1063 (3d Cir. N.J. 1986) (holding that
failing to provide beds or mattresses and food and drinking
water amounted to punishment), and Demery v. Arpaio, 378
F.3d 1020, 1033 (9th Cir. Ariz. 2004) (holding that the
sheriff's policy of transmitting live images over the
internet of pretrial detainees by webcam was an excessive
response to the purpose assigned to it).
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
21. Based on the credible evidence presented by
Defendants and the lack of any evidence to the contrary,
Defendant Cho, in her individual capacity, has qualified
immunity from Plaintiff's 42 U.S.C. § 1983 claims because
she did not knowingly violate Plaintiff's Constitutional
rights and the Court concludes that Plaintiff did not suffer
Punishment.
 
. . . .
 
25. Based on the credible evidence presented by the
Defendants and the lack of evidence to the contrary, the
Court concludes that all Defendants acted reasonably in
considering other factors of Plaintiff's criminal history to
reach the conclusion that he should remain in maximum
 custody.
 
26. Based on the totality of the facts, documents in
evidence and the lack of any evidence to the contrary, the
plaintiff has not met its burden to demonstrate that SOH
and/or its employees breached its duty to act reasonably in
their classification procedure.
 
27. The Court concludes that Defendant Cho,
individually, is afforded the protections of a qualified
privilege as to Plaintiff's state law claims because
Plaintiff did not prove by clear and convincing evidence
that Defendant Cho was motivated by malice and not by an
otherwise proper purpose.
 
28. Based upon the above Findings of Fact and
Conclusions of Law, Judgment to be entered for Defendants
State of Hawaii, Petra Cho, and Jodie F. Maesaka-Hirata on
all claims.
 
On June 19, 2014, the Circuit Court entered the
 
Judgment in favor of Defendants the State, Cho, and Maesaka-
Hirata, and dismissed any and all remaining claims. On July 1,
 2014, Gordon timely filed a Notice of Appeal.
 II. POINTS OF ERROR

 
Gordon raises several points of error on appeal,
 
contending that the Circuit Court erred: (1) in finding that
 Gordon's initial custody level was calculated correctly and then
 relying upon this finding in determining that individual prison
 officials acted reasonably; (2) in finding that all Max Custody
 inmates, whether pretrial or not, are treated under the same
 conditions as Gordon, and then relying on this finding to
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclude that the restrictions and conditions that Gordon was
 
subjected to did not amount to punishment; (3) in concluding that
 there was no infringement of Gordon's constitutional rights
 because Gordon failed to produce substantial evidence showing
 that Defendants categorized Gordon as a maximum custody pre-trial
 detainee purely to impose punishment on him; (4) in concluding
 that the restrictions and conditions Gordon was subjected to did
 not amount to punishment; (5) in concluding that Cho, in her
 individual capacity, has qualified immunity from the 42 U.S.C.
 Section 1983 claims because she did not knowingly violate
 Gordon's constitutional rights and that Gordon did not suffer
 punishment; (6) in concluding that all Defendants acted
 reasonably in considering other factors of Gordon's criminal
 history to reach the conclusion that he should remain in Max
 Custody; (7) in concluding that Gordon has not met his burden to
 demonstrate that the State and or its employees breached their
 duty to act reasonably in their classification procedure; and (8)
 in concluding that Cho, in her individual capacity, is afforded
 the protections of a qualified privilege as to Gordon's state law
 claims because Gordon did not prove by clear and convincing
 evidence that Cho was motivated by malice or an otherwise
 improper purpose.
 III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
"[A] trial court's FOFs are subject to the clearly
 
erroneous standard of review. An FOF is clearly erroneous when,
 despite evidence to support the finding, the appellate court is
 left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
been committed." Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the Emps.' Ret. Sys. of 
the State of Hawai 'i, 106 Hawai 'i 416, 430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 
(2005) (internal quotation marks, citations, and ellipses 
omitted). "An FOF is also clearly erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding. [The Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court has] defined substantial evidence as credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Leslie v. Estate of Tavares, 91 Hawai
'i 394, 399, 984 P.2d 1220, 
1225 (1999) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). 
A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and is
freely reviewable for its correctness. [The appellate
court] ordinarily reviews COLs under the right/wrong
standard. Thus, a COL that is supported by the trial
court's FOFs and that reflects an application of the correct
rule of law will not be overturned. However, a COL that
presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under
the clearly erroneous standard because the court's
conclusions are dependent upon the facts and circumstances
of each individual case.
 
Chun, 106 Hawai 'i at 430, 106 P.3d at 353 (internal quotation 
marks, citations, and brackets omitted). 
"An appellate court will not pass upon the trial 
judge's decisions with respect to the credibility of witnesses 
and the weight of the evidence because this is the province of the trial judge." Porter v. Hu, 116 Hawai
'i 42, 60, 169 P.3d 
994, 1012 (App. 2007) (quoting State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai 'i 131, 
139, 913 P.2d 57, 65 (1996)). IV. DISCUSSION
 A. The Impact of the Initial Custody Classification
 Gordon recognizes that FOF 17, regarding the accuracy
 
of the initial custody calculation, is factually correct. Gordon
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argues, rather, that the Circuit Court erred because it relied
 
upon FOF 17 in determining that the individual prison officials
 acted reasonably in deciding the conditions of his pretrial
 custody. This argument is unconvincing.
 
In FOF 23, the Circuit Court found that "Defendant Cho 
testified credibly that the [C]ommittee took into consideration all aspects of Plaintiff's history, including his current offenses, prior convictions, and Plaintiff's statements." In FOF 24, the Circuit Court pointed to Cho's testimony that she and the Committee knew that the 2006 sexual assault charge was no longer pending, but nevertheless concluded that he should remain in Max Custody for the reasons articulated in the Classification Notice. In FOFs 25-27, the court identified the additional reasons stated by the Committee as to why they decided to keep Gordon in Max Custody, including, inter alia, his bail amount, his extradition to Hawai
'i, his leaving the state without permission while on 
probation, and his flight risk. As stated in the FOFs, after an Exception Case form was prepared with a recommended custody reclassification as Medium Custody, the DPS Classification Office disapproved it based on, inter alia, the violent nature of Gordon's charges, his extensive criminal record, the high bail amount, and unresolved substance abuse issues as reasons. 
The Circuit Court also found that Chun "testified
 
credibly that a pretrial detainee can be held as maximum custody
 based solely on their past behavior and criminal history," and
 that "based on her training and experience, [she] believed it is
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasonable to house an inmate as a maximum security pretrial
 
detainee" based on, inter alia, the nature of the current
 charges, bail amount, criminal history, failure to complete
 probation, and unaddressed substance abuse issues. As discussed
 above, the record demonstrates that both the Committee and the
 DPS Classification Office considered these factors in deciding to
 keep Gordon at Max Custody. 
These findings are well supported by the testimony and
 
other evidence in the record and constitute substantial evidence
 in support of the Circuit Court's conclusion that the individual
 prison officials acted reasonably in keeping Gordon in Max
 Custody.
 
B. Whether the Custody Conditions Constituted Punishment
 Gordon also recognizes that FOF 50, regarding the
 
consistency of the treatment of Max Custody inmates, is factually
 correct, but argues that the Circuit Court erred because it
 relied on FOF 50 in concluding that the restrictions and
 conditions of Gordon's confinement did not constitute punishment. 
The gravamen of Gordon's argument, however, is that he should not
 have been held in Max Custody and, therefore, doing so
 constituted punishment. This argument is not well-founded.
 
The Circuit Court concluded, in COLs 15-18, that Gordon
 
produced no evidence that the conditions of his pre-trial
 detainment were imposed as punishment; rather, the evidence led
 to the conclusion that the conditions were reasonably related to
 legitimate government objectives related to the safety and
 
19
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
security of the correctional facilities and that they were not
 
excessive for that purpose. Gordon cites no evidence or legal
 authority that his Max Custody classification constituted
 punishment, and instead notes that a Medium level classification
 would have included a number of improvements to his prison life. 
We recognize the important principle that corrections officials
 must not act or fail to act in a manner constituting punishment
 of a pretrial detainee. However, on the totality of the record
 of this case, we cannot conclude that the Circuit Court erred in
 determining that Gordon's Max Custody did not constitute pre­trial punishment.
 
C. The Classification Procedures and Due Process
 Gordon contends that the Circuit Court wrongly
 
concluded that there was no infringement of his constitutional
 rights and that the court erred by disregarding the substantial
 evidence presented at trial which demonstrated the arbitrary and
 capricious manner in which his classification was handled. He
 
argues that prison "policies and regulations may create a liberty
 
interest should they 'impose atypical and significant hardship[s]
 on the inmate in relation to the ordinary incidents of prison
 life.'" Estate of DiMarco v. Wyo. Dept. of Corrections, 473
 
F.3d 1334, 1339 (10th Cir. 2007) (quoting Sandin v. Connor, 515
 U.S. 472, 484 (1995)). He further argues that "[c]onditions of
 incarceration that are harsh, arbitrary, and unrelated to a
 legitimate governmental objective constitute punishment as does
 compelling detainees to 'endure genuine privations and hardship
 
20
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
over an extended period of time.'" Anela v. City of Wildwood,
 
790 F.2d 1063, 1069 (3d Cir. 1986) (quoting Bell v. Wolfish, 441
 
U.S. 520, 538, 542 (1979)). 
As support for his argument that Defendants' actions
 
and decisions were arbitrary, Gordon points to his "placement in
 solitary confinement . . . with the knowledge that [he] was
 initially misclassified" and the failure of prison officials to
 "exercise reasonable care in properly correcting any
 misclassifications according to [the] policies and practices
 delineated in the [ACLU Arrangement]" as evidence of a denial of
 due process. He additionally notes that his "eventual
 reclassification" was because of a request by HCF's deputy
 warden, rather than in accordance with any regular review
 process. 
In Bell, the United States Supreme Court held that
 
"pretrial detainees, who have not been convicted of any crimes,
 retain at least those constitutional rights that we have held are
 enjoyed by convicted prisoners," but "these rights are [] subject
 to restrictions and limitations." 441 U.S. at 545. "A
 [pretrial] detainee simply does not possess the full range of
 freedoms of an unincarcerated individual. . . . There must be a
 mutual accommodation between institutional needs and objectives
 and the provisions of the Constitution that are of general
 application." Id. at 545-46. The court further held that
 
maintaining institutional security and preserving internal
order and discipline are essential goals that may require
limitation or retraction of the retained constitutional
 
21
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rights of both convicted prisoners and pretrial detainees.
Central to all other corrections goals is the institutional
consideration of internal security within the corrections
facilities themselves. Prison officials must be free to
 take appropriate action to ensure the safety of inmates and
corrections personnel and to prevent escape or unauthorized
entry. Accordingly, we have held that even when an
institutional restriction infringes a specific
constitutional guarantee, such as the First Amendment, the
practice must be evaluated in the light of the central
objective of prison administration, safeguarding
institutional security.
. . . [T]he problems that arise in the day-to-day
operation of a corrections facility are not susceptible of
easy solutions. Prison administrators therefore should be
accorded wide-ranging deference in the adoption and
execution of policies and practices that in their judgment
are needed to preserve internal order and discipline and to
maintain institutional security. Such considerations are
 peculiarly within the province and professional expertise of
corrections officials, and, in the absence of substantial
evidence in the record to indicate that the officials have
 exaggerated their response to these considerations, courts
should ordinarily defer to their expert judgment in such
matters.
 
Id. at 546-48 (internal citations, footnotes, brackets, and
 
quotation marks omitted). 
This court has previously held:
 
[P]risoners do enjoy constitutional protections, although
subject to restrictions imposed by the nature of the penal
system. Prisoners do retain the procedural due process
right not to be deprived of a liberty interest without
reasonable notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard.
However, they retain only a narrow range of protected
liberty interests, and the adequacy of the procedural
protection is flexible and variable dependent upon the
particular situation being examined.
 
Wilder v. Tanouye , 7 Haw. App. 247, 255, 753 P.2d 816, 822 (1988)
 
(citations, brackets, ellipses, and quotation marks omitted). 
Other courts have held that "a prisoner has no
 
constitutional right to a particular classification status." 
See, e.g., Hernandez v. Johnston , 833 F.2d 1316, 1318 (9th Cir.
 
1987). The Supreme Court in Bell held that "[i]n evaluating the
 
constitutionality of conditions or restrictions of pretrial
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
detention that implicate only the protection against deprivation
 
of liberty without due process of law, . . . the proper inquiry
 is whether those conditions amount to punishment of the
 detainee." 441 U.S. at 535. The court noted a "distinction
 between punitive measures that may not constitutionally be
 imposed prior to a determination of guilt[,] and regulatory
 restraints that may." Id. at 537. Thus, while Gordon has no
 
constitutional right to a certain classification, he possesses a
 right to be free from punishment prior to an adjudication of
 guilt.
 
A court must then decide whether the condition is
 
imposed for the purpose of punishment or whether it is but an
 incident of some other legitimate governmental purpose. Bell,
 
441 U.S. at 538. In evaluating whether particular restrictions
 and conditions accompanying pretrial detention amount to
 punishment in the constitutional sense of the word, a court must
 look to whether the restrictions evince a punitive purpose or
 intent. Clouthier v. Cty. of Contra Costa, 591 F.3d 1232, 1242
 
(9th Cir. 2010), overruled on other grounds by Castro v. Cty. of
 Los Angeles, 833 F.3d 1060 (9th Cir. 2016). Absent an express
 intent to punish, the court must then consider whether punitive
 intent can be inferred from the nature of the restriction. The
 determination will generally turn upon 
[w]hether the sanction involves an affirmative disability or
restraint, whether it has historically been regarded as a
punishment, whether it comes into play only on a finding of
scienter, whether its operation will promote the traditional
aims of punishment-retribution and deterrence, whether the
behavior to which it applies is already a crime, whether an
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
alternative purpose to which it may rationally be connected
is assignable for it, and whether it appears excessive in
relation to the alternative purpose assigned[.]
 
Bell, 441 U.S. at 537-38. 
Here, the record shows that the Committee met with
 
Gordon, reviewed his case, and recommended that he remain in Max
 
Custody. This recommendation was based on safety and security
 concerns. The Committee, thereafter, reevaluated Gordon's
 classification, pursuant to the Rabacal Memo, and recommended to
 the DPS Classification Office that it be changed to Medium
 custody. However, the DPS Classification Office and Deputy
 Director Tommy Johnson denied the recommendation, based on many
 of the same concerns initially expressed by the Committee. 
Accordingly, we conclude the Circuit Court did not err in finding
 and concluding that the classification decisions made by the
 Committee and the DPS Classification Office were based on the
 legitimate government objective to maintain a safe and secure
 correction facility.
 
Gordon has not shown any evidence of a punitive purpose
 
or intent. See Clouthier, 591 F.3d at 1242. He has not shown
 
that Max Custody classifications "come[] into play only on a
 finding of scienter." See Bell, 441 U.S. at 537-38. He has not
 
shown no "alternative purpose to which it may rationally be
 connected is assignable for it" or that his classification is
 "excessive in relation to the alternative purpose assigned." See
 
id. at 538. Additionally, Gordon failed to establish that the
 procedure detailed in the ACLU Arrangement is guaranteed to him,
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or that it somehow supersedes the "wide-ranging deference"
 
accorded to prison officials "in their judgment" that is "needed
 to preserve internal order and discipline and to maintain
 institutional security." Id. at 547. Gordon has not shown that
 
his confinement in Max Custody was arbitrary, purposeless,
 intended as a punishment, or unrelated to a "legitimate
 nonpunitive governmental objective." Id. at 538, 561. Further,
 
because he has not shown that his classification was intended as
 a punishment, he has not shown that he was deprived of due
 process for being punished prior to an adjudication of guilt. 
See id. at 535; Superintendent v. Hill, 472 U.S. 445, 454 (1985). 
The reasons for keeping Gordon in Max Custody were
 
clearly articulated and appear to be related to the legitimate
 nonpunitive governmental objective of security and safety. 
Gordon has not shown that he was subject to an arbitrary action
 of government. See also Wolff v. McDonnell, 418 U.S. 539, 558
 
(1974). 
Gordon's eventual reclassification to a Medium custody
 
level is not inconsistent with this conclusion. According to
 Lortz's testimony at trial, every Max Custody inmate, whether
 pretrial or sentenced, is reassessed once a year. Although
 Gordon's classification was re-evaluated after only eight months,
 an early review did not cause him any harm and does not
 demonstrate a denial of due process rights. 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
 
holding that Gordon's due process rights were not violated.
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D.	 Cho's Qualified Immunity
 
On the issue of qualified immunity or privilege, the

 
supreme court has held that
 
non-judicial governmental officials, when acting in the
performance of their public duty, enjoy the protection of
what has been termed a qualified or conditional privilege.
This privilege effectively shields the official from
liability, and not from the imposition of the suit itself,
to the extent that the privilege is not abused and thereby
lost. Hence, . . . in order for an action to lie against an
official acting under a claim of privilege, it is essential
that the injured party allege and prove, to the requisite
degree, that the official had been motivated by malice and
not by an otherwise proper purpose. 
Towse v. State, 64 Haw. 624, 632-33, 647 P.2d 696, 702 (1982) 
(citations omitted). Here, Gordon argues that, under Awakuni v. Awana, 115 Hawai
'i 126, 165 P.3d 1027 (2007), the Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court looked to Black's Law Dictionary for the definition of "malice," in the context of qualified immunity for public officials, and noted that one of the definitions provided is "reckless disregard of the law or of a person's legal rights." Id. at 141, 165 P.3d at 1042 (quoting Black's Law Dictionary 976 (8th ed. 2004)). 
Gordon's argument for relief, however, is based on his
 
contention that his classification was mishandled and that the
 classification procedures clearly constituted a reckless
 disregard of his rights. This argument is without merit. Gordon
 had no right to a particular security classification. In each of
 the classification review proceedings that recommended Max
 Custody, Cho and the other Defendants articulated legitimate
 government reasons for their decisions. We reject Gordon's
 argument that the Circuit Court's conclusion that the Defendants
 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
were not motivated by malice relies solely on self-serving
 
remarks of the Defendant prison officials; rather, the Circuit
 Court's conclusion was based on Gordon's failure to meet his
 burden under Towse to establish that Cho was motivated by malice
 or an otherwise improper purpose. We conclude that the Circuit
 Court did not err in this regard.
 V. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's June 19, 2014
 
Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 30, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
Eric A. Seitz, 
Della A. Belatti,
Sarah R. Devine,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Caron M. Inagaki,

Kendall J. Moser,
Deputy Attorneys General,
for Defendants-Appellees, JODIE F. MAESAKA-HIRATA,
PETRO CHO, and STATE OF HAWAII.
 
27
 