 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000369 22-FEB-2024 07:45 AM Dkt. 72 SO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000369 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI#I 
IN THE INTEREST OF M.J. 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-S NO. 19-00279) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Hiraoka and McCullen, JJ.)  
Guardian Ad Litem-Appellant Court Appointed Special 
Advocates Program (
CASA) appeals from the Findings and Orders 
Concerning Child Protective Act, entered on May 5, 2022 (May 5, 
2022 Order), which denies CASA's March 11, 2022 Reconsideration and/or Motion for Relief from the Findings and Orders Concerning 
Child Protective Act. CASA also challenges the Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law entered on August 11, 2022 (FOFs/COLs) in 
the Family Court of the First Circuit for the State of Hawai# i 
(Family Court).
1 
M.J. (Child) was born in mid-2018. On November 19, 
2019, Child entered foster care. On November 22, 2019, Appellee 
1 The Honorable John C. Bryant, Jr., presided.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Department of Human Services (DHS) filed a Petition for Temporary 
Foster Custody of Child (Petition) due in part to Appellee-Father's (Father's) alleged noncompliance with required sex-offender treatment. On the same day, DHS filed a Family Service 
Plan recommending Father comply with court-ordered sex offender treatment and Hawaii's Opportunity Probation and Enforcement (HOPE) probation, among other things. 
On December 4, 2019, the Family Court awarded DHS with 
foster custody over Child and Appellee-Mother and Father were permitted "reasonable supervised or unsupervised visitation" with Child at DHS and CASA's discretion. On October 20, 2021, and October 21, 2021, the Family Court held an evidentiary hearing (October 2021 Hearings) on (1) an Order to Show Cause why the DHS 
shall not submit a Motion to Terminate Parental Rights or 
Petition for Guardianship, and (2) Father's request for family supervision. At the October 2021 Hearings, Dr. Joseph Giovannoni (Dr. Giovannoni), a qualified expert in sexual abuse treatment, 
testified that he treated Father through the Adult Probation 
Special Services Branch (APS). Dr. Giovannoni testified, inter 
alia, that he did not clinically discharge Father, but Dr. 
Giovannoni closed the case with Father because Father made the choice to go to another program. 
The Family Court continued the hearing to February 8, 
2022 (February 8, 2022 Hearing) and, inter alia, continued foster 
custody of Child. In conjunction with the hearing, the Family Court considered additional argument and evidence, including further testimony from DHS Social Worker Renee San Nicolas (San 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nicolas), Acting Chief Program Officer at Child and Family 
Services Amanda Pump (Pump), and Brandi Lawrence (Lawrence), who had qualified as experts in the field of sex offender treatment. 
A November 23, 2021 Supplemental Safe Family Home Report to Court indicated that Father was to receive a "maximum benefits" discharge and not a "clinical discharge" because he has not admitted to/taken responsibility for the sexual offenses for which he had been convicted. The Family Court specifically stated it was proceeding on the basis that the sex abuse had occurred, but that based on assessments and testimony, Father was at low risk. The Family Court found it would be unfairly prejudicial to Father to change treatment programs, as then requested by DHS and CASA. At the end of the February 8, 2022 Hearing, based upon the credible testimony of the witnesses, exhibits entered into evidence and the parties' arguments, the Family Court found that there was "absolutely no evidence" that there were different recidivism rates for clinical discharge and maximum benefits discharge, so "there was no evidence whatsoever that maximum benefit versus clinical discharge is any better than the other." The court ordered that Father receive a two-hour unsupervised visit with Child once a week, and set up a periodic review hearing. 
A March 11, 2022 Order stated, in relevant part, as 
follows: 
C RENEE SAN NICOLAS was qualified to testify as an
expert in the field on child welfare/protectiveservices under the HRS ยง587A-19, the Hawaii Rules ofEvidence, Rule 702, and based on her education,training and experience; 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
D AMANDA PUMP was qualified to testify as an expert in
the field on sexual abuse treatment under the Hawaii Rules of Evidence, Rule 702, based on her education,training, and experience; 
E BRANDI LAWRENCE was qualified to testify as an expertin the field on sexual offender therapy under theHawaii Rules of Evidence, Rule 702, based on hereducation, training, and experience; 
F The witnesses testified credibly and their testimonywas helpful to the Court, however none of thewitnesses knew the recidivism rate of sexual offenders who receive a non-clinical discharge, clinicaldischarge, or a maximum benefit discharge; i.e., it isunknown whether one type of discharge is moreeffective than the other and judicial notice is notappropriate to determine that issue; 
G [Father] is a convicted sex offender and as a resultof his convictions for Sexual Assaults in the second,third and fourth degrees, is registered as a sexoffender and the Court must proceed in this case as ifthe sexual abuse committed by [Father], but denied byhim, actually occurred; 
. . . . 
I BRANDI LAWRENCE testified that [Father] cannot receive
a clinical discharge from her treatment without anadmission to the sexual offenses for which he was convicted, but [Father] may receive a maximum benefitdischarge from her treatment by completing thetreatment to address his problems to the extentpossible; 
. . . . 
K The Court concludes that it would be unfairly
prejudicial to [Father] to require him to starttreatment with a new provider at this point in thecase, when the child's date of entry into foster carewas November 19, 2019, and treatment with a DHS sexabuse treatment provider would take at least two (2)years from date of entry[.] 
. . . . 
2 The request for [Father] to enter treatment with a DHS
contracted provider for sex offender treatment isdenied; 
. . . . 
8 The issue regarding the psychological evaluation for
[Father] is reserved[.] 
On March 21, 2022, CASA filed a Motion for 
Reconsideration and/or Motion for Relief from the [March 11, 2022 
Order] (Motion for Reconsideration). CASA argued, inter alia, 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the Family Court improperly researched and considered 
recidivism rates in its decision. The Family Court explained that it was important to determine whether Father should be required to transfer programs and complete an additional two years of treatment before he could have limited unsupervised visitation with Child. The Family Court stated that it was unable to determine whether or not it could take judicial notice concerning whether clinical discharge was more beneficial and produced a lower rate of recidivism as compared to maximum benefits discharge. The Family Court then clarified that: 
Even if that research was improper, the court was left
with the same conclusion at the end of its research that it 
had at trial, and that there was no evidence as to thedifference between the two programs. In other words, thesame conclusion was reached whether or not the court did its own research or not. 
In a May 5, 2022 Order, the Family Court ruled that its 
"efforts to determine the efficacy of taking judicial notice of 
the differences, if any, between a clinical discharge and a maximum benefit discharge was appropriate - especially since both CASA and DHS failed to produce such critical evidence." 
On May 31, 2022, CASA filed a notice of appeal. On appeal, CASA challenges the Family Court's FOFs 24, 
30 and 55, and COLs 4, 10, 11, 13, and 14 set forth in the FOFs/COLs;  and contends that the Family Court erred in refusing 
to order Father to submit to a psychological evaluation. The contested FOFs and COLs are as follows: 
2
24. In mid-2021, the DHS and the CASA learned that a
"maximum benefit" discharge from Father's sex offender
treatment was acceptable to be in compliance with the terms 
2 CASA also challenges the corresponding findings and conclusions
set form in the May 5, 2022 Order and the March 11, 2022 Order. 
5  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of Father's probation when clinical discharge from sex
offender treatment had previously been requested. 
. . . . 
30. None of the sex offender treatment experts were
able to testify that the recidivism rates between a "maximum
benefit" treatment program and a "clinical discharge"program were any different. In other words, none of the sexoffender treatment experts were able to testify that a"clinical discharge" program was better for Father ratherthan a "maximum discharge" program. 
. . . . 
55. Based upon the credible expert testimony of the
DHS social worker RENEE SAN NICOLAS, the problems preventing
FATHER from being able to provide a safe home for the Childis his sexual abuse history and lack of appropriateparenting ability. 
. . . . 4. AMANDA PUMP was qualified to testify as an expert in
the field of sexual abuse treatment under the Hawaii Rules of Evidence Rule 702 based on her education,training, and experience. 
. . . . 
Visitation 
10. Based on the credible testimony of the BRANDI LAWRENCEthat the period between when the STABLE 2007 test wasadministered in November 2021 and the trial in February 2022, that father has made improvements inthe areas of Poor Problem Solving and NegativeEmotionality/Hostility, it is a reasonable conclusionthat at the time of the February 8, 2022 trial, Fatherposed a low risk or criminogenic need and may bepermitted limited unsupervised visitation with theChild to be arranged at the discretion of the DHS andin consultation with the CASA/GAL. 
Sex Offender Treatment for Father 
11. Father is on probation for his sexual assaultconvictions and is required to participate in sexoffender treatment through probation resulting fromthat conviction. Since April 2021, Father has beenengaged in sex offender treatment through probationand has been making progress. The evidence presentedat trial was that if Father started a new sex offender program, that program would take an additional twoyears to complete. It would be prejudicial and unfairto Father to require him to start treatment with a newprovider at this point in the case, when the child'sdate of entry into foster care was November 19, 2019. 
. . . . 
13. It was appropriate for the Court, in light of the non-
existence of the evidence supporting the issue of whythe Court should order a "clinical discharge" sex 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
offender treatment program, as requested by CASA and
DHS, to attempt to take judicial notice of the fact. 
14. The Court was unable to take judicial notice of the
contested fact. 
As such, the Court was left with the
same evidentiary set of facts that was in existencewhen the Court undertook its independent investigationinto the issue: there was no evidence to supportCASA's and DHS' position that a "clinical discharge"program was better than a "maximum discharge" programin regards to Father's treatment. As such, even ifnot appropriate, the Court's independent investigationwas harmless error. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve CASA's points of error as follows: 
(1) CASA argues that FOF 24 is clearly erroneous 
because San Nicolas testified that she learned Father's HOPE probation sex offender treatment program would be okay with maximum benefits discharge "right before trial in October" and not "mid-2021." 
San Nicolas testified that she learned, right before 
the 
October 2021 Hearings, that "probation [APS] would be okay 
with maximum benefit." This could reasonably be construed as part of the (broad) middle of the year 2021. It appears that the point was that she did not know this early in the case; it is clear that the Family Court understood that. We cannot conclude that FOF 24 is clearly erroneous. 
CASA argues that FOF 30 is clearly erroneous because 
the expert testimony effectively showed that clinical discharge is better than maximum benefits discharge. However, Pump, who qualified as an expert on sex abuse treatment and child welfare, testified that clinical discharge differs from maximum benefits 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
discharge because clinical discharge requires completion of all 
elements of treatment, including an admission of the prior sex offense, whereas maximum benefits discharge does not. Pump testified, inter alia, that admitting to the sexual abuse offense helps reduce recidivism because it helps the offender "understand why he committed the abuse and how to prevent the abuses." In response to questions from the Family Court, Pump testified that she did not know the recidivism rates for, inter alia, clinical discharge or maximum benefits discharge. It is clear from the record that the Family Court considered the risk of recidivism, i.e., that Father would reoffend, as a highly important factor in deciding whether or not to allow Father unsupervised visitation with Child. 
Lawrence, who was qualified as an expert in sex 
offender treatment, had treated Father and testified that she would not clinically discharge Father because he did not admit to the underlying offense. Lawrence testified that she did not know the recidivism rates for maximum benefits or clinical discharge, could not offer an opinion on Father's risk of reoffending and stated that "it is really difficult to answer that because not all programs give out clinical discharge." Lawrence observed that maximum benefits discharge did not involve having the clients admit to the offense while clinical discharge involves admission. Lawrence did not testify that one treatment program was better than the other. 
The other experts, Dr. Giovannoni and San Nicolas, did 
not know the difference in outcomes between clinical and maximum 
8  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
benefits discharge nor Father's risk of reoffending. According 
to the November 23, 2021 Supplemental Safe Family Home Report to 
Court prepared by San Nicolas, Father was set to receive maximum benefits discharge because he did not admit to the sexual abuse offense. Dr. Giovannoni testified that he usually issues maximum benefits discharge in court-ordered treatment. San Nicolas, on the other hand, testified that DHS recommended clinical discharge for Father so he could "acknowledge and accept responsibility" for the offense, contrary to the maximum benefits discharge provided by APS where Father does not need to admit to the offense. San Nicolas further testified that she did not know 
whether an offender could receive appropriate sex offender 
treatment without admitting to the underlying offense. 
Based on the evidence in the record before the Family 
Court, we cannot conclude that the Family Court clearly erred in entering FOF 30. 
CASA argues that FOF 55 is clearly erroneous because 
Father's alleged refusal to participate in a psychological 
evaluation is a reason that Father could not provide a safe home 
for Child, not just his "child sexual abuse history and lack of appropriate parenting ability." 
San Nicolas testified that Father had not participated 
in a psychological evaluation as part of DHS' new service plan. San Nicolas did not testify that this prevented him from providing a safe home for Child. San Nicolas did not testify that the lack of this evaluation had a correlation to Father's 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
inability to provide a safe home. Thus, we conclude that CASA's 
challenge to FOF 55 is without merit. 
CASA argues that the Circuit Court erred in entering 
COL 4 because Pump was qualified as an expert in sexual abuse treatment, child abuse and neglect, not just sexual abuse treatment. While the record reflects that the Family Court qualified Pump as an expert in child abuse, neglect and sexual abuse treatment, COL 4 is not wrong. At worst, it is incomplete. However, the disputed issue here is sexual abuse treatment and COL 4 correctly states that Pump was qualified as an expert in sexual abuse treatment. 
CASA alleges that COL 10 is incorrect because Father 
still poses a danger to Child and therefore the threatened harm to Child is substantial and irreparable. It appears that COL 10 is based, inter alia, on FOF 32, which found that Father participated in STABLE 2007 Risk Assessment with Lawrence, and Father scored in the "lower end of the moderate range of criminogenic needs" and Lawrence testified Father improved in "Poor Problem Solving" and "Negative Emotionality/Hostility." (The higher end of the range is problematic.) The Family Court found Lawrence's expert testimony, which is the basis for unchallenged FOF 32, to be credible. CASA has failed to demonstrate that COL is wrong or that, as a result of that conclusion, the Family Court abused its discretion in allowing Father limited unsupervised visits with Child. 
CASA alleges that COL 11 is wrong because it was 
Father's fault for prolonging his separation from Child and it 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was wrong for the Family Court to conclude that Father's 
transition to DHS-provided treatment would take an additional two years. As to the additional period of time, COL 11 relies upon Pump's testimony, which the Family Court determined to be credible. Pump testified that on average, it takes DHS clients about two years to complete DHS's preferred sexual abuse treatment. CASA argues that in COL 11, the Family Court put Father's interests ahead of Child's best interests and did not consider Father's own actions in its decision. This argument is inconsistent with the FOFs and COLs as a whole. The Family Court found no credible evidence was presented that the newly recommended treatment requiring that Father admit prior sexual abuse would provide a better outcome, and pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes Chapter 587A, there is in effect an outer limit of time for potential reunification. We cannot conclude that the Family Court erred or abused its discretion in COL 11. 
CASA argues that COL 13 was erroneous because it was 
improper for the Family Court to research recidivism rates sua sponte and because the Family Court did not notify the parties prior to conducting the research. A sua sponte decision to take 
judicial notice of an adjudicative fact constitutes an exercise of a court's discretion. State v. Kotis
, 91 Hawai#i 319, 328-29, 
984 P.2d 78, 87-88 (1999) (citing Rule 201(c) of the Hawai# i 
Rules of Evidence). "Judicial notice or knowledge may be defined as the cognizance of certain facts which judges and jurors may properly take and act upon without proof because they already know them." 
State v. Herrera
, 63 Haw. 405, 408, 629 P.2d 626, 
11   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
629 (1981) (citations omitted). However, the Family Court did 
not take judicial notice of the research it conducted on recidivism rates because it could not determine whether recidivism rates were appropriate for judicial notice, and stated that the court's research did not affect its decisions. 
The Family Court found and concluded that there was no 
evidence of recidivism rates presented by the parties, and the court did not take judicial notice of any such fact. Thus, even 
if it was improper for the Family Court to conduct such research, 
we conclude that it was harmless error under the circumstances here. 
CASA alleges that COL 14 is wrong because Pump's and 
Lawrence's testimony demonstrated that clinical discharge is better than maximum benefits discharge. However, as discussed above, the court weighed the evidence in the record and found that it did not support a conclusion that clinical discharge is necessarily better than maximum benefits discharge. In light of the lack of evidence demonstrating that clinical discharge is better than maximum benefits discharge, we conclude that CASA's argument is without merit. 
CASA alleges that the Family Court erred in refusing to 
order Father to submit to a psychological evaluation. We review the Family Court's decision for an abuse of discretion. In re 
Doe
, 95 Hawai#i 183, 189, 20 P.3d 616, 622 (2001). The Family 
Court determined that Father's service plan would continue to require Father to participate in and comply with APS' sex offender treatment but reserved the psychological evaluation 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
issue at the February 8, 2022 hearing.  We cannot conclude that 
the Family Court abused its discretion in deferring the issue of 
a psychological evaluation. 
For these reasons, the Family Court's May 5, 2022 Order 
is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 22, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Acting Chief Judge
Brandon K. Eugenio,(Arakaki & Eugenio, LLLC), 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Guardian Ad Litem-Appellant, Associate JudgeCourt-Appointed Special Advocates
Program. /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullenAssociate Judge
Herbert Y. Hamada,for Father-Appellee. 
13 