  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000005
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ENE JENNINGS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-1040)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Ene Jennings (Jennings) appeals
 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered December 6,
 
1
2010, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court). 
A jury found Jennings guilty on two counts of sexual assault in
 
the fourth degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
2
§ 707-733(1)(a) (1993)  and he was sentenced to one year of
incarceration.
 
1
 The Honorable Michael D. Wilson presided. 
2
 HRS § 707-733(1)(a) (1993) provides in relevant part:
 
§707-733 Sexual assault in the fourth degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of sexual assault in the fourth degree if:
(a) The person knowingly subjects another person to sexual contact
by compulsion or causes another person to have sexual contact with the
actor by compulsion[.]
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On July 8, 2009, the State of Hawai' i (State) filed a 
complaint charging Jennings with two counts of sexual assault in 
the fourth degree and one count of open lewdness stemming from an 
incident that occurred April 9, 2008 involving Jennings and 
Complainant Witness (CW). Jennings allegedly masturbated in 
front of CW then grabbed her breasts and genitalia. CW reported 
the incident to the Honolulu Police Department (HPD) on April 15, 
2008. On July 10, 2008, an HPD police detective (police 
detective) videotaped CW's statement (videotape). 
On appeal, Jennings contends the circuit court erred 
in: 
(1) allowing the police detective's videotape into
 
evidence without redacting inadmissible hearsay and prejudicial
 
elements;
 
(2) not having the jury view the videotape in open
 
court;
 
(3) not having the jury view the videotape although it
 
was admitted into evidence; and
 
(4) not providing the jury with a limiting instruction
 
regarding the limited purpose of the videotape and witness
 
testimony.
 
I.
 
The jury trial commenced April 1, 2010, and during
 
Jennings's cross examination of CW, Jennings sought to introduce
 
portions of the videotape to impeach CW. The State objected. 
The circuit court advised Jennings to continue questioning CW
 
about the videotape while the circuit court considered whether
 
the videotape would be shown. Jennings continued his cross
 
examination, and at recess, the circuit court advised the State
 
and Jennings to come to an agreement about use of the videotape
 
during trial.
 
After recess, following a lengthy discussion in which
 
the State and Jennings disagreed as to which portions of the
 
2
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
videotape should be shown to the jury, the circuit court
 
instructed Jennings to continue cross examination, and during the
 
3
lunch recess,  the State and Jennings were to come to an
agreement on which portions would be submitted into evidence. 
After the lunch recess, the cross examination continued with no
 
further discussion of the videotape. Before adjourning for the
 
day, the circuit court instructed the jury regarding the
 
videotape stating: "By stipulation or agreement between the
 
parties, a portion of the [videotape] will be admitted into
 
evidence for your viewing during deliberations."
 
On the next trial day, Jennings again brought the issue
 
of the videotape before the circuit court, asking to allow the
 
jury to see two portions in the courtroom and objecting to the
 
State's request to allow the entire videotape into evidence. The
 
State contended that both parties reached an agreement to allow
 
the entire videotape to be shown during jury deliberations. 
After a lengthy discussion, the circuit court agreed to allow the
 
entire videotape into evidence (minus a portion of the videotape
 
that discusses an incident between CW and Jennings's wife) which
 
would be made available to the jury during deliberations.
 
The record is unclear as to whether the jury viewed the
 
videotape, or any part thereof.4 The record is also unclear as
 
to whether the circuit court viewed the videotape. 
II. 
The appellate court applies "two different standards of
 
review in addressing evidentiary issues. Evidentiary rulings are
 
3
 The discussion between Jennings and the State is not on the record. 
4
 Jennings and the State agree the record is silent as to what the
jury may or may not have viewed. The record contains one jury communication
unrelated to the viewing of the videotape. After the circuit court dismissed
 the jury for deliberation, the circuit court informed Jennings and the State
that the bailiff would communicate with the jury to let them know the
videotape is available "when and if" they want to review the evidence. The
 circuit court also clarified that the videotape would remain with the court
until such time as the jury requests the bailiff to show the videotape. No
 such jury communication is in the record. 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reviewed for abuse of discretion, unless application of the rule 
admits of only one correct result, in which case review is under 
the right/wrong standard." State v. Ortiz, 91 Hawai' i 181, 189, 
981 P.2d 1127, 1135 (1999) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). 
III. 
Jennings questioned CW regarding her statements on the
 
videotape, and CW denied making the statements or could not
 
recall such statements. The exchange was as follows:
 
[Defense counsel]: [L]et's go back to April 15th when you
gave your statement. You said that on April 10th, 2008, you
confronted Mr. Jennings, right?
 
[Prosecutor]: Objection, Your Honor. That is not –
 
The Court: Objection's overruled.
 The Interpreter: Yes, that's true because I cannot
control my emotions.
 
[Defense Counsel]: Okay. What you said though is that
you confronted him but failed to settle things, right?
 
[CW]: He apologized to me.
 
[Defense Counsel]: Hold on right there. My question
to you is on April 10th, 2008, you confronted Mr. Jennings trying
to settle things?
 
. . . . 
The Interpreter: He told me he was sorry and he asked for an
apology. 
. . . . 
[Defense counsel]: Let's go to April 10th, 2008. You 
confronted Mr. Jennings, right?
 
[CW]: Yes.
 
[Defense counsel]: Okay. And you said - - actually, you
say you confronted him in your statement on July 15th. Now on 
July 10th of 2008, you told [the police detective] that Mr.
Jennings told you he was sorry that he didn't pick up your dad,
correct?
 
[CW]: He apologized not for my father, he apologized
because of what he did to me.
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Defense Counsel]: Okay. [The police detective] asked you,
Sorry about what, right?
 
[CW]: About what happened to me. 
[Defense Counsel]: Okay. And what was your response to him
was I don't know, maybe what happened, right?
 
[CW]: No, he said I'm sorry for what happened yesterday.
 [Defense Counsel]: If I were to play you your tape
recording interview with [the police detective] from July 10th,
2008, would that be the same to what you just testified?
 
. . . . 
[Defense Counsel]: That's not what you told [the police
detective] on July 10th, 2008, correct?
 
[CW]: I really don't remember because I was so nervous
during that time and I can't remember what I said.
 
. . . . 
[Defense Counsel]: And when you described how he
was touching you during the interview, you laughed and said my
husband was upset when he heard about that, and you laughed,
right?
 
. . . .
 
The Interpreter: I did not laugh. I was afraid that my
husband might construe it that we have a relationship with each
other. 
[Defense Counsel]: Okay. And, Your Honor, with that,
now I would like to introduce that segment of the interview for
impeachment purposes.
 
[Prosecutor]: And, Your Honor, state - - this is improper
impeachment. She has noted the question.
 
The Court: I'll take your request under consideration. And 
you can proceed.
 
. . . .
 
[Defense Counsel]: Okay. And you told [the police
detective] that Mr. Jennings didn't hit you, but pretended to hit
you, right?
 
[CW]: He did not hit me but his hand made contact to my
face like this. 
[Defense Counsel]: Okay. So there was contact?
 
[CW]: Yes, and we were beside the pickup.
 [Defense Counsel]: But you told [the police detective]
there was no contact?
 
5
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . . 
The Interpreter: I felt the contact but it did not hurt that
much.
 
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, again, I would like to
introduce that portion of the statement taped interview with
[the police detective] for impeachment purposes. 
[Prosecutor]: And the [State] would be objecting. This is 
improper impeachment. She answered the question.
 
The Court: All right. I'll take your request under
advisement to use the videotaped interview; is that correct?
 
[Defense Counsel]: Yes, Your Honor.
 
Jennings argues the jury was presented with
 
prejudicial, inadmissible hearsay on the videotape. Jennings
 
argues the jury should have been shown only the two portions of
 
the videotape relating to CW's impeachment on prior inconsistent
 
5
statements. The State asserts the completeness doctrine  allowed
for the entire video to be entered into evidence. The circuit
 
court allowed the entire video into evidence with the redaction
 
of a small portion disclosing an unrelated incident between CW
 
and Jennings's wife.
 
Under Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 106, "[w]hen
 
a writing or recorded statement or part thereof is introduced by
 
a party, an adverse party may require the party at that time to
 
introduce any other part or any other writing or recorded
 
statement which ought in fairness to be considered
 
contemporaneously with it." HRE Rule 106. This evidentiary rule
 
protects the trier of fact from being misled by written or
 
recorded statements taken out of context. Monlux v. General
 
Motors Corp., 68 Haw. 358, 367, 714 P.2d 930, 936 (1986). HRE
 Rule 106 does not necessarily permit wholesale admission of
 
entire writings or recordings, but allows the court to admit
 
5
 The common law doctrine of completeness is codified in HRE Rule 106.
Monlux v. General Motors Corp., 68 Haw. 358, 366, 714 P.2d 930, 935 (1986).
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
additional evidence only as required to prevent the jury from
 
becoming misled. 
In State v. Brooks, the accused sought to admit 
portions of a decedent's testimony, while claiming the 
confrontation clause prevented the State from including 
additional portions to put the decedent's statements in context. 
State v. Brooks, 125 Hawai' i 462, 467, 264 P.3d 40, 45 (2011). 
For each statement the accused requested to present, the State requested that an additional statement be admitted as well. Id. 
at 468, 264 P.3d at 46. The State did not seek to have the entire statement offered into evidence, but selected portions 
necessary to put the decedent's statements into context. Id. 
Where the additional statement's were necessary to ensure the proper context for the decedent's statements, the circuit court 
properly allowed the statements into evidence. Id. at 474, 264 
P.3d at 52. 
Unlike Brooks, the State in this appeal did not request
 
specific additional portions of the videotape to place CW's
 testimony into context. The circuit court admitted the videotape
 
into evidence with no record as to any review by the circuit
 
court. Jennings objected that the videotape contained
 
inadmissible hearsay. Jennings also objected to the jury viewing
 
the entire videotape as a prejudicial repetition of CW's
 
testimony during direct examination.
 
In the roughly half hour videotape interview, CW
 
described an incident involving CW's father and Jennings. CW
 
recalled the incident as explained to her by her father. She
 
described how Jennings and another man drove her father around to
 
unfamiliar places, intimidated him and demanded money before
 
driving him home. CW stated, "[m]y father very nervous because
 
of what they do to me. They also took his money . . . but when I
 
went in my father told me that some one guy that I rode with
 
[took or push] me around and Ene." CW said, "[m]y father was
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
nervous for what they do to him . . . . They were just taking
 
him around after work." CW repeated, "[m]y father was really
 
nervous about what they was doing to him." CW discussed this
 
incident in detail for 7 minutes. 
In the videotape, CW also described a conversation she
 
had with her father immediately after the alleged sexual assault. 
She recalled that she asked her father to call the police, but
 
her father refused, saying Jennings might "kill us."
 
The police detective asked CW to describe what happened
 
at the time of the alleged sexual assault. CW spoke about the
 
alleged sexual assault for 13 minutes.
 
Then CW discussed an unrelated incident between herself
 
and Jennings's wife. This 10 minute portion of the videotape
 
with this unrelated incident was to be redacted.
 
CW concluded the interview by describing an
 
altercation, between herself and Jennings, that occurred the day
 
after the alleged sexual assault. CW discussed this incident for
 
the remaining 3 minutes of the interview.
 
The only parts of the videotape Jennings was offering
 
into evidence to impeach CW concerned her demeanor when making a
 
statement in the videotape about her husband being upset when
 
learning of the alleged sexual assault, and the altercation
 
between she and Jennings after the incident that concerned an
 
apology and Jennings striking CW on the face. CW's interview as
 
to what her father told her about Jennings and another man
 
driving him around, intimidating him and demanding money was not
 
relevant to the parts of the videotape Jennings offered into
 
evidence. Nor was most of the balance of the videotape when she
 
repeatedly described the alleged sexual assault.
 
The circuit court erred in allowing the videotape into
 
evidence (over Jennings's objections) without reviewing the
 
videotape, and in not determining which additional portions were
 
necessary to satisfy HRE Rule 106 without unduly prejudicing
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
9Jennings.  Evidence in the videotape should not have been
admitted or made available to the jury other than what was
necessary to prevent the jury from being misled.  See State v.
Moore, 82 Hawai #i 202, 205, 921 P.2d 122, 145 (1996); State v.
Corella, 79 Hawai# i 255, 263-64, 900 P.2d 1322, 1330-31 (App.
1995).  Clearly inadmissible and prejudicial portions of the
videotape were admitted into evidence that were not necessary to
prevent the jury from being misled.  
IV.
The Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered
December 6, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
vacated and this case is remanded for a new trial.  Because we
vacate and remand for a new trial, we do not address Jennings's
other points on appeal, as they are moot.  
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 9, 2012.
On the briefs:
Randal I. Shintani
for Defendant-Appellant.
Brian R. Vincent
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge