NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0000697
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MHL, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
HJKL, Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 11-1-0899)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant M.H.L. (Father) appeals from a
 
Divorce Decree entered on March 4, 2014, in the Family Court of
 
the First Circuit (family court).1 The Divorce Decree granted a
 
divorce between Father and Defendant-Appellee H.J.K.L. (Mother). 
On appeal, Father contends the family court abused its discretion
 in its (1) calculation of child support; (2) decision to award
 sole legal and physical custody of the couple's child (Child) to
 Mother, subject to Father's reasonable visitation; (3)
 calculation of spousal support; and (4) calculation of the
 equalization payment. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
1
 The Honorable Catherine H. Remigio presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we vacate the
 Divorce Decree to the extent the family court awarded Father zero
 Category 3 credit and the resulting equalization payment, but
 otherwise we affirm the family court. 
"The family court possesses wide discretion in making
 
its decisions and those decisions will not be set aside unless
 there is a manifest abuse of discretion." 
In re Doe , 77 Hawai 'i 
109, 115, 883 P.2d 30, 36 (1994). It is Father's burden to
 demonstrate the family court erred. Bettencourt v. Bettencourt,
 
80 Hawai
'i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995). 
The family court's [Finding of Facts (FOFs)] are
reviewed on appeal under the "clearly erroneous" standard. A
FOF "is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks
substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) despite
substantial evidence in support of the finding, the
appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm
conviction that a mistake has been made." "'Substantial
 evidence' ... is credible evidence which is of sufficient
 quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable
caution to support a conclusion." 
On the other hand, the family court's [Conclusions of
Law (COLs)] are reviewed on appeal de novo, under the
right/wrong standard. COLs, consequently, are "not binding
upon an appellate court and are freely reviewable for their
correctness."
 
. . . [T]he family court's determination of what is or is
not in a child's best interests is reviewed on appeal for
clear error.
 
Moreover, the family court "is given much leeway in
its examination of the reports concerning a child's care,
custody, and welfare, and its conclusions in this regard, if
supported by the record and not clearly erroneous, must
stand on appeal."
 
. . . .
 
"... It is well-settled that an appellate court will
not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of
witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the
province of the trier of fact."
 
In re Doe , 95 Hawai 'i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001) (ellipses 
in original, citations and brackets omitted).
1. Child Support. Father contends on appeal that the
family court abused its discretion in awarding child support in
 
the amount of $771 per month. While this appeal was pending, we
 

 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
granted Father's motion for temporary remand, pursuant to Hawai 'i 
Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 60 and Life of the Land v. 
Ariyoshi, 57 Haw. 249, 553 P.2d 464 (1976), to allow the family court to correct a mistake in the calculation of child support in the Divorce Decree. Upon temporary remand, the family court entered an order granting Father's motion to amend the Divorce Decree in order to correct its failure to include the ordered spousal support payments in the calculation of each party's gross income, and accordingly reduced the amount of child support Father was ordered to pay each month to $325. Because the family court corrected the exclusion of spousal support in its calculation of the parties' gross income, this issue has been resolved. None of Father's other arguments demonstrate that the family court abused its discretion in awarding child support. 
Father's contention that Mother's imputed gross income 
should be higher is waived. The family court imputed $1,596 monthly gross income to Mother for purposes of child support, which appears to exclude her monthly dividend income. At trial, Father argued in his written closing arguments that Mother's income should be imputed at $1,500. His argument that Mother's imputed gross income should be higher is waived. Hill v. Inouye, 
90 Hawai
'i 76, 82, 976 P.2d 390, 396 (1998). 
The family court did not abuse its discretion by
 
including Father's rental and dividend income in his monthly
 gross income. The family court found in FOFs 68-71 that Father
 failed to disclose his current income in any trial exhibits, did
 not submit an updated Income & Expense Statement for trial, and
 did not disclose any income from investments or rental property
 in his Income & Expense Statements. Further, in FOF 88 the
 family court found that Father's non-disclosure of his actual
 income meant that his income was substantially understated. 
Father presents no discernible argument against these FOFs, and
 they are binding. Doe IV v. Roe IV, 5 Haw. App. 558, 568, 705
 
P.2d 535, 544 (1985). 
In terms of the rental income, the family court
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
calculated Father's rental income based on the couple's joint 
2009 tax return (FOF 77). Father contends that it was not a regular and consistent source of income because his 2009 tax return actually reflects that the subject rental property was operating at a loss after deducting rental expenses such as repairs, taxes, and housing association dues. At trial, the family court questioned the numbers in the 2009 tax return, particularly about how the property could be operating at a loss. For example, in the family court's view, the purported monthly association dues of about $800 (i.e., part of the claimed expenses), were "preposterous." Further, in questioning Father about why the rent was so low, Father responded he "would not know" because his sister handled property management. Given Father's failure to disclose updated financial information, and the wide discretion afforded the family court to weigh evidence and judge the credibility of witnesses, the family court did not abuse its discretion in including the rental income in Father's gross income. In re Doe, 95 Hawai
'i at 190, 20 P.3d at 623. 
In terms of dividend income, at issue is dividend
 
income from Father's Schwab One account. At trial, Father
 challenged the "regular and consistent" nature of the income
 because it varied from year to year, contending that his
 investment income should not be considered. The Hawaii Child
 Support Guidelines (HCSG) (2010) provide that investment income,
 including interest and dividend income, counts as gross income,
 even if it is not the same amount each year, as long as it is of
 a recurring nature. HCSG § IV(I)(1)(d). There was sufficient
 evidence that Father had dividend income of a recurring nature. 
On appeal, Father contends that the family court should
 
have averaged the interest and dividends received on the Schwab
 One account for the three years (2009, 2012, and 2013) for which
 evidence was adduced, rather than merely adopting the highest
 yielding year (2012) as Father's income (FOF 75). Father relies
 on three documents that reflect the amount of investment income
 earned in the respective years: the couple's joint 2009 tax
 return, a December 2012 account statement, and an August 2013
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
account statement. However, as noted above, Father did not
 
report his investment income to the family court. Further,
 Father himself adduced no evidence to show the value of his
 Schwab One investment income. The only exhibits addressing the
 value of Father's investment income were provided by Mother. Due
 to Father's repeated failure to provide information about his
 financial situation, the family court found that Father's actual
 income was substantially understated (FOF 88). 
It was not an abuse of discretion for the family court
 
to rely on the most recent full year of information regarding the
 Schwab One account prior to trial, 2012. The trial took place on
 October 21-22, 2013. By that time, the reported dividends on the
 2009 tax return were four years stale, with no evidence of the
 investment income in 2010 or 2011. Also, the 2013 statement was
 issued in August of that year, thus not reflecting a full twelve
 months of dividends and interest. Father presented no argument
 that there was a change in his Schwab One account such that it
 would not produce similar investment income for the totality of
 2013 as it did in 2012, especially considering that almost 90% of
 the investment income earned in 2012 on the Schwab One account
 was earned in December 2012. Given the lack of information
 provided by Father, it is understandable why the family court
 relied on the December 2012 account statement and adopted it as a
 reflection of Father's investment income.
 
2. Custody. Father has not demonstrated that the
 
family court erred in awarding sole legal and physical custody of
 Child to Mother, subject to Father's visitation.
 
Father contends that the family court failed to provide
 
adequate FOFs to support its custody decision.
2 The family court
 
found that it was in the best interests of Child to award sole
 
2
 The family court concluded that "[a]fter careful consideration of the
standards, considerations, and procedures contained in Hawaii Revised Statutes
(HRS) § 571-46, the Court concludes that Mother shall be awarded sole legal
and physical custody of the Child, and unsupervised visitation to Father."
(COL 12) 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
legal and physical custody to Mother, subject to Father's
 
visitation (FOF 64(b) & (c)). In its FOFs, the family court
 identified the enumerated considerations provided in Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571-46 (Supp. 2012) for determining the
 
3
best interests of the Child. FOFs 29-64  are "sufficiently
comprehensive and pertinent to the issues to disclose to this court the steps by which [the family court] reached [the] ultimate conclusion on each factual issue[,]" 
Doe, 5 Haw. App. at 
566, 705 P.2d at 543, indicate that the family court considered the requirements of HRS § 571-46(b) in determining the best interests of Child, and support COL 12. Further, the family court noted that the "findings and conclusions herein are a result, in part, of its consideration of the witnesses' demeanor, manner of testifying, and candor, in addition to the substance of each of their testimony[,]" and "[t]he Court's findings and conclusions herein are also based on the totality of the relevant and credible evidence." (FOF 64(d) & (e)). We defer to the family court's evaluation of credibility and weighing of evidence. In re Doe, 95 Hawai
'i at 190, 20 P.3d at 623. 
Moreover, the family court did not abuse its discretion
 
in declining to adopt the custody evaluator's (CE) recommendation
 as contained in the CE's report and not continuing the parties'
 schedule utilized during the divorce proceedings. The CE's
 recommendation is not binding on the family court, and is only
 considered part of the evidence of the best interests of the
 
3 Father contends that FOFs 62 and 63 are clearly erroneous because
Father provided evidence he could alter his work schedule to permit weekday
overnights, and, further, the FOFs are undermined by the court's visitation
schedule, which requires Father to drop Child off at school on Mondays after
his weekend visitation. However, Father testified that he had not admitted
into evidence any documentary evidence from his employer that his work
schedule could be altered, and also conceded that the custody evaluator had
looked into the issue and found that any alteration of Father's start time
would have to be renewed monthly. FOFs 62 and 63 are not clearly erroneous.
Further, the family court's leniency in permitting the Sunday overnight,
followed by Father dropping Child off at school on Monday, is easily explained
as a temporary inconvenience to Child that would only require Child to wake up
early on two school days per month and permit frequent, continuing, and
meaningful contact with Father.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Child. HRS § 571-46(a)(4); Sabol v. Sabol, 2 Haw. App. 24, 30, 
624 P.2d 1378, 1383 (1981) ("[T]he weight to be accorded to the court officer's opinion and recommendation is to be determined by the trial judge."). The family court has "much leeway" in its consideration of reports concerning child custody, and if its determinations are supported by the record, they must stand on appeal. In re Doe, 95 Hawai
'i at 190, 20 P.3d at 623. Also, a 
court is not bound by any agreement between the parties. Yee v. 
Yee, 48 Haw. 439, 440-41, 404 P.2d 370, 371 (1965). 
Further, the CE testified that, if, hypothetically,
 
problems of poor communication between Mother and Father
 persisted, including disagreements about compliance with the
 parties timesharing agreement, and Father had enrolled Child in
 school without Mother's consent, the CE would alter his
 recommendation of joint legal custody to one that gave Mother
 sole legal custody, with input from Father on decisions regarding
 Child's care. The family court found that the couple had
 continued disagreements about timesharing, and thus it appears
 the family court adopted a version of the alternative plan
 proposed by the CE during trial (FOF 64). 
The family court's determination of the best interests
 
of Child is supported by the record and its determination as to
 Child's custody was not an abuse of discretion.
4
 
3. Spousal Support. Father has not demonstrated that
 
the family court abused its discretion in its award of
 transitional spousal support.
 
Throughout FOFs 85-109, and in particular FOF 108, the
 
family court weighed the factors mandated by HRS § 580-47(a)
 
4
 Father contends that the family court's FOFs do not support the award
of sole legal and physical custody to Mother because the court, and the CE,
found "insufficient evidence" that Father had committed family violence.
However, this finding, FOF 64(a), merely indicates that the family court was
not required to presume, pursuant to HRS § 571-46(a)(9), that it was not in
Child's best interest to give Father sole or joint custody. Instead, the
family court balanced the enumerated criteria and concluded that Mother should
be awarded sole custody, subject to Father's visitation, in part based on the
court's findings that Father had physical and verbal incidents, albeit not
rising to the level of family violence.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(Supp. 2015). HRS § 580-47(a) provides in pertinent part that 
in the event the court determines that support and
maintenance shall be ordered for a specific duration wholly
or partly based on competent evidence as to the amount of
time which will be required for the party seeking support
and maintenance to secure adequate training, education,
skills, or other qualifications necessary to qualify for
appropriate employment, whether intended to qualify the
party for a new occupation, update or expand existing
qualification, or otherwise enable or enhance the
employability of the party, the court shall order support
and maintenance for a period sufficient to allow completion
of the training, education, skills, or other activity, and
shall allow, in addition, sufficient time for the party to
secure appropriate employment.
 
(Emphasis added.) Therefore, it was not error to permit Mother
 
to qualify for new employment. Further, Father's arguments are
 unconvincing that Mother's experience working as a nurse in South
 Korea six years before she met Father, working as a Korean tour
 leader during that six-year period prior to meeting Father and
 moving to Honolulu, and her brief work for six months in 2009 as
 a home nurse in Honolulu, constitutes her having an established
 career, "abandoning" appropriate employment, or that she could be
 self-sufficient without obtaining further training, education,
 skills, or other qualifications. The family court found that
 
5
Mother earned $12 per hour working as a tour guide  and was
currently attending community college (FOF 108(a)(7)(a)). 
This
 
finding is not challenged and is binding. Doe
, 5 Haw. App. at
 
568, 705 P.2d at 544. 
The family court also did not abuse its discretion in 
declining to consider monetary gifts that Mother received from Paternal Grandfather in its consideration of Mother's ability to meet her needs post-divorce. Unlike in Sussman v. Sussman, 112 Hawai
'i 437, 146 P.3d 597 (App. 2006), the family court here 
found (FOF 92) that Mother credibly testified that she would establish her own residence and rely on spousal support and property division while she attends school, while Paternal Grandfather would only continue to pay for Child's education­
5
 Mother testified that she worked 6 hours every Saturday, and 3 hours
every other Sunday. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
related expenses post-divorce (FOF 39). Therefore, there is 
evidence in the record that Paternal Grandfather would not support Mother post-divorce. Cf. Sussman, 112 Hawai
'i at 440, 
146 P.3d at 600. We defer to the family court's evaluation of credibility and weighing of evidence. In re Doe, 95 Hawai
'i at 
190, 20 P.3d at 623. 
The family court's FOF 107, that Father has the ability
 
to pay spousal support, was not clearly erroneous. As noted
 above, Father failed to disclose his current financial
 information to the family court, thus his income was
 substantially understated (FOF 88).
6 Further, Father's argument
 
regarding his ability to pay spousal support is, in part, based
 on the family court's initially erroneous calculation of child
 support. The family court corrected the calculation of child
 support upon temporary remand, reducing the monthly child support
 payment by more than one-half. Father did not file a
 supplemental brief after the family court amended the child
 support payment. In any event, considering the reduced amount of
 child support, the family court's FOF 108(a)(11)(a), that Father
 could afford to pay $2,338 per month in transitional spousal
 support, is supported by substantial evidence and is not clearly
 erroneous. 
Lastly, the family court did not err by considering
 
Father's contingent interest in Paternal Grandfather's
 irrevocable trust as part of his assets. Review of FOF 108
 reveals that the family court only generally considered Father's
 contingent interest in terms of his entire financial resources,
 factor (1) under HRS § 580-47(a). When the family court
 specifically considered the amount of spousal support Father
 could pay, the court appears to have limited its consideration to
 
6
 Father also reiterates his argument that the family court incorrectly
computed Father's monthly income based on its consideration of monthly rental
profits and investment income. As previously discussed above, Father's
contention that the family court abused its discretion in this regard is
without merit. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
actual income. Father cites no authority that indicates that the
 
family court abused its discretion in this regard.
4. Equalization Payment. Father contends that the
 
family court abused its discretion by declining to award Father a
 Category 3 credit for a portion of his Schwab One account. 
Father contends that he deposited a $136,254 gift or inheritance
 received from Paternal Grandmother's revocable trust after
 Paternal Grandmother's death in 2008 into the investment
 account.
7 We agree with Father to the extent that the family
 
court erred in awarding Father no credit for a gift or
 inheritance from Paternal Grandmother.
 
The family court appears to have awarded no Category 3
 
credit because Father failed to disclose the claimed credit until
 trial, failed to provide an updated Asset & Debt Statement, did
 not submit any trial exhibit showing Father received an
 inheritance from Paternal Grandmother or that he deposited the
 inheritance into his Schwab One account. (FOF 113(e)). 
However, the evidence indicates that Father did inherit 
money from Paternal Grandmother such that the family court should not have awarded him zero Category 3 credit. See, Kodama v. 
Kodama, No. CAAP-11-0000641, 2014 WL 7451246, 134 Hawai
'i 305, 
339 P.3d 1106 , at *14 (App. 2014)(mem.), cert rejected, No. SCWC-11-0000641, 2015 WL 1648194 (Apr. 13, 2015), 2015 WL 3384470 (May 22, 2015). Father and Paternal Grandfather both testified that Father had received an inheritance from Paternal Grandmother upon her death. Further, it appears that around $200,000 was withdrawn from Paternal Grandmother's revocable trust in August 2008, which would be consistent with a distribution after Paternal Grandmother's death. This is generally in line with Paternal Grandfather's testimony that he believed Father had 
7
 In his reply brief, Father asserts that the family court erred in
considering Father's interest in the RDLIT as a valid and relevant
consideration in deviating from the Partnership Model. Father did not raise this argument in his opening brief, and it is waived. In re Hawaiian Flour 
Mills, Inc., 76 Hawai' i 1, 14 n.5, 868 P.2d 419, 432 n.5 (1994). 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
received around $90,000 from Paternal Grandmother's trust, which
 
was deposited in Father's account. 
We conclude that the family court erred in denying 
Father any Category 3 credit. While the family court was
 entitled to exercise its discretion in the valuation of the
 Category 3 claim, it should not have awarded Father no credit. 
On remand, we direct the family court to use the available
 evidence to determine a reasonable value for Father's Category 3
 claim.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Divorce Decree
 
entered on March 4, 2014, is vacated to the extent that it awards
 nothing for Father's Category 3 claim and the resulting
 equalization payment. In all other respects, the Divorce Decree
 and the amendments made to the Divorce Decree as part of the
 "Order Re Motion to Amend the Divorce Decree Filed March 4, 2014"
 filed September 15, 2015, in the Family Court of the First
 Circuit, are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 1, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Peter Van Name Esser,
for Plaintiff-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Thomas E. Crowley,for Defendant-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
11
 