NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000744
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
LaVONNE HARRISON, Trustee of LaVONNE'S FAMILY TRUST,
a Revocable Living Trust Agreement dated
September 28, 1989,
Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant/Appellant,
v.
CASA De EMDEKO, INCORPORATED, a Hawaii nonprofit corporation,
Defendants/Counterclaim Plaintiff/Appellees
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; and DOE ENTITIES,
Defendants
  
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-153K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant/Appellant LaVonne
 
Harrison, Trustee of LaVonne's Family Trust, a Revocable Living

 
Trust Agreement dated September 28, 1989, (Harrison) appeals from
 
the "Order Denying Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment, Filed
 4/17/14 and Granting Defendant Casa de Emdeko, Incorporated's
 Cross-Motion for Summary Judgment," filed on July 22, 2014, and
 the "Amended Final Judgment," filed on October 8, 2015, in the
 Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (circuit court).
1
 
On appeal, Harrison contends that the circuit court
 
erred in:
 
(1) concluding that the residential elevators, lanai
 
1
 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.
  Mikelson v. United Services Auto. Ass'n, NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
railings, drains, and cable tv wires were common elements, and
 
the expenses relating to the residential elevators, lanai
 railings, drains, cable tv, and pest control were common
 expenses;
 
(2) holding that Harrison was estopped from filing
 
claims for damages during the time she knew or should have known
 that reserve account and maintenance account funds were being
 applied to what she claimed were limited common elements, but
 delayed in bringing an action;
 
(3) failing to make any findings of fact;
 (4) entering its Amended Final Judgment in favor of
 
Defendant/Counterclaimant/Appellee Casa De Emdeko, Incorporated
 (Association).
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we affirm in part,
 vacate in part, and remand for further proceedings.
 
(1) The declaration and bylaws of a condominium 
association establish the rules governing the condominium. See 
Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Maalaea Kai, Inc. v. Stillson, 108 Hawai
'i 2, 9, 116 P.3d 644, 651 (2005) (citing Bradford Square 
Condo. Ass'n v. Miller, 258 Ga.App. 240, 245, 573 S.E.2d 405, 409 (Ga. Ct. App. 2002) ("The condominium instruments, including the bylaws and the sales agreement, are a contract that governs the legal rights between the [a]ssociation and unit owners.")). Therefore, in determining whether each of the disputed elements in this case is a common element or gives rise to a common expense, we must first look to the terms of the "Restated Declaration of Horizontal Property Regime and By-Laws of Casa De Emdeko" (Declaration). 
Because the declaration and bylaws serve as a contract
 
between the condominium owners and the association,
 interpretation of the declaration and bylaws is a question of law
 freely reviewable by this court. 
Laeroc Waikiki Parkside, LLC v.
 
K.S.K. (Oahu) Ltd. P'ship,  115 Hawai 'i 201, 213, 166 P.3d 961, 
973 (2007) (quoting
107 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i 192, 197, 111 P.3d 601, 606 (2005)). In conducting such 
review, "[i]t is fundamental that terms of a contract should be 
interpreted according to their plain, ordinary and accepted use in common speech, unless the contract indicates a different meaning." Brown v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai
'i 226, 240, 921 
P.2d 146, 160 (1996) (quoting Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 108, 839 P.2d 10, 24 (1992) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted)). 
Where the terms of the declaration and bylaws are 
insufficient in classifying something as a common element or common expense, we must look to Hawai
'i condominium law for 
guidance. Because the Casa De Emdeko condominium project (Project) was created in 1969, it is governed by Chapter 514A of the Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS), except as provided in HRS §§ 514B-22 and 514B-23.
2 See HRS § 514A-1.5 (2017). 
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
that is reviewed de novo. State v. Bowman, 137 Hawai 'i 398, 404, 
375 P.3d 177, 183 (2016). Under this standard, the appellate court "must examine the facts and answer the pertinent question of law without being required to give any weight or deference to the trial court's answer to the question. In other words, [the appellate court is] free to review a trial court's conclusion of law for its correctness." Id. (citing State v. Kelekolio, 94 
Hawai
'i 354, 356, 14 P.3d 364, 366 (Haw. Ct. App. 2000)). 
The supreme court has held that the "fundamental 
starting point for statutory interpretation is the language of the statute itself." State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai
'i 383, 390, 219 
P.3d 1170, 1177 (2009) (quoting Citizens Against Reckless Dev. v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals of the City & Cty. of Honolulu, 114 Hawai
'i 
184, 193, 159 P.3d 143, 152 (2007)). "[W]here the statutory language is plain and unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain and obvious meaning." Id. Moreover, 
"implicit in the task of statutory construction is our foremost obligation to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the 
2
 Pursuant to HRS § 514A-1.5, Hawai' i condominiums created prior to
July 1, 2006 are governed by HRS Chapter 514A, except as provided in HRS §§
514B-22 and 514B-23, while condominiums created on or after July 1, 2006 are
governed by HRS Chapter 514B. 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the language
 
contained in the statute itself." Id.
 
On appeal, Harrison argues that the circuit court erred
 
in concluding that the residential elevators, lanai railings,
 drains, and cable tv wires were common elements, and the expenses
 relating to the residential elevators, lanai railings, drains,
 cable tv, and pest control were common expenses. Harrison owns
 two commercial buildings in the Project, and according to
 Harrison, the commercial buildings have no elevators, cable TV,
 or lanais.
 
Harrison contends that the residential elevators are
 
limited common elements under the terms of the Declaration. 
Section A. of the Declaration divides the Project into 109
 apartment units, common elements, and limited common elements.
 
Section A.1.(d) provides:
 
The respective apartments shall not be deemed to include the
undecorated or unfinished surfaces of the perimeter walls or
interior load-bearing walls, the floors and ceiling
surrounding each apartment or any pipes, wires, conduits, or
other utilities or service lines running through such
apartments which are utilized for or serve more than one
apartment, the same being deemed common elements as
hereinafter provided. Each apartment shall be deemed to
include all the walls and partitions which are not load
bearing within its perimeter walls, the inner decorated or
finished surfaces of all walls, floors and ceilings, doors
and door frames, windows and window frames and all fixtures
originally installed, including stove, oven, refrigerator,
washer, dryer, disposal and dishwasher.
 
Section A.2. of the Declaration provides that all of the
 
remaining portions of the Project that are not a part of the 109
 apartment units are common elements. Here, the residential
 elevators do not fall within the Declaration's description of the
 109 apartment units and are therefore common elements of the
 Project. 
The residential elevators also do not fall under the
 
Declaration's description of the limited common elements. 
Section A.3. of the Declaration provides:
 
3. Limited Common Elements. Certain parts of the common
elements, herein called the "limited common elements", are
hereby designated and set aside for the exclusive use of
certain apartments, and such apartments shall have
appurtenant thereto easements for the use of such limited
common elements as follows:
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(a)	 One parking space or more, designated on said plans by
the designation corresponding to the designation of
each apartment shall be appurtenant to and for the
exclusive use of such apartment.
(b)	 The entries, stairways, hallways and walkways in any
residential building of the project shall be
appurtenant to and for the exclusive use of the
apartments of such building.
(c)	 The hallways and walkways on any floor of any
residential building of the project shall be
appurtenant to and for the exclusive use of the
apartments on such floor.
 
(Emphasis added.) Harrison argues that the residential elevators
 
are limited common elements because they are an essential part of
 the system of "entries, stairways, hallways and walkways." 
However, we conclude that an elevator is not an entry, stairway,
 hallway, or walkway. 
HRS Chapter 514A further supports the conclusion that
 
the residential elevators are common elements. HRS § 514A-3(6)
 (2017) provides that "elevators . . . existing for common use"
 are common elements. HRS § 514A-13(h) (2017) provides that
 "[l]obby areas, swimming pools, recreation areas, saunas, storage
 areas, hallways, trash chutes, laundry chutes, and other similar
 
areas not located inside apartments intended for residential use
 
or the conduct of a business shall constitute common elements
 
unless designated as limited common elements by the declaration." 
(Emphasis added.) Under these provisions, the residential
 elevators, which are not located within the apartments
 themselves, would be considered common elements. 
Harrison argues that the lanai railings are limited
 
common elements because they are located solely within the
 residential buildings. Because the Declaration does not specify
 whether the lanai railings are common elements or limited common
 elements, we must look to HRS Chapter 514A for guidance.
 
HRS § 514A-3(8) provides that "[a]ll other parts of the
 
property necessary or convenient to its . . . safety" are common
 elements. Under this definition, lanai railings, regardless of
 whether they are exclusive to the residential units, are
 necessary for the safety of the Project, and therefore are
 considered common elements.
 
Harrison argues that the drains are limited common
 
elements because they are located solely within the residential
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
units for the exclusive use of the residential owners.  However,
 
the Declaration provides:
 
2. Common Elements. One freehold estate is hereby
designated in all of the remaining portions of the project
herein called the "common elements", including specifically
but not limited to:
 
. . . .
 (d)
	 All breezeways, ducts, electrical equipment, wiring,
pipes and other central and appurtenant transmission
facilities and installations over, under and across
the project for services such as power, light, water,
 gas, sewer, air conditioning, telephone and radio and
television signal distribution.
 
(Emphasis added.) Therefore, under the terms of the Declaration,
 
3
drains,  which are pipes that can be used for services such as
water and sewer, are considered common elements. 

The Association argues that cable tv wires are common

 
elements under the Declaration, which provides that "[a]ll . . .
 
wiring . . . and other central and appurtenant transmission
 facilities and installations over, under and across the project
 for services such as . . . television signal distribution" are
 common elements. We agree with this argument.
 
Harrison argues that expenses relating to the
 
residential elevators, lanai railings, drains, cable tv, and pest
 control are not common expenses. Section H. of the Declaration
 defines common expenses to include "any maintenance, repair,
 replacement and restoration of the common elements." Because we
 conclude that the elevator, lanai railings, and drains are common
 elements, we reject Harrison's claim that the expenses related to
 these elements are not common expenses. In contrast, the record
 is unclear as to the nature of the cable tv and pest control
 expenses challenged by Harrison. Therefore, we conclude that the
 Association failed to show its entitlement to summary judgment as
 to these expenses. Accordingly, we vacate the circuit court's
 designation of the cable tv and pest control expenses as common
 expenses, and remand for further proceedings. 
(2) Harrison contends that the circuit court erred in
 
holding that Harrison was estopped from filing claims for damages
 
3
 The word "drain" is defined by Merriam-Webster as "a means (as a
pipe) by which usu. liquid matter is drained." Merriam-Webster's Collegiate
Dictionary at 378 (11th ed. 2003).
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
7during the time she knew or should have known that reserve
account and maintenance account funds were being applied to what
she refers to as "limited common elements," but delayed in
bringing an action.  Harrison essentially argues that estoppel
was improper because the residential elevators had been accepted
by the Association's board of directors as limited common
elements, and because prior to filing the Complaint, Harrison had
objected to and complained about the disputed assessments.
Because of our decision on the expenses relating to the
residential elevators, lanai railings, and drains, we need not
address estoppel as to those expenses.  With respect to the cable
tv and pest control expenses, genuine issues of material fact
exist as to the Association's estoppel claim.  Accordingly, we
vacate the circuit court's estoppel decision as to the cable tv
and pest control expenses, and remand for further proceedings.
(3)  Harrison contends that the circuit court erred in
failing to make any findings of fact in its "Order Denying
Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment, Filed 4/17/14 and
Granting Defendant Casa de Emdeko, Incorporated's Cross-Motion
for Summary Judgment."  However, Harrison provides no argument
regarding this issue.  At best, Harrison states that the circuit
court "was required, by necessity" to make findings of fact. 
Because Harrison did not present any discernible argument on this
point, this issue is deemed waived and will not be addressed
further here.  Kakinami v. Kakinami,  127 Hawai #i 126, 144 n.16,
276 P.3d 695, 713 n.16 (2012) (citing In re Guardianship of
Carlsmith, 113 Hawai #i 236, 246, 151 P.3d 717, 727 (2007) (noting
that this court may "disregard a particular contention if the
appellant makes no discernible argument in support of that
position") (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted)).
(4)  For the reasons discussed above, we address
Harrison's contention that the circuit court erred in entering
its Amended Final Judgment in favor of the Association in
accordance with the conclusion below.
Based on the foregoing, we affirm in part and vacate in
part the circuit court's "Amended Final Judgment" and underlying
"Order Denying Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment, FiledNOT F OR P UBLICATIO N IN WEST'S H AWAII  REPO RTS OR THE P ACIF IC REP ORTER
7during the time she knew or should have known that reserve
account and maintenance account funds were being applied to what
she refers to as "limited common elements," but delayed in
bringing an action.  Harrison essentially argues that estoppel
was improper because the residential elevators had been accepted
by the Association's board of directors as limited common
elements, and because prior to filing the Complaint, Harrison had
objected to and complained about the disputed assessments.
Because of our decision on the expenses relating to the
residential elevators, lanai railings, and drains, we need not
address estoppel as to those expenses.  With respect to the cable
tv and pest control expenses, genuine issues of material fact
exist as to the Association's estoppel claim.  Accordingly, we
vacate the circuit court's estoppel decision as to the cable tv
and pest control expenses, and remand for further proceedings.
(3)  Harrison contends that the circuit court erred in
failing to make any findings of fact in its "Order Denying
Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment, Filed 4/17/14 and
Granting Defendant Casa de Emdeko, Incorporated's Cross-Motion
for Summary Judgment."  However, Harrison provides no argument
regarding this issue.  At best, Harrison states that the circuit
court "was required, by necessity" to make findings of fact. 
Because Harrison did not present any discernible argument on this
point, this issue is deemed waived and will not be addressed
further here.  Kakinami v. Kakinami, 127 Hawai #i 126, 144 n.16,
276 P.3d 695, 713 n.16 (2012) (citing In re Guardianship of
Carlsmith, 113 Hawai #i 236, 246, 151 P.3d 717, 727 (2007) (noting
that this court may "disregard a particular contention if the
appellant makes no discernible argument in support of that
position") (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted)).
(4)  For the reasons discussed above, we address
Harrison's contention that the circuit court erred in entering
its Amended Final Judgment in favor of the Association in
accordance with the conclusion below.
Based on the foregoing, we affirm in part and vacate in
part the circuit court's "Amended Final Judgment" and underlying
"Order Denying Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment, FiledNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
4/17/14 and Granting Defendant Casa de Emdeko, Incorporated's
 
Cross-Motion for Summary Judgment," and remand the case for
 further proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition
 Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 20, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 Francis L. Jung, and
Carol M. Jung
(Jung & Vassar, P.C.)
for Plaintiff/Counterclaim
Defendant/Appellant
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
 
Wesley H.H. Ching
(Fukunaga Matayoshi Ching &
Kon-Herrera, LLP)
for Defendant/Counterclaim
Plaintiff/Appellee
 Associate Judge
8
 