   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000593
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
WILLIAM ROY CARROLL, III, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 15-1-386)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant William Roy Carroll III (Carroll)
 
appeals from the "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" (
Judgment)
 
filed on July 27, 2016, in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
 
(Circuit Court).1 Carroll was convicted of one count of Theft in
 
the Second Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 708-830(1) (2014)2 and HRS § 708-831(1)(b) (2014),3 and one
 
1 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
 
2 HRS § 708-830(1) provides:
 
§708-830 Theft.  A person commits theft if the person
does any of the following:
(1) 	Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over
 
property. A person obtains or exerts
unauthorized control over the property of
another with intent to deprive the other of the
property.
 
3 At the time of Carroll's offense in 2015, HRS § 708-831(1)(b)
provided:
 
§708-831 Theft in the second degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of theft in the second degree if the
person commits theft:
 
(continued...)
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
count of Theft in the Third Degree in violation of HRS § 708­
830(1) and § 708-832(1)(a) (2014).4 5
 
On appeal, Carroll contends that the Circuit Court
 
erred in: (1) denying his challenges to two prospective jurors
 for cause because the voir dire examination revealed that each
 had preconceived biases that threatened their ability to serve as
 impartial jurors; (2) denying Carroll's Motion for Judgment of
 Acquittal because the testimony elicited at trial on the
 valuation of items claimed to be stolen and damaged was
 insufficient to support a conviction in each charge; and (3)
 sentencing Carroll to the indeterminate term of incarceration of
 five years, because such sentence improperly penalized Carroll
 for exercising his right to a trial. 
Upon careful review of the record and briefs submitted
 
by the parties and having given due consideration to the
 arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the relevant
 statutory and case law, we resolve Carroll's points of error as
 follows, and affirm.
 
3(...continued)
. . .
 
(b) Of property or services the value of which exceeds
$300;
 
4 At the time of Carroll's offense in 2015, HRS § 708-832(1)(a)
provided:
 
§708-832 Theft in the third degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of theft in the third degree if the
person commits theft:
(a) Of property or services the value of which exceeds
$100; . . . . 
5 The Judgment and Mittimus filed on July 27, 2016, contain typographic
errors as to Count 3, Theft in the Third Degree. The "Felony Information and
Non-Felony Complaint" charged Carroll in Count 3 with Theft in the Third
Degree under HRS § 708-832(1)(a). The Judgment, however, incorrectly
references "HRS § 708-831(1)" for Count 3, Theft in the Third Degree, in the
list of original charges and the charges under which Carroll was convicted.
In turn, the Mittimus incorrectly references Count 3 by referring to "HRS
§ 708-832(a)(a)". The parties do not dispute that Carroll was convicted for
Theft in the Third Degree under HRS § 708-832(1)(a). As set forth infra, we
will remand this case for correction of these typographic errors in the
Judgment and Mittimus.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) charged 
Carroll with one count of Theft in the Second Degree, one count 
of Theft in the Third Degree and one count of Criminal Property Damage in the Second Degree in violation of HRS § 708-821(1)(b) (2014).
6 The charges against Carroll were in connection with an 
incident in Hilo, Hawai' i, on September 6, 2015, in which a 
bronze statue of King Kamehameha I was damaged, and a bronze spear connected to the statue was removed and later found with a four-foot pipe and forty-foot chain. 
The case proceeded to jury selection and trial before
 
the Circuit Court. During jury selection, Carroll challenged for
 cause the seating of Prospective Juror 35 (Juror 35) and
 
Prospective Juror 48 (Juror 48). Carroll alleged that the voir
 
dire examination had revealed preconceived biases of Juror 35 and
 
Juror 48 that threatened their ability to sit as impartial jurors
 in the instant case. 
Carroll's challenges were largely based on both jurors'
 
exposure to pre-trial media coverage that had discussed the
 incident involving the statue, and their somewhat ambiguous
 responses regarding their ability to be impartial should they be
 selected as jurors. Carroll also questioned Juror 48's ability
 to be impartial based on her disclosure of prior discussions
 about the incident with her children awhile back, who had
 expressed their displeasure about the incident.
7 The Circuit
 
6 HRS § 708-821(1)(b) provides: 
§708-821 Criminal property damage in the second
degree. (1) A person commits the offense of criminal
property damage in the second degree if by means other than
fire:
 
. . .
 (b) 	The person intentionally or knowingly damages the
property of another, without the other's consent, in
an amount exceeding $1,500; . . . .
 
7
 During voir dire examination, Juror 48 indicated that her daughter
and son-in-law work at the Hawaiian language immersion schoolNâwahîokalani 'ôpu'uiki, where her grandchildren attend as well. Juror 48 also 
(continued...)
 
3
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court allowed for separate questioning of prospective Jurors 35
 
and 48, respectively, to investigate whether they could be fair
 and impartial. Ultimately, the Circuit Court was satisfied with
 both jurors' overall responses, noting that each had expressed
 that they were fairly certain that they could disregard any prior
 information regarding the case, or any preliminary decisions
 concerning Carroll's alleged involvement. As such, Carroll's
 challenges to Juror 35 and Juror 48 for cause were denied. At
 the conclusion of jury selection, Carroll elected to use all
 three of his allotted peremptory challenges, two of which were
 used to excuse Juror 35 and Juror 48.
8
 
During trial, the State presented testimony by Robert
 
"Bobby" Yamada (Yamada) about the Kamehameha I statue. Yamada,
 
who is a construction manager by trade and licensed general
 
contractor, testified that he was part of the Kamehameha Statue
 Committee that installed the statue in its current place. As
 general contractor for the project, Yamada was familiar with the
 bronze statue and the attached bronze spear, which were the
 subject property in Counts 1 and 2.
9 After examination by both
 
parties, the Circuit Court qualified Yamada to render an opinion
 as an estimator and general contractor over Carroll's objection. 
Yamada proceeded to offer testimony regarding his opinion of the
 replacement cost of the piece of the statue that was stolen, and
 the approximate cost to repair the portions of the statue damaged
 in the alleged incident. 
7(...continued)
noted that her son is a Native Hawaiian activist.
 
8 At the conclusion of jury selection, Carroll requested the Circuit
Court grant two additional peremptory challenges to the defense based on the
prior challenges for cause of Juror 35 and Juror 48. The Circuit Court rested
 on its prior ruling, and denied Carroll's request for additional peremptory
challenges. 
9 Count 3 charges Carroll with Theft in the Second Degree, and alleges
that Carroll obtained or exerted unauthorized control over a bronze spear
belonging to the Kamehameha Schools Alumni Association. Count 2 charges
Carroll with Criminal Property Damage in the Second Degree, and alleges that
Carroll, by means other than fire, intentionally and/or knowingly damaged the
bronze statue of King Kamehameha belonging to the Kamehameha Schools Alumni
Association. 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State also offered the testimony of Patrick
 
Ehrenlechner (Ehrenlechner) to testify about the property
 
involved in Count 310 of the instant case. Ehrenlechner
 
testified that as Manager of Bayfront Motors, he was familiar
 
with the pipe and chain that were allegedly taken from Bayfront
 Motors' property, and estimated its value at approximately
 $135.00. Ehrenlechner based his estimate on the original price
 he paid to purchase the pipe and chain. 
At the conclusion of the State's case in chief, Carroll
 
made a motion for judgment of acquittal, asserting that the State
 had failed to prove the necessary elements of each charge,
 specifically the requisite costs or value of the items allegedly
 damaged and stolen. The Circuit Court denied Carroll's motion,
 finding that the testimony elicited from the State regarding the
 valuation of the property was sufficient for the jury to consider
 in determining whether the elements of the charges were proven
 beyond a reasonable doubt. The jury subsequently found Carroll
 guilty of all charges.
11 On July 26, 2016, the Circuit Court
 
sentenced Carroll to an indeterminate term of incarceration of
 five years.
(1) Challenges to Jurors. We review the Circuit 
Court's decision to pass a juror for cause under the abuse of discretion standard. State v. Kauhi, 86 Hawai' i 195, 197, 948 
P.2d 1036, 1038 (1997). As to Carroll's first point of error, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Carroll's motion to excuse Juror 35 and Juror 48 for cause. 
10 Count 3 charges Carroll with Theft in the Third Degree, and alleges
that Carroll obtained or exerted unauthorized control over a four-foot pipe
and forty-foot chain belonging to Bayfront Motors Incorporated. 
11 In a special interrogatory, the jury found that the State failed to
prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Carroll did not commit Theft in the
Second Degree in Count 1 and Criminal Property Damage in the Second Degree in
Count 2 as part of a continuing and uninterrupted course of conduct, or with
separate and distinct intents, rather than acting with one intention, one
general impulse, and one plan to commit both offenses. Accordingly, Count 1
and Count 2 were merged, and the State proceeded to sentence Carroll under
Count 1, Theft in the Second Degree, and Count 3, Theft in the Third Degree. 
5
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Generally, the trial court's exercise of its discretion
 
to excuse or retain a prospective juror is governed by HRS § 612­
7 (2016),12 which includes excusing a prospective juror for "good
 
cause." HRS § 612-7. Here, Carroll contends that good cause
 existed to excuse Juror 35 and Juror 48 because both had been
 exposed to adverse pre-trial media coverage and outside
 information that impaired their ability to serve as impartial
 jurors in this case. 
The constitutional guarantee of a right to a trial by 
an impartial jury requires the jury to be "substantially free from the biasing effects of inflammatory pre-trial publicity". State v. Keohokapu, 127 Hawai' i 91, 101-102, 276 P.3d 660, 670­
671 (2012)(citations omitted). "Once the accused claims that his or her right to a fair trial has been jeopardized by external influences, such as publicity, on the jury, the court must determine whether the influences rise to the level of being substantially prejudicial." Id. at 102, 276 P.3d at 671. If it 
does not rise to such level, the trial court is under no duty to interrogate the jury. Id. "Where, however, the court determines 
that outside influences are of a nature which could substantially prejudice the defendant's right to a fair trial, a rebuttable presumption of prejudice arises." Id. (citations omitted). The 
trial judge would then be "duty-bound to investigate the totality of circumstances to determine the impact of the outside influence on the jury." Id. 
Here, the media coverage that both jurors referred to
 
was nearly a year old, and consisted of mostly non-prejudicial
 information (i.e. the location the bronze spear was recovered,
 the condition of the spear, etc.), and mention that a homeless
 man may have been responsible for the incident. Such media
 
12 HRS § 612-7 provides:
 
§612-7 Excused when, for cause. A prospective juror shall
not be excused by a court for slight or trivial cause, but only when
it appears that jury duty would entail a serious personal hardship,
or that for other good cause the prospective juror should be excused
either temporarily or otherwise.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
coverage is primarily factual, as opposed to being a "barrage of
 
inflammatory publicity immediately prior to trial amounting to a
 huge . . . wave of public passion". See id. at 103, 276 P.3d at
 
672. Juror 48's disclosure of her prior conversations of the
 
case with her children is of similar character. Juror 48 had
 indicated that her children were very upset that the statue had
 been damaged, however as articulated by the Circuit Court, such
 sentiment was not different from how most members of the public
 may have felt about the incident. Accordingly, none of the
 outside influences on Jurors 35 and 48 rose to the level of
 presumed prejudice. 
The record also does not show that Jurors 35 and 48 had
 
exhibited "actual partiality or hostility that could not be laid
 aside" such that actual prejudice existed. See id. at 104, 276
 
P.3d at 673. Although both jurors had offered ambiguous, and at
 times contradictory, responses regarding their ability to act
 impartially, both eventually, and to the Circuit Court's
 satisfaction, expressed a degree of certainty that they were able
 to perform as competent jurors. Juror 48 had indicated to the
 Circuit Court that she was ninety percent certain that she could
 set aside any identified bias that she may have if she were
 selected. Juror 35 similarly expressed that she was eighty
 percent certain that she could do the same. Also, in the State's
 examination of Juror 48, she had expressly indicated that she
 would find the defendant innocent if she were asked to decide the
 case prior to any presentation of evidence. In response to the
 same inquiry by defense counsel, Juror 35 also explicitly stated
 that she would find Carroll innocent in such circumstance. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not 
abuse its discretion in denying Carroll's challenges to Juror 35 and Juror 48 for cause. Additionally, because we conclude that there was no abuse of discretion, we need not reach the inquiry of whether Carroll's right to exercise a peremptory challenge was denied. See State v. Iuli, 101 Hawai' i 196, 205, 65 P.3d 143, 
152 (2003). 
7
   
     
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) Motion for Judgment of Acquittal. The standard of 
review as to a motion for judgment of acquittal is "whether, upon 
the evidence viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution and in full recognition of the province of the trier of fact, the evidence is sufficient to support a prima facie case so that a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a reasonable doubt." State v. Jhun, 83 Hawai' i 472, 481, 927 P.2d 
1355, 1364 (1996). Carroll contends that the Circuit Court erred in denying his motion for Judgment of Acquittal because the State failed to adduce sufficient evidence of the monetary value element for each charge, specifically the value of the properties stolen and/or damaged in the instant offenses. We disagree. 
For the Theft in the Second Degree charge, the State
 
had to prove the value of the stolen portion of the bronze spear
 exceeded $300.00. See HRS § 708-831(1)(b). "[V]alue means the
 
market value of the property or services at the time and place of
 the offense, or the replacement cost if the market value of the
 property or services cannot be determined." HRS § 708-801(1)
 (2014)(emphasis added).
13 At trial, the State offered the
 
testimony of Yamada, who was familiar with the materials and
 costs of the statue, and was involved in both its installation
 and repair. The Circuit Court allowed Yamada to render an
 opinion as a licensed general contractor and estimator, and he
 accordingly offered testimony of his opinion of the replacement
 cost and repair cost of the portion of the bronze spear that was
 allegedly stolen, both of which exceeded the statutory minimum
 value required to find Carroll guilty of Theft in the Second
 Degree.
 
13 HRS § 708-801(1) provides:
 
§708-801 Valuation of property or services. Whenever the
 
value of property or services is determinative of the class or grade
of an offense, or otherwise relevant to a prosecution, the following
shall apply:
(1) 	Except as otherwise specified in this section, value
means the market value of the property or services at
the time and place of the offense, or the replacement
cost if the market value of the property or services
cannot be determined.
 
8
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Although Yamada was not qualified as an expert in the 
field of fine arts or sculptures, expert testimony is not 
required to establish the value of stolen property. See State v. 
Kahele-Bishop, No. CAAP-14-0001361, 2017 WL 430844, at *6 (Hawai'i App. Jan. 31, 2017); See also State v. Thorp, No. CAAP­
13-0000414, 2014 WL 4914623, at *1 (Hawai' i App. Sept. 30, 
2014)(rejecting argument that the prosecution was required to call an expert appraiser to establish the value of stolen water pipes to prove value element in Theft in the Second Degree). Accordingly, Yamada's testimony of both the replacement cost and repair cost of the stolen bronze spear was sufficient evidence to support Carroll's conviction of Theft in the Second Degree in Count 1. 
Although Count 2 eventually merged with Count 1, we 
similarly conclude that there was sufficient evidence presented at trial to support Carroll's conviction of Criminal Property Damage in the Second Degree. For this offense, the State was required to establish that, by means other than fire, Carroll had intentionally or knowingly damaged the property of another, without the other's consent, in an amount exceeding $1,500.00. HRS § 708-821(1)(b). We have previously held that evidence of the cost of reasonable repairs is an appropriate means to establish the amount of damages as an element of the crime of criminal property damage. State v. Pardee, 86 Hawai' i 165, 170, 
948 P.2d 586, 591 (lApp. 1997). Here, Yamada estimated the repair cost for the damages inflicted to the body of the statue at $3,500.00. Such testimony was sufficient evidence to support Carroll's conviction of Criminal Property Damage in the Second Degree in Count 2.
14 
We also conclude that there was sufficient evidence to
 
support a finding as to the value of the stolen pipe and chain, 
to convict Carroll of Theft in the Third Degree in Count 3. For
 this offense, the State was required to establish that the value
 of the stolen pipe and chain exceeded $100.00. See HRS
 
14 We note that the actual replacement and repair costs to both the
spear and the statue could not be ascertained at trial because the services
and materials used to restore the statue were volunteered and donated. 
9
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 708-832(1)(a). At trial, the State offered the testimony of
 
Ehrenlechner, the Manager of Bayfront Motors, to testify about
 the approximate market value of the stolen property. 
Ehrenlechner estimated the aggregate value of the stolen pipe and
 chain at approximately $135.00 based on the price that he had
 originally paid for the materials in 2010 or 2011. Although
 Ehrenlechner's estimate of the pipe and chain was not based on
 the current market price, it was still adequate evidence for the
 trier of fact to determine whether the stolen property's value
 exceeded $100.00 at the time of the offense. See Kahele-Bishop,
 
2017 WL 430844 at *5-6(holding that complainant's testimony that
 the contents of stolen bag were purchased for more than $300 was
 sufficient to prove the value element in Theft in the Second
 Degree). 
Accordingly, we conclude that the evidence presented at 
trial on the value of the stolen portion of the bronze spear, the damage inflicted to the statue, and the value of the stolen pipe and chain, taken in the light most favorable to the State, was sufficient to support a prima facie case so that a reasonable mind might fairly conclude Carroll's guilt as to all three counts beyond a reasonable doubt. See Juhn, 83 Hawai' i at 481, 927 P.2d 
at 1364. 
(3) Sentencing. Finally, we conclude that the Circuit
 
Court did not abuse its discretion in sentencing Carroll to the
 indeterminate five-year term of incarceration. As articulated by
 the Supreme Court of Hawai' i in State v. Mundon, 
A sentencing judge generally has broad discretion in
imposing a sentence. The applicable standard of review
for sentencing or resentencing matters is whether the
court committed plain and manifest abuse of discretion
in its decision. Factors which indicate a plain and
manifest abuse of discretion are arbitrary or capricious
action by the judge and a rigid refusal to consider the
defendant's contentions. And, generally, to constitute
an abuse it must appear that the court clearly exceeded
the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles
of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a
party litigant.
 
121 Hawai' i 339, 349, 219 P.3d 1126, 1136 (2009)(citations 
omitted). Here, no plain and manifest abuse of discretion was 
10
   
 
  
     
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
committed by the Circuit Court in its Judgment. In sentencing
 
Carroll, the Circuit Court considered a variety of factors,
 including the sentencing factors set forth in HRS § 706-606
 (2014),
15 the State and Carroll's arguments on sentencing, and
 
the nature of the offense, and then determined that the
 indeterminate five-year term of incarceration was the appropriate
 sentence. 
Carroll's contention that the Circuit Court had
 
penalized him for exercising his constitutional right to a trial
 by sentencing him to the indeterminate five-year term of
 incarceration is unsupported by the record and without merit. 
The Circuit Court's discussion with Carroll regarding the
 possible consequences of rejecting the State's plea agreement
 prior to trial was permissible, and an "attribute of any
 legitimate system which tolerates and encourages the negotiation
 of pleas." Bordenkircher v. Hayes, 434 U.S. 357, 364 (1978). 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
 sentencing Carroll to the indeterminate five-year term of
 incarceration in its Judgment.
 
15 HRS § 706-606 provides:
 
§706-606 Factors to be considered in imposing a
 
sentence. The court, in determining the particular sentence to be
imposed, shall consider:
(1) 	The nature and circumstances of the offense and
 
the history and characteristics of the defendant;
 
(2) 	The need for the sentence imposed:
(a) 	To reflect the seriousness of the offense,
to promote respect for law, and to provide
just punishment for the offense;
(b) 	To afford adequate deterrence to criminal
conduct;
(c) 	To protect the public from further crimes
of the defendant; and
(d) 	To provide the defendant with needed
 educational or vocational training, medical
care, or other correctional treatment in
the most effective manner;
(3) 	The kinds of sentences available; and
(4) 	The need to avoid unwarranted sentence
 disparities among defendants with similar records
who have been found guilty of similar conduct. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit's
 
"Judgment of Conviction and Sentence", filed July 27, 2016, is
 
affirmed, except that we remand the case to the circuit court to
 correct the typographic errors contained in the Judgment and
 Mittimus as referenced in footnote 5 herein.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 31, 2018. 
On the briefs: 
Keith S. Shigetomi,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Ha'aheo M. Kaho' ohalahala,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
12
 