 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000075 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE INTEREST OF K.D.-V
 
(FC-SS NO. 07-1-0098 - Confidential)
and
 
IN THE INTEREST OF K.D.-K
 
(FC-SS NO. 08-1-0092 - Confidential)
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Appellant-Mother (Mother) of KV and KK (Children)
 
appeals from the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order
 
(FOF/COL/Order), filed on January 11, 2011 in the Family Court of
 
1
the Second Circuit (Family Court).  The Family Court found,
 
among other things, that Mother was not willing or able to
 
provide Children with a safe family home, even with the
 
assistance of a service plan, and it was not reasonably
 
foreseeable that she would become willing or able to do so within
 
a reasonable period of time. The court awarded permanent custody
 
of Children to the Department of Human Services (DHS) and
 
approved DHS's permanent plans dated November 1, 2010. 
On appeal, Mother argues that the Family Court erred in
 
finding that she was not willing or able to provide Children with
 
1
 The Honorable Geronimo Valdriz, Jr. presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan,
 
and it was not reasonably foreseeable that she would become
 
willing or able to do so within a reasonable period of time. 
She maintains that: (1) many significant findings of the court
 
relating to her parental unfitness were based on DHS's
 
Supplemental Safe Family Home Report filed on November 13, 2009
 
(11/13/09 Report), which was inadmissible because Mother never
 
had an opportunity to cross-examine the preparer of the report,
 
DHS social worker Maureen Van Denburgh (Van Denburgh), about its
 
contents; (2) the court's Findings of Fact (FOFs) 50, 54, 55,
 
71, 93 and 105 are clearly erroneous; and (3) Mother demonstrated
 
that she was presently willing and able to provide Children with
 
a safe and stable family home by complying with her service plan,
 
as evidenced by the court's statement that DHS was ready to begin
 
reunifying her with Children. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Mother's points of error as follows:
 
The family court did not clearly err in concluding that
 
Mother was not able or willing to provide a safe family home for
 
Children and it was not reasonably foreseeable that she would be
 
able or willing to do so within a reasonable period of time.
 
(1) Mother does not indicate and the record does not 
reveal that Mother objected to the family court's consideration 
of the 11/13/09 Report or her inability to cross-examine Van 
Denburgh about its contents, and this argument is waived. 
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4)(iii). 
Even if the argument were not waived, there was
 
substantial evidence in the October 26, 2010 Final Safe Family
 Home Report prepared by C. Satyo Dosland (Dosland), and in
 
Dosland's testimony at the show cause and termination of parental
 
rights hearings respectively, to support the family court's
 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Conclusions of Law (COLs); and Mother had ample opportunity to
 
cross-examine Dosland at the hearings. 
(2) FOFs 50, 54, 55, and 93 are not clearly erroneous
 
because there is substantial evidence in the record to support
 
them. 
FOF 71 is clearly erroneous because the evidence shows
 
that KV has been placed in fourteen, not seventeen foster homes. 
This error is harmless because it does not affect Mother's
 
substantial rights. Hawaii Rules of Evidence Rule 103(a). 
(3) The Family Court did not clearly err in determining
 
that Mother failed to demonstrate she was willing and able to
 
provide Children with a safe and stable family home, despite her
 
compliance with her service plan, and FOF 105 is not clearly
 
erroneous, because there was substantial evidence in the record
 
to support the court's COLs, and DHS gave Mother more than the
 
required amount of time to demonstrate that she was willing and
 
able to provide Children with a safe family home or that it was
 
reasonably foreseeable that she would become willing or able to
 
do so within a reasonable amount of time. Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes ยง 587A-33(h)(i) (Supp. 2010). 
Therefore, we affirm the Family Court's January 11, 
2011 Findings of Fact, Conclusion of Law and Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 23, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Davelynn M. Tengan
for Mother-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Brent K. Osterstock Jennifer M.P.E. Oana Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Appellee Department of
Human Services Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
3 