      
      
          
                
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000542 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
HAU PHAN, also known as HAU PHAM,
Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2FC161000394) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Hau Phan, also known as Hau Pham 
(Phan) appeals from the Judgment Conviction and Sentence 
(Judgment) entered by the Family Court of the Second Circuit (family court)  on June 15, 2017.  Plaintiff-Appellee State of 
Hawai
#i (State) charged Phan with Abuse of Family or Household 
Member, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 709-906 (Supp. 2016),  for an incident that occurred on August 11, 2016. 
21
1 The Honorable Richard T. Bissen, Jr. presided. 
2 HRS § 709-906 provides, in relevant part: 
§709-906   Abuse  of  family  or  household  members;  penalty.  
(1)   It  shall  be  unlawful  for  any  person,  singly  or  in
concert,  to  physically  abuse  a  family  or  household  member  or
to  refuse  compliance  with  the  lawful  order  of  a  police  officer
under  subsection  (4).   The  police,  in  investigating  any
complaint  of  abuse  of  a  family  or  household  member,  upon
request,  may  transport  the  abused  person  to  a  hospital  or  safe
shelter. 
F
or the purposes of this section:
. . . . 
"Family or household member":(a) Means spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, former       
     
       
    
     
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After a jury trial, Phan was found guilty as charged. 
On appeal, Phan argues the family court erred by: (1) 
failing to obtain a knowing, intelligent, and voluntary waiver of 
Phan's constitutional right not to testify; (2) admitting into evidence State's Exhibit 8 because it constituted double hearsay; (3) admitting into evidence State's Exhibit 9 because its probative value was outweighed by its prejudicial effect; (5) instructing the jury as to jury instructions numbers 13 and 27 because they were prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading; (6) sentencing Phan to the maximum one-year jail term; and (7) setting Phan's bail pending appeal of his misdemeanor conviction at $50,000.  In addition, Phan contends that trial counsel provided ineffective assistance of counsel and that his due process right to a fair trial was violated. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments they advance and the issues they raise, as well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Phan's points of error as follows. 
A. Pre-Trial Advisement and Ultimate Tachibana Colloquy 
Phan argues that the family court's advisements as to 
Phan's rights to and not to testify were defective for two 
reasons: (1) the pre-trial advisement was premature and untimely; and (2) both the pre-trial advisement and the ultimate Tachibanaadvisement were deficient because the family court failed to engage in a "true colloquy" and instead merely recited a litany of rights. 
3 
On March 9, 2017, at a hearing on various motions in 
limine and a motion to admit evidence, the family court administered its pre-trial advisement of Phan's rights to and not 
spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, persons in a
dating relationship as defined under section586-1, persons who have a child in common,parents, children, persons related byconsanguinity, and persons jointly residing orformerly residing in the same dwelling unit[.] 
3 Tachibana  v.  State,  79  Hawai #i  226,  900  P.2d  1293  (1995). 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to testify:4 
THE COURT: I want you to know that you have a
constitutional right to testify in your own defense.  You 
should consult with your lawyer regarding the decision totestify.  However, it is ultimately your decision and no onecan prevent you from testifying should you choose to do so.If you decide to testify, the prosecutor will be allowed tocross-examine you.
You also have a constitutional right not to testify
and to remain silent.  If you choose not to testify, thejury will be instructed that it cannot hold your silenceagainst you in deciding your case.
If you have not testified by the end of the trial, I
will question you to ensure that it was your decision not totestify.
Do you have any questions about what I've just
explained? 
THE DEFENDANT: No, your Honor. 
THE COURT: All right.  Thank you. 
The jury trial began the following Monday, on March 13, 2017. 
Following the State's case-in-chief, the defense 
indicated that Phan would be testifying.  Prior to Phan 
testifying, the family court administered the ultimate Tachibana colloquy, stating: 
THE COURT: All right.  Mr. Phan, as I discussed with
you before the start of trial, you have a constitutional
right to testify in your own defense.  Although you shouldconsult with your lawyer regarding the decision to testify,it is your decision, and no one can prevent you fromtestifying should you choose to do so.  If you decide totestify, the prosecutor will be allowed to cross-examineyou. 
You also have a constitutional right not to testify
and to remain silent.  If you choose not to testify, thejury will be instructed that it cannot hold your silenceagainst you in deciding your case.
You understand that, sir? 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, your Honor. THE COURT: And it's your decision to testify in this 
case? 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, your Honor. THE COURT: Very good.  Let's call in the jury. 
Phan first contends that the family court's pre-trial 
advisement, as required by State v. Lewis, 94 Hawai# i 292, 12 
P.3d 1233 (2000), was untimely and premature as it "was provided 
to Phan four days before trial actually commenced" and therefore 
4 The  family  court  asked  the  parties  if  there  was  any  objection  to
administering  the  pre-trial  advisement  on  this  date,  rather  than  administering  it
on  the  first  day  of  trial.   Defense  counsel  stated  that  it  did  not  object. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"the court cannot be assured that Phan actually had an 
understanding of his constitutional right not to testify at his trial."  To the extent Phan is arguing on appeal that the court is required to conduct the pre-trial advisement within a certain period of time before trial, he cites no authority for that proposition and we find none.  Lewis merely requires that the advisement occur prior to trial.  Id. at 297, 12 P.3d at 1238. Given the record in this case, the timing involved, and that the defense expressly did not object to the timing of the pre-trial advisement, Phan's argument regarding the timeliness of the court's pre-trial advisement is without merit. 
Phan next contends that the family court's pre-trial 
Lewis advisement and ultimate Tachibana colloquy were not true colloquys but were instead mere recitals of a litany of rights without an ascertainment that Phan actually understood each of his rights. 
Regarding the pre-trial advisement, the supreme court 
in Lewis established that trial courts, prior to the start of trial, shall 
(1) inform the defendant of his or her personal right to
testify or not to testify and (2) alert the defendant that,if he or she has not testified by the end of the trial, thecourt will briefly question him or her to ensure that thedecision not to testify is the defendant's own decision. 
Id. at 297, 12 P.3d at 1238 (emphasis added) (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted).  Here, in the pre-trial advisement, the family court fully informed Phan of his rights to and not to testify and alerted Phan that, if he had not testified by the end of the trial, the court would question him to ensure that it was Phan's own decision not to testify.  The pre-trial advisement thus met the requirements established in Lewis.  We therefore conclude that the family court properly conducted the pre-trial advisement under Lewis. 
Regarding the ultimate Tachibana colloquy, in Lewis, 
the Hawai# i Supreme Court also held that an ultimate Tachibana 
colloquy is not required in cases where a defendant has indicated 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that he or she does intend to testify.   Lewis, 94 Hawai# i at 
296-97, 12 P.3d at 1237-38.  In this case, the defense indicated 
that Phan would be testifying and Phan did actually testify. Therefore the family court was not required to conduct the ultimate Tachibana colloquy at all and any alleged error associated with the court's colloquy is without merit. 5
The family court did not err in its pre-trial 
advisement or the ultimate Tachibana colloquy.  There is nothing in the record to indicate that Phan's decision to testify was anything other than voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently made. 
B. Admission of Evidence 
Phan challenges the family court's admission of the 
Abuse of Family or Household Members Victim Voluntary Statement 
Form (Victim Statement Form) completed by the complaining witness, Ngoc Vu (Vu), during her statement to police (State's Exhibit 8).  On appeal, Phan argues that the Victim Statement Form constituted inadmissible double hearsay because Vu's employer, Minh Nguyen (Nguyen), assisted Vu by translating between English and Vietnamese.  However, Phan's objection at trial was to the admission of the Victim Statement Form to refresh Vu's memory during her testimony; Phan's objection was not regarding double hearsay.  Therefore, we review the admission of the Victim Statement Form for plain error.  See 
Hawai# i Rules 
of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 52(b) (1977) ("Plain errors or defects affecting substantial rights may be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the court."); Hawai# i Rules 
of Evidence (HRE) Rule 103(d) (2016) ("Nothing in this rule precludes taking notice of plain errors affecting substantial rights although they were not brought to the attention of the court."). 
The State offered the Victim Statement Form into 
5 We  note  that  the  Hawai #i  Supreme  Court  recently  held  in  State  v. 
Torres,  144  Hawai #i  282,  292-95,  439  P.3d  234,  244-47  (2019),  that  a  Tachibana
colloquy  must  be  given  in  all  trials,  including  those  where  the  defendant  elects
to  take  the  stand.   The  supreme  court  expressly  stated,  however,  that  this
requirement  is  to  be  given  prospective  application  "in  trials  beginning  after  the
filing  date  of  [Torres]."   Id. at  295,  439  P.3d  at  247.   Phan's  trial  occurred 
prior  to  the  Torres  decision  and  is  thus  not  subject  to  this  requirement. 
5       
        
      
       
       
      
       
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence under HRE Rule 802.1(1)(B) (2016),  which "provides for 
substantive use of most prior inconsistent witness statements" as 
an exception to the hearsay rule.  Commentary to HRE Rule 613 (2016); see also State v. Canady, 80 Hawai# i 469, 480, 911 P.2d 
104, 115 (App. 1996) (stating that HRE Rule 802.1 adopted the federal exception to common law allowing "prior inconsistent statements to be used as substantive proof of the matters asserted in the statement" if the statement's trustworthiness is assured). 6
In State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai# i 131, 137, 913 P.2d 57, 
63 (1996), the Hawai# i Supreme Court outlined the foundational 
requirements for evidence admitted pursuant to HRE Rule 802.1(1)(B): 
(1) a witness must testify about the subject matter of his
or her prior statements so that the witness is subject tocross-examination concerning the subject matter of thoseprior statements; (2) the witness's prior statements must beinconsistent with his or her testimony; (3) the priorinconsistent statements must be reduced to writing andsigned or otherwise adopted or approved by the witness; (4)the prior inconsistent statements must be offered incompliance with HRE Rule 613(b) (1993), which requires that,on direct or cross-examination, the circumstances of theprior inconsistent statements have been brought to theattention of the witness, and the witness has been askedwhether he or she made the prior inconsistent statements. 
(Footnote omitted.) 
Here, Vu's statements in the Victim Statement Form met 
all the requirements for admissibility as substantive evidence of 
a prior inconsistent statement: 
(1)  At trial, the State directly examined Vu as a 
witness and elicited testimony from her regarding the night of the incident, the events that led to her injuries on that night, as well as the statements she made in the Victim Statement Form 
6 HRE Rule 802.1 provides, in relevant part: 
Rule  802.1   Hearsay  exception;  prior  statements  by 
witnesses.   The  following  statements  previously  made  by
witnesses  who  testify  at  the  trial  or  hearing  are  not  excluded
by  the  hearsay  rule:
(
1) I
nconsistent statement. The declarant is subject to
cross-examination concerning the subject matter of the
declarant's statement, the statement is inconsistent with thedeclarant's testimony, the statement is offered in compliancewith rule 613(b), and the statement was:
. . . 
(
B) Reduced to writing and signed or otherwise adoptedor approved by the declarant[.] 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
alleging that Phan injured her.  On cross-examination, Vu 
testified that her injuries were caused by her own actions in pulling away from Phan.  Thus, the State made Vu subject to cross-examination by defense counsel regarding the subject matter of Vu's prior statements in the Victim Statement Form.  See Canady, 80 Hawai# i at 480-81, 911 P.2d at 115-16 (holding that 
HRE Rule 802.1(1) requires, "as a guarantee of the trustworthiness of a prior inconsistent statement, . . . that the witness be capable of testifying substantively about the event, allowing the trier of fact to meaningfully compare the prior version of the event with the version recounted at trial"). 
(2)  During Vu's direct examination by the State, Vu 
testified that Phan did not punch her on the night of the incident.  On the Victim Statement Form completed on the night of the incident, however, Vu stated that she was punched.  Thus, Vu's prior statements in the Victim Statement Form were inconsistent with her testimony at trial. 
(3)  The record indicates that Vu's prior statements 
were reduced to writing in the Victim Statement Form, which she signed.  Vu testified at trial that the responses on the form were in her own handwriting and that the initials and the signature were her own. 
(4)  The circumstances of Vu's prior inconsistent 
statements were brought to Vu's attention when the State asked her whether she remembered filling out the Victim Statement Form with the police on the night of the incident and whether she made the statements in the Victim Statement Form.  Vu answered affirmatively.  Thus, the prior inconsistent statements in the Victim Statement Form were offered in compliance with HRE Rule 613(b). 
Nguyen's assistance in translating the Victim Statement 
Form for Vu did not create a layer of hearsay rendering the Victim Statement Form inadmissible as evidence.  Although it is clear from the record that Nguyen translated the contents of the 
7         
   
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
form for Vu from English to Vietnamese,7 Nguyen's translation of 
the form to Vu was not an out-of-court statement offered for the 
truth of the matter asserted and therefore does not constitute hearsay. 
It appears from the record before us that the 
statements in the Victim Statement Form were made by Vu herself. Both Nguyen and Vu herself testified that the form was completed in Vu's handwriting.  Vu also testified that in completing the form, "I just saw the words [on the form], so I copied them."  To clarify Vu's response, the State asked Vu whether Nguyen had translated the form for her, and Vu responded affirmatively.  The State then confirmed whether Vu understood the form in light of Nguyen's translation, and Vu again responded affirmatively. Therefore, it appears that Vu's statements on the Victim Statement Form were hers and hers alone, based on her understanding of the form.  It appears Vu's statements on the Victim Statement Form were not translated by Nguyen and therefore do not constitute double hearsay.  Thus, we conclude that the family court did not plainly err in admitting the Victim Statement Form into evidence. 
7 During direct examination, Nguyen was questioned about the Victim
Statement Form as follows: 
Q.   And  you  helped  translate  for  [Vu]  during  her  written
statement  [to  the  police]? 
A.   Yes.
 
. . . . 
Q.   Mr.  Nguyen,  if  you  could  take  a  look.   I'm  showing
you  what  has  been  admitted  into  evidence  as  State's  Exhibit  8
[Victim  Statement  Form].   Do  you  recognize  that? 
A.   Yeah. 
Q.   And  is  that  the  written  statement  that  you  helped
translate  for  Ngoc  Vu  that  night? 
A.   Yeah. 
Q.   And  is  that  Ngoc  Vu's  handwriting? 
A.   Yeah. 
Q.   And  do  you  remember  her  reporting  that  to  police? 
A.   Yeah. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Phan also challenges the family court's admission into 
evidence of the August 12, 2016 Ex-Parte Petition for an HRS 586 
Temporary Restraining Order (TRO Petition) filed by Vu (State's Exhibit 9).  The family court admitted the TRO Petition into evidence without any objection from the defense.  We therefore review the issue for plain error.  See HRPP Rule 52(b). 
Under HRE Rule 404(b) (2016), "bad act" evidence is 
admissible when it is relevant for some purpose other than to show action in conformity therewith.  See State v. Renon, 73 Haw. 23, 31-32, 828 P.2d 1266, 1270 (1992).  Once relevance is established, the court must then determine whether the probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.  HRE Rule 403 (2016).  On appeal, Phan contends that the probative value of the prior acts of domestic abuse alleged by Vu in the TRO Petition were substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. 
In State v. Clark, 83 Hawai# i 289, 302, 926 P.2d 194, 
207 (1996), the 
Hawai# i Supreme Court held that, 
where a victim recants allegations of abuse, evidence of
prior incidents of violence between the victim and thedefendant are relevant to show the trier of fact the context of the relationship between the victim and the defendant,where[] . . . that relationship is offered as a possibleexplanation for the victim's recantation. 
Here, Vu recanted her allegations that Phan injured her 
on the night of the incident.  On the night of the incident, Vu 
reported to the police that Phan "physically hurt, harmed or injured" her, causing injury to her forehead, nose, chin, hand, and knees.  At trial, however, Vu testified that her injuries were a result of her accidental fall, that Phan did not punch her, and that she "exaggerated a little bit just to scare [Phan] a little" because she was "partly afraid, partly angry[.]"  The prior incidents of domestic violence between Phan and Vu were used by the State to show the jury the context of Vu's relationship with Phan, which was relevant because the relationship was offered as the basis for Vu's recantation at 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial.8 
We next determine whether the probative value of the 
prior bad acts evidence was outweighed by the prejudicial 
effect.   When weighing probative value against prejudicial 
effect in the context of an HRE Rule 403 analysis, a court must consider a variety of factors, including: 9
the strength of the evidence as to the commission of the
other crime, the similarities between the crimes, theinterval of time that has elapsed between the crimes, theneed for the evidence, the efficacy of alternative proof,and the degree to which the evidence probably will rouse thejury to overmastering hostility. 
State v. Behrendt, 124 Hawai# i 90, 106, 237 P.3d 1156, 1172 
(2010) (citation omitted). 
The incidents of Phan's prior violence and Vu's 
behavior were admissible as probative evidence to show the jury 
Vu's relationship with Phan, which was offered to explain Vu's recantation of the abuse that was the subject of the charged offense against Phan at trial.  Further, the State emphasized the fact that the February 14, 2016 and July 24, 2016 incidents were unreported.  Thus, the need for the evidence warrants the admission of the prior bad acts evidence and, in light of Vu's inconsistent testimony, the admission of the TRO Petition itself. As to the prejudicial impact of the evidence in the TRO Petition, the family court instructed the jury in Jury Instruction 24: 
You have heard evidence that the Defendant at another time,
may have engaged in other acts.  You must not use this evidence to conclude that the Defendant is a person of bad 
8 At  trial,  the  family  court  confirmed  that  the  State  could  question
Vu  as  to  the  prior  incidents  of  violence  and  the  State  clarified  that  it  would
only  bring  in  the  TRO  Petition  itself  if  Vu's  responses  to  the  State's
questioning  was  inconsistent  with  what  she  had  reported  in  the  TRO  Petition.  
With  regard  to  the  admission  of  the  TRO  Petition  itself,  the  family  court
properly  admitted  the  document  as  a  prior  inconsistent  statement  under  HRE  Rule
802.1.   Vu  testified  that  on  February  14,  2016,  Phan  threw  a  vase  in  her
direction  but  it  did  not  hit  her.   Vu  also  testified  that  on  July  24,  2016,  Phan
did  not  slap  her  face  nor  did  he  punch  her  in  the  chest.   The  TRO  Petition  was 
admitted  to  show  that  Vu  had  previously  reported  that  on  February  14,  2016,  Phan
threw  a  flower  vase  at  her  face  and  left  a  bump  and  a  bruise,  and  on  July  24,
2016,  Phan  slapped  her  face  and  punched  her  in  the  chest. 
9 We  note  that  the  family  court  did  not  conduct  an  HRE  Rule  403
analysis  on  the  record.   However,  that  is  not  to  say  that  the  family  court  failed
to  engage  in  such  analysis.   State  v.  Bates,  84  Hawai #i  211,  228,  933  P.2d  48,  65
(1997)  ("[W]e  are  unaware  of  any  precedent[]  .  .  .  requiring  a  trial  court  to
state  for  purposes  of  the  record,  the  balancing  of  competing  interests  under  HRE
Rule  403.   In  the  absence  of  this  requirement,  it  cannot  be  inferred  that  by
reason  of  this  'on  the  record'  omission,  the  court  failed  to  engage  in  the
requisite  balancing."). 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
character and therefore must have committed the offenses 
[sic] charged in this case.  The evidence is being allowedto provide you with the context of the relationship betweenthe complaining witness and the defendant and to give you apossible explanation for the complaining witness's differingtestimony in court and for no other purpose. 
This instruction alleviated any risk of prejudice potentially 
caused by the admission of the TRO Petition.  See State v.Asuncion, 110 Hawai# i 154, 166-67, 129 P.3d 1182, 1194-95 (App. 
2006).  Thus, the probative value outweighed any prejudicial effect and the family court did not plainly err in admitting the TRO Petition into evidence and in further allowing the State to cross-examine Vu and Phan as to the prior incidents of violence that were the subject of the TRO Petition.
C. Jury Instructions 
Phan next argues that Jury Instructions 13 and 27 were 
prejudicially insufficient.  No objection was made to either of 
these jury instructions below. 
When jury instructions or the omission thereof are at issue
on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when read andconsidered as a whole, the instructions given areprejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, ormisleading.  Erroneous instructions are presumptivelyharmful and are a ground for reversal unless itaffirmatively appears from the record as a whole that theerror was not prejudicial.  [However, e]rror is not to beviewed in isolation and considered purely in the abstract.It must be examined in the light of the entire proceedingsand given the effect which the whole record shows it to beentitled.  In that context, the real question becomeswhether there is a reasonable possibility that error mighthave contributed to conviction.  If there is such a reasonable possibility in a criminal case, then the error isnot harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, and the judgment ofconviction on which it may have been based must be setaside. 
State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai# i 327, 334, 141 P.3d 974, 981 (2006) 
(brackets in original) (quoting State v. Gonsalves, 108 Hawai
#i 
289, 292-93, 119 P.3d 597, 600-01 (2005) (internal citations, 
quotation marks, indentations, and paragraphing omitted; bracketed material added)). 
Jury Instruction 13 provided as follows: 
Several times in the trial, I have told you that certain
evidence was allowed into this trial for a particular andlimited purpose.  When you consider that evidence, you mustlimit your consideration to that purpose. 
Phan contends that Jury Instruction 13 was prejudicially 
insufficient because "it failed to clearly instruct the jury that 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the extrinsic evidence concerning the complainant's inconsistent 
statements was admissible only for purposes of impeachment and not substantive evidence of Phan's guilt."  Phan further contends that the family court also failed to give any other separate instruction clarifying this point for the jury. 
Contrary to Phan's contention, we find that the family 
court sufficiently provided a limiting instruction to the jury regarding the prior bad acts evidence.  As discussed supra, the family court read Jury Instruction 24, which clearly instructed the jury of the limited purpose for the extrinsic evidence and that it was not to be used as substantive evidence of Phan's guilt in this case.  We conclude that, in light of the family court giving Jury Instruction 24, Jury Instruction 13 was not prejudicially insufficient.  See State v. Gomes, 93 Hawai
#i 13, 
18, 995 P.2d 314, 319 (2000) ("When jury instructions or the omission thereof are at issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading[.]" (citation and quotation marks omitted)). 
Jury Instruction 27 was the general unanimity 
instruction and provided as follows: 
The law allows the introduction of evidence for the purpose
of showing that there is more than one act upon which proofof an element of an offense may be based.  In order for the prosecution to prove an element, all twelve jurors mustunanimously agree that the same act has been proved beyond areasonable doubt. 
Phan contends that Jury Instruction 27 was prejudicially 
insufficient and misleading because "it failed to clearly instruct the jury that it must be unanimous with respect to both the specific conduct that caused the physical abuse and the specific bodily injury."  Phan further contends that the State alleged multiple acts undertaken by and injuries caused by Phan to Vu, and the State failed to specify: (1) which act constituted the "conduct" element of the charged offense; and (2) which injury constituted the "result of conduct" element of the charged offense. 
In support of his argument, Phan relies on State v. 
Arceo, 84 Hawai# i 1, 32-33, 928 P.2d 843, 874-75 (1996), where 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Hawai# i Supreme Court established that 
when separate and distinct culpable acts are subsumed within
a single count charging a sexual assault—any one of whichcould support a conviction thereunder—and the defendant isultimately convicted by a jury of the charged offense, thedefendant's constitutional right to a unanimous verdict isviolated unless one or both of the following occurs: (1) ator before the close of its case-in-chief, the prosecution isrequired to elect the specific act upon which it is relyingto establish the "conduct" element of the charged offense;or (2) the trial court gives the jury a specific unanimityinstruction, i.e., an instruction that advises the jury thatall twelve of its members must agree that the sameunderlying criminal act has been proved beyond a reasonabledoubt. 
Arceo does not support Phan's argument.  Arceo does not 
require a unanimity instruction regarding a specific bodily 
injury or which injury resulted from certain conduct.  Moreover, in State v. Aki, 102 Hawai# i 457, 77 P.3d 948 (App. 2003), cert. 
denied, 102 Hawai 
#i 526, 78 P.3d 339 (2003), we addressed a 
similar issue where the defendant was charged with one count of Abuse of Family or Household Members but there were separate and distinct acts upon which the charge was brought.  In Aki, there were two acts: "(1) Aki, with an open hand, pushed Clark in the mouth, and (2) Aki grabbed and pulled Clark's hair."  Id. We held that "[i]n a case like this involving an offense like this, the focus is on the single incident of culpable conduct, and not on its component acts, and the Arceo doctrine simply does not apply."  Id. 
The facts of this case are similar to those in Aki. 
The State charged Phan as follows: 
That on or about the 11th day of August, 2016, in the
County of Maui, State of Hawaii, HAU PHAN, also known as HAU
PHAM did intentionally, knowingly or recklessly engage inand cause physical abuse of a family or household member, towit, Ngoc Vu, thereby committing the offense of Abuse ofFamily or Household Member in violation of Section 709-906of the Hawaii Revised Statutes. 
The State asserted during trial that Vu "struck her head on the 
ground when [Phan] pulled her back towards the car" and Phan "dragged [Vu] on the ground, scraping her knees."  Although these are two separate acts, the focus of the offense of Abuse of Family or Household Members is on the single incident of culpable conduct and the Arceo doctrine is not applicable.  Id. Accordingly, the general unanimity instruction was sufficient, 
13           
     
       
      
       
    
     
        
   
       
    
     
   
       
        
        NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and the family court did not plainly err in failing to give the 
jury a specific unanimity instruction explaining that all twelve members had to agree that the same underlying criminal act and the same corresponding injury had been proved beyond a reasonable doubt. 
D. Sentencing 
Phan argues that the family court abused its discretion 
in imposing the maximum one-year jail term despite Vu's position 
in favor of leniency for Phan.
10 
A sentencing judge generally has broad discretion in
imposing a sentence.  The applicable standard of review forsentencing or resentencing matters is whether the courtcommitted plain and manifest abuse of discretion in itsdecision.  Factors which indicate a plain and manifest abuseof discretion are arbitrary or capricious action by thejudge and a rigid refusal to consider the defendant'scontentions.  And, generally, to constitute an abuse it mustappear that the court clearly exceeded the bounds of reasonor disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to thesubstantial detriment of a party litigant. 
State v. Mundon, 121 Hawai# i 339, 349, 219 P.3d 1126, 1136 (2009) 
(citations omitted). 
We find no plain and manifest abuse of discretion in 
the family court's decision to sentence Phan to the maximum one-
year jail term.  In sentencing Phan, the family court considered the sentencing factors set forth in HRS § 706-606 (2014).
11 
10 Prior  to  trial,  Vu  had  submitted  a  request  to  withdraw  the 
prosecution.   After  the  jury  verdict,  Vu  submitted  a  letter  of  support  on  behalf
of  Phan  for  the  court's  consideration  in  sentencing,  asking  the  court  to  be
lenient  and  to  "give  him  a  second  chance[.]" 
11 HRS  §  706-606  provides: 
     §706-606   Factors  to  be  considered  in  imposing  a 
sentence.   The  court,  in  determining  the  particular  sentence
to  be  imposed,  shall  consider:
(
1) The nature and circumstances of the offense and the 
history and characteristics of the defendant;
(2) The need for the sentence imposed:
(a) To reflect the seriousness of the offense,
to promote respect for law, and to providejust punishment for the offense; 
(b) To afford adequate deterrence to criminalconduct; 
(c) To protect the public from further crimes
of the defendant; and 
(d) To provide the defendant with needed
educational or vocational training, medicalcare, or other correctional treatment inthe most effective manner; 
(3) The kinds of sentences available; and 
(4) The need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities
among defendants with similar records who have been found 
14    
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After considering these factors, the family court determined that 
the one-year term was the appropriate sentence.  The only argument that Phan raises on appeal is essentially that Vu implored the family court to be lenient.  Although Vu's letter may be relevant to a determination of the factors, no single factor is dispositive and the trial court is given broad discretion in affording weight to the various factors.  See, e.g., State v. Kong, 131 Hawai# i 94, 101, 315 P.3d 720, 727 
(2013) (weight afforded to sentencing factors is generally left to the discretion of sentencing court); State v. Rauch, 94 Hawai# i 315, 328, 13 P.3d 324, 337 (2000) (HRS § 706-606 requires 
the sentencing court to weigh and balance various factors and does not indicate that any given factor is dispositive). Accordingly, the family court did not abuse its discretion in sentencing Phan to a one-year sentence.
E. Bail 
Phan argues that the family court's refusal to continue 
Phan's $2,000 bail pending appeal and decision to instead 
increase the bail amount to $50,000 violated HRS § 804-4 (2014) and the holding in State v. Kiese, 126 Hawai# i 494, 273 P.3d 1180 
(2012).
12 
HRS § 804-9 (2014) provides that "[t]he amount of bail 
rests in the discretion of the justice or judge[.]"  The 
guilty of similar conduct. 
12 In  Kiese,  the  Hawai #i  S upreme  Court  held: 
Although  stays  are  discretionary  under  HRS  §  641-14,  HRS
§  804-4(a)  provides,  "The  right  to  bail  shall  continue  after
conviction  of  a  .  .  .  petty  misdemeanor[.]"   See  also  HRS 
§  804-4(b)  ("No  defendant  entitled  to  bail,  .  .  .  shall  be
subject,  without  the  defendant's  written  consent,  to  the
operation  of  any  sentence  passed  upon  the  defendant,  while  any
proceedings  to  procure  a  review  of  any  action  of  the  trial
court  .  .  .  are  pending  and  undetermined,  except  as  provided
in  section  641-14(a)[.]").   In  State  v.  Ortiz,  we  held,  "An
accused  misdemeanant,  petty  misdemeanant,  or  law  violator  on
bail  is  entitled  to  bail  as  a  matter  of  right  after  conviction
and  pending  appellate  review."   74  Haw.  343,  356,  845  P.2d 
547,  553  (1993).   Furthermore,  pursuant  to  State  v.  Miller,  79 
Hawai #i  1 94,  200-01,  900  P.2d  770,  776-77  (1995),  once  release
on  bail  pending  appeal  is  secured,  a  trial  court  is  without
jurisdiction  under  the  sentence  of  probation  that  is  the
subject  of  the  defendant's  appeal. 
12
6 Hawai #i at 510, 273 P.3d at 1196. 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sentencing judge therefore has clear authority to increase a 
defendant's bail pending appeal.  The determination of bail under HRS § 804–9 must be made "on an individualized basis[,]" Pelekai v. White, 75 Haw. 357, 366, 861 P.2d 1205, 1210 (1993), and bail is to be fixed in a reasonable amount, considering the financial status of the defendant and the punishment to be imposed upon him on conviction, Sakamoto v. Won Bae Chang, 56 Haw. 447, 451, 539 P.2d 1197, 1200 (1975).  See also HRS § 804-9 ("In all cases, the officer letting to bail should consider the punishment to be inflicted on conviction, and the pecuniary circumstances of the party accused."). 
In State v. Henley, 136 Hawai# i 471, 481, 363 P.3d 319, 
329 (2015), the 
Hawai# i Supreme Court held that the trial court 
abused its discretion when it increased Henley's bail pending appeal from $200 to $2,000 without tailoring the amount to Henley's individual circumstances.  The supreme court noted that 
[a]lthough Henley's right to bail continued post-conviction,
the circuit court had the authority to change the amount ofbail post-conviction pursuant to its discretionary authorityunder HRS § 804–9.  In exercising its discretion, it wasrequired by HRS § 804–9, governing the amount of bail, to"consider the punishment to be inflicted on conviction, andthe pecuniary circumstances of the party accused." 
Id. at 480-81, 363 P.3d at 328-29. Regarding the punishment to be 
imposed upon Henley on conviction, the trial court initially set bail at $200 when Henley was facing the possibility of one year in jail.  Id. at 481, 363 P.3d at 329.  The trial court ultimately sentenced Henley to 30 days' imprisonment but increased bail to $2,000, to be paid in cash only.  Id. Regarding Henley's pecuniary circumstances, Henley was nineteen years old and was determined to be indigent.  Id. The supreme court ultimately held that the trial court did not make any findings about Henley's individual circumstances that would have justified an increase in bail and instead, "at its core, the bail increase was based simply on the fact that defendant had been convicted, sentenced to jail, and had allegedly 'recently' arrived in Hawai# i, despite his family having settled here."  Id. 
In State v. Gishi, No. CAAP–13–0003756, 2016 WL 
1601041, at *3 (Haw. App. March 31, 2016) (SDO), Gishi was found guilty of felony assault.  We held that the trial court did not 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
abuse its discretion when it raised Gishi's bail based on the 
"egregious nature of his offense" and the trial court's findings that Gishi "not only poses a flight risk but he poses more so a danger to the community . . . ."  Id. 
In this case, the family court reasoned that Phan posed 
a high flight risk and risk of danger to the community based on several factors: (1) Phan's extensive criminal record in several states, which he failed to disclose during his pre-sentence investigation and report interview; (2) Phan had a pending extradition warrant from the State of Washington; (3) the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Immigration and Customs Enforcement had a pending warrant of removal against Phan; (4) Phan had previously failed to appear at a pretrial/trial setting conference in this case, where his $1,000 bail was forfeited and his bail increased to $2,000.  As to Phan's pecuniary circumstances, the family court considered the fact that Phan was gainfully employed. 
Furthermore, defense counsel requested that bail be set 
at $10,000 while the State requested that bail be set at $100,000.  The family court ultimately set bail pending appeal at $50,000, to assure that Phan "will surrender and serve his one-year jail should his conviction and sentence be affirmed on appeal." 
Based on this record, we conclude that the family court 
did not abuse its discretion in considering the factors under HRS § 804-9 and deciding to increase the amount of Phan's bail pending appeal to $50,000.
F. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel 
Phan bases his claim of ineffective assistance of 
counsel only on trial counsel's failure to object to the 
admission of the TRO Petition under HRE Rule 403.  In light of our disposition of Phan's point of error regarding the family court's admission of the TRO Petition, we need not address Phan's contention of ineffective assistance of counsel. 
G. Right to a Fair Trial 
Phan argues that the cumulative effect of the errors 
discussed supra deprived him of a fair trial.  However, in light 
17 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of our disposition of Phan's alleged errors, we conclude that 
Phan was not deprived of a fair trial. 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Judgment 
Conviction and Sentence entered by the Family Court of the Second Circuit on June 15, 2017. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 27, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
Hayden Aluli,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Renee Ishikawa Delizo,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Maui,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
18 