NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000575
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
PETER KALANI BAILEY, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 07-1-0386)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)

 
On June 5, 2008, Defendant-Appellant Peter Kalani 
Bailey was convicted on four counts of attempted sexual assault 
in the first degree. On appeal, this court affirmed. Holding that "there was substantial evidence to support Bailey's conviction on all four counts," the Hawai
'i Supreme Court 
nevertheless vacated the judgment due to juror misconduct and remanded the case to the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit ("Circuit Court") for a new trial. State v. Bailey, 126 Hawai
'i 
383, 399, 271 P.3d 1142, 1158, amended on reconsideration (Mar. 22, 2012). 
On retrial, Bailey was convicted by a jury on three
 
counts of attempted sexual assault in the first degree and one
 count of attempted sexual assault in the third degree. He now
 appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed on
 July 14, 2015 in the Circuit Court.
1/ On appeal, Bailey alleges
 
that the Circuit Court erred in (1) denying his motion to dismiss
 
1/
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
or to reduce charges because it was "inequitable and contrary to
 
2/
 the purpose of the double jeopardy clause" for him to be placed
in jeopardy after being convicted of an "included" offense of the 
same class and grade as an offense for which he could not be retried due to the State of Hawai
'i's failure to present 
sufficient evidence at trial; and (2) in modifying the pattern jury instruction regarding the predicate offense to the attempt charge. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs

 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Bailey's
 appeal as follows and affirm.
 
(1) Bailey argues that the jury in the first trial
 
acquitted him by implication of sexual assault in the first
 degree when it found him guilty of the lesser included offense of
 attempted sexual assault in the first degree. He contends that
 Malufau precludes retrial on double jeopardy grounds for
 attempted sexual assault in the first degree, as an offense of
 the same class and grade of the offense that he was acquitted of.
 
Bailey's argument hinges on the unsupported statement 
that "[i]n the instant case, the jury found there was insufficient evidence to support Sexual Assault in the First Degree." That assertion is without merit. Moreover, Malufau is distinguishable because Bailey was retried on offenses for which a jury had found him guilty based on sufficient evidence. As the supreme court stated, "there was substantial evidence to support Bailey's conviction on all four counts." Bailey, 126 Hawai
'i at 
399, 271 P.3d at 1158. Since the supreme court itself remanded the case to the trial court "for a new trial on the four counts of attempted sexual assault in the first degree[,]" id., we 
2/
 Bailey does not explain, either to the court below or on appeal,
whether his contention relates to the fifth amendment of the United States 
Constitution or Article I, section 10 of the Hawai' i Constitution. Because he 
cites to State v. Malufau, 80 Hawai' i 126, 906 P.2d 612, vacated in part on 
reconsideration (Nov. 30, 1995), however, and because that case addresses bothprovisions, we assume that he intends to argue the application of bothprovisions. 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
decline to find error in the trial court's adherence to that
 
charge. 
(2) Bailey argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
modifying his requested instruction nos. 1-4, which, he notes,
 "were based on Instruction No. 14.04 of the Hawaii Pattern Jury
 Instructions-Criminal." Specifically, Bailey contends that the
 jury was not instructed (i) what the material elements of sexual
 assault in the first degree were, and (ii) that the prosecution
 had to prove all of the material elements of sexual assault in
 the first degree beyond a reasonable doubt. 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
 
principle part because Bailey was charged with attempted sexual
 assault in the first degree and not sexual assault in the first
 degree. Consequently, Bailey's argument that the State must
 prove the elements of sexual assault in the first degree beyond a
 reasonable doubt is a mis-statement of the law. Rather, the
 State need only prove a substantial step and intent to commit the
 intended offense. Haw. Rev. Stat. § 705-500(2) (1993).
 
As to the issue of the Circuit Court's alteration of 
the format of the intended offense's elements from numbered form to paragraph form, it is important to note that Hawai
'i courts 
are not bound by pattern jury instructions. State v. Sawyer, 88 
Hawai'i 325, 335, 966 P.2d 637, 647 (1998) (rejecting the premise 
that deviation from pattern instructions is prejudicial per se). Therefore, we must first determine if the instruction was prejudicial, and if it was, then determine if it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Id. 
The content of the altered instruction in this case
 
accurately conveys the elements of sexual assault in the first
 degree—that a defendant knowingly engages in sexual penetration
 with a minor who is less than fourteen years old. Also in the
 instructions, the jury is instructed as to the definition of
 "knowingly" and "penetration" as it related to the various
 accusations in parenthetical explanations. The remaining element
 of the victim's age is uncontroverted, and also within the realm
 of common sense, so requires no definition. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Bailey's contention that the change in formatting is
 
prejudicial is without merit. Therefore, we affirm the Circuit
 
Court's July 14, 2015 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, December 8, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Keith S. Shigetomi
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Ha'aheo M. Kaho 'ohalahala,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Hawai
'i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4

 