FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
O
F THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
---o0o---
FOR OUR RIGHTS, a Hawai# i corporation,
Diana Lomma, David R. Hamman, Randi Hamman, Janet Eisenbach,
L
evana Lomma Keikaika, Lawrence K. Paille, Geralyn Schulkind,
Leonard Schulkind, Daniel Hoshimoto, Christina Cole,
Francesca Woolger, Na# ea Lindsey, Michael Mazzone,
Lanette J. Harley, and Loraine L. Patch, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v. 
DAVID IGE, in his official capacity as Governor
of the State of Hawai# i, HOLLY T. SHIKADA, in her official
capacity as Attorney General for the State of Hawai# i,
and STATE OF HAWAI# I, Defendants-Appellees 
NO. CAAP-21-0000024 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 5CCV-20-0000091) 
F
EBRUARY 25, 2022 
LEONARD, PRESIDING JUDGE, AND MCCULLEN, J., AND
NAKASONE, J., CONCURRING IN PART  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J. 
This case primarily addresses whether Hawai# i Governor 
David Ige exceeded his statutory authority when he issued a 
series of proclamations declaring a state of emergency in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. For the reasons set forth herein, we hold that Hawaii's Emergency Management Act (defined below) authorizes the 
Hawai#i Governor to declare the existence 
of a state of emergency whenever, in his or her sole judgment, 
the Governor finds that circumstances giving rise to a 
declaration of a state of emergency have occurred (or that there is imminent danger or threat of an emergency), regardless of whether a prior emergency proclamation has been issued based on the same, continuing, and/or otherwise related circumstances. On that basis, we affirm in part the trial court's judgment, but we vacate the trial court's judgment to the extent it was based on mootness. 
Plaintiffs-Appellants For Our Rights, a Hawai# i 
corporation, Diana Lomma, David R. Hamman, Randi Hamman, Janet Eisenbach, Levana Lomma Keikaika, Lawrence K. Paille, Geralyn Schulkind, Leonard Schulkind, Daniel Hashimoto, Christina Cole, Francesca Woolger, Na
#ea Lindsey, Michael Mazzone, Lanette J. 
Harley, and Loraine L. Patch (collectively, For Our Rights or 
Appellants)1 appeal from the December 23, 2020 Final Judgment 
1 It appears that Plaintiff-Appellant Daniel Hashimoto passed away
during the pendency of this appeal with no substitution of a representative. 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit 
(
Circuit Court) against them and in favor of Defendants-Appellees 
David Ige, in his official capacity as Governor of the State of 
Hawai#i (Governor Ige), Holly T. Shikada, in her official 
capacity as Attorney General for the State of Hawai
#i, and the 
State of Hawai# i (Appellees).2 Appellants also challenge the 
Circuit Court's November 19, 2020 Order Granting Defendants' Motion to Dismiss Plaintiffs' First Amended Complaint (Dismissal 
Order). 
I. BACKGROUND 
A. Covid-19 Emergency Proclamations On March 4, 2020, Governor Ige issued a proclamation 
(Initial Proclamation) in response to the Covid-19 pandemic, 
pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 127A-2, -12, -13, -
14, -16, -30 (Supp. 2019). By its terms, the Initial Proclamation 
continued through April 29, 2020.
3 The Initial Proclamation 
provided, inter alia, numerous references to the United States 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, World Health 
Organization, and United States Secretary of Health and Human Services, declaring Covid-19 an international concern. The 
Initial Proclamation, inter alia, authorized emergency relief and 
2 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided. 
3 Office of the Governor, Proclamation (2020),
https://governor.hawaii.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/2003020-GOV-Emergency-P
roclamation_COVID-19.pdf. 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
emergency management functions, suspended various statutes, and 
prohibited the increase of the selling price of various commodities, including food, water, medical supplies, and cleaning supplies. 
Through the date of this Opinion, Governor Ige has 
issued subsequent Covid-19-related proclamations on March 16, 2020, March 21, 2020, March 23, 2020, March 31, 2020, April 16, 2020, April 25, 2020, May 5, 2020, May 18, 2020, June 10, 2020 (Ninth Supplementary Proclamation Related to the Covid-19 
Emergency (
Ninth Proclamation)), July 17, 2020 (Tenth 
Proclamation Related to the Covid-19 Emergency (Tenth 
Proclamation)), August 6, 2020 (Eleventh Proclamation Related to the Covid-19 Emergency Interisland Travel Quarantine (Eleventh Proclamation)), August 20, 2020 (Twelfth Proclamation Related to 
the Covid-19 Emergency), September 22, 2020 (Thirteenth 
Proclamation Related to the Covid-19 Emergency), October 13, 2020 (Fourteenth Proclamation Related to the Covid-19 Emergency), November 16, 2020 (Fifteenth Proclamation Related to the Covid-19 Emergency), November 23, 2020 (Sixteenth Proclamation Related to the Covid-19 Emergency), December 16, 2020 (Seventeenth Proclamation Related to the Covid-19 Emergency), February 12, 2021 (Eighteenth Proclamation Related to the Covid-19 Emergency), April 9, 2021 (Ninteenth Proclamation Related to the Covid-19 Emergency), May 7, 2021 (Twentieth Proclamation Related to the Covid-19 Emergency Quarantine for Travel Between Counties), May 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
25, 2021 (
Amendment Nineteenth Proclamation Related to the Covid-
19 Emergency), June 7, 2021 (Twenty-First Proclamation Related to 
the Covid-19 Emergency), August 5, 2021 (Emergency Proclamation Related to the Covid-19 Response), October 1, 2021 (Emergency Proclamation Related to the State's Covid-19 Delta Response), November 29, 2021 (Emergency Proclamation Related to Covid-19), January 26, 2022 (Emergency Proclamation Related to Covid-19 (Omicron Variant)), and February 5, 2022 (Amendment Emergency Proclamation Related to Covid-19 (Omicron Variant)). 
B. Procedural History For Our Rights filed a complaint on September 1, 2020, 
and a First Amended Complaint (the Complaint) on September 24, 
2020. The Complaint alleged that the individual plaintiffs, 
along with other people in Hawai# i, were suffering and would 
continue to suffer from numerous harms as a result of Governor Ige's Covid-19-related proclamations, including the specific harms to the plaintiffs that were identified in the Complaint, including but not limited to anxiety, prevention of travel to see family, lost employment, destruction of business, lost income and other heavy financial losses, lost business opportunities, lost mental health care and other health care services, loss of freedom, serious emotional distress, depression, hopelessness, homelessness, isolation, social exclusion, pain, injury to health, alienation, fear, suicidal thoughts, and other deprivations. 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Complaint asserted two causes of action (Count I 
and Count II
). In Count I, the Complaint alleged, inter alia, 
that Governor Ige's Ninth, Tenth, and Eleventh Proclamations are 
unconstitutional and exceed the authority statutorily delegated by the Hawai# i Legislature to the Hawai# i
  Governor to declare an 
emergency and promulgate rules and regulations to facilitate the government response to such declared emergency, and that Appellants are suffering harms directly related to the continued application and enforcement of those and any preceding supplemental proclamations. More specifically, Count I alleges that, under the Hawai# i Constitution, the Governor does not hold 
an enumerated power to declare states of emergency and that the emergency powers statutorily conferred by the Legislature to the Governor are expressly limited to a period not to exceed 60 days. Count I further alleges that Governor Ige's use of supplemental proclamations is an unauthorized attempt to circumvent the Legislature's express 60-day limit and therefore, the Ninth, Tenth, and Eleventh Proclamation, and any and all such supplemental proclamations, exceed the Governor's statutory and constitutional authority. 
In Count II, the Complaint further alleged, inter alia
, 
that Governor Ige's Ninth, Tenth, and Eleventh Proclamations are unconstitutionally vague and deprive Appellants of due process under the constitutions of the State of Hawai# i and the United 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
States. 
Appellants did not challenge Governor Ige's Initial 
Proclamation. 
The Complaint sought, inter alia, declaratory and 
injunctive relief with respect to the Ninth, Tenth, and Eleventh 
Proclamations, as well as any and all further supplemental proclamations, including a declaration that such supplemental proclamations are unconstitutional, invalid, null, and void, and that Appellees (among others) be enjoined from enforcing them. 
On October 8, 2020, Appellees filed a Motion to Dismiss 
Plaintiffs' First Amended Complaint (Motion to Dismiss), arguing 
that the Complaint in its entirety should be dismissed for 
failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted, and contending that: (1) because Appellants did not challenge the subsequent emergency proclamations that were then in effect, Appellants lack standing and their claims are moot; (2) Governor Ige's emergency proclamations are fully authorized under HRS chapter 127A; and (3) Appellants' void-for-vagueness arguments failed to meet applicable legal standards. 
On November 9, 2020, Appellants filed a memorandum in 
opposition in which they argued, inter alia:  (1) the Complaint 
is not moot because the controversy is capable of repetition yet 
evading review, the public interest exception to the mootness doctrine applies, and contrary to Appellees' contention, injunctive and declaratory relief remain justiciable based on the Complaint's allegations; (2) neither the Hawai# i Constitution nor 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS chapter 127A confer unlimited and unreviewable powers on the 
Governor; and (3) unless the applicable statutes impose an enforceable limitation, the Governor's authority to declare an emergency amounts to a blank check to usurp legislative power and here, Governor Ige's proclamations have ignored and therefore failed to avert their catastrophic impacts and protect the welfare of the people of the Hawai# i.  Appellees filed a reply 
memorandum contending, inter alia
, that the restrictions in the 
emergency proclamations have saved lives and that the proclamations were based on reassessments and evolving circumstances. 
On November 17, 2020, a hearing was held on the Motion 
to Dismiss and the matter was taken under advisement. On November 19, 2020, the Circuit Court entered the Dismissal Order granting the Motion to Dismiss with prejudice, and stating: 
The Court agrees with, and hereby incorporates, the
arguments presented by the Defendants. Specifically, Haw.
Rev. Stat. ("HRS") chapter 127A, as properly interpreted,does not support Plaintiffs' claim. The language, purpose,and history of HRS chapter 127A all demonstrate that theGovernor is empowered to issue supplementary emergencyproclamations extending beyond a single 60-day period.Further, Plaintiffs' claim in regards to the vagueness ofprior emergency proclamations, which are no longer ineffect, is deemed moot and is dismissed with prejudice. 
The Judgment was entered on December 23, 2020. For Our 
Rights timely filed a notice of appeal on January 18, 2021. 
After the appeal was fully briefed, oral arguments were heard on January 26, 2022. 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Appellants raise five points of error on appeal, 
contending that the Circuit Court erred: 
(1) in its 
interpretation of HRS chapter 127A; (2) in the Dismissal Order by 
adopting Appellees' arguments without further reasoning; (3) by tacitly adopting Appellees' arguments that Governor Ige may exercise emergency powers for an indefinite period of time; (4) by tacitly adopting Appellees' arguments that the Complaint was moot; and (5) by tacitly adopting Appellees' arguments that Appellants lacked standing on the grounds of mootness. III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has held: 
A complaint should not be dismissed for failure to state a
claim unless it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff canprove no set of facts in support of his or her claim thatwould entitle him or her to relief. The appellate courtmust therefore view a plaintiff's complaint in a light mostfavorable to him or her in order to determine whether the allegations contained therein could warrant relief under anyalternative theory. For this reason, in reviewing a circuitcourt's order dismissing a complaint the appellate court'sconsideration is strictly limited to the allegations of thecomplaint, and the appellate court must deem thoseallegations to be true. 
Kealoha v. Machado, 131 Hawai# i 62, 74, 315 P.3d 213, 225 (2013) 
(brackets and ellipses omitted) (quoting County of Kaua# i v. 
Baptiste, 115 Hawai# i 15, 24, 165 P.3d 916, 925 (2007)). That 
said, "the court is not required to accept conclusory allegations 
on the legal effect of the events alleged." Id. (citation 
omitted). 
"A circuit court's ruling on a motion to dismiss is 
reviewed de novo." Id. (citation omitted). 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A circuit court's interpretation of a statute is a 
question of law, which is reviewed 
de novo, as is a court's 
determination of an issue of standing. State v. Castillon, 144 
Hawai#i 406, 411, 443 P.3d 98, 103 (2019) (citation omitted) 
(statutory interpretation); Tax Found. of Hawai# i v. State, 144 
Hawai#i 175, 185, 439 P.3d 127, 137 (2019) (standing). Mootness 
is an issue of subject matter jurisdiction, and therefore, is a 
question of law reviewed de novo. Hamilton ex rel. Lethem v. 
Lethem, 119 Hawai# i 1, 4-5, 193 P.3d 839, 842-43 (2008). 
IV. DISCUSSION 
A. HRS Chapter 127A The Circuit Court granted Appellees' request to dismiss 
Count I of the Complaint for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted, based on the court's conclusion that: 
[HRS] chapter 127A, as properly interpreted, does not
support Plaintiffs' claim. The language, purpose, andhistory of HRS chapter 127A all demonstrate that theGovernor is empowered to issue supplementary emergencyproclamations extending beyond a single 60-day period. 
Appellants' primary contention on appeal is that the 
Circuit Court erred as a matter of law in its interpretation of 
key provisions of HRS chapter 127A, in particular HRS § 127A-14 (Supp. 2019), which provides in relevant part: 
§ 127A-14 State of emergency.  (a) The governor may
declare the existence of a state of emergency in the State
by proclamation if the governor finds that an emergency ordisaster has occurred or that there is imminent danger orthreat of an emergency or disaster in any portion of theState. 
. . . . 
(c) The governor . . . shall be the sole judge of the
existence of the danger, threat, or circumstances giving 
10  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rise to a declaration of a state of emergency in the State.
. . . This section shall not limit the power and authorityof the governor under section 127A-13(a)(5). 
(d) A state of emergency . . . shall terminate
automatically sixty days after the issuance of aproclamation of a state of emergency . . ., or by a separateproclamation of the governor . . ., whichever occurs first. 
(References to mayoral powers and local states of emergency 
omitted). 
Appellants do not dispute that HRS § 127A-14(a) 
authorized Governor Ige's declaration of a state of emergency in the Initial Proclamation. Rather, Appellants contend that, on its face, HRS § 127A-14 limits the Governor's emergency powers to a single, 60-day period. Appellants rely on subsection (d) of HRS § 127-14, which states that "[a] state of emergency shall terminate automatically sixty days after the issuance of a proclamation of a state of emergency, or by a separate proclamation of the governor, whichever occurs first." (Cleaned up). 
The plain language of HRS § 127A-14(d) provides for the 
automatic termination of any state of emergency no later than 60 days after the issuance of a proclamation of a state of emergency. Alternatively, a state of emergency can be terminated sooner, by means of a separate proclamation of the governor declaring that the emergency is over. Id.Accordingly, as 
agreed by all parties to this appeal, Governor Ige's Initial Proclamation, issued on March 4, 2020, terminated automatically no later than 60 days after March 4, 2020. 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The disputed issue is whether Governor Ige acted beyond 
his statutorily-granted authority when he issued subsequent 
emergency proclamations in response to the same emergency – in this case, the worldwide outbreak of Covid-19 – notwithstanding the continuing nature of the emergency. 
Appellants urge this 
court to interpret HRS § 127A-14(d) as a hard limit on the Governor's use of emergency powers, one 60-day period only, one 
and done. Appellants point to, inter alia, the extraordinary nature of the powers given to the Governor under chapter 127A, 
describing them as broad, arbitrary, unreviewable, unilateral, unchecked, and far-reaching. However, Appellants (and Appellees) candidly admit that the Circuit Court did not reach any sort of constitutional challenge to the statute; such issues are not properly before us on appeal. See generally Zanakis-Pico v. 
Cutter Dodge, Inc., 98 Hawai# i 309, 319 n.19, 47 P.3d 1222, 1232 
n.19 (2002) (because the circuit court did not reach a question, the supreme court did not reach it either); see also City & Cty. of Honolulu v. Sherman, 110 Hawai# i 39, 56 n.7, 129 P.3d 542, 559 
n.7 (2006) ("A fundamental and longstanding principle of judicial restraint requires that courts avoid reaching constitutional questions in advance of the necessity of deciding them.") (citation omitted). The question before this court is limited to whether the statute itself prohibits the Governor from declaring more than one state of emergency, lasting no longer than 60 days, per emergency, and concomitantly, whether the statute authorizes 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Governor to issue more than one emergency proclamation – in 
this instance, numerous emergency proclamations collectively spanning a period of years – in response to essentially the same emergency. 
HRS § 127A-14(d) does not expressly state that the 
Governor is precluded from issuing more than one emergency proclamation based on the same emergency, although it provides that any state of emergency terminates automatically in 60 days, if it is not terminated sooner. 
Thus, we consider this provision 
in the context of the entirety of HRS chapter 127A (the Emergency 
Management Act  or the Act). 
HRS § 127A-1 (Supp. 2019) sets forth the Legislature's 
intent to provide comprehensive powers to the Governor to act 
when faced with "emergencies of unprecedented size and destructiveness" as follows: 
§ 127A-1 Policy and purpose.  (a) Because of the 
existing and increasing possibility of the occurrence of
disasters or emergencies of unprecedented size anddestructiveness resulting from natural or man-made hazards,and in order to ensure that the preparations of this Statewill be adequate to deal with such disasters or emergencies;to ensure the administration of state and federal programsproviding disaster relief to individuals; and generally toprotect the public health, safety, and welfare, and topreserve the lives and property of the people of the State,it is hereby found and declared to be necessary: 
(1) To provide for emergency management by theState, and to authorize the creation of localorganizations for emergency management in thecounties of the State; 
(2) To confer upon the governor and upon the mayorsof the counties of the State the emergencypowers necessary to prepare for and respond toemergencies or disasters; 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) To provide for the rendering of mutual aid among
the counties of the State and with other states and in cooperation with the federal governmentwith respect to the carrying out of emergencymanagement functions; 
(4) To permit out-of-state utilities to provideservices in the State pursuant to a mutualassistance agreement with a state utility torepair, renovate, or install electrical ornatural gas facilities that have been damaged,impaired, or destroyed due to or in connectionwith such disasters or emergencies; and 
(5) To provide programs, in cooperation with othergovernmental agencies, the private sector, andnonprofit organizations, to educate and trainthe public to be prepared for emergencies anddisasters. 
(b) It is further declared to be the purpose of this
chapter and the policy of the State that all emergencymanagement functions of this State and its counties becoordinated to the maximum extent with the comparablefunctions of the federal government, including its variousdepartments, and agencies of other states and localities,and with private-sector and nonprofit organizations, to theend that the most effective preparation and use may be madeof the nation's personnel, resources, and facilities fordealing with any emergency or disaster that may occur. 
(c) It is the intent of the legislature to provide
for and confer comprehensive powers for the purposes statedherein. This chapter shall be liberally construed toeffectuate its purposes; provided that this chapter shallnot be construed as conferring any power or permitting anyaction which is inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of the United States, but, in so construing this chapter,due consideration shall be given to the circumstances asthey exist from time to time. This chapter shall not bedeemed to have been amended by any act hereafter enacted atthe same or any other session of the legislature, unlessthis chapter is amended by express reference. 
Notably, the stated purpose of the Emergency Management
Act is "to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to
preserve the lives and property of the people of the State." HRS§ 127A-1(a). The means provided to effectuate that purpose include the authorization of emergency powers. HRS § 127A-1(a)(2). Of particular importance here, the Legislature affirmatively stated that:    
14  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
It is the intent of the legislature to provide for and
confer comprehensive powers for the purposes stated herein.This chapter shall be liberally construed to effectuate its 
purposes[.] 
HRS § 127A-1(c). 
HRS § 127A-2 (Supp. 2019) defines emergency as "any 
occurrence, or imminent threat thereof, which results or may 
likely result in substantial injury or harm to the population or substantial damage to or loss of property." 
Even in the absence of a declared state of emergency, 
HRS § 127A-12 (Supp. 2019) provides the Governor with wide-ranging powers pertaining to emergency management. The additional powers provided to the Governor by HRS § 127A-13(a) (Supp. 2019) during a declared state of emergency are extraordinary and potentially effect innumerable aspects of government functions, commercial activities, and the lives and property of the people of the State, as follows: 
§ 127A-13 Additional powers in an emergency period.
(a) In the event of a state of emergency declared by the
governor pursuant to section 127A-14, the governor may
exercise the following additional powers pertaining toemergency management during the emergency period: 
(1) Provide for and require the quarantine orsegregation of persons who are affected with orbelieved to have been exposed to any infectious,communicable, or other disease that is, in thegovernor's opinion, dangerous to the publichealth and safety, or persons who are the sourceof other contamination, in any case where, inthe governor's opinion, the existing laws arenot adequate to assure the public health andsafety; provide for the care and treatment ofthe persons; supplement the provisions ofsections 325-32 to 325-38 concerning compulsoryimmunization programs; provide for the isolationor closing of property which is a source ofcontamination or is in a dangerous condition inany case where, in the governor's opinion, the 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) existing laws are not adequate to assure the
public health and safety, and designate aspublic nuisances acts, practices, conduct, orconditions that are dangerous to the publichealth or safety or to property; authorize thatpublic nuisances be summarily abated and, ifneed be, that the property be destroyed, by anypolice officer or authorized person, or providefor the cleansing or repair of property, and ifthe cleansing or repair is to be at the expenseof the owner, the procedure therefor shallfollow as nearly as may be the provisions ofsection 322-2, which shall be applicable; andfurther, authorize without the permission of theowners or occupants, entry on private premisesfor any such purposes; 
Relieve hardships and inequities, or
obstructions to the public health, safety, orwelfare, found by the governor to exist in thelaws and to result from the operation of federalprograms or measures taken under this chapter,by suspending the laws, in whole or in part, orby alleviating the provisions of laws on suchterms and conditions as the governor may impose,including licensing laws, quarantine laws, andlaws relating to labels, grades, and standards; 
Suspend any law that impedes or tends to impede
or be detrimental to the expeditious andefficient execution of, or to conflict with,emergency functions, including laws which bythis chapter specifically are made applicable toemergency personnel; 
Suspend the provisions of any regulatory law
prescribing the procedures for out-of-stateutilities to conduct business in the State including any licensing laws applicable toout-of-state utilities or their respectiveemployees, as well as any order, rule, orregulation of any state agency, if strictcompliance with the provisions of any such law,order, rule, or regulation would in any wayprevent, hinder, or delay necessary action of astate utility in coping with the emergency ordisaster with assistance that may be providedunder a mutual assistance agreement; 
In the event of disaster or emergency beyond
local control, or an event which, in the opinionof the governor, is such as to make stateoperational control necessary, or upon requestof the local entity, assume direct operationalcontrol over all or any part of the emergencymanagement functions within the affected area; 
Shut off water mains, gas mains, electric power
connections, or suspend other services, and, to 
16 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the extent permitted by or under federal law,
suspend electronic media transmission; 
(7) Direct and control the mandatory evacuation ofthe civilian population; 
(8) Exercise additional emergency functions to theextent necessary to prevent hoarding, waste, ordestruction of materials, supplies, commodities,accommodations, facilities, and services, toeffectuate equitable distribution thereof, or toestablish priorities therein as the publicwelfare may require; to investigate; andnotwithstanding any other law to the contrary,to regulate or prohibit, by means of licensing,rationing, or otherwise, the storage,transportation, use, possession, maintenance,furnishing, sale, or distribution thereof, andany business or any transaction related thereto; 
(9) Suspend section 8-1, relating to state holidays,except the last paragraph relating to holidaysdeclared by the president, which shall remainunaffected, and in the event of the suspension,the governor may establish state holidays byproclamation; 
(10) Adjust the hours for voting to take intoconsideration the working hours of the votersduring the emergency period, and suspend thoseprovisions of section 11-131 that fix the hoursfor voting, and fix other hours by stating thesame in the election proclamation or notice, asthe case may be; 
(11) Assure the continuity of service by criticalinfrastructure facilities, both publicly andprivately owned, by regulating or, if necessaryto the continuation of the service thereof, bytaking over and operating the same; and 
(12) Except as provided in section 134-7.2, wheneverin the governor's opinion, the laws of the Statedo not adequately provide for the commondefense, public health, safety, and welfare,investigate, regulate, or prohibit the storage,transportation, use, possession, maintenance,furnishing, sale, or distribution of, as well asany transaction related to, explosives,firearms, and ammunition, inflammable materialsand other objects, implements, substances,businesses, or services of a hazardous ordangerous character, or particularly capable ofmisuse, or obstructive of or tending to obstructlaw enforcement, emergency management, ormilitary operations, including intoxicatingliquor and the liquor business; and authorizethe seizure and forfeiture of any such objects, 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
implements, or substances unlawfully possessed,
as provided in this chapter.4 
HRS § 127A-21 (Supp. 2019) specifically authorizes the 
Governor to "requisition and take over any materials, facilities, 
or real property or improvements," during the pendency of an emergency proclamation, subject to fair and just compensation and damages. See also HRS § 127A-22 (Supp. 2019) (regarding 
determination of compensation); and HRS § 127A-23 (Supp. 2019) (regarding determination of damages). HRS § 127A-25 (Supp. 2019) provides the Governor rule-making authority not subject to HRS chapter 91. The Emergency Management Act also includes provisions for the enforcement of any rule issued under the Act and punishment including not more than one year of imprisonment and/or a fine of not more than $5,000 for violation of any such rule. See HRS § 127A-28 (Supp. 2019) (regarding injunctions); 
HRS § 127A-29 (Supp. 2019) (regarding misdemeanor penalties for 
violations). HRS § 127A-30 (Supp 2019) prohibits, inter alia, most price increases for any commodities, such as food, water, 
fuel, and other merchandise. 
With the stated purposes and policy goals of the 
Emergency Management Act in mind, and in light of the sweeping scope of its provisions, we return to HRS § 127A-14. Subsection 
4 No issue concerning the constitutionality of these powers (or any
other part of the Emergency Management Act), either on the face of the statute
or as applied in the context of Governor Ige's Covid-19 emergencyproclamations, is before the court in this appeal. 
18 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(a)
 of HRS § 127A-14 directly authorizes the Governor's 
declaration of a state of emergency and simply states: 
The governor may declare the existence of a state of
emergency in the State by proclamation if the governor findsthat an emergency or disaster has occurred or that there isimminent danger or threat of an emergency or disaster in anyportion of the State. 
The only condition or limitation in HRS § 127A-14(a) to 
the Governor's authority to issue an emergency is a finding by 
the Governor that "an emergency or disaster has occurred or that there is imminent danger or threat of an emergency or disaster in any portion of the [State]." Subsection (c) of HRS § 127A-14 provides that the Governor "shall be the sole judge of the existence of the danger, threat, or circumstances giving rise to a declaration of a state of emergency in the State[.]" As discussed above, subsection (d) of HRS § 127A-14 provides for the automatic termination of any state of emergency 60 days after the issuance of a proclamation of a state of emergency (unless terminated sooner), but does not expressly preclude the Governor from issuing more than one emergency proclamation based on the same emergency. 
Read together with HRS § 127A-14(c) & (d), and in light 
of the Emergency Management Act as a whole, we hold that HRS § 127A-14(a) authorizes the Governor to declare the existence of 
a state of emergency whenever, in his or her sole judgment, he or she finds that circumstances giving rise to a declaration of a 
state of emergency have occurred (or that there is imminent 
19 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
danger or threat of an emergency), regardless of whether a prior 
emergency proclamation has been issued based on the same, continuing, and/or otherwise related circumstances. 
This 
statutory authority, in essence, requires an independent finding by the Governor that such circumstances exist each time a proclamation is issued; in other words, the statute does not permit the Governor to "extend" a prior state of emergency in contravention of the automatic termination provision in HRS § 127A-14(a). That said, there is no requirement that the Governor's finding state that new circumstances giving rise to a declaration of a state of emergency have occurred. 
We recognize the breadth and gravity of this statutory 
interpretation. However, we have reviewed the legislative history of the Emergency Management Act and found nothing inconsistent with or casting doubt on our reading of the Act. At oral argument, Appellants acknowledged that nothing in the legislative history supports an alternative conclusion. 
Instead, Appellants urged us to follow the Wisconsin 
Supreme Court's interpretation of that state's emergency powers act to require legislative action to extend a state of emergency beyond 60 days. However, the Wisconsin court's determination was based primarily on the plain language of the Wisconsin statute, which specifies that "[a] state of emergency shall not exceed 60 days, unless the state of emergency is extended by joint resolution of the legislature." See Fabick v. Evers, 956 N.W.2d 
20 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
856, 862 (Wis. 2021) (quoting Wis. Stat. § 323.10 (West 2019
-
20)). The Wisconsin Supreme Court reasoned that the plain 
language of the statute enabled the governor to issue an emergency order for up to 60 days, but "the legislature reserves for itself the power to determine the policies that govern the state's response to an ongoing problem." Fabick, 956 N.W.2d at 
865. Hawaii's Emergency Management Act, as currently enacted, 
contains no such reservation. 
Appellants similarly point to the Michigan Supreme 
Court's opinion in In re Certified Questions From the United States District Court, Western District of Michigan, Southern Division v. Governor of Michigan, 958 N.W.2d 1 (Mich. 2020). However, as the Michigan court recognized, Michigan's emergency powers statute specifically provides that "[a]fter 28 days, the governor shall issue an executive order or proclamation declaring the state of emergency terminated, unless a request by the governor for an extension of the state of emergency for a specific number of days is approved by resolution of both houses of the legislature." Id. at 9 (quoting Mich. Comp. Law. Ann. § 
30.403 (West 2019-20)). Thus, the Michigan statute, like the Wisconsin statute and unlike the Hawai# i statute, expressly 
requires legislative action to authorize a state of emergency beyond the initial statutory period. 
Finally, Appellants argue, in various ways, that our 
interpretation of the Emergency Management Act would produce an 
21 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
absurd result because it would grant the Governor essentially 
limitless and endless powers to rule the State by emergency proclamation, unchecked by legislative or judicial restraints. See
, e.g., State v. Shaw, 150 Hawai# i 56, 61, 497 P.3d 71, 76 
(2021) ("[t]he legislature is presumed not to intend an absurd result, and legislation will be construed to avoid, if possible, inconsistency, contradiction[,] and illogicality") (citation omitted). 
We reject this argument in large part because the 
Emergency Management Act itself contemplates judicial review. HRS § 127A-27 (Supp. 2019) provides in part: 
§ 127A-27 Preliminary or interlocutory injunctions and
temporary restraining orders.  Notwithstanding any other law to
the contrary, no preliminary or interlocutory injunction, or
temporary restraining order, suspending, enjoining, or restrainingthe enforcement, operation, or execution of, or setting aside, inwhole or in part, on the ground of unconstitutionality or for anyother reason or reasons, any provision of this chapter or anyproclamation, order, or rule prescribed, made, or issued under theauthority of this chapter, shall be issued or granted by any courtof the State, or by any judge thereof, unless the application forthe same is presented to a circuit judge, is heard and determinedby the circuit judge sitting with two other circuit judges, and amajority of the judges concur in granting the application. . . . 
In addition, we take judicial notice that the Hawai# i 
Legislature has conducted multiple regular and special sessions 
since Governor Ige's issuance of the numerous Covid-19-related emergency proclamations that followed the Initial Proclamation and thus, the Legislature has had multiple opportunities to amend the Emergency Management Act to expressly limit the Governor's use of emergency powers (or otherwise) or to promulgate resolutions regarding the subject. See generally State v. 
Hussein, 122 Hawai# i 495, 529, 229 P.3d 313, 347 (2010) 
22 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(legislative inaction may indicate tacit approval of statutory 
interpretation). 
While we decline to necessarily read tacit 
endorsement or approval into legislative inaction, here, the Legislature passed Act 57 in 2021, which specifically referred to the Governor's Initial Proclamation and supplemental proclamations. 2021 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 57, § 1 at 181. Thus, the Legislature has demonstrated its ability to act in response to the Governor's proclamations, whether in furtherance or support of the Governor's actions, as in the case of Act 57, or in order to limit or otherwise modify the Governor's emergency powers. 
For these reasons, we conclude that the Circuit Court 
did not err in rejecting Appellants' argument that HRS chapter 127A limits the Governor's exercise of emergency powers under the Act to a single, 60-day period. 
B. The Dismissal Order Appellants contend that the Circuit Court erred in the 
Dismissal Order when the court adopted Appellees' arguments, without identifying the precise issues being decided and without sufficiently elaborating on its reasoning or citing the authorities relied on by the court. We conclude that this argument is without merit. The Dismissal Order includes sufficient detail to allow this court to review the Circuit Court's ruling. The Circuit Court expressly rejected Appellants' argument that HRS chapter 127A supported its first claim and 
23 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stated that Appellants' claim in regards to the vagueness of 
prior emergency proclamations, i.e.
, their second claim, was 
moot. Appellants cite no authority supporting their contention 
that the Circuit Court should be vacated on this ground and we find none. See generally DL v. CL, 146 Hawai# i 328, 339-40, 463 
P.3d 985, 996-97 (2020) (discussing the sufficiency of a family court order). 
C. Mootness The Circuit Court granted Appellees' request to dismiss 
Count II of the Complaint based on Appellees' argument that the Complaint sought to challenge proclamations that were superseded and no longer in effect, stating: 
Plaintiffs' claim in regards to the vagueness of prior
emergency proclamations, which are no longer in effect, isdeemed moot and is dismissed with prejudice. 
On appeal, For Our Rights contends that no issues 
before the court are moot.5 
It is well-settled that: 
A case is moot if it has lost its character as a present,live controversy of the kind that must exist if courts areto avoid advisory opinions on abstract propositions of law.The rule is one of the prudential rules of judicial self-governance founded in concern about the proper - andproperly limited - role of the courts in a democraticsociety. We have said the suit must remain alive throughoutthe course of litigation to the moment of final appellatedisposition to escape the mootness bar. 
5 As the Circuit Court's dismissal of Count II was based on mootness 
and the court did not reach any other issue, our review is limited to whetherAppellants' claim was moot. 
24   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kaho
#ohanohano v. State, 114 Hawai# i 302, 332, 162 P.3d 696, 726 
(2007) (emphasis omitted) (quoting Kona Old Hawaiian Trails Group 
v. Lyman, 69 Haw. 81, 87, 734 P.2d 161, 165 (1987)). 
However, Hawai# i courts recognize certain exceptions to 
the mootness doctrine, including: 
(1) the "capable of 
repetition, yet evading review" exception; and (2) the public interest exception. Hamilton, 119 Hawai# i at 5, 193 P.3d at 843. 
We conclude that both of these exceptions apply in this case. 
Hawai#i courts recognize that: 
The phrase, 'capable of repetition, yet evading
review,' means that 'a court will not dismiss a case on the
grounds of mootness where a challenged governmental actionwould evade full review because the passage of time wouldprevent any single plaintiff from remaining subject to therestriction complained of for the period necessary to
complete the lawsuit.
' 
Hamilton, 119 Hawai# i at 5, 193 P.3d at 843 (citation omitted). 
Here, any challenge of a governor's exercise of emergency powers 
under HRS chapter 127A would necessarily evade full judicial review because any given proclamation of a state of emergency automatically terminates sixty days after the issuance of such proclamation, if not sooner. 
In determining whether the public interest exception to 
the mootness doctrine applies, Hawai# i courts consider "(1) the 
public or private nature of the question presented, (2) the desirability of an authoritative determination for future guidance of public officers, and (3) the likelihood of future recurrence of the question." Doe v. Doe, 116 Hawai# i 323, 327, 
172 P.3d 1067, 1071 (2007) (citations and internal quotation 
25 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
marks omitted); see also Yoshimura v. Kaneshiro
, 149 Hawai# i 21, 
35, 481 P.3d 28, 42 (2021). Here, we conclude that the questions 
presented are clearly of a public nature, as the expansive powers granted to the Governor under the Emergency Management Act can be applied, with few exceptions, to virtually everyone in the State, whether resident or visitor, as well as all government and private enterprises and public and private properties. 
An 
authoritative determination of whether HRS chapter 127A, as currently enacted, limits the Governor's emergency powers to a 
single period of no more than 60 days and whether, inter alia, the mandates, restrictions, and criminal penalties imposed in 
Governor Ige's proclamations would be desirable, as the same or similar mandates, restrictions, and criminal penalties remain in place as of this Opinion or could be imposed in future emergency proclamations. 
With respect to the third prong of this test, the 
mandates, restrictions, and criminal penalties have in fact reoccurred since the proclamations that were specifically challenged in the Complaint and it seems likely that similar measures might be taken in the future in the face of an emergency or disaster in light of language of the Act, as well as its application in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred 
in dismissing the Complaint in part on the grounds of mootness.
6 
6 Although not the basis for our decision, for the purpose of
clarity, we note in dictum that the Circuit Court plainly erred in dismissing
(continued...) 
26 6(...continued)FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appellants argue the Circuit Court erred by "tacitly 
adopting" Appellees' argument that Appellants lack standing, 
which stems principally from the argument that Appellants' claims are moot. 
However, upon review, we conclude that the Circuit 
Court did not determine that Appellants lack standing. Accordingly, we need not address the issue here. V. CONCLUSION 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's December 23, 
2020 Judgment is affirmed in part and vacated in part; the dismissal of Count I of the Complaint is affirmed, and the dismissal of Count II of the Complaint is vacated. This case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent with this Opinion. On the briefs: Marc J. Victor,
Jody L. Broaddus,for Plaintiffs-Appellants. 
Nicholas M. McLean,
Ewan C. Rayner,David D. Day,Craig Y. Iha,Deputy Attorneys General,for Defendants-Appellees. /s/ Katherine G. LeonardPresiding Judge 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate Judge 
a claim with prejudice  based on that claim being moot. 
A dismissal for 
mootness is a dismissal for lack of jurisdiction. See Hamilton, 119 Hawai #i 
at 5-6, 193 P.3d at 843-44. 
A dismissal for lack of jurisdiction is not a
dismissal on the merits. See Smallwood v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 118
Hawai #i 139, 154, 185 P.3d 887, 902 (App. 2008). Dismissal for lack of 
subject matter jurisdiction should be without prejudice, as a court is unable
to reach the merits of claims over which it has no subject matterjurisdiction. See, 
e.g., Target Training Int'l, Ltd. v. Extended Disc N. Am.,
Inc., 645 F. App'x 1018, 1025 (Fed. Cir. 2016); Topper v. Progressive Cty.Mut. Ins. Co., 598 F. App'x 299, 300 (5th Cir. 2015). 
27 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
CONCURRING IN PART 
With regard to Count 1, I concur in the result only. 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge 
28 