NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0000854
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
VICENTE KOTE KAPIKA HILARIO, Defendant-Appellant.
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 12-1-0481)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i (State) charged
Defendant-Appellant Vicente Kote Kapika Hilario (Hilario) by
indictment as a principal and/or accomplice with place to keep
pistol or revolver (Counts 2 and 3); carrying or possessing a
loaded firearm on a public highway (Counts 4 and 5); promoting a
dangerous drug in the second degree for possession of twenty-five
or more tablets of oxycodone (Count 6); and promoting a dangerous
drug in the third degree for possession of cocaine (Count 7). 
The trial in this case took place after a trial in a separate
prosecution in which Hilario was found guilty of first-degree
murder, retaliating against a witness, intimidating a witness,
and bribery of a witness.  State v. Hilario, 139 Hawai #i 546, 394
P.3d 776 (Hawai #i App. 2017) ( Hilario I ), cert. denied , SCWC-13-
0003039, 2017 WL 3725667 (Aug. 29, 2017).NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1/ The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.
2/ HRPP Rule 43(a) provides:  
(a) Presence required.  The defendant shall be present at
the arraignment, at the time of the plea, at evidentiary pretrial
hearings, at every stage of the trial including the impaneling of
the jury
 and the return of the verdict, and at the imposition of
sentence, except as otherwise provided by this Rule.
(Emphasis added.)
2The jury in this case found Hilario guilty as charged
on all counts.  At sentencing, the State conceded that Counts 4
and 5 merged into Counts 2 and 3.  The Circuit Court of the Fifth
Circuit (Circuit Court)1/ sentenced Hilario to ten years of
imprisonment on Counts 2, 3, and 6 and to five years of
imprisonment on Count 7.  The Circuit Court imposed these terms
of imprisonment to run concurrently with each other but
consecutively to any other terms that Hilario was already
serving.  The Circuit Court entered its Judgment on April 28,
2014.
On appeal, Hilario contends that the Circuit Court
violated Hawai #i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 43 (2012)2/
and denied him the right to a fair trial by denying his request
"to hear and observe the individual questioning of jurors at the
bench during jury selection."  Hilario also contends that there
was insufficient evidence to support his convictions. 
Consistent with our analysis in  Hilario I , we conclude
that the sidebar procedure followed by the Circuit Court, which
precluded Hilario from both hearing and observing the demeanor of
prospective jurors when they were questioned at sidebar, violated
Hilario's right to be present under HRPP Rule 43.  Hilario I , 139
Hawai#i at 552-56, 394 P.3d at 782-86.  We further conclude that
there was sufficient evidence to support Hilario's convictions. 
We therefore vacate Hilario's convictions and remand the case for
a new trial.
I.
On August 24, 2010, a "Be On the Lookout" alert or an
"All Points Bulletin" issued by the Kaua #i Police Department
(KPD) was in effect for a gray Nissan Altima, with a specifiedNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3license plate number.  That evening, at about 8:30 p.m., Officer
Damien Loo (Officer Loo), who was driving a marked KPD patrol
car, saw this Nissan Altima in a parking lot.  Officer Loo
notified other units in the area and began following the Nissan
Altima as it left the parking lot.
After Officer Loo had followed the Nissan Altima for a
while, it slowed down, and a male, later identified as Kyle Akau
(Akau), carrying a dark or black backpack, jumped out from the
front passenger door while the car was still moving.  Akau was
barefoot, wearing a dark shirt, dark shorts, and a baseball cap. 
Officer Loo activated his police lights and siren, and the Nissan
Altima came to a stop.  Officer Loo remained with the Nissan
Altima, notified other officers of the fleeing suspect, and
providing a description of the man fleeing.  
Hilario was the person driving the Nissan Altima, which 
Hilario's grandmother had purchased for him in July 2010. 
Hilario had chosen the Nissan Altima, which was a 2006 model, and
Hilario was the person who drove the Nissan Altima most of the
time.  Officer Loo arrested Hilario and found that Hilario had
$1,472.03 in cash on his person.
While Officer Loo remained with Hilario, other officers
attempted to apprehend Akau.  Officer MacKenzie Metcalfe (Officer
Metcalfe) eventually found Akau hiding behind a bush and arrested
him.  Akau had $21.06 on his person.  The backpack Akau had been
carrying was recovered about fifteen yards from where Akau was
hiding from underneath what appeared to be an abandoned
structure.
Inside the backpack, the police found loaded firearms,
additional ammunition, drugs, and documents and items linked to
Hilario.  In the main compartment of the backpack, the police
recovered a Skullcandy brand bag within a Fox brand t-shirt.  In
the Skullcandy bag there were five .22 caliber bullets and a red
bandana.  The red bandana contained a Jennings .22 caliber semi-
automatic pistol, loaded with a magazine that contained six NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4rounds of ammunition.  In the Fox t-shirt, there was also a 100-
bullet capacity box that contained eight .22 caliber bullets.  In
a Hurley brand t-shirt inside the backpack, the police recovered
a Colt .45 caliber revolver loaded with four rounds of
ammunition.
In the main compartment of the backpack, the police
found a pay statement for a check dated August 20, 2010, in the
name of "Vincente K Hilario," issued by Bouchons restaurant,
where Hilario apparently worked.  In that compartment, the police
also found Aston Hotel receipts for "Vicente Hilario" for a hotel
stay from August 17 to 21, 2010, and a camping permit for
"Vincente K K Hilario" for Anini Beach Park for periods between
July 25 and August 10, 2010.  In the backpack, the police
recovered three Aston room card keys and a key tag for a 2006
Nissan Altima.  From the outside net pocket of the backpack, the
police recovered "clocking receipts" for "Vincent Hilario," for a
job identified as "cook," which included various dates in July
2010.
From a rear compartment of the backpack, the police
recovered an unlabeled green medicine bottle containing 123
oxycodone pills.  The police also recovered two additional loose
oxycodone pills from the backpack.  From a rear compartment of
the backpack, the police recovered a baggie that contained
cocaine residue.
The firearms recovered from the backpack were test-
fired and found to be operational.  The Jennings .22 caliber
pistol was not registered in Hawai #i and the Colt .45 caliber
revolver had been reported stolen.  Neither Hilario nor Akau had
a permit to acquire a firearm or a permit to carry a firearm in
the County of Kaua #i, and neither of them had any firearms
registered to them in Hawai #i.  The police did not recover
Hilario's fingerprints or Akau's fingerprints from any of items
in the backpack.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3/ It is not clear from our opinion in Hilario I whether Hilario asked
in that case for headphones to allow him to listen to the sidebar discussions.
5II.
We resolve the issues raised by Hilario on appeal as
follows:
A.
The sidebar procedure followed by the Circuit Court in
this case was virtually the same procedure that we found
deficient in Hilario I.  As in Hilario I , the Circuit Court in
this case conducted the vast majority of the questioning of the
prospective jurors at sidebar; the Circuit Court denied Hilario's
specific request to be present at sidebar; Hilario was not able
to hear the questioning of the jurors at sidebar, and his request
for headphones to allow him to listen to the sidebar discussions
was denied on the ground that the court lacked this capability;3/
although the Circuit Court permitted Hilario's counsel to shuttle
back and forth between the sidebar and Hilario to explain what
was occurring at sidebar, Hilario complained that he could not
observe the jurors' demeanor and evaluate the manner in which
they answered; and the Circuit Court did not articulate any
safety or security concerns particular to Hilario as justifying
the limitations it imposed on Hilario's participation in and
access to the sidebar discussions.  Similar to Hilario I , a
significant number of jurors who where questioned at sidebar and
discussed matters relevant to their potential bias and prejudice 
ended up serving on Hilario's jury.  These jurors discussed
matters at sidebar that included exposure to pretrial publicity,
concerns about the nature of the case, knowledge of witnesses
identified by the State, and relationships with law enforcement.
In addition, the evidence in this case was not overwhelming.  
Under these circumstances, based on our analysis in
Hilario I , we conclude that the sidebar procedure used by the
Circuit Court in this case violated Hilario's right to be present
under HRPP Rule 43, and that the Circuit Court's error was notNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.  Hilario I , 139 Hawai #i at
552-56, 394 P.3d at 782-86. 
B.
Hilario argues that there was insufficient evidence to
prove that he had constructive possession of the firearms and
drugs contained in the backpack.  We disagree.
"To support a finding of constructive possession the
evidence must show 'a sufficient nexus between the accused and
the [item in question] to permit an inference that the accused
had both the power and the intent to exercise dominion and
control over the [item].'"  State v. Mundell , 8 Haw. App. 610,
622, 822 P.2d 23, 29 (1991) (citation omitted), overruled on
other grounds by State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai# i 87, 997 P.2d 13
(2000).  When viewed in the light most favorable to the
prosecution,  State v. Richie, 88 Hawai# i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227,
1241 (1998), we conclude that the State presented sufficient
evidence of a nexus between Hilario and the firearms and drugs in
the backpack to support an inference that Hilario had the power
and intent to exercise dominion and control over the firearms and
drugs.
III.
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the Circuit Court's
Judgment and remand the case for a new trial.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, September 28, 2017.
On the briefs:
Keith S. Shigetomi
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge
Tracy J. Murakami
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Kauai
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge