NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000938
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
ROBERT D. JOHNSON, JR., as guardian of the person of
MICHAEL A. JOHNSON, an incapacitated adult, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. RAINBOW REHABILITATION SERVICES, INC., a Hawai# i
corporation, dba RAINBOW HOUSE; JASON J. MOSSHOLDER-BROM,
Defendants-Appellees, and STATE OF HAWAI #I, Defendant-Appellant,
and JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10;
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10, Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-1855)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant the State of Hawai# i (State)
appeals from the November 16, 2015 Final Judgment Following
Remand (2015 Final Judgment Following Remand ), and challenges the
May 4, 2015 Amended Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
Following Remand ( FOFs and COLs Following Remand ), both entered
by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court ).1 
On appeal, the State contends that the Circuit Court
erred in awarding an additional $1,575,806.00 in special damages
1The Honorable Virginia Lea Crandall presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to Plaintiff-Appellee Robert D. Johnson, Jr. ( Johnson), as co-
guardian of M.J., an incapacitated adult.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve the State's point of error as follows:
The State argues that the Circuit Court erred in its
additional award because it was for a proposed residential
psychosexual treatment program, which the State asserts was "to
treat a condition the trial court concluded [M.J.] neither had
nor was likely to have – a conclusion which the Intermediate
Court of Appeals left undisturbed."  This argument is without
merit.
First, we recognize that, in our May 7, 2013 Amended
Memorandum Opinion ( Memo Op), we concluded that the Circuit Court
did not clearly err in finding that "[M.J.] is not now (and not
likely to become) a sexual predator."  In this subsequent appeal,
however, the State seemingly disregards this court's holding that
"the uncontradicted evidence that [M.J.'s]'s psychosexual
injuries required treatment" and the numerous unchallenged
findings and other evidence cited by this court.  It is clear
from the unchallenged findings before this court on the first
appeal, as well as the additional findings by the Circuit Court
on remand, as well as the entire evidentiary record before the
Circuit Court, that the expert testimony concerning the
appropriate treatment for M.J. constituted substantial evidence
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
in support of the need for residential treatment to prevent M.J.
from being further victimized, as well as, inter alia:
Reducing the sexual acting-out behavior and the paraphilic
behavior that [M.J.] has been engaging in or is likely to
engage in, to improve anger management skills, to improve
his relationships with others, particularly by teaching him
ways of -- of handling situations that don't require making
suicide attempts or threats, and improving his dealings with
the environment in -- in that way, learning to -- to
modulate his own moods so that he doesn't require other
people around to comfort, to soothe himself, and to reduce
his dependence.
The State offers no argument and cites no evidence that
the residential treatment was not needed to address M.J.'s
treatment needs, notwithstanding the Circuit Court's refusal to
find M.J. to be, or likely to become, a sexual predator.  In
addition, neither this court's Memo Op nor the Circuit Court's
earlier findings precluded the Circuit Court from finding on
remand that there was still a risk ( i.e., a less than 50% chance)
of M.J. becoming a sexual predator.  Indeed, on remand the
Circuit Court found:
71.  According to Dr. Matthews, as a result of being
sexually molested by a person of trust [M.J.] was at risk
for engaging in behavior as a sexual predator and as a
sexual victim himself.
(Emphasis added).  
Substantive evidence in the record supports the finding
that there was some level of risk that M.J. might engage in
predatory behavior.  Dr. Darryl B. Matthews ( Dr. Matthews)
testified that as a result of the sexual abuse suffered by M.J.,
M.J. developed paraphilic interests in violence and sex with
teenage boys.  Dr. Matthews also testified that M.J. told him
that "[M.J.] does not initiate contact with school children when
he's hanging out at schools" only because "the people around him
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
prevent him from doing that."  The evidence of this risk and the
evidence regarding the other treatment purposes of residential
treatment support the Circuit Court's finding that residential
treatment was necessary, and the award of additional special
damages.
Finally, the award of $1,575,806.00 was reasonably
determined from the evidence.  
"Special damages are those damages which can be
calculated precisely or can be determined . . . with reasonable
certainty from the evidence."  HI R CIV JURY Instr. 8.2.; see,
e.g., Kometani v. Heath , 50 Haw. 89, 95, 431 P.2d 931, 936 (1967)
(allowing the jury to consider the reasonable value of future
medical expenses reasonably certain to be required was not error
where sufficient evidence showed an injury).  Here, Dr. Matthews
testified that the need for residential treatment was solely
caused by the molestation at Rainbow House.  Karen Klemme
(Klemme), a board-certified nurse and life-care planner who
worked with Dr. Matthews to create treatment recommendations for
M.J., testified that she was familiar with an appropriate
residential treatment program called Casa Colina, she had visited
the facility, and she had spoken with the vice president
regarding the cost of the program.  She stated that the program
cost was between $900.00 and $1,000.00 per day for the first four
to eight years, and with progress the cost might be reduced to
$4,500.00 per month.  Based on all of the testimony presented,
the Circuit Court found that the cost of Casa Colina was
reasonable compared to other similar residential facilities,
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
perhaps even more reasonable, and that the total cost of the
treatment plan ranged between $1,575,806.00 and $3,046,603.00. 
The Circuit Court's additional award was based on this evidence
and the State presented no evidence of any kind on these issues. 
Therefore, we conclude that the award of $1,575,806.00 was
reasonably determined from the evidence.
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's November 16,
2015 Final Judgment Following Remand is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 26, 2018.
On the briefs:
Caron M. Inagaki,
Kendall J. Moser,
Deputy Attorneys General,
for Defendant-Appellant.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
James J. Bickerton,
Nathan P. Roehrig,
(Bickerton Dang LLP),
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge
5