NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000029
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN RE: MARN FAMILY LITIGATION
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(MASTER FILE NO. CIVIL 00-1-MFL)

(CIVIL NOS. 98-4706-10 and 98-5371-12)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Appellants Alexander Y. Marn (Alexander) and Eric Y.
 
1
Marn (Eric) (together, Appellants)  appeal pro se from the
December 17, 2014 "Order Granting Liquidating Receiver Thomas E.
 
Hayes' Motion to Approve McCully Shopping Center and 608 N. Judd
 Street's Amended and Restated Holdback Escrow Agreement, Filed
 12/8/14" (December 17, 2014 Order Granting) entered in the
 
2
Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).
 
On appeal, Appellants contend the circuit court erred

 
in:
 
(1) "ruling that [Alexander's] offer to purchase the
 
Marn family home was not viable";
 
(2) "confirming the sale of the Marn family home (to a
 
lower bidder) when title to the property is in litigation";
 
1
 We note that while both Alexander and Eric are named on the notice
 
of appeal, only Alexander is listed on the opening and reply brief.
 
2
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) confirming the sale of the Judd Street Property3 
because (a) the purchaser, Top Well Development, LLC, a Hawai 'i 
limited liability company, (Top Well) was not a bona fide 
purchaser for value; (b) "the appeal of the instant Judgment is 
not moot"; (c) "Appellants have standing to contest the confirmation of the sale to Top Well"; and (d) "the violation of the purchase and sale agreement [(PSA)] of July 1, 2014 between 
the seller and the purchaser, by premature closing, prevented the 
need for a stay and bond"; 
(4) "allow[ing] post-judgment modification of McCully
 
Associates' MSC Holdback Agreement to provide title insurance for
 Pumehana Associate's sale of Judd St. property (CAAP-15-000029)";
 and
 
(5) "expunging the lis pendens filed with the Bureau of
 
Conveyance [sic], when the PSA already provides purchaser with
 actual and constructive knowledge of the Marn litigation and
 pending appeals, and serve as a direct notice to Top Well." 
We conclude Appellants' contentions are without merit.
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. Partial Final Judgment and Charging Order
 
This appeal stems from a prolonged dispute that began
 
in 1998 between Appellants and other partners of McCully
 Associates, a limited partnership, (McCully Associates) regarding
 
certain partnership interests, which resulted in at least eight
 
consolidated civil lawsuits.
4 The nature of the underlying
 
lawsuit is not at issue in the current appeal. Rather, the
 relevant history of this appeal begins with a Partial Final
 Judgment entered by the circuit court on October 25, 2010. In
 the Partial Final Judgment, the circuit court, inter alia,
 awarded damages in favor of McCully Associates and against
 
3
 Appellants' opening brief titles this point of appeal as "Motion
to Dismiss Issues", but does not indicate which motion to dismiss they are
challenging or where the relevant circuit court order can be found in therecord, as required under Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 28(b)(4).
Based on this court's review of the Appellants' arguments in support of thepoint of appeal, we treat this point as a challenge to the circuit court'sconfirmation of the sale of the Judd Street Property. 
4
 The current appeal involves two of the remaining consolidated
cases, Civil Nos. 98-4706-10 and 98-5371-12.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appellants.
 
5
On June 20, 2011, Thomas E. Hayes,  as McCully
Associates' Liquidating Receiver (
Receiver Hayes), filed a 
"Motion For Entry of Charging Order" against Appellants' 
transferable interest in Pumehana Associates, a Hawai 'i general 
partnership (Pumehana Associates) that owned real property on 
Judd Street in Honolulu (Judd Street Property), to satisfy the 
monetary judgments against Alexander awarded in the Partial Final 
Judgment. The circuit court granted Receiver Hayes' motion and on August 18, 2011, the circuit court entered a charging order, ordering "that Judgment Debtor [Alexander's] transferable interest in [Pumehana Partners] be and is hereby charged with and shall be used for payment of the unsatisfied amounts of the . . . Partial Final Judgment entered in this case on October 25, 2010 (being $
8,313,896.74 as of August 1, 2011)[.]"6 The circuit 
court also entered a charging order, ordering "that Judgment Debtor [Eric's] transferable interest in [Pumehana Partners] be and is hereby charged with and shall be used for payment of the unsatisfied amounts of the . . . Partial Final Judgment entered in this case on October 25, 2010 (being $6,220,182.39 as of August 1, 2011)[.]"
7 
On February 13, 2012, the circuit court found that 
Receiver Hayes had attempted to satisfy the Partial Final
 Judgment with no success and appointed Ronald Kotoshirodo as
 Pumehana Associates' receiver pendente lite (Receiver
 
Kotoshirodo) to serve "as a custodian of the transferable
 
partnership interests of [Appellants] in [Pumehana Associates],
 
individually and through their respective Revocable Living
 Trusts." The circuit court based its authority to appoint a
 receiver for Pumehana Associates on the following findings:
 
5
 On October 5, 2015, S. Steven Sofos was substituted for Receiver
Hayes as Liquidating Receiver for McCully Associates and Ala Wai Investment,
Inc.
 
6
 On December 22, 2011, Appellants purported to transfer their
partnership interests in Pumehana Associates to Richard Yee Marn, Catherine
Marn Oberholzer, Ryan Duck Quon Yee Marn.
 
7
 We refer to the two charging orders, entered against Alexander and
Eric separately on August 18, 2011, as "Charging Orders." 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3. [Appellants] are the sole partners of Pumehana
Associates, a Hawai' i General Partnership, through their
respective Revocable Trusts. 
4. [Appellants] are the sole Settlors and sole
Beneficiaries of their respective Revocable Trusts.
 
5. As the sole Settlors of their Revocable Trusts, the
income, accounts, property and other assets held and owned
in the name of Pumehana Associates, including the [Judd
Street Property], are controlled and used personally by
[Appellants], and they are the actual owners of Pumehana
Associates and its assets.
 
6. On August 18, 2011, this Court entered Charging
Orders Granting Receiver [Hayes'] Motion For Entry Of
Charging Orders filed June 20, 2011 declaring the income,
accounts, property and other assets held by and in the name
of Pumehana Associates are subject to Receiver [Hayes']
Partial Judgment against [Appellants].
 
7. [Appellants], as the owners and controllers of the
assets of Pumehana Associates, have failed to use those
assets to satisfy the Partial Judgment of Receiver Hayes,
and it is necessary for this Court to appoint a Receiver to
secure and take custodial control of Pumehana [Associates']
assets and enforce this Court's Charging Orders filed herein
August 18, 2011.
 
Receiver Kotoshirodo was given the power, duty, and authority to
 
"operate and manage the interests of [Appellants] in Pumehana
 Associates and the business of Pumehana Associates[,]" to
 accomplish enumerated outcomes.
B.	 Sale of McCully Shopping Center and Original Holdback
Agreement
 
The October 25, 2010 Partial Final Judgment also
 
required Receiver Hayes to sell the McCully Shopping Center,
 
which was owned by McCully Associates. On February 21, 2012,
 Receiver Hayes filed a motion seeking confirmation of the sale of
 the McCully Shopping Center to M Pocket Corporation, a Hawai
'i 
corporation (M Pocket). On March 28, 2012, the circuit court
 
granted Receiver Hayes' motion (Order Confirming Sale of McCully
Shopping Center).8
 
On September 19, 2012, McCully Associates, by Receiver
 
Hayes; First American Title Company, Inc., a Hawai 'i corporation 
(First American), as escrow agent; and M Pocket entered into the
 "McCully Shopping Center Holdback Escrow Agreement" (Original
Holdback Agreement) to facilitate the sale of McCully Shopping
 
8
 On June 12, 2012, Alexander appealed from the circuit court's
Order Confirming Sale of McCully Shopping Center in case no. CAAP-12-0000574.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Center to M Pocket. The Original Holdback Agreement required
 
that $3 million of the purchase price be deposited into an escrow
 account from which First American could withdraw funds to cover
 certain costs arising from ongoing and future litigation.
C. Sale of Judd Street Property and Amended Holdback Agreement
 
On March 11, 2014, Receiver Kotoshirodo filed a motion
 
requesting the circuit court to authorize the marketing of
 
Pumehana Associates' real property, including the Judd Street
 Property. On May 7, 2014, the circuit court granted Receiver
 Kotoshirodo's motion.
 
On July 1, 2014, Receiver Kotoshirodo entered into a
 
PSA with Top Well. In the PSA, Receiver Kotoshirodo agreed to
 sell the Judd Street Property to Top Well for $4 million. The
 PSA provided for a thirty-one day closing after entry of the
 order confirming the sale, with closing to occur no later than
 December 31, 2014. The PSA also included provisions for Top
 Well's indemnification in the event of further litigation
 relating to the Judd Street Property and for a $250,000 holdback
 from the proceeds of the sale, which was to be held in escrow, to
 secure Pumehana Associates' obligation to indemnify Top Well.
 
On July 14, 2014, Receiver Kotoshirodo filed a motion
 
to confirm the sale of the Judd Street Property to Top Well
 (Motion to Confirm). Two weeks later, in a letter to Receiver
 
Kotoshirodo's counsel dated July 31, 2014, Appellants offered to
 
purchase the Judd Street Property for $4.2 million. Citing
 contractual restrictions in the PSA, Receiver Kotoshirodo
 rejected the Appellants' offer in a letter dated August 4, 2014.
 Receiver Kotoshirodo's letter also informed Appellants that the
 circuit court was going to hold a hearing on the Motion to
 Confirm on September 3, 2014 and that "the Judge may, in her
 discretion, decide whether over-bidding might be considered with
 regard to the proposed sale of the [Judd Street] Property."
 
The circuit court granted Receiver Kotoshirodo's Motion
 
to Confirm after the September 3, 2014 hearing.
9 In an order
 
entered on September 30, 2014 (Order Confirming Sale of Judd
 
9
 The transcript of the September 3, 2014 hearing is not included in
the record on appeal.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Street Property), the circuit court determined that "[t]he
 
'offer' or over bid in the purported amount of $4.2 million
 
presented by [Alexander] at the hearing is rejected by the Court
 because such 'offer' or overbid is not viable."
10
 
Anticipating the December 31, 2014 deadline to close
 
the sale of the Judd Street Property, McCully Associates, through
 Receiver Hayes, and First American proposed an amendment to the
 Original Holdback Agreement in "McCully Shopping Center Amended
 and Restated Holdback Escrow Agreement" (Amended Holdback
 
11
Agreement).  In the proposed Amended Holdback Agreement,
 
Receiver Hayes agreed that the $1.75 million leftover from the

 
Original Holdback Agreement's $3 million holdback funds, which
 were funds originally intended to be used in litigation defense
 pertaining to the sale of the McCully Shopping Center, could be
 used by the title insurer "as a holdback for reasonable costs of
 defending title claims on the Judd Street Property . . . [.]" 
The proposed agreement also included an additional $250,000
 holdback from the proceeds of the sale of the Judd Street
 Property for the title insurer to use if necessary.
 
On December 8, 2014, the "[Receiver Hayes'] Motion to

 
Approve McCully Shopping Center and Judd Street's Amended and
 Restated Holdback Escrow Agreement" (Motion to Approve) was
 
filed. The Motion to Approve requested "expedited approval" of
 
the proposed Amended Holdback Agreement to facilitate the sale of
 the Judd Property on or before the December 31, 2014 deadline.
12
 
10
 On October 29, 2014, Appellants appealed the circuit court's Order
Confirming Sale of Judd Street Property in case no. CAAP-14-0001232.
 
11
 Receiver Hayes was prepared to agree to the proposed Amended
Holdback Agreement "if and when court approval [was] obtained."
 
12
 Receiver Hayes' declaration, filed in support of his Motion to
Approve, stated: 
3. The balance of the held-back funds is currently
about $1,750,000. In order to facilitate the sale of [the
Judd Street Property] by or before December 31, 2014, which
was complicated by the recent appeal filed by [Alexander], I
am willing to agree with First American and the Pumehana
Associates Receiver to permit the balance of the McCully
Shopping Center holdback to be combined with $250,000 in
funds to be held back in escrow from the Judd Street
 [Property] sale for a total of $2 million in holdback funds.
First American has required that amount of a holdback in
(continued...)
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Alexander filed an opposition to the Motion to Approve on
 
December 11, 2014.
 
The circuit court held a hearing on the Motion to
 
Approve on December 12, 2014, and followed with the entry of the
 December 17, 2014 Order Granting.
 
On January 14, 2015, Appellants filed a notice of
 
appeal from the December 17, 2014 Order Granting.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
"[A] circuit court's decisions involving its
supervision of an equitable receivership are viewed for abuse of 

 
discretion." Hawaii Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, Inc., 114 Hawai'i
 
438, 456, 164 P.3d 696, 714 (2007). 


 
[T]he circuit court abuses its discretion if it bases its
ruling on an erroneous view of the law or on a clearly
erroneous assessment of the evidence. Stated differently, an
abuse of discretion occurs where the circuit court has
 clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules
or principles of law or practice to the substantial
detriment of a party litigant
.
 
Id. (brackets omitted) (quoting Office of Hawaiian Affairs v. 
State, 110 Hawai 'i 338, 351, 133 P.3d 767, 780 (2006)).
III. DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, Appellants characterize the circuit court's
 
December 17, 2014 Order Granting as an amendment to its Order
 Confirming Sale of the McCully Shopping Center, which Appellants
 argue, constitutes an impermissible "reopening of an Order which
 has been granted rule 54(b) certification." Appellants provide
 no argument for how the December 17, 2014 Order Granting, which
 approved the proposed Amended Holdback Agreement, amends or
 alters the circuit court's March 28, 2012 Order Confirming the
 Sale of McCully Shopping Center. The proposed Amended Holdback
 Agreement provided holdback funds for the Judd Street Property's
 
12(...continued)
order to issue title insurance to the Judd Street [Property]

buyer while [Alexander's] appeal is pending.
 
4. McCully Associates has a charging order against the
partnership interests of [Appellants] in Pumehana
Associates. Therefore, McCully Associates will benefit from
a sale of the Judd Street [Property], and agreeing to a
modification of the existing holdback agreement in order to
facilitate the sale of the Judd Street [Property] makes
business sense.
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
litigation defense. The Order Confirming the Sale of McCully
 
Shopping Center, on the other hand, approved the sale of the
 shopping center to M Pocket and provided basic details about the
 nature of the sale, none of which include determinations as to
 holdback funds.
 
Appellants argue that Receiver Hayes' decision to use
 
McCully Associates' holdback funds to facilitate the sale of the
 Judd Street Property was "legally unjustified". Appellants
 further argue that the circuit court's approval of Receiver
 Hayes' decision was "well beyond any reasonable exercise of
 judicial discretion[.]"
 
"A receivership is equitable in nature and the court's
 
extraordinary broad remedial powers and wide discretion to
 appoint receivers derive from its inherent powers of equity to
 fashion relief." Hawaii Ventures, 114 Hawai'i at 456, 164 P.3d
 
at 714. "[C]ourts of equity have the power to mold their decrees
 to conserve the equities of the parties under the circumstances
 of the case." Id. (quoting Honolulu, Ltd. v. Blackwell, 7 Haw.
 
App. 210, 219, 750 P.2d 942, 948 (1988)). Therefore, "whether
 and to what extent relief should be granted rests within the
 sound discretion of the circuit court and will not be disturbed
 absent an abuse of such discretion." Id. (citation, internal
 
quotation marks, and brackets omitted).
 
Receiver Hayes was appointed as McCully Associates'
 
Liquidating Receiver. Receiver Hayes had the authority to wind-
down McCully Associates' businesses, which included the
 responsibility of selling McCully Shopping Center and "tak[ing]
 such action as is necessary to gather and collect the assets and
 property of [McCully Associates], including any judgment to enter
 in favor of [McCully Associates.]"
 
The circuit court's Charging Orders provided that
 
Receiver Hayes could satisfy McCully Associates' judgments
 against Appellants through Appellants' interests in Pumehana
 Associates' Judd Street Property. Receiver Hayes' declaration in
 support of the proposed Amended Holdback Agreement stated that,
 given McCully Associates' interest in the proceeds from the
 pending sale of the Judd Street Property, modifying the Original
 
8
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Holdback Agreement to facilitate the sale of the Judd Street
 
Property made "business sense." Given the discretionary powers
 of the circuit court presiding over the receivership and the
 authority conferred upon Receiver Hayes as Liquidating Receiver
 of the McCully Associates, we conclude that the circuit court did
 not abuse its discretion in entering the December 17, 2014 Order
 Granting approving Receiver Hayes' Motion to Approve the proposed
 Amended Holdback Agreement.
13
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Therefore, the "Order Granting Liquidating Receiver
 
Thomas E. Hayes' Motion to Approve McCully Shopping Center and
 608 N. Judd Street's Amended and Restated Holdback Escrow
 Agreement, Filed 12/8/14" entered on December 17, 2014 in the
 Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 20, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Alexander Y. Marn

 
Appellant pro se. Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge 
Louise K.Y. Ing

Zachary M. DiIonno
Laura P. Moritz
 (Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing)for Liquidating Receiver S.
Steven Sofos, successor to
Liquidating Receiver Thomas E.
Hayes.
 
13
 Appellants' opening brief raises several other issues on appeal
challenging other circuit court orders that are not included in the appeal
before us. Because we only have jurisdiction to consider arguments
challenging the circuit court's December 17, 2014 Order Granting, we decline
to address Appellants' remaining points on appeal.
 
9
 