FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
---o0o---
LARRY BOSWORTH, Claimant-Appellant,
v.
FOSS MARITIME COMPANY, Employee-Appellee,
and
ACCLAIM RISK MANAGEMENT, Insurance Carrier-Appellee
NO. CAAP-16-0000315
APPEAL FROM LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
(CASE NO. AB 2014-352; DCD NO. 2-14-03204)
September 30, 2019
GINOZA, CHIEF JUDGE, LEONARD AND CHAN, JJ.
OPINION OF THE COURT BY GINOZA, C.J.
In this appeal, Claimant-Appellant Larry Bosworth
(Bosworth), who is self-represented, appeals from the "Decision
and Order" ( Order Denying Appeal ) entered by the State of Hawai# i
Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board (LIRAB) on March 8,
2016, in favor of Employer-Appellee Foss Maritime Company and
Insurance Carrier-Appellee Acclaim Risk Management (collectively,
Foss Maritime ).  The Order Denying Appeal affirmed the decision
and order issued by the Director of Labor and Industrial
Relations ( Director) on October 10, 2014, which, inter alia,
denied Bosworth's claim for workers' compensation benefits underFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) Chapter 386 for an alleged injury
that he sustained while employed by Foss Maritime. 
From what we can discern,  Bosworth contends on appeal
that the LIRAB erred by: (1) concluding that the LIRAB lacked
jurisdiction under HRS § 386-7 (2015)  because Bosworth's work
injuries were covered or "provided for" under federal law; and
(2) determining that Bosworth was a "seaman" under 46 U.S.C.
§ 30104 ( the Jones Act).    321
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm.
I.  Background
On February 28, 2014, Bosworth filed a claim with the
State of Hawai#i Department of Labor and Industrial Relations
Disability Compensation Division alleging that on January 11,
2014, he sustained various mental health injuries related to
"stress due to management pressure while preforming [sic]
duties[.]"  Bosworth's claim stated that his occupation with Foss
Maritime was as a "Class II Tug Operator", and that his injuries
were sustained "on Tug in Harbor." 
1  Bosworth's opening brief is deficient in regard to the requirements
of Rule 28 of the Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP).  However,
Hawaii's appellate courts seek to address appeals on the merits where possible
and to the extent that we can discern the arguments raised.  See Marvin v.
Pflueger, 127 Hawai #i
 490, 496, 280 P.3d 88, 94 (2012); Norton v. Admin. Dir.
of Court, 80 Hawai #i 197, 200, 908 P.2d 545, 548 (1995).
2  HRS § 386-7 provides:
§386-7 Interstate and foreign commerce and maritime
employment.   To the extent permissible under the Constitution
and the laws of the United States, this chapter shall apply to
employees and employers engaged in interstate and foreign
commerce and to employees in maritime employment and their
employers not otherwise provided for by the laws of the United
States.
(Emphasis added).
3  46 U.S.C. § 30104 provides: 
A seaman injured in the course of employment or, if the
seaman dies from the injury, the personal representative of
the seaman may elect to bring a civil action at law, with
the right of trial by jury, against the employer. Laws of
the United States regulating recovery for personal injury
to, or death of, a railway employee apply to an action under
this section.
(Emphasis added).
2FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On October 10, 2014, the Director entered a written
decision finding, inter alia, that at the time of his injury,
Bosworth was a "seaman" as contemplated under the Jones Act, and
thus his work injury was covered under federal law.  The
Director, relying on HRS § 386-7, the Jones Act, and Bosworth's
testimony, concluded that Bosworth "does not have a compensable
claim as he is not under the jurisdiction of the State of Hawaii
and is in the jurisdiction of the Jones Act."  The Director thus
denied Bosworth's claim for workers' compensation benefits.   
On October 29, 2014, Bosworth appealed the Director's
decision to the LIRAB.  On October 7, 2015, the LIRAB conducted
an evidentiary hearing on Boswowrth's appeal.  On March 8, 2016,
the LIRAB entered its Order Denying Appeal, concluding, inter
alia, that Bosworth was a "seaman" under the Jones Act, and his
injury was "provided for" under federal law.  The LIRAB thus
concluded that it lacked jurisdiction over Bosworth's claim under
HRS § 386-7.  This appeal follows.
II.  Standard of review
Appellate Review of a LIRAB decision is governed by HRS
§ 91-14(g).  Capua v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 117 Hawai# i 439, 444, 184
P.3d 191, 196 (2008).  At the time of Bosworth's appeal, HRS
§ 91-14(g) (2012) provided:
§91-14  Judicial review of contested cases .
. . . . 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may affirm the
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions
for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the
decision and order if the substantial rights of the
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are:
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or
(4) Affected by other error of law; or
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted
exercise of discretion.
3FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
"Under HRS § 91–14(g), conclusions of law (COLs ) are reviewable
under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions regarding
procedural defects are reviewable under subsection (3).  A COL is
not binding on an appellate court and is freely reviewable for
its correctness.  Thus, the court reviews COLs de novo, under the
right/wrong standard."  Capua, 117 Hawai#i at 444, 184 P.3d at
196 (quoting Tam v. Kaiser Permanente, 94 Hawai#i 487, 494, 17
P.3d 219, 226 (2001)).   
We also note that: 
A COL that presents mixed questions of fact and law is
reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard because the
conclusion is dependent upon the facts and circumstances of
the particular case.  Price v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals of City
and County of Honolulu, 77 Hawai #i 168, 172, 883 P.2d 629,
633 (1994).  When mixed questions of law and fact are
presented, an appellate court must give deference to the
agency's expertise and experience in the particular field.
Dole Hawai #i Division–Castle & Cooke, Inc. v. Ramil, 71 Haw.
419, 424, 794 P.2d 1115, 1118 (1990).  The court should not
substitute its own judgment for that of the agency.  Id.
(citing Camara v. Agsalud, 67 Haw. 212, 216, 685 P.2d 794,
797 (1984)).
Igawa v. Koa House Rest., 97 Hawai#i 402, 406, 38 P.3d 570, 574
(2001) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted) (quoting
In re Water Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai#i 97, 119, 9 P.3d
409, 431 (2000)). 
III.  Discussion
A.  HRS Chapter 386 is Not Applicable to a "Seaman"
     Who is "Provided For" Under the Jones Act      
We first address Bosworth's contention that HRS § 386-7
does not divest the LIRAB of jurisdiction over the claims of a
"seaman" who is "provided for" under the Jones Act.  In its Order
Denying Appeal, the LIRAB concluded that HRS Chapter 386 "does
not apply to maritime employees whose work injuries are covered
or 'provided for' under federal law."  The LIRAB further
concluded that "federal remedies, to the extent that they are
available to injured maritime employees, are expressly excluded
from Hawaii's workers' compensation law."  
The LIRAB based its conclusions on its interpretation
of HRS § 386-7, which provides:
To the extent permissible under the Constitution and the
laws of the United States, this chapter shall apply to
employees and employers engaged in interstate and foreign
4FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
commerce and to employees in maritime employment and their
employers not otherwise provided for by the laws of the
United States.
(Emphasis added). 
We review de novo the LIRAB's conclusions of law and
agree with its interpretation of HRS § 386-7.  Specifically, we
conclude that if an employee in maritime employment and his or
her employer are provided for by the laws of the United States,
i.e., are covered by the laws of the United States, then HRS
Chapter 386 does not apply to that employee.
For questions of statutory interpretation, the
following principles are applicable: 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.
Second, where the statutory language is plain and
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain
and obvious meaning.  Third, implicit in the task of
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself.  Fourth, when
there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness
or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an
ambiguity exists.  And fifth, in construing an ambiguous
statute, the meaning of the ambiguous words may be sought by
examining the context, with which the ambiguous words,
phrases, and sentences may be compared, in order to
ascertain their true meaning.
Hawaii Gov't Emps. Ass'n, AFSCME Local 152, AFL-CIO v. Lingle,
124 Hawai#i 197, 202, 239 P.3d 1, 6 (2010) (citation omitted). 
As stated above, the language of HRS § 386-7 plainly states that
"[t]o the extent permissible under the Constitution and the laws
of the United States," HRS Chapter 386 "shall apply to employees
and employers engaged in interstate and foreign commerce and to
employees in maritime employment and their employers not
otherwise provided for by the laws of the United States." 
(Emphasis added).  The plain and obvious meaning of HRS § 386-7
precludes maritime employees who are "provided for" under federal 
law from receiving workers' compensation benefits under HRS
Chapter 386.4
4  Even though the plain meaning of a statute is apparent, legislative
history may be considered to confirm the statute's plain meaning.  E & J
Lounge Operating Co., Inc. v. Liquor Comm'n of City and Cty. of Honolulu, 118
Hawai#i 320, 335-36, 189 P.3d 432, 447-48 (2008).  With regard to HRS § 386-7,
(continued...)
5FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Applied here, the LIRAB concluded that it lacked
jurisdiction over Bosworth's claim because, as a "seaman",
Bosworth is "provided for" under the Jones Act, making HRS
Chapter 386 inapplicable to his claim for workers' compensation
benefits.  The provision in the Jones Act that the LIRAB held
provides relief for a "seaman" is 46 U.S.C. § 30104, which
states:
A seaman injured in the course of employment or, if the
seaman dies from the injury, the personal representative of
the seaman may elect to bring a civil action at law, with
the right of trial by jury, against the employer.  Laws of
the United States regulating recovery for personal injury
to, or death of, a railway employee apply to an action under
this section.
(Emphasis added).  The LIRAB concluded that a "seaman" is
"provided for" under federal law, inasmuch as "[t]he Jones Act is
a federal statute that provides a seaman a right of action for
damages against the employer for personal injuries sustained in
the course of maritime employment."   We conclude that the plain
and unambiguous language of HRS § 386-7 supports the LIRAB's
interpretation of the statute and the LIRAB's conclusion that it
lacks jurisdiction over Bosworth's claim.5
In a related action to the instant case, the U.S.
District Court for the District of Hawai#i (U.S. District Court )
similarly concluded that pursuant to HRS § 386-7, the State of
Hawaii's workers' compensation law is inapplicable to a
"seaman's" work injury claim because relief is provided for by
the Jones Act.  Bosworth v. Foss Mar., CIVIL 15-00285 LEK-BMK,
2016 WL 6433832, at *6-7 (D. Hawai#i Oct. 31, 2016);  see also In6
4(...continued)
however, the legislative history does not provide further guidance.
5  The criteria to qualify as a "seaman" under the Jones Act is
discussed infra.  
6  Bosworth's lawsuit in the U.S. District Court was brought against,
inter alia , Foss Maritime, and arose out of the same alleged injury involved
in the instant appeal.  The U.S. District Court construed Bosworth's complaint
to allege a number of claims, including a wrongful termination claim in
violation of HRS § 378-32(a)(2), which prohibits termination of an employee
because of an injury compensable under HRS Chapter 386.  The U.S. District
Court concluded, among other things, that Bosworth's HRS § 378-32 claim was
futile because Chapter 386 did not apply to Bosworth because he was a Jones
Act seaman.  Id. at *6-7.
6FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
re Holoholo Litig., 557 F.Supp. 1024 (D. Hawai#i 1983) (holding
that Hawaii's workers' compensation law did not bar deceased
employees' survivors' claims brought under federal law, including
the Jones Act).  
While Hawaii's appellate courts have not yet addressed
this issue, other jurisdictions with similar provisions in their
workers' compensation laws have determined that injured workers
covered by federal law are precluded from seeking benefits under
their respective workers' compensation laws.  See Morris v.
Owensboro Grain Co., LLC, 407 S.W.3d 559, 561-63 (Ky. 2013)
(holding that Kentucky's workers' compensation exemption law
indicated that the Kentucky General Assembly intended to exempt
any worker from the State's workers' compensation law when the
injury is covered by a federal workers' compensation scheme,
including the Jones Act);  Fulmer v. State, Dep't. of Wildlife
and Fisheries, 68 So.3d 499, 505 (La. 2011) (noting that a
provision in Louisiana's worker's compensation law specifically
stating that no compensation shall be payable in respect to the
injuries of any employee covered by the Jones Act is a clear
statement indicating that any employee covered by the Jones Act
is not provided compensation under state workers' compensation
law); Harvey's Casino v. Isenhour, 724 N.W.2d 705, 706-09 (Iowa87
7  Morris considered Ky. Rev. Stat. § 342.650, entitled "Exemptions of
particular classes of employees from coverage", which provided, in relevant:
The following employees are exempt from the coverage of this
chapter:
. . . 
(4)Any person for whom a rule of liability for injury or
death is provided by the laws of the United States,
except those persons covered under Title IV, Public
Law 91-173, 91st Congress, commonly referred to as the
Black Lung Benefits of the Federal Coal Mine Health
and Safety Act of 1969, or as amended[.]
(Footnote omitted).  
8  Fulmer considered La.Rev.Stat. § 23:1035.2, entitled "Claims covered
by certain federal laws", which provided:
No compensation shall be payable in respect to the
disability or death of any employee covered by the Federal
Employer's Liability Act, the Longshoremen's and Harbor
(continued...)
7FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2006) (holding that employees were "seaman" for purposes of the
Jones Act, and thus were not under the jurisdiction of the state
workers' compensation commission because Iowa workers'
compensation law precludes the claims of workers who are covered
by a compensation statute enacted by the Congress of the United
States).  9
We read HRS § 386-7 to exclude employees in maritime
employment and their employers who are "provided for" by the laws
of the United States from coverage under HRS Chapter 386.
Therefore, the LIRAB correctly determined that it lacked
jurisdiction over the workers' compensation claims of a "seaman"
covered under the Jones Act.
B.  The LIRAB Did Not Err in Concluding That
     Bosworth is a "Seaman" under the Jones Act 
As noted by the LIRAB, the term "seaman" is not defined
in the Jones Act.  However, the federal courts have addressed
which maritime workers qualify as a "seaman" entitled to
protection under the Jones Act.  See Chandris, Inc. v. Latsis,
515 U.S. 347, 355 (1995).  In the instant case, the LIRAB relied
on the guidance provided in federal case law to determine
Bosworth's "seaman" status at the time of his alleged injury.  
8(...continued)
Worker's Compensation Act, or any of its extensions, or the
Jones Act.
(Footnote omitted).
9  Harvey's Casino considered Iowa Code § 85.1 (2001), entitled
"Inapplicability of chapter", which provided, in relevant:
Except as provided in subsection 6 of this section, this
chapter does not apply to:
. . . . 
(6) Employers may with respect to an employee or a
classification of employees exempt from coverage
provided by this chapter pursuant to subsection 1, 2,
3, 4, or 5, other than the employee or classification
of employees with respect to whom a rule of liability
or a method of compensation is established by the
Congress of the United States, assume a liability for
compensation imposed upon employers by this chapter[.]
(Emphasis added).
8FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
"[T]he question of who is a 'member of a crew,' and therefore who
is a 'seaman,' is a mixed question of law and fact."  Id. at 369.
The LIRAB applied a two-part test enunciated by the
Fifth Circuit Court of the United States Court of Appeals in
Offshore Company v. Robison, 266 F.2d 769 (5th Cir. 1959).  In
Robison, the Fifth Circuit Court held that an evidentiary basis
for a Jones Act case exists:
(1) if there is evidence that the injured workman was
assigned permanently to a vessel (including special purpose
structures not usually employed as a means of transport by
water but designed to float on water) or performed a
substantial part of his work on the vessel; and (2) if the
capacity in which he was employed or the duties which he
performed contributed to the function of the vessel or to
the accomplishment of its mission, or to the operation or
welfare of the vessel in terms of its maintenance during its
movement or during anchorage for its future trips.
Id. at 779 (footnote omitted).  In its Order Denying Appeal, the
LIRAB also recognized the essential requirements for "seaman"
status as set forth by the U.S. Supreme Court in Chandris and
McDermott International, Inc. v. Wilander, 498 U.S. 337 (1991). 
As explained in Chandris:
[T]he essential requirements for seaman status are twofold.
First, . . . an employee's duties must contribute to the
function of the vessel or to the accomplishment of its
mission . . . . Second, and most important for our purposes
here, a seaman must have a connection to a vessel in
navigation (or to an identifiable group of such vessels)
that is substantial in terms of both its duration and its
nature.
515 U.S. at 368 (citations, brackets, and internal quotation
marks omitted).
In its Order Denying Appeal, the LIRAB made findings
that supported its conclusion that Bosworth was a "seaman"
covered under the Jones Act, and were consistent with the
criteria set forth by the U.S. Supreme Court.  The LIRAB found,
inter alia , that: Bosworth was a Class 2 tugboat operator and
performed a substantial part of his work on a vessel; Bosworth's
job duties contributed to the function of the vessel and the
accomplishment of its mission; Bosworth was a "seaman" prior to
his alleged work injury; Bosworth was placed into a remedial
training program to address the performance of his job and was in
such training program at the time of his alleged injury; and
9FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Bosworth's participation in the remedial training program did not
change Bosworth's job title or job duties operating a vessel.  
The LIRAB thus found that "at the time of his alleged work
injury, [Bosworth] continued to be a seaman, and that his alleged
injury is covered or 'provided for' by the Jones Act, a federal
law of the United States."
Because Bosworth does not directly challenge any of the
of the LIRAB's findings of fact, the LIRAB's findings in its
Order Denying Appeal are binding on this Court.  See Okada
Trucking Co., Ltd. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawai#i 450, 458,
40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002).10
The LIRAB's determination was also made based upon its
own assessment of the credibility of the testimony proffered by
Bosworth and on behalf of Foss Maritime at the October 7, 2015
hearing on Bosworth's claim.  In making its determination, the
LIRAB specifically credited the testimony of Dean Kapoi (Kapoi),
Vice President of Terminal Operations for Young Brothers (which
Kapoi testified is within the "Foss Maritime Company family")
over the testimony of Bosworth.  The LIRAB noted in its Order
Denying Appeal that Kapoi had testified that Bosworth was hired
as a "Harbor Operator II, Class 2 Operator" in 2012, and worked
as a crew member and seaman who was engaged in the navigation of
tugboats.  Kapoi further testified that Bosworth's work was
performed over navigable waters of the United States, and that
Bosworth was not considered a land-based worker.  Kapoi also
testified that Bosworth performed his regular work duties during
the duration of the training program that Bosworth was engaged in
at the time of his injury.
The LIRAB further noted that Bosworth's testimony was
"internally inconsistent, seemingly self-serving, and
unreliable[.]"  Further, the LIRAB found that Bosworth's
10  We further note that the record indicates Bosworth filed a document
entitled "Amend Complaint" with the U.S. District Court in his related federal
action, where he alleged that he was "filing this lawsuit in federal court
under the authority of the Jones Act, 46 U.S.C. 688 because as a tug boat
operator I am a Jones Act seaman[.]"  (Emphasis added).  The LIRAB
specifically references this in its Order Denying Appeal, further supporting
its finding that Bosworth was a "seaman" under the Jones Act.
10FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
testimony regarding his seaman status was not credible.  We
decline to disturb these findings on appeal.  See Igawa, 97
Hawai#i at 410, 38 P.3d at 578 (recognizing that courts decline
to consider the weight of evidence to ascertain whether it weighs
in favor of findings, or to review an agency's findings of fact
by passing upon the credibility of witnesses or conflicts in
testimony). 
As the LIRAB's determination was consistent with
applicable federal law, and was supported by its findings made in
the record, we conclude that the LIRAB did not err in concluding
that Bosworth was a "seaman" covered under the Jones Act.  
IV.  Conclusion
For the reasons discussed above, the Labor and
Industrial Relations Appeals Board's "Decision and Order", filed
March 8, 2016, is affirmed.
On the briefs:
Larry Bosworth, 
Claimant-Appellant, 
self-represented. 
Scott G. Leong, 
Shawn L.M. Benton,
Karolina A. Turska, 
for Employer-Appellee and
Insurance Carrier-Appellee.
11