NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0002509
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CHIT WAI YU, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-1597)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise and Reifurth, JJ., and Nakamura, C.J., dissenting)

 
Defendant-Appellant Chit Wai Yu appeals from the Order
 
of Resentencing; Revocation of Probation, entered on July 5, 2013
 
("July 5, 2013 Order") by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 ("Circuit Court").
1/ The July 5, 2013 Order re-sentenced Yu to
 
probation and incarceration, and ordered restitution for his
 conviction on one count of Theft in the Second Degree in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") section 708­831(1)(b) (2006). 
On appeal, Yu alleges that the Circuit Court abused its 
discretion in (i) granting the Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i's motion for revocation of probation, and (ii) imposing 
"additional incarceration without first considering alternative punishment." Upon careful review of the record and the briefs submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments they advance and the issues they raise, we resolve Yu's points of error as follows and affirm. 
1/
 The Honorable Edward H. Kubo, Jr. presided.
  
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) Yu contends that the order revoking his probation
 
must be reversed because the Circuit Court abused its discretion
 
"when it concluded that [his] failure to comply with a
 substantial condition of probation was inexcusable." Yu concedes
 that "[i]t is undisputed that [he] failed to comply with a
 substantial condition when he did not make restitution payments
 as required by the order of probation[,]" but asserts that his
 failure to comply is excusable, and that the Circuit Court
 "failed to properly consider the circumstances that underlie
 nonpayment before concluding that nonpayment was inexcusable." 
In support of his argument, Yu relies on HRS section 706-625(3)
 and Bearden v. Georgia, 461 U.S. 660 (1983). We conclude,
 however, that the Circuit Court did not err in revoking Yu's
 probation after determining that Yu failed to make a good-faith
 effort to obtain a job as a means of paying restitution.
 
The Circuit Court granted the State's motion for
 
revocation of probation, stating,
 
[t]his Court finds that the defendant has inexcusably failed
to comply with a term and condition of -- a substantial term
and condition of his probation; namely, the payment of
restitution in the amount of $300.
 
This Court finds that the defendant is able-bodied.  The
 
defendant had no problem in going to the complaining witness's
store repeatedly to get money in this particular fraud case,
which resulted in a theft.  In fact, the defendant went to the
store approximately 30 times in this case, which shows his
ability to travel to and from with no substantial physical
problems.
 
The defendant himself agreed to this restitution amount.
And he even worked at two jobs in 2011, which showed that he
was able-bodied. But even when he was working, he failed to
make payments. He was only able -- he only made -- he only
 made one $300 payment.
 
This court previously took that -– his situation into
account and reduced the money to $200 per month. But this
 Court is not satisfied that the defendant, during that period
of time, from the sentencing of May 18, 2011, to the filing of
the revocation of probation on October 26, 2012, that the
defendant made a good-faith effort to sustainedly pay his fees
in the amount of -- or the restitution in the amount of $300
 per month.
 
The Circuit Court then sentenced Yu to the following:
 
It is the judgment and sentence of this Court that you
be placed on five years probation at this point in time.  You
 will be incarcerated for 60 days mitt forthwith.
 
There will be 
a proof of compliance hearing on Tuesday,
November 5, 2013, at 8:30, for proof of compliance on
 
2
  
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 706-625(3) (2011). The Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
has defined the term "inexcusably" in HRS section 706-625(3) as a
 
"willful and deliberate attempt . . . to circumvent the order of
 the court." State v. Villiarimo, 132 Hawai
'i 209, 222, 320 P.3d 
874, 887 (2014) (quoting State v. Nakamura, 59 Haw. 378, 381, 581
 Pl.2d 759, 762 (1978)). 
 
 
 
        NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
restitution payments and employment status. 
. . . .
 
Same terms and conditions as far as the remaining terms
and conditions of probation.
 
Pursuant to the July 5, 2013 Order, Yu began serving his 60-day
 
sentence that same day. 
HRS section 706-625(3) states that, 
[t]he court shall revoke probation if the defendant has
inexcusably failed to comply with a substantial requirement
imposed as a condition of the order or has been convicted of
a felony. The court may revoke the suspension of sentence or
probation if the defendant has been convicted of another crime
other than a felony.
 
This standard requires both an intentional act on the part of
the defendant ("willful"), 
and a deliberate attempt by him or
her to circumvent the probation order, taking into
 consideration the significance of the defendant's action with
respect to the court's order and goals of probation ("to
circumvent the order of the court").
 
Id. (footnote omitted) (quoting Nakamura, 59 Haw. at 381, 581
 
p.2d at 762).2/ Additionally,
 
[g]iven the difficulty of proving the requisite state of mind
by direct evidence in criminal cases, "[w]e have consistently
held that . . . proof by circumstantial evidence and
 reasonable inferences arising from circumstances surrounding
the [defendant's conduct] is sufficient. . . . Thus, the mind
of an alleged offender may be read from his acts, conduct and
inferences fairly drawn from all the circumstances."
 
State v. Stocker, 90 Hawai 'i 85, 92, 976 P.3d 399, 406 (1999) 
(quoting State v. Mitsuda, 86 Hawai 'i 37, 44, 947 P.2d 349, 356 
(1997)). Contrary to Yu's assertion that his "nonpayment was
 
neither willful nor deliberate, and that he made numerous
 attempts to secure employment[,]" the Circuit Court concluded
 that Yu inexcusably failed to comply with a substantial condition
 
2/
 According to Black's Law Dictionary, "willful" is defined as
"[v]oluntary and intentional, but not necessarily malicious." Black's Law
 
Dictionary 1737 (9th ed. 2009).
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
of his probation in that he failed to demonstrate that he was
 
actively looking for employment, and was subsequently unable to
 pay restitution. 
Although the Circuit Court continued the December 3,
 
2012 hearing on the State's motion for revocation for more than
 seven months to give Yu time to secure employment, Yu was still
 unemployed at the time of the continued revocation hearing on
 July 5, 2013. Further, testimony at the continued hearing
 demonstrated that Yu understood that missing a restitution
 payment could be considered to be a violation of his probation;
 that he failed to provide supporting paperwork with prospective
 employer signatures to Mr. Ikeda, his probation officer; that he
 repeatedly sought employment from the same prospective employers;
 that he took jobs where he was uncertain that he would be
 compensated; and that he declined an otherwise acceptable job
 offer on the Big Island because he did not want to go there. 
Bearden applies to this case, but not for the
 
proposition that Yu advances. In Bearden, the trial court
 revoked the defendant's probation for failure to pay his fine
 without first determining whether he had "made sufficient bona
 fide efforts to pay or that adequate alternative forms of
 punishment did not exist." Bearden, 461 U.S. at 662. The Court
 
explicitly held that "[i]f the probationer willfully . . . failed
 to make sufficient bona fide efforts legally to acquire the
 resources to pay [a fine or restitution], the [trial] court may
 revoke probation and sentence the defendant to imprisonment
 within the authorized range of its sentencing authority." 
Bearden, 461 U.S. at 672. That is precisely what the Circuit
 Court did here when it made an inquiry as to why Yu failed to pay
 restitution, and concluded that it was because Yu failed to make
 bona fide efforts to seek employment which would have provided
 him with the resources to pay his restitution. Accordingly, the
 Circuit Court did not err in concluding that Yu inexcusably
 violated his probation and in revoking Yu's probation.
 
(2) Yu asserts that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion when, upon revoking probation "due solely to [his]
 inability [to] pay restitution, it imposed additional
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
incarceration." Yu further contends that "[t]he order revoking
 
[his] probation and resentencing him to a new five-year term of
 probation, including 60 days in jail, should be reversed because
 it violates the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States
 Constitution and Bearden v. Georgia[,]" and was made with obvious
 disregard for his ability to reasonably make restitution.
 
As discussed above, Bearden requires that the Circuit
 
Court consider alternative methods of punishment if the court
 determines that "the probationer could not pay despite sufficient
 bona fide efforts to acquire the resources to do so[.]" Bearden,
 
461 U.S. at 672 (emphasis added). Here, the Circuit Court
 concluded that Yu failed to make bona fide efforts to find
 employment. Accordingly, Bearden does not apply, and the Circuit
 Court did not abuse its discretion when it did not consider
 alternative methods of punishment.
 
Finally, Yu argues that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion by refusing to reduce the required monthly restitution
 payments from $300.00 to $30.00. Under the applicable version of
 HRS section 706-646(3), however, the Circuit Court is authorized
 to impose a freestanding order of restitution payment, but is
 required to: (1) "consider the defendant's financial ability to
 make restitution for the purpose of establishing the time and
 manner of payment" and (2) "specify the time and manner in which
 restitution is to be paid." Haw. Rev. Stat. §706-646(3) (Supp.
 2012).
 
In this case, at Yu's restitution hearing held on
 
June 20 & 21, 2011, Yu proposed and agreed that "he's willing to
 pay $24,293 at the rate of $300 a month per the plea agreement." 
Prior to issuing its original sentence, the Circuit Court
 addressed Yu regarding his understanding of the amount of
 restitution, and confirmed that Yu understood and agreed to the
 amount of restitution. At the restitution hearing, the Circuit
 Court determined, in satisfaction of the requirement in HRS
 section 706-646(3), that Yu would pay $300 per month in
 restitution payments. Yu did not appeal the May 18, 2011
 Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence, or the June 21,
 2011 Amended Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence, and
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
did not contend that the restitution payments of $300 per month
 
were unreasonable until the State filed its motion for revocation
 of probation on October 26, 2012. 
At the first revocation hearing, Yu requested that his
 
restitution payments be reduced to $100 because he was
 unemployed. The Circuit Court explained that "at $300 per month,
 its going to take him quite some time to get there. And if we
 reduce it further, there's going to be even further problems. At
 the same time[,] I don't want to be leaving him at a level where
 he can't pay[.]" Therefore, the court reduced Yu's restitution
 payments from $300 to $200 per month. Following that, however,
 Yu made no further restitution payments until the date of his
 continued revocation hearing, when he paid $10.
 
At the continued revocation hearing, Yu requested that
 
the Circuit Court reduce his restitution payments from $200 to
 $30 a month because he was unemployed. The Circuit Court denied
 Yu's request without prejudice because of a pending job offer
 starting on September 18, after which, the Circuit Court said it
 would look at Yu's "pay stubs and find out what his track record
 is as far as work, then we can intelligently address the issue."
 The Circuit Court's review of Yu's employment record and
 potential for employment in September establishes that it
 considered defendant's financial ability to make restitution
 payments. See State v. Curioso, No. CAAP-13-0001014, 2014 WL
 
1271038, at *3 (Haw. App. Mar. 28, 2014) (noting that the trial
 court's inquiry into the demands on defendant's time and his
 employment status showed that it considered his financial ability
 to make restitution payments); but see, State v. Beaver, No.
 SCWC-11-0000654, 2013 WL 3156152, at *4 (Haw. June 20, 2013)
 (Pollack J., dissenting) (stating that the family court erred by
 imposing monthly restitution payments without asking whether
 petitioner had the ability to make the payments, and not entering
 into the record that the manner of payment was reasonable and in
 an amount that Petitioner could afford to pay). Accordingly, the
 Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying without
 prejudice Yu's request to reduce restitution payments to $30. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore, the Order of Resentencing; Revocation of
 
Probation entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit on
 
July 5, 2013 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, April 11, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Seth Patek,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Associate Judge 
Donn Fudo,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
7
 