NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-16-0000536 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
REALTY FINANCE, INC.,
P
laintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee,
v. 
THOMAS FRANK SCHMIDT AND LORINNA JHINCIL SCHMIDT,
Defendants/Cross-Claim Defendants/
Counterclaim-Plaintiffs/Appellants,
and 
KALOKO TWO PARTNERSHIP, a Hawaii limited partnership;
AMERASIAN LAND CO., a Nevada corporation,
Defendants/Counterclaim-Plaintiffs/Appellees,
and 
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF THE MARCO POLO APARTMENTS,
an unincorporated condominium association,
Defendant/Cross-Claim Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Plaintiff/Appellee,
and 
TURLINGTON CORPORATION, as Successor-In-Interest to JOHN RAPP,
Defendant/Cross-Claim-Defendant/Appellee,
and 
LAWHN & KEEVER, a Law corporation; DOUGLAS J. IGE; STATE OF
HAWAI# I, by and through the Chief, Oahu Collections Branch,
Defendants-Appellees, 
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF THE MARCO POLO APARTMENTS,
Defendant/Third-Party Plaintiff/Appellee,
v. 
R
EAL PROPERTY DIVISION DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE, COUNTY OF MAUI,
BANK OF HONOLULU, AND CHARLES MAZZOLA,
Third-Party Defendants/Appellees. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 97-1235-03)  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.) 
Defendants/Cross-Claim Defendants/Counterclaim-
Plaintiffs/Appellants Thomas Frank Schmidt and Lorinna Jhincil 
Schmidt (Schmidts) appeal from the "Order Granting as Modified Plaintiff's Motion to Vacate Judgment Entered on December 21, 2004, Filed on March 3, 2016," filed on July 7, 2016, (Order) in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).
 The 
Order was filed in favor of Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee Realty Finance, Inc. (Realty) granting with modifications "Plaintiff's Motion to Vacate Judgment Entered on December 21, 2004," filed on March 3, 2016 (Motion to Vacate). 1
This appeal arises out of an extensive history of civil 
proceedings that resulted in a judgment against Realty for $537,258.66, filed on December 21, 2004 (Judgment). On March 3, 2016, Realty filed its Motion to Vacate the Judgment arguing that the Judgment should be deemed "paid and discharged" because the Schmidts failed to renew the Judgment within ten years per Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 657-5 (2016).
 Realty requested that 
the Judgment be vacated under Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rule 60(b)(5) (2006). On July 7, 2016, the circuit court 32
1 The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided. 
2 HRS § 657-5 states: 
§ 657-5 Domestic judgments and decrees. Unless an 
extension is granted, every judgment and decree of any court
of the State shall be presumed to be paid and discharged atthe expiration of ten years after the judgment or decree wasrendered. No action shall be commenced after the expirationof ten years from the date a judgment or decree was renderedor extended. No extension of a judgment or decree shall begranted unless the extension is sought within ten years ofthe date the original judgment or decree was rendered. A court shall not extend any judgment or decree beyond twentyyears from the date of the original judgment or decree. No extension shall be granted without notice and the filing ofa non-hearing motion or a hearing motion to extend the lifeof the judgment or decree. 
3 HRCP Rule 60(b)(5) states in relevant part: 
(b) Mistakes; inadvertence; excusable neglect; newlydiscovered evidence; fraud, etc.  On motion and upon such
terms as are just, the court may relieve a party or aparty's legal representative from a final judgment, order,or proceeding for the following reasons: . . . (5) the 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
entered the Order granting as modified Realty's Motion to Vacate. 
On appeal, the Schmidts contend that the circuit court 
erred in entering the Order because: (1) the Judgment should not 
have been vacated under HRCP Rule 60(b)(5) and the Motion to Vacate was untimely; (2) Realty sought to vacate the Judgment as a means of undermining the Schmidts' collection efforts on the Judgment in related cases under the Uniform Fraudulent Transfer Act (UFTA); (3) the Judgment was equitably extended under HRS § 657-20 (2016)
4 when Realty committed fraud by changing its name 
without informing the circuit court; (4) deeming the Judgment discharged was inequitable given the Schmidts' attempts to recover on the Judgment over the last 15 years; and (5) deeming the Judgment discharged deprived the Schmidts of their constitutional rights to due process and equal protection. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as well as the relevant case law, we resolve the Schmidts' appeal as follows. 
(1) The Schmidts' first point of error on appeal 
contends that the circuit court erred in entering the Order because the Judgment should not have been vacated under HRCP Rule 60(b)(5) and because the Motion to Vacate was untimely. 
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law
reviewable de novo . When construing a statute, our foremost
obligation is to ascertain and give effect to the intention
of the legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from 
judgment has been satisfied, released, or discharged, or a
prior judgment upon which it is based has been reversed orotherwise vacated, or it is no longer equitable that thejudgment should have prospective application[.] 
4 HRS § 657-20 states: 
§ 657-20 Extension by fraudulent concealment. If any
person who is liable to any of the actions mentioned in thispart or section 663-3, fraudulently conceals the existenceof the cause of action or the identity of any person who isliable for the claim from the knowledge of the personentitled to bring the action, the action may be commenced atany time within six years after the person who is entitledto bring the same discovers or should have discovered, theexistence of the cause of action or the identity of theperson who is liable for the claim, although the actionwould otherwise be barred by the period of limitations. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the language contained in the statute itself. Therefore,
the fundamental starting point for statutory interpretationis the language of the statute itself. . . . And where the statutory language is plain and unambiguous, our sole dutyis to give effect to its plain and obvious meaning. 
Int'l Sav. & Loan Ass'n, Ltd. v. Wiig, 82 Hawai# i 197, 199, 921 
P.2d 117, 119 (1996) (internal citations and quotation marks 
omitted). 
In the Order granting Realty's Motion to Vacate, the 
circuit court modified the grounds for granting the motion, ruling only that the Judgment was more than ten years old, the Schmidts' did not seek to extend the Judgment, and thus "[u]nder HRS § 657-5, the [Judgment], with all the rights and remedies appurtenant thereto, is conclusively deemed paid and discharged in accordance with Int'l Sav. & Loan Ass'n, Ltd. v. Wiig, 82 Hawai# i 197, 199, 921 P.2d 117, 119 (1996)." The circuit court 
did not base its Order on HRCP Rule 60(b)(5) and thus we need not address the rule's applicability to the present case. 
Further, unlike HRCP Rule 60(b) which requires that 
motions under the rule be filed within "a reasonable time," HRS § 657-5 contains no provision for the timeliness of a motion for a declaration deeming a judgment paid and discharged. HRS § 657-5 is a statute of repose, and judgments are "conclusively presumed paid and discharged after ten years unless timely renewed," with or without a court declaration. Wiig, 82 
Hawai# i at 199, 201, 
921 P.2d at 119, 121. Thus, the Motion to Vacate was proper and timely insofar as the circuit court construed the motion as a request for a declaration that the Judgment was deemed paid and discharged by operation of law, under HRS § 657-5, ten years after the Judgment was entered on December 21, 2004. 
(2) The Schmidts' second point of error on appeal 
contends that the circuit court erred in entering the Order because Realty sought to vacate the Judgment as a means of undermining the Schmidts' collection efforts on the Judgment in related cases under UFTA. 
HRS § 657–5 is a statute of repose that compels the exercise
of a right within the statutorily defined period of time.In this respect, HRS § 657–5 provides the judgment creditora ten year interval within which to attempt collection ofthe judgment. If the judgment is not satisfied within theprescribed period, the judgment creditor may extend or renew 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the judgment for an additional ten year term. If the 
judgment creditor fails to secure the extension within theten years, the judgment and all the rights and remediesappurtenant to that judgment terminate. 
Id. at 199, 921 P.2d at 119 (internal citations omitted). 
As stated supra, the circuit court declined to vacate 
the Judgment, and instead properly declared that the Judgment was 
deemed paid and discharged by operation of law under HRS § 657-5. HRS § 657-5 takes no account of the success of the judgment creditor's collection actions nor of the debtor's intentions in seeking to have an expired Judgment declared deemed paid and discharged. 
The Judgment expired by operation of law at the end of 
its ten year term. The Schmidts made no attempt to extend the Judgment during its ten year term as required by HRS § 657-5. Realty's intent in seeking the circuit court's declaration and any potential legal ramifications of the expired Judgment on the Schmidts' collection efforts do not affect the circuit court's obligation to declare that the Judgment was deemed paid and discharged by operation of law under HRS § 657-5. 
Further, the appeal before us concerns only whether the 
circuit court erred in declaring that the Judgment was deemed paid and discharged. Thus, although we recently addressed the relationship between expired judgments and UFTA actions in Kekona v. Abastillas, Nos. CAAP-16-0000679 & CAAP-16-0000782, 2018 WL 6259487, at *7-8 (Haw. App. Nov. 30, 2018) (Mem. Op.), in this appeal, the potential legal effects of the Order on the Schmidts' attempts to enforce the Judgment in an ongoing UFTA action have no bearing on whether the Judgment is deemed paid and discharged under HRS § 657-5. Thus, the circuit court did not err in entering the Order. 
(3) The Schmidts' third point of error on appeal 
contends that the circuit court erred in entering the Order because the Judgment was equitably extended under HRS § 657-20 when Realty committed fraud by changing its name without informing the circuit court. The Schmidts contend that HRS § 657-20 should be read in pari materia with HRS § 657-5 to extend the Judgment for an additional six years because Realty 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
fraudulently concealed the identity of a party liable for the 
claim. 
This contention is without merit. The statutes, while 
appearing in the same chapter of the Hawaii Revised Statutes, are not in pari materia  because they do not concern the same subject 
matter. 
See HRS § 1-16 (2009) ("Laws in pari materia, or upon 
the same subject matter, shall be construed with reference to each other."). As stated supra, HRS § 657-5 is a statute of repose. Wiig, 82 Hawai# i at 199, 921 P.2d at 119. On the other 
hand, HRS § 657-20 extends the statute of limitations when a claim must be filed in cases where a liable party fraudulently conceals a cause of action or identity of another liable party. HRS § 657-20, which addresses when a case may begin, has no bearing on the time limits established in HRS § 657-5 for the life of a judgment after the judgment is entered. Further, the Supreme Court of 
Hawai# i has held that even statutes that should 
be read in pari materia with HRS § 657-5 do "not 'toll' the life of the judgment beyond the ten year period." Id. at 121, 921 P.2d at 201. Thus, in the absence of any timely attempt to renew the Judgment, the circuit court properly deemed the Judgment paid and satisfied ten years after the Judgment was entered. 
(4) The Schmidts fourth point of error on appeal 
contends that the circuit court's Order deeming the Judgment discharged is inequitable given the Schmidts' attempts to recover on the Judgment over the last 15 years. 
The Schmidts' present no legal authority for the 
proposition that a judgment can be extended via the equitable powers of the court beyond the time limit established in HRS § 657-5. The Supreme Court of 
Hawai# i has held that under "HRS § 
657–5, the judgment, together with all the rights and remedies appurtenant to it, are conclusively presumed paid and discharged after ten years unless timely renewed." Id. The plain language of HRS § 657-5 is not permissive. Thus, the circuit court did not err in entering the Order. 
(5) The Schmidts' fifth point of error on appeal 
contends that the circuit court's Order deeming the Judgment discharged deprived the Schmidts of their constitutional rights 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
to due process and equal protection. Specifically, the Schmidts 
claim that "the trial court acted in the manner inconsistent with due process and denied the Schmidts under these circumstances their right to equal protection under the law because it denied them a judgment against the proper party." 
This contention is without merit. The Judgment was 
deemed paid and discharged by operation of law ten years after it was entered. The Schmidts failed to avail themselves of the statutory protection afforded under HRS § 657-5 to extend the Judgment for another ten years so that they could continue their collection efforts. The circuit court's Order declaring that the Judgment was deemed paid and discharged did not alter these existing legal realities. Thus, the circuit court's entry of the Order did not deprive the Schmidts of their constitutional rights to due process and equal protection. 
Based on the foregoing, the "Order Granting as Modified 
Plaintiff's Motion to Vacate Judgment Entered on December 21, 2004, Filed on March 3, 2016," filed on July 7, 2016, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 14, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
R. Steven Geshell,
for Thomas Frank Schmidt and Lorinna Jhincil Schmidt. Presiding Judge 
Paul Alston,(Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing),for Realty Finance, Inc. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7 