NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000127
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
RICKY W. TONGG, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-10-02411)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Ricky W. Tongg (Tongg) appeals from
 
the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment 
entered on February 3, 2011, in the District Court of the First
 
Circuit, Honolulu Division (district court).1
 
After a non-jury trial, Tongg was found guilty of
 
Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant, in
 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1) and/or
 
(a)(3), (b)(1) (Supp. 2011) and Accidents Involving Damage to
 
Vehicle or Property, in violation of HRS § 291C-13 (Supp. 2011). 
1
 The Honorable William Cardwell presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Tongg contends the district court erred by
 
denying his Motion to Suppress because (1) no permission to enter
 
the house Tongg resided in was given to Officer Jolon Wagner
 
(Officer Wagner), therefore any statements Tongg made were the
 
result of an illegal search and seizure, (2) Tongg was not
 
advised of his right against self-incrimination when he was
 
subjected to a custodial interrogation, and (3) the officer
 
failed to knock and announce his presence in violation of HRS §
 
803-37 (1993).
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Tongg's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Tongg's right to privacy under the Fourth and 
Fourteenth Amendments under the U.S. Constitution and article I, 
section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution were not violated because 
Officer Wagner had permission to enter the house and he did not enter Tongg's bedroom. Although Tongg had a reasonable 
expectation of privacy in the house and bedroom in which he 
lived, Officer Wagner was not required to obtain a warrant before 
he entered the house as the district court found, based on 
credible testimony, that Tongg's mother, who was on the lease to 
the property, invited Officer Wagner into the house and consented 
to his entry. "It is well-settled that an appellate court will 
not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses 
and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier 
of fact." State v. Mattiello, 90 Hawai' i 255, 259, 978 P.2d 693, 
697 (1999) (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets omitted; block quote format changed). 
Officer Wagner's testimony that Tongg's bedroom door
 
was slightly open when he approached was uncontradicted, and he
 
testified that he knocked on it and that Tongg opened it wider. 
No witness testified that Officer Wagner ever entered Tongg's
 
bedroom from the hallway while he questioned Tongg. Therefore,
 
Tongg's right to privacy was not violated by Officer Wagner
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
during the encounter inside the house and outside Tongg's
 
bedroom.
 
Tongg did not point to where in the record he argued
 
that Officer Wagner unlawfully searched and/or seized him. The
 
crux of Tongg's argument during the hearing on his Motion to
 
Suppress was that Officer Wagner unlawfully entered the house
 
without permission. During the Motion to Suppress hearing, Tongg
 
did not argue that he was unlawfully searched and/or seized
 
without a warrant based on probable cause when Officer Wagner
 
stood outside Tongg's bedroom door and questioned him. Finally,
 
Tongg does not provide any authority for the proposition that the
 
encounter inside the house constituted an illegal seizure.
 
(2) Tongg argues that his admission that he was 
driving the truck in question should have been suppressed as a 
result of a violation of his Miranda rights. We need not reach 
the merits of Tongg's claim that Officer Wagner was required to 
advise Tongg, before questioning Tongg outside Tongg's bedroom, 
of his right against self-incrimination because any error in 
failing to suppress the admission was harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt. See State v. Mundon, 121 Hawai' i 339, 366, 219 
P.3d 1126, 1153 (2009) (A constitutional error may be held harmless if it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.) 
Even without this admission, the other evidence
 
presented at trial overwhelmingly supported this fact. A
 
percipient witness testified that he saw the erratic movements of
 
the truck in question, including its rear-end collision with a
 
stopped car waiting to make a left turn from the left-turn lane;
 
he was able to get a "good look" at Tongg, who was the driver of
 
the truck, as they both stopped at a red light; and he noted and
 
reported the license plate number of the truck to police by
 
cellular phone during or shortly after these events. This
 
percipient witness also testified that he identified Tongg as the
 
driver of the truck when police took him to Tongg's residence
 
approximately fifteen to twenty minutes after he had seen Tongg
 
driving the truck, and identified Tongg as the driver of the
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
truck in court. Officer Wagner testified that dispatch reported
 
Tongg was the registered owner of the truck with the license
 
plate number reported by the percipient witness, and
 
approximately ten minutes later, when he arrived at Tongg's
 
residence, he found Tongg looking at the damage to the front
 
driver's side of the truck. Upon seeing the police vehicle,
 
Tongg swiftly moved into the house, despite Officer Wagner's
 
request to speak with him. Conversely, there was no evidence
 
presented that the driver of the truck was anyone other than
 
Tongg.
 
Based on this overwhelming evidence, testimony that
 
Tongg admitted he was the driver of the truck was harmless beyond
 
a reasonable doubt.
 
(3) Tongg claims that Officer Wagner was required to 
knock and announce his presence, pursuant to HRS § 803-37 
(1993).2 First, Tongg fails to establish that this argument was 
preserved before the district court. The point of error is therefore waived. Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 
28(b)(4). Moreover, HRS § 803-37 is inapplicable since (1) Officer Wagner was not executing a warrant and (2) Officer Wagner 
did not attempt a forced entry because the door to the house was 
2 HRS § 803-37 (1993) states:
 
§803-37 Power of officer serving. The officer charged with
the warrant, if a house, store, or other building is
designated as the place to be searched, may enter it without
demanding permission if the officer finds it open. If the
 doors are shut the officer must declare the officer's office
 and the officer's business, and demand entrance. If the
 doors, gates, or other bars to the entrance are not
immediately opened, the officer may break them. When
 entered, the officer may demand that any other part of the
house, or any closet, or other closed place in which the
officer has reason to believe the property is concealed, may
be opened for the officer's inspection, and if refused the
officer may break them.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
opened by Tongg's mother and the door to Tongg's bedroom, which
 
was ajar upon Officer Wagner's arrival, was opened by Tongg upon
 
Officer Wagner's knock.
 
THEREFORE, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of Entry of
 
Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment entered on February 3,
 2011, in the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu
 
Division is affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 29, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Nietzsche L. Tolan 
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant. 
Chief Judge 
Donn Fudo,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
5
 