NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000006
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ZACK MORRIS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
WAILUKU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 2DTC-10-00463)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Zack Morris (Morris) appeals from
 
1
the Judgment  filed on July 28, 2010 and the Amended Judgment
filed on December 8, 2010 in the District Court of the Second
 
Circuit, Wailuku Division (district court).2
 
1
 The Judgment and the judgment finding Morris not guilty of No Motor
Vehicle Insurance were filed as one document; the Judgment was filed
electronically as page 2.
2
 The Honorable Kelsey T. Kawano presided at trial; the Honorable
Blaine J. Kobayashi presided at the determination of restitution.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The district court found Morris guilty of Inattention
 
to Driving, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291­
12 (Supp. 2010).3
 
On appeal, Morris contends there was insufficient 
evidence to convict him of Inattention to Driving. Specifically, 
Morris argues that the State of Hawai' i (State) failed to adduce 
sufficient evidence to prove that he operated his vehicle without due care or in a manner as to cause a collision with another 
vehicle. Morris also contends the State failed to adduce 
sufficient evidence to prove that he acted intentionally, 
knowingly, or recklessly with respect to the result of his 
conduct. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we affirm.
 
The standard of review on appeal for sufficiency of the 
evidence is substantial evidence. The Hawai' i Supreme Court has 
long held that evidence adduced in the trial court
must be considered in the strongest light for theprosecution when the appellate court passes on thelegal sufficiency of such evidence to support aconviction; the same standard applies whether the casewas before a judge or a jury. The test on appeal isnot whether guilt is established beyond a reasonabledoubt, but whether there was substantial evidence tosupport the conclusion of the trier of fact. Indeed,even if it could be said in a bench trial that the conviction is against the weight of the evidence, aslong as there is substantial evidence to support therequisite findings for conviction, the trial courtwill be affirmed. 
"Substantial evidence" as to every material
element of the offense charged is credible evidence
which is of sufficient quality and probative value to
 
3
 HRS § 291-12 provides:
 
§291-12 Inattention to driving.  Whoever operates any
vehicle without due care or in a manner as to cause a collision
 with, or injury or damage to, as the case may be, any person,
vehicle or other property shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than thirty days, or both, and may be subject
to a surcharge of up to $100 which shall be deposited into the
trauma system special fund.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a
conclusion. And as trier of fact, the trial judge is
free to make all reasonable and rational inferences
 under the facts in evidence, including circumstantial
evidence.
 
State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 248-49, 831 P.2d 924, 931
(1992).
 
State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai' i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 
(2007) (brackets omitted). 
There was substantial evidence Morris operated his
 
vehicle without due care and in a manner as to cause a collision
 
with another vehicle (which in fact did occur). Additionally,
 
there was substantial evidence Morris acted recklessly with
 
respect to the result of his conduct. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment filed on
 
July 28, 2010 and the Amended Judgment filed on December 8, 2010
 in the District Court of the Second Circuit, Wailuku Division,
 
are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 13, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Iokona A. Baker,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
Renee Ishikawa Delizo,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
3
 