NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-16-0000568 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
IN RE OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRACTICES 
OPINION LETTER NO. F16-01 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(S.P. NO. 15-1-0097(1)) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.) 
Petitioner-Appellant James R. Smith (Smith), pro se, 
appeals from the "Final Judgment" (Judgment), entered on July 15, 
2016, in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (circuit court).
1  Smith also challenges the circuit court's "Order 
Granting Respondent Office of Information Practices, State of Hawai# i's Motion for Judgment on the Pleadings, Filed on 
February 8, 2016" (Order Granting Motion for Judgment) and "Order Dismissing Appellant James R. Smith's (1) Motion to Transmit to the Hawaii Supreme Court Certified and Reserved Questions of Law, Filed on February 23, 2016; and (2) Motion to Transmit to the Hawaii Supreme Court Certified and Reserved Questions of Law, as Amended, Filed on February 24, 2016" (Order Dismissing Motion to Transmit), both filed on June 16, 2016. 
This case concerns a special proceeding brought against 
the Office of Information Practices, State of Hawai# i (OIP) 
challenging OIP Opinion Letter No. F16-01 (Opinion) concerning 
1 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the application of the Uniform Information Practices Act (UIPA), 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) chapter 92F, and Hawai# i's 
"Sunshine Law", (Sunshine Law), HRS chapter 92, part I.  OIP's Opinion, dated July 24, 2015, stated that: (1) the Maui County Council did not violate the Sunshine Law when three councilmembers and the Maui County Mayor participated in a meeting of the Kula Community Association because their attendance complied with HRS § 92-2.5(e) (2012); and (2) a report of the meeting was properly noticed in accordance with HRS § 92-7(a) (2012). 
On June 16, 2016, the circuit court entered judgment on 
the pleadings in favor of OIP, finding that the circuit court lacked subject matter jurisdiction, and dismissed the suit and related motions.  Smith timely appealed. 
In his opening brief, Smith contends that the circuit 
court erred by: (1) granting OIP's Motion for Judgment without requiring the presentation of facts alleged in the Complaint or ruling on those facts; (2) granting OIP's Motion for Judgment while issues of material fact remained; (3) failing to apply a standard of review when evaluating OIP's Motion for Judgment; (4) granting OIP's Motion for Judgment without issuing either findings of fact or conclusions of law; (5) failing to grant or deny the Motion to Transmit and instead dismissing it as moot; and (6) failing to order OIP to forward the record used in arriving at its Opinion to the circuit court for review, per HRS § 92F-43. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as well as the relevant case law, we resolve Smith's appeal as follows. 
Regarding a motion for judgment on the pleadings, the 
Hawai
#i Supreme Court has stated: 
An HRCP Rule 12(c) (2004) motion serves much the same
purpose as an HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) (2004) motion, i.e., motion
to dismiss for "failure to state a claim upon which reliefcan be granted," except that it is made after the pleadingsare closed.  Baehr v. Lewin, 74 Haw. 530, 545–46, 852 P.2d44, 52, reconsideration granted in part and denied in part,74 Haw. 650, 875 P.2d 225 (1993) (citation omitted).  "A
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rule 12(c) motion for a judgment on the pleadings only has
utility when all material allegations of fact are admittedin the pleadings and only questions of law remain."  Id. at 546, 852 P.2d at 52 (citation, internal quotation marks, andellipsis omitted). 
In a motion for judgment on the pleadingsunder HRCP Rule 12(c), the movant [must]clearly establish[ ] that no materialissue of fact remains to be resolved and that he [or she] is entitled to judgmentas a matter of law.  In considering amotion for judgment on the pleadings, the[circuit] court is required to view thefacts presented in the pleadings and theinferences to be drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the nonmovingparty. 
Ruf v. Honolulu Police Dep't, 89 Hawai #i 315, 319, 972 P.2d
1081, 1085 (1999) (brackets in original) (citations andinternal quotation marks omitted).  On appeal, this court 
reviews de novo  the circuit court's order granting the 
motion.  Id. (citation omitted). 
Ultimately, our task on appeal is to
determine whether the circuit court's order . . . supports its conclusion that[the defendant] is entitled to judgment asa matter of law and, by implication, thatit appears beyond [a] doubt that theplaintiffs can prove no set of facts insupport of their claim that would entitlethem to relief under any alternativetheory. 
Baehr, 74 Haw. at 550, 852 P.2d at 54 (citations omitted). 
Hawaii Med. Ass'n. v. Hawaii Med. Service Ass'n, Inc., 113 
Hawai# i 77, 90-91, 148 P.3d 1179, 1192-93 (2006) (brackets in 
original) (footnote omitted). 
In its Order Granting Motion for Judgment, the circuit 
court found: 
(1) Sections 92F-27 and 92F-43, Hawaii Revised
Statutes (HRS) do not authorize individuals to appeal OIP
opinions relating solely to chapter 92, HRS, or to otherwisesue the OIP for alleged HRS chapter 92, part 1, violationsby Hawai #i state or county agencies.
(2) Appellant's remedy lies in section 92-12, HRS. 
Similar to our standard of review for a motion for 
judgment on the pleadings, 
[s]tatutory interpretation is a question of law
reviewable de novo .  Our construction of statutes is 
guided by the following rules: First the fundamentalstarting point for statutory-interpretation is thelanguage of the statute itself.  Second, where thestatutory language is plain and unambiguous, our soleduty is to give effect to its plain and obviousmeaning.  Third, implicit in the task of statutoryconstruction is our foremost obligation to ascertain 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and give effect to the intention of the legislature,
which is to be obtained primarily from the languagecontained in the statute itself.  Fourth, when thereis doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctivenessor uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, anambiguity exists.
In construing an ambiguous statute, the meaning of the
ambiguous words may be sought by examining the context, withwhich the ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may becompared, in order to ascertain their true meaning.Moreover, the courts may resort to extrinsic aids indetermining legislative intent.  One avenue is the use of legislative history as an interpretive tool. 
Kawashima v. State, 140 Hawai# i 139, 148-49, 398 P.3d 728, 737-38 
(2017) (block quote format altered) (brackets, citations, and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
(A) HRS § 92F-27 states in relevant part: 
(a)  An individual may bring a civil action against an
agency in a circuit court of the State whenever an agencyfails to comply with any provision of this part, and afterappropriate administrative remedies under sections 92F-23,92F-24, and 92F-25 have been exhausted. 
(Emphases added). 
Under the statute's plain meaning, the enforcement 
mechanism in HRS § 92F-27 is explicitly self-limited to part III 
of HRS chapter 92F, which governs the disclosure of personal records.  Thus, HRS § 92F-27 can only be used to seek judicial review of agency actions related to the disclosure of personal records. 
In this case, Smith argued in his complaint that OIP's 
Opinion misinterprets HRS § 92-1.5 (2012) and HRS § 92-7 (Supp. 2014), and thus that OIP's Opinion itself constitutes a failure to comply with the provisions of HRS chapter 92, making OIP's Opinion the proper subject of a civil suit under HRS § 92F-27 against OIP as an agency.  However, Smith's Complaint does not allege that OIP's Opinion violated any statute in HRS chapter 92F part III related to the disclosure of or failure to disclose Smith's personal information.  Smith's Complaint solely concerns the disclosures of records and notices related to public meetings held and/or attended by members of the Maui County Council under HRS chapter 92.  Thus, there is no set of facts that Smith could present that would raise a claim under HRS chapter 92F part III, and the circuit court did not err in finding as a matter of law that HRS § 92F-27 does not authorize individuals to appeal OIP 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
opinions relating solely to HRS chapter 92 or to otherwise sue 
the OIP for alleged HRS chapter 92, part I, violations by Hawai# i 
state or county agencies. 
(B) HRS § 92F-43 states in relevant part: 
(a)  An agency may not appeal a decision by the office
of information practices made under this chapter orpart I of chapter 92, except as provided in thissection.  Within thirty days of the date of thedecision, an agency may seek judicial review of afinal decision rendered by the office of informationpractices under this chapter or part I of chapter 92,by filing a complaint to initiate a special proceedingin the circuit court of the judicial circuit in theState where: 
(1)  The request for access to a record was made; (2)  The act the office determined was prohibited under partI of chapter 92 occurred; or(3)  The agency's principal place of business is located. 
(Emphasis added). 
As titled, HRS § 92F-43 solely concerns an "[a]gency 
appeal of a decision by the office of information practices."  An 
agency is defined as 
any unit of government in this State, any county, or any
combination of counties; department; institution; board;commission; district; council; bureau; office; governingauthority; other instrumentality of state or countygovernment; or corporation or other establishment owned,operated, or managed by or on behalf of this State or anycounty, but does not include the nonadministrative functionsof the courts of this State. 
HRS § 92F-3 (2012).  While HRS § 92F-43 is broader than HRS § 
92F-27 and may be used by agencies to challenge OIP decisions regarding both HRS chapter 92F or chapter 92 part I, HRS § 92F-43 only confers standing on agencies, as defined in HRS § 92F-3, to challenge OIP decisions. 
In this case, Smith is an individual and HRS § 92F-43 
does not confer any standing on Smith to appeal or directly challenge an opinion issued by OIP.  Thus, there is no set of facts that Smith could present that confer standing under HRS § 92F-43, and the circuit court did not err in finding as a matter of law that HRS § 92F-43 does not authorize individuals to appeal OIP opinions relating solely to HRS Chapter 92 or to otherwise sue the OIP for alleged HRS chapter 92, part 1, violations by Hawai# i state or county agencies. 
5  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(C) HRS § 92-12 concerns enforcement of HRS chapter 92 
part I and states: 
(a)  The attorney general and the prosecuting attorney
shall enforce this part.
(b)  The circuit courts of the State shall have 
jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this part by
injunction or other appropriate remedy.
(c)  Any person may commence a suit in the circuit
court of the circuit in which a prohibited act occurs forthe purpose of requiring compliance with or preventingviolations of this part or to determine the applicability ofthis part to discussions or decisions of the public body.The court may order payment of reasonable attorney's feesand costs to the prevailing party in a suit brought underthis section. 
(d)  Opinions and rulings of the office of information
practices shall be admissible in an action brought underthis part and shall be considered as precedent unless foundto be palpably erroneous.
(e)  The proceedings for review shall not stay the
enforcement of any agency decisions; but the reviewing courtmay order a stay if the following criteria have been met:
(1)  There is likelihood that the party bringing theaction will prevail on the merits;(2)  Irreparable damage will result if a stay is notordered;(3)  No irreparable damage to the public will resultfrom the stay order; and(4)  Public interest will be served by the stay order. 
Regarding the proper parties and subject matter of an 
original suit, under the plain language of HRS § 92-12(c), as 
interpreted by the Hawai# i Supreme Court, suit may only be 
brought upon an "allegation that 'a prohibited act' has occurred in violation of HRS §§ 92–1 through 92–13, in order to enforce compliance with or determine the applicability of the Sunshine Law to the proceedings of [the public body]."  Kaapu v. Aloha Tower Dev. Corp., 74 Haw. 365, 381, 846 P.2d 882, 889 (1993). The supreme court's interpretation contemplates that the proper party subject to suit in circuit court is a public body: (1) that committed "a prohibited act" in violation of HRS §§ 92–1 through 92–13 and (2) against whom compliance with the Sunshine Law may be enforced by the court and/or whose proceedings may be determined to be subject to the Sunshine Law. 
According to HRS § 92F-42 (Supp. 2015)
2, this judicial 
2 HRS § 92F-42, which assigns certain powers to OIP, states in relevant
part that OIP 
[s]hall, upon request, review and rule on an agency denial
of access to information or records, or an agency's grantingof access; provided that any review by the office of 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
enforcement mechanism against an agency for violations of HRS 
chapters 92 and 92F is independent of any OIP review and opinion on the matter.  However, the reviewing court shall consider any opinions issued by OIP on a matter as precedential unless, upon the court's review, the precedent is found to be palpably erroneous.  HRS § 92-12(d).  These provisions indicate that OIP opinions, insofar as they are a quasi-judicial function of OIP, are reviewable by a circuit court in an original action against a public body which committed "a prohibited act" in violation of HRS §§ 92–1 through 92–13 and against whom the Sunshine Law may be enforced. 
In this case, Smith brought his Complaint directly 
against OIP, alleging that the OIP Opinion's misconstruction of HRS §§ 92-1.5 and 92-7 was itself an enforceable violation of the Sunshine Law and seeking to have the circuit court correct the OIP Opinion through its HRS § 92-12(b) jurisdiction to enforce the Sunshine Law.  In its Order Granting Motion for Judgment, the circuit court granted OIP's Motion for Judgment and dismissed the case, ruling that Smith's remedy lies in HRS § 92-12. 
Insofar as Smith is alleging that the actions of the 
Maui County Council violated the Sunshine Law, the circuit court did not err in ruling that as an individual, Smith's remedy falls under HRS § 92-12(c) to bring an original action directly against the Maui County Council, seeking enforcement of the Sunshine Law by injunction or other remedy.  In such a case, any relevant OIP opinions shall be admissible and considered as precedent unless found by the circuit court to be palpably erroneous.  HRS § 92-12(d).  This mechanism permits Smith to seek direct review of an OIP opinion.
3 
information practices shall not be a contested case under
chapter 91 and shall be optional and without prejudice torights of judicial enforcement available under thischapter[.] 
(Emphases added). 
3 On May 2, 2017, the Civil Beat Law Center for the Public Interest
filed an Amicus Curiae Brief in this case arguing that HRS § 92-12 permitsindividuals to directly challenge OIP opinions by naming OIP as a party,citing our decision in Cty. of Kauai v. Office of Info. Practices, State ofHawaii (Kauai v. OIP), 120 Hawai #i 34, 200 P.3d 403 (App. 2009).  While Kauai
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In conclusion, the circuit court did not err in 
granting OIP's Motion for Judgment and dismissing the case on the 
grounds that Smith lacked subject matter jurisdiction because he did not bring suit under the proper statute and against the proper party.  Just as an appeal of a circuit court decision does not name the circuit court as a party when it alleges the circuit court erred in interpreting and applying a particular law, but instead names the party against whom enforcement is proper; HRS § 92-12 contemplates that the proper party for a suit to review an OIP opinion is the agency that followed the OIP opinion in alleged violation of the Sunshine Law and against whom the Sunshine Law will eventually be enforced.  HRS § 92-12 does not confer jurisdiction on the circuit court to order OIP to render a new decision, only to rule a decision non-precedential if palpably erroneous.
4 
Thus, the circuit court did not err when it granted 
OIP's motion for judgment on the pleadings and dismissed the case for lack of subject matter jurisdiction, and we need not address Smith's remaining contentions on appeal. 
Based on the foregoing, the (1) "Final Judgment" 
entered on July 15, 2016; (2) "Order Granting Respondent Office of Information Practices, State of Hawai# i's Motion for Judgment 
on the Pleadings, Filed on February 8, 2016", filed on June 16, 2016; and (3) "Order Dismissing Appellant James R. Smith's (1) Motion to Transmit to the Hawaii Supreme Court Certified and Reserved Questions of Law, Filed on February 23, 2016; and (2) Motion to Transmit to the Hawaii Supreme Court Certified and Reserved Questions of Law, as Amended, Filed on February 24, 
v. OIP is explicit that no restriction can be placed on who is eligible to
bring an action under HRS § 92-12, the proper defendant and subject matter ofsuch a suit are delineated in HRS § 92-12(b) and do not include OIP opinionswhich are specifically addressed in HRS § 92-12(d).  An individual maydirectly challenge an OIP decision by bringing suit for enforcement againstthe public body that committed a prohibited act in violation of the SunshineLaw or UIPA.  Any relevant OIP opinion must be reviewed by the circuit courtas precedent in such a suit pursuant to HRS § 92-12(d). 
4 In other words, even if the circuit court found that OIP erred in its
Opinion, the circuit court has no authority to order OIP to issue a newopinion and the circuit court has no personal jurisdiction over the MauiCounty Council to enforce the Sunshine Law by "injunction or other appropriateremedy" per HRS § 92-12(b).  
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2016", filed on June 16, 2016, in the Circuit Court of the Second 
Circuit are affirmed. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 31, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
James R. Smith,
Pro-Se, Petitioner-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Patricia Ohara,and Stella M.L. Kam,Deputy Attorneys General,for Respondent-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Robert Brian Black on the amicus curiae brief for the Civil Beat Law Center for the Public Interest.  Associate Judge 
9 