     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000940 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
AIVEN ANGEI,
Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CR. NO. 1CPC-18-0000163) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Chan, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Aiven Angei (Angei) appeals from 
the November 20, 2018 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, 
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit 
court).1 On February 1, 2018, Plaintiff-Appellee State of 
Hawai# i (State) charged Angei by indictment with Murder in the 
Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 707-701.5 (2014). 
After a jury trial, Angei was found guilty 
of the lesser included offense of Manslaughter based on reckless conduct (Reckless Manslaughter), in violation of HRS 
§ 707-702(1)(a) (2014). The circuit court then sentenced Angei 
to twenty years of imprisonment. 
Angei argues that the circuit court erred in: (1) 
1 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
denying his request to instruct the jury on the lesser included 
offense of Reckless Endangering in the Second Degree, HRS 
§ 707-714 (2014); and (2) denying Angei's motion for judgment of 
acquittal. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Angei's 
points of error as follows and affirm. 
A. Jury Instructions 
"[W]hen jury instructions or the omission thereof are 
at issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when read 
and considered as a whole, the instructions given are 
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent or 
misleading." State v. Flores
, 131 Hawai# i 43, 57-58, 314 P.3d 
120, 134-35 (2013) (citations and quotation marks omitted). "The failure to instruct the jury on a lesser included offense for 
which the evidence provides a rational basis warrants vacation of 
the defendant's conviction." 
Id.
 at 58, 314 P.3d at 135. 
We first determine whether Reckless Endangering in the 
Second Degree is a lesser included offense of Murder in the 
Second Degree. See id. at 52-53, 314 P.3d at 129-30. An offense 
is included in another charged offense if it meets one of the requirements set forth in HRS § 701-109(4). Relevant to this 
appeal, HRS § 701-109(4)(c) (2014) provides: 
(4) A defendant may be convicted of an offense
included in an offense charged in the indictment or the
information. An offense is so included when: 
. . . 
(c) It differs from the offense charged only in therespect that a less serious injury or risk ofinjury to the same person, property, or publicinterest or a different state of mind indicatinglesser degree of culpability suffices toestablish its commission. 
"[S]ubsection (c) 'expands the doctrine of lesser included 
offenses to include crimes that require a less serious injury or 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
risk of injury.'" State v. Kaeo , 132 Hawai# i 451, 461, 323 P.3d 
95, 105 (2014) (ellipsis omitted) (quoting 
State v. Burdett, 70 
Haw. 85, 90, 762 P.2d 164, 167 (1988)). "The degree of 
culpability, degree of injury or risk of injury and the end 
result are some of the factors considered in determining whether 
an offense is included in another under HRS § 701-109(4)(c)." 
Id. (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting State v. Kupau, 
63 Haw. 1, 7, 620 P.2d 250, 254 (1980)). 
First, as for the degree of culpability, "the lesser 
included offense cannot have a mental state greater than or 
different from that which is required for the charged offense." 
State v. Alston, 75 Haw. 517, 534, 865 P.2d 157, 166 (1994) 
(emphasis omitted). Murder in the Second Degree requires the 
state of mind of "intentionally or knowingly caus[ing] the death 
of another person." HRS § 707-701.5. Reckless Endangering in 
the Second Degree requires the state of mind of "recklessly 
plac[ing] another person in danger of death or serious bodily 
injury." HRS § 707-714(1)(a). Because recklessness is a lesser 
mental state than intent or knowledge, Reckless Endangering in 
the Second Degree does not have a mental state that is greater 
than that required for Murder in the Second Degree. See 
Commentary to HRS § 702-208 (2014) ("[I]ntent, knowledge, recklessness, and negligence are in a descending order of 
culpability[.]"). The two offenses also do not require 
"different" mental state requirements. See Alston, 75 Haw. at 
534, 865 P.2d at 166 (holding that terroristic threatening and intimidating a witness have different mental state requirements 
because "intimidating a witness requires the intent to cause 
another's absence from an official proceeding, and terroristic 
threatening requires the intent to cause, or recklessness in 
causing, terror" (emphases added)). 
Second, as to the degree or risk of injury, Murder in 
the Second Degree under HRS § 707-701.5 requires "caus[ing] the 
death of another person," (emphasis added) while Reckless 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Endangering in the Second Degree under HRS § 707-714(1)(a) 
requires "plac[ing] another person in danger of death or serious 
bodily injury" (emphasis added). Committing an act that places 
another individual in danger of death or "bodily injury which 
creates a substantial risk of death," HRS § 707-700 (2014), is a 
less serious risk of injury than the actual causing of death, for 
one cannot cause the death of another without first placing the 
other in danger of death. See Kaeo
, 132 Hawai# i at 462, 323 P.3d 
at 106. 
Third, we consider the end results of both offenses. 
Our case law indicates that HRS § 701-109(4)(c) applies where "there may be some dissimilarity in the facts necessary to prove 
the lesser offense, but the end result is the same." State v. 
Kinnane
, 79 Hawai# i 46, 55, 897 P.2d 973, 982 (1995) (quoting 
Alston
, 75 Haw. at 536, 865 P.2d at 167). However, the supreme 
court has expressly held that the "end result" factor is not dispositive and is simply a factor to be considered. Kaeo
, 132 
Hawai# i at 464, 323 P.3d at 108. 
Strictly speaking, the end results of Murder in the 
Second Degree and Reckless Endangering in the Second Degree are not the same. 
Murder in the Second Degree results in the death 
of another while Reckless Endangering in the Second Degree places the victim in jeopardy of death or serious bodily injury but does 
not necessarily result in the death of the victim. Reckless 
Endangering in the Second Degree need not always result in bodily 
injury to the victim; all that is required is that the victim be 
placed in danger of death or serious bodily injury. However, the 
end results of both Murder in the Second Degree and Reckless 
Endangering in the Second Degree are offenses against the person 
and involve at least the risk of death. Cf. Kaeo
, 132 Hawai# i at 
464-65, 323 P.3d at 108-09 (holding that the "end result" factor weighed in favor of finding assault in the first degree to be a 
lesser included offense of murder in the second degree where both 
offenses are "classified as offenses against the person, and both 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
result in actual physical harm to a person[,]" even though murder 
results in death and assault results in bodily injury); Kinnane
, 
79 Hawai# i at 56, 897 P.2d at 983 (finding the end results of 
attempted sexual assault in the second degree and sexual assault 
in the fourth degree to be the same because "[i]n both instances 
the victim is placed in jeopardy of being injured or is being 
injured by the defendant's conduct," (ellipsis, internal 
quotation marks, and citation omitted) even though sexual assault 
in the fourth degree "envisions a less serious injury or risk of 
injury [(sexual contact)] than attempted sexual assault in the 
second degree [(risk of sexual penetration)]"). 
Considering all factors, we conclude that Reckless 
Endangering in the Second Degree is a lesser included offense of 
Murder in the Second Degree under HRS § 701-109(4)(c). 
We next determine whether there was a rational basis in 
the evidence in this case to support an instruction on the lesser 
included offense of Reckless Endangering in the Second Degree. 
See Flores
, 131 Hawai# i at 51, 314 P.3d at 128 ("[J]ury 
instructions on lesser-included offenses must be given where there is a rational basis in the evidence for a verdict 
acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and convicting 
the defendant of the included offense."). 
This court decided a similar issue in 
State v. 
Magbulos
, 141 Hawai# i 483, 413 P.3d 387 (App. 2018), 
cert. 
rejected, No. SCWC-14-0001337, 2018 WL 3062557 (Haw. June 21, 2018). In that case, the defendant was charged with and 
convicted of murder in the second degree. Id. at 484, 413 P.3d 
at 388. The trial court had instructed the jury on the lesser included offenses of reckless manslaughter and first-degree 
assault, but denied the defendant's request to instruct the jury 
on the lesser included offenses of assault in the second degree, 
assault in the third degree, and assault in the third degree by 
mutual affray. Id. at 498, 413 P.3d at 402. On appeal, the 
defendant asserted that the trial court erred in denying his 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
request to instruct the jury on the additional lesser included 
offenses. Id. This court discussed the development of the law 
on giving jury instructions on lesser included offenses, 
including State v. Haanio, 94 Hawai# i 405, 16 P.3d 246 (2001), 
Flores, 131 Hawai# i 43, 314 P.3d 120, and Kaeo, 132 Hawai# i 451, 
323 P.3d 95. Magbulos, 141 Hawai# i at 498-99, 413 P.3d at 
402-03. Applying the law to the facts of that case, this court then held: 
Here, the jury, after being instructed on the lesser
included offenses of reckless manslaughter and first-degree
assault, convicted [the defendant] of the charged offense ofsecond-degree murder. Thus, unlike in Flores and Kaeo, thefailure of the Circuit Court to instruct on the lower-level assault offenses did not present [the defendant's] jury withan "all or nothing" choice between the guilty verdict it
rendered and a "complete acquittal." Instead, the jury had
the option of finding [the defendant] guilty of manslaughteror finding him guilty of first-degree assault, but chose tofind him guilty as charged of second-degree murder. 
Under these circumstances, we need not consider
whether there was a rational basis in the evidence to acquit[the defendant] of second-degree murder and convict him ofthe lower-level assault offenses because we conclude that any error in failing to instruct on the lower-level assaultoffenses was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. While the failure to instruct on a lesser included offense just belowthe offense for which the jury returned a guilty verdict isnot automatically harmless error, we conclude that absent
unusual circumstances, the failure to instruct on a lesser
included offense two levels below the offense for which the defendant is found guilty will ordinarily be harmless. In this case, [the defendant] is contending that the failure toinstruct on lesser included offenses that are at least three levels below the second-degree murder for which the juryfound him guilty entitles him to a new trial. It strains credulity to believe that the jury who found [the defendant]guilty as charged of second-degree murder, despite beinginstructed on the lesser included offenses of manslaughterand first-degree assault, might reasonably have found himguilty of the lower-level assault offenses if instructed onthese offenses. We therefore conclude that there is no reasonable possibility that the Circuit Court's failure toinstruct on the lower-level assault offenses affected the 
outcome of this case. 
Id. at 499, 413 P.3d at 403. 
Magbulos is dispositive in favor of the State in this 
case. Here, Angei was charged with Murder in the Second Degree.
The circuit court instructed the jury on the lesser included 
offenses of Reckless Manslaughter, Assault in the First Degree,  
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Assault in the Second Degree, and Assault in the Third Degree. 
The jury ultimately convicted Angei of Reckless Manslaughter. As 
in Magbulos, the jury was not faced with an "all or nothing" 
choice between the guilty verdict and a "complete acquittal" 
because the jury had the option of finding Angei guilty of lesser 
included offenses extending to multiple levels below the charged 
offense, but chose instead to find him guilty of Reckless 
Manslaughter. It "strains credulity" to believe that the jury 
who found Angei guilty of Reckless Manslaughter and rejected 
finding him guilty of any of the lesser included offenses of 
first-, second-, and third-degree assault, might reasonably have 
found him guilty of the lower-level offense of Reckless 
Endangering in the Second Degree if instructed on this offense. 
See id.; see also State v. Manuel, No. CAAP-18-0000420, 2019 WL 
1747020, at *3 (Haw. App. Apr. 18, 2019) (SDO), cert. granted, 
No. SCWC-18-0000420, 2019 WL 4165809 (Haw. Sept. 3, 2019). 
Thus, we conclude that there is no reasonable 
possibility that the circuit court's failure to instruct on 
Reckless Endangering in the Second Degree affected the outcome of 
this case. 
B. Motion for Judgment of Acquittal 
Angei next argues that the circuit court erred in 
denying his motion for judgment of acquittal and rejecting his 
argument that the State failed to adduce evidence of compliance 
with the statutory requirements of HRS § 327C-1 (2010) pertaining 
to the decedent's death. 
When reviewing the denial of a motion for judgment of 
acquittal, 
we employ the same standard that a trial court applies to
such a motion, namely, whether, upon the evidence viewed inthe light most favorable to the prosecution and in fullrecognition of the province of the trier of fact, theevidence is sufficient to support a prima facie case so thata reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond areasonable doubt. Sufficient evidence to support a primafacie case requires substantial evidence as to everymaterial element of the offense charged. Substantial evidence as to every material element of the offense charged 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and
probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution tosupport a conclusion. Under such a review, we give fullplay to the right of the fact finder to determinecredibility, weigh the evidence, and draw justifiableinferences of fact. 
State v. Jhun, 83 Hawai# i 472, 481, 927 P.2d 1355, 1364 (1996) 
(citations and quotation marks omitted). 
In his written motion for judgment of acquittal, Angei 
appeared to challenge the sufficiency of the evidence as to the 
element that Angei intentionally or knowingly caused the 
decedent's death. Angei argued in part that he did not cause the 
decedent's death because when the decedent was brought to the 
hospital, he was alive, and "[r]ather than keeping the decedent 
'alive', a decision was made to 'pull the plug' by the family[.]" 
The remainder of his written motion, however, is premised on the 
alleged failure to comply with HRS chapter 327C. 
HRS § 327C-1(a)-(d) provides: 
§327C-1. Determination of death.  (a) Except as
provided in subsection (b), a person shall be considered
dead if, in the announced opinion of a physician orosteopathic physician licensed under part I of chapter 453,physician or osteopathic physician excepted from licensureby section 453-2(b)(3), physician assistant licensed underchapter 453, or registered nurse licensed under chapter 457,based on ordinary standards of current medical practice, the
person has experienced irreversible cessation of spontaneous
respiratory and circulatory functions. Death will have occurred at the time when the irreversible cessation of the functions first coincided. 
(b) In the event that artificial means of support
preclude a determination that respiratory and circulatoryfunctions have ceased, a person shall be considered dead if,in the opinion of an attending physician or osteopathicphysician licensed under part I of chapter 453, or attendingphysician or osteopathic physician excepted from licensureby section 453-2(b)(3), and of a consulting physician orosteopathic physician licensed under part I of chapter 453,or consulting physician or osteopathic physician exceptedfrom licensure by section 453-2(b)(3), based on ordinarystandards of current medical practice, the person hasexperienced irreversible cessation of all functions of theentire brain, including the brain stem. 
The opinions of the
physicians or osteopathic physicians shall be evidenced bysigned statements. Death will have occurred at the time when the irreversible cessation of all functions of the entire brain, including the brain stem, first occurred.Death shall be pronounced before artificial means of supportare withdrawn and before any vital organ is removed forpurposes of transplantation. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(c) When a part of a donor is used for direct organ
transplantation under chapter 327, and the donor's death is
established by determining that the donor experiencedirreversible cessation of all functions of the entire brain,including the brain stem, the determination shall only bemade under subsection (b). The determination of death in all other cases shall be made under subsection (a). The physicians or osteopathic physicians making thedetermination of death shall not participate in theprocedures for removing or transplanting a part, or in thecare of any recipient. 
(d) All death determinations in the State shall be 
made pursuant to this section and shall apply to allpurposes, including but not limited to civil and criminalactions, any laws to the contrary notwithstanding; providedthat presumptive deaths under the Uniform Probate Code shallnot be affected by this section. 
On appeal, Angei argues that neither of the two 
physicians who made pronouncements regarding the decedent's death 
was described as an "attending physician" or an "osteopathic 
physician." Angei additionally contends that while the first 
physician pronounced the decedent "brain dead," the second 
physician pronounced the decedent "cardiac dead." Furthermore, 
"[t]heir pronouncements were not memorialized by signed 
statements as required by statute." Angei asserts that, because 
the State failed to adduce evidence of compliance with HRS 
chapter 327C, it did not meet its burden of proof regarding the 
cause of decedent's death. 
HRS § 327C-1(d) states, in relevant part: "All death 
determinations in the State shall be made pursuant to this 
section and shall apply to all purposes, including . . . criminal 
actions[.]" However, nowhere in the statute or the chapter in 
which it appears does it describe any consequences for a failure 
to comply with its outlined procedure for the determination of 
death, and what effect, if any, any such violation may have on 
criminal proceedings involving an individual's death. Neither 
the statute nor the chapter in which it appears requires 
compliance with the procedure in proving the death of an 
individual for the purpose of proving an element of a criminal 
offense. There is no requirement that the State prove compliance 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with HRS chapter 327C in order to make a prima facie case of a 
decedent's death as an element of an offense for which a 
defendant is on trial. To that extent, we hold that there is no 
merit to the basis upon which Angei relies in challenging the 
sufficiency of the evidence showing that Angei caused the 
decedent's death. 
Rather, we conclude that there is sufficient evidence 
in the record to support a prima facie case. Syres Kauai 
(Kauai), the decedent's friend who witnessed the incident, 
testified that during the physical altercation between Angei and 
the decedent, Angei had a knife with an approximately four-inch 
blade in his right hand while exchanging blows with the decedent. 
After Angei and the decedent ended their physical altercation and 
separated, Angei fled and Kauai noticed the decedent bleeding. 
While on the phone with an emergency operator, Kauai attempted to 
apply pressure to the decedent's multiple stab wounds before the 
decedent was taken to the hospital. Of relevance, the parties 
also stipulated to the following facts, which were read to the 
jury: "[o]n January 29, 2018, at approximately 8:15 a.m., 
Dr. Chang made a brain death pronouncement for [the decedent] at 
Queen's Medical Center"; and "[o]n January 30, 2018, at 
approximately 5:56 p.m., the body was transferred to the Queen's 
Medical Center operating room. Dr. Jacqueline Lee pronounced the 
decedent cardiac dead prior to organ donation." Christopher 
Happy, M.D., the chief medical examiner for the City and County 
of Honolulu who conducted an autopsy on the body of the decedent, 
testified that the cause of death was stab wounds to the head and 
torso. These facts constitute substantial evidence for the jury 
to conclude that Angei caused the decedent's death. 
In light of this record, and in consideration of the 
right of the jury to determine credibility, weigh the evidence, 
and draw justifiable inferences of fact, we conclude that the 
State adduced substantial evidence of the element that Angei 
caused the death of the decedent. Accordingly, the circuit court 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
did not err in denying Angei's motion for judgment of acquittal. 
Based on the foregoing, the November 20, 2018 Judgment 
of Conviction and Sentence, entered by the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit, is affirmed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 30, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Derrick H. M. Chan
Presiding Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge Chad Kumagai,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Dana S. Ishibashi,for Defendant-Appellant. 
11 