NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-20-0000122 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
LAWRENCE P. PECK; ROBBYN L. PECK; and PECK INC.,
a Hawaii Corporation, Plaintiffs-Appellees, v.
L
YNN LINDER NAKKIM, Defendant-Appellant, and CONTINENTAL
PACIFIC, LLC, a Delaware Limited liability Company,
Defendant-Appellee, and JOHN DOES 1-10; JOHN DOE
PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; JOHN DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10;
JOHN DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants 
AND 
LAWRENCE P. PECK; ROBBYN L. PECK; and PECK INC.,
a Hawaii Corporation, Plaintiffs-Appellees, v.
LYNN LINDER BOERNER NAKKIM, Defendant-Appellant, and LYNN
LINDER NAKKIM, as Trustee under the Lynn Linder Nakkim Trust
dated October 3, 2011, Defendant-Appellee, and
PAUL SULLA, Intervenor-Appellee, and JOHN DOES 1-10; JOHN DOE
PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; JOHN DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 04-1-374 AND 14-1-180) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
I. Introduction 
This case arises from a contract dispute between 
Defendant-Appellant Lynn Linder Nakkim (Nakkim) and Plaintiffs-
Appellees Lawrence P. Peck (Mr. Peck), Robbyn L. Peck (Mrs. Peck; 
together, the Pecks), and Peck, Inc. (collectively, Plaintiffs). 
In 2003, Nakkim and the Plaintiffs executed two documents: (1) an 
Agreement of Sale for a 50-acre parcel of land (Mt. View  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Property) to be sold by Nakkim to the Pecks; and (2) a 
Construction Contract between Nakkim and Peck, Inc. for the 
construction of a residence for Nakkim on a separate parcel of land (Nakkim Residence). The Pecks agreed to purchase the Mt. 
View Property from Nakkim for $180,000 to be paid in two ways: 
(1) the Pecks agreed to pay $87,412.42 through monthly payments of $1,054.42 beginning December 1, 2003; and (2) the remaining balance ($92,587.58) would be paid by providing credit to Nakkim for the first payments due to Peck, Inc. under the Construction Contract. 
Nakkim appeals from the following: (1) "Order Denying 
[Nakkim's] Motion to Prohibit Plaintiffs From Performing Without a Valid State Contractor's License" (Order Denying Motion To
Prohibit) filed November 29, 2019; (2) "Order Granting Motion to 
Release Deeds for Filing" (Order To Release Deeds) filed November 
29, 2019; and (3) "Order Denying [Nakkim's] Non-Hearing Motion to 
Reconsider, Alter or Amend '[Order To Release Deeds]'" (Order 
Denying Reconsideration Re: Deeds) filed February 3, 2020, all 
entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit 
Court).
1 
Nakkim contends the Circuit Court erred in (1) denying 
her motion to prohibit Plaintiffs from performing without a valid 
contractor's license; and (2) allowing the premature release of the deeds to the Mt. View Property to the Pecks and allowing the transfer of title which is the subject of the unsatisfied contract between the parties. 
We have appellate jurisdiction to address Nakkim's 
appeal and we affirm the three orders challenged in this appeal.
II. Background 
This is the second appeal arising from two consolidated 
lawsuits between these parties. Plaintiffs initially filed a "Complaint for Specific Performance, Injunctive Relief and 
1 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura entered the Order Denying Motion To
Prohibit and the Order To Release Deeds. The Honorable Darien W.L. Ching
Nagata entered the Order Denying Reconsideration Re: Deeds. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Damages" against, inter alia, Nakkim, on November 12, 2004, in 
Civil No. 04-1-374. On October 2, 2008, after a jury-waived trial, the Circuit Court entered judgment against Nakkim and in favor of the Plaintiffs. Nakkim appealed, challenging several of the Circuit Court's findings of fact (FOFs) and conclusions of 
law (COLs) in Peck v. Nakkim, No. 29480, 2013 WL 6762359 (Haw. 
App. Dec. 20, 2013) (mem)(First Appeal). 
In the First Appeal, we vacated the Circuit Court's 
FOFs and COLs to the extent that the Circuit Court found that the 
Agreement of Sale and the Construction Contract were intended to form a single contract but ordered specific performance on only one part of the agreement and reformed the contract by substituting monetary compensation for the construction of the Nakkim Residence. Id. at *10-11. We also held that the Circuit 
Court erred by failing to enter any FOFs or COLs as to whether Nakkim was threatening to or in actual breach of either the Agreement of Sale or the Construction Contract in rendering its judgment of specific performance against Nakkim and in favor of the Plaintiffs. Id. at *9. We remanded the case to the Circuit 
Court for further proceedings. 
On April 29, 2014, in Civil No. 14-1-180, the 
Plaintiffs filed another Complaint against, inter alia, Nakkim, claiming among other things that Nakkim delayed the commencement of construction for the Nakkim Residence by failing to obtain the necessary approvals and breached the Agreement of Sale and Construction Contract. The Pecks also claim that during pendency of the First Appeal, Nakkim transferred the deeds to the Mt. View Property and the land for the construction of the Nakkim Residence to Nakkim as the sole trustee under the Lynn Linder Nakkim Trust. On March 4, 2015, the Circuit Court consolidated Civil Nos. 14-1-180 and 04-1-374. 
On June 6, 2016, the Circuit Court entered Amended 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law (Amended FOFs/COLs) pursuant 
to the holding in Peck, 2013 WL 6762359, which Nakkim does not 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
challenge.2 In the Amended FOFs/COLs, the Circuit Court found in 
relevant part: 
13. [T]he Court finds that the delay in the start of
construction on Defendant's Waiki #i Ranch property was not
the fault of Plaintiffs, but primarily attributable to
Defendant's failure to get approvals from the DesignCommittee in a timely fashion. 
. . . . 
16. [The Pecks] have expended in excess of
$
120,000.00 in improvements upon the Mt. View land purchased
by them to construct a dwelling thereon and taken otheractions, in reliance on the Agreement of Sale. 
17. The Court determines that [the Pecks] are
entitled to specific performance of the Agreement of Sale. .. . 
18. After consideration of the Memorandum Opinion
entered in this case by the Intermediate Court of Appeals ofthe State of Hawaii (the "ICA") the Court modifies its'[sic] prior Decision and determines that both the Agreementof Sale and the Construction Contract that are [sic]specifically enforceable as a single agreement. 
. . . . 
21. Based on the Findings of Fact, the court makes
the mixed Finding of Fact and Conclusion of Law, thatDefendant NAKKIM threatened to breach and/or breached theagreement encompassed by the Agreement of Sale and theConstruction Contract and that Nakkim unequivocallyrepudiated the agreement. 
22. Finally, in Paragraph 18 of the original Findings
of Fact, the finding was made that the Construction Contractwas "too imprecise to specifically enforce". 
The ICA 
vacated that finding and made no comment on the effect ofthe finding that the Construction Contract was "tooimprecise to specifically enforce." One possible inferenceis that the ICA does not agree with the finding.Accordingly, the court make [sic] no finding on this pointand specifically enforces the Construction Contractcomponent of the agreement as allowed by law. 
After giving credit to the Pecks for monthly payments, 
adding insurance premiums, real property taxes, and interest 
payable at the judgment rate of interest of ten percent (10%) a year on the principal amount due, the Circuit Court calculated the Pecks' financial obligation to Nakkim under the Agreement of 
2 "Findings of fact ... that are not challenged on appeal are binding
on the appellate court." Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawai #i 
450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002). 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 Sale as $133,653 as of August 31, 2017 plus $20.75 for each day 
after August 31, 2017. On September 27, 2017, the Circuit Court ordered that the Pecks deposit the full amount due on the Agreement of Sale with the exception of the Construction Contract component (the first $92,587.58 credit for Peck, Inc.) within sixty days from the date of the order. On or about November 17, 2017, the Pecks deposited $135,000. 
On January 8, 2018, the Circuit Court entered its 
"Order Granting Motion to Appoint Clerk to Sign Deed and Related Closing Documents on Behalf of [Nakkim] Individually and as Trustee or in the Alternative for an Order/Judgment Divesting Title in Lieu of Directing a Conveyance," which directed Nakkim to sign and deliver the deed to the Mt. View Property to be held by the Circuit Court. 
On October 11, 2019, the Pecks filed a "Motion to 
Release Deeds for Filing" (Motion To Release Deeds) asking the 
Circuit Court to release the deeds to the Mt. View Property so 
that the Pecks could file and record title to the property in their name. Also on October 11, 2019, Nakkim filed a "Motion to Prohibit Plaintiffs From Performing Without a Valid State Contractor's License" (Motion To Prohibit) arguing that Mr. Peck 
no longer held a valid State contractor's license and thus could 
not perform under the Construction Contract. 
On November 29, 2019, the Circuit Court entered its 
Order To Release Deeds, which states, in relevant part: 
1. The Motion To Release Deeds for filing is hereby
GRANTED subject to the filing of a lien on the Mt. View
portion of the property regarding [the Pecks'] obligationsto perform under the Construction Contract portion of thatintegrated Contract consisting of the Agreement of Sale andthe Construction Contract both dated November 29, 2003. TheDeeds held by the Court shall be released to the [Pecks] ortheir counsel of record upon the filing of this Order andthe lien. 
2. A copy of this Order shall be filed in the Bureau
of Conveyances along with the Deeds released to [the Pecks]and the lien herein. 
3. The monies deposited by [the Pecks] on or about
November 17, 2017 ($135,000) and the interest earned thereonshall be released to [Nakkim] or her counsel of record uponpresentation of this Order to the Clerk. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Also on November 29, 2019, the Circuit Court entered its Order 
Denying Motion to Prohibit. On December 1, 2019, Nakkim filed a "Notice of Pendency of Action and Lien Re: TMK (3) 1-8-005:113."
III.  Discussion 
A. Appellate Jurisdiction Under the Forgay Doctrine 
As a preliminary matter, we determine that we have 
appellate jurisdiction over Nakkim's appeal. Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 641-1(a) (2016) authorizes appeals to the ICA 
from "final judgments, orders, or decrees[.]" Appeals under HRS 
§ 641-1 "shall be taken in the manner . . . provided by the rules of court." HRS § 641-1(c) (2016). Hawai# i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (
HRCP) Rule 58 requires that "[e]very judgment shall be 
set forth on a separate document." Typically, an appeal may be taken only after an appealable judgment has been entered resolving claims in favor of and against the parties pursuant to HRCP Rule 58 or 54(b). Jenkins v. Cades Schutte Fleming & 
Wright, 76 Hawai# i 115, 119, 869 P.2d 1334, 1338 (1994). 
An exception to the general rule requiring a final 
judgment is the Forgay
 doctrine, Forgay v. Conrad, 47 U.S. 201 
(1848), which "allows an appellant to immediately appeal a judgment for execution upon property, even if all claims of the parties have not been finally resolved." Ciesla v. Reddish, 78 
Hawai# i 18, 20, 889 P.2d 702, 704 (1995). Under the Forgay 
doctrine, Hawai# i appellate courts "have jurisdiction to consider 
appeals from judgments which [1] require immediate execution of a command that property be delivered to the appellant's adversary, and [2] the losing party would be subjected to irreparable injury if appellate review had to wait the final outcome of the litigation." Id. (citations, internal quotation marks omitted; 
some brackets added and some omitted); see also Lambert v. Teisina, 131 Hawai# i 457, 461-62, 319 P.3d 376, 380-81 
(2014)(noting that "[f]oreclosure decrees, writs of possession, and orders for the sale of specific property are examples of orders and decrees that [the 
Hawai# i Supreme Court] has held to 
be appealable under the Forgay doctrine[,]" and holding there was 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appellate jurisdiction to review an order confirming a partition 
sale and directing distribution of the proceeds). 
In this case, although there is a lien on the Mt. View 
Property and there was a release of $135,000 in favor of Nakkim, the Nakkim Residence has not yet been constructed and the Circuit Court's Order To Release Deeds required that deeds to the Mt. View Property be delivered to Nakkim's adversary, the Pecks. This allowed the Pecks to record title to the Mt. View Property in their name and affected Nakkim's property rights. 
Accordingly, we have appellate jurisdiction to review 
the Circuit Court's Order To Release Deeds regarding the Mt. View Property, and the Order Denying Reconsideration Re: Deeds. Further, we have appellate jurisdiction to review the Circuit Court's Order Denying Motion To Prohibit because Nakkim argues that Mr. Peck cannot perform his obligation to build the Nakkim Residence without his contractor's license. As we stated in the First Appeal, the Agreement of Sale and the Construction Contract were intended by the parties to be an expression of a single agreement between Plaintiffs and Nakkim, and in that agreement, Nakkim is to convey the Mt. View Property to the Pecks in exchange for the construction of the Nakkim Residence by the Plaintiffs. 2013 WL 6762359, at *11. The Circuit Court heard arguments regarding the Motion To Prohibit and the Motion To Release Deeds during the same hearing and filed the Order Denying Motion To Prohibit and the Order To Release Deeds on the same day. The Circuit Court's Order To Release Deeds is implicitly dependent on a determination that the Pecks could fulfill their obligation to build the Nakkim Residence without Mr. Peck's contractor's license. 
Therefore, we review Nakkim's points of error raised in 
this interlocutory appeal.
B. The Circuit Court Did Not Err In Denying Nakkim's Motion To
Prohibit 
Nakkim contends the Circuit Court erred in denying her 
Motion To Prohibit because Mr. Peck is no longer a licensed 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contractor and is thus unable to perform under the Construction 
Contract without her approval. "As a general rule, the construction and legal effect to be given a contract is a question of law freely reviewable by an appellate court." Brown 
v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai# i 226, 239, 921 P.2d 146, 159 
(1996) (citations omitted). 
Nakkim argues that under the Agreement of Sale, the 
Pecks are prohibited from transferring their rights and duties and cannot transfer the duty to perform the Construction Contract to another person without Nakkim's consent.
3 Nakkim also argues 
that the Construction Contract is a "personal services contract" involving the personal skill and relationship of confidence in Mr. Peck and therefore, the Construction Contract is not assignable without her express consent. We conclude the Circuit Court did not err in its Order Denying Motion To Prohibit. 
First, notwithstanding Nakkim's contention that Mr. 
Peck is the contractor under the Construction Contract and/or the Agreement of Sale, the Construction Contract is between Nakkim and Peck, Inc. and specifically refers to Peck, Inc. as the "Contractor". Furthermore, the Agreement of Sale contains the following relevant definitions: 
(B) "SELLER" LYNN NAKKIM, husband and wife [sic], will be
called the "SELLER." 
(C) "BUYER(S)" LAWRENCE P. PECK & ROBBYN L. PECK, will be
called the "BUYER". 
. . . . 
(F)
 "CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT" The Contract between the SELLER
and BUYER for the construction of a HOME on SELLER'S property. Said CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT CONTRACT [sic] shallbe balance of the payment made for PROPERTY. 
The Agreement of Sale also states, "[i]t is agreed that 
BUYER shall build on SELLER'S property a HOME as defined in 
3 Specifically, Nakkim cites the following provision from the Agreement
of Sale: 
(f) Consents. Any consents necessary under this agreementwill not be unreasonably withheld. Any transfer of thisagreement by BUYERS to another party will require consent ofthe SELLER. 
8  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT documents." In other words, under the 
Agreement of Sale, both Mr. Peck and Mrs. Peck, as the "Buyer[s]" are required to build the Nakkim Residence. Neither agreement states that Mr. Peck is a licensed contractor or that he is required to maintain a valid state contractor's license in order to perform. 
Second, "[a]n 'assignment' is a transfer of property or 
some other right from one person (the 'assignor') to another (the 'assignee'), which confers a complete and present right in the subject matter to the assignee." 6 Am. Jur. 2d Assignments § 1 (footnotes omitted). 
Here, Mr. Peck's declaration attached to the Memorandum 
in Opposition to Motion to Prohibit states, inter alia, that he 
did not need a license to supervise or manage a construction 
project and that Kimo Kahele Construction has worked with Peck, Inc. for over fifteen years. At the hearing on October 31, 2019, Plaintiffs' counsel asserted that Mr. Peck controls Peck, Inc., that he will be on-site to assist in building the Nakkim Residence and that there would be a licensed contractor of record to work with Mr. Peck. Therefore, even if the Construction Contract is an unassignable personal service contract between Mr. Peck and Nakkim, the proposed arrangement between Mr. Peck and a licensed contractor is not an "assignment" because the Plaintiffs are not transferring any rights.
4 Instead, to have a licensed 
contractor build the Nakkim Residence, Plaintiffs are delegating 
4 The principle that most rights under contracts are
freely assignable is subject to the exception thatexecutory contracts for personal services or thoseinvolving a relationship of confidence are notassignable unless the contract so provides, the otherparty consents to or ratifies the assignment, or theassignment would not change the character of theperformance or the obligation. 
6. Am. Jur. 2d Assignments § 26 (emphases added) (footnotes omitted). 
Thus, even if the Construction Contract is an unassignable personal
services contract, and Peck, Inc.'s use of another licensed contractor is an
"assignment," Nakkim does not explain how the assignment would change thecharacter of the performance or the obligation of Mr. Peck who will stillsupervise and work with the licensed contractor, or change the obligation ofthe Pecks to build the Nakkim Residence for Nakkim under the Agreement ofSale. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
their duties to a third party. Black's Law Dictionary defines 
"delegation" as "[t]he act of entrusting another with authority or empowering another to act as an agent or representative[.]" Black's Law Dictionary 536 (11th ed. 2019). "[D]elegation of duties" is defined as "[a] transaction by which a party to a contract arranges to have a third party perform the party's contractual duties." Id. Such delegation would not relieve the 
Pecks of their obligation under the Agreement of Sale to build the Nakkim Residence. 
Finally, contrary to Nakkim's assertion that 
Plaintiffs' duties cannot be delegated, the Construction Contract states, in pertinent part: 
[Peck, Inc.] accepts the relationship or trust and
confidence established by this Agreement and conveniencewith the Owner to cooperate and utilize [Peck, Inc.'s] bestskill, effort and judgment in furthering the interests ofthe Owner. And to furnish efficient business administration 
and supervision; to make best effort to furnish at all timesan adequate supply of workers and materials; and to performthe Work in the best way and most expeditious and economicalmanner consistent with the interests of the Owner. 
. . . . 
5.
 SUPERVISION AND PROCEDURES: [Peck, Inc.] shall supervise
and direct the Work, using [Peck, Inc.]'s best skill andattention. [Peck, Inc.] shall be solely responsible for and
have control over construction means, methods, techniques,sequences and procedures and coordinating all portions ofthe Work under the Contract, unless Contract Documents giveother specific instructions concerning these matters. 
(Emphases added). The Construction Contract allows for Peck, 
Inc. to supply workers and have sole control over the construction methods without seeking approval from Nakkim, including delegation of work to a licensed contractor. Thus, the Circuit Court did not err in denying Nakkim's Motion To Prohibit. C. The Circuit Court Did Not Err In Granting The Pecks' Motion
To Release Deeds 
Nakkim contends that the Circuit court erred in 
prematurely releasing the Mt. View Property deed to the Pecks 
because the Pecks have not started construction of the Nakkim Residence and Nakkim did not receive the credit for the first $92,587.58 of payments under the Construction Contract. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"The awarding of specific performance is a matter 
addressed to the sound discretion of the trial court ... and its 
decision will be set aside only where there has been a manifest abuse thereof." Clarkin v. Reimann, 2 Haw. App. 618, 623, 638 
P.2d 857, 861 (1981) (citations omitted). A manifest abuse of discretion occurs where the lower court's decision "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Id. at 624, 638 P.2d at 861 (citations omitted). 
In the First Appeal, this court held the Circuit Court 
erred in ordering specific performance "without entering a finding that Nakkim was threatening to or in actual breach." Peck v. Nakkim, 2013 WL 6762359 at *9 (citing Kaleikau v. Hall, 27 Haw. 420, 430 (Haw. Terr.1923) and Hawaiian Paradise Park Corp. v. Friendly Broad. Co., 414 F.2d 750, 758 (9th Cir.1969)). On remand after the First Appeal, however, the Circuit Court made the following express finding in the Amended FOFs/COLs: 
21. Based on the Findings of Fact, the court makes the
mixed Finding of Fact and Conclusion of Law, that Defendant
NAKKIM threatened to breach and/or breached the agreementencompassed by the Agreement of Sale and the ConstructionContract and that Nakkim unequivocally repudiated theagreement. 
(Emphasis added). This finding is uncontested and we are thus 
bound by it on appeal. Okada Trucking Co., 97 Hawai# i at 458, 40 
P.3d at 81. 
In the Amended FOFs/COLs, the Circuit Court made the 
same ruling in its COL 4. Thus, in terms of ordering specific performance against Nakkim, the Circuit Court on remand remedied an error previously noted in the First Appeal. 
In the Motion To Release Deeds, the Pecks sought to 
file and record title to the property in their name "to protect [their] beneficial interest in the Mt. View property." Furthermore, in the Amended FOFs/COLs, the Circuit Court found that "[the Pecks] have expended in excess of $120,000.00
 in 
improvements upon the Mt. View land purchased by them to construct a dwelling thereon and taken other actions, in reliance on the Agreement of Sale." During an evidentiary hearing on 
11  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
January 31, 2019, Mr. Peck testified that the Pecks could not 
obtain liability insurance coverage for the Mt. View Property because their names were not on the deed. During the same hearing, Nakkim also testified that she was unable to obtain insurance for the Pecks because she had no control or access to the property. 
Nakkim argues that transfer of title for the Mt. View 
Property is premature because the Agreement of Sale provides, "[l]egal title to the [Mt. View Property] shall remain in the SELLER until the BUYER has done everything they are required to do under this agreement[,]" including the construction of the Nakkim Residence under the Construction Contract and credit for the first $92,587.58 for the construction.
5 In the First Appeal, 
we held that "construction of the [Nakkim Residence] was clearly an obligation, nonperformance of which would constitute default." 2013 WL 6762359, at *6. We further concluded that "construction of the [Nakkim Residence] was not a condition precedent, but rather, part of the consideration for the transfer of the [Mt. View] Property." Id. 
Importantly, the Circuit Court made unchallenged FOFs 
that the delay in the construction of the Nakkim Residence was not the fault of Plaintiffs, but was primarily attributable to 
5 Nakkim also cites the following provisions of the Agreement of Sale
in support of her argument: 
"CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT" The Contract between the SELLER and 
BUYER for the construction of a HOME on SELLER'S property.Said CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT CONTRACT [sic] shall be balanceof the payment made for PROPERTY. 
. . . . 
FINAL CLOSING. Upon final payment of all principal andinterest due under this agreement, SELLER agrees to fullyconvey all their rights, title and interest in the propertyin BUYER, free and clear of all liens, mortgages, etc. 
. . . . 
(d)
 Upon full payment SELLER will execute a Warranty Deed in
favor of the BUYER. 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nakkim's delays and failure to obtain necessary approvals for the
construction in a timely manner.6  
6 In the Amended FOFs/COLs, the Circuit Court made the following
relevant findings: 
10. The Court finds that increase in the cost of 
construction costs which arose during delay in the
commencement date of construction is a reasonable ground forseeking an increase in the Construction sum if the delay wasnot the result of fault on the part of Plaintiff Peck Inc. 
11. [Nakkim] was responsible for obtaining approvals
from the Design Committee of the Waiki #i Ranch Homeowners' 
[sic] Association ("Design Committee"). In order to buildher house, [Nakkim] was required to obtain a variance fromthe [D]esign [C]ommittee to allow for a trapezoidal buildingarea. On August 19, 2004, the Design Committee gave noticeto the members of the 
Waiki #i Ranch Homeowners Association 
of a public hearing to consider [Nakkim's] application for avariance. 
12. On September 28, 2004, the Design Committee
approved the variance and also preliminarily approved[Nakkim's] project plans. The preliminary approval requiredthat [Nakkim] meet certain conditions, including thesubmission of a landscape plan. Therefore, [Nakkim] couldnot have given notice to [Mr. Peck] to begin construction on[Nakkim's] Waiki #i Ranch property until after November 5,
2004. 
13. As a result, the Court finds that the delay in
the start of construction on [Nakkim's] Waiki #i Ranch 
property was not the fault of Plaintiffs, but primarilyattributable to [Nakkim's] failure to get approvals from theDesign Committee in a timely fashion. 
. . . . 
19. On Page 4 of the Memorandum Opinion, the ICA
noted: 
"In response, Nakkim sent Peck a letter on July 21,
2004, in which she stated that "a deal was a deal," andbegan to take over payments on the Continental PacificMortgage "in anticipation of [Peck's] defection[.]"Additionally, Nakkim wrote that she would increase the saleprice of the Property if he wanted to renegotiate the priceof the Home." 
"As early as October 7, 2004, Nakkim began listing the
Property for sale. Then, through a November 4, 2004 letter,Nakkim gave Peck, Inc. seven days to complete the Home.Citing the "Termination of Contract by Owner" clause of theConstruction Contract, Nakkim alleged that Peck had"persistently and repeatedly failed to perform the workaccording to the contract and its specifications," and thatsuch delays entitled her to "finish the work by whateverreasonable method [she] the owner may find expedient." Thisultimatum was reiterated in a November 5, 2004 letter, whichalso informed Peck that the "entire matter" was cancelled. 
(continued...) 
13 6(...continued)NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As noted, the Circuit Court also found that Nakkim threatened to 
breach and/or breached the agreement, and that she unequivocally repudiated the agreement. Finally, the Circuit Court made the unchallenged conclusion of law that based upon the FOFs and drawing all reasonable inferences therefrom, "[the Pecks] have substantially complied with the terms and conditions of the Agreement of Sale and are entitled to specific performance of the Agreement of Sale." We further note that this litigation has been ongoing for nearly seventeen years since Plaintiffs' complaint against Nakkim in 2004. Given the Circuit Court's unchallenged FOFs/COLs, the Circuit Court did not manifestly abuse its discretion in awarding specific performance to the Pecks. 
Finally, Nakkim fails to provide any cogent argument 
that the Circuit Court's Order To Release Deeds clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to her substantial detriment. To the contrary, Nakkim received the payment of the Pecks' outstanding financial obligation and obtained a lien on the Mt. View Property to protect her interest in the Mt. View Property should the Pecks fail to perform according to the Agreement of Sale and the Construction Contract. In the Order To Release Deeds, the Circuit Court specifically stated: 
1. The Motion to Release Deeds for Filing is hereby
GRANTED subject to the filing of a lien on the Mt. View
portion of the property regarding Plaintiffs' obligations to 
However, it appears that, as of November 5, 2004, Nakkim hadnot obtained final approval to begin construction of theHome." 
The above statements of fact in the Memorandum Opinion
of the ICA are hereby adopted as Findings of Fact by thecourt. 
20. In addition, based on Exhibit 80, the Court finds
by a letter dated August 12, 2004 from [Nakkim] to [Mr.Peck], that Nakkim had offered to [Mr.] Peck to modify theAgreement of Sale by increasing the amount payable under theAgreement of Sale in exchange for an increase in the chargesunder the Construction Contract or deleting the ConstructionContract and increasing the amount payable [in] theAgreement of Sale. 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 perform under the Construction Contract portion of that
integrated contract consisting of the Agreement of Sale andthe Construction Contract both dated November 29, 2003. The Deeds held by the Court shall be released to the Plaintiffsor their counsel of record upon the filing of this Order and
the lien. 
The Order To Release Deeds also benefitted Nakkim by releasing 
the balance deposited by the Pecks for their outstanding financial obligation of $135,000 to Nakkim under the Agreement of Sale. Thus, the Circuit Court did not clearly exceed the bounds of reason or disregard rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of Nakkim by releasing the Mt. View Property deed to the Pecks as specified in its Order To Release Deeds. 
IV. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the following 
entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit: (1) "Order Denying Defendant's Motion to Prohibit Plaintiffs From Performing Without a Valid State Contractor's License" filed November 29, 2019; (2) "Order Granting Motion to Release Deeds for Filing" filed November 29, 2019; and (3) "Order Denying Defendant's Non-Hearing Motion to Reconsider, Alter or Amend 'Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Release of Deeds Filed October 11, 2019'" filed February 3, 2020. The case is remanded to the Circuit Court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 29, 2021. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
15 Michael S. Zola,for Defendants-Appellants. 
Douglas L. Halsted,
for Plaintiffs-Appellees. 