FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
–––O0O–––
 
SAFEWAY, INC., Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
NORDIC PCL CONSTRUCTION, INC., a Hawaii
corporation, Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
VERSAFLEX INCORPORATED, a Missouri corporation,
CB TECH SERVICES, INC., a Hawaii corporation,
HAWAII NUT & BOLT, INC., a Hawaii corporation,
CASCADE INDUSTRIES, INC., a Hawaii corporation,
Defendants-Appellees
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-50, JANE DOES 1-50, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50,
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50, DOE ENTITIES 1-50, Defendants
 
and
 
CASCADE INDUSTRIES, INC., Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
GRANT HENRY, DIVISION SEVEN CONSULTING OF HAWAII, INC.,
Third-Party Defendants-Appellee,
and 
JOHN DOES 2-50, JANE DOES 2-50, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50,
DOE CORPORATIONS 2-50, and DOE ENTITIES 1-50,
Third-Party Defendants
 
and
 
VERSAFLEX INCORPORATED, a Missouri corporation,
Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
BENNER STANGE ASSOCIATES ARCHITECTS, INC.,
Third-Party Defendant-Appellee
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000046
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-1414)
 
OCTOBER 30, 2013
 
LEONARD, PRESIDING JUDGE, REIFURTH AND GINOZA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY REIFURTH, J.
 
Defendant-Appellant Nordic PCL Construction, Inc.
 
("Nordic") seeks to enforce a contractual provision requiring
 
arbitration of disputes relating to performance of three
 construction contracts entered into between Nordic and Plaintiff-
Appellee Safeway Inc. ("Safeway") for the construction of a
 Safeway Store and retail shops on Kapahulu Avenue. 
Safeway
 
contends that a set of supplemental conditions formed part of the
 contract for the project, and that those conditions expressly
 deleted the arbitration clause. The Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit ("Circuit Court")
1/ declined to enforce the arbitration
 
provision, concluding that "the agreement itself is ambiguous[.]"
 
Nordic appeals from the July 1, 2010 order denying its
 
application to compel arbitration, and the September 23, 2010
 order denying its motion to clarify, amend, or reconsider the
 order denying the application to compel arbitration. Nordic
 alleges that the Circuit Court erred by (1) concluding in those
 orders that the supplementary conditions were part of the
 construction contract, and (2) denying Nordic's request for an
 evidentiary hearing.
 
We concur with the Circuit Court that there were
 
genuine issues of material fact pertaining to the existence of an
 agreement to arbitrate, but conclude that the court should have
 held, and must now hold, an evidentiary hearing to promptly
 determine those issues.
 
1/
 The Honorable R. Mark Browning presided.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
In 2006, Safeway engaged Nordic as the prime general 
contractor for the construction of the Safeway Store #2747, 
retail shops, and related site improvements on Kapahulu Avenue, in Honolulu, Hawai' i (the "Project"). Shortly after the store 
opened, a waterproofing membrane installed on the parking deck, situated above the store, began to fail and water leaked into the store. Eventually, the parties to this appeal, as well as several others, sought to litigate responsibility for the failure as well as claims to monies withheld by Safeway. 
A. Nordic Receives the Bid and Contract Documents
 
In early 2006, Safeway, in the course of soliciting
 
general contractors for the Project's construction, had its
 
architect, Benner Stange Associates Architects, Inc. ("Benner"),
 assemble a project manual ("Project Manual"), consisting of
 standard forms prepared by Safeway and including a list of
 supplementary conditions ("Supplementary Conditions"), for
 distribution to prospective general contractors.
2/ On or about
 
February 6, 2006, Benner sent a copy of the Project Manual to
 Glen Kaneshige, then-President of Nordic. 
Mr. Kaneshige described the section of the Project
 
Manual entitled Bid Form and Supplements as including, among
 other things, "an unsigned eight-page document named
 'Construction Contract,'" ("Initial Construction Contract"), "a
 nine-page document named 'General Conditions,'" ("General
 Conditions"), and the Supplementary Conditions. According to Mr.
 Kaneshige, "Nordic and Safeway never negotiated the terms of any
 of these documents, and they never became a part of the Parties'
 Contracts."
 
On April 10, 2006, Safeway notified Nordic that Nordic
 
had been selected as the Project's general contractor. Safeway
 then provided Nordic with a set of documents, including a
 
2/
 According to Francisco Varela, a former Benner architect who
worked on the Project, "it is customary and typical for supplementary
conditions to be in a project manual and for those supplementary conditions to
modify the standard form A201 general conditions."
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
modified version of the Initial Construction Contract ("Modified
 
Initial Construction Contract") and a document titled AIA
 Document A201–1997: General Conditions of the Contract for
 Construction with many edits, either by strike-through text
 (apparently deletions) or underlined text (apparently additions)
 ("A201 Document"). Safeway provided further copies of the
 Project Manual to Nordic in May and June 2006.
 
Final drafts of three contract documents, each entitled
 
AIA Document A101-1997: Standard Form of Agreement Between Owner
 and Contractor were sent to Nordic by Safeway on or about
 October 2, 2006. Each contract corresponded to one of three
 Project components - construction of the store site ("Site
 Contract"), the store itself ("Store Contract"), and associated
 retail shops ("Shops Contract") (collectively, the "A101
 Documents"). Both the A101 Documents and the A201 Document were
 derived from form contracts commonly used in the construction
 industry. The final drafts of the A101 and A201 Documents
 apparently replaced the Initial and Modified Initial Construction
 Contracts. On November 17, 2006, Nordic sent fully executed
 copies of the A101 Documents to Safeway. 
B. The Contract Documents
 
The A101 Documents are the controlling contract
 
documents; they also enumerate the documents that comprise the
 
whole of the contract documents, including by reference to or
 incorporation of those other documents. Although the A201
 Document, which contains an arbitration provision, is referenced
 in the A101 Documents, the parties disagree over whether the A101
 Documents also incorporate the Supplementary Conditions, which
 purport to delete the arbitration provision. In relevant part,
 each of the three A101 Documents begins:
 
ARTICLE 1 THE CONTRACT DOCUMENTS
 
The Contract Documents consist of this Agreement, Conditions
of the Contract (General, Supplementary and other
Conditions), Drawings, Specifications, Addenda issued prior
to execution of this Agreement, other documents listed in
this Agreement and Modifications issued after execution of
this Agreement; these form the Contract, and are as fully a
part of the Contract as if attached to this Agreement or
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5repeated herein. . . . An enumeration of the Contract
Documents, other than Modifications, appears in Article 8. 
Article 8 in each of the three A101 Document, entitled
Enumeration of Contract Documents, purports to enumerate the
specific documents that comprise the Contract Documents.  In the
Store Contract, Article 8 provides the following:3/
ARTICLE 8  ENUMERATION OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS
§ 8.1  The Contract Documents, except for Modifications
issued after execution of this Agreement, are enumerated as
follows:
.  .  .
§ 8.1.3  The Supplementary and other Conditions of the
Contract are those contained in the Project Manual dated ,
and are as follows:
Document Title Pages
.  .  .
§ 8.1.4  The Specifications are those contained in the
Project Manual dated as in Section 8.1.3, and are as
follows: (Either list the Specifications here or refer to an
exhibit attached to this Agreement)
Title of Specifications exhibit:  Exhibit A attached hereto
and made a part hereof.
§ 8.1.7  Other documents, if any, forming part of the
Contract Documents are as follows:
(List here any additional documents that are intended to
form part of the Contract Documents.  AIA Document A201-1997
provides that bidding requirements such as advertisement or
invitation to bid, Instructions to Bidders, sample forms and
the Contractor’s bid are not part of the Contract Documents
unless enumerated in this Agreement.  They should be listed
here only if intended to be part of the Contract Documents.)
Safeway Inc. (Nor/Cal) Modified AIA Document A201-1997
General Conditions of the Contract for Construction.
Article 8 of each of the Shops and Site Contracts are identical
with the Store Contract, except for Section 8.1.3.  That section,
in both the Shops and Site Contracts, provides: 
§ 8.1.3  The Supplementary and other Conditions of the
Contract are those contained in the Project Manual dated ,
and are as follows:
Document     Title Pages
Value Engineering     Safeway Kapahulu 3
Options     Store #2747
3/Italics/boldface are as in the source document.  In comparing the
Store Contract to the A101 standard form contract, the underlined text are
additions made by Safeway.  Deletions are not shown.FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The A201 Document is incorporated by Article 8, Section
 
8.1.7 in each A101 Document. Paragraph 4.6 of Article 4 of the
 
A201 Document is titled Arbitration; it contains several
 subparagraphs. It begins:
 
4.6.1 Any Claim arising out of or related to the Contract
[apart from certain exceptions] shall . . . be subject to
arbitration. Prior to arbitration, the parties shall
endeavor to resolve disputes by mediation in accordance with
the provisions of Paragraph 4.5. 
Subparagraph 4.6.6, relating to arbitration costs and fees was
 
amended by Safeway as follows:4/
 
4.6.6 Judgment on Final Award. The award rendered by the
arbitrator or arbitrators shall be final, and judgment may
be entered upon it in accordance with applicable law in any
court having jurisdiction thereof. The Owner and the
 
Contractor shall share equally the costs of any arbitration
proceedings instituted under this Paragraph 4.6. In the
 event that either party finds it necessary to bring an
action at law or other proceedings against the other to
enforce the decision of the arbitrator, the prevailing party
shall be paid at reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in
bringing such action or proceedings.
 
The Project Manual is referenced in Sections 8.1.3 and
 
8.1.4 of the A101 Document as well as Subparagraph 1.1.7 of the
 
A201 Document5/ and includes Supplementary Conditions. Each of
 
the Project Manual's General Conditions6/
 and Supplementary
Conditions are contained in the record. In relevant part, the
 Supplementary Conditions provide:
 
SC.1 SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS
 
The following supplements modify, change, delete from
or add to the "General Conditions of Contract for
 Construction", AIA Document A201 - 1977, Fifteenth
Edition. Where any article of the General Conditions
is modified or any paragraph, subparagraph or clause
thereof is modified or deleted by these supplements,
 
4/
 The addition is underlined in the source.
 
5/
 Subparagraph 1.1.7 is entitled "The Project Manual" and defines
the Project Manual as "a volume assembled for the Work which may include the
bidding requirements, sample forms, Conditions of the Contract and
Specifications." 
6/
 These are not the same as the A201 Document, subtitled "General
Conditions of Contract for Construction."
 
6
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the unaltered provisions of that article, paragraph,
subparagraph or clause shall remain in effect.
 
All divisions of the specifications shall be subject
to the General Conditions and Supplementary
Conditions.
 
SC.2 MODIFICATIONS TO ARTICLES OF THE GENERAL CONDITIONS
 
. . . .
 
2.17 ARTICLE 4 – ADMINISTRATION OF THE CONTRACT
 
4.6 Arbitration
 Delete this paragraph in its entirety.
 
C. Execution of the Contract Documents
 
Nordic began work on the Project before having signed
 
any contract documents. On November 16, 2006, Davin Ishii
 
("Ishii") of Nordic responded to an email from Jim Krieger of
 Safeway, who had encouraged Nordic to sign the contracts. 
Ishii's email reply stated:
 
Jim,
 
I just spoke with Glen [Kaneshige]. He will be signing the
contract with the understanding that the unit prices, list
of drawings, specifications, special clauses, exclusions,
etc. . . . will be added into the contract documentation. 
. . . .
 
Thank you,
 
Davin 
One day later, Nordic signed the A101 Documents,
 
backdating them to September 20 and 21, 2006.
 
D. Motion to Compel Arbitration
 
Roughly one year later, a few months after the new
 
store and shops had opened, the waterproofing on the rooftop
 
parking deck began to fail and water began to leak into the
 store. Eventually, in June 2009, Safeway filed suit against
 Nordic and its subcontractors and suppliers. 
Nordic filed an application to compel arbitration
 
("Motion to Compel") on March 2, 2010, contending that an
 arbitration agreement existed in Paragraph 4.6 of the A201
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Document. It further contended that the Supplementary Conditions
 
were not incorporated into the Contract Documents. Safeway
 disputed Nordic's assertion, arguing that the Supplementary
 Conditions had been effectively incorporated into the Contract
 Documents, thereby negating the arbitration provision in the A201
 Document.
 
On June 20, 2010, the Circuit Court held a hearing on
 
Nordic's Motion to Compel. The Circuit Court expressed
 frustration regarding the lack of clarity in the contract: "[I]n
 trying to discern what the heck happened here and what the
 contract was, it was confusing as heck to me." Neither party
 requested, nor did the Circuit Court offer, an opportunity to
 present witnesses or additional evidence.
 
While not making any specific factual findings
 
regarding incorporation, the Circuit Court determined that "[t]he
 agreement incorporates several documents[,]" including the
 "Supplementary and Other Conditions of Contract contained in the
 project manual[.]" As Section 8.1.3 of the A101 Documents was
 therefore applicable, the court concluded that it "cannot ignore
 either the deletion of the requirement of the arbitration
 contained in the project manual or the requirement of arbitration
 contained in the [A201 Document]. Therefore, because there's
 more than one reasonable interpretation of the arbitration
 agreement, the agreement itself is ambiguous." On that basis,
 citing applicable law, the court denied Nordic's Motion to
 Compel. 
E. Motion for Reconsideration 
On July 14, 2010, Nordic filed its motion to clarify,
 
amend, or reconsider the order denying Nordic's Motion to Compel
 
("Motion for Reconsideration"). It sought therein to have the
 Circuit Court either amend its previous order and compel the
 parties to arbitrate or to order "an evidentiary hearing to
 resolve issues of fact with respect to the [Motion to Compel]." 
The Circuit Court denied the Motion for Reconsideration
 
stating that it was not compelled to hold an evidentiary hearing,
 and contended that Nordic had received an evidentiary hearing of
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sorts at the prior hearing on the Motion to Compel since the
 
court had examined the evidence that was submitted at that time. 
This appeal follows.
 
II. 	STANDARD OF REVIEW 
A. Motion to Compel Arbitration
 
"A petition to compel arbitration is reviewed de 
novo[,]" which is the same standard "applicable to a motion for 
summary judgment[.]" Brown v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai' i 
226, 231, 921 P.2d 146, 151 (1996). The appellate court reviews the trial court's decision "using the same standard employed by the trial court and based upon the same evidentiary materials" that were before the trial court in its "determination of the motion." Id. (quoting Koolau Radiology, Inc. v. Queen's Medical 
Center, 73 Haw. 433, 439-40, 834 P.2d 1294, 1298 (1992)) (internal quotation marks omitted). Furthermore: 
As a general rule, the construction and legal effect
to be given a contract is a question of law freely
reviewable by an appellate court. The determination whether
 a contract is ambiguous is likewise a question of law that
is freely reviewable on appeal. These principles apply
equally to appellate review of the construction and legal
effect to be given a contractual agreement to arbitrate.
 
Id. at 239, 921 P.2d at 159 (internal quotation marks and
 
citations omitted).
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") § 658A-7 governs
 
motions to compel arbitration:
 
Motion to compel or stay arbitration. (a) On motion
of a person showing an agreement to arbitrate and alleging
another person's refusal to arbitrate pursuant to the
agreement:
 
. . . .
 
(2)	 If the refusing party opposes the motion, the
court shall proceed summarily to decide the
issue and order the parties to arbitrate unless
it finds that there is no enforceable agreement
to arbitrate. 
. . . .
 
9
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(c)	 If the court finds that there is no enforceable
 
agreement, it shall not, pursuant to subsection
(a) or (b), order the parties to arbitrate.
 
HAW. REV. STAT. § 658A-7 (Supp. 2012). Accordingly, "[w]hen 
presented with a motion to compel arbitration, the court is 
limited to answering two questions: 1) whether an arbitration agreement exists between the parties; and 2) if so, whether the subject matter of the dispute is arbitrable under such agreement." Douglass v. Pflueger Hawaii, Inc., 110 Hawai' i 520, 
530, 135 P.3d 129, 139 (2006) (quoting Koolau Radiology, Inc., 73 Haw. at 445, 834 P.2d at 1300). 
Here, the parties dispute only the first of these two 
questions. An arbitration agreement is itself a contract; its existence is therefore contingent on compliance with laws governing the formation of contracts. 6 C.J.S. Arbitration § 27 (2004); see also Douglass, 110 Hawai' i at 534, 135 P.3d at 144 
(holding no arbitration agreement where the agreement failed for lack of assent). Furthermore, in Hawai' i, "in order to be valid 
and enforceable, an arbitration agreement must have the following three elements: (1) it must be in writing; (2) it must be unambiguous as to the intent to submit disputes or controversies to arbitration; and (3) there must be bilateral consideration." Douglass, 110 Hawai' i at 531, 135 P.3d at 140 (citing Brown, 82 
Hawai'i at 238-40, 921 P.2d at 158-60). 
In ruling on a motion to compel arbitration, "[a] trial 
court can only decide, as a matter of law, whether to compel the parties to arbitrate their dispute if there is no genuine issue of material fact regarding the existence of a valid agreement to arbitrate." Koolau Radiology, Inc., 73 Haw. at 439, 834 P.2d at 
1298 (citing Par-Knit Mills, Inc. v. Stockbridge Fabrics Co., 636 F.2d 51, 54 (3d Cir. 1980)). Additionally, we note that Hawai' i 
has a strong policy favoring arbitration of disputes, although parties must nonetheless have agreed to arbitrate their disputes. Douglass, 110 Hawai' i at 530-31, 135 P.3d at 139-40. 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A.	 The Circuit Court's conclusion that the Motion to
 
Compel must be denied was in error because it did not
properly determine what constituted the contract, and
in turn, whether there existed an unambiguous (or any)
arbitration agreement. 
Each party contends that it ought to have prevailed 
regarding Nordic's Motion to Compel; in doing so, the parties 
disagree as to the set of documents that comprise the Contract Documents and therefore disagree as to the existence of an arbitration agreement. Their dispute focuses on whether Paragraph 4.6 of the A201 Document - the sole arbitration provision in the Contract Documents - is to be given effect or deemed stricken from the Contract Documents. Nordic argues that the A201 Document is incorporated into the Contract Documents, that Paragraph 4.6 therein is an unambiguous arbitration agreement, and that the Contract Documents fail to effectively incorporate the Supplementary Conditions, which, in relevant part, purport to "delete [Paragraph 4.6] in its entirety." Safeway, to the contrary, argues that Section 8.1.3 of each of the A101 Documents does effectively incorporate the Supplementary Conditions, and that Supplementary Condition 2.17 therein operates to eliminate Paragraph 4.6 from the Contract Documents. Alternatively, Safeway argues that the Contract Documents fail to evidence an unambiguous intent to arbitrate, and concludes therefore that Hawai' i precedent compels this court to affirm the 
order denying Nordic's Motion to Compel. 
We consider Safeway's alternative argument first to 
clarify that Hawai' i precedent regarding arbitration agreements 
does not readily determine the outcome of this case. We then turn to the question of which documents comprise the Contract Documents in order to address whether the arbitration provision in Paragraph 4.6 remained intact and effective or was instead stricken entirely.
 1.	 Ambiguities or disputes as to whether the parties
assented to an arbitration agreement do not
necessarily render it ineffective.
 
Safeway cites to Brown and Douglass for the proposition
 
that any ambiguity as to the parties' intent to arbitrate must
 
11
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defeat a purported arbitration provision. Specifically, Safeway
 
asserts that "[a]pplying the factors set forth in Douglass and
 Brown to the facts in this case, at minimum there would be no
 valid or enforceable agreement to arbitrate . . .," concluding
 that incorporation of the Supplementary Conditions, which purport
 to delete the arbitration provision, defeats the required
 "manifestation of an unambiguous intent to arbitrate." 
We disagree with the contention that Douglass and Brown
 
alone settle this case, as they implicate not only whether an
 aribtration provision itself manifests unambiguous intent, but
 also consideration of whether the parties assented to an
 arbitration agreement. Mere ambiguity as to assent, or as to
 whether the parties intended to accept, an arbitration agreement,
 is not enough to defeat such an agreement.
 
In Brown, the Hawai' i Supreme Court considered a 
challenge to an arbitration provision contained in an employment application. 82 Hawai' i at 228-29, 921 P.2d at 148-49. The 
signed application specified that it did not constitute an employment contract, but a separately-signed subsection within the application contained a purportedly binding arbitration provision. The court deemed the employee to be employed pursuant to an oral contract, while holding that the arbitration provision in the application constituted a written arbitration agreement. Having thus determined that the writing requirement for 
7/
arbitration agreements was satisfied,  it proceeded to uphold
the arbitration agreement as valid because, in addition to being supported by bilateral consideration, the arbitration provision was "manifestly unambiguous in its expressed intent that . . . disputes be arbitrated rather than resolved via resort to the . . . court[s]." 82 Hawai' i at 237-39, 921 P.2d at 157-59. 
7/
 See 9 U.S.C. § 4 (1994). In Brown, the Court had determined that
the Federal Arbitration Act was applicable, and that to the extent its
application was less restrictive than Hawai' i arbitration statutes, it
preempted those statutes. See 82 Hawai' i at 238-39 & n.15, 921 P.2d at 158-59
& n.15. This was significant in Brown because of the oral nature of the 
employment relationship vis-à-vis the writing requirement mandated by both
federal and state arbitration statutes, compare 9 U.S.C. § 4, with HAW. REV. 
STAT. § 658-1 (1993) (repealed 2002), but is not germane here. 
12
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Subsequently, in Douglass, the Supreme Court considered 
a challenge to another "manifestly unambiguous" arbitration 
provision. Douglass, 110 Hawai' i at 532, 135 P.3d at 141. The 
Douglass court described its holding in Brown as follows: 
We held in Brown that, in order to be valid and
enforceable, an arbitration agreement must have the
following three elements: (1) it must be in writing; (2) it
must be unambiguous as to the intent to submit disputes or
controversies to arbitration; and (3) there must be
bilateral consideration.
 
Id. at 531, 135 P.3d at 140. Additionally, Douglass recognized
 
that despite satisfaction of each of these conditions,
 surrounding circumstances in a case may reveal the lack of
 "mutual assent . . . to arbitrate." Id. at 532-33, 135 P.3d at
 
141-42. This was particularly relevant in Douglass where the
 arbitration provision in question was "buried" within a sixty-
page employee handbook, the employee's signature merely
 acknowledged receipt of the handbook and an understanding of the
 items presented to him, and the signed acknowledgment provision
 emphasized the non-contractual nature of the handbook and did not
 call any attention to the arbitration provision. Id.
 
Thus, the court's challenge was to determine the effect
 
of the signed acknowledgment provision as to the handbook's
 arbitration provision. Douglass concluded that, in light of the
 
entirely inconspicuous nature of the arbitration provision and
 the lack of any evidence indicating that the employee had ever
 been apprised of it, the signature was not a manifestation of
 assent to the arbitration provision and that, therefore, the
 "[employee] cannot be compelled to arbitrate his claims[.]" See
 
id. at 534, 135 P.3d at 143).
 
Douglass thus compels us here to perform two inquiries. 
First, does the arbitration agreement satisfy the three Brown conditions? As to the intent inquiry in the Brown test, arbitration agreements themselves must clearly manifest the intent to submit disputes to binding arbitration. See Douglass, 
110 Hawai' i at 531-32, 135 P.3d at 140-41; Brown, 82 Hawai' i at 
239, 921 P.2d at 159; see also, e.g., Luke v. Gentry Realty, Ltd., 105 Hawai' i 241, 249, 96 P.3d 261, 269 (2004) (declining to 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
enforce an arbitration agreement in light of conflicting
 
provisions regarding dispute resolution options in a contract).
 Second, does the arbitration agreement fail for lack of assent? 
These inquiries are consistent with general principles regarding
 the existence, validity, and enforceability of arbitration
 agreements. See 6 C.J.S. Arbitration § 26 ("[N]o particular
 
words are necessary [to give effect to an arbitration agreement]
 . . . [but] it must clearly appear that the intention of the
 parties was to submit their differences to the arbitrators and to
 be bound by their decision." (footnotes omitted)); 6 C.J.S.
 Arbitration § 28 ("There must be mutual assent to an agreement to
 arbitrate."). 
The mere fact that assent to an arbitration agreement 
is at issue does not necessarily defeat the agreement. In both Brown and Douglass, the ambiguous intent inquiry focused on the text of the arbitration provision itself. In each case, the supreme court found that the provisions were manifestly unambiguous as to the intent to arbitrate. Douglass, 110 Hawai' i 
at 531, 135 P.3d at 140; Brown, 82 Hawai' i at 239, 921 P.2d at 
159. In Douglass, however, while the court found assent to be at
 
issue, it did not end its inquiry there. Rather, it proceeded to
 resolve whether the parties did in fact assent to the arbitration
 agreement,
8/ just as with any question regarding assent to a
 
contract provision. See, e.g., Earl M. Jorgensen Co. v. Mark
 
Const., Inc., 56 Haw. 466, 470-72, 540 P.2d 978, 982-83 (1975). 
If all that were required to defeat an arbitration
 
agreement was to put assent at issue (or to put at issue the
 parties' intent to accept that agreement, see Earl M. Jorgensen
 Co., 56 Haw. at 470–71, 540 P.2d at 982 (relating mutual assent
 to an intent to accept)), arbitration agreements would be
 peculiarly vulnerable and easily defeated. Such impairment
 accords with neither the strong policy favoring arbitration, see
 
8/
 While the supreme court appeared to view its assent inquiry as an
aspect of the inquiry regarding the second Brown factor (i.e., ambiguity of
the arbitration agreement's expressed intent), we understand these to be
distinct inquiries, as performed in Douglass, such that a finding of ambiguity
as to assent does not defeat the arbitration agreement (whereas ambiguity as
to expressed intent of the arbitration agreement itself would do so).
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Douglass, 110 Hawai' i at 530-31, 135 P.3d at 139-40, nor the 
principle that arbitration agreements should be on equal footing 
with other contract provisions, cf. Brown, 82 Hawai' i at 240, 921 
P.2d at 160 ("[T]he [Federal Arbitration Act] 'was designed . . . to place arbitration agreements upon the same footing as other contracts.'" (quoting Scherk v. Alberto-Culver Co., 417 U.S. 506, 510-11 (1974))). 
Here, there is no question that Paragraph 4.6, the
 
arbitration provision, is in writing, is supported by bilateral
 consideration, and unambiguously mandates arbitration of
 disputes. What is in question is whether the parties assented to
 the incorporation of the Supplementary Conditions into the
 Contract Documents, which, if so, would have the effect of
 deleting Paragraph 4.6 from the A201 Document.
9/ While this is
 
not directly a question of assent to the arbitration provision
 itself - it is instead a question of whether the parties
 indirectly assented to the deletion of the arbitration provision
 by way of assenting to incorporation of the Supplementary
 Conditions as a whole - we see no reason to regard it as anything
 but a question of the parties' assent.
 
That there is a question, an ambiguity, as to assent
 
does not end our inquiry. Rather, it focuses our inquiry on
 precisely that question, which we turn to next.
 
2.	 Because there are disputed issues of material fact
regarding whether the parties assented to
incorporation of the Supplementary Conditions, we
cannot determine as a matter of law that the
 arbitration agreement should be enforced. 
Whether the arbitration agreement exists and is
 
enforceable turns on whether the Supplementary Conditions form a
 
part of the Contract Documents. If they do, then, per
 Supplementary Condition 2.17, the arbitration agreement is
 deleted from the A201 Document. If they do not, then Paragraph
 
9/
 Or, at minimum, those provisions addressing arbitration ­
Supplementary Condition 2.17 and Paragraph 4.6 - would result in an ambiguous,
and therefore unenforceable, arbitration agreement. See Luke, 105 Hawai' i at 
249, 96 P.3d at 269. 
15
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4.6 remains intact, forms the whole of the arbitration agreement,
 
and is valid and enforceable as such.
 
In order to effectively incorporate by reference a
 
separate writing, or a portion thereof, into a contract, "the
 language used . . . must explicitly, or at least precisely,
 identify the written material being incorporated and must clearly
 communicate that the purpose of the reference is to incorporate
 the referenced material into the contract (rather than merely to
 acknowledge that the referenced material is relevant to the
 contract, e.g., as background law or negotiating history)." 
Northrop Grumman Info. Tech. Inc. v. United States, 535 F.3d
 1339, 1345 (Fed. Cir. 2008); see also Ingersoll-Rand Co. v. El
 Dorado Chem. Co., 283 S.W.3d 191, 233 (Ark. 2008) ("[A] majority
 of states have concluded that the contract must clearly and
 specifically reference the document to be incorporated."); Mgmt.
 Comp. Controls, Inc. v. Charles Perry Const., Inc., 743 So. 2d
 627, 631 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1999) ("A document may be
 incorporated by reference . . . if the contract specifically
 describes the document and expresses the parties' intent to be
 bound by its terms."); 17A C.J.S. Contracts § 402 (In order to
 incorporate a separate document by reference into a contract, the
 reference "must be clear and unequivocal, and the terms of the
 incorporated document must be known or easily available to the
 [contracting] parties."). "At common law, '[i]n order to uphold
 the validity of terms incorporated by reference it must be clear
 that the parties to the agreement had knowledge of and assented
 to the incorporated terms.'" PaineWebber Inc. v. Bybyk, 81 F.3d
 
1193, 1201 (2d Cir. 1996) (quoting Lamb v. Emhart Corp., 47 F.3d
 551, 558 (2d Cir. 1995)); accord Ingersoll-Rand Co., 283 S.W.3d
 at 233. 
"Although it is clear that whether one agreement has 
incorporated another has factual components, whether material has been incorporated presents a question of law." 11 Richard A. Lord, Williston on Contracts § 30:25, at 308 (4th ed. 2012); see also Lamb, 47 F.3d at 558 ("Evidence of . . . assent may be found in the circumstances surrounding the agreement."); Douglass, 110 Hawai'i at 532, 135 P.3d at 141 (determining the issue of mutual 
16
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
assent "in combination with the surrounding circumstances
 
presented in the case"). 
The Circuit Court's initial task - as now is ours -
was to ascertain whether it could rule that, as a matter of law,
 the parties had an agreement to arbitrate. Koolau Radiology,
 
Inc., 73 Haw. at 439, 834 P.2d at 1298. That question hinged on
 whether the Supplementary Conditions had, as a matter of law,
 been incorporated into the Contract Documents. If the Circuit
 Court could so conclude that they were not incorporated, then the
 arbitration provision would unambiguously provide for arbitration
 as the means to resolve disputes. If the Circuit could so
 conclude that they were incorporated, then the arbitration
 provision would be nullified by the Supplementary Conditions.
10/
  
If, however, because of the existence of genuine issues of
 material fact, it could not conclude either way as a matter of
 law, then it would remain to resolve those factual issues in
 order to answer the question of incorporation. See
 Part IV.B
 
infra. 
Article 1 in each of the A101 Documents contains an
 
integration clause:
 
ARTICLE 1 THE CONTRACT DOCUMENTS
 
The Contract Documents consist of this Agreement, Conditions
of the Contract (General, Supplementary and other
Conditions), Drawings, Specifications, Addenda issued prior
to execution of this Agreement, other documents listed in
this Agreement and Modifications issued after execution of
this Agreement; these form the Contract, and are as fully a
part of the Contract as if attached to this Agreement or
repeated herein. 
The Contract represents the entire and
integrated agreement between the parties hereto and
supersedes prior negotiations, representations or
agreements, either written or oral. An enumeration of the
 Contract Documents, other than Modifications, appears in
Article 8.
 
In addition to identifying the types of documents constituting
 
the Contract Documents, the provision points to Article 8 as
 enumerating the constituent documents. 
10/
 Or, at minimum, the arbitration provision would no longer
unambiguously manifest an intent to arbitrate, and would therefore be without
effect. See Douglass, 110 Hawai' i at 531, 135 P.3d at 140. 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
18Article 8 provides that11/: 
§ 8.1  The Contract Documents, except for Modifications issued
after execution of this Agreement, are enumerated as follows:
§ 8.1.1  The Agreement is this executed 1997 edition of the
Standard Form of Agreement Between Owner and Contractor, AIA
Document A101-1997 as revised by Safeway Inc.
§ 8.1.2  The General conditions are the 1997 edition of the
General Conditions of the Contract for Construction, AIA
Document A201-1997 as revised by Safeway Inc.
§ 8.1.3  The Supplementary and other Conditions of the
Contract are those contained in the Project Manual dated ,
and are as follows:
Document Title Pages
§ 8.1.4  The Specifications are those contained in the
Project Manual dated as in Section 8.1.3, and are as follows:
(Either list the Specifications here or refer to an exhibit
attached to this Agreement.)
Title of Specifications exhibit:  Exhibit A attached hereto
and made a part hereof.
§ 8.1.5  The Drawings are as follows, and are dated    
unless a different date is shown below: 
(Either list the Drawings here or refer to an exhibit
attached to this Agreement.)
Title of Drawings exhibit:  attached hereto and made a part
hereof.
§ 8.1.6  The Addenda, if any are as
follows:
Number Date Pages  
Portions of Addenda relating to bidding requirements are not
part of the Contract Documents unless the bidding
requirements are also enumerated in this Article 8.
§ 8.1.7  Other documents, if any, forming part of the
Contract Documents are as follows:
(List here any additional documents that are intended to
form part of the Contract Documents.  AIA Document A201-1997
provides that bidding requirements such as advertisement or
invitation to bid, Instructions to Bidders, sample forms and
the Contractor's bid are not part of the Contract Documents
unless enumerated in this Agreement.  They should be listed
here only if intended to be part of the Contract Documents.)
11/Each of the A101 Documents, including Article 8, was derived from
a template document, intended to be customized by parties wishing to use the
contract.  Except for language that is underlined and/or in boldface above,
the language in Article 8 is the same language as in the template.  In
particular, Section 8.1.3, as it appears above, is precisely as it is in the 
template document and in the Store Contract.  The only difference as to
Article 8 between the Store, Shops, and Site Contracts, as discussed supra
Section I.B., is Section 8.1.3. 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Safeway Inc. (Nor/Cal) Modified AIA Document A201-1997
 
General Conditions of the Contract for Construction.
 
Nordic argues that Section 8.1.3 is ineffective to
 
incorporate the Supplementary Conditions because it does not
 
clearly and unequivocally define what is to be incorporated.12/
 
However, cases where incorporation is found ineffective as a
 matter of law generally turn on such facts as whether a document
 reference is simply too "amorphous . . . [to] guide the reader to
 the incorporated document," Chan v. Drexel Burnham Lambert, Inc.,
 178 Cal. App. 3d 632, 643 (1986); accord Cariaga v. Local No.
 1184 Laborers Int'l Union of N. Am., 154 F.3d 1072, 1075 (9th
 Cir. 1998), or whether the reference even specified the target
 document at all, see Heitritter v. Callahan Constr. Co., No. 02­0889, 2003 WL 22015970, at *5 (Iowa Ct. App. Aug. 27, 2003). 
Such is not the case here. Neither the parties nor the 
record suggests that the reference to Supplementary Conditions within the Project Manual fails to guide the reader to the allegedly incorporated document. Nordic, in fact, acknowledges "that the document at issue was provided to [it] in the project manual during bidding." Therefore, the identity of the Supplementary Conditions is not reasonably in question. Remaining to be resolved, however, is whether the parties assented to incorporation of those conditions, and it is here that the inquiry shifts from a matter of law to a matter of fact. See Douglass, 110 Hawai' i at 533, 135 P.3d at 142; see also Lamb, 
47 F.3d at 558 ("Evidence of . . . assent may be found in the circumstances surrounding the agreement."). 
We cannot determine from the Contract Documents alone
 
whether the parties' signatures were a manifestation of their
 assent to incorporate the Supplementary Conditions. Despite the
 plainly incorporative purpose of Article 8, its incorporative
 mechanism is, in certain instances, ambiguous; in addition to
 
12/
 Nordic observes that the Project Manual is never actually defined
as a specific document. It is, however, defined abstractly in Subparagraph
1.1.7 of the A201 Document, and it appears that Section 8.1.3 is intended to
identify with specificity which particular document constitutes the Project
Manual, but the "dated" field in Section 8.1.3 was left blank in the A101
Documents. 
19
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
specifying portions of the Project Manual to be incorporated, the
 
language "and are as follows" in Sections 8.1.3 and 8.1.4 implies
 that further specification of the provisions to be incorporated
 is expected. It is not clear from the Contract Documents whether
 the absence of such further specification is to be deemed fatal
 to the incorporation of the Supplementary Conditions. For this
 reason, we concur with the Circuit Court that it is ambiguous
 whether the parties assented to the incorporation of the
 Supplementary Conditions. 
We therefore look to the surrounding circumstances of 
the case to ascertain whether the parties assented to incorporation of the Supplementary Conditions. See Douglass, 110 
Hawai'i at 532, 135 P.3d at 141; cf. Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki 
Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 124-25, 839 P.2d 10, 31 (1992) ("[P]arol evidence regarding the parties' intent as to the language used in a contract may be considered only when the contract language is ambiguous."). In doing so, we note that assent is a factual inquiry and that the parties offer disputed interpretations of several circumstances informing whether the parties intended to be bound to the Supplementary Conditions. 
Safeway emphasizes the fact that Nordic was necessarily
 
familiar with the Project Manual, including the Specifications
 therein, and the Supplementary Conditions, and that they had been
 an integral part of the bid process, suggesting that Nordic could
 not have bid or built the project without them. This may be a
 compelling argument, but contravening it, Safeway never attempts
 to explain why Section 8.1.3 remained as it was— seemingly
 incomplete—and ignores that portion of it which creates the
 ambiguity. 
Nordic points out that Paragraph 4.6, like much of the
 
rest of the A201 Document, had been modified by Safeway. Nordic
 argues that information as to why Safeway would modify a portion
 of the contract that it elsewhere deleted is germane to
 determining the parties' intent as to incorporation. 
Additionally, on this record, Nordic's email to Safeway
 
confirming its intent to sign the A101 Documents contingent upon
 "the understanding that the unit prices, list of drawings,
 
20
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
specifications, special clauses, exclusions, etc. . . . will be
 
added into the contract documentation" is ambiguous and
 potentially highly relevant to the parties' understanding of the
 status of the Supplementary Conditions. Further evidence or
 testimony regarding this email could be instrumental to
 ascertaining the parties' intent as to incorporation of the
 Supplementary Conditions. 
Thus, the question of whether the Project Manual and/or
 
Supplementary Conditions was incorporated turns on disputed
 issues of fact; in particular, whether the parties assented to
 incorporation of the Supplemental Conditions in light of both
 their presence and relevance throughout the project, the oddly
 incomplete Section 8.1.3, and other circumstances discussed above
 that may reveal whether the parties did in fact have a "meeting
 of the minds," see Earl M. Jorgensen Co., 56 Haw. at 470, 540
 P.2d at 982, as to incorporation of the Supplementary Conditions.
 Indeed, the Circuit Court recognized that there were "genuine
 issues of material fact all over the place." We therefore cannot
 determine whether the Supplementary Conditions were incorporated
 as a matter of law.
 
B.	 As there were genuine issues of material fact
pertaining to the existence of an agreement to
arbitrate, the Circuit Court should have held an
evidentiary hearing.
 
Notwithstanding the June 10, 2010 hearing, Nordic
 
argues that it was deprived of an evidentiary hearing whereby the
 
court, on a full record, should have resolved disputed issues of
 material fact prior to determining the existence and validity of
 the arbitration agreement. Safeway argues in response that an
 evidentiary hearing was not required and further argues that
 Nordic waived any claim for an evidentiary hearing by failing to
 request one prior to the Circuit Court's ruling.
 
HRS § 658A-7 requires that where a motion to compel 
arbitration is opposed, "the court shall proceed summarily to decide the issue[.]" H
AW. REV. STAT. § 658A-7. HRS § 658A-7 is 
part of Hawai' i's enactment of the Revised Uniform Arbitration 
Act ("RUAA"), see 2001 Haw. Sess. Laws Act. 265, § 8 at 820, and 
21
  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is practically identical to section 7 of the RUAA. Compare HAW.
 
REV. STAT. § 658A-7, with RUAA § 7, 7 U.L.A. 31–32 (2009). The
 
commentary to RUAA § 7 specifies that "[t]he term 'summarily'
 
. . . has been defined to mean that a trial court should act
 expeditiously and without a jury trial to determine whether a
 valid arbitration agreement exists." RUAA § 7 cmt.
 
This court has previously noted, in an unpublished
 
opinion, that an evidentiary hearing is an appropriate means to
 resolve issues of material fact where the disputed issues
 precluded granting a motion to compel arbitration as a matter of
 law. See Tavares v. McNair, No. 29590, 2010 WL 2535167, at *3 &
 
n.2 (Haw. Ct. App. June 24, 2010). We now further consider that
 determination as well as whether such a hearing is not merely
 appropriate in the present case, but, rather, required. 
While Hawai' i has not yet determined what a summary 
proceeding entails in this context, several of the many jurisdictions that have explicitly adopted the RUAA
13/ have 
explored or commented on that issue. 
These jurisdictions generally construe the requirement
 
to "proceed summarily" (or similar) as a procedure requiring two
 distinct determinations. First, a court should determine
 whether, on the basis of the parties' submissions, it can decide
 the issue (of the existence or enforceability of an arbitration
 agreement) as a matter of law. Second, if the court cannot do so
 because there are disputed issues of material fact, it should
 hold an evidentiary hearing to resolve those factual issues. See
 
Moffett v. Life Care Ctrs. of Am., 219 P.3d 1068, 1079 (Colo.
 2009) (en banc) ("The court must determine whether material
 issues of fact are disputed and, if such factual disputes exist,
 it must conduct an expedited evidentiary hearing to resolve the
 dispute." (quoting J.A. Walker Co. v. Cambria Corp., 159 P.3d
 126, 130 (Colo. 2007))); St. Fleur v. WPI Cable Systems/Mutron,
 879 N.E.2d 27, 33 (Mass. 2008) ("[T]hose courts [which have
 interpreted the phrase 'proceed summarily' under the Uniform
 
13/
 The preface to the RUAA indicates that thirty-five states have
adopted the RUAA and fourteen others have adopted "substantially similar
legislation." Prefatory Note to the RUAA.
 
22
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Arbitration Act] have interpreted [it] to mean that a judge
 
determines whether there is a dispute as to a material fact; and,
 if there is not such a dispute, the judge resolves the issue as a
 matter of law; but, if there is such a dispute, the judge
 conducts an expedited evidentiary hearing on the matter and then
 decides the issue."); Nitro Distributing, Inc. v. Dunn, 194
 S.W.3d 339, 352 (Mo. 2006) (en banc) ("Where . . . there [are]
 disputed factual issues, it is necessary to conduct an
 evidentiary hearing."); Jack B. Anglin Co. v. Tipps, 842 S.W.2d
 266, 269 (Tex. 1992) ("[W]e hold that the trial court may
 summarily decide whether to compel arbitration on the basis of
 affidavits, pleadings, discovery, and stipulations. However, if
 the material facts necessary to determine the issue are
 controverted, by an opposing affidavit or otherwise admissible
 evidence, the trial court must conduct an evidentiary hearing to
 determine the disputed material facts."); accord Haynes v. Kuder,
 591 A.2d 1286, 1290 (D.C. Ct. App. 1991); FL-Carrollwood Care
 Ctr., LLC v. Estate of Gordon ex rel. Gordon, 34 So. 3d 804, 806
 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2010); Bass v. SMG, Inc., 765 N.E.2d 1079
 (Ill. App. Ct. 2002). 
These authorities demonstrate that the summary nature
 
of the proceeding should not deprive the parties of the
 opportunity to present evidence at a hearing in order to resolve
 genuine issues of material fact.
14/ Indeed, in other types of
 
cases that are treated akin to motions for summary judgment, such
 issues are resolved by "trial or an evidentiary hearing." See,
 
e.g., Gilmartin v. Abastillas, 10 Haw. App. 283, 296, 869 P.2d
 1346, 1352 (1994) ("A motion to enforce a disputed settlement
 agreement is treated as a motion for summary judgment. A motion
 for summary judgment should not be granted where there is a
 factual question as to the existence, validity, and terms of the
 alleged settlement agreement, and where such a dispute exists, a
 trial or an evidentiary hearing to resolve the dispute is
 required." (emphasis added and citations omitted)).
 
14/
 In neither Brown nor Douglass does it appear that the parties
argued that they were entitled to such a hearing. Thus, the Hawai' i Supreme
Court did not have occasion to review on that basis. 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The purpose of an evidentiary hearing in the context of
 
a motion to compel arbitration is to permit parties to present
 
evidence beyond the "affidavits, pleadings, discovery, and
 stipulations submitted by the parties." Moffett, 219 P.3d at
 
1079; see also Keeton v. Wells Fargo Corp., 987 A.2d 1118, 1122
 (D.C. Ct. App. 2010) ("On remand, the trial court should allow discovery, followed by an evidentiary hearing to determine the unconscionability of the arbitration clause."). But see Nitro 
Distributing, Inc., 194 S.W.3d at 352 (holding no error where the trial court declined to hear live witness testimony where it had reviewed a "voluminous mass" of over "3700 pages of documents, affidavits, deposition transcripts and other materials," and reasoned that "the evidence . . . was more than ample to resolve [the parties'] disputes"). In other words, parties should generally have the opportunity to present additional evidence where doing so would further resolution of factual disputes. Providing the parties with an opportunity to demonstrate the existence of an arbitration agreement also promotes our strong policy favoring arbitration agreements where they may be found to exist. See Douglass, 110 Hawai' i at 531, 135 P.3d at 140. 
We therefore hold that, upon a disputed motion to
 
compel arbitration, where there are genuine issues of material
 fact as to the existence of an arbitration agreement, a trial
 court must resolve those issues through an evidentiary hearing. 
We do not propose here to prescribe the scope or conduct of the
 evidentiary hearing except to conclude that what was provided in
 this case was insufficient. At a minimum, where live witness
 testimony or cross examination of affiants would meaningfully
 promote resolution of factual disputes, such evidence should be
 received.
 
C.	 To the extent that the Circuit Court may have intended
its hearing on Nordic's Motion to Compel as an
evidentiary hearing, it was not, and Nordic is entitled
to a proper evidentiary hearing.
 
Despite its suggestion at the hearing on Nordic's
 
Motion for Reconsideration that its prior hearing had constituted
 
an evidentiary hearing, the Circuit Court did not consider that
 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
one whose summary judgment motion is denied goes on to receive a
 
trial or evidentiary hearing. See Haw. R. Civ. P. 56(d). Thus,
 
the court's procedure and hearing fell short of the mark. It is
 not apparent from the Circuit Court's initial order whether it
 regarded the question of incorporation as a matter of law, fact,
 or both. It stated, in relevant part, that "The [Contract]
 incorporates . . . Section 8.1.3, Supplementary and other
 Conditions of Contract contained in the Project Manual[.]" It
 cited the fact that two other sections of the Contract Documents,
 in the context of specifying the Specifications, contemplate the
 Project Manual. But it did not otherwise provide any discussion,
 findings, or conclusions regarding its efforts to discern what
 constituted the contract was, despite finding that the contract
 itself was confusing. The court, in fact, acknowledged at the
 hearing on Nordic's Motion for Reconsideration that there were
 genuine issues of material fact throughout the case. 
Nordic was thus entitled to an evidentiary hearing. 
Contrary to the Circuit Court's characterization of its hearing
 on the Motion to Compel as an evidentiary hearing, it merely
 heard argument regarding previously-submitted evidence. While it
 may not be necessary to hear live testimony in all cases, see,
 e.g., Nitro Distributing, Inc., 194 S.W.3d at 352, disputed
 factual issues cannot be resolved on the basis of an under­developed record, see Keeton, 987 A.2d at 1122; FL-Carrollwood
 Care Ctr., 34 So. 3d at 806 (requiring "a full evidentiary
 hearing" where "the court implicitly determined that a
 substantial issue concerning the making of the agreement was
 raised"). 
Safeway argues that Nordic waived any right to an
 
evidentiary hearing by not requesting one until after the Circuit
 Court issued its ruling. However, as discussed above and as
 Nordic maintains on appeal, the Circuit Court's initial inquiry
 should have focused on, and resolved, whether it could grant the
 Motion to Compel as a matter of law; this it did not do, and
 Nordic was deprived of the proper opportunity to request such a
 hearing. Indeed, in the context of summary judgment proceedings,
 where the court makes a preliminary examination of the evidence,
 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
parties do not waive the right thereafter to present testimony
 
and have their cases heard. See Haw. R. Civ. P. 56(d). Nordic
 
remains entitled to an evidentiary hearing.
 
V. CONCLUSION
 
We therefore vacate the July 1, 2010 Order Denying
 
Petitioner Nordic PCL Construction, Inc.'s Application to Compel
 
Arbitration, and the September 23, 2010 Order Denying Nordic PCL
 Construction, Inc.'s Motion to Clarify, Amend, or Reconsider
 Order Denying Petitioner Nordic PCL Construction Inc.'s 
Application to Compel Arbitration. We remand the case to the
 Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent with this
 opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
David Schulmeister and
 
Jeffrey M. Osterkamp
(Cades Schutte LLP)
 
and
 Wayne M. Sakai,
Michiro Iwanaga, and
Daniel M. Chen
 (Sakai Iwanaga Sutton Law Group)
for Defendant-Appellant
Nordic PCL Construction, Inc.
 
Terence J. O'Toole,
Judith Ann Pavey, and
Wil K. Yamamoto
 (Starn O'Toole Marcus & Fisher)
for Plaintiff-Appellee
Safeway, Inc.
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Lorraine H. Akiba,
Paul B.K. Wong, and
Jordon J. Kimura
 (McCorriston Miller Mukai MacKinnon)
for Defendants/Appellees
Division Seven Consulting of
Hawaii, Inc. and Grant Henry
 
26
 