NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000531
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
DAVID PREBLE, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P.
 NO. 11-1-0054 (CR. NO. 99-2362))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant David Preble (Preble) appeals from
 
the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying
 
Petition for Post-Conviction Relief Without a Hearing" (Order
 Denying Petition) filed by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (Circuit Court).
1/ We affirm.
 
I.
 
In his underlying criminal case, a jury found Preble
 
guilty of eleven counts of sexually assaulting twin sisters and
 their younger sister, when each sister was under the age of
 fourteen. The twins were twelve years old, and their younger
 sister was ten years old, when the sexual assaults were reported
 to the police. The jury found Preble guilty of three counts of 
1/ The Honorable Steven S. Alm presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
first-degree sexual assault and eight counts of third-degree
 
sexual assault.2/
 
Respondent-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) moved for 
extended terms of imprisonment on the ground that Preble was a multiple offender whose commitment for extended terms was necessary for protection of the public. The Circuit Court
3/ 
granted the motion, finding, among other things, that extended terms for the protection of the public were warranted because Preble's assaultive behavior had continued unabated for twenty years from the time he was a juvenile; there was documented evidence of his methamphetamine use; and his assaultive behavior was of an extreme nature and included a 1991 conviction for second-degree robbery, which involved his beating of a 73-year­old man, and his sexual assault of three minor girls under the age of fourteen in the pending case. The Circuit Court sentenced Preble to extended terms of life with the possibility of parole for the first-degree sexual assault convictions and extended terms of ten years of imprisonment for the third-degree sexual assault convictions. The Circuit Court ran these terms concurrently with each other, but consecutively to the ten-year term for second-degree robbery that Preble was still serving. 
The Circuit Court entered its amended judgment on 
November 19, 2001, and Preble filed a direct appeal. In a summary disposition order issued on December 3, 2004, this court affirmed the Circuit Court's amended judgment. State v. Preble, 
No. 24680, 2004 WL 2757909 (Hawai
'i App. Dec. 3, 2004). In our 
decision, we addressed and rejected Preble's claims that: (1) the Circuit Court erred in denying his motion to dismiss the indictment for pre-indictment delay; (2) Preble's right to a speedy trial under Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 
48 (2001) had been violated; (3) Preble's trial counsel was 
2/ In two prior trials, the jury had been unable to reach unanimous
verdicts.
 
3/ The Honorable Marie N. Milks presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ineffective for failing to move to dismiss the indictment based
 
on the destruction of evidence favorable to the defense, namely,
 pubic hair, vaginal swabs, and blood samples taken from one of
 the complaining witnesses; (4) Preble's trial counsel was
 ineffective in failing to move to dismiss the indictment based on
 the statute of limitations; (5) Preble's trial counsel was
 ineffective for failing to object to testimony about a purported
 bad act of Preble; (6) Preble's trial counsel was ineffective in
 her handling of a medical expert witness for the State; (7) the
 Circuit Court erred in denying Preble's motion for bill of
 particulars; (8) the Circuit Court punished Preble for exercising
 his right to a trial; and (9) the testimonies of the three
 complaining witnesses were not credible as a matter of law. 
Preble, 2004 WL 2757909, at *1-3. 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court denied Preble's application 
for writ of certiorari on January 13, 2005, and there is no indication that Preble petitioned the United States Supreme Court for certiorari. Thus, it appears that Preble's convictions and sentences became final in 2005. 
II.
 
On September 26, 2011, Preble filed a "Petition to
 
Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner
 from Custody" (Petition) pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 (2006), which
 is at issue in this appeal. Preble raised the following grounds
 for relief in his Petition: (1) the State destroyed evidence that
 could have been exculpatory evidence and thus failed to disclose
 evidence favorable to the defendant; (2) trial counsel was
 ineffective for failing to move to dismiss the case based on the
 destruction of exculpatory evidence; and (3) appellate counsel
 was ineffective for failing to raise the issue of the destruction
 of exculpatory evidence on appeal. On November 12, 2013, Preble
 moved to amend his Petition to add as an additional ground for
 relief that his extended term sentences were illegal because they
 were based on facts found by a judge, and not a jury. In support 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of this additional ground, Preble cited Apprendi v. New Jersey,
 
530 U.S. 466 (2000), and a federal district court case, Loher v.
 Thomas, Civ. No. 11-00731 LEK-KSC. 
On January 30, 2014, the Circuit Court issued its Order
 
Denying Petition. The Circuit Court denied the Petition without
 a hearing on the grounds that Preble's claims had previously been
 ruled upon, were patently frivolous, or had been waived. This
 appeal followed.
 
III.
 
On appeal, Preble contends that: (1) he was not 
represented by a legally licensed attorney at trial and therefore his convictions should be vacated; (2) the State destroyed evidence of an exculpatory nature; (3) he was illegally held in prison for two years by the Hawai
'i Paroling Authority while his 
case was being investigated; (4) his extended terms of imprisonment were illegal because they were based on judge-found facts; and (5) his attorney on direct appeal was ineffective. As explained below, we conclude that Preble has not demonstrated his entitlement to relief, and we affirm the Order Denying Petition. 
We resolve the claims raised by Preble on appeal as
 
follows: 
A.
 
Preble asserts that his trial counsel, Mary Helen Wong 
(Wong), who was a Deputy Public Defender when she represented Preble, was not a licensed attorney when she represented him and therefore, his convictions cannot stand. Preble, however, did not raise this claim for relief in his Petition. He also does not provide any support for his allegation that Wong was not a licensed attorney when she represented him. Because Preble did not raise the claim that Wong was not a licensed attorney in his Petition, we will not consider it on appeal. State v. 
Sunderland, 115 Hawai
'i 396, 399-400, 168 P.3d 526, 529-30 
(2007); State v. Naeole, 62 Haw. 563, 570, 617 P.2d 820, 826 (1980). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
Preble contends that the State's destruction of
 
evidence he describes as exculpatory in nature, namely, evidence
 
from one of the complaining witnesses from which a DNA analysis
 could have been conducted, violated his rights. However, this
 court addressed Preble's claim in his direct appeal and rejected
 it, concluding that Preble's claim that the destroyed evidence
 would have been favorable to him was "pure speculation." Preble,
 
2004 WL 2757909, at *1. Accordingly, the Circuit Court properly
 denied Preble's claim as having been previously ruled upon. 
C.
 
Preble is not entitled to relief on his claim that he 
was illegally held in prison for two years by the Hawai
'i 
Paroling Authority while his case was being investigated. Preble did not raise this claim in his Petition, and in Preble's direct appeal, this court rejected the substance of Preble's claim by noting that he was kept in prison for parole violations, and not on the sexual assaults that were being investigated. Id. 
D.
 
We reject Preble's claim that his extended term 
sentences were illegal based on Apprendi, as well as the State's concession of error on this point. In Mara v. State, No. CAAP­16-0000118, 2017 WL 680415 (Hawai
'i App. Feb. 21, 2017), we held, 
based on Hawai 'i Supreme Court precedent, that in determining 
whether an extended term sentence imposed by a judge without jury findings is subject to collateral attack, the line of demarcation is the United States Supreme Court's 2007 decision in Cunningham v. California, 549 U.S. 270 (2007). Mara, 2017 WL 680415, at *3. 
In other words, extended term sentences that became final before
 Cunningham are not subject to Apprendi-based collateral attacks. 
Id. at *5. Here, Preble's convictions and sentences became final
 in 2005, before Cunningham was decided, and therefore, we reject
 his Apprendi-based challenges to his extended term sentences.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
E.
 
We also reject Preble's claim that his appellate 
counsel provided ineffective assistance. An Apprendi claim would 
have been denied on direct appeal, so appellate counsel was not ineffective for failing to raise an Apprendi claim to challenge Preble's extended term sentences. See State v. Kaua, 102 Hawai
'i 
1, 72 P.3d 473 (2003); Mara, 2017 WL 680415. With respect to other issues identified by Preble, his appellate counsel raised these issues on appeal, and they were considered and rejected by this court. While Preble attacks the manner in which appellate counsel raised these issues, he fails to meet his burden of showing ineffective assistance, as he fails to demonstrate that his appellate counsel omitted an "appealable issue" -- an issue which raises "an error or omission . . . resulting in the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 442, 465-67, 848 P.2d 966, 
977-78 (1993). 
IV.
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Order Denying
 
Petition.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, March 17, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
David Preble

 
Petitioner-Appellant, pro se.
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Brian R. Vincent

 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Respondent-Appellee.
 
6

 