  
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000451
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ROICHY PESET, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 11-1-0440)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Roichy Peset ("Peset") appeals from
 
the Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence, filed on April
 
9, 2012, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit ("Circuit
 Court").
1 After a jury trial, the Circuit Court entered judgment
 
against Peset for one count of Theft in the Second Degree, in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") § 708-831(1)(a).
2
 
Peset was sentenced to five years probation with special
 conditions, including a term of imprisonment of one year, with
 credit for time served. On appeal, Peset argues that there was
 not substantial evidence to support his conviction.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Peset's point of error as follows:
 
Considering the evidence in the light most favorable to 
the State, as we must, there was substantial evidence to support Peset's conviction. See State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 
1
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 
2
 HRS § 708-831(1)(a) provides: "A person commits the offense of
theft in the second degree if the person commits theft . . . [o]f property
from the person of another[.]" H AW. REV. STAT. § 708-831(1)(a) (Supp. 2012). 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998). The jury heard undisputed testimony that
 
Peset approached Complainant and used a knife to cut open a
 plastic bag held by Complainant.
3 According to Peset, his intent
 
was to take money, including a ten-dollar bill he had observed
 inside the bag. Peset, however, disputes that he took the money,
 contending instead that an unnamed friend ran off with the
 plastic bag after it fell to the ground.
 
Complainant, to the contrary, testified that upon
 
slicing the bag, it was Peset that "picked up" the money and
 walked away. Complainant testified that Peset was the only
 person involved. After being flagged down, one of the police
 officers observed that Complainant was holding the "top half,
 which is like the handles" of a plastic bag. Both Complainant
 and a police officer testified to observing Peset toss a knife
 into nearby vegetation; the officer recovered the knife and
 Complainant confirmed that it was Peset's. Police found two one­
4
dollar bills and change on Peset's person,  but did not find a
ten dollar bill. 
Complainant's testimony was mostly corroborated by 
either Peset's police interview, related testimony, or police officers' on-scene observations. 
While the jury heard testimony 
that Complainant suffers from schizophrenia, including visual and auditory hallucinations, and that he was hearing and seeing things "a little bit" the day of these events, the jury plainly credited Complainant's testimony regarding those aspects which Peset disputed. Contrary to Peset's argument on appeal, it is not our place to second-guess the jury's credibility determination. See State v. Martinez, 101 Hawai' i 332, 340, 68 
P.3d 606, 614 (2003). Nor do we find dispositive the fact that police did not recover the ten-dollar bill. The jury may have reasonably inferred that Peset disposed of it prior to or upon arrival of the police officers. See State v. Agard, 113 Hawai' i 
3
 Peset did not testify, but the jury heard a recorded police
interview with Peset, and the interviewing Honolulu Police Officer testified
about that interview.
 
4
 Complainant testified to having had one ten dollar bill and two
one dollar bills in the bag.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
321, 324, 151 P.3d 802, 805 (2007). The testimony at trial
 
provided substantial evidence to support Peset's conviction. 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Probation Sentence, filed on April 9, 2012, in the Circuit
 
Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 10, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Jon N. Ikenaga,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Brandon H. Ito,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
3
 