NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-20-0000717 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
IN THE INTEREST OF AB and BB 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-S NO. 14-00235) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Appellant Mother (
Mother) appeals from the Order 
Terminating Parental Rights, filed on October 21, 2020, and the 
Orders Concerning Child Protective Act, filed on October 22, 2020 (collectively, the 
TPR Orders), in the Family Court of the First 
Circuit (Family Court).1  Mother also challenges, in part, the 
Family Court's November 19, 2020, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (FOFs and COLs).  Mother's parental rights to 
her children, AB and BB (collectively, Children), were terminated and permanent plans with the goal of adoption were approved.
2 
1/ The Honorable Jessi L.K. Hall presided. 
2/ The parental rights of Children's legal and natural father 
(Father ) – who did not participate in these proceedings and was defaulted –
were also terminated. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mother raises four points of error on appeal, 
contending that:  (1) the TPR Orders are wrong because there were 
less restrictive measures to ensure the best interests of the Childen; (2) FOF 90 is clearly erroneous because it lumped Mother and Father together, even though they are divorced, Mother was willing and able to provide Children with a safe family home, with the assistance of a service plan it was reasonably foreseeable that Mother would become willing and able to provide Children with a safe family home within a reasonable period of time, and the May 6, 2020 Permanent Plans (Permanent Plans) and 
goal of adoption were not in the best interests of the Children; 
(3) FOF 91 is clearly erroneous because Mother was willing and able to provide Children with a safe family home, with the assistance of a service plan it was reasonably foreseeable that Mother would become willing and able to provide Children with a safe family home within a reasonable period of time, and the Permanent Plans and goal of adoption were not in the best interests of the Children; and (4) COLS 15, 16, and 17 are wrong because Mother completed all of her services and it is implausible that she could have completed all of her services and still could not provide a safe family home for the Children, even with the assistance of a service plan. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Mother's points of error as follows: 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
FOFs 90 and 91 and COLs 15, 16, and 17 state: 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
. . . . 
90. On September 30, 2020, pursuant to [Hawaii
Revised Statutes ( HRS)] § 587A-33(a), the court found
by clear and convincing evidence that:  (1) Mother and
Father were not willing and able to provide theChildren with a safe family home, even with theassistance of a service plan; (2) it was notreasonably foreseeable that Mother and Father wouldbecoming [sic] willing and able to provide theChildren with a safe family home, even with theassistance of a service plan, within a reasonableperiod of time; and (3) the Permanent Plans, with thegoal of adoption, dated May 6, 2020, were in the bestinterests of the Children. 
91. Accordingly, on September 30, 2020 the
Court entered orders granting the DHS' Motion to TPRpursuant to HRS § 587A-33(b), terminating Mother andFather's parental rights, awarding permanent custodyof the Children to the DHS, and ordering the permanentplans, with the goals of adoption, dated May 6, 2020. The Order Terminating Parental Rights and the Lettersof Permanent Custody were filed on October 21, 2020. 
. . . . 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
. . . . 
15. Mother and Father are not presently
willing and able to provide the children with a safefamily home, even with the assistance of a serviceplan. 
16. It is not reasonably foreseeable that
Mother and Father will become willing and able toprovide the child[ren] with a safe family home, evenwith the assistance of a service plan, within areasonable period of time. 
17. The Permanent Plans dated May 6, 2020,
with the goal of adoption, are in the best interest ofthe children. 
As a preliminary matter, we note that the Children 
entered foster care in January of 2015.  Mother contends that 
FOFs 90 and 91 are clearly erroneous and COLs 15, 16, and 17 are wrong because Mother was willing and able to provide a safe family home, especially with the assistance of a service plan, itwas reasonably foreseeable Mother would become willing and able  
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to provide a safe family home, especially with the assistance of 
a service plan, within a reasonable period of time, and the Permanent Plans with the goal of adoption were not in the best interest of the children.  Mother challenges FOF 90 because the Family Court "lumped together father and mother in the finding of fact, even through the two are divorced."  Mother claims that there was no clear and convincing evidence that she was unwilling or unable to provide a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan.  Mother notes that she completed all of the services identified in the service plan, that she had homeschooled the Children,
3 and a witness, Dr. Taketa-Wong, 
testified that Mother's house was livable and that Dr. Taketa-Wong found no signs of abuse, bruising, or injury.  Mother submits that "the court can terminate parental rights if the child is likely to be adopted.  That was not the case here, especially as AB was only a few months away from his 18th Birthday. . .  Thus, continued supervision of [Mother] and a continued proposed reunification plan was clearly in the best interests of AB and BB[.]" 
FOF 90 is not clearly erroneous because it stated both 
Mother and Father as unwilling and unable to provide a safe family home.  Generally speaking, marital status is not implicated in a proceeding related to the termination of parental 
3/ This appears to be in response to the fact that when BB entered
foster care at age 9, he had never attended school. 
4  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rights.  See HRS § 587A-33 (2018).4  The Family Court found 
Father had been defaulted in the case since November 2, 2015, and 
had expressed to Petitioner-Appellee the State of Hawai# i, 
Department of Human Services (DHS) that he did not want to 
reunify with the Children or participate in any services; thus, 
Father was unwilling and unable to provide a safe family home. 
4/ HRS § 587A-33 provides, in relevant part: 
§ 587A-33  Termination of parental rights hearing.
(a) At a termination of parental rights hearing, the court
shall determine whether there exists clear and convincingevidence that: 
(1) A child's parent whose rights are subjectto termination is not presently willingand able to provide the parent's childwith a safe family home, even with theassistance of a service plan; 
(2) It is not reasonably foreseeable that thechild's parent whose rights are subject totermination will become willing and ableto provide the child with a safe familyhome, even with the assistance of aservice plan, within a reasonable periodof time, which shall not exceed two yearsfrom the child's date of entry into fostercare; 
(3) The proposed permanent plan is in the bestinterests of the child.  In reaching thisdetermination, the court shall: 
(A) Presume that it is in the best 
interests of the child to be promptly and permanently placed withresponsible and competent substituteparents and family in a safe andsecure home; and 
(B)  Give greater weight to thepresumption that the permanent planis in the child's best interest, theyounger the child is upon thechild's date of entry into fostercare; and 
(4) The child consents to the permanentplan if the child is at leastfourteen years old, unless the courtconsults with the child in camera and finds that it is in the best interest of the child to proceedwithout the child's consent. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The FOFs concerning Father were not the basis for the Family 
Court's termination of Mother's parental rights.  There were independent and unrelated bases for terminating Mother's parental rights.  
We conclude that there was clear and convincing 
evidence that Mother was not presently willing and able to provide a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan, even though she had completed services.  Unchallenged FOFs include that, in 2011, DHS was contacted several times due to Mother's violent, threatening, and out of control behaviors involving the Children.  In 2014, DHS assumed temporary foster custody of the Children through police protective custody and confirmed physical threat of abuse, neglect, and educational neglect.  At the same time, Mother was evicted by the police, and the home was observed to be unsanitary, filthy, and strongly smelling of urine; the home had very little food, several windows were broken, and the Children were not enrolled in school and were socially isolated. 
Jahona Jackson (Jackson), a DHS human services 
professional qualified to testify as an expert in the field of social work and child protective and child welfare services, testified that both AB and BB have high needs.  AB, who is autistic, has needs that are more physical, and BB needs emotional stability. 
It was reported that by February 15, 2019, Mother 
completed recommended services in her service plan such as parenting classes, individual therapy, and anger management, but 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not intensive in-home family therapy to address topics such as 
reconnection, coping skills, developing a support system, community linking, and parenting a child with special needs. Although Mother had completed an anger management course, she had inconsistent insight and use of skills, which caused her ability to manage her anger to remain a concern.  
Among other incidents that occurred after Mother 
received services, with respect to AB, in April 2019, Mother decided not to give AB all of his prescribed medication during an unsupervised weekend visit because she wanted to see how AB would do without the medication.  Mother reported that AB attacked her while she was driving on the freeway.  In July 2019, when AB was returned from another visit with Mother, there were still six tablets in the bottle for his prescription medication, indicating that Mother had not provided AB with his medication as prescribed.  Mother claimed information from the internet indicated AB's prescribed medication was poisoning him and instructed the resource caregivers to stop giving it to AB.  Jackson testified that Mother displayed no insight as to the possible harmful and life-threatening effects of altering AB's medications without medical guidance.  
In May 2020, AB was hospitalized for water 
intoxication, which occurred after Mother allowed or gave AB more than twelve liters of water.  Even after being advised by hospital personnel not to give AB any more fluids while waiting to be assessed, Mother gave AB three more liters of water.  AB cannot regulate his food or beverage intake, but Mother suggested 
7  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that AB stop one of his medications because she thought it made 
AB repeatedly ask for water.  Jackson stated Mother did not show insight as to administering basic needs of a child with AB's conditions, because a caregiver would limit the amount of AB's water by redirection or just saying no.  
DHS's concerns about Mother's ability to parent BB 
include that BB did not believe that Mother would be able to provide the structure he would need, BB was exposed to emotional and mental trauma, and Mother's absence from 2015 to 2017 caused trauma to BB, who was fifteen years old at the time of trial.
5 
Mother would randomly show up to a foster home without having visitation, and demand to see the Children for their birthdays but then would not participate in the family court case to reunify with the Children.  Jackson did not think that Mother had addressed the issues that necessitated removal of the Children because Mother completed services, but failed to display insight into the Children's needs.  Jackson stated that Mother is not able to provide for BB's emotional and psychological needs, she failed to show insight or acknowledgments, she has not expressed any responsibility concerning how the Children are developing, and she does not think that she contributed to the Children's 
5/ FOFs 26 and 27, which are not challenged on appeal, state: 
26. Mother was absent in this case and defaulted for 
over two years, from April 22, 2015 through June 14, 2017. 
During this time, Mother did not contact the Children ormaintain any contact with the DHS.  The DHS made several reasonable attempts to contact Mother and engage Mother inservices by calling her and sending her emails. 
27. Ms. Jackson testified that during this time
period she attempted to call Mother from other phone numbersand that when Mother realized it was Ms. Jackson, Motherwould hang up. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
emotional and/or developmental state.  During therapy sessions 
involving Mother and BB, Mother was told not to do certain things, but Mother persisted in those things, such as asking BB to live with her, promising BB things, offering BB things, and insisting on giving BB a cell phone during therapeutic services. Mother denied such actions, but the Family Court did not find Mother's testimony to be credible.  The Family Court found Jackson to be a credible witness. 
Jennifer Cartwright (Cartwright), BB's therapist, 
testified that Mother was defensive and unable to admit to some of her parenting issues.  Cartwright had concerns regarding Mother's ability to provide for BB's safety and needs because Mother was unable to recognize what is in BB's best interest; Mother instead tried to bribe BB with games and other things. Cartwright stated that Mother cannot stand up to BB and Mother gave in to whatever BB wanted.  In Cartwright's opinion, it is not in BB's best interest to reunify with Mother because further dragging the case on would not allow BB to move forward.  The Family Court found Cartwright to be a credible witness.  
The hearing on whether to terminate Mother's parental 
rights began on July 23, 2020, although from April to June 2020, DHS was not able to determine Mother's whereabouts. 
Mother testified that AB was not enrolled in school at 
the time DHS became involved because he was abused at Ewa Elementary School, BB was also abused at public school, and BB asked to do home school.  Mother did not, however, register with or inform the Department of Education that the Children were 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
being homeschooled nor certify curriculum compliance.  As noted 
above, the Family Court found Mother was not credible. 
Mother's reliance upon Dr. Taketa-Wong's opinion that 
Mother's house was livable is unwarranted because Dr. Taketa-Wong visited Mother's residence in 2013, while DHS reported that the family home was unsanitary and filthy in November of 2014.  Likewise, Dr. Taketa-Wong's statement that she found no signs of abuse, bruising, or injury to AB is unhelpful because she saw AB in 2013, while DHS observed bruising and marks when it became involved in November of 2014.  In any case, Jackson clarified that there was no allegation of physical abuse, only threat of abuse, neglect, and physical neglect. 
For these reasons, as well as the entirety of the 
evidence in the record of appeal, we conclude that there was clear and convincing evidence that Mother was not presently willing and able to provide a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan.  Even after completing services, Mother was not able to provide for AB's physical needs by preventing harm.  Mother was not able to provide for BB's emotional and psychological needs, by recognizing the harm she caused and following his therapist's guidelines for conjoint therapy sessions which would lead to reunification.  Mother disengaged from the case in the months immediately prior to the start of the hearing seeking to terminate her parental rights (after a previous absence from the case, without maintaining contact with the Children or DHS, for a period of over two years). 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We further conclude that there was clear and convincing 
evidence that it was not foreseeable that Mother would become 
willing and able to provide a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan, within a reasonable period of time not to exceed two years from the date the Children entered foster care.  The Children entered foster care in January of 2015.  At the time the hearing on terminating Mother's parental rights began on July 20, 2020, the Children had been in foster care for five and a half years.  Clearly, it was not foreseeable that Mother would become willing and able to provide the children with a safe family home within two years of entering foster care.  In addition, Cartwright testified that it would take two more years of family and individual therapy before Mother could have unsupervised contact with BB.  Thus, it would have been at least another two years before Mother could be reunified with the Children.    
Mother challenges the Family Court's approval of the 
Permanent Plans with adoption as the goal for both AB and BB. Mother incorrectly suggests that the court can only terminate parental rights if the child is likely to be adopted or that family supervision or continued efforts at reunification is possible, after a finding that a parent is not willing and able to provide a safe family home and it is not reasonably foreseeable a parent will become willing and able to provide a safe family home.  Rather, the Family Court must find that the proposed permanent plan is in the best interest of the child before terminating parental rights.  HRS § 587A-33(a)(3).  A 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 permanent plan must state whether the permanency goal will be 
achieved through adoption, legal guardianship, or permanent custody, with adoption being the preferred option, unless there is a compelling reason that legal guardianship or permanent custody is in a child's best interest.  HRS § 587A-32(a)(1) (2018).  Thus, the likelihood of adoption is not required before parental rights may be terminated; family supervision or continued reunification efforts is not an option for a permanent plan.  Because AB and BB were over fourteen years of age at the time Mother's parental rights were terminated, AB and BB were required to consent to the permanent plan or the court was required to find it was in the Children's best interest to proceed without their consent.  HRS § 587A-33(a)(4).  BB consented to the permanent plan with the goal of adoption and the Family Court found that AB was not competent to consent to a permanent plan.  Although AB would be turning eighteen a short time after Mother's parental rights were terminated, DHS stated that it would extend foster care past AB's 18th birthday to ensure that he has a caregiver.  Mother provided no argument that it was in the Children's best interest that the permanent plan goal should be legal guardianship or permanent custody. Therefore, we conclude that FOFs 90 and 91 are not clearly erroneous and COLs 15, 16, and 17 are not wrong. 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, the Family Court's October 21, 2020, 
and October 22, 2020 TPR Orders are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, August 27, 2021. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
Chief Judge 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
Associate Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
Associate Judge Shawn A. Luiz, for Respondent/Mother-Appellant. 
Scott D. Boone, 
Julio C. Herrera,Ian T. Tsuda, Deputy Attorneys General, for Petitioner-Appellee Department of Human Services. 
Michelle K. Moorehead,
(Legal Aid Society of Hawai
#i), 
Guardian Ad Litem for BB 
13 