______________________________________ NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-15-0000442 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE APPLICATION OF 
CHARLES EDMOND DAVIS,
Situate in Waikiki, Honolulu, Oahu. 
IN RE PETITIONERS LILY TAI NOMURA, RICHARD Y.S.
LEE, LONG LIFE FOUNDATION, a Hawaii non-profit
corporation, and ALOHA RAINBOW INVESTMENTS, a Hawaii
corporation affecting Transfer Certificate of Title
Nos. 1053288 and 182404 
APPEAL FROM THE LAND AND TAX APPEAL COURT 
(1 L.D. No. 14-1-3091) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.) 
Petitioners-Appellants Lily Tai Nomura, Richard Y.S. 
Lee, Long Life Foundation, and Aloha Rainbow Investments, Inc. 
(
Petitioners) appeal from the Final Judgment entered on January 
23, 2015 (Judgment), by the Land and Tax Appeal Court of the 
State of Hawai# i (Land Court).1/ Petitioners also challenge the 
Land Court's January 23, 2015 Order Granting [Appellee-] 
1/ The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Respondent Association of Apartment Owners of Century Center's 
[(AOAO's)] Motion for Summary Judgment (Order Granting Summary 
Judgment) and September 24, 2015 Order Denying Petitioner's [sic] Motion to Reconsider the Court's [Order Granting Summary 
Judgment] and to Set Aside Final Judgment (Order Denying 
Reconsideration). 
Petitioners raise two points of error on appeal, 
contending that: 
(1) the Land Court erred in finding and 
concluding that the AOAO's Second Restated Declaration of 
Condominium Property Regime of the Century Center (Declaration)/ 
provides for a contractual power of sale to conduct a nonjudicial foreclosure; and (2) the Land Court erred in finding and concluding that Petitioners' Petition to Enjoin or Cancel a Wrongful Foreclosure and Expunge or Strike Doc. Nos. 9010254 and 9010255 From TCT 1053288 (Petition) was untimely under Aames 
Funding Corp. v. Mores, 107 Hawai# i 95, 110 P.3d 1042 (2005). 2
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve the parties' points of error as follows: 
(1) Petitioners contend, inter alia, that the 
Declaration merely provides that the AOAO may foreclose as provided by the Condominium Property Act, that the applicable 
2/ The AOAO submits that an earlier version of the Declaration was in 
effect at the time the disputed foreclosure process was initiated, but states
that the earlier version contains identical language regarding AOAOforeclosures. For the purposes of this appeal, we will refer to the versionof Section H of the Declaration quoted by Petitioners, recognizing that theversion of Section H quoted by the AOAO may in fact be applicable, but thatthe parties agree and this court recognizes that the differences are notmaterial to resolution of this appeal. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statutes do not grant the AOAO with a power of sale of the 
Petitioners' units, that the Declaration does not unambiguously give the AOAO a power of sale over its units, and that therefore, the AOAO did not have the power to foreclose using nonjudicial power of sale foreclosure procedures. 
The AOAO contends, inter alia, that the language of the 
Declaration stating a lien against an apartment "may be foreclosed by the Board or Managing Agent as provided by said Condominium Property Act," permits the AOAO to foreclose using the nonjudicial or power of sale foreclosure procedures set forth in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) chapter 667 (2016). 
Section H of the Declaration provides, in relevant 
part: 
The Board of Directors of the Association (herein called the
"Board") shall from time to time assess the common expensesagainst all the apartments in their respective proportionateshares, and the unpaid amount of such assessments againstany apartment shall constitute a lien against such apartmentwhich may be foreclosed by the Board or Managing Agent asprovided by said Condominium Property Act, . . . providedthat thirty (30) days' prior written notice of intention toforeclose shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to all personshaving any interest in such apartment as shown in theAssociation's record of ownership. 
This court recently addressed the issue of whether an 
express power of sale in favor of an association must exist, in 
the association's bylaws or another enforceable agreement with its unit owners, in order for the association to avail itself of the nonjudicial power of sale foreclosure procedures set forth in HRS chapter 667. See Sakal v. Ass'n. of Apt. Owners of Hawaiian Monarch, 143 Hawai# i 219, 426 P.3d 443 (App. 2018).
/ After 3
3/ On December 30, 2018, the Hawai #i Supreme Court rejected
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellee Association of Apartment Owners of Hawaiian
(continued...) 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reviewing the Hawai# i Foreclosures statute, HRS chapter 667, this 
court concluded: 
[A] power of sale is an authority reserved by or
granted to a person or entity to dispose of another person's
vested property interest, for the first party's own benefitor the benefit of a third party. We will not infer that such significant powers have been granted over an entireclass of property in the absence of a clear legislative actor, with respect to a particular association or property, byexpress authorization in a contract entered into by, orotherwise binding on, the affected parties. HRS chapter 667provides for various alternative processes or proceduresthrough which a lienholder might foreclose on a property,but it does not grant a lienholder association with a powerof sale over a unit owner's property. Rather, such power ofsale must otherwise exist in order for the association to lawfully avail itself of the nonjudicial foreclosurealternative. 
Sakal, 143 Hawai< i at 226, 426 P.3d at 450 (citation omitted). 
After reviewing the Hawai# i condominium property regime 
statutes, HRS chapters 514A and 514B, this court further 
concluded: 
HRS § 514A-90 does not authorize an association to conduct a
nonjudicial or power of sale foreclosure other than asprovided in HRS chapter 667, which in turn does notauthorize a nonjudicial power of sale foreclosure absent anotherwise existing power of sale.
and 
[L]ike HRS § 514A-90, HRS § 514B-146 does not authorize anassociation to conduct a nonjudicial or power of saleforeclosure other than as provided in HRS chapter 667, whichdoes not authorize a nonjudicial or power of saleforeclosure absent a power of sale. 
Sakal, 143 Hawai< i at 228, 426 P.3d at 452. 
Upon review of the pertinent language in the 
Declaration, we conclude that the Declaration does not give the 
3/(...continued)
Monarch's Application for Writ of Certiorari. The petitioner association had
argued, inter alia,  that the Condominium Property Act authorized and empowered
associations to exercise nonjudicial or power of sale foreclosures, an
argument that this court rejected. On January 17, 2019, the supreme courtaccepted Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant Christian Sakal's Application for Writof Certiorari. The petitioner apartment owner argued that this court erred byconcluding that, under the circumstances of the case, the petitioner apartmentowner was precluded from recovering title to the foreclosed-upon unit. This latter petition remains pending before the supreme court. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
AOAO a power of sale over its units and, as held in Sakal, the 
statutes relied upon by the AOAO do not grant associations powers of sale over all condominium units. Accordingly, we conclude that the Land Court erred in finding and concluding that the Declaration establishes a contractual right for the AOAO to conduct nonjudicial or power of sale foreclosures and erred in granting summary judgment on that basis. 
(2) Petitioners contend that the Land Court erred in 
concluding that the Petition was untimely under Aames. 
In Aames, the supreme court concluded as to Land Court 
property, 
inter alia, that "defenses to mortgages foreclosed upon 
by exercise of the mortgagee's power of sale must be raised 'prior to the entry of a new certificate of title.' HRS § 501-118." Aames, 107 Hawai# i at 102, 110 P.3d at 1049. The supreme 
court further concluded that, when objections were filed after, rather than prior to, the issuance of a new transfer certificate of title (
TCT), title in the subject property had become 
conclusive and unimpeachable. Id. at 102-03, 110 P.3d at 1049-50. 
Here, as the AOAO acknowledges, there was no entry of a 
new certificate of title because the interest foreclosed upon was a leasehold interest. Thus, we conclude that Aames is inapplicable. See Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. Omiya, 142 
Hawai# i 
439, 420 P.3d 370 (2018) (strictly construing HRS § 501-118 and holding that the issuance of a new certificate of title, not some other indicia of transfer such as the assignment of a new TCT 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
number, is necessary to render title conclusive and unimpeachable 
under HRS § 501-118). 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred 
when it entered summary judgment based on its finding and conclusion that "filing of the petition is untimely under the Hawaii State Supreme Court's decision in Aames Funding Corp. v. Mores, 107 Hawai# i 95 (2005)."
/ 4
In light of our ruling on the Order Granting Summary 
Judgment, we need not address the Order Denying Reconsideration. 
For these reasons, the Land Court's January 23, 2015 
Judgment is vacated, and this case is remanded to the Land Court for further proceedings. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 28, 2019. 
On the briefs: Gary Victor Dubin,
Frederick J. Arensmeyer,Daniel J. O'Meara,(Dubin Law Offices),for Petitioners-Appellants. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge 
R. Laree McGuire,
Jennifer M. Porter,(Porter McGuire Kiakona & Chow),for Respondent-Appellee. Associate Judge 
4/ We do not reach potential alternative grounds for summary judgment
that were not raised in AOAO's November 18, 2014 motion for summary judgmentand not relied upon in the Land Court's Order Granting Summary Judgment. 
6 