NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-21-0000040 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JOY BARUA, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(HONOLULU DIVISION)
(CASE NO. 1DTA-18-02991) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Joy Barua (Barua) appeals from the 
December 29, 2020 Findings of Fact [(FOFs)] and Order Granting 
Motion to Dismiss Without Prejudice for Lack of Prosecution 
(Dismissal Order) entered by the Honolulu Division of the 
District Court of the First Circuit (District Court).1 This is 
Barua's second appeal from the dismissal without prejudice of the 
charge against him. 
1 The Honorable Kenneth J. Shimozono ( Judge Shimozono ) entered the
Dismissal Order.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On August 26, 2018, Barua was arrested, and on 
September 14, 2018, Barua was charged via Complaint with one 
count of Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an 
Intoxicant, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 291E-
61(a)(1) and/or (3) (Supp. 2017) (OVUII). On February 14, 2019, 
the OVUII charge against Barua was dismissed for lack of 
prosecution. 
In Barua's first appeal, CAAP-19-0000180, Barua argued 
that the District Court made inadequate findings to support the dismissal without prejudice and that the case against him should be dismissed with prejudice without a remand for further 
findings. The State of Hawai# i (State) agreed that the District 
Court's findings were inadequate, but argued that Barua's failure 
to order more than a single transcript from the District Court proceedings rendered the record on appeal inadequate for meaningful review of the District Court's exercise of its discretion. 
This court concluded that the record was inadequate 
for meaningful review of the District Court's exercise of its discretion. The District Court's initial judgment of dismissal was vacated and the case was remanded for the District Court to enter findings to support its decision or for further proceedings consistent with this court's Summary Disposition Order in CAAP-19-0000180. 
On remand, the District Court entered the Dismissal 
Order. 
The dismissal of the charge against Barua was based on 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the State's lack of prosecution for failing, at multiple 
hearings, to present witnesses to challenge the allegations of constitutional violations raised in Barua's November 6, 2018 
motions to suppress (collectively, Motion to Suppress).  The 
District Court's exercise of its discretion to dismiss without 
prejudice was based on the court's findings that Barua "shares responsibility" for the delay in the prompt disposition of the Motion to Suppress because, although counsel appeared on his behalf, Barua did not appear at three of the hearings on his Motion to Suppress. 
Barua raises two points of error in this appeal, 
contending that: (1) either the District Court should have dismissed the case with prejudice or the District Court failed to enter accurate and fair findings in support of the dismissal without prejudice; and (2) the District Court erred in refusing 
to issue FOFs or conclusions of law (COLs) as to why Barua could 
not waive his right to be present for the suppression hearings in 
this case. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the relevant legal authorities, we resolve Barua's points of error as follows: 
(1) Barua includes multiple arguments in support of 
his first point of error. In sum, he challenges various of the 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
District Court's FOFs, alleged omissions from the FOFs, and the 
District Court's conclusion that Barua contributed to the delay because the suppression hearings would not have commenced without his physical presence. 
Barua argues that he did not move for dismissal, as is 
noted in the Dismissal Order. This contention is not supported by the record. At the February 14, 2019 hearing, Barua's counsel stated, "you should grant the motion to suppress and/or dismiss the case." 
Barua argues that the District Court clearly erred in 
certain FOFs concerning the hearings on the Motion to Suppress. For clarity, these issues are addressed in the following context. 
Upon review of the transcripts of proceedings, it is 
clear that on October 22, 2018, the Honorable Darolyn Lendio Heim set a suppression hearing for November 15, 2018. While there was some confusion about that at the November 5, 2018 hearing before the Honorable Sherri-Ann L. Iha, Judge Iha stated that the court was "not vacating anything," in response to defense counsel's request not to vacate the November 15, 2018 hearing date. 
A hearing was held before the Honorable William M. 
Domingo on November 15, 2018, which both parties and the court treated as a hearing on the Motion to Suppress, as well as Barua's motions to compel discovery. The State was not ready to proceed on the Motion to Suppress. The State acknowledged that it had made a mistake in not sending out any subpoenas for the 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Motion to Suppress. On that basis, Judge Domingo reset the 
hearing on the Motion to Suppress to December 6, 2018. Although it was stated on the record that Barua was not present (pursuant 
to a Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule [43] waiver), 
Judge Domingo's only statement in response was "[a]ll right," 
Barua's absence was not referenced as a reason for delay, and Judge Domingo confirmed, with no objection from the State, that "we'll charge everything to the State." 
A hearing was held on December 6, 2018, before Judge 
Iha. The transcript does not reflect Barua's presence at the hearing; however, Barua's absence was neither the basis for further delay nor commented on in any way. The hearing primarily addressed outstanding discovery materials from the State. While the exchange between the parties and the court was a bit terse, Judge Iha ultimately stated, "Well, we're not going to do the hearings on the motion to suppress (indiscernible) continue this to [January] 9th?" Barua had sought to get the outstanding discovery materials before the suppression hearing without the suppression hearing delaying the January 9th trial date. Judge Iha converted the January 9th trial date to a hearings on motions date and said that a new trial date would be set that day. 
The January 9, 2019 hearing was held before Judge 
Shimozono. Corporation Counsel appeared on behalf of the 
Honolulu Police Department's (HPD's) Communications Division, as 
well as its Central Receiving Division, and requested at least an 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
additional week extension to get responsive records to Barua. 
Judge Shimozono indicated that the court would grant HPD additional time, setting a January 16, 2019 deadline for HPD, and set a trial date. Barua noted that they were set for hearing on the Motion to Suppress and that, again, the State did not subpoena its witnesses for the hearing. The State confirmed that no officers were subpoenaed. After considerable back-and-forth regarding who would be charged with what time for HRPP Rule 48 purposes (and no decision being made on that issue), a further hearing was set on February 7, 2019, on the Motion to Suppress, and no trial date was set. Again, the hearing transcript does not reflect Barua's presence at the hearing; however, Barua's absence was neither the basis for further delay nor commented on in any way. 
The February 7, 2019 hearing was held before Judge 
Shimozono. Defense counsel noted that he wished to waive Barua's presence at the hearing. After some discussion of materials that had still not been produced by HPD, defense counsel represented to the court that the State was not ready to proceed on the Motion to Suppress and asked that the Motion to Suppress be granted. At that point, Judge Shimozono noted that the Motion to Suppress was an evidentiary hearing and that Barua was not present. Defense counsel stated that they "had been proceeding under [an HRPP] Rule 43 waiver." The District Court informed defense counsel that it was not waiving the defendant's presence 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and, although noting that the State was not ready on the Motion 
to Suppress, the defendant did not have prior permission to be excused from the hearing. When asked the basis for not waiving the defendant's presence, the District Court stated that it was evidentiary, "[a]nd the court requires the defendant to be here, just like the trial if it's evidentiary." The District Court denied the defense's request for FOFs and COLs as to why the court was requiring the defendant's presence. After confirming with the State that it could be ready in a week, the District Court reset the hearing on the Motion to Suppress to February 14, 2019, as well as the discovery status and motions to compel. 
The February 14, 2019 hearing was held before Judge 
Shimozono. Barua was present in the courtroom. The State informed the District Court that the State was not ready to proceed on the Motion to Suppress. The parties and the court reviewed and confirmed that there were four hearings on the Motion to Suppress where the State was not ready to proceed, November 15, 2018, January 9, 2019, February 7, 2019, and February 14, 2019. The District Court orally ruled: 
THE COURT: Okay. So one, two, three, four. Okay. So what 
I'm going to do is I'm going to deny the State's request tocontinue this for APT and motions. I'm going to grant thedefense motion to dismiss. I'm going to dismiss it without
prejudice. 
 
To the extent that the FOFs in the Dismissal Order are 
inconsistent with the above, we are left with a definite and firm 
conviction that a mistake has been made and they are clearly 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
erroneous. As discussed above, Judge Lendio Heim set November 
15, 2018, for a hearing on the Motion to Suppress and the State was not ready to proceed on that day. Thus, there were four, not three dates where the Motion to Suppress was set for hearing and the State was not ready to proceed.  The record does not support 
an implied finding that the December 6, 2018 hearing on the Motion to Suppress was continued because Barua was not present.
 32
We conclude that the District Court (Judge Shimozono 
presiding) abused its discretion when it grounded its decision to dismiss the charges against Barua without prejudice on Barua's absence at the November 15, 2018 hearing before Judge Domingo, the December 6, 2018 hearing before Judge Iha, and after-the-fact, the January 9, 2019 hearing before Judge Shimozono. 
We recognize that HRPP Rule 43 generally requires a 
defendant's presence at pre-trial evidentiary hearings.  
4 
2 At the February 14, 2019 hearing, the District Court recognized
the State's lack of readiness at four hearings, but in the Dismissal Order,
the District Court found that the State was not ready at three hearings. In the State's appellate brief, the State references its four failures to beready to proceed on the Motion to Suppress, while arguing that the DismissalOrder should be affirmed. 
3 The Dismissal Order states, in paragraph 13.b., that "[t]he State
was ready to proceed on December 6, 2018, but the Defendant was not present." 
4 HRPP Rule 43 provides in part: 
Rule 43. PRESENCE OF THE DEFENDANT. 
(a) Presence required. The defendant shall be 
present at the arraignment, at the time of the plea, at
evidentiary pretrial hearings, at every stage of the trialincluding the impaneling of the jury and the return of theverdict, and at the imposition of sentence, except asotherwise provided by this Rule.
(b) Continued presence not required.  The further 
progress of a pretrial evidentiary hearing or of the trialto and including the return of the verdict shall not be
(continued...) 
8 4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
However, the same rule permits a court to conduct an evidentiary 
pretrial hearing in the defendant's absence when the defendant's counsel orally represents that the defendant consents to the conduct of the hearing in the defendant's absence. HRPP Rule 43(d)(1). Without commenting on Judge Shimozono's decision not to rule on the Motion to Suppress on February 7, 2019, due to Barua's absence from the courtroom on that date, neither Judge Shimozono nor the State cite any rule or case law authority for Judge Shimozono's determination that Judges Domingo and Iha would not have been able to proceed in Barua's absence, and we find none. In other words, there is no support in the law (or the record in this case) for Judge Shimozono's after-the-fact ruling 
(...continued)
prevented and the defendant shall be considered to have
waived the right to be present whenever a defendant,initially present,
(1) is voluntarily absent after the hearing or trial
has commenced (whether or not the defendant has beeninformed by the court of the obligation to remain during thetrial); or
(2) engages in conduct which is such as to justify
exclusion from the courtroom. 
(c) Presence not required.  A defendant need not be 
present either physically or by video conference if:
(1) the defendant is a corporation and appears by
counsel; or
(2) the proceeding is a conference or argument upon a
question of law; or
(3) the proceeding is a reduction of sentence under
Rule 35. 
(d) Presence may be waived for non-felony offenses.
In prosecutions for offenses other than a felony, the court
may: 
(1) conduct an arraignment, wherein a plea of not
guilty is accepted, or conduct an evidentiary pretrial
hearing in the defendant's absence , provided the defendant
consents in writing or the defendant's counsel orallyrepresents that the defendant consents. 
(Emphasis added). 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on whether the other judges could have proceeded to hearing if 
the State had been ready. 
The only other supporting ground stated for the 
District Court's decision to dismiss without prejudice was Barua's absence at the February 7, 2019 hearing, at which the State was not prepared to go forward.   Assuming that there was 
no abuse of discretion in the District Court's refusal to proceed in Barua's absence under the circumstances of this case, it is undisputed that the State was unable to proceed with an evidentiary proceeding on that date, and any delay resulting in part from Barua's absence was only one week. 
5
In Barua's previous appeal, this court explained: 
"In criminal cases, 'the power of a court to dismiss a
case on its own motion for failure to prosecute with due
diligence is inherent.'" State v. Mageo, 78 Hawai #i 33, 37,
889 P.2d 1092, 1096 (App. 1995) (emphasis and bracketsomitted) (quoting State v. Estencion, 63 Haw. 264, 268, 625P.2d 1040, 1043 (1981)). A trial court has the inherent power to dismiss a charge with or without prejudice for thefailure to prosecute with due diligence, but must clearlyarticulate the reasons for its decision so that a reviewingcourt may accurately assess whether the trial court dulyexercised its discretion. See id. at 37-38, 889 P.2d at
1096-97 (trial courts exercising their inherent power todismiss a criminal case with prejudice should set forththeir reasons for doing so); 
State v. Hern, 133 Hawai #i 59,
64, 323 P.3d 1241, 1246 ([App.] 2013) (in determiningwhether to dismiss a charge with or without prejudice underHawai #i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 48(b), the
trial court must "clearly articulate the effect of the . . .factors [set forth in Estencion, 63 Haw. at 269, 625 P.2d at1044] and any other factor it considered in rendering itsdecision"). When issuing its findings, the trial courtshould consider the appropriate factors depending upon thegrounds for dismissal. Compare Mageo, 78 
Hawai #i at 37-38,
889 P.2d at 1096-97 (dismissal with or without prejudice for 
5 The parties have not argued, and we do not reach the issue of,
whether it is necessary for a defendant to be present pursuant to HRPP Rule43, absent a waiver, when no evidentiary hearing could be held due to theState's inability to meet its burden to present witnesses to challenge theallegations of constitutional violations raised in a motion to suppress. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
want of prosecution requires "balancing of the interest of
the state against fundamental fairness to a defendant withthe added ingredient of the orderly functioning of the courtsystem" (quoting State v. Moriwake, 65 Haw. 47, 56, 647 P.2d705, 712 (1982)) (bracket omitted)), with Estencion, 63 Haw.at 269, 625 P.2d at 1044 (dismissal with or withoutprejudice for violation of HRPP Rule 48 requiresconsideration of: "the seriousness of the offense; thefacts and the circumstances of the case which led to the dismissal; and the impact of a reprosecution on theadministration of this chapter and on the administration ofjustice."). 
State v. Barua, No. CAAP-19-0000180, 2020 WL 3497648 at *2-*3 
(Haw. App. June 29, 2020) (SDO). 
As noted, Mageo held that dismissal with or without 
prejudice for want of prosecution requires "balancing of the interest of the state against fundamental fairness to a defendant with the added ingredient of the orderly functioning of the court system." Mageo, 78 Hawai# i at 37-38, 889 P.2d at 1096-97 
(citation and brackets omitted). 
Here, although not citing Mageo, it appears that the 
District Court applied the Mageo balancing test in FOFs 13(d), (e), and (f):
 d. The State has an interest in prosecuting criminal
offenses and imposing sanctions for criminal conduct.
That is clearly outweighed by the State's failure todiligently prosecute this case in a timely manner andthe orderly functioning of the court system. 
While 
the State was ready to proceed on the motions tosuppress on one occasion (December 6, 2018), the Stateoffered no justifiable explanation for its failure tosubpoena witnesses on two separate occasions (January9, 2019 and February 14, 2019). In addition, theState was not ready to proceed on February 7, 2019,because a police officer did not appear at court totestify. 
e. Fundamental fairness to the Defendant requires that
Defendant's motions be heard and resolved in a timelymanner so that the case may [] proceed to trial.However, Defendant has an obligation to be physicallypresent for evidentiary hearings pursuant to HRPP43(a). 
On three of the four dates set for hearing on
the motions to suppress, Defendant was not present and 
11  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
did not receive the Court's permission to waive his
appearance. Therefore, Defendant's repeated failuresto appear would have prevented the hearings fromproceeding as scheduled and Defendant sharesresponsibility in this case for the delay in theprompt disposition of his motions to suppress. Both the State and Defendant thereby failed to assist inthe orderly functioning of the court in this case. 
f. In balancing the interest of the State against thefundamental fairness to the defendant, withconsideration to the orderly functioning of the courtsystem, the court finds shared culpability in thedelay in the prompt disposition of the motions tosuppress in this case, with no explanation from theState for their lack of diligence in issuing subpoenasfor its witnesses on two separate occasions, or fromDefendant for his failure to appear on multiple(three) occasions for his evidentiary hearings.Therefore, dismissal without prejudice in this case iswarranted insofar as it promotes the orderly andprompt disposition of criminal cases, while notrewarding Defendant's failures to appear by barringany further proceedings in the case should the State
decide to refile the charges. 
However, the District Court assessed in FOF 13(e) and 
(f) that the Defendant bore "shared culpability" and "shared 
responsibility" for the delay based on "Defendant's repeated failures to appear" that "would have prevented the hearings from proceeding as scheduled," even though no evidence could have been presented, even if Barua had been in attendance. This assessment clearly exceeds the bounds of reason and constitutes a manifest abuse of discretion. The District Court's mixed FOF/COL in FOF 13(f) was clearly erroneous to the extent that it relied on Barua's absence as the cause for delay impacting the orderly court functioning in this case.
6 
6 The District Court also analyzed the Estencion factors that must
be analyzed when there is a dismissal based on HRPP Rule 48. However, there
was no dismissal based on HRPP Rule 48 in this case, and therefore, we neednot address the District Court's Estencion analysis. We note, however, theDistrict Court stated that it "finds that while there were delays attributable
(continued...) 
12 6(...continued)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Thus, we conclude that the District Court failed to 
duly exercise its discretion in dismissing the charge against 
Barua without prejudice. This court has previously held that even if a trial court's findings are insufficient to support its decision to dismiss a case with or without prejudice, where the record is sufficient for the appellate court to make a determination of whether the trial court abused its discretion, the appellate court may elect, at its option, to resolve the appeal on the merits. State v. Hern, 133 Hawai# i 59, 64, 323 
P.3d 1241, 1246 (App. 2013), abrogated on other grounds by State v. Nicol, 140 Hawai# i 482, 494 n.12, 403 P.3d 259, 271 n.12 
(2017). Under the circumstances of this case, where this issue is on appeal for the second time after remanding to the District Court to set forth sufficient findings, we conclude that it is appropriate to resolve the appeal on its merits, rather than to remand the case to the District Court. 
For the reasons set forth above, the District Court's 
December 29, 2020 Dismissal Order, which dismissed the charge against Barua without prejudice, is reversed and prejudice is 
to both the State and defendant in resolving the pending motions to suppress,
HRPP Rule 48 has not been violated as of the date of dismissal." 
There are no 
findings to support a conclusion that HRPP Rule 48 had not been violated, along-established requirement in this jurisdiction. See, e.g., State v. Hutch,
75 Haw. 307, 331, 861 P.2d 11, 23 (1993) (holding that both trial courtscommitted reversible error in denying defendant's HRPP Rule 48 motions withoutstating their "essential findings on the record" in accordance with HRPP Rule12(e)). 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hereby attached to the dismissal. In light of this conclusion, 
we need not reach Barua's second point of error. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 24, 2023. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate JudgeRichard L. Holcomb,(Holcomb Law, LLLC), for Defendant-Appellant. 
Stephen K. Tsushima, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
14 