NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000319
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
NATIONSTAR MORTGAGE LLC, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
DANIEL KALEOALOHA KANAHELE, Defendant-Appellant,
and
THE ESTATE OF MARCUS C. KANAHELE, CHILD SUPPORT
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY, STATE OF HAWAII, UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA, FIA CARD SERVICES, N.A., GLORIA KANAHELE,
PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE OF THE ESTATE OF MARCUS C. KANAHELE,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
DOES 1-20, inclusive, Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-0584(2))
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Daniel Kaleoaloha Kanahele
(Kanahele) appeals from the Judgment entered on March 14, 2016,
in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court ),1 in
favor or Plaintiff-Appellee Nationstar Mortgage LLC ( Nationstar),
and against all defendants (Judgment on Foreclosure Decree). 
Kanahele also challenges the following:  (1) the Circuit Court's
March 14, 2016 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law; Order
1The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Granting Plaintiff's Renewed Motion for Summary Judgment and for
Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure (Foreclosure Decree ); (2) its
January 7, 2016 Order Denying Kanahele's Motion to Compel
Plaintiff to Answer Interrogatories and to Confirm Matters
Admitted or Direct Plaintiff to Otherwise Comply with Rule 36(a)
(Order Denying Motion to Compel ); and (3) its March 14, 2016
Order Denying Kanahele's Motion for Summary Judgment.
I.BACKGROUND
On October 7, 2014 Nationstar filed a Verified
Complaint to Foreclose Mortgage (Complaint ).  In the Complaint,
Nationstar alleged that on December 4, 2006, Kanahele delivered
to Lehman Brothers, FSB ( Lehman) a promissory note dated December
4, 2006 (Note), in the amount of $625,000.00, which was secured
by a mortgage in favor of Mortgage Electronic Registration
Systems, Inc. ( MERS), solely as nominee for Lehman, on the
subject property ( Property).  Nationstar alleged that it is the
current holder of the Note by virtue of the blank indorsement on
the Note and that Nationstar is in possession of the Note
indorsed-in-blank.  The Complaint further alleged that the
subject mortgage was assigned to Aurora Loan Services, LLC
(Aurora), and then further assigned to Nationstar, pursuant to
duly-recorded assignments.  
With the Complaint, Nationstar submitted a Verification
to Foreclosure Complaint executed under penalty of perjury by
Jesslyn Williams ( Williams), Assistant Secretary of Nationstar,
averring, inter alia , (a) that she personally reviewed the
documents and records in Nationstar's possession relating to this
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
case for factual accuracy, including the Complaint and the
attached Note, (b) that such records and files are kept by
Nationstar in the ordinary course of business, and were made at
or near the time of such acts, and (c) that Nationstar is in
possession of the original Note and that it is indorsed-in-blank. 
The verified copy of the Note attached to the Complaint contained
two indorsement stamps on the third and final page - an undated
special indorsement executed by Lehman to Lehman Brothers Holding
(Lehman Holding ) and an undated blank indorsement executed by
Lehman Holding.2
Filed contemporaneously with the Complaint was an
attorney affirmation executed by counsel for Nationstar pursuant
to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS ) § 667-17 affirming that counsel
had verified the accuracy of the documents.  Kanahele filed his
Answer to the Complaint on July 22, 2015, raising numerous
defenses including that:  Nationstar lacked standing, Nationstar
is not entitled to enforce the Note, Nationstar is not the holder
2These stamps read as follows: 
Pay To The Order Of
Lehman Brothers Holding Inc
Without Recourse
Lehman Brothers Bank, FSB
By: [signature]
E. Todd Whittemore
Vice President 
PAY TO THE ORDER OF
___________________
WITHOUT RECOURSE
LEHMAN BROTHERS HOLDINGS INC.
BY: [signature]
PAUL E. SVEEN
AUTHORIZED SIGNATORY
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of the Note in due course, fraud, deceptive and unfair trade
practices, unconscionability, and mistake. 
On March 30, 2015, Nationstar filed a motion for
summary judgment which was supported by, inter alia , a
declaration executed under penalty of perjury by Demetrice Person
(Person), a Document Execution Specialist for Nationstar, which
mirrors the Williams verification.  In other words, Person also
averred, inter alia , that (a) she personally reviewed the
documents and records in Nationstar's possession relating to this
case for factual accuracy, including the Complaint and "the
original wet-ink [Note]," (b) such records and files are kept by
Nationstar in the ordinary course of business, and were made at
or near the time of such acts, and (c) Nationstar "is in
possession of the original Note" and that it is indorsed-in-
blank.  The attached copy of the Note is the same as the copy
attached to the Complaint with the same indorsements as in
footnote two above.   On July 7, 2015, Kanahele filed a
memorandum in opposition asserting that certain paragraphs of the
Person declaration were inadmissible under, inter alia , Hawai#i
Rules of Evidence ( HRE) Rule 803(b)(6), and raising similar
arguments as are made on appeal.  Thereafter, on July 16, 2015,
Nationstar withdrew this motion.
On August 31, 2015, Kanahele served Nationstar with a
request for discovery, to which Nationstar responded on September
30, 2015.  On October 26, 2015, Kanahele filed a "Motion to
Compel Plaintiff to Answer to Interrogatories and to Confirm
Matters Admitted or Direct Plaintiff to Otherwise Comply with
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
[HRCP] Rule 36(a)" ( Motion to Compel ) asserting that Nationstar
provided "evasive and incomplete answers" and refused to answer
some of his discovery requests.  At the December 16, 2015
hearing, the Circuit Court orally denied the motion, stating that
many of Kanahele's requests sought irrelevant information3 and
found that "the answers that have been provided are appropriate
and reasonable responses to the way the questions and
interrogatories and the admissions were asked."  On January 7,
2016, the Circuit Court entered the Order Denying Motion to
Compel. 
On December 15, 2015, Nationstar filed a Renewed Motion
for Summary Judgment and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure
(Renewed Motion for Summary Judgment ).  The motion was supported
by, inter alia, a declaration by Toni Vincent ( Vincent), a
Document Execution Specialist for Nationstar, averring under
penalty of perjury that, inter alia , (a) she personally reviewed
the records in Nationstar's possession as to this case including
"a current copy of the original Note," which was indorsed-in-
blank and attached thereto, (b) that such records and files were
incorporated and kept in the ordinary course of business and she
had verified them for accuracy, and (c) that "the Note was in the 
3Specifically, the Circuit Court stated, "[a] lot of the discovery
requests, I don't even see why they're relevant" and "[a] lot of your
admissions and requests do not pertain to the issues that are currently in
this case, nor are they designed to lead to the discovery of admissible
evidence." 
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
possession of and has been maintained by Nationstar since before
the commencement of this case."4  Vincent further averred that 
4Vincent's declaration more fully provides in relevant part: 
2. I have access to and am familiar with
Nationstar's books and records regarding the Loan, including
Nationstar's servicing records and copies of the applicable
loan documents.  I am familiar with the manner in which
Nationstar maintains its books and records, including
computer records relating to the servicing of the Loan. 
Nationstar's records are made at or near the time of the
occurrence of the matters set forth in such records, by an
employee or representative with knowledge of the acts or
events recorded.  Such records are obtained, kept and
maintained by Nationstar in the regular course of
Nationstar's business.  Nationstar relies on such records in
the ordinary course of its business. 
3. The Loan has been serviced by Nationstar since
July 01, 2012.  Prior to that the Loan was serviced by prior
lender(s) and/or servicer(s) ("Prior Lenders/Servicers").  I
have received training on, understand the process of, and
have knowledge of Nationstar's practice of acquiring loans
from other financial institutions and how these loans are
transferred into Nationstar's system of record.  The
information regarding the Loan transferred to Nationstar
from the Prior Lender/Servicers has been validated in many
ways, including, but not limited to, going through a due
diligence phase, testing, reviewing reports/data, and
obtaining hard copy documents.  It is Nationstar's regular
practice, after these phases are complete, to receive
records from prior servicers and integrate these records
into Nationstar's business records at the time of
acquisition.  Once integrated, Nationstar maintains and
relies on these business records in the ordinary course of
its mortgage loan servicing business.  Based on these
standard processes, Nationstar has confirmed that prior
records for the Loan received from the Prior
Lenders/Servicers are accurate and have been incorporated
into Nationstar's business records for the Loan. 
4. . . . . The Note contains a blank indorsement on
page 3.  My personal knowledge of these statements is
derived from my having inspected a copy of the Note
maintained by Nationstar.  A true and correct copy of the
Note that I inspected is attached hereto as Exhibit A . 
5. The original indorsed in blank Note has been
sent to Nationstar's counsel in this action so that
Nationstar's counsel can produce the Note for inspection. 
Prior to this, the Note was in the possession of and has
been maintained by Nationstar since before the commencement
of this case.
. . . .
14. Nationstar has policies and procedures in place
to ensure that the contents of a declaration executed by a
Nationstar employee are accurate ("Declaration Policies and
Procedures"). Nationstar regularly trains all of its
employees who are responsible for executing declarations on
its Declaration Policies and Procedures. I complied with
Nationstar's Declaration Policies and Procedures when
reviewing and executing this Declaration and, as a result, I
can confirm that the contents of this Declaration are
(continued...)
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
based on her review of Person's declaration and attached
exhibits, and having conferred with Person, that Person's
declaration was "inaccurate" because Person failed to follow
Nationstar's policies and procedures.  She explained that Person
had not personally reviewed the "original wet-ink Note" and that
Person had provided an outdated copy of the Note "which did not
contain all of the indorsements currently set forth on the
original Note."  The copy of the Note attached to Vincent's
declaration differs from the prior two copies of the Note. 
Namely, it contains three indorsement stamps on the third and
final page - an undated special indorsement executed by Lehman to
Lehman Holding, an undated special indorsement executed by Lehman
Holding to Aurora, and an undated blank indorsement executed by
Nationstar as Aurora's attorney-in-fact.5   Later, Nationstar
4(...continued)
accurate. 
. . . .
17. In fact, Person did not review the original
"wet-ink" Note.  Rather, Person reviewed an outdated copy of
the Note which did not contain all of the indorsements
currently set forth on the original Note. 
18. Also, the copy of the Note included as Exhibit A
to the MSJ Declaration was not a true and correct copy of
the original Note. . . . . 
19. My personal knowledge of these statements is
derived from my having inspected a copy of the MSJ
Declaration, the Exhibits thereto, a current copy of the
original Note, and my having conferred with Person regarding
this matter. 
5These indorsement stamps read:
Pay To The Order Of
Lehman Brothers Holding Inc
Without Recourse
Lehman Brothers Bank, FSB
By: [signature]
E. Todd Whittemore
Vice President 
PAY TO THE ORDER OF
(continued...)
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
submitted a February 10, 2016 declaration of counsel which
attached portions of (1) a June 12, 2012 "Amended and Restated
Residential Servicing Asset Purchase Agreement" between Aurora
and Nationstar ( Service Agreement), and (2) a limited power of
attorney executed by Aurora on June 26, 2012, in favor of
Nationstar ( Limited Power of Attorney ).
On January 26, 2016, Kanahele filed a memorandum in
opposition to the Renewed Motion for Summary Judgment, raising
similar arguments as are made on appeal.  His memorandum was
supported by his own declaration "under penalty of law" where he
declared, in summary, as follows.   He and his brother, Marcus
Kanahele ( Marcus) inherited the subject property in 2002 when
their father died.6  In 2006, Marcus, who apparently lived in
Florida at the time, told Kanahele that he needed help to pay for
business expenses and they "agreed to investigate the possibility
of refinancing the loans against the property."  He averred that
they decided to use "a mortgage broker with Maui Mortgage
5(...continued)
         AURORA LOAN SERVICES LLC
WITHOUT RECOURSE
LEHMAN BROTHERS HOLDINGS INC.
BY: [signature]
PAUL E. SVEEN
AUTHORIZED SIGNATORY
Pay to the Order of
Without Recourse
Aurora Loan Services LLC by Nationstar
Mortgage LLC Its Attorney-In-Fact
By: [signature]
Assistant Secretary
Julie Martinez
(Formatting altered).  
6Per the warranty deed, Marcus and Daniel were tenants in common of
the property. 
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Professionals."  The broker represented that "because [Kanahele]
was the owner occupant we qualified for a loan without having to
provide any documentation regarding assets or income at a rate of
approximately 6.6%."  He stated that he "took approximately
$25,000 of the money to pay off credit card debt and the rest of
the money was withdrawn for Marcus," that "[m]ost of the debt of
the loan was for Marcus," that they paid their "fair share" of
the debt on the house, and that in 2008, Marcus filed for
bankruptcy.  Marcus died in 2013.  Kanahele stated, "[i]t was
only when the litigation began in this case did I learn that I
was the only borrower - that my brother never signed the note. 
As the mortgage stated us as 'co-borrowers' on the signature
lines of the mortgage, I had no idea that my brother was not a
co-borrower."  He also attested, "I would never have agreed to
the loan had I known that I was the sole borrower and that I
would have been responsible for any 'deficiency judgment'". 
Kanahele makes no statement in his declaration that the mortgage
broker was affiliated with Lehman.
Kanahele also attested that in August, 2012, he "made a
debt and servicing rights validation request to [Nationstar]
through our former attorney," that on August 30, 2012, Nationstar
"provided a copy of the Note with two indorsements" - one from
Lehman to Lehman Holdings, and one from Lehman Holdings to 
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Aurora, and that a "true and correct copy of the Note we
received" was attached as an exhibit and incorporated therein.7 
At a February 3, 2016 hearing, Kanahele took issue with
the differing indorsement stamps on different copies of the Note
in the record, stating, "we have these three notes and which one
is the right note?  Maybe Aurora Loan Services is the one who
should be bringing the foreclosure action against me and not
Nationstar."  Kanahele also argued, "There are conflicting
affidavits that create a genuine issue of material fact as to
whether the plaintiff has a note that they can enforce. . . . The
latest affidavit plaintiff has submitted in their renewed motion
for summary judgment regarding the note undermines the
credibility of the other affidavit submitted earlier with the
complaint."  Kanahele asserted, "The new affidavit or declarant
creates a genuine issue of material fact because here is an
employee of Nationstar saying that the previous custodian of
records didn't know what she was doing and that there was a
problem with their record keeping.  So how do we know that now
this is the valid note?" 
7These indorsement stamps read:
Pay To The Order Of
Lehman Brothers Holding Inc
Without Recourse
Lehman Brothers Bank, FSB
By: [signature]
E. Todd Whittemore
Vice President 
PAY TO THE ORDER OF
         AURORA LOAN SERVICES LLC
WITHOUT RECOURSE
LEHMAN BROTHERS HOLDINGS INC.
BY: [signature]
PAUL E. SVEEN
AUTHORIZED SIGNATORY
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On January 6, 2016, Kanahele filed his motion for
summary judgment arguing that Nationstar had not refuted
Kanahele's affirmative defenses.  As to admissibility of
Nationstar's evidence, Kanahele argued that Nationstar had not
"produced admissible evidence establishing elements of a remedy
of foreclosure," but made no further argument. 
On March 14, 2016, the Circuit Court entered the Order
Denying Kanahele's Motion for Summary Judgment, the Foreclosure
Decree, and a Judgment on the Foreclosure Decree.  On April 5,
2016, Kanahele timely filed a notice of appeal.
II.POINTS OF ERROR
Kanahele raises seven points of error on appeal,
contending that the Circuit Court erred in:  (1) denying his
October 26, 2015 Motion to Compel "where conflicting affidavits
and evidence concerning the ownership of the Note were raised by
Nationstar's own evidence;" (2) "treating Nationstar as a holder
in due course where such status was neither properly pled nor
proven;" (3) "failing to conclude Nationstar's indorsement to
itself as Aurora Loan's 'attorney in fact' was an abuse of its
[limited power of attorney];" (4) granting Nationstar's December
15, 2015 Renewed Motion for Summary Judgment because Nationstar
failed to meet its burden of proving the absence of any genuine
issues of material fact; (5) by granting Nationstar's December
15, 2015 Renewed Motion for Summary Judgment "despite
Nationstar's failure to substantively respond to [Kanahele's]
affirmative defenses;" (6) denying Kanahele's January 6, 2016
motion for summary judgment; and (7) "failing to weigh the
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
equities of the parties in granting an interlocutory decree of
foreclosure under an interpretation of the doctrine of laches."
III.APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
"The appellate court reviews a circuit court's grant or
denial of summary judgment de novo."  Anastasi v. Fid. Nat. Title
Ins. Co., 137 Hawai #i 104, 112, 366 P.3d 160, 168 (2016)
(brackets and internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Bremer
v. Weeks, 104 Hawai #i 43, 51, 85 P.3d 150, 158 (2004)). 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together, with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The
evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom, in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
Id. (brackets omitted) (quoting Blaisdell v. Dep't of Pub.
Safety, 119 Hawai# i 275, 282, 196 P.3d 277, 284 (2008)). 
Where a plaintiff-moving party has satisfied its
obligation of showing, prima facie , that there is no genuine
issue of material fact and the plaintiff is entitled to a
judgment as a matter of law, the burden shifts to the
defendant-non-moving party to produce materials regarding
any affirmative defenses that have been raised pro forma in
the pleadings. If the defense produces material in support
of an affirmative defense, the plaintiff is then " obligated
to disprove an affirmative defense in moving for summary
judgment."
Ocwen Fed. Bank, FSB v. Russell, 99 Hawai #i 173, 183, 53 P.3d
312, 322 (App. 2002) (citations and internal brackets omitted)
(first citing GECC Fin. Corp. v. Jaffarian , 79 Hawai #i 516, 526,
904 P.2d 530, 540 (App. 1995) (Acoba, J., concurring), concurring
opinion adopted by the Hawai #i Supreme Court in GECC Fin. Corp.
v. Jaffarian, 80 Hawai# i 118, 119, 905 P.2d 624, 625 (1995); then
quoting Jaffarian, 79 Hawai# i at 526, 904 P.2d at 540).  
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The Hawai #i Supreme Court has held:  
The Hawai #i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) reflect a basic
philosophy that a party to a civil action should be entitled
to the disclosure of all relevant information in the
possession of another person prior to trial, unless the
information is privileged. However, the extent to which
discovery is permitted under Rule 26 is subject to
considerable latitude and the discretion of the trial court.
Thus, the exercise of such discretion will not be disturbed
in the absence of a clear abuse of discretion that results
in substantial prejudice to a party. Accordingly, the
applicable standard of review on a trial court's ruling on a
motion to compel discovery, brought pursuant to HRCP Rule
26, is abuse of discretion.
Anastasi, 137 Hawai #i at 111, 366 P.3d at 167 (quoting Hac v.
Univ. of Hawai# i, 102 Hawai# i 92, 100-01, 73 P.3d 46, 54-55
(2003)).  "An abuse of discretion occurs when the trial court has
clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a
party litigant."  Hac , 102 Hawai #i at 101, 73 P.3d at 55
(internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Davis v. Wholesale
Motors, Inc., 86 Hawai# i 405, 418, 949 P.2d 1026, 1039 (App.
1998)). 
IV.DISCUSSION
As it is preliminary to the parties' other arguments,
we begin with Kanahele's assertion that Nationstar "was unable to
establish the Note was admissible as a 'record of regularly
conducted activity'" under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) because "its
sources of information or other circumstances indicate lack of
trustworthiness." 
In order for a record to be admissible under HRE Rule
803(b)(6), the proponent must establish a sufficient
foundation. Specifically,
[t]he proponent must establish (1) that the record
evidences "acts, events, conditions, opinions, or
diagnoses"; (2) that the record was made in the course
of a regularly conducted activity; and (3) that the
record was made "at or near the time" of the acts or
events that are recorded.
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Furthermore, "[t]he record must also survive the
discretionary untrustworthiness exclusion of the rule."
The necessary foundation can be established "by the
testimony of the custodian or other qualified witness, or by
certification that complies with rule 902(11) or a statute
permitting certification...."
State v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawai #i 354, 365, 227 P.3d 520, 531
(2010) (citations omitted) (first quoting HRE Manual
§ 803–3[5][B]; then quoting HRE Rule 803(b)(6)).  Kanahele argues
that "[i]nconsistences between copies of the Note introduced by
Nationstar and Nationstar's inability to account for its 2012
statement that Wells Fargo owned the Note demonstrated a lack of
trustworthiness." 
Regarding trustworthiness, the commentary on HRE Rule
803(b)(6) provides in pertinent part: 
[T]he hallmark of reliability in this area is not the nature
of the business or activity but rather its "regularity and
continuity which produce habits of precision, [the] actual
experience of business in relying upon [the records], [and
the] duty to make an accurate record as part of a continuing
job or occupation."  A further safeguard is that preliminary
determination of the trustworthiness of such records is
discretionary with the court.
HRE Rule 803(b)(6) cmt. (quoting Fed. R. Evid. 803(6), Advisory
Committee's Note).
Here, Vincent declared that Nationstar validated the
information regarding the loan by "going through a due diligence
phase, testing, reviewing reports/data, and obtaining hard copy
documents."  She attested to Nationstar's regular practice of
receiving and integrating such records into Nationstar's business
records and relying on them to service mortgage loans, and that
she complied with Nationstar's policies and procedures to verify
the accuracy of the statements in her declaration.  Person's
"inaccurate" declaration bears on Person's credibility, not
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
necessarily on the reliability of the record-keeping system
itself or the accuracy of the substance of Nationstar's business
records, which is the focus of this foundational requirement.  
We conclude that Vincent provided sufficient foundation
to establish the trustworthiness of Nationstar's business
records. 
Other foundational requirements of HRE Rule 803(b)(6)
are addressed in the supreme court's recent decisions in  U.S.
Bank, N.A. v. Mattos, 140 Hawai #i 26, 29, 398 P.3d 615, 618
(2017) and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. Behrendt , 142 Hawai #i 37,
40, 414 P.3d 89, 92 (2018).  In both of these cases, the supreme
court considered whether declarations by the foreclosing bank's
loan-service providers established sufficient foundation to admit
the foreclosing bank's loan documents, including the subject
note, in order to satisfy the standing requirements established
in Bank of America, N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo , 139 Hawai #i 361,
367-70, 390 P.3d 1248, 1254-57 (2017). 
In U.S. Bank, N.A. v. Mattos, 140 Hawai #i at 29, 398
P.3d at 618, summary judgment was granted in favor of the
foreclosing bank, U.S. Bank.  On appeal, the supreme court
addressed whether relevant loan documents had been properly
admitted through the declaration of an individual named Richard
Work (Work ), as records of regularly conducted activity under HRE
Rule 803(b)(6).  Id.  at 28, 30–33, 398 P.3d at 617, 619–22.  In
his declaration, Work attested, inter alia, that he was a
"Contract Management Coordinator" of OCWEN Loan Servicing, LLC
(Ocwen), the "servicer" for U.S. Bank on the subject loan.  Id.
15NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
at 30–31, 398 P.3d at 619–20.  Because Work did not attest that
he was the custodian of records for either U.S. Bank or Ocwen,
the supreme court noted that "the documents attached to his
declaration are admissible under the HRE 803(b)(6) hearsay
exception only if he is a 'qualified witness' with respect to
those documents."  Id. at 32, 398 P.3d at 621.  The supreme court
applied its analysis in Fitzwater , 122 Hawai #i at 365–66, 227
P.3d at 531–32, and ruled as follows:
To the extent the ICA ruled that Work's declaration
established him as a "qualified witness" with respect to
Ocwen's records, we agree. To the extent the ICA opinion
concluded that Work met the requirements to be a "qualified
witness" with respect to U.S. Bank's records, however, we
disagree. Fitzwater addresses situations in which one
business receives documents created by another business and
includes them in its own records. Work's declaration does
not indicate that U.S. Bank's Records were received by Ocwen
and incorporated into the Ocwen Records. Work's declaration
also does not establish that Work is familiar with the
record-keeping system of U.S. Bank. Rather, Work merely
states that he has access to and is familiar with U.S.
Bank's records. Thus Work's declaration does not satisfy
foundational requirements to make him a "qualified witness"
for U.S. Bank's records pursuant to Fitzwater
.
Id. at 32–33, 398 P.3d at 621–622.
In light of its prior ruling in Bank of America, N.A.
v. Reyes–Toledo, 139 Hawai #i 361, 390 P.3d 1248 (2017), the
supreme court in Mattos further held that:
[s]ince [an] allonge was apparently used to specifically
indorse the note to U.S. Bank, admissible evidence was
needed to demonstrate that U.S. Bank was in possession of
the note and allonge at the time of the filing of this
foreclosure complaint for U.S. Bank to be entitled to
summary judgment.
Id. at 33, 398 P.3d at 622.  The supreme court noted that Work's
declaration did not attest that U.S. Bank possessed the original
note and allonge when the foreclosure complaint was filed.  Id. 
The supreme court thus ruled that "Work's declaration failed to 
16NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
meet U.S. Bank's burden of establishing facts necessary for a
grant of summary judgment."  Id. 
In Behrendt , 142 Hawai #i at 40, 414 P.3d at 92, another
judicial foreclosure case, summary judgment was granted in favor
of the foreclosing bank, Wells Fargo.  Wells Fargo had attached a
copy of the subject note to its unverified complaint together
with an allonge indorsing the note in blank.  Id.  at 39-40, 414
P.3d at 91-92.  The supreme court reviewed the admissibility of
these documents under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) through a similar
declaration as in Mattos8 attached to Wells Fargo's motion for
summary judgment.  Id.  at 44-46, 414 P.3d at 96-98.  This
declaration was made by Vanessa Lewis ( Lewis), who was also a
"contract management coordinator" for Ocwen, Wells Fargo's loan-
service provider.  Id.  Because Lewis did not attest that she was
the custodian of record for either Wells Fargo or Ocwen, the
supreme court again observed that the documents attached to her
declaration were admissible under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) only if her
declaration demonstrated that she was a "qualified witness."  Id.
at 45, 414 P.3d at 97 (citing Mattos, 140 Hawai #i at 32, 398 P.3d
at 621).  The supreme court stated the rule regarding necessary
qualifications to admit incorporated records under Mattos and
Fitzwater as follows:
The court in Mattos held that a witness may be
qualified to provide the testimony required by HRE Rule
803(b)(6) even if the witness is not employed by the
business that created the document or lacks direct, personal
knowledge of how the document was created. "There is no
requirement that the records have been prepared by the
entity that has custody of them, as long as they were
8 The Behrendt court observed that the Lewis and Work declarations
were "nearly identical."  Behrendt , 142 Hawai #i at 45, 414 P.3d at 97.
17NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
created in the regular course of some entity's business."
The witness, however, must have enough familiarity with the
record-keeping system of the business that created the
record to explain how the record was generated in the
ordinary course of business.
Records received from another business and
incorporated into the receiving business' records may in
some circumstances be regarded as "created" by the receiving
business. Incorporated records are admissible under HRE Rule
803(b)(6) when a custodian or qualified witness testifies
that the documents were incorporated and kept in the normal
course of business, that the incorporating business
typically relies upon the accuracy of the contents of the
documents, and the circumstances otherwise indicate the
trustworthiness of the document.
Id. (citations omitted; emphasis added) (citing and quoting
Mattos, 140 Hawai #i at 32, 398 P.3d at 621).  
In holding that Lewis was not a "qualified witness"
under its decision in Mattos, the Behrendt court stated:
Here, as in Mattos, the Lewis Declaration does not
establish that the loan documents were received by Ocwen and
then incorporated into Ocwen's records. In addition,
although Lewis averred that Ocwen's records relating to the
loan were made and maintained in the regular course of
Ocwen's business, Lewis asserted only that she had "access
to and [was] familiar" with Wells Fargo's records and
documents relating to this case. The Lewis Declaration does
not establish that Lewis was familiar with Wells Fargo's
record-keeping system. It also makes no assertions as to
Lewis's familiarity with the record-keeping systems of
Funding Group or Option One, which first created the Note
and allonges. Thus, the Lewis Declaration satisfies the
foundational requirements to make Lewis a qualified witness
only with respect to Ocwen's original records about the loan
and not any records of Wells Fargo or the loan documents
themselves.
The Lewis Declaration also refers only to the Note and
not the allonges that Wells Fargo asserts were used to
endorse the Note in blank. As noted, the Lewis Declaration
does not establish that Lewis was a qualified witness, and
thus she could not have satisfied the requirements of HRE
Rule 803(b)(6) with respect to the allonges. But, as with
the declaration in Mattos , the Lewis Declaration did not
attempt to admit the allonges under the business records
exception.  Thus, even if the Note fell within the bounds of
HRE Rule 803(b)(6), the allonges endorsing it in blank did
not because the declaration did not provide the requisite
foundation. This is to say that the documents purporting to
allow Wells Fargo to enforce the Note were not admissible
under the business record exception. Since the documents
were not admissible as asserted, Wells Fargo did not meet
its burden of establishing facts necessary for a grant of
summary judgment.
Id. at 46, 414 P.3d at 98 (citations omitted).
18NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Here, unlike in Mattos and Behrendt, the Vincent
declaration establishes that Nationstar (1) received the loan
documents, including the Note, from prior loan servicers and
incorporated them into its records; and (2) that once integrated
Nationstar "relie[d] on these business records in the ordinary
course of its mortgage loan servicing business."  And as stated
above, Vincent provided additional facts sufficient to establish
the trustworthiness of the documents attached to her declaration.
Kanahele asserts that "Nationstar's conflicting
presentation of Notes, ownership history, and failures to respond
to discovery raised genuine issues of material fact as to its
credibility," and "the credibility of Nationstar's record-keeping
system and its affiants."  Kanahele points to "Nationstar's
inconsistent versions of the Note, declaration of mistake via
Toni Vincent, [and] failure to address Nationstar's ownership,"
and cites generally to the Vincent declaration, Nationstar's
discovery responses, and an August 27, 2012 letter from a
Nationstar employee to Kanahele's former counsel. 
This court has held that summary judgment is improper
where the non-moving party "point[s] to some facts which refute
the proof of the movant in some material portion[.]"  Costa v.
Able Distributors, Inc., 3 Haw. App. 486, 489, 653 P.2d 101, 104
(1982).  The non-moving party may "not merely recite the
incantation, 'Credibility,' and have a trial on the hope that a
jury may disbelieve factually uncontested proof."  Id. (citation
omitted).  "A fact is material if proof of that fact would have
the effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential
19NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties."  Anastasi, 137 Hawai #i at 112, 366 P.3d at 168
(citation omitted).
Here, Nationstar reported to the parties and the court
that the Person declaration was incorrect and submitted the
Vincent declaration to correct those misstatements.  Nationstar
is not relying on the Person declaration to establish any element
of its claim.  The August 27, 2012 letter Kanahele refers to is a
letter from Nationstar to Kanahele's former counsel which states
that "the current owner of the loan is Wells Fargo."  The issue
here is whether Nationstar was the holder at the time of the
filing of the Complaint, not the identity of the owner two years
prior.  Therefore, we are not persuaded that there is a genuine
issue of material fact based solely on the credibility of
Nationstar's declarants.
Nevertheless, in order to establish a right to
foreclose, the foreclosing plaintiff must prove that it has
standing, or entitlement to enforce the subject note, at the time
the action was commenced.  Reyes-Toledo , 139 Hawai #i at 367-70,
390 P.3d at 1254-57.
In order to prove entitlement to foreclose, the foreclosing
party must demonstrate that all conditions precedent to
foreclose under the note and mortgage are satisfied and that
all steps required by statute have been strictly complied
with. See 55 Am. Jur. 2d Mortgages § 575 (Nov. 2016 Update).
This typically requires the plaintiff to prove the existence
of an agreement, the terms of the agreement, a default by
the mortgagor under the terms of the agreement, and giving
of the cancellation notice. See Bank of Honolulu, N.A. v.
Anderson, 3 Haw. App. 545, 551,654 P.2d 1370, 1375 (1982)
(citing 55 Am. Jur. 2d Mortgages § 554 (1971)).  A
foreclosing plaintiff must also prove its entitlement to
enforce the note and mortgage.
20NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Id. at 367, 390 P.3d at 1254 (further citations omitted).  In
Reyes-Toledo, the Hawai# i Supreme Court held that although the
foreclosing bank produced evidence that it possessed the
blank-indorsed note at the time it moved for summary judgment, a
genuine issue of material fact existed as to whether the bank
possessed the note, or was a holder of the note, at the time it
brought the foreclosure proceeding.  Id.  at 370-71, 390 P.3d at
1257-58.
Here, in support of its Renewed Motion for Summary
Judgment, Nationstar relied on, inter alia, (1) the Vincent
declaration and (2) a copy of the Note that Nationstar had
indorsed-in-blank on behalf of Aurora.9  Like in Reyes-Toledo,
the copy of the Note attached to the Vincent declaration and the
Renewed Motion for Summary Judgment does not reflect the date of
the blank indorsement and the Vincent declaration, which was made
after the filing of the Complaint in this case, does not reflect
the date of the blank indorsement.  Although Vincent declared
that "the Note was in the possession of and has been maintained
by Nationstar since before the commencement of this case," she
did not attest that the Note was indorsed-in-blank prior to the
9Nationstar also relied on the following:  (3) a copy of the
Mortgage; (4) a copy of a Corporate Assignment of Mortgage recorded in the
Bureau of Conveyances on September 1, 2009, indicating that MERS as nominee
for Lehman and "its successors and assigns," assigned the Note and Mortgage to
Aurora for $10.00 and "other good and valuable consideration[;]" (5) a copy of
an Assignment of Mortgage record in the Bureau of Conveyances on September 20,
2012, indicating that effective July 1, 2012, Aurora assigned the Mortgage
"together with all interest secured thereby, all liens, and any rights due or
to become due thereon" to Nationstar "for good and valuable consideration[;]"
(6) a June 15, 2009 letter of default from Aurora to Kanahele; and (7) a
series of ledgers indicating that Kanahele stopped making payments in
November, 2008.  Filed contemporaneously with the Complaint was (8) an
attorney affirmation executed by counsel for Nationstar affirming that counsel
had verified the accuracy of the documents attached to the Complaint in
compliance with HRS § 667-17. 
21NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
commencement of this case or that the copy attached reflects the
indorsements as they existed when the Complaint was filed. 
Indeed, she states that her personal knowledge is based on having
inspected, inter alia , "a current copy of the original Note[.]"
Arguably, the Williams verification and attached Note
indorsed-in-blank from Lehman Holding, which were filed with the
Complaint, could satisfy Reyes-Toledo.  However, in this case,
Kanahele put forth evidence that the Note was specially indorsed
to Aurora prior to the filing of the Complaint and thereby
creating a material question of fact as to whether Nationstar was
the holder of the Note indorsed-in-blank when the proceedings
commenced.  Specifically, in Kanahele's declaration in support of
his memorandum in opposition to the Renewed Motion for Summary
Judgment, Kanahele attested that on August 30, 2012, Nationstar
sent him a copy of the Note that contained two indorsement
stamps:  a specific indorsement from Lehman to Lehman Holding and
an undated, specific indorsement from Lehman Holding to Aurora, a
copy of which was attached thereto.   Viewing this evidence in
the light most favorable to Kanahele, it appears that the Note
was specially indorsed to Aurora prior to the filing of the
Complaint on October 7, 2014.  This has two implications:  (1)
that Nationstar could not have been the holder of the Note via a
blank indorsement executed by Lehman Holding at the time it filed
the Complaint, as declared by Person and Williams, and (2) that
either (a) at some point after August 30, 2012, Nationstar
indorsed the Note in blank on behalf of Aurora, or (b) the copy
sent to Kanahele on August 30, 2012, itself  was outdated and
22NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Nationstar had since indorsed the original Note in blank on
behalf of Aurora. 
In any case, Nationstar did not submit evidence that
the final indorsement in blank occurred prior to the filing of
the Complaint.  Although Vincent declared that "the Note was in
the possession of and has been maintained by Nationstar since
before the commencement of this case," the crucial inquiry here
includes not only whether Nationstar was in possession, but also
when Nationstar executed the final blank indorsement, making it
the holder of the Note.  Plainly stated, based on this evidence,
it is possible that when Nationstar filed the Complaint, the
original Note (although in Nationstar's possession) was
nonetheless still specially indorsed to Aurora and Nationstar had
yet to execute the blank indorsement on Aurora's behalf.  Until
Nationstar did so, it was not the holder of the Note. 
Viewing the facts and inferences in the light most
favorable to Kanahele, as we must for purposes of a summary
judgment ruling, we conclude that there is a genuine issue of
material fact as to whether Nationstar was entitled to enforce
the Note at the time this foreclosure action was commenced.
Therefore, the Circuit Court erred in granting Nationstar's
Renewed Motion for Summary Judgment.  See Reyes-Toledo , 139
Hawai#i at 370-71, 390 P.3d at 1257-58.
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's March 14, 2016
Judgment on Foreclosure Decree and Foreclosure Decree are
23NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
vacated,10 and this case is remanded to the Circuit Court for
further proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 12, 2018.
On the briefs:
Bianca K. Isaki,
  and
Lance D. Collins,
for Defendant-Appellant.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
David A. Nakashima,
Jade Lynne Ching,
Kanoelani S. Kane,
(Nakashima Ching LLC),
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
10Accordingly, we need not address Kanahele's further arguments.
24