FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
RENE UMBERGER, MIKE NAKACHI, KA'IMI KAUPIKO,
WILLIE KAUPIKO, CONSERVATION COUNCIL FOR HAWAI 'I,
HUMANE SOCIETY OF THE UNITED STATES, and
CENTER FOR BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v. DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES,
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Defendant-Appellee
 
NO. CAAP-13-0002125

 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-2625-10 JHC)

 
AUGUST 31, 2016
 
FUJISE, PRESIDING JUDGE, LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.

 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Rene Umberger, Mike Nakachi, 
Ka'imi Kaupiko, Willie Kaupiko, Conservation Council for Hawai 'i 
(CCH), Humane Society of the United States (Humane Society), and 
Center for Biological Diversity (CBD) (collectively, Plaintiffs or Appellants), appeal from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's (Circuit Court) June 24, 2013 Order Granting Department   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of Land and Natural Resources State of Hawaii's [(DLNR's)],
 
Motion for Summary Judgment filed February 4, 2013, and Denying
 
Plaintiffs' Motion for Summary Judgment filed February 5, 2013
 (Summary Judgment Order), and the Final Judgment in Favor of
 
Defendant and Against Plaintiffs (Judgment), also filed on June
 24, 2013.
1
 
The dispute concerns whether DLNR must require each 
applicant for an aquarium fish permit to comply with the 
environmental review procedures set forth in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) chapter 343, the Hawai
'i Environmental Policy Act 
2
(HEPA),  before DLNR issues a permit pursuant to HRS § 188-31(a)
(2011). 

Appellants ask the court to vacate the Circuit Court's

 
Summary Judgment Order and Judgment and require the Circuit Court
 to: (1) issue a declaratory judgment concluding that (a) DLNR is
 in violation of HEPA for failing to comply with the statute prior
 to approving the aquarium collection permits, and (b) DLNR's
 issuance and/or renewal of such permits without complying with
 HEPA is invalid and illegal; and (2) issue an injunction
 enjoining collection under existing aquarium fish permits and
 enjoining DLNR from approving any additional permits until it
 fully complies with HEPA. For the following reasons, we affirm
 the Summary Judgment Order and Judgment.
 
1
 The Honorable Jeannette H. Castagnetti presided.
 
2
 Although "HRS chapter 343 is entitled 'Environmental Impact
Statements,' the law has long been referred to, by the public and [appellate]
court[s], as the Hawai' i Environmental Policy Act." Sierra Club v. Dep't of
Transp., 115 Hawai' i 299, 304 n.4, 167 P.3d 292, 297 n.4 (2007). 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3I.BACKGROUND FACTS
Appellants consist of concerned individuals and three
nonprofit organizations.  CCH is a citizens' organization with
approximately 5,500 members and its mission is to "protect native
Hawaiian species and to restore native Hawaiian ecosystems for
future generations."  The Humane Society is a national
organization "dedicated to the protection of wildlife and
habitat."  The Humane Society has over 11 million members,
including 55,000 of which live in Hawai #i.  CBD is an
organization "dedicated to preserving, protecting, and restoring
biodiversity, native species, ecosystems, and public lands."  CBD
has approximately 450,000 members, many of whom reside in
Hawai#i. 
DLNR is the state agency responsible for managing,
administering, and exercising control over the State's water
resources and ocean waters.  HRS § 171-3 (2011).  The Division of
Aquatic Resources is the division within DLNR responsible for
evaluating and administering aquarium collection permits.  DLNR
has the authority to issue and renew aquarium fish permits
pursuant to HRS § 188-31, which provides:
§ 188-31  Permits to take aquatic life for aquarium
purposes.  (a) Except as prohibited by law, the department,
upon receipt of a written application, may issue an aquarium
fish permit, not longer than one year in duration, to use
fine meshed traps, or fine meshed nets other than throw
nets, for the taking of marine or freshwater nongame fish
and other aquatic life for aquarium purposes.
(b)Except as prohibited by law, the permits shall
be issued only to persons who can satisfy the department
that they possess facilities to and can maintain fish and
other aquatic life alive and in reasonable health.
(c)It shall be illegal to sell or offer for sale
any fish and other aquatic life taken under an aquarium fish FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
permit unless those fish and other aquatic life are sold
alive for aquarium purposes.
 
The department may adopt rules pursuant to chapter 91

for the purpose of this section.
 
(d)	 For the purposes of this section:
 
(1)	 "Aquarium purposes" means to hold salt water
fish, freshwater nongame fish, or other aquatic
life alive in a state of captivity as pets, for
scientific study, or for public exhibition or
display, or for sale for these purposes; and
 
(2) 	"Aquarium fish permit" means a permit issued by
the board for the use of fine mesh nets and
 traps to take salt water fish, freshwater
nongame fish, or other aquatic life for aquarium
purposes. 
On October 24, 2012, Appellants filed a complaint for
 
declaratory and injunctive relief, seeking, inter alia, a
 
declaration that DLNR is in violation of HEPA because it has
 failed to require aquarium fish permit applicants to, at a
 minimum, prepare environmental assessments (EAs) and engage in
 
the related process of consultation, information gathering, and
 
public review and comment. Appellants also asserted that DLNR's
 "issuance and renewal of the challenged permits required
 discretionary agency approval to allow the applicants to use
 State lands-the State's waters-to collect fish and invertebrates
 for the aquarium trade." 
On February 4, 2013, DLNR filed a motion for summary
 
judgment, contending that there are no disputed issues of fact
 and that the issue of whether an EA is required is a matter of
 law. DLNR argued that an EA is not required for two reasons: 
(1) the collection of aquarium fish under DLNR-issued permits
 does not constitute applicant action; and (2) there is no agency
 approval. DLNR argued that aquarium collection under DLNR-issued
 permits does not constitute an applicant action because it is not
 
4
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a specific, identifiable project. Additionally, DLNR contended
 
that the permit application process is online and completely
 automatic and that "there is no space in the process for the
 State or its officials to exercise discretion." 
On February 5, 2013, Appellants filed a motion for
 
summary judgment, contending that they are entitled to judgment
 as a matter of law because "HEPA requires DLNR to, at a minimum,
 require preparation of EAs before allowing aquarium collection
 under the [p]ermits and before approving any additional permits." 
Appellants argued that aquarium collection under the DLNR-issued
 permits constitutes the use of state land which triggers
 environmental review under HEPA and that DLNR's issuance of the
 permits is a discretionary action that constitutes "approval"
 under HEPA.
 
After further submissions from the parties, on May 21,
 
2013, the Circuit Court held a hearing on the motions for summary
 judgment. In a minute order entered on May 28, 2013 (Minute
 
Order), the Circuit Court granted DLNR's motion for summary
 judgment and denied Appellants' motion for summary judgment. 
The Circuit Court noted that the parties "agree that there are no
 genuine issues of material fact and [that] this court may rule on
 the question presented as a matter of law." 
In its Minute Order, the Circuit Court stated that the
 
"applicant 'action' at issue here, according to plaintiffs, is
 'aquarium collection' for each individual permit authorized by
 DLNR pursuant to HRS § 188-31" and that the "broad 'action' of
 'aquarium collection' is neither a program nor a project as those
 
5
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
terms are generally defined." The Circuit Court recognized that 
the cases cited by the parties in their motions for summary judgment involve specifically identifiable programs or projects such as the Koa Ridge development project, the Hawai
'i Superferry 
project and a research program concerning genetically modified algae. The Circuit Court concluded, as a matter of law, that "'aquarium collection' does not specifically identify any program or project to review for HEPA purposes." The Circuit Court also concluded, as a matter of law, "'aquarium collection' is not an applicant 'action' that triggers HEPA." The Summary Judgment Order, entered on June 24, 2013, states that the court denied Appellants' motion and granted DLNR's motion "on the ground that there is no applicant 'action' that triggers [HEPA]." Judgment was entered in favor of DLNR on June 24, 2013. 
Appellants filed a timely notice of appeal on July 18,
 
2013.
 II. POINT OF ERROR ON APPEAL
 
Appellants raise a single point of error, contending
 
that the Circuit Court erred when it concluded that aquarium
 collection under an aquarium fish permit issued by DLNR is not an
 "applicant action" under HEPA.
 III. APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
An order on a motion for summary judgment is reviewed 
de novo. See, e.g., Gurrobat v. HTH Corp., 133 Hawai
'i 1, 14, 
323 P.3d 792, 805 (2014). 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7"Statutory interpretation is a question of law
reviewable de novo."  State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai #i 383, 390, 219
P.3d 1170, 1177 (2009) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
IV.DISCUSSION
Appellants have raised serious concerns about the
potential for significant, detrimental effects on Hawai #i's reef
ecosystems resulting from "allowing reefs to be stripped of an
unlimited number of fish and other marine animals, without
analyzing the impacts on the environment and without any
regulation or oversight."  There is no question that the DLNR
shares Appellants' concerns about the health of Hawai# i's reefs
and its marine inhabitants and seeks to appropriately manage and
administer the aquatic life and aquatic resources of the State in
accordance with all applicable laws.  The question before this
court, however, is not whether DLNR should more stringently
regulate these resources, whether too many aquarium fish are
being taken from Hawai# i's waters, or whether more regulation or
oversight should be implemented to protect the aquatic life that
is collected for aquarium purposes, particularly by large-scale,
commercial collectors.  Rather, the question before us is whether
a particular Hawai# i statute, HEPA, is intended to apply so that
each applicant for an aquarium fish permit must, at a minimum,
prepare an EA – as well as engage in the related process of
consultation, information gathering, and public review and
comment – and DLNR must, with each application, undertake a HEPA
review prior to issuing an aquarium fish permit.Sierra Club IIFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A. HEPA
 
In enacting HEPA, the Hawai 'i Legislature established a 
"system of environmental review which will ensure that
 environmental concerns are given appropriate consideration in
 decision making along with economic and technical
 considerations." HRS § 343-1 (2010). The framework of HEPA
 "consists of various stages of assessment by the proposing or
 accepting agency, each of which may entail additional review
 procedures." Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp., 115 Hawai
'i 299, 
306, 167 P.3d 292, 299 (2007) ( ). The Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court has described the environmental review process as
 follows: 
Once a proposed action is subject to the environmental
review process, an environmental assessment is made by the
applicant and is used to evaluate the possible environmental
effects of a proposed action. The agency reviewing the
assessment then determines if there are "significant"
environmental impacts anticipated. If there is a
determination that there may be "significant" environmental
impacts, the accepting agency then files an environmental
impact statement (EIS) preparation notice with the Office of
Environmental Quality Control (OEQC), which in turn
publishes the notice in the OEQC bulletin. Publication of
this notice initiates a 30 day consultation period during
which the public and interested agencies or organizations
may submit written comments regarding adverse effects of the
proposed action. The proposing agency or applicant must
respond in writing and address all concerns and questions
before proceeding with the development of the EIS. Once this
phase of the process is complete, the applicant then begins
preparation of the EIS.
 
Sierra Club v. Office of Planning, 109 Hawai 'i 411, 415, 126 
P.3d 1098, 1102 (2006) (citing Price v. Obayashi Haw. Corp., 81
 
Hawai'i 171, 180, 914 P.2d 1364, 1373 (1996)) (Sierra Club I) 
(brackets omitted).
 
"An important preliminary step in assessing whether an
 
'action' is subject to environmental review is defining the
 action itself." 
Sierra Club II, 115 Hawai 'i at 306 n.6, 167 
8
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.3d at 299 n.6. An "action" is "any program or project to be
 
initiated by an agency or applicant." 
HRS § 343-2 (2010). An
 
EA is required for "actions" that meet certain criteria. Sierra
 
Club II, 115 Hawai 'i at 306, 167 P.3d at 299. First, the action 
must be initiated by a government agency ("agency actions") or
 by a private party who requires government approval ("applicant
 actions"). HRS § 343-2; Sierra Club II, 115 Hawai
'i at 306, 167 
P.3d at 299. Second, the "action" must fall within one or more
 of nine categories listed under HRS § 343-5 (2010).
3 Third, the
 
3
 HRS § 343-5 provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 343-5
 Applicability and requirements. (a) Except
as otherwise provided, an environmental assessment shall be
required for actions that: 
(1)	 Propose the use of state or county lands or the use of
state or county funds . . .
(2) 	Propose any use within any land classified as a
conservation district by the state land use commission
under chapter 205;
(3)	 Propose any use within a shoreline area as defined in
section 205A-41;
(4) 	Propose any use within any historic site as designated
in the National Register or Hawaii Register, as
provided for in the Historic Preservation Act of 1966,
Public Law 89-665, or chapter 6E;
(5) 	Propose any use within the Waikiki area of Oahu, the
boundaries of which are delineated in the land use
 ordinance as amended, establishing the "Waikiki
Special District";
(6) 	Propose any amendments to existing county general
plans where the amendment would result in designations
other than agriculture, conservation, or preservation,
except actions proposing any new county general plan
or amendments to any existing county general plan
initiated by a county;
(7) 	Propose any reclassification of any land classified as
a conservation district by the state land use
commission under chapter 205;
(8) 	Propose the construction of new or the expansion or
modification of existing helicopter facilities within
the State. . .
 
(9)	 Propose any:
(A) Wastewater treatment unit, except an individual
wastewater system or a wastewater treatment unit
serving fewer than fifty single-family dwellings or
the equivalent;
(B) Waste-to-energy facility;
(C) Landfill;
(D) Oil refinery; or
(E) Power-generating facility.
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"action" must not be exempt under HRS § 343-6(a)(2) (2010).5
  
Id. If the alleged "action" fulfills these three criteria, then
 
it is an action subject to the HEPA environmental review
 process. 

In the instant case, Appellants challenge DLNR's
 
issuance and renewal of aquarium fish permits pursuant to HRS

 
§ 188-31. DLNR is authorized to "issue an aquarium fish permit,
 not longer than one year in duration, to use fine meshed traps,
 or fine meshed nets other than throw nets, for the taking of
 marine or freshwater nongame fish and other aquatic life for
 aquarium purposes." HRS § 188-31(a). A person may apply for
 either a "recreational aquarium fish permit" or a "commercial
 aquarium fish permit.
6    HAR § 13-75-14(4) provides:
 
Aquarium fish collectors with a valid aquarium fish permit
issued pursuant to section 188-31, HRS, may use traps and
nets for aquarium fish and other aquatic life in conformance
with the conditions of the permit, provided that non­commercial aquarium fish collectors shall be limited to a
combined total of five fish or aquatic life specimens per
person per day[.]
 
Thus, the alleged "action" at issue here is the "taking
 
of marine or freshwater nongame fish and other aquatic life for
 
5
 HRS § 343-6 provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 343-6 Rules. (a) After consultation with the
affected agencies, the council shall adopt, amend or repeal
necessary rules for the purposes of this chapter in
accordance with chapter 91 including, but not limited to,
rules that shall:
 . . .
 (2) Establish procedures whereby specific types of actions,
because they will probably have minimal or no significant
effects on the environment, are declared exempt from the
preparation of an environmental assessment[.] 
6
 Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) § 13-77-2 provides, inter alia,
that: "'Commercial aquarium fish permit' means a valid aquarium fish permit
issued to a person who also has been issued a valid commercial marine
license;" and "'Recreational aquarium fish permit' means a valid aquarium fish
permit issued to a person for non-commercial use."
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
aquarium purposes," which is initiated by an applicant's request
 
for an aquarium fish permit. HRS § 188-31(a). Accordingly, it
 is an alleged "applicant action," potentially subject to HRS
 § 343-5(e) (Supp. 2015).
7 On appeal, Appellants described the
 
alleged action as the "directed, intentional, large-scale
 commercial removal under each [p]ermit, and collectively under
 the dozens of such [p]ermits DLNR issued," but freely
 acknowledged that they seek an interpretation of HEPA that would
 apply equally to both recreational and commercial aquarium fish
 permits.
 
B. Applicability of HEPA to Aquarium Collection Permits
 Thus, we must examine whether aquarium collection, as
 
described above, is an "action" under HEPA. As noted, HRS
 § 343-2 provides that "'Action' means any program or project to
 be initiated by any agency or applicant." The issue of whether
 aquarium collection pursuant to a DLNR-issued permit constitutes
 a program or project is a question of statutory interpretation. 
This court's construction of statutes is guided by the
 following:
 
7
 HRS § 343-5(e) states, in relevant part: 
(e) Whenever an applicant proposes an action specified
by subsection (a) that requires approval of an agency and
that is not a specific type of action declared exempt under
section 343-6, the agency initially receiving and agreeing
to process the request for approval shall require the
applicant to prepare an environmental assessment of the
proposed action at the earliest practicable time to
determine whether an environmental impact statement shall be
required; provided that if the agency determines, through
its judgment and experience, that an environmental impact
statement is likely to be required, the agency may authorize
the applicant to choose not to prepare an environmental
assessment and instead prepare an environmental impact
statement that begins with the preparation of an
environmental impact statement preparation notice as
provided by rules. . . . 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.
Second, where the statutory language is plain and
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain
and obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task of
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself. Fourth, when
there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness
or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an
ambiguity exists. And fifth, in construing an ambiguous
statute, the meaning of the ambiguous words may be sought by
examining the context, with which the ambiguous words,
phrases, and sentences may be compared, in order to
ascertain their true meaning.
 
Haw. Gov't Emps. Ass'n, AFSCME Local 152, AFL–CIO v. Lingle, 124 
Hawai'i 197, 202, 239 P.3d 1, 6 (2010) (citation omitted). 
Furthermore, a "rational, sensible and practicable 
interpretation of a statute is preferred to one which is unreasonable or impracticable," inasmuch as "[t]he legislature is presumed not to intend an absurd result, and legislation will be construed to avoid, if possible, inconsistency, contradiction, and illogicality." Bowers v. Alamo Rent-A-Car, 
Inc., 88 Hawai
'i 274, 277, 965 P.2d 1274, 1277 (1998) 
(citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
Our analysis begins with the plain language of the 
statute. The definition of "action" under HEPA has not changed since it was first introduced in 1974. 1974 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 246, § 1 at 707. An "action" is "any program or project to be initiated by an agency or applicant." HRS § 343-2. The words "program" and "project" are not defined in HEPA. When a word is not statutorily defined, this court "may resort to legal or other well accepted dictionaries as one way to determine the ordinary meaning[.]" Nuuanu Valley Ass'n v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 119 Hawai
'i 90, 98, 194 P.3d 531, 539 (2008) (quoting 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Leslie v. Bd. of Appeals of the Cty. of Haw., 109 Hawai 'i 384, 
393, 126 P.3d 1071, 1080 (2006)) (internal quotation marks
 
omitted). Using a well-accepted dictionary, the Circuit Court
 defined "program" as "a plan or system under which action may be
 taken toward a goal" and "project" as "a specific plan or
 design; scheme or planned undertaking." Clearly, not every
 activity initiated by an applicant or agency rises to the level
 of a program or project.   The Circuit Court utilized the
 
ordinary meaning of program and project to conclude that
 "'aquarium collection' does not specifically identify any
 program or project to review for HEPA purposes."
 
We also consider a number of Hawai
'i appellate court 
cases that have identified or discussed programs or projects
 that constitute applicant actions under HEPA. 
In Kahana Sunset Owners Ass'n v. Cty. of Maui,  86
 
Hawai'i 66, 75, 947 P.2d 378, 387 (1997), the Napilihau Villages 
development project was the "action" for the purposes of HEPA. 
The Napilihau Villages development project consisted of a 312­unit multi-family residential development on Maui. Id. at 68,
 
947 P.2d at 380. The Napilihau Villages project also included
 the installation of a "36-inch drainage line beneath Napilihau
 Street connecting to an existing 24-inch culvert beneath Lower
 Honoapi
'ilani Highway." Id. at 71, 947 P.2d at 383. The Maui 
County Planning Commission (MCPC) granted developer JGL
 
Enterprises Inc.'s application for a Special Management Area use
 
permit and concluded that an EA was not required for the
 Napilihau Villages project. Id. at 68, 947 P.2d at 380. 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Pursuant to HEPA, an EA is mandatory unless the "action" is
 
declared exempt under HRS § 343-6. Id. at 71, 947 P.2d at 383. 
The supreme court determined that the Napilihau Villages project
 was not exempt under HRS § 343-6. Id. at 72, 947 P.2d at 384. 
As such, the supreme court ruled, inter alia, that the MCPC had
 erred in not requiring an EA for a proposal to build the
 Napilihau Villages project. Id. at 68, 947 P.2d at 380. 
In Citizens for Protection of North Kohala Coastline v. 
Cty. of Haw., 91 Hawai
'i 94, 104, 979 P.2d 1120, 1130 (1999), 
the "action" for the purposes of HEPA was the Mahukona Lodge development project. The Mahukona Lodge development project consisted of a "hotel, residential subdivision, 18-hole golf course, tennis facilities, and other related site improvements and infrastructure." Id. at 96, 979 P.2d at 1122. The Mahukona 
Lodge project also included the construction of two underpasses below a public highway. Id. at 103, 979 P.2d at 1129. The 
Hawai
'i County Planning Commission granted Chalon International 
of Hawai 'i Inc.'s permit for the development of the Mahukona 
Lodge project. Id. at 96, 979 P.2d at 1122. The Circuit Court 
concluded as a matter of law that the Mahukona Lodge project did not fall within the subject category listed in HRS § 343-5(a)(1) and therefore environmental review was not required under HRS Chapter 343. Id. at 97, 979 P.2d at 1123. The supreme court 
ruled, inter alia, that the two underpasses constituted the "use of State lands" within the meaning of HRS § 343-5(a)(1) and therefore environmental review was "triggered" under Chapter 343. Id. at 105, 979 P.2d at 1131.
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Sierra Club I , 109 Hawai 'i at 415-16, 126 P.3d at 
1102-03, the supreme court held that the reclassification of an
 
agricultural district to an urban district in order to develop
 the Koa Ridge project constituted an "action" under HEPA. The
 Koa Ridge project consisted of "thousands of homes, a commercial
 center, elementary school, park, church/day care, recreation
 center and the Pacific Health Center." 
Id. at 413, 126 P.3d at
 
1100. The Koa Ridge project also involved the installation of
 sewage and water transmission lines that would "tunnel
 underneath Kamehameha Highway, the H-1 Freeway, the H-2 Freeway,
 and Farrington Highway, all of which are State land." Id.
 
The supreme court noted that under the plain and
 
unambiguous language of the statute, the Koa Ridge project
 constituted an "action" under HEPA because it is a "project to
 be initiated by applicants." 
Id. at 415, 126 P.3d at 1102
 
(internal quotation marks omitted). The supreme court
 recognized that the reclassification of land "in and of itself,
 does not trigger" an EA. Id. at 416, 126 P.3d at 1103. 
However, an EA can be required "at the reclassification stage if
 one of the triggers set forth in HRS § 343-5(a) applies to the
 proposed project." Id. The Koa Ridge project proposed the use
 
of "state or county lands" under HRS § 343-5(a)(1) because the
 construction of the water and sewage transmission lines involved
 tunneling beneath State highways. Id. at 415, 126 P.3d at 1102.
 
Lastly, no party had asserted that the Koa Ridge project was
 exempt under HRS § 343-6. Id. at 418, 126 P.3d at 1105. 
Therefore, an EA was required under HEPA. Id.
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Sierra Club II,  115 Hawai 'i at 304, 167 P.3d at 297, 
the Sierra Club, Maui Tomorrow, Inc., and the Kahului Harbor
 
Coalition challenged the Department of Transportation's (DOT)
 
approval of various harbor improvements and permits associated
 
with the Hawai 'i Superferry project. The Hawai 'i Superferry was 
an "inter-island ferry service between the islands of O 'ahu, 
Maui, Kaua 'i, and Hawai 'i, using harbor facilities on each 
island." Id. at 305, 167 P.3d at 298. The parties did not
 
dispute that the "harbor improvements–which propose the use of
 state funds and state lands–are a triggering 'action' under
 HEPA." Id. at 336, 167 P.3d at 329. The parties disputed DOT's
 
determination that the harbor improvements were exempt from the
 requirements of HEPA under HRS § 343-6. Id. The supreme court
 
concluded that the DOT's determination that the harbor
 improvements were exempt from the requirements of HEPA was
 erroneous as a matter of law. Id. at 342, 167 P.2d at 335.
 
In 
Nuuanu Valley Ass'n,  119 Hawai 'i at 102, 194 P.3d at 
543, the parties did not dispute that the proposed Laumaka
 subdivision was an action within the meaning of HEPA. The
 Laumaka subdivision involved the creation of nine large
 subdivision lots capable of supporting two homes each. Id. The
 
Laumaka subdivision would require the "use of and connection to
 the county's drainage and sewer systems." Id. at 101, 194 P.3d
 
at 542. The supreme court held, inter alia, that connection to
 the County's existing drainage and sewage lines did not
 constitute a use of state or county land and therefore an EA was 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not required. Id. at 104, 194 P.3d at 545 (internal quotation
 
marks omitted). 
In 'Ohana Pale Ke Ao v. Bd. of Ag. , 118 Hawai 'i 247, 
249-50, 188 P.3d 761, 763-64 (App. 2008), a marine biotechnology
 
firm requested a permit from the State Department of Agriculture
 to import eight strains of algae to Hawai
'i. The firm intended 
to "keep and grow the imported algae" at a state site to
 "demonstrate the feasibility of scaling up their cultures to a
 capacity of several hundred liters." Id. at 254, 188 P.3d at
 
768. This court noted that the demonstration project
 constituted an "action" that proposed the "use of state land"
 and therefore was subject to environmental review. Id. 
The Napilihau Villages, Mahukona Lodge, Koa Ridge 
project, harbor improvements for the Superferry Project, Laumaka subdivision, and a research program concerning genetically modified algae are examples of projects or programs that constitute "actions" within the ambit of HEPA. 
The Circuit 
Court recognized that in these Hawai 'i appellate cases 
concerning HEPA, the actions at issue involve "specifically identifiable programs or projects." We agree. The projects or programs described in these cases also exemplify the essential nature of HEPA's intended reach and that the definition of "action" as "any program or project" – as opposed to, for example, "any activity whatsoever" – reflects that not every level of regulated activity is meant to be swept into HEPA's reach. The projects or programs in these cases stand in stark contrast to the activity of aquarium fish collection as 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
permitted under HRS § 188-31, which includes a parent netting
 
one or two fish from a stream for his or her child's fish tank,
 as well as larger scale commercial operations. It would be
 unprecedented to apply HEPA to require individual Hawai
'i 
citizens to undertake the EA process for such an activity. 
Hawai
'i courts have not construed "any program or project" to 
mean each and every government-regulated activity.
 
We also consider Appellants' argument in the context of
 
related Hawai 'i statutes and regulatory measures, including 
other individual licenses and permits. 
First, in casting HEPA review of individual aquarium
 
fish permits as the intended and necessary means to protect
 marine life and the reef ecosystem from the "unconstrained
 removal" of large numbers of aquarium fish, Appellants ignore
 the panoply of other regulatory tools that are in place. For
 example, HAR § 13-77-6 sets limits applicable to commercial
 aquarium fish permit holders in the waters of Oahu, including: 
limits to the length and height of small mesh nets (HAR § 13-77­6(a)); daily bag limits for yellow tang, kole, moorish idols,
 and other species (HAR § 13-77-6(b)); size restrictions and
 other prohibitions (including some complete bans) for yellow
 tang, kole, cleaner wrasse, certain butterfly fish, and other
 species (HAR § 13-77-6(c-f)). 
See also HRS § 187A-5 (2011). 
Commercial marine licensees (who are the only permittees allowed
 to take more than five fish per day) are also subject to monthly
 reporting requirements (HAR § 13-74-20(d)), and their licenses
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and permits may be subject to "such conditions [as are]
 
necessary to manage, protect, and conserve aquatic life" (HAR
 § 13-74-2(4)). 
See also  HRS §§ 189-2, 189-3 & 189-3.5 (2011). 
By statute and rule, Hawaii's waters include Marine Life
 Conservation Districts, Regional Fisheries Management Areas
 (including Fish Replenishment Areas), Shoreline Fisheries
 Management Areas (including Marine Protection Areas), and Marine
 Refuges. Hawai
'i law provides DLNR with numerous powers and 
duties to manage aquatic life and resources, comprehensively and
 systemically, rather than based on a separate environmental
 review for each fishing permit or license. See generally HRS
 
Chapters 187A (Aquatic Resources), 188 (Fishing Rights and
 Regulations), 188F (West Hawaii Regional Fishing Management
 Area), 189 (Commercial Fishing), 190 (Marine Life Conservation
 Program), and 195D (Conservation of Aquatic Life, Wildlife, and
 Land Plants). While this extensive statutory and regulatory
 framework is not dispositive of the issue of whether the
 activity of aquarium fish collection pursuant to an HRS § 188-31
 permit should be construed as a "program or project" under HEPA,
 we consider the meaning of the HEPA terms in light of other
 statutes touching upon the issue.
 
In addition, as argued by Amicus Curiae Pet Industry
 
Joint Advisory Council, the State implements numerous other
 permitting or licensing systems for similar activities. In
 addition to aquarium fish permits, DLNR's Division of Aquatic
 Resources issues, inter alia, bait fish licenses (HRS § 188-45
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2011)), bottomfishing vessel registrations (HAR § 13-94),
 
commercial marine licenses (HRS § 189-2), freshwater game fish
 licenses (HRS § 188-50 (2011)), special activity permits (HRS §
 187A-6 (2011)), West Hawai
'i aquarium permits (HAR § 13-60.4), 
and permits to enter or conduct activities in certain areas (HAR
 §§ 13-31 (Molokini Shoal), 13-60.5 (Northwestern Hawaiian
 Islands Marine Refuge), and 13-62 (Wahiawa Public Fishing
 Area)). Other DLNR divisions issue various other types of
 permits and licenses including hunting licenses, camping
 permits, collecting permits, access permits, commercial activity
 permits (
e.g., beach weddings), commercial harvest permits, and
 
marine event permits (for canoe, surf, swim, body board
 contests, beach clean up, sailing races, etc.), See generally
 Department of Natural Resources, www.dlnr.gov (last visited
 August 26, 2016). Appellants offer no rational distinction or
 logical reason why HEPA environmental review procedures should
 be required for aquarium fish permits, but not for these other
 types of licenses and permits. Nor would this expansive
 interpretation of "applicant action" be necessarily limited to
 activities permitted or licensed by DLNR.
 
An EA must provide a "detailed description of the
 
proposed action or project and evaluate direct, indirect, and
 
cumulative impacts , as well as consider alternatives to the
 
proposed project and describe any measures proposed to minimize
 potential impacts." Sierra Club II, 115 Hawai
'i at 307, 167 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.3d at 300 (emphasis added) (citation omitted). Cumulative
 
impact is defined as:
 
[T]he impact on the environment which results from the
incremental impact of the action when added to other past,
present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions
regardless of what agency or person undertakes such other
actions. Cumulative impacts can result from individually
minor but collectively significant actions taking place over
a period of time.
  
 
HAR § 11-200-2. Therefore, among other things, each individual
 
permit applicant would have to evaluate the cumulative impact of
 aquarium collection under all issued permits in his or her
 preparation of an EA. 
We conclude that to interpret "program or project" so 
sweepingly as to require individual aquarium fish permit applicants to undertake the EA process is not a "rational, sensible and practicable interpretation" of HEPA and would create an unreasonable, impractical, and absurd result. See 
Bowers, 88 Hawai
'i at 277, 965 P.2d at 1277. Accordingly, we 
hold that aquarium collection under an aquarium fish permit issued by DLNR pursuant to HRS § 188-31 is not an "applicant action" under HEPA. 
C. The DLNR's Exercise of Discretion
 DLNR also argues that, even if aquarium collection fell
 
within the definition of an "applicant action," it is not
 subject to HEPA because there is no discretionary agency
 approval of aquarium fish permits. This argument is without
 merit.
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Pursuant to HRS § 343-5(e), an EA is required only when
 
an applicant proposes an "action" that requires approval of an
 
agency. "Approval" is defined as "discretionary consent
 required from an agency prior to actual implementation of an
 action." HRS § 343-2. "Discretionary consent" means "a
 consent, sanction, or recommendation from an agency for which
 judgment and free will may be exercised by the issuing agency,
 as distinguished from ministerial consent." Id. "Ministerial
 consent" means "a consent, sanction, or recommendation from an
 agency upon a given set of facts, as prescribed by law or rule
 without the use of judgment or discretion." HAR § 11-200-2.
 
DLNR argues that it has no discretion as to whether or
 
not to issue an aquarium fish permit because the application

 
process is online and completely automatic. In other words, if
 an applicant fills in the online form and clicks the box
 accepting the "terms and conditions," an aquarium fish permit is
 issued. As Appellants argue, however, by its plain language,
 HRS § 188-31 gives DLNR discretionary authority over whether to
 approve a aquarium fish permit, stating that DLNR "may issue an
 aquarium fish permit" (HRS § 188-31(a)), and stating that DLNR
 must be satisfied that certain requirements are met, i.e., that
 "permits shall be issued only to persons who can satisfy [DLNR]

 
that they possess facilities to and can maintain fish and other
 aquatic life alive and in reasonable health" (HRS § 188-31(b)). 
The online form, including the applicant's representation that
 specified conditions are met, is simply the means by which DLNR
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
has determined to exercise its discretion. The legislative
 
history of HRS § 188-31 makes DLNR's discretionary authority
 clear, stating, inter alia, that the statute was "designed to
 permit the establishment of such an aquarium fishing industry
 and provides safeguards so that the abuse of the privilege of
 using fine mesh nets can be prevented." H. Stand. Comm. Rep.
 No. 586, in 1953 House Journal, at 675. HRS § 188-31(c)
 provides that DLNR may adopt rules for the purpose of the
 statute, suggesting that the Legislature intended that DLNR
 would have ample means with which to exercise its discretion. 
Accordingly, we reject DLNR's argument that a lack of
 discretionary approval provides a separate ground for denying
 Appellants' requested relief.
 V. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's Summary Judgment
 
Order and Judgment, both filed on June 24, 2013, are affirmed.
 On the briefs:
 Paul H. Achitoff,
Summer Kupau-Odo,
(EarthJustice),
for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
 
William J. Wynhoff,
Deputy Attorney General,
for Defendant-Appellee.
 
23
 