 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
   
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-20-0000435 20-MAY-2024 07:49 AM Dkt. 103 SO 
NO.  CAAP-20-0000435  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I  
CURT LANCE NAKAMURA, Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
CHARLENE KEIKO NAKAMURA, Defendant-Appellant  
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY  COURT OF THE FIRST  CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO.  1DV191000133)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Wadsworth, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and Guidry, JJ.)  
Defendant -Appellant Charlene Keiko Nakamura ( wife) 
appeals from the Order Denying Defendant's Motion and 
Declaration for Post Decree Relief Filed on March 3, 2020, 
entered by the Family Court of the First Circuit ( family court ) 
on June 15, 2020 .1 
1 The Honorable Jessi L.K. Hall presided.   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wife raises seven points of error on appeal. Upon 
careful review of the record and relevant legal authorities, and 
having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the 
issues raised by the parties, we resolve wife's points of error 
as follows: 
(1) With respect to wife's first five points of error, 
wife contends that she was entitled to relief: (1) from the 
divorce decree pursuant to Hawaiʻi Family Court Rules ( HFCR) 
Rule 60(b); and on the grounds that (2) the divorce decree was 
unconscionable; (3) Curt Lance Nakamura ( husband) "engaged in 
misconduct by not fully disclosing his financial status prior to 
wife entering into said divorce decree"; (4) husband 
"accelerated" the divorce process while she was "mentally weak"; 
and (5) she was not properly informed of husband's assets. 
"The standard of review for the grant or denial of 
a[n] HFCR Rule 60(b) motion is whether there has been an abuse 
of discretion." LaPeter v. LaPeter , 144 Hawaiʻi 295, 304, 
439 P.3d 247, 256 (App. 2019) (citation omitted). 
With regard to unconscionability, 
Unconscionability encompasses two principles: one -sidedness 
and unfair surprise. Lewis [v. Lewis , 69 Haw. 497, 502, 
748 P.2d 1362, 1366 (1988) ]. One-sidedness (i.e., 
substantive unconscionability) means that the agreement 
"leaves a post -divorce economic situation that is unjustly 
disproportionate. " Id. Unfair surprise (i.e., procedural 
unconscionability) means that "one party did not have full 
and adequate knowledge of the other party 's financial 
condition when the [marital] agreement was executed. " 
Balogh v. Balogh , 134 Hawaiʻi 29, 41, 332 P.3d 631, 643 (2014) . 
2   
 
 
   
   
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As the record reflects, husband filed a complaint for 
divorce in February 2019. Husband was represented by counsel; 
wife appeared self -represented, and filed an Appearance and 
Waiver on February 22, 2019. Each party filed their respective 
Income and Expense Statements and Asset and Debt Statements. In 
March 2019, the family court issued a Divorce Decree that, inter 
alia, awarded no alimony to either party, and divided the 
parties' assets and debts. There is no reservation of alimony 
in the divorce decree. Both parties approved the divorce decree 
as to form and content.2 
2 The divorce decree, as signed by wife, included the following 
acknowledgement, 
PARTIES' STATEMENT RE: ATTORNEY REPRESENTATION/VOLUNTARY 
EXECUTION. The parties acknowledge and understand that [husband] has been represented in this matter by COATES FREY TANIMOTO & 
GIBSON, ATTORNEYS AT LAW, LLLC. [Wife] was given the time and 
opportunity to obtain her own attorney. [Wife] further 
understands and acknowledges that [Wife] has been informed 
throughout these proceedings that said law firm represents only  
[husband] and not [wife], and [wife] is aware that such is the 
case although she may have had voluntary contact(s) with various 
personnel associated with said law firm during the processing of 
this agreement. Instead, [wife] acknowledges that she has been 
advised from the beginning that she has the right to consult with 
and/or retain independent counsel to review this Divorce Decree 
and all other documents or agreements made in this case with 
regard to their propriety and fairness and/or to represent [wife] 
in this matter. [Wife] acknowledges that her decision regarding 
consultation of lack of same with her own attorney and to proceed 
with the signing of any documents or agreements without also 
having an attorney review and/or sign same on her behalf has been 
reached knowingly, intelligently and voluntarily . Both [husband] 
and [wife] recognize, acknowledge and agree that in the event that any of [wife's] contacts or interactions with the Coates Frey Tanimoto & Gibson law firm could possibly be viewed in any 
way to constitute a conflict of interest or representation of any 
sort, then both [husband] and [wife] have hereby voluntarily, 
knowingly and intelligently waived any such conflict(s). Both 
[husband] and [wife] acknowledge that they have carefully read 
the Divorce Decree to be entered in this case and all the other 
supporting financial and other documentation pertinent to this  
(continued . . .) 
3   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
This appeal arises out of wife's second Motion and 
Declaration for Post-Decree Relief ( Second Motion for Relief ), 
filed in March 2020.   In the Second Motion for Relief, wife, who 
was represented by counsel, requested alimony and a 
recalculation of the parties' assets and debts. After a hearing 
on May 21, 2020, the family court determined that wife had not 
presented any evidence or arguments justifying relief under 
HFCR  Rule 60(b), and  denied the Second Motion for Relief.  3
The purpose of a motion for reconsideration is to allow the 
parties to present new evidence and/or arguments that could 
not have been presented during the earlier adjudicated 
motion. Reconsideration is not a device to relitigate old 
matters or to raise arguments or evidence that could and 
should have been brought during the earlier proceeding. 
Tagupa v. Tagupa, 108 Hawai‘i  459, 465, 121 P.3d 924, 930 (App. 
2005) (cleaned up).   
On this record, we conclude that wife has not shown 
that she presented any evidence or arguments that could not have 
2(. . .continued) 
matter. They both confirm that all said documents are current 
and accurate, and that they are completely aware of, and in 
agreement with, the contents of same . This document is the 
complete and final expression of all agreements made by the 
parties to this divorce. There are no other express or implied 
promises, or agreements, which are not set forth herein. Both 
parties acknowledge that they have voluntarily executed the 
Divorce Decree and any other documents or agreements pertaining 
to this case with sufficient knowledge of the facts, both 
parties' respective finances, and the applicable law; and that 
this Divorce Decree is fair and reasonable , and as such they both 
agree to be bound by this Decree and by their representations as 
contained herein. 
(Emphasis added.) 
3 Wife, represented by counsel, filed a first Motion and 
Declaration for Post-Decree Relief in June 2019. Wife withdrew this first 
motion on June 27, 2019. 
4   
 
 
  
   
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
been presented prior to entry of the divorce decree that the 
decree was unconscionable, that husband did not disclose his 
financial records prior to entering the divorce decree, that 
husband improperly "accelerated" the divorce process while wife 
was "ment ally weak," or that she was not properly informed of 
husband's assets. 
The family court did not abuse its discretion in 
denying wife's Second Motion for Relief. 
(2) Wife contends that the family court erred in 
refusing to set a trial on her Second Motion for Relief. 
"Decisions relating to the conduct of a trial or hearing and the 
adequacy of process usually involve the exercise of discretion, 
and thus warrant rev iew under the abuse of discretion standard 
on appeal." TSA Int'l Ltd. v. Shimizu Corp. , 92 Hawai ʻi 243, 
252, 990 P.2 713, 722 (1999) . In its discretion, a family court 
"may deny relief under Rule 60(b) without holding a hearing and 
may decide the issue on the basis of papers submitted." 
Cvitanovich -Dubie v. Dubie , 125 Hawai ʻi 128, 149, 254 P.3d 439, 
460 (2011) (citations omitted). 
At the hearing on wife's Second Motion for Relief, the 
family court determined that wife, who was present and 
represented by counsel, did not present any evidence or 
arguments that would support the motion. The family court noted 
that "[i]t is clear from the record that [wife] prepared and 
5   
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
signed her financial statements," and that "[s]he had the 
opportunity to request [husband's] financial statements prior to 
signing the Divorce Decree or even obtaining counsel prior to 
signing the Divorce Decree." Moreover, "[wife] [had] the 
opportunity t o file her initial motion [for relief from the 
Divorce Decree]," and, with the advice of counsel, "she chose to 
withdraw it." The Second Motion for Relief thus lacked merit, 
and the family court did not abuse its discretion in denying the 
motion without a trial or evidentiary hearing. 
(3) Wife contends that the family court mislabeled its 
Findings of Fact ( FOF) nos. 19, 20, and 21; i.e., that FOF no. 
19 is actually a mixed FOF and conclusion of law ( COL), and FOF 
nos. 20 and 21 are actually COLs.4 The family court's FOF no. 23 
provides that, "[t]o the extent that any Finding of Fact herein 
is a Conclusion of Law, it shall be so construed." The family 
court's COL no. 4 provides that, "[t]o the extent any Conclusion 
of Law herein is a Finding of Fa ct, it shall be so construed." 
"[T]he trial court's label is not determinative of the standard 
of review. A determination that embraces an ultimate fact is a 
factual finding subject to the clearly erroneous standard of 
review even though classified as a COL." Crosby v. State Dep 't 
of Budget & Fin ., 76 Hawai ʻi 332, 340, 876 P.2d 1300, 1308 (1994) 
4 The family court entered its Findings of Fact and Conclusions of 
Law, with regard to its Order Denying wife's Second Motion for Relief, on 
August 7, 2020. 
6   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(citation omitted) . We conclude that FOF no. 19 is not clearly 
erroneous, and, to the extent FOF nos. 20 and 21 could be 
construed as mislabeled COLs, they are not wrong. 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the family 
court's Order Denying Defendant's Motion and Declaration for 
Post Decree Relief Filed on March 3, 2020 , entered on June 15, 
2020. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai ʻi, May 20, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
Presiding Judge 
Stephen T. Hioki , 
for Defendant -Appellant. /s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
Associate Judge 
Kai Lawrence , 
for Plaintiff -Appellee. /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
Associate Judge 
7 