 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS  AND P ACIFIC REPORTER  
 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000299 27-SEP-2024 07:59 AM Dkt. 76 SO 
NO. CAAP-23-0000299 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
D.F., Plaintiff-Appellant, v. 
T.F., nka T.Y., Defendant-Appellee. 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 3DV181000175) 
  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: 
Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant Father appeals from the Family 
Court of the Third Circuit's  April 17, 2023 "Decision and Order 
Following Trial re: Child Custody, Timesharing, Child Support, 
Child Related Expenses and Fees[.]" 1
In September 2019, the family court entered a divorce 
decree2 awarding legal and physical custody of the three minor 
children to Father with a time-sharing schedule. At the time of 
1 The Honorable Jeffrey W. Ng presided. 
2 The Honorable Charles H. Hite presided.   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the divorce decree, Father was represented by counsel and 
Defendant-Appellee Mother was not. 
In September 2020, a year later, and represented by 
counsel, Mother moved for post-decree relief requesting sole 
legal and physical custody of the children and to relocate to 
Connecticut. Mother provided a statement explaining that a 
change in custody was in the best interests of the children 
based on, among other reasons: lack of supervision while Father worked; Father's physical violence towards one of the children; 
Father's use of pain medication; and the children's poor 
performance and poor attendance at school. 
Following trial, the family court found Mother 
credible and Father not credible. The family court further 
found that the issue of domestic violence was not litigated in 
the "initial divorce case," Father committed family violence, 
Father was emotionally abusive and used coercive control, 
"Mother's concern that Father abuses prescription medication and is unsafe for the Children is credible and valid," and Father 
neglected the children's educational and health needs. 
The family court granted Mother's request as to the 
youngest child, concluding it was in that child's best interest 
to relocate with Mother. The family court noted that when the 
proceedings began, the oldest child was a minor but had turned 
18 years old by the time trial ended and moved to another state. 
2   
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The family court also noted the middle child was going to turn 
18 in two months. 
On appeal, Father argues (1) res judicata bars 
Mother's abuse claims, and (2) Mother failed to show relocation 
was in the youngest child's best interest. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve the points of error as discussed below, and affirm. 
(1) In asserting claim preclusion, Father contends 
"[i]f Mother desired for her allegations of abuse to be raised 
and considered by the Court prior to having their divorce 
finalized, she should - and could - have raised them at the 
divorce trial in August 2019" and in her motions to reconsider. 
Res judicata, or claim preclusion, "prohibits a party 
from relitigating a previously adjudicated cause of action." 
Bremer v. Weeks
, 104 Hawai‘i 43, 53, 85 P.3d 150, 160 (2004) 
(citation omitted). But, res judicata appears less constraining 
when a court considers the best interest of the child factors while modifying a custody order. 
See generally
, Tumaneng v.
Tumaneng
, 138 Hawai‘i 468, 473, 474, 382 P.3d 280, 285, 286 
(2016) (allowing evidence of pre-decree family violence to be brought forth in a custody modification hearing). 
3   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Under Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571-46 (2018), 
the family court considers the best interest of the child when 
making a custody award, and any custody award is subject to further order by the court. HRS § 571-46(a)(6) ("Any custody 
award shall be subject to modification or change whenever the 
best interests of the child require or justify the modification 
or change[.]"); HRS § 571-46(a) ("In actions for divorce . . . 
or any other proceeding where there is at issue a dispute as to 
the custody of a minor child, the court . . . may make an order 
for the custody of the minor child as may seem necessary or 
proper."). 
In every proceeding where the custody of a child is at 
issue, "a determination by the court that family violence has been committed by a parent raises a rebuttable presumption that 
it is detrimental to the child and not in the best interest of 
the child to be placed in sole custody, joint legal custody, or 
joint physical custody with the perpetrator of family violence." 
HRS § 571-46(a)(9). 
And the family court is required to 
consider "[a]ny history of sexual or physical abuse of a child 
by a parent[.]" HRS § 571-46(b)(1). 
Here, the family court found the "issue of domestic 
violence was not litigated during the initial divorce case." 
Father does not challenge this finding in his points of error. 
Hawai‘i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4). 
4   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The family court also found Father committed domestic 
violence and sexual violence against Mother, and committed 
domestic abuse against the oldest child who was still a minor at 
the start of trial. The family court also determined Father 
committed family violence. Father does not challenge these 
findings in his points of error. HRAP Rule 28(b)(4). 
Under these circumstances, the family court properly 
considered evidence of violence in determining the best interests of the children pursuant to HRS § 571-46, and claim 
preclusion did not bar the consideration of such evidence. 
(2) Father next contends the family court "was clearly 
erroneous and also abused its discretion in allowing [the 
youngest child] to relocate with Mother because Mother did not 
meet her burden of proving that the relocation was in [the 
youngest child]'s best interests." (Formatting altered.) 
HRS § 571-46 sets forth the "[c]riteria and procedure 
in awarding custody and visitation," and " Hawai‘i courts have 
consistently adhered to the best interests of the child standard as paramount when considering the issue of custody." HRS § 571
-
46 (emphasis omitted); Fisher v. Fisher
, 111 Hawai‘i 41, 50, 137 
P.3d 355, 364 (2006). "In doing so, the family court is granted 
broad discretion to weigh the various factors involved, with no 
single factor being given presumptive paramount weight, in determining whether the standard has been met." 
Id.
5   
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, the family court methodically evaluated the 16 
factors listed in HRS § 571-46(b), with 12 factors weighing in 
Mother's favor, one factor weighing in Father's favor, and the 
other three factors being inapplicable or not clearly in either 
party's favor. 
As to the factors in Mother's favor, the family court 
found Father committed physical violence against the oldest 
child; Father was emotionally abusive and coercively controlling; Father neglected the children's educational, 
emotional, and health needs; Father did not support the 
children's relationship with Mother; Mother did not abandon the 
children but was escaping domestic violence; Mother's concern 
about children's safety due to father's use of pain medication 
was credible; Mother's claim that Father made visitation 
difficult was credible, and Mother demonstrated she was willing 
to consider the needs of the children ahead of her own. 
The family court found Mother credible and, thus, 
Mother's testimony provided sufficient evidence to support these findings. "It is well-settled that an appellate court will not 
pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and 
the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of 
fact." Fisher
, 111 Hawai‘i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360 (citation 
omitted). 
6   
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As to relocation in particular, the appointed custody 
fact finder in this case testified the youngest child "is bright 
and that the educational opportunit[ies] in Connecticut [are] 
substantially better than [Hawaiʻ i]."  He further testified it 
was his opinion the youngest child "would do well overall and 
thrive in Connecticut." 
Because the family court considered the factors 
outlined in HRS § 571-46(b), assessed the credibility of 
witnesses, and accorded weight to certain witnesses over others, 
the family court did not abuse its discretion in determining it 
was in the youngest child's best interest to relocate to 
Connecticut to live with Mother. See Fisher, 111 Hawai‘ i at 50-
51, 137 P.3d at 364-65 ("Inasmuch as the family court accorded 
weight to certain witnesses over others and those witnesses provided evidence that the relocation would benefit the 
children, the ICA did not err in upholding the family court's 
findings and conclusions regarding the best interests of the 
children."). 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the family court's 
April 17, 2023 "Decision and Order Following Trial re: Child 
7   
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Custody, Timesharing, Child Support, Child Related Expenses and 
Fees[.]" 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai‘i, September 27, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
 Acting Chief Judge 
Rosa Flores,  
for Plaintiff-Appellant. /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
 Associate Judge 
David B. Leas,  
for Defendant-Appellee. /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge 
8 