NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0001072
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
ROARING LION, LLC, a Montana Limited Liability Company;
DAVID COWAN and NATHALIE COWAN; UMANG P. GUPTA and
RUTH M. GUPTA, as Trustees of the Umang and Ruth Gupta Trust
under Trust Agreement dated January 18, 2000;
and PAUOA BEACH 8 LLC, a Hawai' i Limited
 
Liability Company, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
EXCLUSIVE RESORTS PBL1, LLC, a Delaware Limited
Liability Company; and EXCLUSIVE RESORTS PBL3, LLC
a Delaware Limited Liability Company, Defendants-Appellees
and
 
PAUOA BAY PROPERTIES, LLC, a Delaware Limited Liability
Company; WHITE SAND BEACH LIMITED PARTNERSHIP, a Delaware
Limited Partnership; PAUOA BEACH REALTY LLC, a Hawai' i
 
Limited Liability Company, JOHN DOES 1-50, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 04-1-0332)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Roaring Lion, LLC, David Cowan,
 
Nathalie Cowan, Umang P. Gupta, Ruth M. Gupta, and Pauoa Beach 8
 
LLC (Plaintiffs) appeal from the December 5, 2011 Amended Final
 
Judgment and related orders entered in the Circuit Court of the
 
1
Third Circuit  (circuit court).  The circuit court entered
 
1
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided .
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2judgment in favor of Defendants-Appellees Exclusive Resorts PBL1,
LLC (ER1) and Exclusive Resorts PBL3, LLC (ER3) (Defendants).
I.  BACKGROUND
A. Factual Background
This appeal concerns the Pauoa Beach subdivision within
the Mauna Lani Resort (Resort) master development2 in the County
of Hawai# i.  The Resort includes hotels, residences, retail
operations, recreational areas, golf courses, and other uses and
services.  All lots in the Pauoa Beach subdivision are subject to
both the Mauna Lani Resort Association Declaration of Covenants
and Restrictions (Resort Declaration) and the Pauoa Beach
Declaration of Covenants, Conditions, Restrictions, and Easements
(Pauoa Beach Declaration) (collectively, Project Documents).
Pauoa Beach consists of two subdivisions with
residential lots: a subdivision of oceanfront lots (Makai
Subdivision) and a subdivision of non-oceanfront lots (Mauka
Subdivision).  Plaintiffs own lots in the Makai Subdivision of
Pauoa Beach.  In December 2003, non-party Exclusive Resorts, LLC
(ER) - Defendants' parent company - purchased lots in the Mauka
Subdivision.  The lots were consolidated and renamed Lot B, and
ER received approval from the Mauna Lani Resort Design Committee
to build eight condominium units in the form of four duplexes on
Lot B.  ER assigned its purchase agreement for Lot B to its
subsidiary ER1.  Upon completion of constructing residences at
the Pauoa Beach lots, Defendants intended to make the residences
available to members of a luxury destination club, the details of
which are discussed further below.  During the litigation of the
summary judgment rulings on appeal, construction of the four
duplexes on Lot B was underway, and there is no evidence
2A "master development" means "a real estate development that
consists of more than one project, including but not limited to a planned
community association subject to [Hawai# i Revised Statutes (HRS)] chapter 421J
[(2004 Repl.)] with one or more sub-associations."  HRS § 514E-1(D) (2006 Repl.) . 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
regarding actual use of Lot B by members of the destination club. 
However, the record indicates destination club members who stayed
 
elsewhere in the Resort received some access to Pauoa Beach
 
facilities.
 
The Resort Declaration governs the permitted uses in
 
all subdivisions within the Resort, including Pauoa Beach, and
 
states that all property within the Resort is subject to certain
 
restrictive covenants running with the land. Article V lists the
 
restrictive covenants and contains a section providing general
 
restrictions on land use. Section 1(a)(14) states: 
(14) Except in the case of Commercial Lots, no
gainful occupation, profession or trade shall be maintained
on any Lot or in any structure on any Lot without the prior
approval of the [Resort] Board, except that this provision
shall in no way limit or restrict Declarant or Declarant's
Nominees in their activities prior to the sale, leasing or
other development of Lots within the Mauna Lani Resort nor
prevent Owners from renting their houses, apartment units or
Condominium Units.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
The Pauoa Beach Declaration states: "Developers intend
 
to develop the Property for residential use comprised of Lots and
 
the Association Property and, at the election of Developers, one
 
or more Condominium Projects, and to sell or otherwise convey the
 
Lots, Units and Association Property." The Pauoa Beach
 
Declaration provides that if it contains a provision more
 
restrictive than that in the Resort Declaration, the more
 
restrictive provision controls. The Pauoa Beach Declaration
 
contains the following use restrictions:
 
§ 15.4.1 Residential Use. All Lots and Units shall be
 
used only for residential use (whether transient or
permanent) and incidental activities and in compliance with
the Resort Declaration and applicable law (including zoning
ordinances and building codes). As provided in the Resort
Declaration, no gainful occupation, profession or trade
shall be maintained on any Lot or Condominium Common
Elements or within any Unit without the prior approval of
the Board of Directors of the Resort Association.
 . . .
 
§ 15.4.13 Timeshare Prohibited. No timeshare use or
 
ownership plan to which Chapter 514-E, [HRS] would be
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4applicable shall be permitted with respect to all or any
portions of the Property.
(Emphases added.)
The deed to Lot B stated the property was expressly
subject to the Project Documents' restrictive covenants, and the
purchase agreement contained a use restriction provision stating:
"The Lot shall at all times be occupied and used only for
residential purposes in accordance with applicable laws, the
Resort Declaration and the Pauoa Beach Declaration and for no
other purposes."
B. Procedural Background
On October 7, 2004, Plaintiffs filed a complaint
alleging the Project Documents only allowed for residential use
in Pauoa Beach and prohibited "commercial, hotel, transient or
vacation rental, time-share, club activities and the like."  The
complaint sought a judicial declaration that the Project
Documents prohibited Defendants' proposed use of Lot B and
requested an order enjoining ER1 from operating a destination
club within Pauoa Beach.  The complaint also asserted breach of
fiduciary duty by and statutory claims against the subdivision
developers, Pauoa Bay Properties, LLC (PBP) and White Sand Beach
L.P., and misrepresentation by the developers and their broker. 
On July 25, 2005, Plaintiffs filed a First Amended Complaint
(FAC) adding ER3 as a defendant.
On February 24, 2005, Plaintiffs filed a motion for
partial summary judgment asserting that ER1's intended use
violates the Pauoa Beach Declaration's restrictive covenant
against "time share use or ownership plans to which Chapter 514E,
Hawai#i Revised Statutes [(2006 Repl.)] would be applicable"
(Plaintiffs' HRS Chapter 514E MSJ).  On March 31, 2005, PBP filed
a cross-motion for partial summary judgment on all claims
relating to compliance with the Project Documents' restrictions
relating to residential use in Pauoa Beach (Cross-Motion).  InNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
April 2005, ER1 joined PBP's Cross-Motion and also filed a motion
 
for partial summary judgment on the interpretation and
 
application of HRS Chapter 514E (ER1's HRS Chapter 514E MSJ).
 
On July 19, 2005, the circuit court filed its order (1)
 
denying Plaintiffs' HRS Chapter 514E MSJ and (2) granting ER1's
 
HRS Chapter 514E MSJ. On July 27, 2005, the circuit court filed
 
its order granting PBP's Cross-Motion.
 
On December 13, 2010, Defendants filed a motion for
 
attorneys' fees, and on May 11, 2011, the circuit court filed an
 
order granting in part Defendants' motion for attorneys fees.
 
On May 17, 2007, the circuit court entered an order
 
granting Defendants' motion for summary judgment on any remaining
 
claims asserted in Plaintiffs' FAC. On December 5, 2011, the
 
circuit court entered its Amended Final Judgment, which resolved
 
all claims against all parties. Defendants filed a timely notice
 
of appeal from the Amended Final Judgment on December 20, 2011.
 
On appeal, Plaintiffs contend the circuit court erred
 
in:
 
(1) holding that Defendants' use would not violate the
 
Project Documents' covenants regarding residential use in Pauoa
 
Beach;
 
(2) holding that Defendants' use did not constitute a
 
time share use plan as defined under HRS § 514E-1 and therefore
 
did not violate the Pauoa Beach Declaration's prohibition of time
 
share use plans; and
 
(3) awarding Defendants' attorneys fees.3
 
3
 Plaintiffs also raised as a point of error the circuit court's
August 18, 2010 decision to stay certain orders regarding the enforcement of an
interim settlement agreement. This argument requires us to analyze the merits of
the enforcement orders at issue in a related appeal under consolidated case Nos.
30152 and CAAP-12-00000003. Given the Memorandum Opinion being filed
simultaneously in the related appeal, concluding that there was no enforceable
settlement agreement, the circuit court's stay order is moot. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6II.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW
A. Summary Judgment
The standard of review for the grant or denial of a
motion for summary judgment is well-settled.  "Unlike other
appellate matters, in reviewing summary judgment decisions
an appellate court steps into the shoes of the trial court
and applies the same legal standard as the trial court
applied."  Beamer v. Nishiki, 66 Haw. 572, 577, 670 P.2d
1264, 1270 (1983).  "[The appellate] court reviews a circuit
court's grant or denial of summary judgment de novo." 
Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai# i 43, 51, 85 P.3d 150, 158 (2004)
(quoting Hawai#i Cmty. Fed. Credit Union v. Keka, 94 Hawai# i
213, 221, 11 P.3d 1, 9 (2000)).
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together, with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law.  A fact is material if
proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties.  The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party.  In other
words, we must view all of the evidence and the
inferences drawn therefrom, in the light most
favorable to the party opposing the motion.
Omerod v. Heirs of Kaheananui, 116 Hawai# i 239, 254-55, 172
P.3d 983, 998-99 (2007) (citations omitted) (emphasis
added).
Blaisdell v. Dep't of Public Safety, 119 Hawai #i 275, 282, 196
P.3d 277, 284 (2008).
B. Award of Attorneys' Fees
[The appellate] court reviews the trial court's grant
or denial of attorneys' fees and costs under the abuse of
discretion standard.  Price [v. AIG Hawai# i Ins. Co.], 107
Hawai#i [106,] 110, 111 P.3d [1,] 5 [(2005)].
The trial court abuses its discretion if it bases its
ruling on an erroneous view of the law or on a clearly
erroneous assessment of the evidence.  Stated
differently, an abuse of discretion occurs where the
trial court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason
or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice
to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.
 
Id.
Enoka v. AIG Hawaii Ins. Co., Inc., 109 Hawai #i 537, 544, 128
P.3d 850, 857 (2006).NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7III.  DISCUSSION
A. The Meaning of "Residential Use" and the Prohibition on
"Gainful Occupation, Profession or Trade"
Plaintiffs presented uncontroverted evidence to the
circuit court indicating Defendants provided or intended to
provide a number of services and amenities in conjunction with
the rental of Defendants' units.  ER's chief executive officer
described ER's operations as "combin[ing] the size and elegance
of a private home with the amenities of a five-star hotel."  He
further stated:
We provide complete staffing for all our locations.  This
includes, at a minimum, local concierge and housekeeping. 
We also make available private chefs, massage therapists,
and other high end service providers. In many markets,
including Hawai# i, we also provide our Members with access
to our fleet of automobiles.  Our current Hawai# i
automobiles include Toyota Sequoia's [sic] and electric GEM
cars.
 
The circuit court concluded Defendants' use would not
violate any of the Project Documents' use restrictions.  The
court noted the Project Declarations' provisions generally
require all lots and units in the Pauoa Beach Subdivision be used
for residential purposes only and therefore, commercial uses are
prohibited at Pauoa Beach.  The court determined Defendants'
rental of units would not constitute a commercial use, stating:
"Article V, § 1(a)(14) of the Resort Declaration makes
clear . . . that owners may rent their homes or units.  This
would be considered a residential use rather than a commercial
use." Consequently, the circuit court granted partial summary
judgment in Defendants' favor on this issue.
"The fundamental rule in construing restrictive
covenants is that the intention of the parties as shown by the
covenant governs."  DeMund v. Lum,  5 Haw. App. 336, 342, 690 P.2d
1316, 1321 (1984).  In construing the covenant, "the court is not
limited to dictionary definitions, but the meaning of words used
is governed by the intention of the parties . . . .  The words   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
are to be taken in their ordinary and popular sense . . . unless
 
it appears from the context that the parties intended to use them
 
in a different sense." Id. at 342-43, 690 P.2d at 1321 (quoting
 
20 Am. Jur. 2d Covenants § 186 (1965)).
 The restrictions' language and the surrounding
 
circumstances support the circuit court's conclusion that
 short-term rentals for profit may be considered a residential
 
use. The Pauoa Beach Declaration specifically states residential
 
uses may be either "transient or permanent." The Pauoa Beach
 
subdivision is located in an area zoned "resort-hotel," and the
 
record indicates at least one other lot on the subdivision was
 
being used as a transient vacation rental. Therefore, the mere
 
fact an owner rents a unit, even on a short-term basis and for a
 
profit, does not turn the unit's use from residential to
 
commercial.
4
 
Plaintiffs agree the Project Documents generally permit
 
rentals but contend the restrictive covenants, when read in their
 
entirety, bar owners from carrying on "commercial" activity in
 
renting their units. We agree. Furthermore, based on the record
 
before us of Defendants' activities and of the parties' intent as
 
expressed by the Project Documents' language, we conclude there
 
is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Defendants'
 
rental activities rise to the level of commercial activity. 
4 The majority of jurisdictions that have addressed the scope of the
term "residential use" have also concluded the short-term rental of property
may be considered a "residential use" when the occupants use the property only
for ordinary residential purposes such as eating and sleeping. Slaby v.
Mountain River Estates Residential Ass'n, Inc., 100 So. 3d 569, 578-79, 582
(Ala. Civ. App. 2012), cert. denied, No. 1110881 (Ala. 2012). The
 "residential" nature is not defeated by the transitory duration of the rental
or by the owner's receipt of rental income and commercial benefit. Id. at
 
580-81. See also Pinehaven Planning Bd. v. Brooks, 70 P.3d 664 (Idaho 2003)
(holding that restrictive covenants disallowing "commercial or industrial
ventures or business of any type" from being maintained on any lot in the
subdivision were not ambiguous and, "according to their plain meaning, clearly
allow the rental of residential property[,]" whether short-term or long-term,
because the use "does not violate the prohibition on commercial and business
activity as such terms are commonly understood"); Lowden v. Bosley, 909 A.2d
261 (Md. 2005); Mullin v. Silvercreek Condo. Owners Ass'n, 195 S.W.3d 484 (Mo.
App. 2006); Mason Family Trust v. DeVaney, 207 P.3d 1176 (N.M. Ct. App. 2009).
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Although we are aware our courts "resolve substantial 
doubts or ambiguity in restrictive covenants against the person 
seeking enforcement[,]" Hiner v. Hoffman, 90 Hawai' i 188, 195, 
977 P.2d 878, 885 (1999) (emphasis added and omitted), "[t]he fundamental rule in construing restrictive covenants is that the 
intention of the parties as shown by the covenant governs[.]" 
DeMund, 5 Haw. App. at 342, 690 P.2d at 1321. "[T]he rule 
regarding construction favoring the free use of land is not 
applicable . . . where the evidence of intent is clear and 
unrefuted." Id. 
Here, the Project Documents' language clearly and
 
unambiguously evince an intent to prohibit commercial activity on
 
the Pauoa Beach lots. The Resort Declaration contemplates only
 
two types of lots: residential and commercial. The Resort
 
Declaration defines a "Residential Lot" as a lot used for
 
"residential purposes" by a single family or by more than one
 
family. A "Commercial Lot" is defined as a lot "designated for
 
commercial purposes." The Project Documents' two provisions
 
prohibiting the maintenance of a "gainful occupation, profession
 
or trade" are the only general use restrictions in the Project
 
Documents that differentiate between "commercial" and
 
"residential" lots. Therefore, because the Project Documents
 
contemplate only two types of lot use, and because the
 
prohibition of "gainful occupation, profession or trade" is the
 
only use restriction unique to residential lots, any use rising
 
to the level of maintaining a "gainful occupation, profession or
 
trade" constitutes a commercial use and cannot be deemed
 
"residential" within the meaning of the Project Documents.
 
Our interpretation of the term "commercial" is further
 
informed by the Resort Declaration's definition of the term
 
"Commercial Apartment" as "a building or structure containing
 
apartment units which are owned substantially by a single common
 
entity and rented or leased for profit." (Emphasis added.).
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendants note the term "Commercial Apartment" does not appear
 
elsewhere in the Resort Declaration and appears again only in the
 
Resort's bylaws, under the section addressing voting rights
 
classifications. Consequently, the circuit court concluded the
 
Resort Declaration's definition of a "Commercial Apartment" "does
 
not relate to use restrictions on those units" but rather "is
 
used to categorize ownership interests in order to determine
 
voting power and assessments." Although the term may relate
 
primarily to voting power, the definition is nevertheless
 
relevant to our determination of the meaning intended by the
 
parties because we must consider the entire context of the
 
covenants. See Pelosi v. Wailea Ranch Estates, 10 Haw. App. 424,
 
436, 876 P.2d 1320, 1327 (1994) ("[T]he intent of the parties, as
 gleaned from the entire context of the covenant, governs."). 
Defendants contend our analysis of a potential breach 
of a use restriction should focus not on the unit owners' 
activities but rather on the unit's occupants, who use the units 
for residential purposes. Our case law, however, demonstrates 
that we must consider the nature and character of the owner's 
use. In Chang v. Magbee, 45 Haw. 454, 3700 P.2d 479(1962), the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court concluded a convalescent home violated a 
restrictive covenant prohibiting, among other operations, a boarding house or hospital. Although the inhabitants used the 
home for residential purposes, the supreme court reached its 
decision in part because of the services the home's owners 
provided (food, lodging, laundry services, and assistance with 
daily activities). Id., 45 Haw. at 455, 370 P.2d at 480. 
Moreover, in determining whether rental activities
 
exceed the scope of "residential use," one factor other
 
jurisdictions have found relevant is whether the owner provided
 
services or conducted transactions on-site.
5 The nature and
 
5
 For example, in Applegate v. Colucci, 908 N.E.2d 1214 (Ind. Ct.
 
App. 2009), the court analyzed restrictive covenants requiring subdivision
(continued...)
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
extent of such services (such as any increase in noise, traffic,
 
or pollution; the hours of operation; and whether outside
 
employees would be working on-site) are also relevant to whether
 
Defendants' use constitute "incidental activities," which are
 
permitted under the "residential use" provisions.6 See Pauoa
 
Beach Declaration § 15.4.1 ("All Lots and Units shall be used
 only for residential use (whether transient or permanent) and
 
incidental activities[.]").
 
As noted above, it is undisputed in this case that
 
Defendants intended to provide a number of services and amenities
 
to its renters. Because construction of Defendants' Pauoa Beach
 
units was ongoing during the summary judgment proceedings,
 
however, there is little in the record before us that we can use
 
to accurately determine the impact of Defendants' intended use of
 
its Lot B units. At oral argument, Defendants' counsel did not
 
know whether Defendants' services and amenities would be provided
 
at the units or off-site, and it is unclear from the record the
 
extent to which such activities would result in increased noise,
 
traffic, or usage of the subdivision's common facilities.
 
5(...continued)
parcels be "used only for residential purposes" and stating: "No commercial
business shall be carried on upon any parcel. . . . Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the leasing or renting of property or structures for residential
use[.]" Id.
 at 1217. The court concluded the owners' short-term rental of
 
their cabins was allowed, but the maintenance of a rental office on the
property created a question of fact as to whether covenants were violated.
Id. at 1219-21. See also Slaby, 100 So.3d at 580 (specifically noting the
owners rented their cabin as a residence but did not provide any services to
their tenants and did not conduct any mercantile or financial transactions
on-site); Yogman v. Parrott, 937 P.2d 1019, 1021 (Or. 1997) (noting the owners
"provide no goods, staff, or services at the house" and "renters use their own
linens, do their own cleaning, buy and prepare their own food, and take out
their own garbage").
 
6
 Compare Sullivans Island v. Byrum, 413 S.E.2d 325 (S.C. Ct. App.
 
1992) (use of part of home as a bed and breakfast was not "incidental and
secondary" to residential use of property because the boarding operations
"dominated the character and use of the residence") and Gregory v. State Dep't of
Mental Health, Retardation & Hosps., 495 A.2d 997 (R.I. 1985) (concluding group
home for six persons with disabilities was within the scope of "single-family
dwelling" and "residential purposes only," noting that necessities of group homes
(such as maintaining records and providing care in exchange for payment) were
incidental to primary purpose of operating as family housekeeping unit, and the
home would not alter the neighborhood's character and quality of life).
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
12Based on the foregoing, we conclude that although the
Project Documents expressly allow "transient" rentals, the
Project Documents on the whole establish the parties' intent to
limit the scale and scope of the unit owners' rental activity. 
We further conclude that whether Defendants' intended use rises
to the level of maintaining a "gainful occupation, profession or
trade" remains a genuine issue of material fact.  The circuit
court erred in granting partial summary judgment on the issue of
whether Defendants' use violated any of the Project Documents'
restrictions related to residential use.  
B. "Time Share Plan" Under HRS Chapter 514E
Upon completion of constructing residences at their
Pauoa Beach lots, Defendants intended to make their residences
available to members of a destination club.  Defendants planned
to assign their occupancy rights to Exclusive Resorts Club
Management, LLC, ("Club") which operated a destination club that
provided its members with access to a portfolio of vacation
residences in locations around the world.  Members paid a
one-time membership fee of up to $375,000 and annual dues ranging
from $9,500 to $30,000.
The Club's membership agreement set forth the
membership's terms and conditions.  Under the membership
agreement, every member had the right to use Club properties for
a set number of "included days" according to the member's
purchased usage plan.  For example, a "Silver" usage plan
entitled the member to use Club properties for thirty "included
days," and a "Platinum" plan entitled the member to sixty
"included days."  Additionally, once a member has used all of his
or her "included days" for the year, the member could also
purchase an unlimited number of additional days for $1,500 per
night.  The membership agreement further specified that a
member's opportunity to occupy available Club properties was on a
"first-come, first-served basis."NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiffs contend Defendants' use of Lot B constitutes
 
a time share use plan governed by HRS Chapter 514E and is
 
therefore prohibited under the Pauoa Beach Declaration. Section
 
15.4.13 of the Pauoa Beach Declaration provides: "No timeshare 
use or ownership plan to which Chapter 514-E [sic], Hawai' i 
Revised Statutes would be applicable shall be permitted with respect to all or any portions of the Property." 
HRS Chapter 514E regulates the sale and operation of 
time share plans in Hawai' i. Preliminarily, Plaintiffs contend 
Chapter 514E is a remedial statute and should be broadly construed to accomplish "the protective purpose and policy of the 
statute that time sharing and transient vacation rentals should 
not be permitted where the life styles of the permanent residents 
will be disrupted in an unreasonable manner." Reefshare, Ltd. v. 
Nagata, 70 Haw. 93, 100, 762 P.2d 169, 174 (1988) 
The statutory language and legislative history indicate
 
the legislature promulgated Chapter 514E to carry out two
 policies: the protection of consumers who purchase time share
 
interests, and the preservation of the residential character of
 
neighborhoods. Neither policy concern is present in this case. 
First, Plaintiffs undisputedly are not consumers who purchased
 
time share interests. As for the second policy concern, the
 
legislature chose to protect residential lifestyle by generally
 
prohibiting time shares except "[i]n areas designated for hotel
 
use, resort use, or transient vacation rentals, pursuant to
 
county authority under section 46-4 [("County zoning")][.]" HRS
 
§ 514E-5 (2006 Repl.); see also Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 8-80, in
 
1980 Senate Journal, at 941-42. Thus, the legislature intended
 
to authorize time shares on property that can lawfully be used
 
for hotel purposes. As noted above, the Pauoa Beach subdivision
 
is located in an area zoned "resort-hotel," and the Pauoa Beach
 
Declaration permits transient rental usage of the property.
 
Because this case's circumstances do not implicate the
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
legislative concerns underlying Chapter 514E, Plaintiffs'
 
argument for a broad construction of the statute is unpersuasive. 
HRS § 514E-30 (2006 Repl.) establishes the Chapter's
 
scope and states: 
This chapter applies to the offer and sale in Hawai' i of 
time share interests in time share units located in 
Hawai'i . . . As to the offer and sale outside of Hawai' i of 
time share interest in a time share plan which includes timeshare units located in Hawai' i, this chapter . . . shall apply. 
Defendants contend the Club's operations are outside the
 
Chapter's scope because Defendants hold title to their Pauoa
 
Beach lots in full and were not offering to sell any interests in
 
their lots. However, HRS § 514E-1's definition of a "time share
 
interest" does not require that purchasers receive an ownership
 
interest. Rather, the statute defines the term broadly to mean
 
"any interest in a time share unit or plan which entitles the
 
owner or holder thereof to the use . . . of a time share unit[.]" 
HRS § 514E-1. The Club gives its members rights to temporary use
 
of its accommodations, which is a sufficient interest to fall
 
within the broad definition of a "time share interest."
 
As to whether the Club constitutes a "time share plan,"
 
HRS § 514E-1 provides the following definitions:
 
§514E-1 Definitions .
 
. . . .
 
"Time share plan" means any plan or program in which
the use, occupancy, or possession of one or more time share
units circulates among various persons for less than a
sixty-day period in any year, for any occupant. The term
time share plan shall include both time share ownership
plans and time share use plans, as follows:
 
(1)
 "Time share ownership plan" means any arrangement
whether by tenancy in common, sale, deed or by other
means, whereby the purchaser receives an ownership
interest and the right to use the property for a
specific or discernible period by temporal division.
 
(2) "Time share use plan" means any arrangement, excluding
normal hotel operations, whether by membership agreement,
lease, rental agreement, license, use agreement, security or
other means, whereby the purchaser receives a right to use
accommodations or facilities, or both, in a time share unit
for a specific or discernible period by temporal division,
but does not receive an ownership interest.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Plaintiffs did not assert at the trial level or on
 
appeal that Defendant's use constituted a time share ownership
 
plan. In any case, the Club's membership agreement expressly
 
dictates that Club members do not receive "investment, equity or
 
ownership interest or any other real property interest[.]"
 
Therefore, we limit our analysis to whether Defendant's use falls
 
within the definition of a "time share plan" and "time share use
 
plan." 
Because the statutory provisions set forth a number of
 
features and characteristics that are inconsistent with the
 
Club's operations, we conclude Defendants' use does not fall
 
within the meaning of a time share plan. First, HRS § 514E-1
 
establishes that a plan or program does not constitute a "time
 
share plan" unless the plan limits an occupant's use of the units
 
to "a specific or discernible period by temporal division." The
 
circuit court concluded that under the Club's plan, members were
 
not entitled to "a specific or discernible period" of use, and we
 
agree.
 
A number of provisions in Chapter 514E indicate that
 
the phrase refers to a limitation of each purchaser's use rights
 
to a definite or distinct duration (for example, a week),
 
regardless of when the time period begins or ends. First,
 
HRS § 514E-8.6 (2006 Repl.) imposes a "one-to-one use-right to
 
use-night requirement" on all time share plans and was enacted
 
"to prohibit overselling, or selling the right to use more weeks
 
or nights than are available in a time share plan, and to assure
 
the right and practical ability of each owner to use a time share
 
unit for the maximum number of nights to which the owner is
 
entitled." Sen. Comm. Rep. No. 582, in 1997 Senate Journal, at
 
1127. In order to know the number of nights to which an owner is
 
entitled, however, each owner's right to use must be for a
 
definite and distinct unit of time. Additionally, HRS § 514E-1's
 
definition requires that time share units "circulate[] among
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
various persons," which suggests occupancy of the units must move
 
through a circuit according to some schedule.
 
In this case, the membership rules limit each member's
 
right to use any one location to twenty-one consecutive days, but
 
there is no limit on the number of times the member can stay at
 
one location. Moreover, the membership agreement expressly
 
states Club properties are not divided into occupancy periods or
 
intervals. Instead, Club members receive an unlimited right to
 
use, common among other members and based on availability on a
 
first-come, first-serve basis. In All Seasons Resorts v. Dep't
 
of Bus. Regulation, 455 So. 2d 544 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1984),
 
the Florida court examined a plan similar to the Club and
 
concluded the plan lacked specific periods of time for use by the
 
purchaser. Consequently, the court concluded the plan was not a
 
time-share project subject to registration under the Florida
 
Time-Share Act. Id., 455 So.2d at 548. Because the Club does
 
not confine its members' use to "a specific or discernible period
 by temporal division," as this phrase is used in Chapter 514E, we
 
conclude the Club does not fall within the definition of a time
 
share plan.
 
The applicable statutory definitions further establish
 
that a plan or program does not constitute a "time share plan"
 
unless the plan limits its occupants' use of the units to "less
 
than a sixty-day period in any year." The Club, however, does
 
not place a sixty-day limit on its members' use of the
 
properties. Members who purchase the "Platinum" usage plan
 
receive the right to use Club properties for a full sixty days
 
and are thus outside of the statutory definition. Members of all
 
usage plans also have the right to use the properties for an
 
unlimited number of additional days for a daily fee. A member
 
who makes multiple stays at the Pauoa Beach properties could, in
 
theory, stay for a net total of sixty days or more under the
 
"Platinum" plan or by purchasing additional days, and the record
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
indicates Club members have in fact stayed at other Club
 
properties on the mainland for greater than sixty days.
 
Plaintiffs claim a factual dispute exists as to whether 
any of Defendants' members may use a unit for more than a 
sixty-day period per year, because the evidence indicates no 
member has yet occupied a Club location in Hawai' i for more than 
sixty days. We disagree. Statutory qualification as a "time share plan" turns on whether the Club's plan provides the right 
to occupy and use its properties for sixty or more days, and not 
on an after-the-fact determination of whether a member has in 
fact availed himself or herself of this usage right. 
Chapter 514E sets forth further requirements that flesh
 
out the definition of a time share plan, such as the
 
establishment of an owners' association, the mandate for an
 
annual budget, the power to levy assessments, and the provision
 
of voting rights to purchasers. HRS §§ 514E-29, 514E-6.5 (2006
 
Repl.). The Club, however, only allows temporary use and does
 
not offer property ownership, so the Club does not provide for an
 
owners' association. Members do not participate in the Club's
 
governance and have no voting rights. Other than the initial
 
membership fee and annual fee, members cannot be charged special
 
or other assessments to cover maintenance or operational costs.
 
Furthermore, HRS § 514E-19 (2006 Repl.) requires all funds to be
 
held in escrow until the sale is closed and the time share
 
interest is conveyed to the purchaser "free and clear of any
 
blanket liens." However, the Club's members purchase their
 
interests through a membership contract; the transaction is not a
 
real estate transaction that is required to be free and clear of
 
liens. Lastly, as noted above, HRS § 514E-8.6's one-to-one use-
right to use-night requirement is incompatible with the Club's
 
concept of offering its members an unlimited right to use.
 
The cardinal rule of statutory construction is that we
 
must ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
18legislature, and we must read statutory language in the context
of the entire statute and construe it in a manner consistent with
its purpose.  Haole v. State,  111 Haw. 144, 149, 140 P.3d 377,
382 (2006).  "The legislative intent may be determined from a
consideration of the entire act, its nature, its object, and the
consequences that would result from construing it one way or the
other."  Tataii v. Cronin , 119 Hawai #i 337, 339, 198 P.3d 124,
126 (2008) (internal quotation marks omitted).  Furthermore, "the
legislature is presumed not to intend an absurd result, and
legislation will be construed to avoid, if possible,
inconsistency, contradiction, and illogicality."  State v. Arceo,
84 Hawai# i 1, 19, 928 P.2d 843, 861 (1996) (internal quotation
marks, citation, and brackets omitted).
This is not a case of Defendants attempting to escape
the ambit of HRS Chapter 514E by simply failing to provide for
items which the statute requires.  Rather, construing HRS Chapter
514E as a whole and looking to the substance of its regulatory
requirements, it is apparent the legislature did not contemplate
regulating programs such as the Club under HRS Chapter 514E.  As
discussed above, because several of Chapter 514E's requirements
are incompatible with the Club's operations, the statute would
have to be applied in a piecemeal manner, and major provisions
would have to be waived or modified.  We presume the legislature
did not intend this result.
Therefore, we conclude the circuit court did not err in
concluding that Defendants' Club operations were not a violation
of the Pauoa Beach Declaration's prohibition on time share plans. 
C. Attorneys' Fees
In light of our decision to vacate the circuit court's
grant of summary judgment, we must also vacate the circuit
court's award of attorneys' fees on the grounds that neither
party is the prevailing party for the purposes of awarding fees
under HRS § 607-14 (Supp. 2012). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the 
(1)
 July 27, 2005 "Order Granting Defendant Pauoa Bay
 
Properties, LLC's Cross-Motion, Filed on March 31, 2005, for
 Partial Summary Judgment Against Plaintiff Roaring Lion, LLC,
 
David Cowan and Nathalie Cowan, Umang P. Gupta and Ruth M. Gupta,
 
As Trustees of the Umang and Ruth Gupta Trust Under Agreement
 
Dated January 28, 2000, and Pauoa Beach 8 LLC on Residential Use
 
and on Compliance with Article V, Sec. 1(A)(14) of the Mauna Lani
 
Resort Declaration and Defendant Exclusive Resorts PBL1, LLC's
 
Joinder, Filed on April 4, 2005"; 
2) 
May 11, 2011 "Order Granting in Part Defendants
 
Exclusive Resorts PBL1, LLC and Exclusive Resorts PBL3, LLC's
 
Motion for Attorneys' Fees, Filed on December 13, 2010"; and
 
(3)
 December 5, 2011 "Amended Final Judgment," all
 
entered in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit. We remand
 
this case for further proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, April 24, 2013. 
Margery S. Bronster
Rex Y. Fujichaku(Jae B. Park with them on the briefs)(Bronster Hoshibata)for Plaintiffs-Appellants. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Robert G. Klein 
R. John Seibert Lisa W. Cataldo (McCorriston Miller Mukai MacKinnon)for Defendants-Appellees. 
Associate Judge
 
19
 