NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000172
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
IN THE INTEREST OF PC and AC
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(FC-S. NO. 14-00145)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
Father-Appellant (Father) appeals from the Order
Terminating Parental Rights, entered on February 9, 2017, by the
Family Court of the First Circuit (family court).1  The family
court terminated Father's parental rights to his children, PC and
AC (collectively, Children), finding, among other things, that
Father was not presently willing and able to provide his Children
with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service
plan, and he would not become willing or able to do so in the
reasonably foreseeable future.
Father contends that the family court clearly erred by
terminating his parental rights where (1) Mother's expert
witness, Conchita Schlemmer (Schlemmer), testified that Father
was actively trying to improve his parenting skills and habits
and provide a safe family home, and his cognitive deficiencies
1  The Honorable Linda S. Martell presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
could be overcome through additional intensive parenting guidance
and therapy; and (2) witness, Emily Adeszko's (Adeszko's)
evaluation failed to take into account Father's cognitive
deficiencies and, thus, lacked credibility and weight.  Related
to these arguments is Father's challenge to the family court's
May 23, 2017 Findings of Fact (FOF) and Conclusions of Law (COL),
FOFs 64 and 65 and COLs 10 and 11.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Father's points of error as follows.
In order to terminate a parent's parental rights, the
family court must, among other things, determine by clear and
convincing evidence that:
(1) A child's parent whose rights are subject to termination
is not presently willing and able to provide the parent's
child with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a
service plan;
(2) It is not reasonably foreseeable that the child's parent
whose rights are subject to termination will become willing
and able to provide the child with a safe family home, even
with the assistance of a service plan, within a reasonable
period of time, which shall not exceed two years from the
child's date of entry into foster care[.]
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 587A-33(a)(1), (a)(2) (Supp.
2016).  The family court made both of these determinations by
clear and convincing evidence in terminating Father's parental
rights.
Schlemmer, Mother's therapist, testified that she
treated Mother following the removal of Children from the family
home.  Schlemmer's assessment of Father was based solely on her
therapeutic relationship with Mother.  Schlemer could not assess
Father because he was not her patient.  Based on her testimony,
the family court ultimately found that Schlemmer was not a
credible witness.  This court declines to pass upon the family
court's determinations regarding the credibility of witnesses and
weight of the evidence.  See Fisher v. Fisher , 111 Hawai #i 41,
46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006).
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Adeszko, a Catholic Charities outreach worker,
monitored three-hour visits every Saturday between the parents
and Children.  Following these visits, Adeszko prepared reports
regarding the parents' strengths and weaknesses, the directions
or feedback that had been provided, and challenges or concerns
regarding parents' abilities.  The family court found Adeszko to
be a credible witness and based some of its many findings
regarding Father's parenting weaknesses on her opinions.  The
family court, which assessed the reports along with the rest of
the evidence, took into account Father's cognitive limits in
determining whether to grant the motion to terminate parental
rights.  Based on the family court's uncontested findings of
fact, there is sufficient evidence in the record to support the
order terminating Father's parental rights.  As previously
stated, we decline to review the credibility of the witness and
weight of the evidence determinations of the family court.  See
Fisher, 111 Hawai# i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360.
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that FOFs 64 and 65
are not clearly erroneous, and COLs 10 and 11 are not wrong.
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the family court's
Order Terminating Parental Rights entered on February 9, 2017, is
affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 9, 2018.
On the briefs:
Jacob G. Delaplane
for Father-Appellant.
Douglas S. Chin,
Attorney General,
Julio C. Herrera and 
Jonathan M. Fujiyama,
Deputy Attorneys General,
for Petitioner-Appellee,
Department of Human Services.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
3