 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000429
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MARK A. ANDERSON, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-0360(3))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
  
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Mark A. Anderson (Anderson) appeals
 
from the Judgment entered in the Circuit Court of the Second
 
1
Circuit (Circuit Court)  on April 29, 2011. After a jury trial,
Anderson was convicted of first-degree terroristic threatening. 
He was sentenced to five years of probation, subject to the
 special condition that he serve nine days of imprisonment with
 credit for time served.
 
On appeal, Anderson argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
in: (1) admitting into evidence Anderson's statement that he
 wanted the arresting police officer to shoot him, which Anderson
 asserts was obtained in violation of his 
Miranda rights; and (2)
 
excluding evidence that the complaining witnesses "were
 trespassing on the Nahiku property and that they damaged a house
 on the property," which Anderson asserts would have shown their
 bias and motive to fabricate their terroristic threatening claim. 
1/ The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State concedes error on both points and agrees with Anderson
 
that the case should be remanded for a new trial. We vacate the
 Circuit Court's Judgment and remand the case for a new trial.
 
I.
 
Based on our review of the record, we conclude that 
Anderson did not validly waive his Miranda rights, and therefore, the Circuit Court erred in admitting Anderson's statement that he wanted the arresting police officer to shoot him. "An explicit statement of waiver is not invariably necessary to support a finding that the defendant waived the right to remain silent or the right to counsel guaranteed by the Miranda case." State v. 
Henderson, 80 Hawai' i 439, 442, 911 P.2d 74, 77 (1996) (internal 
quotation marks and brackets omitted) (quoting North Carolina v. Butler, 441 U.S. 369, 375–76 (1979)). In this case, however, we conclude that under the totality of the circumstances, including Anderson's failure to acknowledge understanding his rights, the absence of an express waiver, Anderson's irrational behavior, and his request to be taken to the mental health ward, that Anderson did not validly waive his Miranda rights. We further conclude that the erroneous admission of Anderson's challenged statement was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Accordingly, we vacate Anderson's conviction and remand the case for new trial. 
Anderson argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
excluding evidence that the complaining witnesses were
 trespassers who had "made a mess" on the property he was
 managing, evidence he asserts would have shown their bias and
 motive to fabricate their claims against him. It is not clear
 that Anderson objected to the Circuit Court's exclusion of the
 proffered evidence on this basis.
2 However, in light of our
 
decision to remand the case based on Anderson's Miranda claim, we
 need not resolve the scope of Anderson's objection at trial. The
 State concedes that Anderson should have been allowed to present
 
2/ In opposing the State's motion in limine, Anderson argued that the
proffered evidence was necessary to show why Anderson approached the
complaining witnesses at the time the alleged terroristic threats were made. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
evidence regarding the complaining witnesses's "alleged squatting
 
and property damage" to show their motive to fabricate their
 claim and to question their credibility. We conclude that on
 remand, Anderson is entitled to present such evidence to show the
 complaining witnesses's bias and motive for fabricating their
 claim against him. 
II.
 
We vacate the Circuit Court's Judgment and remand the
 
case for a new trial. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 26, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Benjamin E. Lowenthal
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Richard K. MinatoyaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
3
 