NO. CAAP-19-0000411 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
IN RE VBR 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-S NO. 17-00230) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.) 
Appellant Mother (Mother
) and Cross-Appellant Father 
(Father) appeal from the Order Terminating Parental Rights, filed 
on May 24, 2019, in the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court),
1 which terminated Mother's and Father's parental rights 
to their child, VBR. 
On appeal, Mother contends there was not clear and 
convincing evidence that she was not presently willing and able 
to provide a safe family home for VBR, even with the assistance 
of a service plan, or that it was not reasonably foreseeable 
Mother would become willing and able to provide a safe family 
home for VBR, even with the assistance of a service plan, within 
a reasonable period of time. 
Mother challenges Finding of Fact 
1 The Honorable Paul T. Murakami presided.  (FOF) 74 and Conclusion of Law (COL) 18 in the Findings Of Fact 
And Conclusions of Law (Findings and Conclusions) entered by the 
Family Court on July 3, 2019.2 
On cross appeal, Father contends he was not provided a 
reasonable opportunity to reunite with VBR because DHS failed to 
allow him to complete a service plan while incarcerated, 
resulting in his parental rights being terminated due solely to 
his incarceration. 
Based on our careful review of the record, the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we affirm. 
Mother's Appeal 
Mother has not challenged numerous factual findings 
made by the Family Court related to, among other things, the harm 
and threatened harm to VBR, Mother's long-term substance abuse, 
Mother's inappropriate parenting ability and criminal history, 
and Mother's lack of participation in services. Unchallenged 
findings of fact by the Family Court are binding on appeal. In 
re Doe, 99 Hawai# i 522, 538, 57 P.3d 447, 463 (2002). Regarding 
2 FOF 74 states: 
74. It is not reasonably foreseeable that
Mother will become willing and able to provide the
child with a safe family home, even with theassistance of a service plan, within a reasonableperiod of time not to exceed two (2) years fromthe child's date of entry into foster care onDecember 11, 2017. 
(Footnote omitted). 
COL 18 states: 
18. It is not reasonably foreseeable that the child's
Mother or Father will become willing and able to provide the
child with a safe family home, even with the assistance of aservice plan, within a reasonable period of time. 
2 harm to VBR, the Family Court made the following unchallenged 
findings: 
38. On August 25, 2017, the DHS received a report of
concern for the newborn child. Upon hospital admission,
Mother tested positive for methamphetamines. Mother washomeless and only had one prenatal visit during herpregnancy. Mother admitted to using methamphetamines dailyfor approximately six (6) years, and up until the day shegave birth to the child. The DHS developed an in-homesafety plan to maintain the child in Mother's care. Fatherwas incarcerated at that time. 
39. On September 4, 2017, Father was released from
incarceration, and placed on probation. Mother was then facing her own incarceration due to an outstanding warrant,and probation violation due to a prior TerroristicThreatening in the First Degree conviction. In preparationof Mother's incarceration and Father's recent release from incarceration, the DHS developed another in-home safety planto maintain the child in Father's care. It was agreedbetween the DHS and parents that parents would always besupervised when with the child. 
40. Mother was court ordered to enter Women's Way in
her criminal matter. On October 10, 2017, Mother'stransport did not pick her up to transport her to Women'sWay due to a miscommunication. The DHS and the Women's Wayprogram spoke with Mother that day and informed Mother thatshe must be at Women's Way by three o'clock that afternoon.The DHS informed Mother that if she did not attend Women's Way that the child would be placed in the custody of theDHS. Mother admitted at trial that although she was awareof this timeline, she did not make any effort to attendWomen's Way that day. Parents' whereabouts were then unknown. 
41. On October 11, 2017, Father arranged for paternal
grandfather's girlfriend, [DH] to pick up the child. [DH]encouraged Mother to call the DHS, however, Mother did notcall the DHS. Mother and Father's whereabouts became unknown and they both reportedly relapsed on illegalsubstances. 
During the course of the proceedings in the Family 
Court, Mother became incarcerated but participated in the 
proceedings as indicated by the Family Court's findings related
to the procedural history of the case, which Mother does not 
challenge. See FOFs 8-28.  
With regard to Mother's substance abuse, the Family
Court's unchallenged findings include:  
48. Mother has an extensive substance abuse history 
3 based on her self-report of using methamphetamines and
marijuana since the age of fifteen (15). 
4 49. Mother stated her drug of choice is
methamphetamine. Mother admitted she would rely on Father to
administer the drug to her. 
50. Mother's use of illicit substances inhibits her
ability to provide appropriate care for the child. 
51. On April 23, 2017, Mother tested positive for
methamphetamines upon hospital admission for the delivery ofthe child. Mother admitted she used methamphetamines dailyuntil the day she delivered the child and used marijuanaapproximately once a month. At trial, Mother admitted shewas aware of the dangerous effects of using methamphetamineswhile pregnant, but continued to use methamphetaminesthroughout her pregnancy because she was addicted. 
52. Mother was court ordered to attend the Women's
Way program in her criminal matter. On October 11, 2017,Mother did not enter Women's Way, she then relapsed onillegal substances, and her whereabouts became unknown.While incarcerated, and under the terms and conditions ofher probation, Mother started residential substance abusetreatment at Habilitat on March 27, 2018, but she left theprogram against clinical advice, and without approval on May7, 2018. While incarcerated, Mother was encouraged toattend the Hina Mauka substance abuse treatment program, butshe self-terminated services twice and complained about theenvironment and the staff. 
53. Mother stated that she has resolved her substance
abuse issue because she has abstained from using illegalsubstances while incarcerated. However, Mother mustsuccessfully complete all phases of a substance abusetreatment program, and demonstrate the ability to live adrug-free and sober lifestyle on a sustained prolongedbasis, outside of incarceration, to show that she hasactually resolved her substance abuse issues. 
54. Throughout the pendency of this case, Mother
failed to successfully complete any substance abusetreatment program, and has thereby failed to demonstrate theability to live a drug-free and sober lifestyle on asustained and prolonged basis to date. 
With regard to Mother's inappropriate parenting ability
and criminal history, the Family Court's unchallenged findings 
include:  
56. Mother has inappropriate parenting skills as
evidenced by leaving her child with others without making
the appropriate legal arrangements, using methamphetamineswhile she was pregnant, her criminal history, and hercurrent incarceration. 
57. In October 2013, Mother was arrested and
convicted of Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree.Subsequently, Mother was sentenced to probation. Mother 
5  violated her probation, and around September 2017, Mother
was facing incarceration. 
58. Mother was given the opportunity to engage in
residential substance abuse treatment at Women's Way as apart of her probation program, she did not attend Women'sWay and violated her probation. 
59. Mother was given the opportunity to engage in
residential substance abuse treatment at Habilitat as partof her probation program. Mother entered Habilitat on March 27, 2018, but she left the program on May 27, 2018 againstclinical advice. Mother did not maintain contact with the DHS social worker until May 31, 2018, when she was arrestedfor violating her probation. 
60. At the time of the trial on the DHS' Motion to 
TPR on May 13, 2019, Mother was incarcerated at the Women'sCommunity Correctional Center ("WCCC") due to non-compliancewith the terms and conditions of her probation. Per Mother's testimony at trial, she had been placed insegregation for the past three (3) months due to a negativeoutburst and yelling. 
61. After Mother's release, she would need to
complete the recommended services contained in the familyservice plan, and then demonstrate her insight and abilitylearned from those services[.] 
62. Mother's visits were supervised due to her
incarceration. Mother's visits had not progressed to
unsupervised visits due to her current incarceration. 
63. At trial, Mother admitted that she is presently
unable to provide stability and permanency for her child. 
Regarding Mother's lack of participation in services,
the Family Court's unchallenged findings include:  
65. Mother completed a parenting education program
while incarcerated. However, Mother did not provide the DHS
verification of her completion due to her being placed insegregation. Mother is unable to demonstrate whether she has learned any appropriate parenting skills due to hercurrent incarceration. 
66. Mother completed a short psychological evaluation
while she was briefly in residential treatment, but she didnot complete the DHS' psychological evaluation. 
67. Mother did not complete a substance abuse
assessment or treatment program. 
68. Mother did not complete any counseling services. 
69. When Mother was released from incarceration, she
did not cooperate with the DHS or maintain contact with theDHS despite DHS' numerous phone calls, and attempts 
6 throughout the case. Mother admitted that she did not engage
in services when she was released because she was not sober for a long enough period, and would become re-incarceratedfor violating her probation terms and conditions. 
70. Mother has not made any progress in the court
ordered services to address the problems that necessitatedthe child's placement in foster care. Mother cannot demonstrate her ability to provide a safe family home forthe child even with the assistance of a service plan. 
71. At the time of the trial on the DHS' Motion to 
TPR on May 13, 2019, Mother was incarcerated and per hertestimony, is scheduled for release on October 30, 2020.After her release, she would need to complete therecommended services contained in the family service plan,and then demonstrate her insight and ability learned fromthose services. Mother's prognosis for successfulcompletion of services is poor based on her failure toparticipate in services during the eighteen (18) months thiscase had been open. Mother would not be able to reunifywith her child within two (2) years from the child's date ofentry into foster care on December 11, 2017. 
(Footnote omitted). 
Given the unchallenged findings and the evidence in the 
record, there was clear and convincing evidence that Mother was 
not presently willing and able to provide a safe family home, 
even with the assistance of a service plan. Dina Koyanagi 
(Koyanagi), a DHS section administrator and expert in social 
work, testified that DHS does not believe Mother is able to 
provide a safe family home and has not provided a safe family 
home for almost two years due to unresolved substance abuse, 
homelessness, and parental incarceration, which have been safety 
concerns since the case began. Mother did not complete 
recommended services but they were available while she was 
incarcerated. Mother was admitted into Women's Way, a substance 
abuse treatment program, but did not show up for her intake 
appointment and had not completed substance abuse treatment to 
date. Nonetheless, Mother testified she did not agree that she 
had a substance abuse problem but admitted she was addicted to 
methamphetamine, used it several times after she was released 
from prison twice, and did not complete any substance abuse 
7 program. When Mother was released two prior times she asked 
about services but did not do them because she "just didn't have 
the strength to do it[.]" Mother also stated "[j]ust me being on 
the streets makes me want to use drugs." Mother admitted she did 
not participate in any counseling services when she was released 
because "I wasn't sober long enough to set it up for myself." 
There was also clear and convincing evidence that it 
was not reasonably foreseeable Mother would become willing and 
able to provide a safe family home, even with the assistance of a 
service plan, within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 
two years from the date VBR entered foster care. VBR entered 
foster custody on December 11, 2017. Trial on DHS's Motion to 
Terminate Parental Rights began on May 13, 2019. Jeana Baudouin 
(Baudouin), a DHS social worker, testified that Mother is not 
able to provide a safe family home, even with the assistance of a 
service plan, within a reasonable amount of time. Mother only 
completed parenting classes although other services were 
available while she was incarcerated. Baudouin was not able to 
make referrals for outside services while Mother was 
incarcerated. DHS is not required to provide services beyond 
what is available within the corrections system, and "completion 
of a service plan is an empty pursuit until the parent has been 
released and is capable of raising a child again." In re Jane 
Doe, 100 Hawai# i 335, 345, 60 P.3d 285, 295 (2002). Mother will 
be incarcerated until October 2020, approximately a year and a 
half after trial began. 
"[I]ncarceration may be considered along 
with other factors and circumstances impacting the ability of the parent to remedy the conditions of abuse and neglect." Id. 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Mother failed to engage in services to address her safety concerns while she 
was released and while incarcerated, and she was not due to be 
8 released from prison until more than two years had elapsed from 
the date VBR entered foster custody. 
Father's Appeal 
Father contends he was not provided a reasonable 
opportunity to reunite with VBR because DHS failed to arrange a 
psychological evaluation for him while he was incarcerated. 
Father contends had he received a psychological evaluation, it 
may have resulted in a different service plan that could be 
completed during his incarceration. Father thus argues that 
DHS's failure to allow him an opportunity to complete a service 
plan during his incarceration resulted in terminating his 
parental rights based solely on his incarceration, contrary to In 
re Jane Doe, 100 Hawai
#i at 345, 60 P.3d at 295. Father 
challenges FOFs 26, 29, 104, 109, 115, 117, 118 and COL 12 in the Findings and Conclusions entered by the Family Court on July 3, 
2019.
 3
3 Father does not specifically address any of the findings
he purports to challenge or point to evidence contrary to
particular findings. Rather, it appears Father challenges thespecified findings because they indicate that he was unwilling orunable to provide VBR with a safe family home even with theassistance of a service plan, that it was not reasonablyforeseeable that he would become willing or able to provide VBRwith a safe family home even with the assistance of a serviceplan within a reasonable period of time, that Father was given areasonable opportunity to provide a safe family home and toreunify with VBR, that Father's incarceration was not the solebasis for the Family Court's ultimate findings about Father'sability to provide a safe family home, that DHS providedreasonable efforts to reunify VBR with Father, and that DHS gaveFather every reasonable opportunity to succeed and to reunifywith VBR. See FOFs 26, 104, 109, 115, 117, 118. We will address Father's general arguments as set forth in his opening brief andwill not address each of these findings individually. As to FOF 29, it states Father did not file a notice of appeal, but we notethat Father filed a timely cross-appeal. 
COL 12 states: 
(continued...) 
9 Like Mother, Father does not challenge any of the 
Family Court's findings related to harm or threatened harm to VBR
and those findings are thus binding on appeal. See FOF 38-41. 
Father also does not challenge the Family Court's findings 
related to Father's substance abuse, which state:  
82. Father has an extensive substance abuse history
based on his self-report of using methamphetamines and
marijuana since he was sixteen (16) years old. 
83. Father's drug of choice is methamphetamine and he
admitted at trial to being addicted to methamphetamines andusing methamphetamines everyday prior to incarceration. 
84. Father's use of illicit substances inhibits his 
ability to provide appropriate care for his child. 
85. When Father was first released from the OCCC, he
was ordered to enter residential substance abuse treatment at the Salvation Army Adult Rehabilitation center, but heeloped the same day he was admitted into the program.Father admitted he was not ready to address his substanceabuse issue, and he was subsequently arrested due toviolating his criminal probation by leaving the program. 
86. Father admitted at the trial that when he was 
released from incarceration during the duration of thiscase, he used methamphetamines, and did not maintain contactwith the DHS, the relative resource caregivers, or visit hischild because he was always "high". 
87. Father has not completed any substance abuse
assessment or treatment. Father failed to demonstrate his ability to maintain his sobriety when not incarcerated. 
With regard to his participation in court ordered 
3(...continued)
12. The DHS is under no obligation to provide services
to an incarcerated parent when the services are not
available to the incarcerated parent in the prison system.In re [Jane] Doe, 100 Haw. 335, 345, 60 P.3d 285, 295(2002). 
This conclusion of law is correct. In re Jane Doe
, 100 Hawai# i 
at 345, 60 P.3d at 295 ("While there is no dispute that DHS hadan obligation to make every reasonable opportunity to reuniteFather and Jane, it is not reasonable to expect it to provideservices beyond what was available within the correctionssystem.") 
10 services, Father does not challenge the following findings by the 
Family Court: 
96. The DHS developed five (5) family service plans
dated October 13, 2017, February 12, 2018, June 12, 2018,
September 11, 2018, and April 9, 2019 to assist Father inaddressing his unresolved problems. Father knowingly andvoluntarily stipulated to participate in the following courtordered service plans: October 13, 2017, February 12, 2018,and April 9, 2019 service plans. 
97. Father stated that he enrolled in parenting, and
is currently engaged in Keiki O Ka Aina  parenting courses at
OCCC. However, Father has not completed parenting, and isunable to demonstrate whether he has learned any appropriateparenting skills due to his current incarceration. 
98. Father did not complete the DHS psychological
evaluation. 
99. Father did not complete a substance abuse
assessment or treatment program. 
100. Father did not complete any counseling services. 
101. When Father was released from incarceration, he
did not cooperate with the DHS or maintain contact with theDHS despite the DHS' numerous phone calls and attempts.Father admitted that he did not engage in services when hewas released because he was always high. Father was then incarcerated again for violating his probation. 
102. Father has not made any progress in the court
ordered services to address the problems that necessitatedthe child's placement in foster care. Father cannot demonstrate his ability to provide a safe family home forthe child even with the assistance of a service plan. 
103. At the time of the trial on the DHS' Motion to 
TPR on May 13, 2019, Father was incarcerated and per histestimony, is scheduled for release on July 11, 2023. After his release, he would need to complete the recommendedservices contained in the family service plan and thendemonstrate his insight and ability learned from thoseservices. Father's prognosis for successful completion ofservices is poor based on his failure to participate inservices in the eighteen (18) months this case had beenopen. Father would not be able to reunify with his childwithin two (2) years from the child's date of entry intofoster care on December 11, 2017. 
(Footnote omitted). 
We further note that Father has not challenged the
following findings:  
105. Father's ability to access appropriate services 
11 during his incarceration were limited, but not by any
actions of the DHS. 
106. Father is not presently willing and able to
provide his child with a safe family home, even with theassistance of a service plan. 
. . . . 
108. Father is currently incarcerated and has not
addressed any of the DHS' safety concerns, which prevents
him from being willing and able to provide his child with asafe family home. Although Father testified that he expectsto be released on July 11, 2023, he has stated expectedrelease dates in the past that have not occurred. Father's current release date is beyond the two years from thechild's date of entry into foster care which is December 11,2017. 
(Footnote omitted). 
DHS is required to "provide a reasonable opportunity to 
parents through a service plan to reunify the family." Id. at 
343, 60 P.3d at 293 (citation omitted). "[A] claim for 
additional services and accommodations must be timely made." Id. 
at 344, 60 P.3d at 294. There is no cognizable procedural complaint when a request is not made until trial. Id. Father 
does not point to any part of the record where he made a request that DHS provide a psychological evaluation while he was 
incarcerated. It appears Father did not make such a claim until 
after trial. Thus, under In re Jane Doe, his argument is without 
merit. Father also admits on appeal that it is speculative that 
a psychological evaluation would have resulted in a different 
service plan. Such concession is supported by Father's testimony 
that he does not have any mental health issues and has not been 
diagnosed with anything. 
Baudouin testified the psychological evaluation 
required by the service plan provides a cognitive assessment, 
thorough psychosocial background, recommendations for services, 
and an opinion on the ability to parent. Father was initially 
incarcerated at OCCC, released, and then incarcerated at Halawa 
Correctional Facility, where he is currently being held. 
12 Koyanagi testified she was aware of one case in which DHS 
arranged for a psychological evaluation at OCCC, but not at any 
other prison. Baudouin stated Father could not complete a 
psychological evaluation at OCCC because it was not provided at 
OCCC at the time Father was incarcerated there and DHS does not 
arrange for psychological evaluations at Halawa Correctional 
Facility. In addition, Koyanagi testified that normally a person 
has to first complete substance abuse treatment before a 
psychological evaluation is performed for it to be valid. 
Father did not complete any substance abuse treatment while 
incarcerated nor when he was previously released from 
incarceration. Thus, even if DHS provided Father with an 
opportunity for a psychological evaluation while incarcerated it 
would not have been valid. 
"[I]nvoluntary confinement, a criminal charge, or 
conviction for a criminal offense does not mandate a per se 
forfeiture of a parent's rights to a child." Id. at 345, 60 P.3d 
at 295 (citations omitted). However, as noted above, it may be considered along with other factors when determining whether a 
parent can provide a safe family home. Id. DHS's safety 
concerns with Father were unresolved substance abuse, homelessness, and parental incarceration since the beginning of 
the case. Termination of Father's parental rights was not based 
solely on his incarceration, although it was considered as a 
factor in the Family Court's decision. The Family Court found 
Father had inappropriate parenting skills by leaving VBR with 
others without making appropriate legal arrangements, used 
methamphetamine, had a criminal history, and was subject to long-
term incarceration. See FOF 88. Father had the opportunity to 
engage in substance abuse treatment but left a program on the day he was admitted, he was due to be incarcerated until July 2023, 
after his release Father would need to complete recommended 
13 services and demonstrate insight and ability learned from 
services, Father admitted he did not visit with VBR during the 
period that Father was released from incarceration, and Father 
admitted he was presently unable to provide stability and 
permanency for his child. See FOFs 89, 91-95. Father also did 
not complete parenting classes, substance abuse assessment or 
treatment, counseling services, did not maintain contact with DHS
when he was released from incarceration, and admitted he did not 
engage in services while released because he was "high." See 
FOFs 97-101.  
Given the record and the Family Court's unchallenged 
findings, termination of Father's parental rights was not based 
solely on his incarceration. 
Conclusion 
Based on the above, the Order Terminating Parental 
Rights, filed on May 24, 2019, in the Family Court of the First 
Circuit, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 17, 2020. 
Tae Chin Kim,
for Appellant Mother. Chief Judge 
Herbert Y. Hamada,for Cross-Appellant Father. Associate Judge 
Nara E. Sitachitta,Julio C. Herrera,Erin L.S. Yamashiro,Patrick A. Pascual,Deputy Attorneys General,for Petitioner-Appellee/Cross-Appellee. Associate Judge 
14 