FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
IN THE MATTER OF

 
BERNARD KUAMOO, Complainant-Employee/Appellant-Appellant,
and
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY (2010-122),
Respondent-Employer/Appellee-Appellee,
and
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, MERIT APPEALS BOARD; COLLEEN R. MEYER;
VALERIE B. PACHECO; ALVIN M. YOSHIMORI (MAB CASE NO. 265),
Agency/Appellees-Appellees
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-1624)
 
__________ 
IN THE MATTER OF
 
DENISE GABRIEL, Complainant-Employee/Appellant-Appellant,
and
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY (2010-123),
Respondent-Employer/Appellee-Appellee,
and
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, MERIT APPEALS BOARD; COLLEEN R. MEYER;
VALERIE B. PACHECO; ALVIN M. YOSHIMORI (MAB CASE NO. 266),
Agency/Appellees-Appellees
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-1680)
 
__________ 
IN THE MATTER OF
 
ARASI MOSE, Complainant-Employee/Appellant-Appellant,
and
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY (2011-025),
Respondent-Employer/Appellee-Appellee,
and
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, MERIT APPEALS BOARD; ALVIN M. YOSHIMORI;
VALERIE B. PACHECO; JANICE T. KEMP (MAB CASE NO. 274),
Agency/Appellees-Appellees
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-2269)
 __________ 
__________ FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE MATTER OF
KELII LAU, Complainant-Employee/Appellant-Appellant,
and
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY (2011-022),
Respondent-Employer/Appellee-Appellee,
and
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, MERIT APPEALS BOARD; ALVIN M. YOSHIMORI;
VALERIE B. PACHECO; JANICE T. KEMP (MAB CASE NO. 275),
Agency/Appellees-Appellees
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-2270)
 
 
IN THE MATTER OF
 
FIAFIA SATARAKA, Complainant-Employee/Appellant-Appellant,

and
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY (2011-023),
Respondent-Employer/Appellee-Appellee,
and
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, MERIT APPEALS BOARD; ALVIN M. YOSHIMORI;
VALERIE B. PACHECO; JANICE T. KEMP (MAB CASE NO. 277),
Agency/Appellees-Appellees
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-2271)
 
NO. CAAP-13-0001579
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
AUGUST 18, 2016
 
FOLEY AND FUJISE, JJ.
WITH NAKAMURA, C.J. CONCURRING SEPARATELY
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
Complainants-Employees/Appellants-Appellants Bernard
 
Kuamoo (Kuamoo), Denise Gabriel (Gabriel), Kelii Lau (Lau), Arasi
 
Mose (Mose), and Fiafia Sataraka (Sataraka) (collectively,
Appellants) appeal from the May 24, 2013 "Order Dismissing
 
Appeal" and June 4, 2013 "Judgment" both entered in the Circuit
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1
Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).
 
On appeal, Appellants argue that the circuit court
 
erred by:
 
(1) affirming the findings of fact (FOFs) of 
Agency/Appellee-Appellee State of Hawai 'i Merit Appeals Board 
(Board); 
(2) holding that the Board's conclusions of law (COLs)
 
"were supported by its [FOFs] and were not made in violation of
 
constitutional or statutory provisions" or "made upon unlawful
 
2
procedure";  and
(3) upholding the Board's determination that the 
recruitment and examination process of Respondent-Employer/ Appellee-Appellee State of Hawai
'i, Department of Public Safety 
(PSD) was "fair and impartial."
I. BACKGROUND
 
This is a secondary administrative appeal from five 
separate Board orders, each entitled "Findings of Fact,
 
3
Conclusions of Law, Decision and Order"  (FOFs/COLs), which
 
affirmed PSD's decision not to promote Appellants.
 
Appellants worked as Adult Correction Officers (
ACO)
 
for PSD and were members of the United Public Workers Union
 (Union). Between 2009 and 2010, PSD issued "Departmental
 
Competitive Announcements" for various ACO IV and V positions,
 
which are supervisory positions within PSD (Supervisory
 
4
Positions).  Appellants each submitted applications seeking
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 
2
 For clarity, this opinion consolidates what was originally the
second and third points of appeal in Appellants' opening brief, and addresses
the two points as one.
 
3
 Although the circuit court consolidated the five appeals, which
have similar underlying facts, Appellants initially sought relief before the
Board individually. As a result, the Board filed separate FOFs/COLs for each
Appellant.
 
4
 PSD's "Departmental Competitive Announcement" advertised the
vacant Supervisory Positions. The announcement indicated:
 
ACO IV SUMMARY OF DUTIES:  Participate in the correctional
process of adult residents in a correctional facility as a
primary assignment and perform security and custodial
duties; or serve as assistant to a higher level officer in
(continued...)

 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
promotions to the Supervisory Positions. Appellants received
 
letters from PSD acknowledging PSD's receipt of Appellants'
 applications and letters stating that they were each eligible for
 consideration. Appellants then signed consent and waiver forms,
 which authorized the release of records and information
 pertaining to Appellants' backgrounds for the purpose of aiding
 PSD's determination as to whether Appellants met fitness and
 suitability requirements for the Supervisory Positions. 
In reviewing Appellants' records—including, but not
 
limited to, Appellants' disciplinary records, employment history,
 and work performance—PSD discovered that Appellants had each been
 
5
suspended for violating PSD's Standards of Conduct  within two
years of their application and that there was proper cause for
 
4(...continued)
charge of an area in a correctional facility on a shift,

including the supervision of a small group of correctional
officers, and participate in the correctional process of
adult residents; and perform other related duties as
assigned. 
ACO V SUMMARY OF DUTIES :
 Supervise the work of all other
corrections officers on a shift in a correctional facility;
with limited staff inmate population and program activities;
or supervise, through one or more subordinate supervisors,
the activities of a functional correctional area in a major
correctional facility; and perform other related duties as
assigned.
 
. . . .

 
PERSONAL REQUIREMENTS: Applicants must demonstrate that they
possess traits and characteristics required for this work.
Among these are: alertness, tact, integrity, honesty, good
judgment, and ability to deal with inmates and employees.
 
. . . .
 QUALITY OF EXPERIENCE: Possession of the required number of
years of experience will not in itself be accepted as proof
of qualification for a position. The applicant's overall
experience must have been of such scope and level of
responsibility as to conclusively demonstrate that he/she
has the ability to perform the duties of the position for
which he/she is being considered.
 
5
 The PSD's Standards of Conduct establishes the proper conduct that
ACOs must follow when performing their duties. ACOs are given a copy of the
Standards of Conduct during their basic recruit training and are trained on
its requirements.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
PSD's disciplinary actions.6 PSD determined that Appellants,
 
based on PSD's background investigations, were "unsuitable" for
 
the Supervisory Positions for the following reasons:
 
1. 	Inadequate amount of elapsed time from the effective
date of your suspension to show rehabilitation.
 
2. 	[Appellants'] decision to violate or disregard the
Standards of Conduct.
 
In separate letters to each Appellant, PSD informed Appellants
 
that they had not been selected for promotions to the Supervisory
 Positions.
 
Appellants each wrote internal complaints to PSD
 
requesting reconsideration of its decision, but PSD sustained its
 determinations of unsuitability without further review.
 Appellants then individually appealed the PSD's decisions to the
 Board and the Board held hearings to determine "with respect to
 the nonselection taken on the [Supervisory Positions], did [PSD]
 comply with the established laws, rules, regulations, policies,
 procedures and/or practices governing the selection process."
 
On February 29, 2012, the Board held separate hearings
 
on Kuamoo and Gabriel's appeals. At Kuamoo's hearing, PSD
 Personnel Officer Colleen Miyasato (Miyasato) testified that the
 
unwritten practice within PSD was to deem applicants as
 
unsuitable for promotion if they had been suspended for violating
 the Standards of Conduct within two years of when promotion was
 sought (suspension policy). The suspension policy was
 
implemented to prevent the promotion of ACOs who had recently
 
failed to follow the Standards of Conduct. PSD Personnel
 Management Specialist Clayton Kitamori (Kitamori) testified that
 
the suspension policy was developed in 2005 after wardens
 
expressed concern that ACOs were being promoted when they had
 
6
 Kuamoo was suspended for two working days for failing to submit a
report of an incident that Kuamoo observed on June 16, 2009. Gabriel was
 
suspended for five working days for a verbal confrontation with another ACO
that occurred on April 16, 2009. Lau was suspended for one working day for
accruing unauthorized overtime on April 28, 2010. Sataraka was suspended for
one working day for improperly releasing an inmate on June 12, 2009. Mose was
 suspended for ten working days for failing to wear the proper footwear and for
sleeping on while on duty on September 10, 2010.
 
We note that the Union's Unit Collective Bargaining Agreement with
PSD provided Appellants with the right to challenge their suspensions through
a grievance process, but Appellants did not engage the grievance process.
 
5
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
suspensions on their record. The wardens viewed this as
 
worrisome because the ACOs were "taking on positions that [were]
 considered to be higher responsibility, these are supervisors."
 The Board ultimately denied Kuamoo's appeal in a FOFs/COLs dated
 May 10, 2012 and denied Gabriel's appeal in a separate FOFs/COLs
 dated May 16, 2012.
 
On June 20, 2012, the Board held a joint hearing for
 
the appeals of Mose, Lau, and Sataraka. In three separate
 FOFs/COLs dated August 14, 2012, the Board denied the appeals of
 Mose, Lau, and Sataraka.
 
The Board's five FOFs/COLs made nearly identical FOFs
 
and COLs as to each Appellant. Notably, the Board found in each
 case:
 
14.	 Appellant did not present credible evidence or argue
convincingly that the [PSD] had committed any
violations of established laws, rules, regulations,
policies, procedures, and/or practices governing the
recruitment and examination process in its
non-selection of Appellant to the [Supervisory
Position].
 
15. 	Conversely, [PSD], through its presentation,
documentation, and the testimony of its witnesses,
provided credible evidence that the recruitment and
examination process was fair and impartial.
 
In addition, all the Board's FOFs/COLs concluded, "Pursuant to
 
[Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §] 91-10(5) [(2012 Repl.)],
 
Appellant has failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence
 
that [PSD] did not comply with any applicable law, rule, policy,
 procedure or practice governing the recruitment and examination
 process."
 
On June 8, 2012, Kuamoo filed his notice of appeal and
 
on June 15, 2012, Gabriel filed her notice of appeal to the
 circuit court from the Board's FOFs/COLs. Mose, Lau, and
 Sataraka also filed individual notices of appeal to the circuit
 court from the Board's FOFs/COLs on August 30, 2012. On
 November 16, 2012, the circuit court entered an order
 consolidating the five appeals.
 
On May 24, 2013, the circuit court entered its "Order
 
Dismissing Appeal," which (1) affirmed the Board's FOFs/COLs and
 (2) dismissed all five administrative appeals. Specifically, the
 circuit court held:
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
There is evidence in the record on appeal including,
but not limited to the testimony of [Kitamori] and the
declarations of [Miyasato], Roy Yamamoto and Edwin T.
Shimoda, which explained the reasons for the creation of the
policy to find employees with a prior suspension for
violations of the [PSD's] Standards of Conduct within the
past two years not suitable for promotions to [Supervisory
Positions] (namely that suspensions for violations of the
Standards of Conduct specifically correlate to both the
ability to properly and safely perform this very demanding
job and supervise others who do so).
 
These reasons also explained why [PSD] treated
suspensions (as opposed to lesser forms of discipline) for
violations of the Standards of Conduct as a bright line
barrier to future promotions for two years, as opposed to
looking at each violation on a case by case basis, as is
done by [PSD] with regard to pre-employment past criminal
convictions.
 
The reasons identified by [PSD] support the [FOFs]
made by the Board and are neither arbitrary, nor capricious
and are reasonably related to bonafide employer concerns.
Therefore the Court finds that the Board's [FOFs] do not
violate the provisions of HRS § 91-14(g)(5) as they are not
clearly erroneous.
 
On June 4, 2013, the circuit court entered its "Judgment."
 
On June 21, 2013, the Appellants filed a consolidated
 
notice of appeal from the circuit court's May 24, 2013 "Order
 
Dismissing Appeal" and June 4, 2013 "Judgment."
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
"On secondary judicial review of an administrative
 
decision, Hawaii appellate courts apply the same standard of

 
review as that applied upon primary review by the circuit court."
 AlohaCare v. Ito, 126 Hawai
'i 326, 341, 271 P.3d 621, 636 (2012) 
(quoting Kaiser Found. Health Plan, Inc. v. Dep't of Labor &
 Indus. Relations, 70 Haw. 72, 80, 762 P.2d 796, 800-01 (1988)). 
HRS § 91-14(g) (2012 Repl.), which sets forth the
 
applicable standard of review for administrative appeals, 

 
provides:
 
§91-14 Judicial review of contested cases. . . .
 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may affirm
the decision of the agency or remand the case with
instructions for further proceedings; or it may reverse or
modify the decision and order if the substantial rights of
the petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutoryprovisions; or 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority orjurisdiction of the agency; or 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(3) 	Made upon unlawful procedure; or
 
(4) 	Affected by other error of law; or
 
(5) 	Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or 
(6) 	Arbitrary, capricious, or characterized by abuse
of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of
discretion. 
"Under HRS § 91–14(g), conclusions of law are reviewable under 
subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions regarding procedural defects are reviewable under subsection (3); findings of fact are reviewable under subsection (5); and an agency's exercise of discretion is reviewable under subsection (6)." Save Diamond Head Waters LLC. v. Hans Hedemann Surf, Inc., 121 Hawai
'i 16, 24, 211 P.3d 74, 82 (2009) (brackets omitted) 
(quoting Paul v. Dep't of Transp., 115 Hawai 'i 416, 426, 168 P.3d 
546, 556 (2007)). In addition, "[a] conclusion of law that presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard because the conclusion is dependent upon the facts and circumstances of the particular case." Save 
Diamond Head Waters LLC., 121 Hawai
'i at 25, 211 P.3d at 83 
(quoting Del Monte Fresh Produce (Hawaii), Inc. v. Int'l Longshore and Warehouse Union, Local 142, AFL–CIO, 112 Hawai
'i 
489, 499, 146 P.3d 1066, 1076 (2006)).
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. The circuit court did not err in finding the Board's FOFs
were not clearly erroneous.
 
Appellants argue that the circuit court erred in 
finding the Board's FOFs were not clearly erroneous. Appellants' opening brief, however, fails to provide an argument to support their blanket assertion and does not demonstrate how the Board clearly erred in its factual findings.
7 Therefore, the Board's 
FOFs must remain undisturbed. See Kaho 'ohanohano v. Dep't of 
7
 To the extent that Appellants may attempt to challenge the
credibility of PSD's evidence, we note that "it is well-settled that an
appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility ofwitnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier offact." Inoue v. Inoue, 118 Hawai' i 86, 101, 185 P.3d 834, 849 (App. 2008)
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Human Servs., State of Haw., 117 Hawai 'i 262, 297 n.37, 178 P.3d 
538, 573 n.37 (2008); see also Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed 
waived.").
B. The circuit court did not err in finding the Board's COLs
were supported by its FOFs, were not made in violation of the
law, and were not made upon an unlawful procedure.
 
Appellants argue that the circuit court erred by 
holding that the Board's COLs "were supported by its [FOFs] and 
were not made in violation of constitutional or statutory provisions" or "made upon unlawful procedure[.]" Specifically, Appellants contend that PSD violated applicable laws because (1) PSD did not disclose its suspension policy to the Union; (2) PSD's suspension policy violates the "merit principle," as articulated in HRS § 76-1 (2012 Repl.); and (3) PSD was required to engage rule-making procedures under the Hawai
'i Administrative 
Procedures Act (HAPA) before implementing the suspension policy.
1. PSD was not required to disclose its suspension
policy during Union negotiations.
 
Appellants argue that PSD was required to disclose its
 
suspension policy during negotiations with the Union. According
 
to Appellants, "[t]he failure to disclose a critical requirement
 is inconsistent with the negotiation history between the parties
 and transparency of the process in other respects." Appellants'
 opening brief, however, does not provide any factual support for
 their contention that PSD was required to disclose its suspension
 policy to the Union and, absent any evidence stating otherwise,
 we decline to read such a requirement into the record.
 
Therefore, we turn to whether PDS was required to 
disclose its policy to the Union under applicable law. HRS § 89­9 (2012 Repl.) codifies an employer's management rights in the context of collective bargaining negotiations, memoranda of agreement, and memoranda of understanding. HRS § 89-9(d); see In re Hawaii Org. of Police Officers, 134 Hawai
'i 155, 161, 338 P.3d 
1170, 1176 (App. 2014), aff'd sub nom. In re Grievance Arbitration Between State Org. of Police Officers, 135 Hawai
'i 
456, 353 P.3d 998 (2015). HRS § 89-9(d) provides, in relevant part: 
9
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
§89-9 Scope of negotiations; consultation. . . .
 
(d) . . . The employer and the exclusive
representative shall not agree to any proposal which would
be inconsistent with the merit principle . . . which would
interfere with the rights and obligations of a public
employer to:
 
. . . .
 
(2) 	Determine qualifications, standards for work,
and the nature and contents of examinations;
 
(3) 	Hire, promote, transfer, assign, and retain
employees in positions[.]
 
. . . .
 
This subsection shall not be used to invalidate provisions
of collective bargaining agreements in effect on and after June
30, 2007, and shall not preclude negotiations over the procedures

and criteria on promotions
, transfers, assignments, demotions,
layoffs, suspensions, terminations, discharges, or other
disciplinary actions as a permissive subject of bargaining during
collective bargaining negotiations or negotiations over a
memorandum of agreement, memorandum of understanding, or other
supplemental agreement.
 
(Emphases added.) Thus, pursuant to HRS § 89-9(d), an employer 
has the freedom to promote employees based on employer determined qualifications. Nothing in HRS § 89-9 requires an employer to disclose to the employee representative what qualifications it will consider when promoting employees. HRS § 89-9 merely gives an employer and the employee representative the option to negotiate promotion procedures and criteria if they wish. See In 
re Hawaii Org. of Police Officers, 134 Hawai
'i at 162, 338 P.3d 
at 1177 ("HRS § 89-9(d) represents the legislature's balance between policies of requiring employers to fulfill their 'public responsibility,' which would include consistency with the merit principle, and a public policy of 'allowing the public employees and their employers free range in negotiating the terms of their contract.'" (citation and brackets omitted)). 
The record in this appeal includes one Memorandum of
 
Agreement (MOA) between PSD and the Union pertaining to "filing
 
vacancies for [the Supervisory Positions]" and two Memoranda of
 
Understanding (MOUs) amending the original MOA.  In the MOA, PSD
 
and the Union agreed to the following promotion procedure:
 
4. 	When filling [the Supervisory Positions'] vacancies,
the following shall apply:
 
a.	 [PSD] will conduct the process via Internal
Vacancy Announcement (IVA) recruitment process.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The [PSD's] Personnel Office . . . will be
responsible for this process.
 
. . . .
 
e. 	[PSD's Personnel Office] shall notify employees
via IVA and shall:
 
. . . .
 2) 	Receive and screen applications to
ensure employees meet the minimum
qualifications for the position this
includes, but is not limited to
applicants who have documented
refusal to accept temporary
assignment.
 
. . . .
 
g. 	Those applicants who have not passed and not
recommended for hire shall be notified
 accordingly.
 
h.	 [PSD's Personnel Office] shall process
those who are initially recommended for
hire by the Corrections, three-member
panel of subject matter experts
accordingly:
 
1) 	Process the applicant through usual
process (e.g., suitability in
accordance with Chapter 23-10
Administrative Rules, Chapter
353C-5, Hawaii Revised Statutes).
 
a) 	Those applicants who are not 
recommended for hire shall be
 
notified accordingly.
 
b)	 Those applicants who are
cleared shall be recommended
 for hire and processed
accordingly.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
The MOA and MOUs do not contain a procedure for
suitability determinations, nor do they contain a list of the
 
criteria that PSD will consider when determining the suitability
 of ACO applicants. Consequently, PSD retained the right to
 determine its process for making suitability determinations, and
 it also retained the right to determine what qualities ACO
 applicants must possess for PSD to find them suitable for the
 Supervisory Positions. Therefore, PSD did not violate HRS § 89-9
 when it implemented its suspension policy and Appellants'
 argument is without merit.

 
2. PSD's suspension policy did not violate the "merit
principle."
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appellants argue that PSD's suspension policy violates
 
the "merit principle" articulated in article XVI, section 1 of

 
i Constitution8	the Hawai '  and HRS § 76-1 (2012 Repl.). 9
  In 
Hawai'i, the "merit principle" governs the employment of persons 
in State civil service. Haw. Const. art. 16, § 1. Under HRS
 
§ 76-1, "[t]he merit principle is the selection of persons based
 on their fitness and ability for public employment and the
 retention of employees based on their demonstrated appropriate
 conduct and productive performance."  "Merit is served through a
 
system of competitive examinations and qualification standards
 aimed at identifying competent candidates." Konno v. Cty. of
 
Hawai
'i, 85 Hawai 'i 61, 68, 937 P.2d 397, 404 (1997); see HRS 
§ 76-1(2) (requiring the "[i]mpartial selection of individuals
 for public service by means of competitive tests which are fair,
 objective, and practical").
 
PSD is responsible for ensuring that its employees are
 
of "reputable and responsible character." Hawaii Administrative
 
10
Rules (HAR) § 23-10-2(b) (effective Apr. 15, 2000).  To fulfill
 
8
 Article XVI, section 1 of the Hawaii Constitution provides, "The
employment of persons in the civil service, as defined by law, of or under the
State, shall be governed by the merit principle."
 '
9
 HRS § 76-1 provides, in relevant part:
 
§76-1 Purposes; merit principle. It is the purpose
of this chapter to require each jurisdiction to establish
and maintain a separately administered civil service system
based on the merit principle. The merit principle is the
selection of persons based on their fitness and ability for
public employment and the retention of employees based on
their demonstrated appropriate conduct and productive
performance. It is also the purpose of this chapter to build
a career service in government, free from coercive political
influences, to render impartial service to the public at all
times, according to the dictates of ethics and morality and
in compliance with all laws.
 
In order to achieve these purposes, it is the declared
policy of the State that the human resource program within
each jurisdiction be administered in accordance with the
following:
 
. . . .
 
(2)	 Impartial selection of individuals for public
service by means of competitive tests which are
fair, objective, and practical[.]
 
10
 HAR § 23-10-2 provides in relevant part:
 
(continued...)
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
11
 this responsibility,  PSD has the authority to make suitability
determinations of a prospective employee's fitness pursuant to
 
HAR § 23-10-6 (effective Apr. 15, 2000), which provides: 
§23-10-6 Suitability determination. A suitability
determination may be made on staff member's or prospective
staff member's fitness for employment based on criminal
history records, employment records, and other such
information that the department deems necessary to ensure
that staff members and prospective staff members are of
reputable and responsible character, and are capable of
performing the duties of the job.
 
Among other factors that PSD considers in determining
 
whether ACO applicants are suitable for promotions to Supervisory
 
Positions, is whether the ACOs have been suspended within the
 past two years for violating the Standards of Conduct.  If ACOs
 
have been suspended within the determined time period, then the
 PSD deems them unsuitable. According to Kitamori, the impetus
 for the suspension policy was a concern that ACOs who had been
 suspended for violating the Standards of Conduct were being
 promoted to Supervisory Positions, which were "considered to be
 higher responsibility [positions.]" According to PSD,
 
10(...continued)
§23-10-2 General rule.
 . . . .
 
(b) Staff members and prospective staff members shall
be of reputable and responsible character. In order to
ensure that staff members and prospective staff members are
of reputable and responsible character and are capable of
performing the duties of the job, suitability assessments
shall be ongoing and shall include periodic criminal history
checks and such other investigation as the department deems
necessary.
 
11
 During Kuamoo's Board hearing, Kitamori, PSD's Personnel
Management Specialist, described the process PSD follows to fill vacant
Supervisory Positions: 
[KITAMORI:] We do a written test, and if the person

have to pass with a minimum 70 percent, then we go by
workplace seniority. And depending how many vacancies are
available, we then contact the senior person to do for
background suitability.
 
[PSD'S COUNSEL:]  And what does the term background

suitability mean?
 
[KITAMORI:]  Suitability is just an examination process

whereby we do like a fitness for employment. It covers some
predetermined things that we have to look at, and before we
can deem someone suitable or not. And this is just for to
measure the -- we consider it to be for the reputable and
responsible character of the individual.
 
This process is consistent with the negotiated process articulated in the MOA

and MOUs.
 
13
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
suspensions on an ACO's record indicates the ACO "[could ]not
 
follow their own Standards of Conduct." PSD wanted to "make sure
 that whoever [PSD is] promoting [is] going to follow the same
 Standards of Conduct that they're going to enforce upon whoever
 they supervise."
 
PSD's suspension policy is objective and speaks
 
directly to PSD's responsibility to ensure that whomever it
 promotes to the Supervisory Positions has the necessary fitness
 and character to fulfill the duties of the Supervisory Position,
 which includes ensuring that other ACOs do not violate the
 Standards of Conduct. PSD's suspension policy, therefore, does
 not violate the "merit principle" pursuant to HRS § 76-1.
3. PSD's suspension policy was not a "rule" subject
to HAPA's rule-making requirements.
 
Appellants argue that PSD improperly promulgated a 
"rule" in violation of HAPA, HRS §§ 91-1 et seq. (2012 Repl.), 
when it implemented its unwritten suspension policy in 2005. In general, "[a] state agency must conform to the requirements of HAPA when acting in a rule-making capacity." Rose v. Oba, 68 
Haw. 422, 425, 717 P.2d 1029, 1031 (1986). HRS § 91-1(4) defines a "rule" as "each agency statement of general or particular applicability and future effect that implements, interprets, or prescribes law or policy, or describes the organization, procedure, or practice requirements of any agency." However, "[t]he term does not include regulations concerning only the internal management of an agency and not affecting private rights of or procedures available to the public, nor does the term include declaratory rulings issued pursuant to section 91-8, nor intra-agency memoranda." HRS § 91-1(4) (emphasis added). Under Hawai
'i case law, informal policies that relate to an agency's 
hiring policies are not "rules" and therefore, are exempt from HAPA's public rule-making requirements. See Gibb v. Spiker, 68 
Haw. 432, 435, 718 P.2d 1076, 1078-79 (1986) (holding that "The decision not to rehire [the former police chief] based on an informal, unwritten policy against hiring anyone under investigation for possible criminal wrongdoing was a purely internal management function not within the scope of HRS § 91­1(4)."). 
14
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
PSD's suspension policy only affects current ACOs and
 
only applies to PSD's internal promotion decisions. The
 
suspension policy is, therefore, purely an "internal management"
 function that does not affect the "private rights of or
 procedures available to the public." See Waugh v. Univ. of
 
Hawaii, 63 Haw. 117, 131, 621 P.2d 957, 968 (1980) (holding that
 "[T]he area of concern raised by appellant is exempted from
 public rule-making procedures" because "the 'rules' of practice
 which appellant claims the University should be required to
 promulgate would affect only the staff and faculty of the
 University and not the 'private rights of or procedures available
 to the public.'"). Because PSD's suspension policy is not a
 "rule" as contemplated by HRS § 91-14(4), the policy is not
 subject to HAPA's rule-making procedures and Appellants' argument
 is without merit. 
C. The Board did not err in determining that PSD's recruitment
and examination process was "fair and impartial."
 
Appellants argue that the circuit court erred in
 
upholding the Board's determination that "PSD, through its
 
presentation, documentation, and the testimony of its witnesses,
 provid[ed] credible evidence that the recruitment and examination
 process was fair and impartial. . . ."
12 Appellants maintain
 
that, although PSD has the authority to make its own suitability
 determinations under HAR § 23-10-1, PSD could not base its
 suitability determination solely upon its suspension policy
 because "[t]he definition [of suitability] does not state that
 any one factor will preclude an applicant from a positive finding
 of suitability."
 
While Appellants characterize PSD's suitability
 
determination as being based on "one factor," the Board's
 unchallenged [FOFs] found that PSD deemed Appellants unsuitable
 
12
 Appellants argue in their opening brief that this court should
review the Board's determination that the promotion process was "fair and
impartial" for abuse of discretion standard, pursuant to HRS § 91-14(g)(6).However, we note that because the Board's determination presented a mixedquestion of law and fact, we review the alleged error under a clearlyerroneous standard. See Save Diamond Head Waters LLC., 121 Hawai' i at 25, 211
P.3d at 83 ("A conclusion of law that presents mixed questions of fact and lawis reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard because the conclusion isdependent upon the facts and circumstances of the particular case." (citationand internal quotation marks omitted)). 
15
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for two reasons: (1) "Inadequate amount of elapsed time from the
 
effective date of the suspension to show rehabilitation" and (2)
 "[Appellants'] decision to violate or disregard the Standards of
 Conduct." The Board's finding is consistent with PSD's letters
 to each Appellant notifying them of the two reasons PSD found
 them unsuitable and Kitamori's testimony that PSD not only
 considers whether an ACO has a suspension on record for its
 suitability determinations, but also takes into consideration
 when a suspension was received.
13
 
HAR § 23-10-6 grants PSD with the discretion to make
 
suitability determinations "based on criminal history records,
 employment records, and other such information that the
 department deems necessary to ensure that staff members and
 prospective staff members are of reputable and responsible
 character, and are capable of performing the duties of the
 job[,]" without limiting the weight that PSD may place on any one
 factor. Appellants suggest that PSD should review each ACO's
 suspension on a case-by-case basis before making suitability
 determinations, the same way PSD approaches criminal convictions. 
However, PSD is required to consider the circumstances of an
 ACO's criminal conviction when making employment decisions by
 both statute and rule, whereas no such statute or rule requires
 the same consideration for a suspension issued by PSD. See HRS
 
14 15
§ 353C-5 (2015 Repl.);  HAR § 23-10-7 (2000).
13
 Even if PSD's suitability determinations were based on one factor,
Appellants' argument is without merit. Appellants suggest that this court
"use the federal government's standard for suitability determinations as
guidance in finding that an absolute bar on promotion due to employee
misconduct violates the merit principle." Appellants' reliance on federal
law, however, is misguided because federal agencies are not precluded from
making suitability determinations based solely on an employee's misconduct.
See 5 C.F.R. § 731.202(a) (providing that "[the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM)], or an agency in which OPM has delegated authority, must base its
suitability determination on the presence or absence of one or more" factors
enumerated in the regulation, including "[m]isconduct or negligence in
employment" (emphasis added)).
 
14
 HRS § 353C-5 provides in relevant part:
 
§353C-5 Criminal history record checks.  (a) The
department shall develop standards to ensure the reputable
and responsible characters of staff members of its
correctional facilities which shall include criminal history
record checks.
 
. . . .
 
(continued...)
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Furthermore, during the Board's hearings, Kitamori
 
testified that the PSD considers whether the circumstances
 
underlying a criminal conviction are relevant to an applicant's
 
14(...continued)
(d) The department may deny employment to a
prospective staff member who was convicted of a crime other
than a minor traffic violation involving a fine of $50 or
less and if the department finds from the prospective staff
member's criminal history record that the prospective staff
member poses a risk to the health, safety, security, or
well-being of inmates under supervision and confinement,
other staff, or the public at large.
 
(e) Staff members shall not be subject to termination
based on findings in their criminal records except for those
whose conviction of a crime occurred after May 8, 1989, or
under circumstances in which a staff member is a fugitive
from justice. Staff members shall be subject to termination
for crimes other than a minor traffic violation involving a
fine of $50 or less, where because of the staff member's
conviction record, the staff member poses a risk to the
health, safety, security, or well-being of inmates under
supervision and confinement, other staff, or the public at
large.
 
15
 HAR § 23-10-7 provides:
 
§23-10-7 Denial or termination of employment. In
addition to any existing rules and regulations, the
department may deny or terminate employment:
 
(1) 	If the department determines after investigation
that the prospective staff member is not
suitable for employment, or the staff member is
not suitable for continued employment;
 
(2) 	If the prospective staff member was convicted of
a crime other than a minor traffic violation
 involving a fine of fifty dollars or less and
the department finds from the prospective staff
member's criminal history record that the
prospective staff member poses a risk to the
health, safety, security or well being of
inmates under supervision and confinement, other
staff, or the public at large.
 
(3) 	If the staff member was convicted of a crime
 other than a minor traffic violation involving a
fine of fifty dollars or less, and the
department determines that the staff member
poses a risk to the health, safety, security or
well-being of inmates under supervision and
confinement, other staff, or the public at
large. Staff members shall not be subject to
termination based on findings in their criminal
records except for conviction of a crime which
occurred after May 8, 1989;
 
(4) 	If the prospective staff member or staff member
is a fugitive from justice; or
 
(5) 	Other good cause as determined by the department
or director.
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ability to perform the duties of the Supervisory Position. In
 
contrast, an ACO applicant's suspension for violating the
 Standards of Conduct needs no further inquiry because an ACO's
 suspension is, by its very nature, indicative of whether the ACO
 possesses the necessary fitness and character to supervise the
 conduct of others. PSD provided testimony that its suspension
 policy is meant to ensure "that whoever [PSD is] promoting [is]
 going to follow the same Standards of Conduct that they're going
 to enforce upon whoever they supervise."
 
PSD provided sufficient evidence that its process for 
promoting ACOs to Supervisory Positions, including its suspension policy, was tailored towards ensuring that whomever is promoted possesses the necessary fitness and character to perform the duties of the job. Therefore, the Board's determination that PSD's process for promoting ACOs was "fair and impartial" was not clearly erroneous. See Save Diamond Head Waters LLC., 121 
Hawai
'i at 25, 211 P.3d at 83. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The May 24, 2013 "Order Dismissing Appeal" and June 4,
 
2013 "Judgment" both entered in the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit are affirmed.
 
On the briefs:
 
Lowell K.Y. Chun-Hoon
 
Tatjana A. Johnson
(King, Nakamura & Chun-Hoon)
for Complainants-Employees/
Appellants-Appellants.
 
James E. Halvorson
 
Richard H. Thomason
 Deputy Attorneys General
for Respondent-Employer/
Appellee-Appellee.
 
John S. Mukai
 
Deputy Corporation Counsel
City and County of Honolulu
for Agency-Appellees.
 
18
 