NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000026
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
HSBC BANK USA, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION AS TRUSTEE FOR
LUMINENT 2006-7, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
LERMA SALUDES YAMASHITA, Defendant-Appellant,
and
RANDALL M.L. YEE, PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE
FOR THE ESTATE OF FRED BRIOSO SALUDES; 
PACITA CABULERA SALUDES; NATIONAL BANK,
Defendants- Appellees,
and
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 150; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; DOE ENTITIES 1-10; and 
DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50, Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-1821)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard, and Ginoza, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Lerma Saludes Yamashita
(Yamashita ), appeals from the "Findings of Fact and Conclusions
of Law; Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Default and/or
Summary Judgment Against All Parties and for Interlocutory Decree
of Foreclosure" (Order Granting Summary Judgment), and a
Judgment, both filed on December 19, 2016, by the Circuit CourtNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of the First Circuit (circuit court ).1  The Order Granting
Summary Judgment and the Judgment were entered in favor of
Plaintiff-Appellee HSBC Bank, USA as Trustee for Luminent 2006-7
(HSBC Bank ).2
On appeal, Yamashita contends the circuit court erred
in granting summary judgment to HSBC Bank because: (1) HSBC Bank
failed to establish standing; (2) the circuit court relied on
hearsay evidence; (3) there was a genuine issue of material fact
whether HSBC Bank was prevented from obtaining "the equitable
relief of foreclosure where the Doctrine of Unclean Hands
applied"; and (4) loss mitigation was pending.  
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant legal authorities, we resolve Yamashita's
points of error as follows, and we vacate and remand.
The Hawai #i Supreme Court's decisions in Bank of
America, N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai #i 361, 390 P.3d 1248
(2017) and U.S. Bank, N.A. v. Mattos , 140 Hawai #i 26, 398 P.3d
615 (2017) are dispositive in this case.
In Reyes-Toledo , a judicial foreclosure action, the
supreme court held that in order to establish a right to
foreclose, the foreclosing plaintiff must establish standing, or
entitlement to enforce the subject note, at the time the action
was commenced.  139 Hawai #i at 367-70, 390 P.3d at 1254-57.  The
supreme court stated that a foreclosing plaintiff must typically
"prove the existence of an agreement, the terms of the agreement,
a default by the mortgagor under the terms of the agreement, and
giving of the cancellation notice."  Id.  at 367, 390 P.3d at 1254
1  The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided. 
2  It appears in the record that at times HSBC Bank is also referred to
as "HSBC Bank USA, National Association as Trustee for Luminent 2006-7." 
There does not appear to be anything formal in the record showing a
substitution or change in name for the plaintiff.  The allonge that endorses
the subject Note in this case is made payable to "HSBC Bank USA, National
Association as Trustee for Luminent 2006-7."
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(citing Bank of Honolulu, N.A. v. Anderson, 3 Haw. App. 545, 551,
654 P.2d 1370, 1375 (1982)).  Furthermore, "[a] foreclosing
plaintiff must also prove its entitlement to enforce the note and
mortgage."  Id.  (citations omitted).  The supreme court then
expressed that "[a] foreclosing plaintiff's burden to prove
entitlement to enforce the note overlaps with the requirements of
standing in foreclosure actions as 'standing is concerned with
whether the parties have the right to bring suit.'"  Id.
(brackets omitted) (quoting Mottl v. Miyahira , 96 Hawai #i 381,
388, 23 P.3d 716, 723 (2001)).  The supreme court further stated
that "[a]s standing relates to the invocation of the court's
jurisdiction, it is not surprising that standing must be present
at the commencement of the case."  Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai# i at
368, 390 P.3d at 1255 (citation omitted).
In Mattos , also a judicial foreclosure case, summary
judgment was granted to the foreclosing plaintiff, U.S. Bank. 
140 Hawai #i at 29, 398 P.3d at 618.  On appeal, one of the issues
was whether relevant loan documents had been properly admitted
through the declaration of an individual named Richard Work
(Work), as records of regularly conducted activity under Hawaii
Rules of Evidence ( HRE) 806(b)(6).  Id. at 28, 30-33, 398 P.3d at
617, 619-622.  In his declaration, Work attested, inter alia ,
that he was a "Contract Management Coordinator" of OCWEN Loan
Servicing, LLC ( Ocwen), the "servicer" for plaintiff U.S. Bank on
the subject loan.  Id.  at 30-31, 398 P.3d at 619-20.  Because
Work did not attest that he was the custodian of records for
either U.S. Bank or Ocwen, the supreme court noted that "the
documents attached to his declaration are admissible under the
HRE 803(b)(6) hearsay exception only if he is a 'qualified
witness' with respect to those documents."  Id. at 32, 398 P.3d
at 621.  The supreme court applied its analysis in State v.
Fitzwater, 122 Hawai #i 354, 365-66, 227 P.3d 520, 531-32 (2010)
and ruled as follows:
To the extent the ICA ruled that Work's declaration
established him as a "qualified witness" with respect to
Ocwen's records, we agree. To the extent the ICA opinion
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
concluded that Work met the requirements to be a "qualified
witness" with respect to U.S. Bank's records, however, we
disagree. Fitzwater  addresses situations in which one
business receives  documents created by another business and
includes them in its own records. Work's declaration does
not indicate that U.S. Bank's Records were received by Ocwen
and incorporated into the Ocwen Records. Work's declaration
also does not establish that Work is familiar with the
record-keeping system of U.S. Bank. Rather, Work merely
states that he has access to and is familiar with U.S.
Bank's records. Thus Work's declaration does not satisfy
foundational requirements to make him a "qualified witness"
for U.S. Bank's records pursuant to Fitzwater .
Mattos, 140 Hawai #i at 32-33, 398 P.3d at 621-622 (emphasis
added).
In light of its prior ruling in Reyes-Toledo , the
supreme court in Mattos  further held that:
[s]ince [an] allonge was apparently used to specifically
indorse the note to U.S. Bank, admissible evidence was
needed to demonstrate that U.S. Bank was in possession of
the note and allonge at the time of the filing of this
foreclosure complaint 
for U.S. Bank to be entitled to
summary judgment.
140 Hawai# i at 33, 398 P.3d at 622 (emphasis added).  Among other
shortcomings, the supreme court noted that Work's declaration did
not attest that U.S. Bank possessed the original note and allonge
when the foreclosure complaint was filed.  Id.  The supreme court
thus ruled that "Work's declaration failed to meet U.S. Bank's
burden of establishing facts necessary for a grant of summary
judgment."  Id.
In the instant case, HSBC Bank filed the Complaint For
Foreclosure (Complaint) on June 27, 2012.3  Like the foreclosing
plaintiffs in Reyes-Toledo and Mattos, HSBC Bank was granted
summary judgment and a decree of foreclosure.  A grant of summary
judgment is reviewed de novo .  Mattos , 140 Hawai #i at 30, 398
P.3d at 619.
HSBC Bank argues on appeal that it established its
standing at the commencement of the action.  Specifically, HSBC
3  The Complaint was filed one day before the effective date of Hawaii
Revised Statutes ( HRS) ยง 667-17 (Supp. 2012), which if applicable would have
required the filing of an attorney affirmation verifying the accuracy of
documents submitted in this judicial foreclosure action.  See 2012 Haw. Sess.
Laws Act 182, ยง 3 at 645-46.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Bank argues that it alleged in the Complaint that it " is the
holder of the Note" and that the factual accuracy of the
Complaint allegations were later attested to by both PNC Bank
N.A. (PNC ), the servicer for HSBC Bank, and by HSBC Bank's
counsel.  However, given the record and the supreme court's
recent rulings, there is no admissible evidence to establish HSBC
Bank's standing when the Complaint was filed.
HSBC Bank relies on the following, filed
contemporaneously with its summary judgment motion, to establish
its standing: (1) the "Verified Declaration of Indebtedness"
executed on July 7, 2014, by Luann Jones (Jones), an employee of
PNC and the "Authorized Signer," to which the subject Adjustable
Rate Note (Note ) and allonge are attached as Exhibit "A"; and (2)
the "Affirmation of Attorney" executed by Robin Miller ( Miller),
counsel for HSBC Bank in this case.
Jones's declaration attests, in relevant part, that PNC
is the "loan servicing agent" for HSBC Bank and that "[PNC] is in
possession of the Note."4  Jones's statement that "[PNC] is in
possession of the Note" is insufficient given that it does not
establish that HSBC Bank had possession of the Note and allonge
at the time the Complaint was filed.  Mattos, 140 Hawai #i at 33,
398 P.3d at 622 ("Since the allonge was apparently used to
specifically indorse the note to U.S. Bank, admissible evidence
was needed to demonstrate that U.S. Bank was in possession of the
note and allonge at the time of the filing of this foreclosure
complaint for U.S. Bank to be entitled to summary judgment.")
Jones further attests that "I have reviewed the
Complaint for Foreclosure prepared by RCO Hawaii, LLLC, including
the attached exhibits and I have confirmed the factual accuracy
4 Given Jones's definition of the "Note" in her declaration, it does not
appear to include the allonge which endorses the Note to "HSBC Bank USA,
National Association as Trustee for Luminent 2006-7."  That is, Jones defines
the Note as the promissory note executed by Yamashita and Fred Brioso Saludes
on July 13, 2006 and "delivered to National City Mortgage a division of
National City Bank of Indiana."  Jones does not include the allonge as part of
the definition of "Note."
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of the allegations set forth therein."  First, the Note and
allonge were not attached to the Complaint.  Second, Jones's
declaration is similar to the declaration of Work in Mattos . 
Jones does not attest that she is the custodian of records for
either PNC or HSBC Bank, and pursuant to the analysis in Mattos ,
she is not a "qualified witness" for purposes of admitting HSBC
Bank's records under the HRE 803(b)(6) hearsay exception.
Jones's declaration states in relevant part:
1.  I have knowledge of and I am competent to testify
to the matters stated herein by virtue of my employment for
PNC Bank N.A. the loan servicing agent for Plaintiff HSBC
BANK USA, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION AS TRUSTEE FOR LUMINENT 2006-
7 ("Plaintiff").  I have been trained to use and understand
the record keeping system utilized for this loan.  I know
that pursuant to normal business practices, the entries in
the business records are made at or near the time of the
occurrence by the person with actual knowledge of the
occurrence being recorded in the business record.  I have
also been trained to use and understand the entries in the
record and am familiar with the same.  My knowledge is based
on my review of the business records and files related to
the mortgage loan which is the subject of this foreclosure. 
. . . . 
10.  All documents, memoranda, reports and records of
data compilation (collectively, "Records of Acts") that are
attached as Exhibits A-E to my Declaration, as well as all
other factual information contained herein, represent
records of regularly conducted activity relating to the
subject loan. 
11.  The Records of Acts were and are made in the
course of Plaintiff's and Plaintiff's servicing agent's
regularly conducted business activity of mortgage lending
and mortgage servicing. 
12.  All herein referenced Records of Acts were and
are made at or near the time of the acts reported.  Entries
into these records are made by persons having personal
knowledge of such event, and are reviewed by me from time to
time to ensure accuracy and completeness, and are relied
upon by Plaintiff and its servicing agent in the conduct of
its business. 
13.  I am familiar with the referenced Records of
Acts, which is used to record and track events and documents
by Plaintiff and its servicing agent that are relevant to
this loan.  These records are routinely made in the ordinary
course of business in a filing and computer system that I
have access to, have been trained to use and understand, and
with which I am familiar. 
14.  I reviewed the Complaint for Foreclosure prepared
by RCO Hawaii, LLLC, including the attached exhibits and I
have confirmed the factual accuracy of the allegations set
forth therein. 
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
15.  I reviewed the notarizations contained in the
supporting documents filed with the Complaint for
Foreclosure and confirmed the accuracy of the notarizations
by examining the notarizations for signs of forgery or
tampering and verifying the factual accuracy of the
notarized documents using business records. 
Similar to Work's declaration in Mattos , Jones's
declaration does not indicate that HSBC Bank's records were
received by PNC and incorporated into PNC's records.  140 Hawai #i
at 33, 398 P.3d at 622.  Further, like Work's declaration,
although Jones states she has access to and is familiar with HSBC
Bank's records, her declaration does not establish that she is
familiar with the record-keeping system of HSBC Bank.5  See Id.
at 32-33, 398 P.3d at 621-22.  Therefore, under Mattos , Jones is
not a "qualified witness" with respect to admission of HSBC
Bank's records.
As for Miller's declaration, she does not attest to any
personal knowledge of the relevant facts or documents, but rather
relies primarily on Jones's declaration.
In sum, the admissible evidence submitted in support of
HSCB Bank's summary judgment motion and the record fail to
demonstrate that HSCB Bank was in possession of the Note and
allonge at the time this action commenced.  Viewing the facts and
inferences in the light most favorable to Yamashita, as we must
for purposes of reviewing the summary judgment ruling, there is a
genuine issue of material fact as to whether HSBC Bank was
entitled to enforce the subject Note when this foreclosure action
was commenced.  Under Reyes-Toledo , HSBC Bank failed to meet its
initial burden to show that it was entitled to summary judgment. 
Therefore, the circuit court erred in granting HSBC Bank's motion
for summary judgment.  Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai# i at 370-71, 390
P.3d at 1257-58.
Given that HSBC Bank did not establish its standing, we
5  Jones attests that "I have been trained to use and understand the
record keeping system utilized for this loan."  (Emphasis added.)  This does
not appear to satisfy the requirements discussed in Mattos.  Moreover, the
records attached to Jones's declaration do not establish that HSBC Bank
possessed the note and allonge when the compliant was filed.   
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
need not address Yamashita's other points of error.
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the circuit
court's "Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law; Order Granting
Plaintiff's Motion for Default and/or Summary Judgment Against
All Parties and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure" and
Judgment, both filed on December 19, 2016, are vacated.  This
case is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawaii, December 7, 2017. #
On the briefs:
Gary Victor Dubin,
Katherine S. Belford,
for Defendant-Appellant.Presiding Judge
Jade Lynne Ching, 
David A. Nakashima, 
Kanoelani S. Kane, 
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
8