NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000548 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MICHAEL KUMUKAUOHA LEE, Petitioner-Appellant-Appellant,
v.
 
WILLIAM AILA, in his official capacity as Chairperson
of the Board of Land and Natural Resources,
and HASEKO (EWA) Inc., Respondent s-Appellees-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-1644)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant-Appellant Michael Kumukauoha Lee
 
(Lee) appeals from the February 24, 2014 Final Judgment entered
 
1
in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court)
 
pursuant to the May 30, 2013 "Order Affirming Decision of Board
 
of Land and Natural Resources and Dismissing Appeal."
 
On appeal, Lee contends:
 (1) the Board of Land and Natural Resources (BLNR)
 
failed to adequately assess how an amendment to Conservation
 District Use Permit OA-2670 (CDUP) will effect Native Hawaiian
 
burials;
 
(2) the BLNR failed to adequately assess a CDUP
 
amendment's effect on Native Hawaiian religious and cultural
 
practices;
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(3) the BLNR improperly shifted the burden onto a
 
Native Hawaiian Practitioner in granting a CDUP amendment;
 
(4) the BLNR clearly erred when it found that a
 
reduction in the size of a proposed marina will not adversely
 
impact Native Hawaiian burial sites; and
 
(5) the circuit court erred in holding that it lacked
 
authority to grant the redress or relief Lee requested.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude Lee's
 appeal is without merit.
 
The circuit court did not err in dismissing Lee's
 
appeal and affirming the BLNR's decision. Under Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) ยง 91-14(f) (2012 Repl.), the circuit court's
 
review of Lee's contested case was confined to the record below
 
and its authority to grant relief was limited pursuant to HRS
 ยง 91-14(g). The crux of Lee's challenge to Respondent-Appellee-
Appellee Haseko (Ewa) Inc.'s (Haseko) amendment centers around
 
whether there are significant burial sites in the entrance
 
channel that would connect Haseko's marina to the Pacific Ocean. 
However, the BLNR limited Lee's contested case to "issues raised
 by the change in the size of the marina." The BLNR noted in its
 conclusions of law that the contested case was "not a proceeding
 to modify, suspend, or revoke CDUP OA-2670." Lee did not
 challenge this conclusion or the scope of the contested case in
 the circuit court and did not object to this conclusion as
 proposed by the hearing officer before it was adopted by the
 BLNR. In addition, the BLNR concluded that "evidence tending to
 show that information or data submitted to the Board in
 connection with CDUA OA-2670 was false, incomplete, or
 inaccurate" was irrelevant to the proceeding, except to the
 extent that such evidence shows that reducing the size of the
 water basin for the marina would cause the CDUP to no longer meet
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the requirements of applicable law or would violate public trust
 
principles.
 
The circuit court correctly noted that "[a]lthough
 
Appellant Lee may have legitimate concerns, he admits that his
 concerns lie with the excavation of the entrance channel, which
 was not the subject of the contested case below." Instead of
 focusing on the effects of reducing the size of the marina's
 water basin, Lee continued to argue that the BLNR failed to
 assess the entrance channel's effect on Native Hawaiian burial
 sites and cultural practices. In essence, Lee sought to
 challenge Haseko's CDUP, which gave it permission to build the
 entrance channel. Haseko's requested amendment to the CDUP
 sought to reduce the size of the marina's water basin. The
 contested case only pertained to the effects of reducing the size
 of the marina's water basin. Therefore, Lee's arguments against
 constructing the entrance channel were misplaced and the circuit
 court did not err in holding that it could not grant Lee the
 redress or relief he sought.
 
The only argument Lee raised that directly pertained to
 
the marina was that "[a] smaller marina may require a smaller
 entrance, or a larger entrance, or to shift the location of the
 entrance entirely from its current trajectory." Lee fails,
 however, to point to any evidence in the record to support his
 contention. Haseko specifically stated in its application to
 amend the size of the marina that "[t]here will be no change to
 the marina entrance channel . . . within the conservation
 district[.]" The BLNR then determined in its findings of fact
 that Haseko's request to reduce the size of the marina's water
 basin "will not change the dimensions or methodology of
 construction of the entrance channel, or the effects of the
 construction on any alleged burial sites, cultural sites, or
 native Hawaiian rights." The BLNR relied upon this finding of
 fact to ultimately conclude that Haseko's requested amendment
 "will not violate the Public Trust doctrine, [and] will not
 violate customary or traditional rights of native Hawaiians[.]" 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Based on the record before us, the BLNR's finding of fact was not 
clearly erroneous. See Del Monte Fresh Produce (Hawaii), Inc. v. 
Int'l Longshore & Warehouse Union, Local 142, AFL-CIO, 112 Hawai
'i 489, 502, 146 P.3d 1066, 1079 (2006). 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the February 24, 2014 Final
 
Judgment entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 pursuant to the May 30, 2013 "Order Affirming Decision of Board
 of Land and Natural Resources and Dismissing Appeal" is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 26, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Michael Kumukauoha Lee
 
Petitioner-Appellant-Appellant
pro se.
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Yvonne Y. Izu
 
Angela Fong
(Morihara Lau & Fong)
for Respondent-Appellee-Appellee
Haseko, (Ewa) Inc. 
4
 