NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000378
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
WILLIAM A. KEENER, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-2033)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant William A. Keener (Keener) appeals
 
from the April 20, 2011 Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of
 
1
the First Circuit (circuit court)  convicting Keener of Sexual
Assault in the Fourth Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) §707-733(1)(a) (1993) and sentencing him to one
 
year of probation with special conditions.
 
On appeal, Keener argues that the circuit court erred
 
in failing to instruct the jury on his defense of consent and
 
that his trial counsel was ineffective when he failed to request
 
that the circuit court so instruct the jury.
 
Evidence at trial was comprised of the testimony of the
 
complainant, the physician who examined her after the incident,
 
complainant's co-worker and two others present at the scene,
 
although not witnesses to the events forming the basis of the
 
charges. 
Keener presented no witnesses.
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The complainant testified that she accompanied a male
 
friend and co-worker to a party held at a private house owned by
 
a friend of her co-worker. The complainant had been to parties
 
at this house before and understood that most, if not all the
 
persons attending the party would be homosexual. The plan was to
 
stay overnight at the house and her co-worker would drive her
 
back home the following day. 
Upon entering the house, the complainant immediately
 
noticed a male, Keener, that she had not met before. She was
 
introduced to him, specifically being told by others present that
 
Keener was "straight" and was asked if she found Keener
 
attractive. Not wanting to appear rude, she responded, "yes." 
Asked if he found complainant attractive, Keener also replied in
 
the affirmative.
 
Others at the party had been drinking and "were pretty
 
intent on having people drink." The complainant mixed her own
 
drinks during the evening and claimed not to be "tipsy" or drunk,
 
consuming approximately five drinks between the four hours or so
 
between arrival and going to bed.
 
Some at the party made "really inappropriate comments"
 
that made complainant uncomfortable. They asked if she and
 
Keener "were going to get down, that they wanted to watch." As a
 
result of these comments, complainant walked outside of the
 
house, to the patio, with Keener. They conversed about their
 
respective backgrounds, and complainant thought Keener "seemed
 
like a nice enough guy."
 
When the host of the party came outside and suggested
 
complainant and Keener weren't drinking enough, complainant left
 
the house and walked to the nearby beach. Keener went with her
 
and while on the beach, he grabbed complainant's hand without
 
asking her. Complainant sat down on the beach and positioned
 
herself in such a way that Keener could not hold her hand. They
 
continued to talk and commiserate about experiences they had in
 
common. However, when Keener made a comment about "the best
 
relationships begin through friends" it "freaked" her out because
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that was not what she was looking for. She excused herself to go
 
to the bathroom and ran back to the house.
 
Complainant told her co-worker about the incident on
 
the beach, and he told her that she needed to be forceful, that
 
she "couldn't be nice about it or else he wouldn't get the hint." 
For the most part, complainant tried to avoid Keener for the rest
 
of the evening.
 
Later, one of the other party members told her to sit
 
in a chair while Keener "was going to give [her] a sexy dance." 
Keener was there at the time and began to approach her and begin
 
to dance, but complainant got up and "ran away."
 
Still later, when complainant was outside, talking to
 
the host about unrelated subjects, Keener joined in the
 
conversation and complainant tried to follow her co-worker's
 
advice to be abrasive, told Keener that his comment was grossly
 
inaccurate, that he didn't know what he was talking about, and
 
that he should go away. Keener left, and the host asked
 
complainant why she was acting this way, that "he knew [she] was
 
really nice" and "didn't have to be so mean." Complainant
 
explained to her host that she was not interested in Keener and
 
asked that they stop heckling her and suggesting that she and
 
Keener get together.
 
As her co-worker was arranging for a bed for her to
 
sleep in, complainant was lying down on a couch, when Keener
 
approached her. Complainant "said, [she] was going to bed, and
 
he said 'don't you mean our bed?' And [she] said no, it's my
 
bed, not your bed. It's not our bed, it's my bed and [co­
worker's] bed, and you're not invited, you're not welcome,
 
nothing will happen between us tonight." With that, Keener got
 
up and moved away.
 
Co-worker arranged for complainant to sleep on one of
 
two twin beds in one of the bedrooms. One couple was already
 
asleep on the other bed and were "really drunk and passed out." 
Complainant kept her t-shirt and underwear but changed from her
 
jeans to a pair of rigid heavy cotton shorts to sleep in. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Complainant asked her co-worker to lock the door knowing he knew
 
how to "pop" the lock.
 
Complainant turned on her side, away from the door, to
 
sleep. At some point she heard the doorknob moving and assumed
 
it was her co-worker entering the room as he was the only other
 
person who would have reason to enter and because he knew how to
 
jimmy the lock. She then felt the blanket being lifted and a
 
finger inserted in her vagina. She immediately turned over to
 
see Keener crouching down on the side of the bed. He was of the
 
same build as Keener and wore the same t-shirt and baseball cap
 
he had been wearing before. Complainant looked at him, waiting
 
for him to say something, but Keener got up and left the room. 
Complainant did not know what to do; as the bedroom was at the
 
back of the house, she did not know if anyone could hear her if
 
she screamed. She felt the "smart thing to do" was to confront
 
him when others were around. Although the couple was in the
 
room, "they were really drunk and they were passed out" neither
 
awoke during the incident.
 
Approximately five to seven minutes later, the door
 
opened for a second time. Complainant "thought it was [co­
worker] because who else was supposed to be there but him, but it
 
wasn't him." When she felt a hand go up her shirt and touch the
 
outside of her bra, she sat up and saw it was Keener beside her. 
He was wearing the same clothes he had on when he first came into
 
the room. She hopped out of bed and ran down the hallway
 
screaming asking where her co-worker was.
 
After a brief and unsuccessful search for her co­
worker, she saw Keener walking into the livingroom from the
 
hallway leading to the bedroom they had been in. She yelled at
 
Keener, "Don't you fucking come near me again." Keener did not
 
respond. Although her co-worker moved her to another room to try
 
and calm her down, complainant left the room and searched for
 
Keener, who was then outside the house and demanded that he
 
explain himself. Keener again did not respond.
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Complainant later learned that Keener left the house
 
sometime during the night.
 
Keener was later charged with one count of Sexual
 
Assault in the Second Degree, in violation of HRS §707-731(1)(a)
 
2
(Supp. 2011)  based on sexual penetration by compulsion and one
count of Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree, a violation of HRS
 
3
§707-733(1)(a)  based on placing his hand on her breast.  The
 
jury found Keener not guilty of the former and guilty of the
 
latter charge. 
On appeal, Keener argues the circuit court erred
 
because it did not instruct the jury on the defense of consent. 
Specifically, Keener argues that it was error not to give "any
 
instruction (1) defining consent, (2) stating that consent may be
 
implied, and (3) directing that consent is a defense to the
 
charges." Keener argues that, because compulsion is an element
 
of the charge and compulsion is defined as the absence of
 
consent, the jury should be instructed that "consent means a
 
'voluntary agreement or concurrence[,]' that consent 'may be
 
express or implied,' and 'that [the jury] could not convict
 
defendant unless it found beyond a reasonable doubt [the
 
complainant] did not expressly or impliedly consent to sexual
 
contact].'"
 
2 HRS §707-731(1)(a) provides now, as it did at the time of this
offense, 
§707-731 Sexual assault in the second degree. (1) A
 
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the second
degree if:
 (a) 	 The person knowingly subjects another person to
an act of sexual penetration by compulsion[.]
 
3
 HRS §707-733(1)(a) provides now, as it did at the time of this
offense, 
§707-733 Sexual assault in the fourth degree. (1) A
 person commits the offense of sexual assault in the fourth
degree if:
 (a) 	 The person knowingly subjects another person to
sexual contact by compulsion or causes another
person to have sexual contact with the actor by
compulsion[.]
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The standard of review for jury instructions that were 
not objected to at trial was clarified in State v. Nichols, 111 
Hawai'i 327, 141 P.3d 974 (2006), where the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
held that 
although as a general matter forfeited assignments of error
are to be reviewed under [Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure 
(HRPP)] Rule 52(b) plain error standard of review, in thecase of erroneous jury instructions, that standard of reviewis effectively merged with the HRPP Rule 52(a) harmlesserror standard of review because it is the duty of the trialcourt to properly instruct the jury. As a result, onceinstructional error is demonstrated, we will vacate, withoutregard to whether timely objection was made, if there is areasonable possibility that the error contributed to the
defendant's conviction, i.e., that the erroneous jury
instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Id. at 337, 141 P.3d at 984 (footnote omitted). Thus, the 
appellant must first demonstrate instructional error by rebutting 
the "presumption that unobjected-to jury instructions are 
correct[.]" Id. at 337 n.6, 141 P.3d at 984 n.6; accord State v. 
Eberly, 107 Hawai' i 239, 250, 112 P.3d 725, 736 (2005). If the 
appellant is able to rebut this presumption, the burden shifts to 
the State to prove that the error was harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt because 
[e]rroneous instructions are presumptively harmful and are a
ground for reversal unless it affirmatively appears from the
record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial.
However, error is not to be viewed in isolation and
considered purely in the abstract. It must be examined in
 the light of the entire proceedings and given the effect
which the whole record shows it to be entitled.
 
Nichols, 111 Hawai' i at 334, 141 P.3d at 981 (brackets in 
original omitted) (quoting State v. Gonsalves, 108 Hawai' i 289, 
293, 119 P.3d 597, 601 (2005)). 
In this case the jury was instructed regarding the
 
elements of Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree as follows:
 
There are three material elements to the offense of
 
Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree, each of which the
prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
These three elements are:
 
(1), That on or about March 15, 2009, in the City and
County of Honolulu, the defendant subjected [complainant] to
an act of sexual contact, or did cause [complainant] to have
sexual contact with him; and,
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(2), That the defendant did so by compulsion; and,
 
(3), That as to the foregoing two elements, the
defendant did so knowingly.
 
"Compulsion" means absent [sic] of consent, or a
threat, expressed or implied, that places a person in fear
of public humiliation, property damage or financial loss.
 
Keener did not request any instructions. He admits
 
that the "main defense theory" was that complainant was not a
 
credible witness and that the contacts never occurred. However,
 
he argues that his other theory, as presented by his trial
 
counsel, was that of consent.4
 
We are convinced that the error, if any, was harmless. 
The testimony of the complainant, which Keener did not dispute,
 
was that she told Keener, "It's not our bed, it's my bed and [co­
worker's] bed, and you're not invited, you're not welcome,
 
nothing will happen between us tonight." Complainant also
 
testified that, thereafter, Keener entered the bedroom in which
 
complainant was sleeping not once, but twice, and on each
 
occasion, touched complainant. Complainant testified, without
 
contradiction, that she did not call out after the first contact
 
because the individuals sleeping on the other bed were "passed
 
out" and she did not know if anyone in the rest of the house
 
4 Taking counsel's argument in context, it is not clear he was
asserting that complainant consented to the contact as much as she did not
prevent it:
 
She makes her own drinks. There was this straight man
interested in her, so she locks her door. Was there any
testimony about anything about [Keener's] conduct that was
so bizarre? No, there wasn't. [Keener] was not doing
anything that would warrant this type of conduct from any
normal person -- I've covered this before -- yet she locks
the door, puts the alarm on the door, she allows the
assault.
 
Your [sic] know, if this second incident happened,
this Assault in the Fourth Degree, if that happened -- and
it didn't. If it did happen, if somebody came, it wasn't
[Keener], because Harrison said he was out in the living
room during this period of time. But if somebody came in
and touched her, she let him do it, she let him come in.
She says she watched him come in the door, come and lay down
next to her and then touch her. She let it happen. She
 didn't reset the lock. Step by step by step, if any of that
happened, and I submit it didn't, she allowed it to happen.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
would hear her. Neither complainant nor Keener spoke during this
 
first contact; there was no testimony that complainant
 
affirmatively encouraged Keener by nonverbal means. Based on
 
this state of the evidence, there was not a reasonable
 
possibility that the lack of an instruction on consent
 
contributed to the verdict.
 
As we conclude any error in the failure to instruct on
 
consent was harmless, we need not reach Keener's second point on
 
appeal, that trial counsel was ineffective when he did not
 
request such an instruction.
 
Therefore, we affirm the Circuit Court of the First
 
Circuit's April 20, 2011 Judgment.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 28, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Audrey E. Stanley,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge
 
Sonja P. McCullen,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
Associate Judge
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
8
 