NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000637 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
GAIL ANN KOSIOREK, Individually and as Trustee,
Plaintiff-Appellee, v. GRAEME DONALD MANKELOW,
Individually and as Trustee, and LINDA MAE HENRIQUES,
Defendants-Appellants, and JOHN DOES 1-10,
JANE DOES 1-10, and DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants,
and 
GRAEME DONALD MANKELOW, Counterclaim Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. GARY GRIMMER and GAIL ANN KOSIOREK,
Counterclaim Defendants-Appellees, and JOHN DOE 1-10,
JANE DOES 1-10, and DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 16-1-0152-01 ECN) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.) 
Defendant/Counterclaim-Plaintiff/Third-Party 
Plaintiff/Appellant Graeme Donald Mankelow, individually and as 
Trustee (Mankelow
), and Defendant/Appellant Linda Mae Henriques 
(Henriques) appeal from the Amended Rule 54(b) Final Judgment, 
filed on August 29, 2017 (Amended Judgment), by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court),
1  in favor of 
1 The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai entered the Amended Judgment; the
Honorable Edwin C. Nacino presided over the earlier proceedings referenced
herein. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Defendant/Appellee Gail Ann Kosiorek, 
individually and as Trustee (Kosiorek). Mankelow and Henriques 
(collectively, Defendants) also challenge the Circuit Court's (1) Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment on 
Supplemental Complaint and for Entry of Rule 54(b) Final Judgment, filed on January 4, 2017 (Order Granting Partial 
Summary Judgment
) and (2) Order Denying Defendants' Motion to 
Extend Time for Filing Additional Declaration Based on Newly 
Obtained Evidence in Support of [Defendants'] Memorandum in Opposition to Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment on Supplemental Complaint and for Entry of Rule 56(b) Final Judgment, filed on October 26, 2016 (Order Denying Motion to 
Extend Time). 
This dispute arises out of a conflict between Mankelow 
and Kosiorek, former spouses, over a lot adjacent to their former 
home, which is now owned by Kosiorek. Both parties claim that they have acquired title to the adjacent lot by separate conveyances executed by the same individual, Darrell W. Mattos (Mattos
).  The Circuit Court granted partial summary judgment to 
Kosiorek and ruled, inter alia, that Kosiorek acquired title from Mattos. We vacate and remand. I. BACKGROUND A. The Conveyances On December 9, 1981, Darrell W. Mattos & Associates, 
Inc. (the Corporation) received title to a five-acre parcel of 
land (the Property); the conveyance was recorded in the State of 
Hawai# i, Bureau of Conveyances. The stated purpose of the 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Corporation was to acquire, develop, and subdivide the Property, 
and sell the lots. 
At some point in 1989, after five lots were sold, the 
Corporation ceased all operations; all creditors were paid and all assets were informally taken over by Mattos. Mattos knew that a remnant, nonconforming, un-buildable lot (Lot 6
) remained, 
and he believed that the City & County of Honolulu (Honolulu) had 
taken control of it. Neither Mattos nor the Corporation were 
ever assessed or paid real property taxes for Lot 6 after the completion of the project. On November 16, 1998, the Corporation was involuntarily dissolved by the State of Hawai# i, Department 
of Commerce and Consumer Affairs (DCCA)
, pursuant to Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 415-95 (1993 & Supp. 1998).   2 
2 HRS § 415-95 states, in relevant part: 
§ 415-95 Involuntary; ordered by director and
certificates, notices; reinstatement.  (a) Whenever the
director certifies the name of a corporation as having given
any cause for dissolution pursuant to section 415-94, thedirector may declare the corporation dissolved. Before the director may declare a corporation dissolved, the directorshall: 
(1) Give notice of the ground or grounds fordissolution as provided in section 415-94, bymailing the notice to the corporation at itslast known address appearing in the records ofthe director; and 
(2) Give statewide public notice of the intention todissolve the corporation once in each of threesuccessive weeks. 
(b) Parties of interest may petition a court of
competent jurisdiction to appoint a trustee to settle theaffairs of any corporation so dissolved. If a trustee isappointed, the trustee shall pay to the State out of anyfunds that may come into the trustee's hands as trustee, asum equal to any penalty imposed under section 415-135. If atrustee is not appointed by a court of competentjurisdiction, the last directors of the dissolvedcorporation shall be and act as trustees for the creditorsand shareholders of the dissolved corporation with fullpowers to settle its affairs. 
3  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Henriques contacted Mattos in the late summer of 2015 
regarding Lot 6, as she had conducted research and found that the 
Corporation was still the owner of record. She claimed she lived 
nearby and had taken care of Lot 6, and she sought to acquire a 
quitclaim deed for the lot. In return for a payment of $1,000, deposited into Mattos's personal bank account, Mattos executed a quitclaim deed (Henriques Quitclaim Deed) in favor of Henriques 
for Lot 6, which was recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances on 
September 21, 2015. The Henriques Quitclaim Deed stated that the Corporation was the Grantor. Nothing in the Henriques Quitclaim Deed indicates that the Corporation was dissolved or that Mattos was acting in any capacity other than in his personal capacity. Two days later, on September 23, 2015, a further conveyance of Lot 6 was recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances, i.e., a quitclaim deed from Henriques to Mankelow (Mankelow Quitclaim 
Deed). 
Mattos was later contacted by Kosiorek's counsel who 
told Mattos that Kosiorek wished to buy Lot 6. At his 
deposition, Mattos testified that he relied on Kosiorek's counsel's evaluation that to effectively convey Lot 6, a deed would have to be made by Mattos personally and not by the Corporation. Mattos agreed and executed a deed listing himself as the grantor and Kosiorek as the grantee (Kosiorek Deed).
3 On 
February 17, 2016, the Kosiorek Deed was recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances. 
3 The Kosiorek Deed is labeled as a "Deed" and not specifically as
either a warranty or quitclaim deed. However, the deed makes no warranties
of title. 
4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B. The Relevant Litigation 
On April 27, 2016, Kosiorek filed a Supplemental 
Complaint against the Defendants, seeking to quiet title to Lot 6.  The Supplemental Complaint averred that the conveyance to 
Henriques, by way of the Henriques Quitclaim Deed, was invalid as a matter of law and unenforceable. Therefore, the Mankelow Quitclaim Deed was also without legal effect, but the conveyance to Kosiorek in the Kosiorek Deed effectively transferred title to Lot 6 to her. 4
On June 17, 2016, Kosiorek filed Plaintiff's Motion for 
Partial Summary Judgment on Supplemental Complaint and for Entry of Rule 54(b) Final Judgment (MPSJ). 
Kosiorek argued that upon 
the dissolution of the Corporation, the assets of the Corporation, including Lot 6, vested in and belonged to Mattos as its sole shareholder. Therefore, Kosiorek argued, the Kosiorek Deed transferred title to Lot 6 to Kosiorek, as Mattos, as an individual, held title to the lot and was the proper grantor. Kosiorek argued that the Henriques Quitclaim Deed was not effective to convey any interest in Lot 6 because the grantor, the Corporation, was administratively dissolved in 1998, and ceased to exist. Therefore, the Corporation could not have taken 
4 Kosiorek's original Complaint against the Defendants asserted
breach of warranty deed, slander of title, adverse possession, and harassment,
stalking and invasion of privacy. The Complaint alleged that she acquiredtitle to Lot 6 by adverse possession, and that Mankelow was claiming to havepurchased the parcel. She also alleged that Mankelow was using Lot 6 toinvade her privacy and harass her. Mankelow filed a counterclaim againstKosiorek for trespass, conversion, and theft, and filed a third-partycomplaint against Kosiorek's attorney, asserting similar claims. These claims are not at issue in this appeal, as this appeal only concerns the partialsummary judgment in favor of Kosiorek on her Supplemental Complaint to quiettitle to Lot 6. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 any action to convey Lot 6, and the conveyances to Henriques and 
Mankelow were not effective to convey any interest in Lot 6. 
In opposition to the MPSJ, Defendants argued, inter 
alia, that Mattos became a statutory trustee at the time of the Corporation's dissolution and that he had the power as trustee to convey the dissolved Corporation's property in its own name. Defendants also requested additional time to conduct discovery under the Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(f). 
The hearing on the MPSJ was held on July 19, 2016. 
The Circuit 
Court took the matter under advisement and granted Defendants' request to conduct additional discovery, specifically, to depose Mattos. On October 20, 2016, Mattos responded to a subpoena and was deposed by the parties. Defendants thereafter filed submissions of facts discovered from Mattos's deposition for the court to consider with respect to summary judgment, and Kosiorek responded thereto. 
On July 25, 2016, after the hearing on the MPSJ was 
completed, but during the interim period granted by the court to allow Defendants to depose Mattos, Defendants filed a Motion to Extend Time for Filing Additional Declaration Based on Newly Obtained Evidence in Support of [Defendants'] Memorandum in Opposition to Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment on Supplemental Complaint and for Entry of Rule 56(b) Final Judgment, filed June 17, 2016 (Motion to Extend Time
). In the 
Motion to Extend Time, Defendants requested additional time (after the hearing on the MPSJ) to submit a declaration from Mankelow, in which he alleged that on July 20, 2016, he received 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a real property tax bill from Honolulu. Attached to the Motion 
to Extend Time was the proposed declaration and the tax bill. The court entered an Order Denying Motion to Extend Time on October 26, 2016. 
On January 4, 2017, the Circuit Court entered the Order 
Granting Partial Summary Judgment. On August 29, 2017, the Circuit Court entered an Amended Judgment under HRCP Rule 54(b).
  
The Amended Judgment states that upon the involuntary dissolution of the Corporation, its assets, including Lot 6, "vested in and belonged to its sole shareholder, [Mattos]." It further states that Kosiorek acquired title to Lot 6 when Mattos individually conveyed Lot 6 by the Kosiorek Deed and that the Henriques Quitclaim Deed and Mankelow Quitclaim Deed were not effective to convey any interest in Lot 6. The Circuit Court certified there was no just reason for delay under HRCP Rule 54(b).  
6 5
5 The Circuit Court first entered judgment on January 4, 2017, which
was appealed. This court found, however, that the judgment was not properly
certified under HRCP Rule 54(b) and, therefore, the court did not haveappellate jurisdiction. See Kosiorek v. Mankelow, No. CAAP-17-0000019, 2017
WL 2829543 (Haw. App. June 30, 2017) (Order). The Circuit Court subsequentlyentered the Amended Judgment, appropriately certified under HRCP Rule 54(b). 
6 HRCP Rule 54(b) states: 
(b) Judgment upon multiple claims or involving
multiple parties.  When more than one claim for relief is 
presented in an action, whether as a claim, counterclaim,cross-claim, or third-party claim, or when multiple partiesare involved, the court may direct the entry of a finaljudgment as to one or more but fewer than all of the claimsor parties only upon an express determination that there isno just reason for delay and upon an express direction forthe entry of judgment. In the absence of such determinationand direction, any order or other form of decision, howeverdesignated, which adjudicates fewer than all the claims orthe rights and liabilities of fewer than all the partiesshall not terminate the action as to any of the claims orparties, and the order or other form of decision is subjectto revision at any time before the entry of judgmentadjudicating all the claims and the rights and liabilitiesof all the parties. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendants timely filed a notice of appeal. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Defendants raise two points of error on appeal, 
contending that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) granting 
Kosiorek's MPSJ, based on numerous alleged flaws in the court's 
conclusions; and (2)
 denying their Motion to Extend Time. 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
An appellate court reviews an award of summary judgment 
de novo.  Fujimoto v. Au, 95 
Hawai# i 116, 136, 19 P.3d 699, 719 
(2001) (citing Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 104, 839 P.2d 10, 22). The Hawai
#i Supreme Court has 
articulated the standard as follows: 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions onfile, together with the affidavits, if any, show that thereis no genuine issue as to any material fact and that themoving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. 
Id. (citations omitted). We must review the evidence in the 
light most favorable to the party opposing the motion for summary judgment. Id. at 137, 19 P.3d at 720 (citing State ex rel. Bronster v. Yoshina, 84 Hawai# i 179, 186, 932 P.2d 316, 323 
(1997) and Maguire v. Hilton Hotels Corp., 79 Hawai# i
 110, 112, 
899 P.2d 393, 395 (1995)). 
Questions of statutory interpretation are questions of 
law reviewed de novo. 
In our review of questions of statutory
interpretation, this court follows certain well-established
principles, as follows:
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.Second, where the statutory language is plain andunambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plainand obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task ofstatutory construction is our foremost obligation toascertain and give effect to the intention of the 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself. Fourth, whenthere is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctivenessor uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, anambiguity exists. And fifth, in construing an ambiguousstatute, the meaning of the ambiguous words may be sought byexamining the context, with which the ambiguous words,phrases, and sentences may be compared, in order toascertain their true meaning. 
State v. Silver, 125 Hawai# i 1, 4, 249 P.3d 1141, 1144 (2011) 
(citations and quotation marks omitted). 
We review the Circuit Court's ruling on the Motion to 
Extend Time for an abuse of discretion. "A court abuses its 
discretion if it 'clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.'" AC v. AC, 134 Hawai
#i 221, 229, 339 P.3d 719, 727 (2014) (citation and brackets 
omitted). IV. DISCUSSION A. Partial Summary Judgment in Favor of Kosiorek Defendants argue that the Circuit Court erred in 
granting Kosiorek's MPSJ because the court erred by concluding that title to the real property of a dissolved corporation "automatically springs" from the name of the corporation to the shareholder or shareholders upon dissolution, even though (i) a corporation might have multiple shareholders; 
(ii) State law does 
not require the public disclosure of shareholders such that anyone examining recorded title at the Bureau of Conveyances could not determine who is the legitimate title holder, and (iii) a shareholder does not become the record owner in the Bureau of Conveyances upon dissolution. Thus, the central question before this court is by what means title to real property, recorded in 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Bureau of Conveyances as the property of a corporation, can 
be conveyed to a purchaser after the corporation is dissolved. 
"At common law, in the absence of statute, when a 
corporation was effectively dissolved its existence as a legal entity ceased. Dissolution terminated its power to sue or be sued in its corporate name, and extinguished all debts due to or from it." In re Ellis, 53 Haw. 23, 26, 487 P.2d 286, 288 (1971) (citation omitted) (Ellis
). With respect to real property, the 
common law rule was harsh and provided that "the real property of a dissolved corporation reverted to the grantors and donors or their heirs." 16A William Meade Fletcher & Carol A. Jones, Fletcher Cyclopedia of the Law of Corporations § 8134, at 285 (rev. vol. 2012) (Fletcher).   
7 
As the supreme court explained in Ellis, to abrogate 
these harsh common law rules, statutes have been enacted in most jurisdictions with respect to the legal status of dissolved corporations and the disposition of its property. See Ellis, 53 
Haw. at 27 n.4, 487 P.2d at 288 n.4 (citing 16A W. Fletcher, Cyclopedia of Corporations § 8143, at 316 (rev. vol. 1962)). 
7 Fletcher explains: 
Courts have avoided the harshness of common law rules 
[by which real property of a dissolved corporation reverted
back to grantors or donors or their heirs] by resorting toprinciples of equity and holding that title to the propertyof a dissolved corporation vests in the shareholders subjectto the claims of creditors. Some states have abandoned both common law and equity rules governing dissolution byproviding that dissolution does not transfer title to thecorporation's property.
A dissolved corporation in the process of winding up
and liquidating its business and affairs is entitled to. . . transfer or convey property[.] 
Fletcher, § 8134, at 285-89 (footnotes omitted). 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Although the statutes take various forms, they are all "remedial 
in purpose." Id.
It is undisputed that the Corporation was involuntarily 
dissolved by the DCCA on November 16, 1998, under HRS § 415-95. Chapter 415 was repealed and replaced by Chapter 414 as of July 1, 2001, but the savings provision of Chapter 414 explicitly provides that the repeal of HRS § 415-95 by Chapter 414 "does not affect . . . [a]ny . . . dissolution commenced under the statute before its repeal" and the "dissolution may be completed in accordance with the statute as if it had not been repealed." HRS § 414-483(a)(4) (2004).  Therefore, Chapter 415, in effect at 
the time of the dissolution of the Corporation, governs our analysis. 
8
The version of HRS § 415-95 applicable at the time of 
the Corporation's dissolution in 1998 provided, in relevant part: 
8 HRS § 414-483 states: 
§ 414-483 Savings provision.  (a) Except as provided
in subsection (b), the repeal of a statute by this chapter
does not affect: 
(1) The operation of the statute or any action takenunder it before its repeal;
(2) Any ratification, right, remedy, privilege,obligation, or liability acquired, accrued, orincurred under the statute before its repeal;
(3) Any violation of the statute, or any penalty,forfeiture, or punishment incurred because ofthe violation, before its repeal;
(4) Any proceeding, reorganization, or dissolutioncommenced under the statute before its repeal,and the proceeding, reorganization, ordissolution may be completed in accordance withthe statute as if it had not been repealed.
(b) If a penalty or punishment imposed for violation
of a statute repealed by this chapter is reduced by thischapter, the penalty or punishment if not already imposedshall be imposed in accordance with this chapter.
(c) Nothing in this chapter shall affect the validity
of any action taken by any corporation, or shall impair oraffect the validity of any provision of the articles ofincorporation or bylaws adopted by any corporation, prior toJuly 1, 2001. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
If a trustee is not appointed by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the last directors of the dissolvedcorporation shall be and act as trustees for the creditorsand shareholders of the dissolved corporation with fullpowers to settle its affairs. 
HRS § 415-95(b). There is no Hawai# i case law addressing the 
questions raised here under HRS § 415-95. However, case law 
addressing its predecessor statute, which also utilized a trustee structure, provides guidance. 
At the time of the supreme court's decision in Ellis, 
the applicable statutes governing involuntary dissolution of a corporation were HRS §§ 416-123  and 416-124 (1976).  Pursuant 
to those statutes, "when a corporation is involuntarily dissolved, its directors automatically become the liquidating trustees for its creditors and stockholders until some other persons are appointed, and as trustees they become the owners of all corporate assets." Sam Daily Realty, Inc. v. W. Pac. Corp., 
10 9
9 HRS § 416-123 stated, in relevant part: 
§ 416-123 Proceedings after dissolution; appointment
of trustees. . . . 
Upon the involuntary dissolution of any corporation
and unless and until some other person or persons are
appointed by the director of regulatory agencies or a courtof competent jurisdiction, the directors of any corporationorganized for profit . . . shall be and act as trustees forthe creditors and stockholders or members of the corporationwith full powers to settle its affairs[.] 
10 HRS § 416-124 stated, in relevant part: 
§ 416-124 Trustee; powers, liabilities, duties.  The 
title to all assets and property, real, personal, and mixed,belonging to the corporation shall, immediately upon thedissolution thereof, unless by decree of court of competentjurisdiction it is otherwise ordered, vest in the trustee ortrustees for the creditors and stockholders or members of the corporation dissolved.
Under the name of the trustee or trustees of the 
corporation dissolved . . . the trustee or trustees shallhave power . . . to have, hold, reserve, sell, and disposeof property, real, personal, and mixed; . . . to proceed asspeedily as practical to a complete winding up of thecorporation and, to that end, to exercise all powers of thedissolved corporation. 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4 Haw. App. 577, 579, 671 P.2d 450, 452 (1983) (citation 
omitted). HRS § 416-124 provided that upon the dissolution of the corporation, title to all property, including real property, immediately vests in the trustee or trustees,  who had the power 
to dispose of the property and to exercise all the powers of the dissolved corporation. 
11
Under HRS § 416-123, "the directors of the corporation 
are designated trustees and become the automatic successors of the dissolved corporation." Makaneole v. Pac. Ins. Co., 77 Hawai# i 417, 421, 886 P.2d 754, 758 (1994) (citing HRS §§ 416-123 
and -124 (1985)). Pursuant to that scheme, this court held that "the director of a corporation, even if not properly designated a trustee after the corporation's dissolution, is a trustee and has standing to sue on its behalf" as "the former directors became statutory trustees who succeeded to the interest of the corporation by operation of law." 
Id. (citing Cane City 
Builders, Inc. v. City Bank of Honolulu, 50 Haw. 472, 443 P.2d 145 (1968) (interpreting HRS §§ 172-132 and -133 (1955), which was essentially identical to HRS §§ 416-123 and -124). Thereafter, relying on Cane City Builders, this court held in Sam Daily Realty, that if a trustee of a dissolved corporation may sue in the name of the dissolved corporation pursuant to HRS § 416–124, it can also be sued in the same name. 4 Haw. App. at 580-81, 671 P.2d at 452. The court explained that "[t]he trustee 
11 As explained in Ellis, the more appropriate term is "statutory
liquidator" but because the statutes generally refer to the former director as
a "trustee," we will use the terms interchangeably. See 53 Haw. at 28, 487
P.2d at 289; see also Fletcher, § 8175, at 390-93. 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is the automatic successor of the dissolved corporation" and 
continues its corporate existence in the name of the trustee, that is, "[t]he dissolved corporation's name is the trustee's pseudonym." Id. at 580, 671 P.2d at 452 (emphasis added); see also Makaneole, 77 Hawai# i at 422, 886 P.2d at 759 (citing Sam 
Daily Realty and holding that substitution of parties was unnecessary following dissolution of a corporation because its corporate existence continued in the automatically designated trustees). 
Chapter 416 was repealed and replaced by Chapter 415 in 
1983. The purpose of that legislation was to "replace existing state statutes which regulate the operation of profit corporations with an amended version of the Model Business Corporation Act." H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 703, in 1983 House Journal, at 1163; see also S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No, 406, in 1983 Senate Journal, at 1212 ("The purpose of this Act was to unify and update the law of profit corporations in the State and to bring it into conformity with the Model Business Corporation Act.") The revised statute under Chapter 415 also provided that the former directors of a dissolved corporation became trustees upon dissolution. Thus, the applicable statute in this case, HRS § 415-95, and its predecessor statutes, HRS §§ 416-123 and 416-124, both utilized a structure whereby former directors of a corporation become trustees for the dissolved corporation, 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sometimes referred to as the "trust fund theory." See Ellis, 53 
Haw. at 27, 487 P.2d at 289.  12
HRS § 415-95(b) generally provides that the trustee 
shall act "with full powers to settle [the dissolved corporation's] affairs." Fletcher describes the general rules as follows: 
Under a statute making the directors or other officers
of a corporation, on its dissolution, trustees for creditors
and shareholders for the purpose of settling its affairs,the property rights of a corporation survive itsdissolution. . . . 
In most jurisdictions, with some exceptions, it is
well settled that these statutory trustees are vested withtitle to the corporation's assets. . . . The term "title" in a statute vesting title to the corporate assets in theformer director-trustees for the creditors and shareholders of the dissolved corporation has been construed to mean theright of possession, since the property of a dissolvedcorporation actually belongs to those persons who wereshareholders at the time of its dissolution. 
Fletcher, § 8175, at 391-92 (emphasis added; footnotes omitted); 
see also Ellis, 53 Haw. at 27-28, 487 P.2d at 289. Title to real property vests in the statutory trustees upon dissolution, who may subsequently convey the property to wind up the affairs of the business. Fletcher, § 8134, at 285-89. Fletcher also notes that when trustees do act on behalf of a dissolved corporation, "[a]s a general rule, all of the trustees must join in an act or one trustee must act as the agent of the others." Id., § 8181, at 410; see also Rice v. Hill City Stock Yards Co., 826 P.2d 1288, 1291 (Idaho 1992) (deed a nullity where trustee acted unilaterally); Camden v. Dodds Truck Line, Inc., 404 S.W.2d 233, 
12 The statute currently in effect, HRS § 414-385(b)(1) (2004),
expressly provides that the "[d]issolution of a corporation does not . . .
[t]ransfer title to the corporation's property." The dissolved corporation"continues its corporate existence" but only so that it may "wind up andliquidate its business and affairs." Id. at § 414-385(a). The earlier 
statutes do not contain similar language. 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
237 (Mo. Ct. App. 1966) (statutory trustees should act as a group 
and not individually, and should transact business as trustees and not in the name of the corporation). 
Based on the powers granted in HRS § 415-95, and 
consistent with the aforementioned authorities, we conclude that the trustees of the Corporation were vested with title to the Corporation's assets upon its dissolution.
 13
Defendants recognize that upon dissolution the 
directors serve as trustees in dissolution, but they maintain that we should nevertheless conclude that title does not transfer upon dissolution to either the shareholders or statutory trustees, but should remain with the dissolved Corporation. Defendants point to the current corporate dissolution statute, HRS § 414-385(b)(1) (2004)  and the Model Business Corporation 
14
13 We note that Missouri utilized the same trust fund theory for
dissolved corporations. Missouri's RSMo. § 351.525 (1986) provided that
"[t]he statutory trustees succeed to the interest of the corporation byoperation of law." SAB Harmon Indus., Inc. v. All State Bldg. Sys., Inc., 733S.W.2d 476, 483 (Mo. Ct. App. 1987). When confronted with the issue of who has the power to convey title, Missouri courts have held that the dissolutionof a corporation terminates its corporate existence and the dissolvedcorporation has no power to convey property in its corporate name andcapacity. See Land Clearance for Redevelopment Auth. of St. Louis v. Zitko,
386 S.W.2d 69, 81 (Mo. 1964) (en banc) ("[I]t is well-recognized that acorporation whose charter has been forfeited has no legal existence and a deedexecuted by a defunct corporation is not effective to convey title to realestate."); New Hampshire Fire Ins. Co. v. Virgil & Frank's Locker Serv. Inc.,
302 F.2d 780, 782–83 (8th Cir. 1962) ("It is elementary that purported acts ofa nonentity are without legal effect and that a corporation deed, executedwhile the corporation has no legal existence, is a worthless thing."). Thus,under Missouri law, the trustees, not the corporation or its shareholders,have the power to convey corporate property upon dissolution. 
14 HRS § 414-385 states: 
§ 414-385 Effect of dissolution.  (a) A dissolved
corporation continues its corporate existence but may notcarry on any business except that appropriate to wind up andliquidate its business and affairs, including:
(1) Collecting its assets;
(2) Disposing of its properties that will not be
distributed in kind to its shareholders;
(continued...) 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
14Act § 14.05(b). HRS § 414-385(b)(1) indeed reflects the new rule 
found in the Model Business Corporation Act that provides that title does not transfer upon dissolution. However, as explained above, HRS § 415-95 remains applicable in this case. 
Turning to the conveyance documents at issue, the 
Henriques Quitclaim Deed identifies the Corporation as the grantor and is signed by Mattos without any indication that he is operating in any capacity other than his personal capacity. When asked about this in his deposition, he responded that he did not know in what capacity he was signing. However, the Corporation's property rights in Lot 6 vested in its former directors, as trustees of the Corporation, upon dissolution. Accordingly, the Corporation itself could not effectively transfer title to Henriques. 
(...continued)
(3) Discharging or making provision for discharging
its liabilities;
(4) Distributing its remaining property among itsshareholders according to their interests; and
(5) Doing every other act necessary to wind up andliquidate its business and affairs.
(b) Dissolution of a corporation does not:
(1) Transfer title to the corporation's property;
(2) Prevent transfer of its shares or securities,although the authorization to dissolve mayprovide for closing the corporation's sharetransfer records;
(3) Subject its directors or officers to standardsof conduct different from those prescribed inpart IX;
(4) Change quorum or voting requirements for itsboard of directors or shareholders; changeprovisions for selection, resignation, orremoval of its directors or officers or both; orchange provisions for amending its bylaws;
(5) Prevent commencement of a proceeding by oragainst the corporation in its corporate name;
(6) Abate or suspend a proceeding pending by oragainst the corporation on the effective date ofdissolution; or
(7) Terminate the authority of the registered agentof the corporation. 
17   
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Kosiorek Deed purported to transfer the rights that 
Mattos had to Lot 6 to Kosiorek. Mattos was listed as the 
grantor and again signed only his name. No reference to the dissolved Corporation is made; nor is there any indication that he was acting in the capacity of a trustee. In his deposition, Mattos explained that he believed that he was acting in his personal capacity. Again, the title to the property vested in 
the statutory trustees upon dissolution of the Corporation and 
therefore did not vest in Mattos in his personal capacity. 
It further appears that both deeds suffered from an 
additional defect precluding summary judgment. Mattos averred, 
in his declaration and in his deposition testimony, that he was 
the sole incorporator and shareholder of the Corporation, and that upon dissolution of the Corporation no trustee was appointed. In his deposition, Mattos also claimed he was the sole director of the Corporation.  However, in their memorandum 
in opposition to the MPSJ, Defendants included the Corporation's 
record from the DCCA's business registration online database (DCCA Record) and asked the Circuit Court to take judicial notice 
of the DCCA Record, which reports that there were two directors 
at the time of the Corporation's dissolution.
15 On appeal, the 
Defendants request that this court also take judicial notice of the DCCA Record. 
15 See Business Registration Division, Department of Commerce &
Consumer Affairs,
https://hbe.ehawaii.gov/documents/business.html?fileNumber=48994D1 (lastvisited September 13, 2019). 
18  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The DCCA is an executive agency of the State of public 
Hawai# i. See HRS § 26–4(5) (2009).  As such, its records are 
records and open to inspection. See HRS § 92F–3 (2012)  
("'Government record' means information maintained by an agency 
in written, auditory, visual, electronic, or other physical form."); HRS § 92F–11(a) (2012) ("All government records are open to public inspection unless access is restricted or closed by law.").  The DCCA Record, as a public record, is generally one 
that could be accepted through judicial notice. See Williams v. Aona, 121 Hawai# i 1, 11 n.6, 210 P.3d 501, 511 n.6 (2009) (taking 
judicial notice of a public record that is easily verifiable); Hawai# i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 201.  Kosiorek does not 
19181716
16 HRS § 26-4 states, in relevant part: 
§ 26-4 Structure of government.  Under the supervision
of the governor, all executive and administrative offices,
departments, and instrumentalities of the state governmentand their respective functions, powers, and duties shall beallocated among and within the following principaldepartments that are hereby established:
. . . . (5) Department of commerce and consumer affairs(Section 26-9)[.] 
17 HRS § 92F-3 states, in relevant part: 
§ 92F-3 General definitions.  Unless the context 
otherwise requires, in this chapter:
. . . . "Government record" means information maintained by an
agency in written, auditory, visual, electronic, or otherphysical form. 
18 HRS § 92F-11 states, in relevant part: 
§ 92F-11 Affirmative agency disclosure
responsibilities.  (a) All government records are open to
public inspection unless access is restricted or closed bylaw. 
19 Under HRE Rule 201, judicial notice may be taken of facts "either
(1) generally known within the territorial jurisdiction of the trial court, or(2)
 capable of accurate and ready determination by resort to sources whose
(continued...) 
19 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
19argue on appeal that this court should not take judicial notice 
of the DCCA Record. As the request to take judicial notice of the DCCA Record was made to the Circuit Court and the DCCA Record is a public record, we conclude that it is appropriate for this court to take judicial notice of the DCCA Record for the purposes of this appeal. 
The DCCA Record identifies Mattos as the President, 
Treasurer, and a director of the Corporation. Marjorie C. Mattos (Marjorie), Mattos's wife, is listed as the Vice-President, 
Secretary, and also a director. HRS § 415-95 provides that in 
the absence of a court-appointed trustee, "the last directors of the dissolved corporation shall be and act as trustees." (Emphasis added). The statute does not provide that a single director, for example a president, is to serve as the trustee of the dissolved corporation but, rather, the "last directors." This evidence conflicts with Mattos's deposition testimony in which he testified that he was the only director of the Corporation. 
"In considering whether an issue of material fact 
exists, 'the inferences to be drawn from the underlying facts alleged in the materials (such as depositions, answers to interrogatories, admissions and affidavits) . . . must be viewed in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion.'" See, e.g., Yamaguchi v. Queen's Med. Ctr., 65 Haw. 84, 91-92, 648 
(...continued)
accuracy cannot reasonably be questioned." HRE 201 also provides that "[a]
court may take judicial notice, whether requested or not ... at any stage ofthe proceeding." 
20 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.2d 689, 694 (1982) (citation omitted). If, as it appears from 
the DCCA Record, both Mattos and Marjorie were directors at the time of the Corporation's dissolution, they both became trustees upon dissolution, and presumably would have needed to act together to effectively convey Lot 6.  We conclude, therefore, 
that a genuine issue of material fact exists with respect to whether only Mattos was a director or, as suggested by the DCCA Record, both Mattos and Marjorie were directors at the time of dissolution. 
20
For these reasons, we conclude that the Circuit Court 
erred in entering partial summary judgment in favor of Kosiorek. 
B. The Motion to Extend Time Defendants argue the Circuit Court erred in denying 
their Motion to Extend Time by not permitting them to submit a declaration attaching and authenticating a Honolulu real property tax bill that Mankelow received in the mail after the oral hearing on the MPSJ but before the court decided the motion, in order to prove that Honolulu considered Mankelow to be "the owner of Lot 6, the real property in dispute." However, as this court has concluded that the Circuit Court erred in granting partial summary judgment in favor of Kosiorek, it is unnecessary to address whether the Circuit Court erred in entering its Order Denying Motion to Extend Time. 
For these reasons, we vacate the Circuit Court's August 
29, 2017 Amended Judgment and January 4, 2017 Order Granting 
20 As the issue is not before us, we do not express an opinion as to
whether it may have been possible to establish that one trustee was acting as
an agent or on behalf of both trustees. 
21 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Partial Summary Judgment; this case is remanded to the Circuit 
Court for further proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 7, 2019. 
On the briefs: Robert F. Miller,
and 
Randolph R. Slaton,
Jerrold K. Guben,(O'Connor Playdon Guben &
Inouye LLP),
for Defendants/CounterclaimPlaintiffs-Appellants. Presiding Judge
Associate JudgeAssociate Judge 
Gary G. Grimmer,
for Plaintiff/CounterclaimDefendant-Appellee. 
22 