NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0001432
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MICHAEL C. GREENSPON,
Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellant,
v.
 
DEUTSCHE BANK NATIONAL TRUST COMPANY,
AS TRUSTEE OF RESIDENTIAL ASSET SECURITIZATION TRUST 2006-A8,
MORTGAGE PASS-THROUGH CERTIFICATES SERIES 2006-H UNDER THE
 
POOLING AND SERVICING AGREEMENT DATED JUNE 1, 2006,
Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff-Appellee,
and
 
INDYMAC FEDERAL BANK, F.S.B.; ONEWEST BANK, F.S.B.;
CAL-WESTERN RECONVEYANCE CORPORATION, Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
DOES 1-50, Defendants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-0194)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff/Counter-Claim Defendant/Appellant Michael C.
 
1
Greenspon (Greenspon), pro se,  appeals from the following
entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit
 
2
court) in favor of Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff-Appellee
Deutsche Bank National Trust Company, as Trustee of Residential
 
Asset Securitization Trust 2006-A8, Mortgage Pass-Through
 
1
 Greenspon was represented by Dubin Law Offices before the circuit
court. Dubin Law Offices withdrew as counsel after the notice of appeal was
filed but prior to briefing. 
2
 The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Certificate Series 2006-H Under the Pooling and Servicing
 
Agreement Dated June 1, 2006 (DBNTC), and Defendant-Appellee
 
OneWest Bank, F.S.B. (OneWest) (collectively, Appellees):3
 
(A) the "Order Granting: (1) Defendants [OneWest] and
 
[DBNTC's] Motion for Summary Judgment Re: First Amended
 
Complaint, Filed on November 5, 2012; and (2) [DBNTC's] Motion
 for Summary Judgment Re: Counterclaim (and Writ of Ejectment
 Against [Greenspon]), Filed on November 5, 2012", (Order Granting
Summary Judgment) entered on March 13, 2013;
 
(B) the "Final Judgment [Re: [Order Granting Summary
 
Judgment]]", (Rule 54(b) Judgment) entered on March 13, 2013; and
 
(C) the "Order Denying [Greenspon's] Motion to
 
Reconsider The Court's Order Granting Summary Judgment And
 
Judgment For Possession," entered on May 23, 2013.
 
4
Greenspon contends  that the circuit court erred in (1)
granting DBNTC's motion for summary judgment on its counterclaims; (2) granting the Appellees' motion for summary judgment on Greenspon's First Amended Complaint; (3) failing to grant a continuance for discovery pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(f); (4) failing to grant an HRCP Rule 15(a) request for leave to amend the First Amended Complaint; and (5) denying Greenspon's motion for reconsideration.
5 
3 Defendants-Appellees IndyMac Federal Bank, F.S.B. (IndyMac Federal)
and Cal-Western Reconveyance Corporation (Cal-Western) did not file briefs in
this appeal.
4 Greenspon's opening brief violates Hawai' i Rules of Appellate
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28 in many ways, which alone raises the potential forwaiver of issues sought to be raised. Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai' i 
225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995); HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) & (7). However,because we seek to address cases on the merits where possible, we addressGreenspon's arguments to the extent they are discernable in the opening brief.Bettencourt, 80 Hawai' i at 230, 909 P.2d at 558.
We further note that Greenspon failed to provide transcripts from
the circuit court proceedings to the appellate court. However, included in
the record on appeal is a transcript of the January 9, 2013 hearing on the
summary judgment motions. Our review will thus be limited to the lone
 transcript appearing in the record on appeal. 
5
 HRAP Rule 28(a) expressly limits the length of opening or answering
briefs to 35 pages, and reply briefs to 10 pages, exclusive of indexes,
appendices, and statements of related cases. Greenspon filed two separate
motions to file an extended-page opening brief. This court denied both
 
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For the reasons set forth below, we affirm in part and
 
vacate in part, and remand for further proceedings.
I. Brief Background
 
This case stems from a non-judicial foreclosure of real
 
property owned by Greenspon.
 
On June 21, 2011, Greenspon filed a First Amended
 
6
Complaint against DBNTC, OneWest, IndyMac Federal,  and Cal-
Western, asserting claims for "Wrongful Foreclosure and Quiet
 
Title," "Injunctive Relief," and "Damages" for Unfair and
 Deceptive Acts and Practices (UDAP).
 
On August 30, 2011, DBNTC filed a Counterclaim against
 
Greenspon, asserting that a non-judicial foreclosure of
 Greenspon's property had been properly conducted and thus DBNTC
 was entitled to Ratification of Non-Judicial Foreclosure and a
 
5(...continued)
motions. 
Nevertheless, on November 1, 2013, Greenspon filed an opening brief
totaling 36 pages, plus an additional 15-page "Supplemental Brief" containing
substantive argument. Greenspon also filed an additional 26-page appendix
that was duplicative of a portion of the 166-page appendix that accompanied
the opening brief. In his "Supplemental Brief", Greenspon admitted that he
was filing the "Supplemental Brief" due to page limitations mandated in HRAP
Rule 28(a). Subsequently, upon the Appellees' motion, this court struck the
"Supplemental Brief" and the 26-page appendix and informed the parties that we
will not consider either document or any arguments raised in them.
Limiting our consideration of Greenspon's points of error to his
opening brief, we note that Greenspon presents no argument in the opening
brief regarding the court's alleged error in failing to grant an HRCP Rule
15(a) request for leave to amend the First Amended Complaint, or in denying
the motion for reconsideration. These points of error are waived. HRAP Rule
 28(b)(7).
 
Additionally, Greenspon's reply brief is 16 pages in length (14
pages of substantive argument, plus 2 pages of preface), exclusive of indexesand appendices. HRAP Rule 28(a) mandates that reply briefs not exceed 10pages. Greenspon acknowledged in his reply brief that his brief exceeded thepage limit provided in HRAP Rule 28(a). The Appellees' filed an objection toGreenspon's reply brief, and advocated that sanctions were warranted andnecessary, including dismissal of the appeal. As noted above, we seek toaddress cases on the merits where possible. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai' i at 230,
909 P.2d at 558. Thus, we decline to dismiss the appeal but we limit ourconsideration of Greenspon's reply brief to the first 10 pages and will notconsider any substantive argument set forth beyond the first 10 pages.
Lastly, Greenspon raises numerous arguments for the first time in
his reply brief. Arguments not raised until the reply brief are waived. In reHawaiian Flour Mills, Inc., 76 Hawai' i 1, 14 n.5, 868 P.2d 419, 432 n.5
(1994).
6
 The First Amended Complaint asserts Greenspon obtained a $650,000
loan from IndyMac Bank, F.S.B. (IndyMac) in March 2003, and a mortgage on
Greenspon's property was granted as security for the loan; that the loan was
modified in April 2006, increasing the principal amount of the loan to
$800,000; that in July 2008 IndyMac was closed by, inter alia, the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC); and that IndyMac Federal assumed control
of substantially all of the assets of IndyMac.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Writ of Ejectment.
 
On September 15, 2011, Greenspon filed a Notice of
 
Dismissal of All Claims Against IndyMac, which was based on a
 
"Disclaimer of Interest" by the FDIC as Receiver for IndyMac
 Federal. In the Disclaimer of Interest, a representative of the
 FDIC declared, in pertinent part:
 
4. The FDIC-Receiver has determined that it has no
 
interest in the subject property and that it desires to
disclaim any interest in the subject property, waive any and
all rights of redemption it may have in connection with the
subject property, and consent to be forever barred from
asserting any rights in or to the subject property. 
5. FDIC-Receiver is making this Declaration and
Disclaimer of Interest in exchange for plaintiff's agreement
to dismiss without prejudice all claims plaintiff alleged or
could allege against defendant IndyMac Federal Bank, F.S.B.,
IndyMac Bank, F.S.B., and the FDIC as Receiver of those two
entities from this action.
 
On November 5, 2012, DBNTC filed a Motion for Summary
 
Judgment on its Counterclaim. Moreover, on the same day, DBNTC
 
and OneWest jointly filed a Motion for Summary Judgment as to
 Greenspon's claims in the First Amended Complaint, and Cal-
Western filed a joinder in that motion. 
On March 13, 2013, the circuit court issued orders:
 
granting summary judgment in favor of DBNTC and against Greenspon
 on DBNTC's counterclaims for Ratification of Non-Judicial
 Foreclosure and Writ of Ejectment; granting summary judgment in
 favor of DBNTC and Onewest and against Greenspon as to the First
 Amended Complaint; and granting Cal-Western's joinder in DBNTC
 and OneWest's summary judgment motion as to Greenspon's First
 Amended Complaint.
 
On the same date, March 13, 2013, pursuant to Hawai
'i 
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 54(b), the circuit court entered Final Judgment: (1) in favor of DBNTC as to all claims asserted in its Counterclaim against Greenspon; and (2) in favor of DBNTC and OneWest as to all claims asserted in Greenspon's First Amended Complaint. 
On March 25, 2013, Greenspon filed a Motion to
 
Reconsider, seeking to have the circuit court reconsider its
 orders granting summary judgment. The circuit court denied the
 Motion to Reconsider on May 23, 2013. On June 13, 2013,
 
4
   Greenspon asserts that the circuit court erred in
 
granting DBNTC's motion for summary judgment on its counterclaims
 
seeking (1) ratification of the non-judicial foreclosure and (2)
 a writ of ejectment. Upon our de novo review, 
Ralston v. Yim,
  
129 Hawai 'i 46, 55-56, 292 P.3d 1276, 1285-86 (2013), and also 
based on Kondaur Capital Corp. v. Matsuyoshi, 136 Hawai 'i 227, 
361 P.3d 454 (2015), DBNTC did not satisfy its initial burden to
 demonstrate there were no genuine issues of material fact
 regarding the validity of the non-judicial foreclosure. 
Therefore, the circuit court erred in granting DBNTC's motion for
 summary judgment. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Greenspon filed a Notice of Appeal.
II.	 Discussion
 
A. DBNTC's Motion for Summary Judgment on Its Counterclaim
1.	 Kondaur Capital Case
 
DBNTC asserted it possessed title to the subject
 
property after a valid non-judicial foreclosure was completed in
 accordance with HRS §§ 667-5 through -10 (1993 & Supp. 2010)
 (repealed 2012).
7 In Kondaur Capital, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
recently ruled as follows: 
In Ulrich v. Security Investment Co., 35 Haw. 158
(Haw. Terr. 1939), we held that a personal property
mortgagee seeking to enforce a non-judicial foreclosure sale
bears the burden of establishing that the sale was conducted
in a manner that is fair, reasonably diligent, and in good
faith and that an adequate price was procured for the
 
7 The non-judicial foreclosure auction was held on February 26, 2010.
At that time, HRS § 667-5 provided in pertinent part:
 
§667-5 Foreclosure under power of sale; notice;
affidavit after sale. (a) When a power of sale is contained
in a mortgage, and where the mortgagee, the mortgagee's
successor in interest, or any person authorized by the power
to act in the premises, desires to foreclose under power of
sale upon breach of a condition of the mortgage, the
mortgagee, successor, or person shall be represented by an
attorney who is licensed to practice law in the State and is
physically located in the State. The attorney shall:
(1)	 Give notice of the mortgagee's, successor's, or
person's intention to foreclose the mortgage and
of the sale of the mortgaged property, by
publication of the notice . . . ; and
(2)	 Give any notices and do all acts as are
authorized or required by the power contained in
the mortgage.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
property. . . .
We hold that the duties set forth in Ulrich remain
 
viable law and are applicable to non-judicial foreclosures
of real property mortgages. Additionally, in situations
where a mortgagee acts as both the seller and the purchaser
of the subject property at a non-judicial foreclosure sale,
that mortgagee, or its quitclaim transferree or non-bona
fide successor, bears the burden of proving compliance with
the requirements of Ulrich. 
Kondaur Capital, 136 Hawai 'i at 229, 361 P.3d at 456 (footnotes 
omitted). The supreme court held that when a party seeking 
ejectment received title from a self-dealing mortgagee in a non­judicial foreclosure, i.e., the foreclosing mortgagee was the purchaser at the foreclosure auction, the party seeking ejectment must establish that the non-judicial foreclosure sale was conducted in a "manner that is fair, reasonably diligent, and in good faith, and to demonstrate that an adequate price was procured for the property." Id. at 240, 361 P.3d at 467 
(footnote omitted). As the supreme court noted, this is a burden separate from the mortgagee's adherence to the statutory requirements and terms of the mortgage under which the foreclosure sale is conducted. Id. at 243, 361 P.3d at 470. 
DBNTC, as the moving party seeking ejectment, had the
 
burden of demonstrating that no genuine issue of material fact
 existed as to whether it had title to and right of possession of
 the subject property. Id. at 241, 361 P.3d at 468. Kondaur
 
Capital places the burden on a self-dealing mortgagee, or its
 quitclaim transferee or non-bona fide successor, to prove
 compliance with the Ulrich requirements. In this case, there is
 a genuine issue of material fact whether the FDIC as Receiver for
 IndyMac Federal, the foreclosing party, was self-dealing, and
 whether DBNTC is a non-bona fide successor, such that DBNTC must
 prove compliance with the Ulrich requirements. In the
 Mortgagee's Affidavit of Foreclosure Sale Under Power of Sale
 (Mortgagee's Affidavit), recorded by Cal-Western as agent for
 mortgagee FDIC as Receiver for IndyMac Federal, the affiant
 attests that DBNTC was the high bidder at the public sale, which
 may not trigger application of Kondaur Capital. However, DBNTC
 acknowledged in answers to interrogatories that IndyMac Federal
 was the winning bidder at the auction having credit bid the
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
indebtedness owed on the subject loan, and that IndyMac Federal
 
designated DBNTC to take title in its place. Given this
 contradictory evidence in the record, it is unclear if Kondaur
 Capital applies in this case. 
If Kondaur Capital is applicable, DBNTC was required to
 
prove that the foreclosure sale "was regularly and fairly
 conducted in every particular" in order to establish the validity
 of its title. Id. at 241-42, 361 P.3d at 468-69. The only
 
evidence produced by DBNTC with respect to the manner in which
 the sale was conducted was the Mortgagee's Affidavit, which
 provides that the requirements of HRS §§ 667-5 through -10 were
 complied with. However, the Mortgagee's Affidavit contains no
 averments addressing the fairness and regularity of the sale,
 whether the sale was conducted in a diligent and reasonable
 manner, or the adequacy of the price bid (which appears to have
 been a credit bid of the indebtedness). The Affidavit addresses
 issues such as notice, publication of notice, the postponement of
 the sale, the date and location of sale, and the number of
 bidders and the highest bid. However, these statements do not
 fully satisfy the Ulrich requirements as applied in Kondaur
 Capital. 
Because genuine issues of material fact exist (1)
 
whether DBNTC was required to prove compliance with the Ulrich
 requirements, and, (2) if so, whether DBNTC demonstrated that the
 non-judicial foreclosure sale was conducted in a manner that was
 fair, reasonably diligent, in good faith, and would obtain an
 adequate price, summary judgment was not warranted as to DBNTC's
 counterclaims.
 
2. Greenspon's Arguments on Appeal
 
As noted above, the circuit court erroneously granted
 
summary judgment in favor of DBNTC on its counterclaims in light
 of the supreme court's recent ruling in Kondaur Capital. On
 appeal, Greenspon raises various other challenges to the evidence
 submitted by DBNTC in support of its motion for summary judgment
 on the counterclaims. We address his contentions to the extent
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
discernible.8
 
In its counterclaim, DBNTC sought: (1) ratification of
 
the non-judicial foreclosure; and (2) a writ of ejectment. To
 
obtain a writ of ejectment, DBNTC was required to demonstrate
 that it is entitled as a matter of law to possession of the
 premises. HRS § 604-6 (1993). DBNTC's claim to possession is
 dependent on the propriety of the non-judicial foreclosure
 conducted by FDIC as receiver for IndyMac Federal. 
On appeal, Greenspon contends that genuine issues of
 
material fact exist that preclude summary judgment because (a)
 the circuit court erred in accepting a declaration submitted by
 DBNTC as the "sole evidence" of Greenspon's default when it
 constituted hearsay and was contradicted by Greenspon's evidence;
 (b) Greenspon and IndyMac agreed to a modification agreement and
 FDIC as Receiver for IndyMac Federal purportedly breached the
 modification agreement by foreclosing on the subject property;
9
 
(c) there are multiple issues of material fact regarding whether
 FDIC as Receiver for IndyMac Federal strictly complied with the
 statutes governing non-judicial foreclosures; and (d) an amended
 deed filed by DBNTC as proof of title did not cure alleged
 defects in title and actually evidences a broken chain of title. 
Generally, Greenspon contends that DBNTC failed to
 
demonstrate via admissible evidence that Greenspon was in default
 as a precondition to the non-judicial foreclosure sale. See Lee
 
v. HSBC Bank USA, 121 Hawai
'i 287, 291, 218 P.3d 775, 779 (2009). 
The alleged default was failure in payment. In support of its motion for summary judgment, DBNTC submitted a declaration from Charles Boyle, Vice President, Default Litigation, for OneWest (Boyle Declaration). Boyle declared that he had previously been an employee of IndyMac (until July 14, 2008) and IndyMac Federal 
8
 To the extent that Greenspon makes assertions in his briefs that are
not argued, they are waived. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). 
9
 As noted in fn. 6, supra, Greenspon's original loan was from IndyMac.
IndyMac assigned its interest in the mortgage to IndyMac Federal prior to the
non-judicial foreclosure. Greenspon contends there are genuine issues of
material fact regarding the assignment of mortgage from IndyMac to IndyMac
Federal in terms of what was actually assigned. However, a borrower does not
have standing to challenge an assignment to which he was not a party. Velasco
 
v. Sec. Nat'l. Mortg. Co., 823 F. Supp. 2d 1061, 1067 (D. Haw. 2011).
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(until March 2009). Boyle declared that "[i]n the regular
 
performance of my job functions, I am familiar with business
 records maintained by OneWest for purposes of servicing mortgage
 loans[,]" "I have personally examined these business records as
 they relate to the subject matter of this action[,]" and
 "OneWest's records indicate that as of June 1, 2008, Plaintiff
 was in default in the payment of principle and interest mentioned
 in the Note. . . . Throughout the foreclosure, the amounts due
 and owing under the Note and Mortgage remained in default and the
 default remains uncured." Attached as an exhibit to the Boyle
 Declaration is a November 2008 letter from IndyMac Federal to
 Greenspon noting that his loan was in "serious default" because
 he had not made required payments, the first outstanding payment
 had been due June 1, 2008, and the total amount Greenspon was
 required to pay to cure the default was $27,664.44.
 
Greenspon contends that the Boyle Declaration was 
hearsay because it relied on records that were not attached as exhibits, DBNTC did not produce "the complete record" of the documents reviewed, and Boyle did not declare that he reviewed the records of IndyMac or IndyMac Federal, therefore there was no evidence Greenspon was in default. Greenspon notes that an affidavit consisting of inadmissible hearsay cannot serve as a basis for awarding or denying a motion for summary judgment. Haw 
Cmty Fed. Credit Union v. Keka, 94 Hawai
'i 213, 221, 11 P.3d 1, 9 
(2000). However, as noted above, attached to the Boyle Declaration was the November 2008 letter documenting Greenspon's default, which Boyle declared was part of OneWest's records. Further, in his own declaration filed in support of his opposition to DBNTC's motion for summary judgment, Greenspon admitted he stopped paying his loan in June 2008, and despite making one payment on July 30, 2008, in accordance with an alleged modification agreement, made no further payments. Therefore, there was no genuine issue of material fact that Greenspon was in default. 
Next, Greenspon contends he was not in default because
 
he demonstrated the existence of a modification agreement that
 FDIC as Receiver for IndyMac Federal breached by foreclosing and
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
that he made a payment on July 30, 2008, in accordance with the
 
terms of the alleged modification agreement. Greenspon contends
 the genuine issue of material fact regarding the existence of the
 modification agreement prohibits summary judgment. 
Greenspon submitted in support of his declaration a
 
copy of the alleged modification agreement signed by Greenspon,
 but not signed by a representative of IndyMac, and a September
 2008 statement of his loan which indicated IndyMac received the
 July 30 payment. Greenspon contends his good faith performance
 with the modification agreement was frustrated and the
 foreclosure was wrongful. However, Greenspon declares that
 beyond the July 2008 payment, he did not make further payments
 because IndyMac and IndyMac Federal refused to recognize the
 modification agreement and he was "not allowed to pay my modified
 mortgage loan, and no new repayment plan could be agreed upon." 
Greenspon does not explain how or why he was not permitted to
 make further payments. There is no genuine issue of material
 fact that Greenspon stopped making payments altogether on the
 loan by at least August 2008, and thus was in default by the
 February 26, 2010 foreclosure sale.
 
Greenspon's main challenge to IndyMac Federal's
 
compliance with the statutory law governing non-judicial
 foreclosures relates to notice. It is undisputed that Greenspon
 was not given timely notice of the original auction date due to
 delayed service of the Notice of Mortgagee's Intent to Foreclose
 Under Power of Sale.
10 However, the sale was postponed numerous
 
times, as was permitted under HRS § 667-5, and each time a letter
 was sent via First Class mail
11 to Greenspon which provided that
 
10 Greenspon contends on appeal that the Notice of Intent to Foreclose
is facially invalid because the signature page of the document was notarized
on January 26, 2009, while the previous page, which provides the actual
notice, identifies that "Rev 04/01/09". Greenspon contends that this
demonstrates a genuine issue of material fact whether IndyMac Federal
conducted a valid non-judicial foreclosure because the notice was created
months after the sworn certificate of the notary. Greenspon did not raise
this argument below and it is waived. 
11 Section 15 of the mortgage provides in pertinent part that "[a]ny
notice to Borrower in connection with this Security Instrument shall be deemed
to have been given to Borrower when mailed by first class mail or when
(continued...)
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the notice of postponement was called out, and identified the
 
date of the rescheduled auction.12
 
In terms of DBNTC's title to the subject property, it 
appears that the First Deed conferring title to DBNTC incorrectly identified the grantor as FDIC as Receiver for IndyMac. DBNTC relies on an amended deed as proof of title which identifies the grantor as FDIC as Receiver for IndyMac Federal. Greenspon did not object to the amended deed in the circuit court and thus waived any challenge to its admissibility. See, Price v. AIG 
Hawaii Ins. Co., 107 Hawai
'i 106, 111, 111 P.3d 1, 6 (2005).
B.	 The Appellees' Motion for Summary Judgment on
Greenspon's First Amended Complaint
 
Greenspon contends that the circuit court erred in
 
granting the Appellees' motion for summary judgment on his First
 
Amended Complaint because there are genuine issues of material
 fact that the essential elements of his claims have been
 supported and Appellees adduced no evidence to negate his claims. 
As discussed further below, because we vacate the circuit court's
 grant of summary judgment on DBNTC's counterclaim, we vacate in
 part the circuit court's grant of summary judgment on the First
 Amended Complaint. 
In the First Amended Complaint, Greenspon asserted 
three claims: (1) Quiet Title and Wrongful Foreclosure; (2) Injunctive Relief; and (3) Damages (Fraud UDAP). To carry their burden as defendants-movants, the Appellees must "either (1) present[] evidence negating an element of the non-movant's claim, or (2) demonstrat[e] that the nonmovant will be unable to carry his or her burden of proof at trial." Ralston, 129 Hawai
'i at 
60, 292 P.3d at 1290. 
11(...continued)
actually delivered to Borrower's notice address if sent by other means." 

12 Greenspon contends that DBNTC has not demonstrated that each
postponement was done by public announcement as was required by HRS § 667-5.
This contention is contrary to the evidence submitted. DBNTC submitted copiesof letters informing Greenspon of the postponements. Each letter providesthat the postponement was by public announcement "at said time and at setplace" designated in prior notice. Greenspon provides no evidence to thecontrary and cannot survive summary judgment by asserting general allegations.Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawai' i, 46, 55-56, 292 P.3d 1276, 1285-86 (2013). 
11
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1. Quiet Title and Wrongful Foreclosure
 
In the First Amended Complaint, Greenspon asserted that
 
he has superior title to quiet title because the non-judicial
 
foreclosure on the subject property was void and the fraudulently
 created documents evidencing chain of title should be stricken
 and expunged from the Bureau of Conveyances.
13
 
In terms of Greenspon's request to quiet title, his
 
appeal is from the Rule 54(b) Judgment resolving claims only
 against the Appellees, and the issue is whether Greenspon has
 superior title to the Appellees, particularly DBNTC. Greenspon's
 assertion of superior title to DBNTC is dependent on an unwinding
 of the non-judicial foreclosure. Because there are genuine
 issues of material fact whether the underlying non-judicial
 foreclosure sale was proper under Kondaur, there are genuine
 issues of material fact regarding quiet title as between
 Greenspon and DBNTC. 
However, with regard to his claim for wrongful
 
foreclosure, Greenspon's claim is based on improper conduct in
 the foreclosure performed by FDIC as Receiver for IndyMac
 Federal. Greenspon purports to have dismissed all claims against
 IndyMac Federal. His appeal here is from the Rule 54(b) Judgment
 in favor of the Appellees. Importantly, in the First Amended
 Complaint, Greenspon asserts no acts committed by either of the
 Appellees that was part of the allegedly wrongful foreclosure
 that resulted in damages to Greenspon.
14 Therefore, to the
 
extent Greenspon argues a wrongful foreclosure claim against
 Appellees in this appeal, such argument is without merit.
2. Damages (UDAP and Fraud)
 
In the First Amended Complaint, Greenspon asserted
 
13 Greenspon also argues that once title to DBNTC is void, the property
returns to him with superior claim to all others because FDIC, on behalf of
IndyMac and IndyMac Federal, has disclaimed any interest in the subject
property. Greenspon did not make this argument in opposition to the
Appellees' motion for summary judgment. 
14 The only assertion of any improper actions committed by the
Appellees was that DBNTC lacked authority under the Pooling and Servicing
Agreement (PSA) creating the trust to purchase the subject property. However,
Greenspon lacks standing to challenge whether DBNTC violated the PSA. Klohs
 
v. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., 901 F. Supp. 2d 1253, 1260 n.3 (D. Haw. 2012).
 
12
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
claims of UDAP and fraud based on all of the acts asserted in the
 
complaint and apparently against all named defendants. However,
 the only defendants involved in this appeal are the Appellees. 
The lone actions alleged in the First Amended Complaint
 attributable to the Appellees are that OneWest purchased IMFB,
 and DBNTC received transfer of title to the subject property
 without authority. 
None of the alleged actions asserted in the First 
Amended Complaint describe a transaction occurring between Greenspon as a consumer and the Appellees as a seller in a business context in order to support a UDAP claim. See Keka, 94 
Hawai
'i at 227, 11 P.3d at 15. Therefore, the circuit court did 
not err in granting summary judgment to Appellees on Greenspon's UDAP claim. 
In terms of any alleged fraud, like all torts, 
Greenspon must have alleged that the Appellees breached a duty owed to Greenspon and the breach caused injury to Greenspon. Exotics Hawaii-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Du Pont De Nemours & Co., 116 Hawai
'i 277, 298, 172 P.3d 1021, 1042 (2007). Greenspon has not 
alleged any injury caused by the Appellees' actions.
3. Injunctive Relief
 
Injunctive relief is not an independent cause of action
 
but a remedy to other causes of action. Ramos v. Chase Home
 
Fin., 810 F. Supp. 2d 1125, 1132 (D. Haw. 2011). Because we
 vacate the circuit court's grant of summary judgment as to quiet
 title, we also vacate the grant of summary judgment regarding
 Greenspon's request for injunctive relief on this claim. 
In sum, the circuit court erred in granting summary
 
judgment for Appellees as to Greenspon's claim to quiet title and
 to the extent he seeks injunctive relief based on his quiet title
 claim. In all other aspects, the circuit court did not err in
 granting summary judgment for Appellees related to Greenspon's
 claims asserted in his First Amended Complaint.
15
 
15 To the extent Greenspon argues that summary judgment for Cal-Western
was not proper, the Rule 54(b) Judgment did not enter judgment as to Cal-
Western. Therefore, we will not address the claims against Cal-Western. 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We need not address Greenspon's remaining point of
 
error regarding the circuit court's denial of his request for a
 
HRCP Rule 56(f) Discovery Continuance.
III. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the following entered by the
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit are affirmed in part and
 
vacated in part:
 
(A) "Order Granting: (1) Defendants [OneWest] and
 
[DBNTC's] Motion for Summary Judgment Re: First Amended
 Complaint, Filed on November 5, 2012; and (2) [DBNTC's] Motion
 for Summary Judgment Re: Counterclaim (and Writ of Ejectment
 Against Defendant Michael C. Greenspon), Filed on November 5,
 2012", entered on March 13, 2013, 
(B) "Final Judgment [Re: [Order Granting Summary
 
Judgment]]", entered on March 13, 2013, and
 (C) "Order Denying [Greenspon's] Motion to Reconsider
 
The Court's Order Granting Summary Judgment And Judgment For
 Possession," entered on May 23, 2013.
 
They are vacated with respect to (1) DBNTC's
 
counterclaim and (2) Greenspon's claim to quiet title and for
 injunctive relief. Otherwise, we affirm. This case is remanded
 to the circuit court for proceedings consistent with this
 opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 14, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Michael C. Greenspon,
Plaintiff/CounterclaimDefendant-Appellant, pro se. Chief Judge 
J. Blaine Rogers,Jenny J.N.A. Nakamoto,(David B. Rosen on the briefs)for Defendant-Appellees. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
14

 