         
 
       
          
         
           
           
 
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000222 05-JUN-2025 07:55 AM Dkt. 76 SO 
NO.  CAAP-22-0000222 
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE  COURT  OF  APPEALS 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
B.P.,  on  behalf  of  K.B.,  a  minor,  Petitioner-Appellee,  v. 
H.B.,  Respondent-Appellant 
APPEAL  FROM  THE  FAMILY  COURT  OF  THE  FIRST  CIRCUIT 
(FC-DA  NO.  22-1-000064) 
SUMMARY  DISPOSITION  ORDER 
(By:   Leonard,   Acting  Chief  Judge,  Hiraoka   and  Wadsworth,   JJ.) 
Respondent-Appellant   H.B.  (Father)  appeals   from  the 
February   28,  2022  Order  For  Protection   (Order  For  Protection ) 
entered   by  the  Family  Court  of  the  First  Circuit   (Family  Court)
in  favor  of  Petitioner-Appellee  B.P.  (Mother)  on  behalf  of  a 
minor  K.B.  (Child).   Father  also  challenges  some  of  the  Family 
Court's  July  7,  2022  Findings  of  Fact  and  Conclusions  of  Law 
(FOFs/COLs ). 1 
Father
 raises two points of error on appeal, contending 
that the Family Court erred in granting the Order For Protection 
because: (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support 
FOFs 15.k, 15.1, 15.m, 15.ee, 15.11, 16, and 17, and COLs 38-39, 
41-44, 52, 55, 60, and 61; and (2) the Family Court admitted 
inadmissible hearsay. 
1 The Honorable Lesley N. Maloian presided.          
   
   
         
         
        NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon  careful  review  of  the  record  and  the  briefs 
submitted  by  the  parties,  and  having  given  due  consideration  to 
the  arguments  advanced  and  the  issues  raised,  we  resolve  Father's 
points  of  error  as  follows:  
(1)   Father  argues  that  the  challenged  FOFs  include 
that  Mother  testified  to  the  allegations  set  forth  therein,  but 
that  no  such  testimony  was  received  by  the  court  at  trial.  
Accordingly,  Father  argues,  the  FOFs  lack  substantial  evidence  in 
support,  as  do  the  challenged  COLs  relying  on  those  FOFs. 
However, Mother testified, without objection, that the 
information contained in the initial petition for an order of 
protection (Petition ) was related to Mother by Child and that 
Mother absolutely believed that the information was true and 
correct. 
Although  Father  correctly  argues  that  the  Family  Court 
sustained  objections  to  Mother's  answers  to  two  questions,  those 
questions  were:   "[w]hy  are  you  asking  for  five  years?"  and  "who 
else  was  doing  the  name  calling  toward  [Child]?"   The  first 
question  and  disallowed  answer  is  not  reflected  in  any  of  the 
challenged  FOFs  or  COLs.   The  second  one  –  concerning  verbal 
abuse  by  others  –  appears  to  be  reflected  in  lines  2-5  of  FOF 
15.l.   Although  the  Family  Court  clearly  erred  in  finding  that 
Mother  so  testified,  this  was  harmless  error  because  Father  is 
the  only  person  subject  to  the  Order  For  Protection.   The  other 
challenged  findings  are  supported  by  Mother's  above-referenced 
testimony.   See  also  Hawaii  Revised  Statutes  (HRS)  §  587A-21(a) 
(2018)  ("Any  statement  relating  to  an  allegation  of  imminent 
2
          
   
     
 
         
        
      
          
        
         
         
          
         
         
       
       
          
          
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
harm,  harm,  or  threatened  harm  that  a  child  has  made  to  any 
person  shall  be  admissible  as  evidence.") 
We conclude that Father's first point of error is 
without merit. 
(2) Father argues that the Family Court erred in 
entering the Order For Protection because the court admitted 
inadmissible hearsay statements contained within the Department 
of Human Services (DHS) social workers' report for the truth of 
the matter asserted therein. More specifically, Father asserts 
that the testifying DHS social worker, CJ Ibarra (Ibarra), did 
not offer testimony at trial regarding the statements made by 
Child to Ibarra, but the statements that Child made to Ibarra 
were included in the February 22, 2022 Confidential Report of 
[DHS] (Report to Court), which was submitted to the court 
pursuant to HRS § 586-10.5 (2018).2 
At trial, Ibarra testified that he completed an 
investigation in this case. As part of that investigation, inter 
alia, he spoke with Child. At the conclusion of that 
2 HRS § 586-10.5 states: 
§  586-10.5   Reports  by  the  department  of  human 
services;  court  responsibilities .   In  cases  where  there  are 
allegations  of  domestic  abuse  involving  a  family  or 
household  member  who  is  a  minor  or  an  incapacitated  person 
as  defined  in  section  560:5-102,  the  employee  or  appropriate 
nonjudicial  agency  designated  by  the  family  court  to  assist 
the  petitioner  shall  report  the  matter  to  the  department  of 
human  services,  as  required  under  chapters  350  and  587A,  and 
further  notify  the  department  of  the  granting  of  the 
temporary  restraining  order  and  of  the  hearing  date.   The 
department  of  human  services  shall  provide  the  family  court 
with  a  written  report  on  the  disposition  of  the  referral. 
The  court  shall  file  the  report  and  mail  it  to  the 
petitioner  and  respondent  at  least  two  working  days  before 
the  hearing  date,  if  possible.   If  circumstances  prevent  the 
mailing  of  the  report  as  required  in  this  section,  the  court 
shall  provide  copies  of  the  report  to  the  petitioner  and 
respondent  at  the  hearing.   The  report  shall  be  noted  in  the 
order  dismissing  the  petition  or  granting  the  restraining 
order. 
3          
 
       
          
         
        
        
          
          
            
        
         
 
        
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
investigation,  Ibarra  completed  a  report,  along  with  the 
disposition  in  that  report,  which  was  that  physical  abuse  and 
threat  of  abuse  to  Child  by  Father  was  confirmed.   Ibarra 
testified  that  he  had  nothing  to  add  to  the  report  and  it 
contained  the  disposition  from  DHS. 
The
 Family Court determined that the Report to Court 
complied with HRS § 586-10.5, and Father does not challenge that 
determination on appeal. The Report to Court was completed 
pursuant to the Family Court's January 12, 2022 Temporary 
Restraining Order, which ordered DHS to investigate the matter, 
submit a written report to the court, and have the investigating 
social worker appear to testify. We conclude that the statements 
made by Child to Ibarra, which were set forth in the Report to 
Court, were admissible pursuant to HRS § 587A-21(a). 
Accordingly, we conclude that Father's second point of error is 
without merit. 
For these reasons, the Family Court's February 28, 2022 
Order For Protection is affirmed. 
DATED:   Honolulu,  Hawai i,  June  5,  2025. 
On  the  briefs: /s/  Katherine  G.  Leonard 
Acting  Chief  Judge 
Justin  L.  Sturdivant, 
Daniel  E.  Pollard, /s/  Keith  K.  Hiraoka 
(Smith  &  Sturdivant,  LLLC), Associate  Judge 
for  Respondent-Appellant. 
/s/  Clyde  J.  Wadsworth 
Pablo  P.  Quiban, Associate  Judge  
for  Petitioner-Appellee. 
4
 