 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JOSHUA R.D. WILLIAMS, Defendant-Appellant
 
NO. CAAP-13-0001285
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 12-1-0425)

 
FEBRUARY 29, 2016
 
NAKAMURA, C.J., FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Joshua R.D. Williams (Williams) with 
attempted murder in the second degree of David Quindt Jr. (Quindt). At the time of the charged offense, Williams was 
renting a room from and residing with Quindt. The charge stemmed 
from Williams' stabbing Quindt in the neck, face, and arm with a knife, while Quindt was driving his sports utility vehicle (SUV) and Williams was in the back seat. Quindt sustained injuries,  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
including a life-threatening 12-centimeter laceration to the
 
neck, a laceration from his nose down through his lip, a deep
 laceration to his cheek, and a 15-centimeter laceration to his
 elbow. Williams claimed self-defense, asserting that he stabbed
 Quindt because Quindt had threatened to kill Williams once the
 SUV came to a stop.
 
A jury found Williams guilty as charged. The Circuit
 
1
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)  sentenced Williams to
life in prison, with the possibility of parole.

 
On appeal, Williams contends that the Circuit Court

 
erred in "limiting and excluding" certain evidence he sought to
 introduce. Prior to trial, Williams filed a notice of his
 
intent, pursuant to Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b)
 
(Supp. 2015), to introduce statements made by Quindt before the
 charged incident that: Quindt had done "hard time" in California
 for the crime of murder; as the result of spending time in jail,
 Quindt had experience with violence, knew how to fight, and
 learned how to fight to survive; Quindt knew about "gang-bangers
 and gang-members"; and Quindt committed the murder, but "got
 away" with the murder because someone else "took credit for it."
 Williams did not claim that he could prove the truth of Quindt's 
statements. In particular, Williams acknowledged that he did not
 clearly know whether, and would not attempt to prove that, Quindt
 had committed a murder. Williams, however, argued that Quindt's
 
statements were relevant to show Williams' state of mind and that
 
Williams acted reasonably in using deadly force to defend himself
 against Quindt.
 
The Circuit Court ruled before opening statements that
 
Williams would be allowed to introduce evidence that he heard
 Quindt say that Quindt had been convicted of murder, that Quindt
 knew how to fight, and that Quindt learned how to fight in jail.
 The Circuit Court excluded the remainder of the evidence
 proffered by Williams. Notwithstanding the Circuit Court's
 
1The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.
 
2
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ruling, Williams was permitted at trial to introduce additional
 
evidence that Quindt said he had killed somebody in the past but
 had gotten away with it. Williams was also permitted to testify
 
that Quindt bragged about killing people and about the murder
 
charge. 
Williams argues on appeal that the Circuit Court erred
 
in limiting the evidence of the statements made by Quindt that
 Williams sought to introduce. We conclude that in light of the
 evidence the Circuit Court ruled would be permitted and the
 evidence that was actually presented at trial, any error in the
 limitations imposed by the Circuit Court on Williams' proffered
 evidence did not materially impair his claim of self-defense and
 was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Accordingly, we affirm
 Williams' conviction. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
Williams and Quindt first met several weeks before the
 
charged incident. At that time, Quindt worked at West Side
 Tattoo, was a body piercer, and was training to become a tattoo
 artist. Williams saw Quindt in front of West Side Tattoo wearing
 a t-shirt of a rap-rock music group of which Williams was a big
 fan. They struck up a conversation, learned that they shared an
 interest in tattoos and piercings, and exchanged phone numbers.
 
A few days later, Williams learned that Quindt was looking to
 
rent a room in Quindt's house, where Quindt resided with his wife
 and two children. Quindt agreed to rent a room to Williams, and
 Williams and his four-year-old son moved into Quindt's house.
 
About three weeks later, as part of Quindt's
 
apprenticeship to become a tattoo artist, Quindt drew a tattoo on
 Williams' thigh. After the tattoo session, Williams, Quindt, and
 Quindt's wife left West Side Tattoo around 9:15 p.m., picked up
 Williams' son, and eventually went home. While Williams took his
 son into the house, Quindt waited in his car, a 1999 GMC Jimmy
 SUV, because Quindt and Williams planned to drive to Fred's 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
house. Quindt had agreed to do a piercing for Fred, who was
 
William's friend. 
Quindt became irritated and felt disrespected because
 
of the time Williams kept him waiting. When Williams returned to
 the SUV, Quindt and Williams began arguing and yelling at each
 other. Shortly after Quindt began driving, Williams jumped out
 of the SUV. Quindt stopped the SUV, Williams eventually ended up
 in the backseat of the SUV, and Quindt resumed driving. 
While Quindt was driving, Williams used a knife to stab
 
Quindt in the neck, in the face, and in the left forearm. Quindt
 drove into the Waianae Mall Shopping Center (Waianae Mall), 
Quindt stopped the SUV, and both Quindt and Williams got out. 
Quindt was bleeding profusely. Williams subsequently agreed to
 drive Quindt to the emergency room at the Waianae Coast
 Comprehensive Health Center (Waianae Health Center) in Quindt's
 SUV. When they arrived at the Waianae Health Center, Williams
 hid the knife he used to stab Quindt. Quindt was examined by an
 emergency room doctor at the Waianae Health Center, who
 stabilized Quindt's bleeding and had Quindt transported by
 ambulance to the trauma center at Queen's Medical Center. 
When Williams was initially questioned by the police,
 
he lied and said that he and Quindt had been attacked by three
 men at the beach, one of whom stabbed Quindt. Later, however,
 Williams admitted that he had stabbed Quindt, claimed that he had
 acted in self-defense, and described to the police where he had
 hidden the knife.
 
II.
 
A.
 
Prior to trial, Williams filed a notice of his intent
 
to introduce evidence of statements that Quindt had made to
 Williams before the charged incident regarding Quindt's "prior
 bad acts" (Notice of Intent). The Notice of Intent was filed
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pursuant to HRE Rule 404(b).2 The proffered statements included
 
references to a murder of which Quindt had been convicted but
 
later exonerated. The record indicates that Quindt had been
 convicted of murder in California and had served several years in
 prison before being exonerated. It was determined that Quindt's
 conviction was a case of mistaken identity, and he was exonerated
 when someone else apparently admitted to committing the murder.
  
In his Notice of Intent, Williams alleged as follows:
 
1.	 During the 2-3 week time period prior to the date of
the incident on March 10, 2012, while [Williams] and
[Quindt] were living in the same residence, [Quindt]
would bully, berate, insult, criticize and demean
[Williams] about his life choices, past history, lack
of street knowledge, his relationship with the mother
of his child, his child rearing skills, and his
family. They would argue and at times, [Quindt] would
boast and brag about the following:
 
a.	 Doing time for the crime of murder in
California;
 
b.	 That [Quindt] did hard time in California;
 
c.	 That [Quindt] knows how to fight because of the
time he spent in jail and that he had to learn
to fight to survive;
 
d.	 That [Quindt] knows about gang-bangers and
gang-members;
 
e.	 That [Quindt] has experience with violence from
spending time in jail;
 
f.	 That [Quindt] "got away" with murder by beating
the charge -- because someone else took credit
for it;
 
g.	 That [Quindt] did the crime but got off on a
technicality.
 
2HRE Rule 404(b) provides, in relevant part:
 
(b) Other crimes, wrongs, or acts. Evidence of other
 
crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character
of a person in order to show action in conformity therewith. It
 may, however, be admissible where such evidence is probative of
another fact that is of consequence to the determination of the
action, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation,
plan, knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of mistake
or accident. 
5
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
Prior to opening statements, the Circuit Court held a
 
hearing on the State's motion in limine to exclude the alleged
 
statements made by Quindt to Williams set forth in Williams'
 Notice of Intent. Williams asserted that he sought to introduce
 the proffered statements to prove his state of mind in support of
 his claim of self-defense. Williams' counsel argued: 
[T]he things that I've included in my 404(b) notice have to
do with my client's state of mind and the things that were
in his head as a result of statements made by Mr. Quindt
that caused [Williams] to then be concerned for his personal
safety. So they go directly to his state of mind. 
1.
 
There was no dispute at the hearing that Quindt had
 
been exonerated of the prior murder conviction. The State
 
asserted that Quindt was not involved in the murder and had
 maintained his innocence; that Quindt's conviction was a case of
 mistaken identity; and that he was exonerated when someone else
 confessed to the murder. Williams, through his counsel,
 acknowledged that Quindt was exonerated of the murder charge in
 California after being convicted and serving three and a half
 years of incarceration, when "someone's wife went to the police
 to tell them that her husband was involved, and that led to a
 further investigation. And then later it was determined that Mr.
 Quindt was falsely identified." 
While acknowledging that Quindt had been exonerated of
 
the murder charge, Williams' counsel argued that Quindt's
 statements about the murder were relevant to showing Williams'
 state of mind at the time Williams stabbed Quindt. Defense
 counsel stated: "[I]t's my understanding that [Williams] will
 testify that Mr. Quindt claimed that he was convicted of murder,
 that he got off on the charge, but the implication being that he
 may have done it; he may not have done it." The State argued
 that since Quindt had been exonerated of the murder, permitting
 Williams to introduce the proffered statements about the murder
 
6
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
would create confusion and be prejudicial to the State. The
 
Circuit Court indicated that because Williams' state of mind -­
his belief "that Quindt [had] participated in the killing of
 someone" -- was relevant to Williams' claim of self-defense, it
 would allow Williams to introduce certain statements by Quindt
 relating to the murder. 
The parties and the Circuit Court then discussed the
 
scope of what Williams would be permitted to say about what
 Quindt had told him about the murder. The State argued that
 Williams should be limited to testifying that Quindt bragged that
 he "maybe" killed someone. The State contended that this would
 avoid the need to explain that there had been a conviction that
 was later overturned, which the State believed would be "too much
 for the jury to consider." Defense counsel stated that she had
 no problem with the State introducing evidence that Quindt had
 been exonerated of the murder. However, defense counsel argued
 that what was "swirling in [Williams'] mind when he's deciding
 whether or not he needs to act in self-defense" was that Quindt
 had said: "he was convicted of murder" but "got away with it"
 because someone else "took the fall"; he did three years of "hard
 time"; and "to survive in prison, you have to be able to take
 care of yourself and fight." 
The State argued that references to Quindt having been
 
convicted of murder and then exonerated should not be brought up
 because this would complicate matters and confuse the jury. In
 response, the Circuit Court asked defense counsel if the defense
 would agree to refrain from using the word "conviction" and
 instead elicit evidence that Quindt said he was involved in a
 murder. Defense counsel responded that Williams would not agree
 to that limitation because Quindt used the term "conviction" when
 he spoke to Williams, which is the word that was in Williams'
 head and one of the reasons Williams feared Quindt. The Circuit
 Court then ruled that the references to Quindt's murder
 conviction would be admitted "for state of mind only . . . as to
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
what Williams was thinking at the time." The Circuit Court
 
informed the State that it could "bring in the fact that [Quindt]
 was exonerated." The Circuit Court asked defense counsel, "[s]o
 basically [Williams is] going to say Quindt said he was convicted
 of murder?" Defense counsel responded, "Or use the term "murder
 conviction." The Circuit Court stated, "All right . . . that's 
. . . the extent to which he's going to testify as to that at
 this point."
 
2.
 
With respect to the proffered evidence that Quindt
 
said: (1) he knows how to fight, learned how to fight to survive,
 and experienced violence because of the time he spent in jail,
 and (2) he "knows about gang-bangers and gang-members," defense
 counsel argued that this evidence was also relevant to Williams'
 state of mind pertaining to his claim of self-defense. Defense
 counsel asserted that during verbal arguments that did not result
 in physical fights, Quindt would make these statements to
 Williams to cause Williams to back down. Defense counsel argued
 that the implication of these statements was that Quindt knew how
 to fight due to his experiences on the street, namely, gang-
banging, and because of the time he served in prison. Defense
 counsel stated that the defense did not intend to "wallow" in
 this evidence, but noted that "these snippets" popped in
 Williams' head and caused "his alarm to go to something higher
 such that he feels he needs to act in self-defense." 
When asked by the Circuit Court what the term "gang­
banger" means, defense counsel responded: "It means that you were
 involved in gang activity, could be involved in fights or
 involved in just criminal activity having to do with gang
 membership. I'm not going to go beyond the term 'gangbanger[.]'" 
The Circuit Court observed that the term does not necessarily
 connote violent conduct. Defense counsel then stated: "[Williams
 is] going to use the term 'gangbanger.' I can, I guess, on
 direct ask him what did that mean to you. But at that -- I
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
wasn't planning to do that. I was just going to be referencing
 
the term."3 Defense counsel also asserted that the defense
 
wanted to use the term "prison" rather than "jail." 
The State argued that because the Circuit Court was
 
permitting evidence that Quindt had been convicted of murder, it
 was not necessary, would be prejudicial, and would "open[ ] up a
 lot of doors for confusion" to permit evidence that Quindt said
 he was incarcerated or in jail. Regarding the use of the term
 "jail" versus "prison," the State argued that Williams' Notice of
 Intent used the term "jail," rather than "prison." 
The Circuit Court ruled that it was excluding the
 
proffered evidence relating to "gangbangers" because it thought
 the term was "too general." The Circuit Court permitted evidence
 that Quindt said he learned to fight in "jail," apparently
 denying Williams' request to use the term "prison."
 
3.
 
With respect to the evidence of Quindt's statements
 
proffered by Williams in his Notice of Intent, the Circuit Court
 ruled as follows:
 
1. With respect to items 1.a. ("Doing time for the
 
crime of murder in California") and 1.b. ("[Quindt] did hard time
 in California"), the Circuit Court found that these two items
 were basically the same thing. It ruled that Williams would be
 permitted to elicit evidence that Quindt said he was convicted
 for murder.
 
2. With respect to item 1.c. ("[Quindt] knows how to
 
fight because of the time he spent in jail and that he had to
 learn to fight to survive"), the Circuit Court permitted evidence
 that Quindt said he knows how to fight and he learned how to
 fight in jail.
 
3Defense counsel later stated that Williams interpreted the term "gang­
banger" as something beyond just minor gang activity and that "it involves
something a little bit more serious and involves more violence."
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3. With respect to item 1.d. ("[Quindt] knows about
 
gang-bangers and gang-members") and 1.e. ("[Quindt] has
 
experience with violence from spending time in jail"), the
 Circuit Court excluded this evidence as too general. 
4. With respect to items 1.f. ("[Quindt] 'got away'
 
with murder by beating the charge -- because someone else took
 credit for it") and 1.e. ("[Quindt] did the crime but got off on
 a technicality"), the Circuit Court excluded this evidence. The
 Circuit Court had earlier indicated that if Quindt admitted to
 Williams that Quindt was involved in the commission of the
 murder, whether Quindt got off would not be relevant to Williams'
 state of mind.
 
III.
 
A.
 
In opening statement, the State asserted that Quindt
 
will testify that
 
he has been involved with the judicial system before.
[Quindt] will testify that he was convicted of murder.
However, [Quindt] will also testify that he was later
exonerated of that murder. Although [Quindt] did spend some
time in jail, he will testify that he was released, and the
conviction was reversed. 
(Formatting altered.) 
B.
 
In Williams' opening statement, defense counsel
 
asserted that the evidence would show that when Williams was in
 
the back seat of Quindt's SUV, Quindt engaged the child locks
 which prevented Williams from opening the back doors and windows. 
Defense counsel stated that while Williams was "a prisoner" in
 the backseat,
 
[Williams] remembers how [Quindt] would talk about his
murder conviction in California. He knows -- he remembers
 
10
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
how [Quindt][4] would talk about how he learned how to fight
in prison because you have to fight -- I'm sorry -- in jail
because you have to learn how to fight to survive in jail.
 
Now, all these thoughts are swirling around in his
head. What's this guy going to do to me? It's a giant
nightmare. Just as [Quindt] jerks the car into a dark
parking lot, the parking lot of the Pizza Hut, [Quindt] says
those words: "When I stop this car, I'm going to fuckin'
kill you."
 
Defense counsel stated that Williams then grabbed a pocket knife
 
and stabbed Quindt in order to disable him "so he can't get out
 of that car and do what he's just said he's going to do."
 
Defense counsel further asserted that the evidence
 
would show that after the stabbing, Quindt assured Williams that
 "Nobody is going to go to jail. Nobody is going to jail. It's
 going to be okay." Defense counsel stated that Quindt's words
 "get twisted in [Williams'] mind, and he does something
 incredibly stupid." Defense counsel related that Williams
 decides to get rid of the knife and then lies to the police by
 making up a story that he and Quindt were attacked at the beach
 by other people. In the end, however, Williams admitted that he
 was the person who stabbed Quindt. Defense counsel asserted that
 "Joshua Williams stabbed David Quindt in self-defense to prevent
 David Quindt from acting on his threat." 
IV.
 
A.
 
At trial, Quindt testified about meeting Williams and
 
then renting a room to Williams. Quindt testified that prior to
 the charged incident, he had never directly mentioned to Williams
 that he had been convicted of murder in another jurisdiction. 
Quindt stated that Williams overheard Quindt discussing the
 conviction with someone from "the Hawaiian Innocence Project"
 
4According to the transcript, Williams' counsel stated that "he
remembers how Joshua would talk about how he learned to fight in prison," but
it is clear from the context of counsel's remarks that she meant to refer to
 David Quindt instead of Joshua Williams. 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
over the telephone.5 Quindt testified that he had been convicted
 
of murder, but that he was exonerated of that murder in 1998. 
According to Quindt, on the night of March 10, 2012,
 
the date of charged incident, he was waiting in his SUV for
 
Williams after driving home with Williams, Williams' child, and
 Quindt's wife. Quindt and Williams were going to the house of
 Williams' friend, Fred, for whom Quindt had agreed to do a
 piercing. Quindt was tired, and he was frustrated because he was
 doing Williams a favor by piercing Fred and wanted Williams to
 hurry. When Williams returned to the SUV, Quindt complained
 about having to wait. Quindt and Williams argued with raised
 voices, and Quindt told Williams, "please don't disrespect me." 
As Quindt was driving slowly up the street, Williams
 
opened the passenger door and jumped out of the SUV. Quindt
 stopped the SUV, told Williams to get back into the vehicle, and
 said that they "shouldn't be arguing like children." Williams
 got back into the SUV, but sat in the backseat on the passenger
 side. Quindt did not push or touch Williams while Williams was
 outside the vehicle. 
Quindt testified that his 1999 SUV had a master lock
 
that controlled all the windows, but there was no master lock
 that controlled the doors. Each door could be unlocked
 individually. 
According to Quindt, as he was driving towards Fred's
 
house, he heard Williams talking on the phone with Nicole,
 Williams' girlfriend. This frustrated Quindt because he had
 helped Williams seek custody of Williams' child and obtain a
 restraining order against Nicole. Quindt told Williams that
 Williams was not supposed to be talking to Nicole because of the
 restraining order against her and that Williams was "messing up
 his custody case." Williams became "agitated and angry" with
 
5On cross-examination, Quindt testified that after he was stabbed by
Williams, he told a detective that he had been "very up front with [Williams]"
in reference to Quindt's "history." 
12
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Quindt, and they yelled and swore at each other. Quindt then
 
told Williams he wanted Williams "to get the fuck out of my
 house" because he could not deal with the "stress and drama
 anymore." He told Williams to "[j]ust take your stuff and get
 out of my house." 
As Quindt was turning into the Waianae Mall, he felt "a
 
hit to [his] right-hand side on [his] face." At first, Quindt
 thought Williams had punched him, but Quindt realized he had been
 stabbed when he noticed warm blood "squirting" out and running
 down his neck onto his shirt. This initial stabbing caused a
 laceration from Quindt's right ear all the way down to his Adam's
 apple. Quindt tried to fight off Williams as Williams was
 reaching over from the backseat to stab Quindt again. Quindt
 alternately gassed the SUV and hit the brake in an attempt to
 throw Williams off balance and prevent Williams from stabbing
 him. Besides the initial stabbing, Williams also stabbed Quindt
 
"straight through [his] septum, [his] nose" with the blade
 
cutting through his upper lip and coming out the left side of his
 cheek. Williams attempted to stab Quindt in the chest, and
 Quindt had a "cut mark" on his chest, a laceration to his left
 arm, and cuts to his fingers. 
The knife Williams used to stab Quindt belonged to
 
Quindt's son. Quindt and his son were active in the Boy Scouts
 and Quindt had bought identical knives for himself and his son. 
Quindt had seen Williams with the knife earlier that day. Quindt
 was carrying his knife in his back pocket. Quindt, however, did
 not attempt to take out his knife while Williams was stabbing him
 because Quindt was seat-belted in and there was no way he could
 retrieve the knife from his back pocket.
 
After being stabbed, Quindt hit a curb in the parking
 
lot, put the SUV in park, jumped out, and ran in front of the
 SUV. Williams also got out of the vehicle. Quindt tried to dial
 911 on his phone, but his touch screen did not work because there
 was blood covering the screen. Williams used his phone to call
 
13
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
his mother. Quindt heard Williams tell his mother, "I'm going to
 
go to jail, I just stabbed [Quindt]." 
Quindt felt weak because he had lost so much blood. 
Quindt told Williams, "if I die, you're going to get in more
 trouble" and asked Williams to drive him to the hospital. 
Williams drove Quindt to the emergency room at the Waianae Health
 Center. Afraid for his life and that Williams would retaliate
 against him, Quindt told Williams, "[D]on't worry, I won't get
 you into trouble." When they arrived at the Waianae Health
 Center, Williams ran down the hill towards the ocean and told
 Quindt he was going to get rid of the knife. Quindt did not tell
 Williams to get rid of the knife or to make up a story about
 Quindt being attacked by three unknown males. While in the SUV
 driving to Fred's house prior to being stabbed, Quindt did not
 threaten to kill Williams or to hurt Williams and did not
 remember threatening to "kick [Williams'] ass or beat him up."
6
 
B.
 
Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Detective Ernest
 
Robello (Detective Robello) testified that two days after the
 stabbing, he interviewed Williams at the police station. 
Williams was a suspect and had already been placed under arrest
 in the attempted murder investigation. Williams was interviewed
 twice by Detective Robello on that day.
 
According to Detective Robello, during the first
 
interview, Williams basically repeated the story he had given to
 HPD patrol officers at the Waianae Health Center. Williams
 stated that he and Quindt had gone to a beach park called "Green
 Lantern"; that they had a confrontation with three males they did
 not know; that the three males followed them to the Waianae Mall;
 and that a fight ensued during which one of three males stabbed
 Quindt. Williams, however, changed his story and admitted to
 
6On cross-examination, Quindt admitted that in a post-stabbing
interview, he told a detective that during a prior incident after Williams
threatened him, he told Williams, "Dude, you keep disrespecting me, . . . I'm
going to kick your fuckin' ass." 
14
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stabbing Quindt when Detective Robello confronted him with
 
information learned in the investigation. Williams said that it
 was Quindt who suggested that they come up with the false story. 
Williams said that the knife he used to stab Quindt belonged to
 Quindt's son and that he had obtained the knife from Quindt's
 house. 
Detective Robello interviewed Williams a second time
 
about an hour after the first interview ended. When asked about
 the location of the knife, Williams said it could not be
 recovered as he had thrown the knife into the ocean. However,
 later in the second interview, Williams admitted that he had not
 thrown the knife into the ocean but had hidden it on the grounds
 of the Waianae Health Center. Williams drew a diagram showing
 
where he had hidden the knife. 
During the second interview, Williams stated that he
 
stabbed Quindt in self-defense. Williams did not say that Quindt
 
made any type of aggressive or threatening move toward Williams
 which prompted the stabbing; rather, Williams indicated that he
 thought Quindt was reaching for his back pocket where Williams
 knew Quindt normally kept his knife. Detective Robello asked
 Williams, "So basically you did kind of a preemptive strike?", to
 which Williams responded, "[Y]es." Williams stated that in his
 mind he was thinking "I have to either kill him, or he's going to
 kill me." Detective Robello asked Williams, "So you stabbed him
 with the intent to kill him before he could kill you?" Williams'
 response was "Yes." 
On cross-examination, Detective Robello stated that
 
during the second interview, Williams said that he felt that he
 had to act in self-defense, that he was afraid for his life, and
 he knew some of Quindt's previous history. Defense counsel
 elicited Detective Robello's testimony that "[Williams] said that
 the night before the stabbing, during an argument between the two
 of them, [Williams] said that Mr. Quindt had said that he had
 been incarcerated. He had killed somebody in the past and gotten
 away with it." 
15
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C.
 
The police recovered the knife that Williams had used
 
to stab Quindt on the grounds of the Waianae Health Center in the
 
area where Williams said he had thrown it. The knife was a
 folding knife that was eight inches long with the blade extended. 
Dr. Eric Nino (Dr. Nino), the emergency room doctor who
 
treated Quindt at the Waianae Health Center, testified about the
 stab wounds suffered by Quindt. Dr. Nino testified that Quindt
 had a 12-centimeter laceration to the right side of his neck, a
 deep laceration to his left cheek, a laceration from his nose
 down through his lip, and a 15-centimeter laceration to his left
 elbow. Dr. Nino opined that the wound to the right side of
 Quindt's neck was "life-threatening" and caused "a substantial
 risk of death." Quindt's injuries required that he be seen
 immediately at a trauma center. Because the Waianae Health
 Center was not set up as a trauma center, Dr. Nino stabilized
 Quindt's wounds and had him transported to Queen's Medical
 Center. 
V.
 
Williams testified in his own defense at trial. 
Williams rented a room from Quindt and had lived with Quindt and
 his family for about three weeks before the stabbing incident. 
According to Williams, after moving in with Quindt,
 
there were times when they "would kind of butt heads" and
 described Quindt as "an Alpha male." Williams and Quindt
 "clashed a few times, had a few arguments," and "[Quindt] lost
 his temper very easily" and when he lost his temper, "he would
 want to fight." Williams described himself as the type of person
 who does not like confrontation that much and would usually walk
 away. During Williams' arguments with Quindt, "[t]here was never
 actually physical blows thrown[,]" although a few times they came
 close to "an actual altercation." 
16
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
With respect to whether they had conversations about
 
Quindt's past, Williams testified:
 
There was times when [Quindt] and I were discussing
things about our past or whatnot, and [Quindt] would bring
it up nonchalantly, kind of bragging about an alleged
attempted murder that he committed. 
[Defense Counsel:] Q. Okay. So what -- I guess -­
well, first of all, did this come up in a conversation
between the two of you? 
A. Yes, a few times. 
Q. And let's just clarify. Did you overhear him
talking about a murder conviction in a phone conversation he
was having with someone else, or did you have a direct
conversation with him? 
A. I never overheard him on a conversation at all. 
There was direct speaking of the murder charge. He bragged
about it multiple times. I don't know if he was trying to
make himself look good or look bad. In my eyes, I just -- I
was frightened by it really in the long run. 
. . . .
 
A. Anytime an altercation would happen, anytime
that he would lose his temper, it was the first thing in my
mind, was that that had happened and that he bragged about
it. So it was, I guess, a touchy subject or it -- it
alarmed me. 
On the evening of the stabbing, after arriving home,
 
Quindt asked Williams to hurry while Quindt waited in the SUV to
 
go to Fred's house to do a piercing and Williams took his son
 inside. When Williams returned to the SUV, Quindt was upset and
 yelled at Williams for taking so long and also began cursing and
 yelling at Williams about other matters. As they drove away from
 
the house and approached a stop sign, Williams jumped out of the
 
SUV and began walking back to the house. 
According to Williams, Quindt pushed him from behind
 
and he fell to the pavement. Quindt challenged Williams to a
 fight, saying, "[Y]ou think I'm afraid of you? I learned how to
 fight in jail. I'm not afraid of you. Let's do this, let's
 throw." Williams told Quindt that he did not want to fight. 
Quindt then grabbed Williams, pushed him towards the SUV, opened
 the driver's side rear door, pushed Williams into the SUV, and
 slammed the door. Quindt jumped into the SUV and resumed
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
driving. Quindt drove erratically, rocking the truck so Williams
 
was being thrown around "a little" in the back seat. Quindt was
 yelling at Williams, and Williams apologized, attempting to calm
 and diffuse the situation. Williams tried to open the door, but
 discovered that he could not open the door or window because the
 child safety locks were engaged. Williams saw Quindt looking at
 him through the rear view mirror, and Quindt had a "sardonic
 smile" as if to say "I got you, . . . you're not getting
 anywhere." 
Williams testified that at this point, he was thinking,
 
"[H]oly shit, I'm trapped, I'm stuck in this guy's truck. He's
 murdered before. He's yelling at me, screaming at me. What am I
 going to do?" Quindt then looked back at Williams and said,
 "[W]hen I stop this truck, I'm going to fucking kill you." 
Williams testified:
 
The main thing that kept going through my mind was that
[Quindt] brags about killing people, and I didn't know if he
was for real about it. I didn't know if he was joking
about it. I didn't know if he would actually kill me. I
 didn't know anything at that point. I was scared. I was
 petrified. In my mind, I really thought I was going to die.
 
As Quindt turned up a dark road, Williams took the
 
knife out of his pocket and stabbed Quindt. Williams stabbed
 
Quindt in the neck. When Williams "pulled [the knife] out,"
 Quindt turned. Williams stated: "And I was going to stab him
 again, and he put his hand up; and he deflected it, and he got
 his arm. When it came out of his arm, it cut his face. He had a
 nose ring, and I think his nose ring ripped out of his nose. I
 stabbed him two times." 
Quindt turned into the Waianae Mall parking lot and
 
stopped the SUV. Williams testified that he reached over the
 driver's seat, rolled down a back window, opened the door from
 the outside, and jumped out of the SUV. Williams was distraught
 because he had "just stabbed my friend." Williams called his
 mother. While waiting for her to answer, he noticed that Quindt
 was bleeding badly from the neck, and Williams told Quindt that
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Quindt did not look good. Williams drove Quindt to the Waianae
 
Health Center. On the way, Quindt talked to Williams' mother and
 told her "everything's going to be okay . . . nobody's going to
 jail[.]" Quindt also told Williams not to worry and not to tell
 the police what happened. When they arrived at the Waianae
 Health Center, Quindt told Williams, [D]on't tell the police that
 you did anything, tell 'em something else." Quindt also told
 Williams to "get rid of [the knife]."
 
Williams ran down the roadway of the Waianae Health
 
Center and threw the knife in a drainage area. Williams had
 blood on his hands and arm and went inside the Waianea Health
 Center and washed up. When the police arrived and asked for a
 statement, Williams "made up a story about getting jumped by
 three guys that followed us from a beach park" and one of them
 stabbing Quindt. This was not a story that Quindt had
 specifically told Williams to tell; rather, Williams made up this
 story himself. During his first interview with Detective
 Robello, Williams maintained the same story about the three guys
 from the beach park, but later in the interview decided to "come
 clean" and admit that he had stabbed Quindt. 
On cross-examination, Williams admitted that the first
 
interview statement he gave to Detective Robello reflected that
 he abandoned his story about the three males when Detective
 Robello confronted William with information provided by a
 security guard and referred to a security video of the Waianae
 Mall parking lot. Detective Robello told Williams that a
 security guard at Waianae Mall saw that Quindt was injured and
 overheard Williams tell someone over the phone that he had
 "stabbed [Quindt]." Detective Robello also referred to a
 security video showing Quindt's vehicle in the Waianae Mall
 parking lot.
 
Williams also admitted that he told Detective Robello
 
that after he stabbed Quindt in the neck, he could have run off
 and he wanted to run off, but he panicked. The prosecutor asked
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Williams if he responded "Yeah" when Detective Robello had asked
 
him whether the first stabbing of Quindt was "kind of like a
 preemptive strike[.]" Williams responded to the prosecutor's
 question by stating: "That's what [Detective Robello] asked me,
 yes." Williams testified that "it was either him or me, and I
 wasn't going to let it be me." Williams admitted that when he
 stabbed Quindt, he intended to kill Quindt by stabbing him. 
VI.
 
The jury found Williams guilty as charged. The Circuit
 
Court sentenced Williams to life imprisonment with the
 possibility of parole, and it filed its Judgment on May 9, 2013. 
This appeal followed. 
DISCUSSION 
On appeal, Williams contends that the Circuit Court
 
erred in imposing limitations on "prior bad act" statements he
 asserts were made by Quindt that Williams sought to introduce to
 support his claim of self-defense. As explained in greater
 detail below, we conclude that in light of the evidence that the
 Circuit Court ruled would be permitted and the evidence that was
 actually admitted at trial, any error in the Circuit Court's pre­opening-statement limitation of Williams' proffered evidence was
 harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. The limitations imposed by
 the Circuit Court did not materially impair Williams' claim of
 self-defense.
 
I.
 
Williams did not dispute that he stabbed Quindt and
 
inflicted the injuries sustained by Quindt. Williams' theory of
 defense at trial was self-defense. 
The standards applicable to a claim of self defense are
 
set forth in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 703-304 (2014),
 which provides in relevant part:
 
(1) . . . [T]he use of force upon or toward another
person is justifiable when the actor believes that such
force is immediately necessary for the purpose of protecting
himself against the use of unlawful force by the other
person on the present occasion.
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) The use of deadly force is justifiable under this
section if the actor believes that deadly force is necessary
to protect himself against death [or] serious bodily injury
. . . . 
(3) . . . [A] person employing protective force may
estimate the necessity thereof under the circumstances as he
believes them to be . . . .
 
In evaluating a defendant's claim of self-defense, "the 
evidence must be assessed from the standpoint of a reasonable 
person in the defendant's position under the circumstances as the defendant subjectively believed them to be at the time he or she tried to defend himself or herself." State v. Lubong, 77 Hawai
'i 
429, 433, 886 P.2d 766, 770 (App. 1994). The test for self-defense contains both a subjective and an objective prong. Id. "Under the subjective prong the jury is required to evaluate 
the use of force from the defendant's perspective. The focus is on the circumstances known to the defendant, thus directing the jury to consider the actions of a reasonable person in the defendant's position under the circumstances as he believed them to be." State v. Locken, 134 Hawai
'i 376, 389, 341 P.3d 1175, 
1189 (App. 2015) (internal quotation marks, citation, brackets, and ellipsis points omitted). "Under the objective prong, emphasis is placed on the reasonable person standard so the defendant's use of force must be determined from the point of view of a reasonable person." Id. (internal quotation marks and 
citation omitted). 
"Under common law, a defendant who claims self-defense
 
to a charge of homicide is permitted to introduce evidence of the
 deceased's violent or aggressive character either to demonstrate
 the reasonableness of his apprehension of immediate danger or to
 show that the decedent was the aggressor." State v. Lui, 61 Haw.
 
328, 329, 603 P.2d 151, 154 (1979). Where such character
 evidence is offered to show the defendant's state of mind to
 prove the reasonableness of the defendant's apprehension, the
 defendant must lay a foundation that he or she knew of the
 deceased's character for violence at the time of the homicide. 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. This foundation is not required when evidence of the
 
deceased's violent character is offered to prove that the
 
deceased was the first aggressor. Id. 
The common law rule set forth in Lui was codified in
 
HRE Rule 404(a)(2) (Supp. 2015), which provides in relevant part:
 
(a) Character evidence generally. Evidence of a
 
person's character or a trait of a person's character is not
admissible for the purpose of proving action in conformity
therewith on a particular occasion, except:
 
. . .
 
(2) Character of victim. Evidence of a pertinent
trait of character of the victim of the crime offered by an
accused[.]
 
II.
 
On appeal, Williams cites HRE Rule 404(a)(2) and Lui in
 
arguing that the Circuit Court erred in limiting the evidence he
 
proffered regarding Quindt's statements. Williams argues that
 the evidence of Quindt's "prior bad act" statements primarily
 related to Williams' state of mind to show the reasonableness of
 Williams' apprehension of immediate danger, but that the evidence
 was also relevant to show that Quindt had been the first
 aggressor.
 
Although the proffered evidence was clearly relevant to
 
showing Williams' state of mind, it is questionable whether the
 proffered evidence was relevant to establishing that Quindt had a
 violent character under HRE 404(a)(2) to support a claim that
 Quindt had been the first aggressor. First, Quindt's statements,
 if offered to prove the truth of the matters asserted, 
constituted hearsay. Williams did not offer any substantive
 evidence that Quindt's statements were true. HRE Rule 404(a)(2)
 authorizes a defendant to introduce evidence of a victim's
 pertinent character trait to prove action by the victim in
 conformity with that character trait. However, if the evidence
 offered to prove the victim's character trait is weak, equivocal,
 or untrue, there is no reasonable basis to infer that the victim
 acted in conformity with the purported character trait.
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Here, the most significant evidence proffered by
 
Williams was Quindt's statements that he had been convicted of,
 
or had committed, a murder. However, there was no dispute that
 Quindt had in fact been exonerated of the murder conviction, that
 his conviction had been a case of mistaken identity, and that
 someone else had admitted to committing the murder. Williams did
 not claim that he could prove the truth of Quindt's statements
 about having committed murder, and Williams' counsel told the
 Circuit Court before opening statements that Williams would not
 attempt to prove that Quindt had committed a murder. 
Accordingly, Quindt's statements about the murder did not show
 that Quindt had a violent character or that he acted in
 conformity therewith on the date of the charged incident.
 
Second, at trial, Williams did not offer the evidence
 
of Quindt's statements as character evidence under HRE Rule
 404(a)(2). Williams also did not seek to admit Quindt's
 statements to prove that Quindt was the first aggressor. 
Instead, Williams only offered Quindt's statements under HRE Rule
 404(b) to prove Williams' state of mind -- to show that he
 reasonably believed that using deadly force in stabbing Quindt
 was immediately necessary to protect himself against death or
 serious bodily injury.
 
III.
 
HRE Rule 404(b) provides in relevant part: 
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible
to prove the character of a person in order to show action
in conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible
where such evidence is probative of another fact that is of
consequence to the determination of the action, such as
proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan,
knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of mistake
or accident.
 
Under HRE Rule 404(b), "prior bad act" evidence is admissible
 
when: (1) it is relevant to any fact of consequence other than to
 show action in conformity therewith; and (2) its probative value
 is not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
 prejudice. See State v. Renon, 73 Haw. 23, 31–32, 828 P.2d 1266,
 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1270 (1992). The trial court's decision in balancing probative
 
value against unfair prejudice involves the application of HRE
 
7
Rule 403 (1993)  and is reviewed for abuse of discretion.  State
 
v.
 Cordeiro, 99 Hawai 'i 390, 404, 56 P.3d 692, 706 (2002). A 
trial court does not abuse its discretion unless it "clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." State v. Matias, 74 Haw. 197, 203, 840 P.2d 374, 377 
(1992) (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). 
IV.
 
Through his Notice of Intent filed pursuant to HRE Rule
 
404(b), Williams sought to introduce statements he claimed that
 Quindt had made to him prior to the stabbing. The sole basis on
 which Williams offered and sought to introduce these statements
 was to prove his state of mind at the time of the stabbing to
 support his claim of self-defense. The statements proffered by
 Williams were that Quindt would "boast and brag about the
 following: 
a. Doing time for the crime of murder in
California, 
b. That [Quindt] did hard time in California; 
c. That [Quindt] knows how to fight because ofthe time he spent in jail and that he had tolearn to fight to survive; 
d. That [Quindt] knows about gang-bangers andgang-members; 
e. That [Quindt] has experience with violencefrom spending time in jail; 
7HRE Rule 403 provides: "Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if
its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of
cumulative evidence."
 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
f.	 That [Quindt] 'got away' with murder by
beating the charge -- because someone else
took credit for it;
 
g.	 That [Quindt] did the crime but got off on a
technicality."
 
The Circuit Court ruled before opening statements that Williams
 
would be allowed to introduce Quindt's statements that Quindt had
 been convicted of murder, that Quindt knew how to fight, and that
 Quindt learned how to fight in jail.
 
A. 
We conclude that the evidence permitted by the Circuit
 
Court satisfied the requests made by Williams in items a., b.,
 c., and e. The evidence that the Circuit Court permitted was in
 substance equivalent to the evidence that Williams had proffered
 in these items with respect to the purpose for which the evidence 
was offered, namely, showing Williams' state of mind in relation
 to his claim of self-defense. Permitting evidence that Quindt
 told Williams that Quindt was convicted of murder and that he
 knew how to fight and learned how to fight in jail conveyed the
 same message to the jury as the proffered evidence that Quindt
 told Williams that Quindt did hard time for the crime of murder
 and that as a result of spending time in jail, he knew how to
 fight, learned how to fight to survive, and experienced violence. 
A person convicted of murder would have been adjudged guilty of
 committing the crime of murder, and a jury would naturally infer
 that a convicted murderer who knew how to fight and learned how
 to fight in jail would have done "hard time," experienced
 violence in jail, and learned how to fight to survive. 
We are also not persuaded by Williams' claim that the
 
Circuit Court erred by limiting him to using the term "jail"
 rather than "prison." In the context of a convicted murderer who
 knew and learned how to fight due to his incarceration, we fail
 to see any material difference between using the term "jail"
 rather than "prison" in describing the incarceration. 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its
 
discretion in its rulings on items a., b., c., and e. 
B.
 
With respect to items d., f., and g., we need not
 
decide whether the Circuit Court abused its discretion in ruling
 on these items because we conclude that any error was harmless
 beyond a reasonable doubt. 
1.
 
With respect to items f. and g., that Quindt said he
 
committed a murder but had beaten the charge on a technicality,
 although the Circuit Court excluded this evidence at the motion 
in limine hearing, it permitted Williams to introduce the
 substance of this evidence at trial.
8 Williams was permitted to
 
elicit evidence from Detective Robello that "[Williams] said that
 the night before the stabbing, during an argument between the two
 of them, [Williams] said that Mr. Quindt had said that he had
 been incarcerated. He had killed somebody in the past and gotten
 away with it." 
In addition, the Circuit Court permitted Williams to
 
testify:
 
There was times when [Quindt] and I were discussing things
about our past or whatnot, and [Quindt] would bring it up
 
8The apparent discrepancy between the Circuit Court's ruling at the
motion in limine hearing and its permitting the evidence to be admitted at
trial may be explained as follows. When it ultimately made its ruling on
items f. and g. at the motion in limine hearing, the Circuit Court had already
ruled that Williams could introduce Quindt's statement that Quindt had been
convicted of murder. In addition, although the Circuit Court informed the
State that it could introduce evidence that Quindt had been exonerated, the
State indicated that it was not planning to introduce such evidence because it
would complicate matters and confuse the jury. The Circuit Court presumably
felt that if the jury heard that Quindt stated he had been convicted of
murder, without evidence of his exoneration being presented, there was no need
for the jury to hear references to Quindt's beating the charge or getting off
on a technicality. If evidence of exoneration was not presented, Quindt's
statement that he was convicted of murder would support Williams' belief that
Quindt had committed murder and Quindt's getting off on a technicality would
not be relevant to Williams' state of mind regarding Williams' claim of self-
defense. However, the State subsequently decided to elicit evidence that
Quindt had been exonerated of the murder charge. After this evidence was
 introduced, the Circuit Court permitted Williams to introduce the evidence
referred to in items f. and g., that Quindt said he had murdered someone but
had beaten the charge and gotten off. 
26
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
nonchalantly,  kind of bragging about an alleged attempted
murder that he committed
. 
[Defense Counsel:] Q.
 Okay. So what -- I guess -­
well, first of all, did this come up in a conversation

between the two of you? 
A. Yes, a few times. 
Q. And let's just clarify. Did you overhear him
talking about a murder conviction in a phone conversation he
was having with someone else, or did you have a direct
conversation with him? 
A. I never overheard him on a conversation at all. 
There was direct speaking of the murder charge. He bragged
about it multiple times. I don't know if he was trying to
make himself look good or look bad. In my eyes, I just -- I
was frightened by it really in the long run. 
. . . .
 
A. Anytime an altercation would happen, anytime
that he would lose his temper, it was the first thing in my
mind, was that that had happened and that he bragged about

it. So it was, I guess, a touchy subject or it -- it
alarmed me.
 
(Emphases added). 
The Circuit Court further permitted Williams to testify
 
that just prior to stabbing Quindt:
 
I'm thinking holy shit, I'm trapped, I'm stuck in this guy's
truck. He's murdered before.
 
. . . .
 
The main thing that kept going through my mind was that

[Quindt] brags about killing people , and I didn't know if he
was for real about it. I didn't know if he was joking about
it. I didn't know if he would actually kill me. I didn't
 know anything at that point. I was scared. I was
 petrified. In my mind, I really thought I was going to die.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
The record shows that Williams was in fact permitted to
introduce the substance of the evidence he sought to introduce in
 
items f. and g. -- that regardless of whether Quindt had been
 exonerated of his murder conviction, Quindt had stated, and
 Williams believed, that Quindt had committed murder. 
Accordingly, any error in the Circuit Court's ruling on these
 items was harmless. 

 
27

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2.
 
9
With respect to item d.,  that Quindt stated that he
"knows about gang-bangers and gang-members," Williams indicated

 
at the motion in limine hearing that he sought to introduce this
 
evidence to show his state of mind regarding Quindt's ability to
 
fight.10 Defense counsel also stated that the fighting skills
 
learned while incarcerated in prison would be higher and more
 significant to Williams' state of mind and fear than fighting
 learned on the street. 
Here, the Circuit Court permitted Williams to introduce
 
evidence that Quindt stated he had been convicted of murder, that
 he had killed someone in the past and gotten away with it, that
 he had been incarcerated, that he knew how to fight, and that he
 learned how to fight in jail. The proffered evidence that Quindt
 stated he knew about gang-bangers and gang-members, offered to
 show that Williams believed Quindt knew how to fight, was covered
 by, merely cumulative of, and less significant than the evidence
 admitted into evidence. Therefore, any error in the Circuit
 Court's exclusion of item d. was harmless.
 
3.
 
Moreover, the State presented compelling evidence to
 
negate Williams' claim of self-defense. The evidence showed that
 prior to the day of the stabbing, Quindt had not had any physical
 altercations with Williams. Williams' actions in stabbing Quindt
 
9In excluding item d., the Circuit Court determined that the term "gang­
banger" was too general and did not necessarily connote violent conduct. When
 
asked what "gang-banger" meant, defense counsel stated, "It means that you
were involved in gang activity, could be involved in fights or involved in
just criminal activity having to do with gang membership. I'm not going to go
beyond the term 'gangbanger.'" Defense counsel later vaguely described
Williams' interpretation of "gang-banger" as "[Williams] thinks it's something
beyond just . . . minor gang activity, and it involves something a little bit
more serious and involves more violence." 
10At the hearing, the Circuit Court asked, "What's this gangbanger
stuff? I mean, does he just talk: I've learned to fight on the street?"
Defense counsel replied, "Yeah. I mean, there's on the street, gangbanging.
There's in prison you got to learn how to fight on day one. You got to learn
to take care of yourself, you know. It's a combination of all that." 
28
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in the neck, face, and arm, causing Quindt to sustain injury
 
described as "life-threatening," were not in response to any
 overt physical action taken by Quindt against Williams. Rather,
 Williams admitted to Detective Robello that his stabbing of
 Quindt was basically a "preemptive strike." Quindt was occupied
 driving his SUV when Williams stabbed him from behind, and the
 stabbing came as a complete surprise to Quindt, who initially did
 not realize that he had been stabbed. Williams hid the knife and
 initially lied to the police by claiming that Quindt had been
 stabbed by an unknown male after a confrontation at the beach,
 behavior which showed a consciousness of guilt and was
 inconsistent with a legitimate claim of self-defense. The
 compelling evidence presented by the State to refute Williams'
 claim of self-defense, which supported the State's position that
 Williams did not reasonably believe that his use of deadly force
 in stabbing Quindt was immediately necessary to protect himself
 against death or serious bodily injury, reinforces our conclusion
 that any error in the Circuit Court's rulings with respect to
 items d., f., and g. was harmless. 
V.
 
Finally, we note that although at trial Williams did
 
not seek to admit or argue for the admission of Quindt's
 statements to prove that Quindt was the first aggressor, he
 contends for the first time on appeal that the Circuit Court
 abused its discretion in limiting the proffered evidence because
 it was relevant to his first-aggressor claim. We disagree.
 
First, Williams waived this argument by failing to
 
present it to the trial court. See State v. Hoglund, 71 Haw.
 
147, 150, 785 P.2d 1311, 1313 (1990) ("Generally, the failure to
 properly raise an issue at the trial level precludes a party from
 raising that issue on appeal."); State v. Ildefonso, 72 Haw. 573,
 584, 827 P.2d 648, 655 (1992) ("Our review of the record reveals
 that [the defendant] did not raise this argument at trial, and
 thus it is deemed to have been waived."); State v. Moses, 102
 
29
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003) ("As a general rule, if 
a party does not raise an argument at trial, that argument will 
be deemed to have been waived on appeal[.]"). At trial, Williams only argued that the proffered evidence was relevant to his state of mind to show the reasonableness of his belief that the immediate use of deadly force was necessary; he did not argue that the proffered evidence was relevant to a first aggressor claim. 
Second, the probative value of the proffered statements
 
to show that Quindt was the first aggressor was nonexistent or
 tenuous at best. As noted, the proffered statements, if offered
 to prove the truth of the matters asserted, constituted hearsay;
 the proffered statements could not be used as substantive
 evidence that the matters asserted in Quindt's statements were
 true. However, the probative value of the proffered statements
 to prove that Quindt had a violent character, and thereby permit
 the inference that he had been the first aggressor, depended on
 the matters asserted in the proffered statements being true. 
Williams did not claim that he could prove the truth of Quindt's
 statements about having committed a murder, and it was undisputed
 that Quindt had been exonerated of the charged murder. Williams
 also did not proffer any substantive evidence that would show
 that Quindt in fact knew gang-bangers or gang members or that
 would prove the truth of any of the other proffered statements.
11
 
Under the circumstances, even if Williams had sought to
 
admit the proffered statements on the first-aggressor issue,
 there would have been no error in the Circuit Court's declining
 to admit the proffered statements on that issue. We conclude
 that the Circuit Court did not commit plain error in failing to 
11We also note that permitting the introduction of substantive evidence
at trial with respect to whether Quindt in fact had committed the murder,
despite being exonerated, and whether Quindt in fact knew gang-bangers or gang
members would have raised collateral issues, resulted in undue delay,
distracted the jury, and caused jury confusion. See HRE Rule 403. 
30
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
admit the proffered evidence with respect to Williams' first-
aggressor claim. 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit
 
Court's Judgment.
 
On the briefs:
 
Taryn R. Tomasa
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant
 
James M. Anderson
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
31
 