NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000611
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
WAYNE PEELUA, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
IMPAC FUNDING CORPORATION dba IMPAC LENDING GROUP, a California
Corporation; MORTGAGE ELECTRONIC REGISTRATION SYSTEMS, INC.,
a Delaware Corporation; HAWAII FINANCIAL SERVICES CORP.; TERA
PALEKA; COUNTRYWIDE HOME LOANS, INC.; COUNTRYWIDE BANK, FSB;
COUNTRYWIDE FINANCIAL CORP.; DEUTSCHE BANK NATIONAL TRUST
COMPANY, AS TRUSTEE UNDER THE POOLING AND SERVICING AGREEMENT
RELATING TO IMPAC SECURED ASSETS CORP. MORTGAGE PASS-THROUGH
 
CERTIFICATES SERIES 2007-2; INDYMAC FEDERAL BANK, FSM; INDYMAC
LOAN SERVICES; BANK OF AMERICA; GMAC MORTGAGE CORPORATION;
and JOHN DOES 1-10, Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-0031)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Wayne Peelua (Peelua) appeals from
 
a Judgment filed on June 20, 2012 by the Circuit Court of the
 
Second Circuit (circuit court).1 The Judgment dismissed all of
 
the claims asserted by Peelua in his First Amended Complaint and
 was based on the circuit court's "Order Granting Defendants Impac
 Funding Corporation, Countrywide Home Loans, Inc., Countrywide
 Bank, FSB, Countrywide Financial Corp., Bank of America, Mortgage
 Electronic Registration Systems, Inc. and Deutsche Bank National
 Trust Company's Motion to Dismiss First Amended Complaint and to
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Expunge Lis Pendens," which also was filed on the same day,
 
June 20, 2012. 
Peelua contends on appeal that the circuit court erred
 
in ruling that the claims in his First Amended Complaint are
 barred by the doctrine of res judicata and that, therefore, the
 motion to dismiss should not have been granted.
2
 
For the reasons set forth below, we affirm the Judgment
 
as to Deutsche Bank but vacate as to the other defendants.
 
I. Background
A. Procedural History of This Case
 
Peelua initiated this lawsuit on January 21, 2010, when 
he filed his original complaint in the circuit court alleging federal and state law claims against the numerous defendants. The case was removed to the United States District Court for the District of Hawai
'i (U.S. District Court). The U.S. District 
Court granted a Motion for Judgment on the Pleadings filed by some of the defendants and gave Peelua leave to amend with regard to specific counts. See Peelua v. Impac Funding Corp., Civ. No. 
10-00090 JMS/KSC, 2011 WL 1042559 (D. Haw. Mar. 18, 2011). Peelua subsequently filed a First Amended Complaint asserting only state law claims. The U.S. District Court declined to retain supplemental jurisdiction and remanded the case back to the circuit court. 
Upon remand to the circuit court, some but not all of
 
the defendants named in the First Amended Complaint filed a
 Motion to Dismiss, asserting that res judicata barred Peelua's
 claims against them. These defendants argued that res judicata
 applied because there had been a final adjudication against
 Peelua in an ejectment action brought by Deutsche Bank National
 Trust Company, as Trustee Under the Pooling and Servicing
 Agreement Relating to Impac Secured Assets Corp. Mortgage Pass-
Through Certificates Series 2007-2 (Deutsche Bank). The
 
2
 As discussed more fully infra, only some of the defendants filed the
motion to dismiss, but the circuit court's judgment disposed of "all parties
and all claims in this action."
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
defendants that filed the Motion to Dismiss are: Impac Funding
 
Corporation dba Impac Lending Group, a California Corporation
 (Impac); Countrywide Home Loans, Inc., Countrywide Bank, FSB, and
 Countrywide Financial Corp. (Countrywide); Bank of America (BOA);
 Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc., a Delaware
 Corporation (MERS); and Deutsche Bank (collectively Moving
 Defendants).
 
The following defendants did not file or join in the
 
Motion to Dismiss: Hawaii Financial Services, Corp. (HFS); Tera
 Paleka (Paleka); Indymac Federal Bank, FSM and Indymac Loan
 Services (Indymac); and GMAC Mortgage Corporation (GMAC).
 
The circuit court granted the Motion to Dismiss, ruling
 
that Peelua's claims are barred by res judicata and dismissing
 the First Amended Complaint with prejudice. In its Judgment,
 which references the order granting the Motion to Dismiss, the
 circuit court stated that "[t]his Judgment disposes of all
 parties and all claims in this action."
B. Peelua's First Amended Complaint
 
Peelua's First Amended Complaint alleges three causes
 
of action, each against specific defendants. In Count I, Peelua
 alleges Negligence and Breach of Fiduciary Duty against HFS,
 Paleka and Impac. In Count II, Peelua alleges Unfair and
 Deceptive Trade Practices (UDAP), again against HFS, Paleka and
 Impac. In Count III, Peelua alleges Fraud against HFS, Paleka,
 Impac, BOA, Countrywide, and MERS.
 
Although the First Amended Complaint also identifies
 
3
Deutsche Bank, Indymac, and GMAC as defendants,  it contains no
allegations or claims asserted against these defendants.
 
3
 Deutsche Bank and Indymac are identified in the text of the First
Amended Complaint, whereas GMAC is not. GMAC is solely referenced in the
caption.
 
Additionally, it appears from the record that some of the defendants
were never served with either the original complaint or the First Amended
Complaint. Two such defendants – Deutsche Bank and MERS – nonetheless
 appeared in the case as part of the Moving Defendants who filed the Motion to
Dismiss.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Count I (Negligence and Breach of Fiduciary Duty),
 
Peelua alleges that HFS and Paleka, in their capacity as licensed
 
mortgage brokers and solicitors, and in concert with and as
 agents of Impac as lender, were negligent and breached fiduciary
 duties owed to Peelua when they induced him to sign two notes and
 two mortgages that refinanced an existing loan on his residential
 property.  Peelua alleges inter alia that HFS, Paleka, and Impac
 
failed to provide accurate information on a loan application,
 gave him misleading financial advice, withheld important
 information, knew it was not likely that he would be able to
 repay the loans, and arranged for the loans in order to generate
 fees for themselves.
 
In Count II (UDAP), Peelua similarly alleges that HFS,
 
Paleka, and Impac gave him financial advice about the loans,
 developed a relationship of trust with him, took advantage of his
 inexperience in financial matters, and made the loans to him
 knowing he would likely not be able to repay them. He claims
 HFS, Paleka, and Impac engaged in unfair and deceptive practices
 by using false information and omitting true information
 concerning his financial condition in order to qualify him for
 the loans, by giving him erroneous financial advice, and by
 making the loans to him. 
In Count III (Fraud), Peelua repeats his allegations
 
against HFS, Paleka, and Impac. He also alleges that BOA and
 Countrywide made false statements to him that they should have
 known were false, to the effect that Peelua could reinstate his
 loan if he put $65,000 into escrow. Peelua alleges that, based
 on the false representations of BOA and Countrywide, he deposited
 $65,000 into escrow but that eventually BOA and Countrywide would
 not reinstate the loan. Peelua also alleges that MERS made false
 representations knowing that Peelua would rely on them.
 
As to all counts, Peelua claims that he suffered
 
emotional distress, damage to his property and credit, loss of
 his home and equity, and additional monetary damages. Unlike his
 original complaint, Peelua's First Amended Complaint does not
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
allege that the prior non-judicial foreclosure or the prior
 
ejectment action were improper. Peelua also does not seek to
 have title to the foreclosed property restored to him. Rather,
 his claims in the First Amended Complaint are for money damages.
C. Non-Judicial Foreclosure and the
 Ejectment Action By Deutsche Bank
 
In the Motion to Dismiss filed on April 17, 2012, the 
Moving Defendants asserted that Peelua's claims in this case were barred by res judicata because his claims were either raised and/or should have been raised in the prior ejectment action brought by Deutsche Bank against Peelua. In that case, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court issued an opinion on November 8, 2011, 
affirming a judgment ejecting Peelua from his home. Deutsche 
Bank Nat'l Trust Co. v. Peelua, 126 Hawai 'i 32, 265 P.3d 1128 
(2011) (Ejectment Action). Because the circuit court's ruling based on res judicata in this case rests on the litigation in the Ejectment Action, we take judicial notice of the records in the Ejectment Action. See Kaleikini v. Thielen, 124 Hawai
'i 1, 5, 
237 P.3d 1067, 1071 (2010). The background and claims involved in the Ejectment Action are as follows. 
In November 2008, Peelua was notified that he was
 
delinquent on his mortgage payments. Deutsche Bank subsequently
 filed a Notice of Mortgagee's Intention to Foreclose Under Power
 of Sale, and a non-judicial foreclosure sale was held in April
 2009, resulting in the property being sold to Deutsche Bank.
 
When Peelua refused to vacate the property after the
 
non-judicial foreclosure was completed, Deutsche Bank filed a
 verified complaint for ejectment against Peelua on July 14, 2009,
 in the District Court of the Second Circuit, Lahaina Division
 (district court) (Civil No. 09-1-1872). Peelua filed an answer
 and a motion to dismiss Deutsche Bank's complaint, alleging that
 the district court lacked jurisdiction over the matter because
 the action was "a real action and one in which title to real
 estate is involved[,]" and also stating as an affirmative defense
 that Deutsche Bank's claim was void or voidable "as they are a
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
result of violations of the law and illegal acts, and they are a
 
result of fraud, coercion and/or duress." After a trial, the
 district court issued a judgment for possession and a writ of
 possession in favor of Deutsche Bank on November 18, 2009. 
Peelua appealed from the district court's judgment. 
The specific issue on appeal in the Ejectment Action was whether
 an affidavit submitted by Peelua, attached to his motion to
 dismiss the Ejectment Action, had sufficiently raised a question
 of title to real estate such that the district court lacked
 jurisdiction pursuant to Rule 12.1 of the District Court Rules of
 
4 5
Civil Procedure (DCRCP)  and HRS § 604-5 (Supp. 2014).  In the appeal, this court ruled that Peelua had raised an issue of title and thus the district court did not have jurisdiction. Deutsche 
Bank Nat'l Trust Co. v. Peelua, No. 30225, 2011 WL 1909111 at *1, 125 Hawai
'i 240, 257 P.3d 253 (App. May 17, 2011) (SDO). 
However, Deutsche Bank sought further review from the Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court, which ultimately ruled that Peelua's affidavit "neither included specificity or detail regarding the source, nature, and extent of title claimed nor other particulars that would fully apprise the [district court] of his claim to title[,]" and thus the supreme court held that the district court 
4
 DCRCP Rule 12.1, entitled "Defense of Title in District Courts,"
provides:
 
Pleadings. Whenever, in the district court, in defense of an
action in the nature of an action of trespass or for the
summary possession of land, or any other action, the
defendant shall seek to interpose a defense to the
jurisdiction to the effect that the action is a real action,
or one in which the title to real estate is involved, such
defense shall be asserted by a written answer or written
motion, which shall not be received by the court unless
accompanied by an affidavit of the defendant, setting forth
the source, nature and extent of the title claimed by
defendant to the land in question, and such further
particulars as shall fully apprise the court of the nature
of defendant's claim.
5
 HRS § 604-5(d) provides in pertinent part that "[t]he district courts
shall not have cognizance of real actions, nor actions in which the title to
real estate comes in question[.]" 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
properly exercised jurisdiction in the Ejectment Action. 
Deutsche Bank, 126 Hawai 'i at 33, 265 P.3d at 1129. 
II. Standards of Review
 
In this case, the circuit court granted the Defendants' 
Motion to Dismiss, brought pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 12(b)(6), for failure to state a claim. Although there are documents attached to the Motion to Dismiss, the documents relevant to the Motion to Dismiss are simply the declaration of Moving Defendant's counsel regarding attached exhibits and the exhibits, which consist of documents from the Ejectment Action, of which, as indicated above, we take judicial notice. Therefore, the attached documents do not convert the motion to a summary judgment motion. Rosa v. CWJ Contractors, 
Ltd., 4 Haw. App. 210, 215, 664 P.2d 745, 749 (1983) (attaching an affidavit that essentially presented no material facts did not convert a motion to dismiss into a motion for summary judgment); MGIC Indem. Corp. v. Weisman, 803 F.2d 500, 504 (9th Cir. 1986) (stating that "[o]n a motion to dismiss, we may take judicial notice of matters of public record outside the pleadings"). 
We thus review the circuit court's ruling de novo under 
the motion to dismiss standard. Cnty. of Kaua
'i ex rel. Nakazawa 
v. Baptiste, 115 Hawai 'i 15, 24, 165 P.3d 916, 925 (2007); Ellis 
v. Crockett, 51 Haw. 45, 55, 451 P.2d 814, 821 (1969) (holding
 that where res judicata appears from prior interrelated
 proceedings alluded to in the complaint, the defense can be
 raised by a motion to dismiss).
 
A complaint should not be dismissed for failure to state a
claim unless it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff can
prove no set of facts in support of his or her claim that
would entitle him or her to relief. [This court] must
therefore view a plaintiff's complaint in a light most
favorable to him or her in order to determine whether the
 allegations contained therein could warrant relief under any
alternative theory. For this reason, in reviewing [a]
circuit court's order dismissing [a] complaint ... [this
court's] consideration is strictly limited to the
allegations of the complaint, and [this court] must deem
those allegations to be true.
 
Baptiste, 115 Hawai 'i at 24, 165 P.3d at 925 (citation and block 
format omitted).
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Further, the application of res judicata is a question 
of law. E. Sav. Bank, FSB v. Esteban, 129 Hawai 'i 154, 157, 296 
P.3d 1062, 1065 (2013). "Questions of law are reviewed de novo 
under the right/wrong standard." Id. 
III. Discussion
 
In this appeal, we must determine whether the circuit
 
court was correct in dismissing all of Peelua's claims in his
 First Amended Complaint based on the doctrine of res judicata,
 which is also referred to as claim preclusion.
 
Claim preclusion ... prohibits a party from relitigating a
previously adjudicated cause of action. Moreover, the
judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction is a bar to a
new action in any court between the same parties or their
privies concerning the same subject matter, and precludes
 the relitigation, not only of the issues which were actually
 
litigated in the first action, but also of all grounds of
 claim and defense which might have been properly litigated
 in the first action but were not litigated or decided. The
 party asserting claim preclusion has the burden of
establishing that (1) there was a final judgment on the
merits, (2) both parties are the same or in privity with the
parties in the original suit, and (3) the claim decided in
the original suit is identical with the one presented in the
action in question.
 
Id. at 159, 296 P.3d at 1067 (citation and block format omitted). 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has emphasized that "public interest 
staunchly permits every litigant to have an opportunity to try his case on the merits; but it also requires that he be limited to one such opportunity." Ellis, 51 Haw. at 56, 451 P.2d at 822. 
In reviewing whether the circuit court correctly
 
granted the Moving Defendants' HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) motion to
 dismiss, we thus view the allegations in the First Amended
 Complaint in a light most favorable to Peelua and accept the
 allegations in the First Amended Complaint as true, while also
 considering whether the Moving Defendants met their burden of
 establishing the three requirements necessary for res judicata to
 apply.
 
Along with addressing the merits of the res judicata
 
issue, we must also determine which of the defendants properly
 raised the issue. As noted, only some of the defendants filed
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the Motion to Dismiss. Moreover, some defendants have no
 
allegations asserted against them in the First Amended Complaint.
 
To complicate matters further, the record indicates
 
that Indymac, GMAC, MERS, and Deutsche Bank were not served with
 Peelua's original January 21, 2010 complaint or the First Amended
 Complaint. After the case was removed to the U.S. District Court
 on February 24, 2010, the circuit court filed an Order of
 Dismissal on August 24, 2010, dismissing Indymac, GMAC, MERS, and
 Deutsche Bank from the action for want of service. Peelua
 subsequently filed a Motion to Set Aside the Order of Dismissal
 on September 8, 2010. The circuit court held a hearing on
 September 30, 2010 and a minute order was issued giving Peelua
 ninety days from that date to serve Indymac, GMAC, MERS, and
 Deutsche Bank and to stay the proceedings due to the fact that
 the case was pending in the U.S. District Court. Peelua's
 counsel was directed to prepare the order, but there is no record
 of any order. Further, the record does not indicate whether
 Indymac, GMAC, MERS, and Deutsche Bank were ever served. Both
 MERS and Deutsche Bank, however, were among the Moving Defendants
 who filed the Motion to Dismiss.
 
We therefore address the defendants in appropriate
 
groups.
 
A. HFS and Paleka
 
The First Amended Complaint asserts a variety of
 
allegations and all three counts against HFS and Paleka. The
 record shows that HFS and Paleka were served, that Paleka filed
 an answer, but that neither HFS nor Paleka filed a motion to
 dismiss or joined in the Motion to Dismiss filed by the Moving
 Defendants. Thus, dismissal of the claims against HFS and Paleka
 was in error.
6
 
B. Indymac and GMAC
 
As noted, it appears from the record that Indymac and
 
GMAC were not served with either the original or First Amended
 
6
 HFS and Paleka have not filed any briefs in this appeal.
 
9
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Complaint, and that they did not file or join in the Motion to
 
Dismiss. However, it is unclear what occurred as to the
 dismissal of these defendants for lack of service (no actual
 order was issued after Peelua moved to set aside the August 24,
 2010 Order of Dismissal). The circuit court's stated basis for
 dismissing these defendants appears to have been res judicata,
 although they were not movants and, moreover, there are no
 allegations asserted in the First Amended Complaint against
 Indymac or GMAC to assess whether res judicata applies.
 
Given the record before us, the questions as to service
 
of process, and that they were not among the Moving Defendants,
 we cannot agree that dismissal of Indymac and GMAC was proper.
C. Deutsche Bank
 
Peelua's original complaint filed in this case
 
asserted, among other things, claims of wrongful foreclosure and
 ejectment. While the case was removed to the U.S. District
 Court, that court granted a motion for judgment on the pleadings
 brought by some of the defendants, including Deutsche Bank. The
 U.S. District Court dismissed the wrongful foreclosure and
 ejectment claim, and as it pertained to Deutsche Bank, the court
 stated that "this claim was a compulsory counterclaim that
 Plaintiff should have raised in the state court ejectment action
 such that he is barred from raising it now." Peelua, 2011 WL
 
1042559 at *10.
 
In the subsequently filed First Amended Complaint,
 
Deutsche Bank is still identified as a defendant, but there are
 no allegations asserted against it. We conclude that Deutsche
 Bank was properly dismissed from this action on the basis that
 Deutsche Bank was one of the Moving Defendants and the First
 Amended Complaint contains no allegations against it. With no
 allegations asserted against Deutsche Bank in the First Amended
 Complaint, there is no basis upon which to analyze application of
 res judicata, although res judicata would clearly bar any claims
 that were or might have been properly litigated against Deutsche
 Bank in the Ejectment Action.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D. Impac, MERS, Countrywide and BOA
 
Impac, MERS, Countrywide and BOA (the Remaining Moving
 
Defendants) are among the Moving Defendants and have claims
 
asserted against them in the First Amended Complaint. As to
 these Remaining Moving Defendants, therefore, we analyze
 application of the res judicata doctrine to the claims asserted
 against them.
 
1. Final Judgment on the Merits
 
There is no doubt that there was a final judgment on 
the merits in the Ejectment Action given the Hawai
'i Supreme 
Court's opinion in Deutsche Bank, 126 Hawai 'i 32, 265 P.3d 1128 
and the judgment entered on appeal.
2. Privity
 
The Remaining Moving Defendants were not parties to the 
Ejectment Action. Therefore, as to the second requirement for res judicata, the Remaining Moving Defendants must establish that they were in privity with Deutsche Bank, the only other party in the Ejectment Action against Peelua. Under Hawai
'i law, the 
"concept of privity has moved from the conventional and narrowly defined meaning of 'mutual or successive relationships to the same rights of property' to 'merely a word used to say that the relationship between the one who is a party of record and another is close enough to include that other within the res adjudicata.'" In re Dowsett Trust, 7 Haw. App. 640, 646, 791 
P.2d 398, 402 (1990) (some internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). However, a determination of whether parties are in privity requires careful examination of the circumstances of each case. Id. 
Adequate representation of the interests of the nonparty,
and proper protection to the rights of the person sought to
be bound, are major considerations in privity analysis.
Moreover, since res judicata is an affirmative
defense . . . the party asserting the defense has the burden
of proving adequate representation of the interests and
proper protection of the rights of the nonparty in the prior
action.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. at 646, 791 P.2d at 402-03 (citations, quotation marks, and
 
footnote omitted) (emphasis added).
 
In briefing, the Remaining Moving Defendants assert 
that Deutsche Bank adequately represented all of their interests in the Ejectment Action and that their rights were afforded proper protection and therefore the privity analysis is satisfied. This self-serving statement cannot serve as a shield to the instant action, especially in the context of a motion to dismiss. When deciding an issue of privity, "current decisions look directly to the reasons for holding a person bound by a judgment." Bush v. Watson, 81 Hawai
'i 474, 480, 918 P.2d 1130, 
1136 (1996) (citation and block format omitted). Further, in reviewing the allegations in the First Amended Complaint in a light most favorable to Peelua, there is no relationship alleged between Deutsche Bank and any of the Remaining Moving Defendants so as to establish privity. 
In the First Amended Complaint, Peelua alleges that
 
Paleka, HFS, Countrywide, and BOA were acting as agents for Impac
 such that Impac should be held liable for their actions under the
 respondeat superior and master-servant doctrines. However, there
 are no allegations in the First Amended Complaint to establish
 privity beyond the relationship with Impac, or in other words,
 between Deutsche Bank and the Remaining Moving Defendants. 
Further, even taking judicial notice of the record in
 
the Ejectment Action, the Remaining Moving Defendants fail to
 demonstrate privity with Deutsche Bank in this case. From the
 transcripts of the trial proceedings in the Ejectment Action, it
 appears that Deutsche Bank did not attempt to demonstrate how it
 came to hold the right to conduct the non-judicial foreclosure,
 because it was Deutsche Bank's position that the only matter at
 issue during the Ejectment Action was to establish ownership
 through submission of the pertinent quitclaim deed. The
 quitclaim deed only reveals that Deutsche Bank granted the
 property to itself subsequent to the non-judicial foreclosure
 sale.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Considering the applicable standards for a motion to
 
dismiss, which include viewing the allegations in the First
 
Amended Complaint in a light most favorable to Peelua, the
 Remaining Moving Defendants have not demonstrated privity between
 Deutsche Bank and themselves.
 
3. Same Claims Inquiry
 
As noted above, the First Amended Complaint in this
 
case alleges claims of Negligence and Breach of Fiduciary Duty
 (Count I), UDAP (Count II), and Fraud (Count III). Peelua's
 claims against Impac revolve around allegations that HFS and
 Paleka, as loan brokers and agents of Impac, entered false
 information in Peelua's loan application to qualify him for
 proposed loans and that they made knowingly false representations
 to Peelua, which he relied upon, that he could successfully
 borrow and repay the monies given his financial condition. In
 turn, Peelua's claims against BOA and Countrywide rest on
 allegations that they falsely represented to him that he would be
 able to reinstate his loan if he submitted $65,000 to escrow,
 which he did, and then subsequently BOA and Countrywide did not
 reinstate his loan. Peelua also makes a generalized claim of
 fraud against MERS. Peelua does not claim the foreclosure or
 Ejectment Action were improper, nor does he claim that title to
 the property should somehow be restored to him. Plainly, he
 seeks money damages.
 
We conclude that the claims asserted in the First
 
Amended Complaint are not the same as those actually litigated in
 the Ejectment Action and, moreover, they are not claims that
 should have been litigated in the Ejectment Action.
 "It is important to note that res judicata precludes 
not only the relitigation of claims or defenses that were litigated in a previous lawsuit, but also of all claims and defenses that might have been properly litigated, but were not litigated or decided." Esteban, 129 Hawai
'i at 159, 296 P.3d at 
1067. The Moving Defendants further point to the general proposition that "[t]o determine whether a litigant is asserting 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the same claim in a second action, the court must look to whether
 
the 'claim' asserted in the second action arises out of the same
 transaction, or series of connected transactions, as the 'claim'
 asserted in the first action." Kauhane v. Acutron Co., 71 Haw.
 
458, 464, 795 P.2d 276, 279 (1990). As discussed below, although
 the claims in the Ejectment Action and the claims in this case
 against Impac, MERS, Countrywide and BOA may all generally relate
 to Peelua's refinancing of his residence, they are quite distinct
 claims. 
Peelua contends that the claims asserted in the First 
Amended Complaint were not part of the Ejectment Action because during the prior action, Deutsche Bank "asserted unequivocally on the record that any issues between PEELUA and DEUTSCHE BANK other than the ejectment issues were not part of the [Ejectment Action] and that any such issues would have to be brought by PEELUA in a separate action . . . ." This is, however, the wrong inquiry. Given that res judicata bars "all claims and defenses that might have been properly litigated," Esteban, 129 Hawai
'i at 159, 296 
P.3d at 1067, the relevant question in the context of the Ejectment Action is whether asserting the First Amended Complaint claims in the Ejectment Action would have precluded the district court from ejecting Peelua from his home; for instance, by raising an issue of title to real estate, so that the district court would not have had jurisdiction over Deutsche Bank's ejectment action. See Albano v. Norwest Fin. Hawaii, Inc., 244 
F.3d 1061, 1064 (9th Cir. 2001) (holding that a claim was subject to claim preclusion under Hawai
'i law where it should have been 
litigated in a foreclosure action as a defense that would have precluded foreclosure if meritorious). 
In his asserted claims for Negligence/Breach of
 
Fiduciary Duty, UDAP and fraud, Peelua is requesting money
 damages. He is not making a claim against title or claiming that
 the foreclosure was improper. Not only do these claims in this
 case involve different issues of fact and law, they are asserted
 against different parties who have not established any privity
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
with Deutsche Bank. While the alleged Negligence/Breach of
 
Fiduciary Duty, UDAP and fraud claims stem from events that
 eventually resulted in Deutsche Bank's writ of ejectment, Peelua
 did not have a fair opportunity to litigate these claims for
 money damages in the Ejectment Action.
 
Moreover, Peelua was not required to bring the
 
Negligence/Breach of Fiduciary Duty, UDAP and/or fraud claims in
 the Ejectment Action, or to join the Remaining Moving Defendants
 in the Ejectment Action. Peelua's claims against the Remaining
 Moving Defendants were not compulsory in the Ejectment Action
 
7
under DCRCP Rule 13(b)  because the Remaining Moving Defendants
were not parties to that proceeding. Further, there was no basis
 to file third-party claims against the Remaining Moving
 Defendants in the Ejectment Action. DCRCP Rule 14(a) provides
 that "a defending party, as third-party plaintiff, may cause a
 summons and complaint to be served upon a person not a party to
 the action who is or may be liable to such third-party plaintiff
 or to the plaintiff for all or part of the plaintiff's claim
 against the third-party plaintiff." (Emphasis added). In the
 Ejectment Action, Deutsche Bank (as plaintiff) sought to eject
 Peelua from his residence, claiming ownership through the non­judicial foreclosure. The money damages claims that Peelua now
 asserts against the Remaining Moving Defendants do not address
 title to the property, would have had no import to the claim
 asserted by Deutsche Bank in the Ejectment Action, and would not
 have made the Remaining Moving Defendants liable to Deutsche Bank
 or Peelua "for all or part of [Deutsche Bank's] claim against
 [Peelua]" in the Ejectment Action.
 
7
 DCRCP Rule 13(b) provides:
 
(b) Counterclaims.  A pleading shall state as a
counterclaim any claim against an opposing party but the
relief shall not exceed the jurisdictional limitations of
the court.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Remaining Moving
 
Defendants fail to demonstrate the same claim requirement for res
 
judicata.
 
In sum, under the motion to dismiss standard, Remaining
 
Moving Defendants have failed to establish privity with Deutsche
 Bank, or that the claims asserted by Peelua against them in this
 case were litigated or might have properly been litigated in the
 Ejectment Action. They fail to carry their burden to establish
 that the doctrine of res judicata bars the claims against them.
IV. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the June 20, 2012 Judgment
 
entered in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit is affirmed as
 to Deutsche Bank. As to all other defendants, the Judgment is
 vacated and the case is remanded to the circuit court for further
 proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, July 2, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
James Richard McCarty
for Plaintiff/Appellant Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Patricia J. McHenry
Sean M. Smith
 (Cades Schutte LLP) for Defendants-Appellees
Impac Funding Corporation,
Countrywide Home Loans, Inc.,
Countrywide Bank, FSB, Countrywide Financial Corp.,
Bank of America, Mortgage
Electronic Registration
Systems, Inc., and Deutsche
Bank National Trust Company
 
16
 