 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAI# I 
---o0o---
MARK H.K. GREER, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ROSALYN H. BAKER, Defendant-Appellant, and
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Defendant-Appellee, and
DOES 1-10, Defendants 
NO. CAAP-15-0000034 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-2004-09) 
FEBRUARY 21, 2019 
FUJISE, PRESIDING JUDGE, LEONARD, REIFURTH, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J. 
Plaintiff-Appellee Mark H.K. Greer (Greer
) filed a tort 
action, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit 
Court),1 against Defendant-Appellant State of Hawai# i Senator 
Rosalyn H. Baker (Senator Baker).2 Greer alleged that Senator 
Baker improperly used her position as Chair of the Senate Ways & 
Means Committee to eliminate his position as the (now former) 
1 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided. 
2 Greer also sued Defendant-Appellee State of Hawai #i (State ), but
those claims, which remain pending, are not at issue in this appeal. I. BACKGROUND FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Chief of the General Medical & Preventive Services Division at 
the Hawai# i State Department of Health (DOH), due to his 
whistleblowing activities. 
The issues before this court are whether Senator Baker 
is entitled to absolute legislative immunity for her allegedly tortious actions and, relatedly, whether the Circuit Court erred when it considered Senator Baker's alleged motive or intent when she proposed the budget legislation that abolished Greer's position. We hold that Senator Baker was entitled to absolute legislative immunity for actions taken in the exercise of her legislative functions, under article III, section 7, of the Hawai# i Constitution, and the Circuit Court erred in considering 
her alleged motivation for such actions. 
We vacate in part and 
remand. 
On September 23, 2014, Greer filed a non-vehicle tort 
complaint against Senator Baker. The Complaint alleged that: (1) Senator Baker introduced a budget amendment to eliminate Greer's position in retaliation for his whistleblower activities regarding alleged Medicaid fraud; and (2) Senator Baker colluded with the head of DOH to have Baker fired. The Complaint included three claims for relief: (1) Count I, which alleged that Senator Baker violated the 
Hawai# i Whistleblower Protection Act, Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 378-61 to 378-70 (2015) (HWPA); (2) 
Count II, which alleged intentional infliction of emotional 
distress (IIED); and (3) Count III, which alleged negligent 
infliction of emotional distress (NIED). 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Senator Baker filed a motion to dismiss the Complaint, 
primarily on the ground that she is immune from suit based on 
legislative immunity. Senator Baker also argued that the HWPA claim should be dismissed based on the applicable statute of limitations and because she was not Greer's employer. Senator Baker further argued that the IIED and NIED claims should be dismissed based on the applicable statute of limitations and the lack of an underlying cognizable claim. 
After a November 26, 2014 hearing, on December 24, 
2014, the Circuit Court entered an order granting in part and denying in part Senator Baker's motion to dismiss the complaint (Order re Dismissal).  In the Order re Dismissal, the Circuit 
Court granted Senator Baker's motion as to Counts I and III, and 
denied the motion as to Count II. As relevant to Senator Baker's motion, in the Order re Dismissal the Circuit Court: (1) rejected Senator Baker's claim of legislative immunity; (2) dismissed Count I against Senator Baker because she was not Greer's employer; and (3) dismissed Count III against Senator Baker, apparently because Greer failed to allege an underlying cognizable claim against Senator Baker. 
Senator Baker then filed, inter alia, a notice of 
appeal from the Order re Dismissal. After this court initially dismissed the appeal for lack of appellate jurisdiction,
3 the 
Hawai# i Supreme Court concluded that the Intermediate Court of 
Appeals (
ICA) has jurisdiction to hear Senator Baker's appeal as 
3 See Greer v. Baker, No. CAAP–15–0000034, 2015 WL 3385890 (App. May
26,
2015), Leonard, J., dissenting ( Greer v. Baker I ). 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
an immediately appealable collateral order. Greer v. Baker, 137 
Hawai# i 249, 258, 369 P.3d 832, 841 (2016) (Greer v. Baker II). 
The supreme court held that "[t]he denial of Baker's absolute legislative immunity claim conclusively determined the disputed question, resolved an important issue separate from the merits of the action, and would be effectively unreviewable on appeal," and remanded the case to the ICA for a determination of Senator Baker's appeal on the merits. Id. at 251, 369 P.3d at 834 (citation omitted). II. 
POINT OF ERROR ON APPEAL 
Senator Baker raises a single point of error. In her 
Opening Brief, Senator Baker framed her point as follows: "The circuit court erred when it denied Senator Baker absolute legislative immunity considering Senator Baker's subjective intent in performing a quintessential legislative act in determining whether legislative immunity applies." 
In her 
Amended Opening Brief, which was filed after the supreme court's remand of this case to the ICA, Senator Baker restated her point of error as follows: "The circuit court erred when it considered Senator Baker's motive or intent in performing a legislative function in deciding whether absolute legislative immunity applies." III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
We will review the Circuit Court's denial of 
legislative immunity de novo. See, e.g., Kaahumanu v. County of Maui, 315 F.3d 1215, 1219 (9th Cir. 2003). 
A circuit court's ruling on a motion to dismiss is
reviewed de novo . 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A complaint should not be dismissed for failure
to state a claim unless it appears beyond doubt that
the plaintiff can prove no set of facts in support ofhis or her claim that would entitle him or her to relief. [The appellate court] must therefore view aplaintiff's complaint in a light most favorable to himor her in order to determine whether the allegationscontained therein could warrant relief under anyalternative theory. For this reason, in reviewing [a]circuit court's order dismissing [a] complaint . . .[the appellate court's] consideration is strictlylimited to the allegations of the complaint, and [theappellate court] must deem those allegations to betrue. 
County of Kaua# i v. Baptiste, 115 Hawai# i 15, 24, 165 P.3d 916, 
925 (2007) (citations omitted). 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
"It is well established that federal, state, and 
regional legislators are entitled to absolute immunity from civil liability for their legislative activities." Bogan v. Scott-Harris, 523 U.S. 44, 46 (1998). Legislative immunity has long been recognized in Anglo-American law, and is rooted in "the Parliamentary struggles of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries." Id. at 48-49 (citation omitted). If a state legislator is corrupt "he may be impeached or indicted but the law will not tolerate an action to redress the individual wrong which may have been done." Id. at 50 (citation omitted). 
The Hawai# i State Constitution enshrines legislative 
immunity. "No member of the legislature shall be held to answer before any other tribunal for any statement made or action taken in the exercise of the member's legislative functions[.]" Haw. Const. art. III, § 7. In construing this provision, the Hawai# i 
Supreme Court has held: 
[The] record of the proceedings of the Constitutional
Convention shows that the delegates to the Convention
purposefully intended to broaden the scope of thelegislative immunity and further intended for the courts to 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
finally determine the parameter of the legislative immunity
by construing the clause "the exercise of his [or her](legislator's) legislative function" on a case by casebasis. The delegates did not place any restrictions premisedon time and place of a legislator's exercise of his [or her]legislative function. 
Abercrombie v. McClung, 55 Haw. 595, 600, 525 P.2d 594, 597 
(1974). 
This case comes before this court on the Circuit 
Court's ruling on a motion to dismiss the Complaint. Therefore, our consideration is strictly limited to the allegations of the Complaint, and we must deem those allegations to be true. Baptiste, 115 Hawai# i
 at 24, 165 P.3d at 925. 
As stated above, Greer alleged two sets of actions by 
Senator Baker, which are stated in paragraphs 15 and 18 of the Complaint, as follows: 
15. In retaliation for GREER's whistleblowing
activities, and in order to prevent more whistleblowing,
BAKER attempted to have GREER fired by using her power asChair of the Senate Ways & Means Committee to eliminate hisposition from the 2008 state appropriations budget.  She did 
so by duplicitously representing to the Senate that heramendment did not impact or eliminate any filled Statepositions.
. . . . 18. BAKER finally eliminated GREER  in retaliation for 
his whistleblowing activities by colluding with the new
Director of [DOH], Loretta J. Fuddy ("Fuddy"), now deceased . 
On August 24, 2011, Fuddy announced that two positions wouldbe eliminated from [DOH], GREER and his Secretary, CarolineAlbano. 
(Emphasis added). 
In Greer v. Baker II, the supreme court held: 
Absolute legislative immunity is available to Baker if heraction was taken in the exercise of [her] legislativefunctions[.] Haw. Const. art. III, § 7. Whether an act is legislative generally turns on the nature of the act itself,rather than on the motive or intent of the official performing it. Bogan v. Scott–Harris, 523 U.S. 44, 45, 118S.Ct. 966, 140 L.Ed.2d 79 (1998). That determination would be separate from a decision on the merits of a[n] . . . IIEDclaim. See . . . Young v. Allstate Ins., Co., 119 Hawai #i 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
403, 429, 198 P.3d 666, 692 (2008) (describing the elements of an
IIED claim).[4] 
137 Hawai# i at 255, 369 P.3d at 838 (internal quotation marks 
omitted). 
With respect to the actions alleged in paragraph 15 of 
the Complaint, we conclude that Senator Baker is entitled to 
absolute legislative immunity because Senator Baker's actions, as Chair of the Senate Ways & Means Committee, of and related to introducing and voting on budget legislation, were undertaken in the exercise of her legislative functions. See, e.g., Bogan, 523 U.S. at 55-56. In Bogan, the plaintiff filed suit alleging that the elimination of her position "was motivated by racial animus and a desire to retaliate against her for exercising her First Amendment rights." Id. at 47. The Supreme Court reversed a court of appeals decision upholding a judgment against the defendant, stating: 
Respondent, however, asks us to look beyond
petitioners' formal actions to consider whether the
ordinance was legislative in substance . We need not 
determine whether the formally legislative character of
petitioners' actions is alone sufficient to entitlepetitioners to legislative immunity, because here theordinance, in substance, bore all the hallmarks oftraditional legislation. The ordinance reflected a discretionary, policymaking decision implicating thebudgetary priorities of the city and the services the cityprovides to its constituents. Moreover, it involved thetermination of a position, which, unlike the hiring orfiring of a particular employee, may have prospectiveimplications that reach well beyond the particular occupantof the office. And the city council, in eliminating DHHS,certainly governed in a field where legislatorstraditionally have power to act. Thus, petitioners'activities were undoubtedly legislative. 
Id. at 55-56 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
4 "[T]he tort of IIED consists of four elements: 1) that the act
allegedly causing the harm was intentional or reckless, 2) that the act wasoutrageous, and 3) that the act caused 4) extreme emotional distress toanother." Young, 119 Hawai #i at 429, 198 P.3d at 692 (citation and internal
quotation marks omitted). 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, regardless of Senator Baker's possible subjective 
intentions or motives, the exercise of her powers as Chair of the Senate Ways & Means Committee was undoubtedly legislative and thus entitled to immunity from suit. See id.
The actions alleged in paragraph 18 of the Complaint 
simply assert that Senator Baker eliminated Greer by colluding with Fuddy. We disregard any intentions or motives for Senator Baker's alleged actions in paragraph 18. Nevertheless, we must view the allegations in paragraph 18 in a light most favorable to Greer. Baptiste, 115 
Hawai# i at 24, 165 P.3d at 925. Although 
there may be alternative grounds for the dismissal of this claim for relief, we cannot conclude from the face of the Complaint that Senator Baker's alleged actions were undertaken in her legislative capacity. If, as Senator Baker argues on remand to this court, the alleged collusion itself relates to the elimination of Greer's position through budget legislation, then such actions would be entitled to absolute legislative immunity as well. However, that determination cannot be made based on the record that is currently before us. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred 
in failing to dismiss Count II to the extent that Count II arises out of paragraph 15 of the Complaint, based on Senator Baker's absolute legislative immunity. 
We cannot conclude, based on the 
record on appeal, that the Circuit Court erred in failing to dismiss Count II to the extent that Count II arises out of paragraph 18 of the Complaint, based on Senator Baker's absolute legislative immunity. 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
V. CONCLUSION 
With respect to the issue of Senator Baker's absolute 
legislative immunity from the claim stated in Count II of Greer's 
Complaint, the Circuit Court's December 24, 2014 Order re Dismissal is affirmed in part and vacated in part, as set forth above. This case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent with this Opinion. 
On the brief: James E. Halvorson,
Maria C. Cook,Deputy Attorneys General,State of Hawai# i,
for Defendant-Appellant. 
9 