NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000434
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
KUI PALAMA, Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-0116)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) appeals 
from the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order 
Granting Defendant's Motion to Dismiss" entered on April 26, 2012 
1
by the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (circuit court),  which
dismissed this case against Defendant-Appellee Kui Palama
 (Palama) for (1) simple trespass in violation of Hawaii Revised
 
2
Statutes (HRS) § 708-815 (2014)  and (2) prohibited hunting on
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 
2
 HRS § 708-815 provides:
 
§708-815 Simple trespass. (1) A person commits the
offense of simple trespass if the person knowingly enters or
remains unlawfully in or upon premises.
 
(2) Simple trespass is a violation.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
private lands in violation of HRS § 183D-26 (2011).3 The circuit
 
court granted Palama's Motion to Dismiss on the grounds that his
 
pig hunting in this case was an exercise of native Hawaiian
 rights that deserved protection under the Hawai
'i Constitution. 
For the reasons discussed below, and due to the
 
particular circumstances and the record in this case, we affirm
 the circuit court's dismissal of the charges against Palama.
I. Background
 
On January 17, 2011, Palama entered Kupo Ridge,
 
situated at the upland, or mauka, portion of Hanap
epe Valley on
 
the Island of Kaua 'i to hunt for pig. The record reflects that 
the area in which Palama hunted is privately owned and is
 
referred to generally by the parties as Robinson Family property
 or Gay & Robinson property (the subject property). Palama
 contends that he maintains taro patches on his kuleana land
4
 
located at the lower end of the Hanap epe ahupua 'a5 and that he 
3
 HRS § 183D-26 provides:
 
§183D-26 Hunting on private lands prohibited. (a) No
person shall enter upon any land or premises belonging to,
held, or occupied by another, for the purpose of hunting or
to take any kind of wildlife including game without first
having obtained permission from the owner or a duly
appointed agent, if the owner is the occupier or holder, or
if the owner has let another occupy or hold the same,
without having first obtained the permission of the occupier
or holder thereof, or the duly appointed agent of the
occupier or holder.
 
(b) No prosecution shall be brought under this section,
except upon the sworn complaint of the owner, occupier, or
holder of the land or premises, or a duly appointed agent,
or if the owner, occupier, or holder is either a corporation
or a partnership, then the complaint shall be sworn to by an
officer of the corporation or by one of the members of the
partnership.
4
 The word "kuleana" is defined as, inter alia, "[r]ight, privilege,
concern, responsibility, ... [or] small piece of property, as within an
ahupua'a[.]" M.K. Pukui & S.H. Elbert, Hawaiian Dictionary 179 (1986).
5
 An "ahupua' a" is a land division usually extending from the mountains
to the sea along rational lines, such as ridges or other natural
characteristics. In re Boundaries of Pulehunui, 4 Haw. 239, 241 (Haw. Kingdom
1879) (acknowledging that these "rational" lines may also be based ontradition, culture, or other factors); Pukui & Elbert, supra, 9 (defining"ahupua' a" as a "[l]and division usually extending from the uplands to the
sea, so called because the boundary was marked by a heap (ahu) of stones
surmounted by an image of a pig (pua' a), or because a pig or other tribute was 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
enters the subject property for a variety of activities,
 
including to hunt pig and to inspect the river's water flow and
 quality for his taro patches.
 
According to Palama, on the day in question, he drove
 
to his kuleana land, parked, and then entered the subject
 property by foot at 7:00 a.m. accompanied by a mule and hunting
 dogs to hunt pig. Palama asserts the subject property did not
 have any fences or signs indicating that it was private property.
 Palama had a hunting license at the time but did not ask for
 permission from anyone before entering the subject property. He
 used a knife to kill two wild pigs while on the subject property.
 On his way out of the subject property, but before reaching his
 truck, Palama was confronted by two Robinson employees.
 
On March 2, 2011, the State filed a complaint against 
Palama for (1) simple trespass; and (2) prohibited hunting on private lands. On February 9, 2012, Palama filed the Motion to Dismiss, asserting the constitutional defense of privilege under State v. Hanapi, 89 Hawai
'i 177, 185-87, 970 P.2d 485, 493-95 
(1998). Palama brought his Motion to Dismiss based on article XII, section 7 of the Hawai
'i Constitution, HRS § 7-1 (2009) and 
HRS § 1-1 (2009), claiming that his conduct was a traditional and customary native Hawaiian practice and therefore protected.
6 The 
laid on the altar as tax to the chief.").
6
 Article XII, section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution provides: 
The State reaffirms and shall protect all rights,
customarily and traditionally exercised for subsistence,
cultural and religious purposes and possessed by ahupua'a
tenants who are descendants of native Hawaiians who
 inhabited the Hawaiian Islands prior to 1778, subject to the
right of the State to regulate such rights.
 
HRS § 1-1 provides:
 
The common law of England, as ascertained by English and
American decisions, is declared to be the common law of the
State of Hawaii in all cases, except as otherwise expressly
provided by the Constitution or laws of the United States,
or by the laws of the State, or fixed by Hawaiian judicial
precedent, or established by Hawaiian usage; provided that
no person shall be subject to criminal proceedings except as
provided by the written laws of the United States or of the
State.
 
HRS § 7-1 provides:
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State filed its Memorandum in Opposition on March 12, 2012,
 
arguing, inter alia, that killing game mammals is not an
 enumerated right and that hunting is subject to State regulation. 
The circuit court held evidentiary hearings on Palama's
 
Motion to Dismiss. The circuit court heard testimony from:
 expert witness Jonathan Kamakawiwo
'ole Osorio, Ph.D. (Dr. 
7
Osorio),  a professor at the University of Hawai 'i Center for 
8
Hawaiian Studies; kama 'aina witnesses  Lavern Silva (Silva),
Elvin Kaiakapu (Kaiakapu) and Herbert Kauahi (Kauahi); and

 
Palama. 
The State did not put on any evidence.
 On April 26, 2012, the circuit court dismissed the
 
charges with prejudice, ruling that Palama's conduct was
 constitutionally protected. As discussed more fully below, the
 circuit court concluded that Palama brought forward sufficient
 evidence to demonstrate that: (1) he is a native Hawaiian; (2)
 his claimed right was an established native Hawaiian custom or
 tradition practiced prior to 1892 and his family's pig hunting
 has been customarily and traditionally exercised on the subject
 property; (3) the subject property is not developed; and (4) his
 pig hunting on the subject property merited constitutional
 
Where the landlords have obtained, or may hereafter obtain,
allodial titles to their lands, the people on each of their
lands shall not be deprived of the right to take firewood,
house-timber, aho cord, thatch, or ki leaf, from the land on
which they live, for their own private use, but they shall
not have a right to take such articles to sell for profit.
The people shall also have a right to drinking water, and
running water, and the right of way. The springs of water,
running water, and roads shall be free to all, on all lands
granted in fee simple; provided that this shall not be
applicable to wells and watercourses, which individuals have
made for their own use.
 
7
 Over the State's objection, the circuit court recognized Dr. Osorio
as an expert in Hawaiian studies, particularly in native Hawaiian practices.
On appeal, the State does not challenge the circuit court's designation of Dr.
Osorio as an expert.
8
 The circuit court uses the term kama' aina witness in its Findings of
Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order. A kama' aina witness is a person
"familiar from childhood with any locality." In Re Boundaries of Pulehunui, 4 
at 245. This would also include "persons [who] were specially taught and maderepositories of this knowledge[.]" Id. at 241. "In this jurisdiction, we
have accepted kama' aina testimony as proof of ancient Hawaiian tradition,
custom, and usage." Hanapi, 89 Hawai' i at 187 n.12, 970 P.2d at 495 n.12. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
protection.
 
The State timely filed this appeal.
II. Standards of Review
 
Palama asserts a defense based on a constitutional 
right. "We answer questions of constitutional law by exercising 
our own independent constitutional judgment based on the facts of the case. Thus, we review questions of constitutional law under the right/wrong standard." Hanapi, 89 Hawai
'i at 182, 970 P.2d 
and 490 (quoting State v. Mallan, 86 Hawai 'i 440, 443, 950 P.2d 
178, 181 (1998) (internal quotation marks omitted)). 
We review a circuit court's findings of fact (FOF) and
 
conclusions of law (COL) in a pretrial ruling according to the
 following standard:
 
Appellate review of factual determinations made by the trial
court deciding pretrial motions in a criminal case is
governed by the clearly erroneous standard. A finding of
fact is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks
substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) despite
substantial evidence in support of the finding, the
appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm
conviction that a mistake has been made. The circuit
 court's conclusions of law are reviewed under the
 right/wrong standard.
 
State v. Locquiao, 100 Hawai 'i 195, 203, 58 P.3d 1242, 1250 
(2002) (citations and quotation marks omitted).
III. Points of Error
 
The points of error asserted in the State's opening
 
brief are summarized as follows:9
 
(1) the circuit court erred when it concluded that
 
Palama met his burden under Hanapi to prove that he is a native
 
Hawaiian and that his pig hunting is a constitutionally protected
 traditional and customary practice;
 
9
 We disregard some of the State's points of error. First, the State
provides no argument about its assertion that the "circuit court erred in
concluding the property where Palama was hunting is an actual ahupuaa."
 
Second, we decline to address the following point of error because the State
appears to be challenging semantics, not substance:
 
D. The circuit court erred in finding that the State has
"attempt[ed] to regulate Defendant's conduct"; an accurate
finding and conclusion is that the State has successfully
and completely regulated Palama's pig hunting on private
and/or public property. All FOF and COL.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) the circuit court erred when it found that Palama 
was a lawful occupant of an ahupua 'a; 
(3) the circuit court erred in concluding that the
 
State's regulation of Palama's pig hunting on private property is
 
a "blanket prohibition or extinguishment" of Palama's pig
 hunting; and
 
(4) the circuit court erred in concluding that Palama's
 
pig hunting requires constitutional protection and may be upheld
 as long as no actual harm is done. 
The State contends that it challenges all FOF and COL
 
issued by the circuit court.
IV. Discussion
 
A. Judicial Notice and Amicus Curiae
 
As an initial matter, we address issues that have
 
arisen in this appeal regarding the court's discretion to
 
consider evidence not presented below and the proper role of
 amicus curiae. We emphasize that our primary task is to decide
 this case based on the record.
 
On April 1, 2015, the State filed a Motion for Judicial
 
Notice, requesting that we take judicial notice of the following:
 (1) the records and files in an unrelated case pending before this court, Pele Defense Fund, et al. v. Department of Land and Natural Resources, et al., No. CAAP-14-0001033; (2) three sources referenced and relied upon by the Department of Land & Natural Resources (DLNR) in the above case; and (3) the State of Hawai
'i 
DLNR Game Mammal Hunting Regulations, Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) Title 13, Chapter 123, specifically, for the Island of Kaua
'i. We denied the motion "except that this court may take 
judicial notice of [HAR] Title 13, Chapter 123 and a chart and maps describing the regulations specific to Kaua
'i." The State 
requested judicial notice of HAR Title 13, Chapter 123, because "[t]hese hunting regulations help this court to understand . . . that there are public hunting grounds throughout the island where pig hunting is permitted." We note, however, that the State did not argue below that Palama's defense was somehow affected by the availability of public hunting grounds on Kaua
'i, and thus any such contention is waived. See State v. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Moses, 102 Hawai 'i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003) ("As a 
general rule, if a party does not raise an argument at trial, 
that argument will be deemed to have been waived on appeal."). 
We were also asked to consider evidence or facts not 
presented to the circuit court by way of amicus curiae briefs that were filed in this appeal by the Attorney General of the State of Hawai
'i (Attorney General) and the Robinson Family 
Partners and Gay & Robinson, Inc. (Robinson Family).10 In its 
amicus brief, the Attorney General asserts that in balancing the competing interests of Palama and the State, the circuit court failed to adequately consider the State's interest in public safety, in particular that hunting is a dangerous activity that the State regulates. The Attorney General notes that this court could take judicial notice of the fact that hunting is a potentially dangerous activity. In turn, the Robinson Family asserts in its amicus brief that Palama's hunting on private land without landowner permission was not a customary or traditional native Hawaiian practice, and that permitting Palama to assert such a defense promotes lawlessness. The Robinson Family requested that this court consider an article entitled, "Pua
'a 
(pigs) In Hawai 'i, from Traditional to Modern," two declarations 
by members of the Robinson Family, and two Kingdom of Hawai 'i 
statutes. 
It is well-recognized that "[i]n general, an amicus
 
curiae must accept the case before the reviewing court as it
 stands on appeal, with the issues as framed by the parties. 
Accordingly, an amicus curiae generally cannot raise issues that
 have not been preserved by the parties." 4 Am. Jur. 2d Amicus
 Curiae § 7 (2007). Moreover, "an amicus curiae will not be
 permitted to present additional evidence on appeal which was not
 before the trial court[.]" 4 Am. Jur. 2d Amicus Curiae § 8. 
With this in mind, we consider the evidentiary issues
 
raised by amicus curiae in this case. In regard to the Attorney
 General's request that we take judicial notice of the dangers
 
10
 The Attorney General was granted leave to participate in the oral
argument in this case, over Palama's objection. The Robinson Family did not
participate in oral argument.
 
7
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
posed by hunting, the State did not argue in the circuit court
 
that its interest in public safety should trump Palama's rights. 
The State also failed to present any evidence to the circuit
 court regarding the dangers posed by pig hunting generally, let
 alone the manner in which Palama hunted. We recognize the
 significance of the public safety issue, but we must also be
 mindful that this is a criminal case against Palama. The State
 cannot raise arguments on appeal that simply were not preserved
 below or assert generalized facts where no evidence was presented
 to the trial court to counter Palama's evidence. 
In regard to the Robinson Family's amicus curiae brief 
and submissions, we entered an order granting Palama's motion to strike the declarations and exhibits submitted by the Robinson Family, "except to the extent that this court may take judicial notice of relevant Kingdom of Hawai
'i laws." We conclude that, 
although we may take judicial notice of the existence of the two Kingdom laws identified by the Robinson Family in its amicus curiae brief, the significance of these laws related to the issues in this case is unclear because further factual development is needed to shed light on whether and how these laws may show, or not show, that pig hunting on private land was, or was not, a customary or traditional native Hawaiian practice. First, the Robinson Family requests judicial notice be taken of the 1892 Laws of Her Majesty Lili
'uokalani, Chapter LXXVII, 
Section 1 (1892), entitled "To Prevent Hunting and Shooting on Private Grounds."
11 Not only does this particular statute 
potentially fall outside the applicable time frame,12 we also 
believe further factual development is necessary to determine the 
11
 The 1892 Laws of Her Majesty Lili' uokalani, Chapter LXXVII,
Section 1 provided: 
It shall not be lawful for any person or persons to enter
upon any land belonging to or occupied by another, for the
purpose of hunting with dogs, or to shoot, kill, take or
destroy any kind of game without first having obtained
permission from the owner or occupier of such land.
12
 Queen Lili' uokalani approved Chapter LXXVII, Section 1 on December
28, 1892, approximately one month after November 25, 1892, "the date by whichancient Hawaiian usage must have been established in practice." State by
Kobayashi v. Zimring, 58 Haw. 106, 115 n.11, 566 P.2d 725, 732 n.11 (1977). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
true impact of this law in demonstrating what was, or was not,
 
the customary and traditional native Hawaiian practice prior to
 the adoption of this law.
 
Second, the Robinson Family requests judicial notice of
 
the 1874 Laws of His Majesty Kal
akaua, Chapter XXVII, Section 1
 
(1874).13 Interpretation of this law, as applicable to the
 
issues in this case, also involves factual issues that simply
 have not been developed in this case.
 
B.	 The Circuit Court Did Not Err in Concluding that Palama
Satisfied the Hanapi Test
 
The State contends that the circuit court erred in
 
concluding that Palama met his burden under Hanapi to prove that
 
he is a native Hawaiian and that his pig hunting on the subject
 property is a constitutionally protected traditional and
 customary practice.
 
In Hanapi, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court identified a 
three-part test that a criminal defendant must meet, at minimum, to establish that his or her conduct is constitutionally protected as a native Hawaiian right. 89 Hawai
'i at 185-86, 970 
P.2d at 493-94. First, the defendant "must qualify as a 'native Hawaiian' within the guidelines set out in [Public Access Shoreline Hawaii v. Hawai
'i County Planning Commission (PASH), 79 
Hawai'i 425, 903 P.2d 1246 (1995)]." 89 Hawai 'i at 186, 970 P.2d 
at 494. Second, the native Hawaiian defendant "must then establish that his or her claimed right is constitutionally protected as a customary or traditional native Hawaiian practice." Id. Third, the defendant "must also prove that the 
13
 The 1874 Laws of His Majesty Kala kaua, Chapter XXVII, Section 1
provided:
 
All cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, sheep, goats and swine,
over twelve months of age, not marked or branded according
to law, and which may have been running wild and at large
for six months or over, upon any of the lands of this
Kingdom shall belong to, and be the property of the owners
or lessees of the lands on which the said animals may be
found running.
 
9
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exercise of the right occurred on undeveloped or 'less than fully
 
developed property.'" Id. 
The circuit court determined that Palama "satisfied his 
burden through evidence and testimony" and established his constitutional defense. The State does not contest that Palama satisfied the third part of the Hanapi test. On appeal, the State argues that Palama failed to provide evidence establishing his status as a native Hawaiian or that pig hunting anywhere, let alone on Kaua
'i, was a customary or traditional native Hawaiian 
practice. 
1. Substantial evidence Palama is native Hawaiian
 
The first prong of Hanapi requires a defendant to prove 
that he is a descendant of "native Hawaiians who inhabited the islands prior to 1778" regardless of blood quantum. Hanapi, 89 
Hawai
'i at 186, 970 P.2d at 494 (quoting PASH, 79 Hawai 'i at 449, 
903 P.2d at 1270) (quotation marks omitted). The circuit court determined that Palama met this definition and made the following FOFs on the matter: 
4.	 The State offered no evidence to controvert that
 
Defendant is native Hawaiian.
 
. . . .
 
7.	 Defendant is native Hawaiian, as testimony and
exhibits collectively demonstrated that Defendant is a
descendant of native Hawaiians who inhabited Kauai
 prior to 1778, regardless of Defendant's specific
blood quantum. See Article XII, section 7 of the
Hawaii Constitution; see also [PASH].
 
There is substantial evidence in the record supporting
 
the circuit court's findings. The circuit court heard testimony
 
from witnesses Silva,14 Kaiakapu, and Kauahi regarding Palama's
 
genealogy and received two exhibits into evidence, exhibits D-1
 
14
 Silva testified that she is considered a family history consultant
for the island and for her church, the Latter-Day Saints church; that she has
volunteered for over twenty years at the family history center at her church;
and that she teaches genealogy and has taken classes in genealogy at her
church. Silva also testified that it is her regular practice to update the
genealogy records for the Palama family and that she gathers information from
various sources including family members, public records, church records and
government records.
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and D-2.15 Based on her personal knowledge of her own genealogy,
 
and being of blood relation to Palama, Silva testified that
 
Palama is native Hawaiian, with his great-grandfather and
 previous ancestors being pure Hawaiian. The State did not object
 to Kaiakapu's testimony that Palama is native Hawaiian and that
 they belong to the same family. The State also did not object to
 Kauahi's testimony that Palama is native Hawaiian. 
Based on the evidence in the record, we conclude that
 
the circuit court's FOFs 4 and 7 are not clearly erroneous.
2. 	Customary or traditional native Hawaiian practice
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court articulated the second Hanapi 
factor as follows:
 
[O]nce a defendant qualifies as a native Hawaiian, he or she
must then establish that his or her claimed right isconstitutionally protected as a customary or traditionalnative Hawaiian practice. Some customary and traditionalnative Hawaiian rights are codified either in art. XII,section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution or in HRS §§ 1-1 and
7-1 (1993). The fact that the claimed right is not specifically enumerated in the Constitution or statutes,does not preclude further inquiry concerning othertraditional and customary practices that have existed. 
Hanapi, 89 Hawai 'i at 186, 970 P.2d at 494 (footnote omitted). 
In this case, the circuit court concluded that Palama's
 
pig hunting deserved constitutional protection and made several
 
FOFs and COLs on the issue, including:
 
5.	 The State offered no evidence to controvert that
 
Defendant's pig hunting is constitutionally protected
as a customary or traditional native Hawaiian
practice.
 
. . . .
 
8. 	Defendant established, through kama' aina and expert
testimony, that his hunting pig on the subject
property is constitutionally protected as a customaryor traditional native Hawaiian practice. 
15
 In its opening brief, the State notes that it objected to exhibits
D-1 and D-2 and the testimony of Silva, which the circuit court overruled.Exhibit D-1 is described as a pedigree chart personally prepared by Silva thatillustrates Palama's bloodline. Exhibit D-2 is described in the record as four-generation genealogical charts stored by the church. In a footnote, theState asserts that "[n]either Ex.s [sic] D1 & D2 . . . are [Hawai' i Rules of 
Evidence (HRE)] 803 or HRE 804 exceptions to the hearsay rule." However, theState does not assert as a point of error that the circuit court erred inoverruling its objections, nor does the State present any substantive argumenton the issue, and thus the State has waived any challenge to the admissibilityof the exhibits or Silva's testimony. Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure
(HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4) & (7). 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
10.	 Based on Dr. Jonathan Osorio's expert testimony, as
well as the testimony of kama' aina witnesses, the Court
finds that Defendant's pig hunting on the subject propertyconstitutes an established native Hawaiian custom or tradition practiced prior to 1892. See generally State v.
Pratt (Pratt I), 243 P.3d 289, 311 (Haw.Ct.App 2010) . . .cert. granted, SCWC-27897, 2011 WL 1523485 (Haw. Apr. 21,2011). 
. . . .
 
13.	 Defendant and his ohana hunt pig for food and
[subsistence]; the pig meat is shared with members of
the ohana.
 
14. 	Defendant and his ohana hunt pig for cultural reasons.
 
15. 	Defendant and his ohana hunt pig to preserve ohana
tradition.
 
16. 	Defendant and his ohana hunt pig to keep the wild pig
population down.
 
. . . .
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
. . . .
 
3. 	The "Hawaiian usage" clause may establish certain
customary Hawaiian rights beyond those found in HRS
§ 7-1[.]
 
4.	 In the case at bar, pig hunting, while not
specifically enumerated in HRS § 7-1, qualifies as a
traditional and customary native Hawaiian practice
deserving Constitutional protection, as Defendant
brought forward evidence that hunting pig was an
established native Hawaiian custom or tradition
 practiced prior to 1892. See generally Pratt I.
 
5. 	Native Hawaiian rights protected by article XII, § 7may extend beyond the ahupua' a in which a native 
Hawaiian resides where such rights have beencustomarily and traditionally exercised in thismanner. Pele Defense Fund v. Paty, 73 Haw. 578, 619,837 P.2d 1247 (1992). In the instant matter,Defendant's Ohana's pig hunting has been customarilyand traditionally exercised on the subject property. 
The State contends the circuit court erred because pig
 
hunting is not enumerated in HRS § 7-1, and it cannot be a
 
traditional or customary practice. However, Hanapi clearly
 
states that "[t]he fact that the claimed right is not
 specifically enumerated in the Constitution or statutes, does not
 preclude further inquiry concerning other traditional and
 customary practices that have existed." Hanapi, 89 Hawai
'i at 
186, 970 P.2d at 494; see also Pele Defense Fund v. Paty, 73 Haw.
 
12

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
578, 619, 837 P.2d 1247, 1271 (1992) ("In [Kalipi v. Hawaiian
 
Trust Co., 66 Haw. 1, 656 P.2d 745 (1982)] we foresaw that the
 precise nature and scope of the rights retained by § 1-1 would,
 of course, depend upon the particular circumstances of each
 case." (citation, internal quotation marks and brackets
 omitted)). Thus, COL 3 is right.
 
Pig hunting may qualify as a traditional and customary 
practice if there is "an adequate foundation in the record connecting the claimed right to a firmly rooted traditional or customary native Hawaiian practice." Hanapi, 89 Hawai
'i at 187, 
970 P.2d at 495 (footnote omitted). 
A defendant may lay an adequate foundation by putting forth
specialized knowledge that the claimed right is a
traditional or customary native Hawaiian practice. This
specialized knowledge may come from expert testimony,
pursuant to [Rule 702 of the Hawai' i Rules of
 
Evidence]. . . .
. . . . 
In this jurisdiction, we have also accepted kama' aina
 
witness testimony as proof of ancient Hawaiian tradition,
custom, and usage.
 
Id. at 187 n.12, 970 P.2d at 495 n.12. 
At the hearing on Palama's motion to dismiss, several
 
witnesses testified that pig hunting has been traditionally
 
practiced in the area. Dr. Osorio testified that based on his
 training, experience, and understanding of the facts, Palama's
 pig hunting is an established native Hawaiian custom or
 tradition. Dr. Osorio testified that, including the period prior
 to 1892, pigs played an important role in subsistence living in
 ancient Hawaiian society, and Hawaiians also hunted pigs to
 control wild pig populations. Given this historical background,
 Dr. Osorio said he believed Palama was hunting "in order to
 supplement the diet of his family, and that he was doing this in
 the same way that his father before him and ancestors before him
 had done." Kauahi testified that "[e]ven supposedly the
 Robinsons owned [the subject property], people were still hunting
 and gathering up there." Kauahi also testified that the practice
 of hunting pig has been passed down from generation to generation
 and has always been an important subsistence activity for his
 family, as it has been in Palama's family. Similarly, Kaiakapu
 
13
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testified that Palama is hunting as part of the native Hawaiian
 
lifestyle. Finally, Palama testified that he has been hunting
 pig in Hanap
epe Valley since he was a little kid and that he was
 
taught by his family, who in turn were taught by their family. 
Palama further testified that he uses the pig meat for various
 types of food and that he shares it with his family.
 
As noted, the State did not present any evidence to
 
counter the evidence produced by Palama.
 
The circuit court's COL 4 that Palama "brought forward
 
evidence that hunting pig was an established native Hawaiian
 custom or tradition practiced prior to 1892" was based on FOF 5,
 8, and 10, which are supported by substantial evidence and are
 not clearly erroneous. Therefore, COL 4 is not wrong. See State
 
v. Rippe, 119 Hawai
'i 15, 21, 193 P.3d 1215, 1221 (App. 2008) ("A 
conclusion of law that is supported by the trial court's findings of fact and that reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be overturned." (Citation and quotation marks omitted)). 
The State also contends that the circuit court erred in 
granting Palama's motion to dismiss because article XII, section 7 of the Hawai
'i Constitution only protects "rights, customarily 
and traditionally exercised for subsistence, cultural and religious purposes and possessed by ahupua
'a tenants," and Palama 
did not prove he is a tenant of an ahupua 'a, let alone the 
Hanapepe ahupua 'a at the time of the alleged offense. The State 
has waived this contention for failure to raise the argument before the circuit court. Nevertheless, COL 5 –- recognizing that native Hawaiian rights may extend beyond the ahupua
'a in 
which a native Hawaiian resides, if such rights have been customarily and traditionally exercised in the manner in question -- reflects an accurate statement of the law and is supported by the FOFs.
16 
16
 During oral arguments, the State argued, for the first time, that
the circuit court issued a vague order that appeared to expand the scope of
protected customary or traditional practices previously recognized in Hawai' i,
by making the right "incident to kuleana lot ownership," and not residency inan ahupua' a. In COL 2, the circuit court concluded that: 
14
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We acknowledge that to date, there have been no Hawai 'i 
appellate cases directly addressing whether pig hunting is a
 
constitutionally protected traditional and customary practice,
 and for this reason, we reiterate that our decision here is
 confined to the narrow circumstances and the particular record in
 this case.
17 Based on the uncontroverted kama 'aina testimony of 
Palama's witnesses and the expert testimony of Dr. Osorio, the
 circuit court did not err in concluding that Palama's pig hunting
 on the subject property constitutes a traditional and customary
 
2. Lawful native Hawaiian occupants of an ahupua' a may--for
the purpose of practicing native Hawaiian customs and
traditions--enter undeveloped lands within the ahupua' a to 
gather specifically enumerated items. Kalipi v. Hawaiian
Trust Co., Ltd. 66 Haw. 1, 3-4, 656 P.2d 745 (1982).Defendant and his ohana are lawful occupants of the subjectahupua'a. 
The State argued that the circuit court erred because the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court in Kalipi expressly rejected that customary or traditionalpractices could be exercised by an individual who was not a lawful occupant,
i.e. resident, of the ahupua' a in which the practices were being conducted,
and instead merely owned a lot in the ahupua' a. Although the circuit court
incorrectly relied on Kalipi in COL 2, cases subsequent to Kalipi have
recognized that "native Hawaiian rights protected by article XII, section 7may extend beyond the ahupua' a in which a native Hawaiian resides where such 
rights have been customarily and traditionally exercised in this manner."Pele Defense Fund, 73 Haw. at 620, 837 P.2d at 1272; see also State v. Pratt(Pratt II), 127 Hawaii 206, 215, 277 P.3d 300, 309 (2012); PASH, 79 Hawaii at439-40, 903 P.2d at 1260-61. This development in the law is reflected in thecircuit court's COL 5, which is not wrong. 
17
 The State also appears to contend, without any supporting legal
authority, that because pig hunting is dangerous in nature, it cannot receive
constitutional protection. The State also contends that hunting is not
similar to the enumerated rights provided in HRS § 7-1 thus cannot be a
protected right. We disagree. We have already rejected the State's contention
that the native Hawaiian rights that receive constitutional protection are
limited to those included in HRS § 7-1.
Further, a Standing Committee Report discussing article XII,
section 7 of the Hawaii Constitution suggests that hunting may be entitled to
protection:
 
Your Committee found that besides fishing rights,
other rights for sustenance, cultural and religious purposes
exist. Hunting, gathering, access and water rights, while
not provided for in the State Constitution, were
nevertheless an integral part of the ancient Hawaiian
civilization and are retained by its descendants.
 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 57, reprinted in 1 PROCEEDINGS OF THE CONSTITUTIONALCONVENTION OF HAWAII OF 1978, at 640 (emphasis added). The Committee on Hawaiian Affairs noted that hoa' aina, or tenants of an ahupua' a, "had rights to
make use of house lots, cultivate personal taro patches and engage insubsistence gathering and hunting activities that consumed but did not depletethe natural resources, wild animals and birds of the ahupua' a." Id. at 640 
(emphasis added). 
15
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
practice.18 Accordingly, given the record in this case, the
 
circuit court did not err in concluding that Palama met his
 
burden under Hanapi.
C. 	The Circuit Court Did Not Err in Concluding that
Palama's Actions Were Protected
 
"[O]nce a criminal defendant satisfies the three-prong
 
showing required by Hanapi, there remains a balancing test before
 
the defendant's assertion of the native Hawaiian privilege
 
negates any possible criminal conviction." State v. Pratt
 (Pratt
 
II), 127 Hawai 'i 206, 216, 277 P.3d 300, 310 (2012). In 
performing the balancing test, a court must look to the totality
 
of the circumstances and balance the State's interest in
 regulating the activity against the defendant's interests in
 conducting the traditional or customary practice. 
Id. at 216-18,
 
277 P.3d at 310-12.19
 
In its articulation of the balancing test, the circuit
 
court made the following FOFs and COLs:
 
18. There was nothing unreasonable about the way Defendant
hunted pig.
 
19. The State's attempt to regulate Defendant's
conduct . . . amounts to a blanket prohibition or
extinguishment of Defendant's protected practice of hunting
pig on the subject property. . . .
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
. . . .
 
7. Constitutionally protected native Hawaiian rights,
reasonably exercised, qualify as a privilege for purposes of
enforcing criminal trespass statutes. State v. Hanapi. The
 
reasonable exercise of ancient Hawaiian usage is entitled to
protection under article XII, section 7. Id. Here,
Defendant's exercise of his ancient Hawaiian usage was
reasonable.
 
18
 The Robinson Family claims that pig hunting cannot be a customary or
traditional native Hawaiian practice because hunting game without the
permission of the landowner constituted a violation of Kingdom law. As
 discussed previously, the Kingdom laws submitted by the Robinson Family are
not dispositive in this appeal because determining their applicability to the
issues would require additional facts outside of the record before us.
 
19
 In PASH the Hawai' i Supreme Court explained that prior case law
informs that "[t]he balance of interest and harms clearly favors a right of
exclusion for private property owners as against persons pursuing non­traditional practices or exercising otherwise valid customary rights in anunreasonable manner." 79 Hawai' i at 442, 903 P.2d at 1263. 
16
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
8. Because Defendant satisfied his burden through evidence
and testimony, the Court reconciled the competing interests
and upheld Defendant's privilege because it was reasonably
exercised to the extent feasible.
 
9. The regulatory power provided in article XII, section 7
does not justify summary extinguishment of such rights by
the State merely because they are deemed inconsistent with
generally understood elements of the western doctrine of
"property." PASH at 442. Extinguishing traditional rights
based simply upon the possible inconsistency of purported
native rights with our system of land tenure must fail; the
Court's obligation to preserve and enforce such traditional
rights is part of the Hawaii State Constitution. . . . Here,
the State's attempt to regulate[] Defenant's [sic]
traditional right, through criminal prosecution, amounts to
a blanket prohibition or extinguishment of Defendant's
protected practice of hunting pig on the subject property.
 
10. The government must protect the privilege of Defendant
to enter the subject property to practice continuously
exercised access and gathering rights necessary for
subsistence and cultural purposes because no actual harm was
done by Defendant. . . .
 
11. For the above reasons, Mr. Palama's activities are
established native Hawaiian customs or traditions that
 require this Court's constitutional protection.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
As an initial matter, the circuit court utilized an
 
"actual harm" test which was subsequently rejected by the Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court in Pratt II , issued after the circuit court
 
dismissed this case. Although the State appears to take issue
 
with the circuit court's balancing analysis, it does not provide
 any argument regarding the circuit court's use of the "actual
 
harm" test.20 We conclude that even under the totality of the
 
circumstances test articulated in Pratt II, the circuit court did
 not err in dismissing this case given the record. 
As covered above, the circuit court did not err, based
 
on this record, in concluding that Palama's pig hunting on the
 subject property was a customary or traditional practice. If
 Palama's conduct was unreasonable, however, the State's interest
 in regulation would prevail. 
Pratt II , 127 Hawai 'i at 217, 277 
P.3d at 311. The circuit court found and concluded that Palama
 reasonably exercised his privilege. There is substantial
 
20
 The circuit court dismissed this case on April 26, 2012. Pratt II
 
was issued several weeks later, on May 11, 2012. 
The briefs on appeal in this
case were filed after Pratt II  was issued. 
17
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
evidence in the record supporting the circuit court's
 
determination that Palama hunted in a reasonable manner. 
Palama entered the subject property on foot at 7 a.m. 
in the morning and did not carry any guns. According to Palama, there were no fence lines and nothing to indicate that the property is privately owned by the Robinson Family. There is no evidence that there were other people in the area that Palama hunted. The State stipulated that pigs are a nuisance to Kaua
'i's landscape and agriculture. According to Dr. Osorio, in 
addition to being a subsistence activity, pig hunting was a traditional resource management technique used to keep the pig population down and prevent further destruction of taro and sweet potato patches. Palama was pig hunting in an area around his taro patch. 
On this record, the circuit court did not err in
 
finding that there was nothing unreasonable about the way Palama
 hunted pig in this case.
 
The circuit court also concluded in COL 8 that
 
competing interests were "reconciled." The State, the Attorney
 General, and the Robinson Family all appear to stress that the
 State's preeminent interest is to maintain public safety. In its
 opening brief on appeal, the State makes only vague reference to
 public safety as a reason for enforcing hunting regulations. The
 Attorney General urges this court to consider public safety in
 its analysis, and the Robinson Family contends that the circuit
 court's ruling promotes lawlessness.
21
 
The difficulty in this case is that the State failed to
 
provide any evidence to the circuit court of potential dangers,
 harms or concerns that the relevant statutes seek to address. 
21
 Both the Robinson Family and the Attorney General argue that this
court's affirmation of the circuit court's decision would amount to an
 
unprecedented expansion of the traditional and customary practices doctrine,
endanger the public, and promote lawlessness. For example, the Attorney
General argues that the safety risk becomes much greater if the native
Hawaiian custom or tradition were "more broadly defined to include pig hunting
with firearms" and warns that regulating hunting on public land would be in
jeopardy if we affirm. We decline to address circumstances not in the record
 in this case. We reiterate that Palama used dogs and a knife, not a gun, that
there is no evidence in the record that he hunted in an unsafe manner, and
that our task is to determine whether the circuit court erred on the record
 before it.
 
18
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For example, this case is unlike Pratt II, where a representative
 
from the DLNR testified for the prosecution about the purpose of
 the park regulations involved in that case. In this case, based
 on the evidence and arguments before it, the circuit court was
 left to balance Palama's rights against "the western doctrine of
 'property'" and "our modern system of land tenure" and not any
 specific regulatory purpose.
22 See COL 9. Although we agree
 
that hunting can be a dangerous activity and the State certainly
 has a valid interest in protecting public safety, we cannot
 decide this case based on an argument that the State waived and

 
for which the record is devoid of evidence. See Moses, 102
 
Hawai'i at 456, 77 P.3d at 947 (stating the general rule that if 
a party fails to raise an argument at trial, that argument will
 be deemed to be waived on appeal). 
Pratt II and State v. Armitage, 132 Hawai
'i 36, 319 
P.3d 1044 (2014), both cases involving defendants who argued the
 Hanapi defense to violations of administrative regulations, are
 instructive for our purposes here.
23 In both cases, the State
 
presented evidence regarding the purpose of the applicable
 
22
 "[T]he regulatory power provided in article XII, section 7 does not
justify summary extinguishment of such rights by the State merely because they
are deemed inconsistent with generally understood elements of the westerndoctrine of 'property.'" PASH, 79 Hawai' i at 442, 903 P.2d at 1263. 
23
 In Pratt II, the defendant was cited for visiting a closed area of 
the Kalalau Valley in the Na  Pali Coast State Wilderness Park on Kaua' i. 
Pratt II, 127 Hawai' i at 207-08, 277 P.3d at 301-02. Pratt claimed that he 
was not illegally camping but was taking care of the heiau in the park as hisancestors had done. Id. at 208-09, 277 P.3d at 302-03. The State argued that
its right to regulate in order to "protect the health and safety of thepublic" and "preserve the natural environment" should prevail, and the trialcourt concluded that the balancing analysis weighed in favor of the State.Id. at 210, 277 P.3d at 304. On appeal, the Hawai' i Supreme Court held that
Pratt's interest in conducting his activities without a permit did notoutweigh the State's interest in limiting the number of visitors to KalalauValley, thus, Pratt's activities did not fall under constitutional protection.Id. at 218, 277 P.3d at 312.
Most recently in Armitage, three defendants were charged with
unlawfully entering the Kaho' olawe Island Reserve in violation of HAR § 13­
261-10, which prohibits entrance absent specific authorization from theKaho'olawe Island Reserve Commission. 132 Hawai' i at 40-41, 319 P.3d at 1048­
49. On appeal, the Hawai' i Supreme Court, having assumed that the defendants
satisfied the three-part Hanapi test, concluded that the State's interests inpublic safety prevailed because the regulation is "intended to limit theexposure of individuals to potential safety hazards in the Reserve[,]" and thedefendants made no attempt to obtain lawful entry into the Reserve. Id. at 
54-55, 319 P.3d at 1062-63. 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
regulations, the harms they intended to prevent, and the State's 
interests in enforcement, and the trial court in both cases concluded that the State's interests prevailed over those of the defendants. Pratt II, 127 Hawai
'i at 209, 277 P.3d at 303; 
Armitage, 132 Hawai 'i at 44-45, 319 P.3d at 1052-53. On appeal 
in these cases, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that the State's 
interest in regulating the activity conducted by the defendants outweighed the defendants' interest in performing the activities, especially where an avenue existed to perform the activity within the applicable regulations, and the defendants made no effort to comply with those procedures. Pratt II, 127 Hawai
'i at 218, 277 
P.3d at 312; Armitage, 132 Hawai 'i at 54-55, 319 P.3d at 1062-63. 
These cases stand in stark contrast to the present appeal, where the State has failed to present any evidence whatsoever regarding the statutory purpose or the concerns addressed by HRS § 183D-26. 
Finally, we address the State's challenge to the
 
circuit court's FOF 19 and COL 9, in which the circuit court
 determined that the State's regulation of Palama's conduct
 amounts to a blanket prohibition or extinguishment of his
 protected practice on the subject property.
 
On appeal, the State argues that FOF 19 is clearly
 
erroneous and COL 9 is wrong because "[a]ll Palama has to do is
 ask the landowner, or get a hunting license and hunt in the
 proper place." In the alternative, the State argues that even if
 the private landowner denies access, there is no blanket
 prohibition or summary extinguishment of Palama's rights because
 he can easily hunt in nearby State-regulated hunting areas. The
 Attorney General and the Robinson Family reiterate this argument
 in their amicus briefs. Palama responds that under HRS § 183D-26
 "private property owners would then be delegated the absolute
 power to grant or deny Native Hawaiians their constitutional
 privileges." 
The circuit court carefully tailored FOF 19 and COL 9
 
to address only Palama's right to hunt pig on the subject
 property. Our analysis focuses on whether the State's
 enforcement of HRS § 183D-26 and § 708-815 in this case operates
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
as a prohibition on Palama's pig hunting on the subject property,
 
not hunting in general on private or public property. 
Our review of the relevant case law and legislative
 
history leads us to the conclusion that the circuit court was
 correct in concluding, on the record in this case, that the
 State's efforts to regulate Palama's pig hunting on the subject
 property (by requiring permission from the private land owner) in
 effect operates as a summary extinguishment of Palama's
 constitutionally protected right to hunt pig on the subject
 property. 
In PASH, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court declared that 
the reasonable exercise of ancient Hawaiian usage is
entitled to protection under article XII, section 7. See 
Pele, 73 Haw. at 618–21, 837 P.2d at 1269–72 (holding that
rights primarily associated with residence in a particularahupua'a under HRS § 7–1 might have extended beyond those
bounds through ancient Hawaiian custom preserved in HRS
§ 1–1); id. at 620, 837 P.2d at 1272 (holding that article
XII, section 7 reaffirmed “all such rights”). Traditional and customary rights are properly examined against the lawof property as it has developed in this state. Thus, theregulatory power provided in article XII, section 7 does notjustify summary extinguishment of such rights by the Statemerely because they are deemed inconsistent with generallyunderstood elements of the western doctrine of “property.” 
79 Hawai 'i at 442, 903 P.2d at 1263 (emphasis added). The court 
in PASH later noted that "[o]ur examination of the relevant legal
 
developments in Hawaiian history leads us to the conclusion that
 the western concept of exclusivity is not universally applicable

 
in Hawai 'i." Id. at 447, 903 P.2d at 1268 (citations omitted). 
Further, review of the history surrounding the
 
enactment of article XII, section 7 supports a conclusion that a
 landowner's right to exclude may not in itself prevent the
 exercise of customary and traditional practices. 
The Committee decided to add this new section to the
 
Constitution in order to reaffirm, for descendants of native
Hawaiians, rights customarily and traditionally exercised
for subsistence, cultural and religious purposes. Aware and
 
concerned about past and present actions by private
landowners, large corporations, ranches, large estates,
hotels, and government entities which preclude native
Hawaiians from following subsistence practices traditionally
used by their ancestors, your Committee proposed this new
section to provide the State with the power to protect these
rights and to prevent any interference with the exercise of
these rights. Moreover, your Committee decided to provide
language which gives the State the power to regulate these
rights. Your Committee did not intend these rights to be
 
21
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
indiscriminate or abusive to others. While your Committee
recognizes that, historically and presently, native
Hawaiians have a deep love and respect for the land, called
aloha aina, reasonable regulation is necessary to prevent
possible abuse as well as interference with these rights. 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 57, reprinted in 1 PROCEEDINGS OF THE
 
CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION OF HAWAII OF 1978, at 639 (emphases
 added). Delegates expressed that the amendment was important
 "since the large landowners, who basically are 10 to 12
 corporations and estates and who own almost 90 percent of all
 private lands, have intruded upon, interfered with and refused to
 recognized such rights." Comm. Whole Rep. No. 12, id. at 1016. 
This history informs our analysis of Palama's claimed right in
 this case. 
Here, the language of HRS § 183D-26 gives the Robinson
 
Family, not the state, all of the power to grant or deny access
 to Palama. Without permission, Palama, who possessed a valid
 hunting permit, apparently could not avail himself of any
 regulatory process to seek to engage in his customary and
 traditional practice of pig hunting mauka of his taro patch on
 the subject property.
24 To say that Palama must obtain
 
permission from the landowner or else hunt on public land
 frustrates the protections afforded by HRS §§ 1-1 and 7-1 and
 article XII, section 7, which, in part, were adopted to protect
 native Hawaiian rights to continue traditional and customary
 practices in the areas they had been practiced. Thus, we
 conclude that FOF 19 is not clearly erroneous and that COL 9 is
 not wrong based on the record in this case. 
Our review of Palama's interests, as established by
 
evidence and testimony, and the State's interests, of which there
 is no evidence in the record, leads us to the conclusion that, in
 view of the totality of the circumstances established in this
 
24
 In contrast, in both Pratt II and Armitage, the Hawai' i Supreme
Court took into account that the defendants could practice their traditional
and customary rights within the bounds of law by applying for and obtainingthe relevant permits. See Pratt II, 127 Hawai' i at 218, 277 P.3d at 312
(considering that the defendant could obtain a camping permit or apply for acuratorship to work with the DLNR); Armitage, 132 Hawai' i at 55, 319 P.3d at
1063 (highlighting that defendants could apply for authorization to enter theReserve). 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
case, the circuit court did not err in balancing the respective
 
interests of Palama and the State. Absent any evidence of the
 State's public safety interest, the circuit court did not err in
 concluding that Palama's interests prevailed over the State's
 interest.
 
V. Conclusion

 
Accordingly, for the reasons set forth in this opinion,
 
we affirm the circuit court's dismissal of the criminal charges
 
against Palama in this case.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, December 11, 2015. 
Tracy Murakami,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
(John H. Murphy,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, on the briefs) for
Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge

Daniel G. Hempey, (Hempey & Meyers),
(Timothy J. Tobin,
Court-appointed Attorney
on the answering brief), for Defendant-Appellee.
 Associate Judge

Associate Judge
Robert T. Nakatsuji,

Deputy Solicitor General,
Department of the Attorney General,
for amicus curiae Attorney General
of the State of Hawai
'i.
 
Eric A. James,
Tim Lui-Kwan,
Arsima A. Muller,
on the amicus curiae brief for Movants,
Robinson Family Partners and Gay & Robinson, Inc. 
23
 