NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0001084
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
STEPHEN BAPTISTA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
PUNA DIVISION
 
(CR. NO. 3P109-00106)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Steven Baptista (
Baptista) appeals
 
from the Judgment of Conviction & Sentence entered on November
 
29, 2011, in the District Court of the Third Circuit, Puna
 Division (District Court).
1
 
Baptista was found guilty of Sexual Assault in the
 
Fourth Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 707-733(1)(a) (1993).
 
On appeal, Baptista contends that: (1) there is
 
insufficient evidence to support his conviction; (2) the
 
unavailability of several transcripts mandate reversal of his
 conviction; (3) the District Court erred by allowing the State to
 call a rebuttal witness; and (4) he received ineffective
 assistance of trial counsel.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Baptista's points of error as follows:
 
1
 The Honorable Harry P. Freitas presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(1) Baptista argues that there is insufficient
 
evidence to support his conviction because the State failed to
 
establish the requisite mens rea and/or that the complaining
 witness did not consent to Baptista's alleged touching of her.
 
The test for sufficiency of the evidence is whether 
there is "substantial evidence" for each material element of the offense. State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai
'i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 
322, 330-31 (2007) (quoting State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 248-49, 831 P.2d 924, 931 (1992)). Substantial evidence is "credible 
evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to 
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Id. at 158, 166 P.3d at 331 (quoting Batson, 73 Haw. at 248-49, 831 P.2d at 931) (brackets omitted). The test on appeal is not whether guilt has been established beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Bayly, 118 Hawai
'i 1, 6, 185 P.3d 186, 191 (2008). 
In a bench trial, the trial judge is entitled "to make 
all reasonable and rational inferences under the facts in evidence, including circumstantial evidence." Batson, 73 Haw. at 
249, 831 P.2d at 931. It is not the role of the appellate court to weigh credibility or resolve conflicting evidence. State v. 
Eastman, 81 Hawai
'i 131, 139, 913 P.2d 57, 65 (1996); accord 
State v. Ferm, 94 Hawai 'i 17, 27, 7 P.3d 193, 203 (App. 2000); 
State v. Wallace, 80 Hawai 'i 382, 418, 910 P.2d 695, 731 (1996). 
In considering sufficiency, we must view the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution. Bayly, 118 Hawai
'i at 
6, 185 P.3d at 191. Here, we must determine whether substantial evidence supports the elements of fourth-degree sexual assault. 
HRS § 707-733(1)(a) provides:
 
§ 707-733. Sexual assault in the fourth degree. (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the fourth
degree if:
 
(a) 	The person knowingly subjects another person to
sexual contact by compulsion or causes another
person to have sexual contact with the actor by
compulsion.
 
Compulsion is defined as the absence of consent. HRS
 
§ 707-700 (1993). The material elements of fourth-degree sexual
 
assault are, in their basic form: (1) a knowing mens rea; (2)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sexual contact; and (3) absence of consent. Baptista contends
 
that the State failed to prove the first and third of these
 elements, arguing both that (a) the complaining witness had
 consented to being touched, in the context of Baptista's
 evaluation of her for boxing training, and (b) that there was
 insufficient evidence that he knew that the complaining witness
 did not consent to the reported touching, under the
 circumstances, because she did not testify that she complained or
 told him to stop his actions.
 
The complaining witness's testimony included that
 
Baptista inquired about whether the complaining witness had any
 problems with her joints; in response, with respect to her ankles
 and her groin area, she told him that "it pops." The complaining
 witness testified that she laid down on a cot at Baptista's
 suggestion so that he could "stretch out" her leg. However, as
 she lay down on the cot, Baptista touched the groin area where
 her leg "folds in between." She felt very uncomfortable. She
 testified that her reaction was to get up fast and that she said,
 "I need to go to work now." She said that she expressed her
 discomfort to Baptista by jumping up and looking uncomfortable
 and frightened. She further testified that, as she was standing,
 Baptista then placed both of his hands on the back of her legs
 and moved them up the inside of her shorts until he grabbed her
 buttocks with both hands. We conclude that it was reasonable for
 the trial court to infer that the complaining witness did not
 consent to further touching by Baptista after she quickly got up
 from a cot looking frightened and stated that she had to go to
 work, that she had conveyed this lack of consent to Baptista
 through her words and actions – although she did not specifically
 tell him to stop touching her – and that at that point, Baptista
 knew that the complaining witness did not consent to any further
 intimate touching. According to the complaining witness's
 testimony, at this point knowing that the complaining witness did
 not consent to be touched, Baptista again touched the complaining
 witness, who was now standing, by rubbing both his hands up the
 back of her legs, under her shorts, until he touched her
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
buttocks. Given the testimony describing Baptista's acts and
 
conduct, and inferences fairly drawn from all of the
 circumstances, we conclude that there was sufficient evidence
 presented that Baptista acted with the requisite intent to be
 convicted of sexual assault in the fourth degree. 
(2) Baptista argues that his conviction should be
 
reversed because the transcripts of proceedings held on December
 15, 2009, January 10, January 16, March 30, May 18, September 7,
 and October 26, 2010 are unavailable due to a malfunction of the
 court's audio/visual recording system.
 
In State v. Bates, 84 Hawai
'i 211, 214, 933 P.2d 48, 51 
(1997), the defendant claimed that appellate counsel could not know whether errors were committed during the inaudible portions of the trial because of numerous inaudible entries in a transcript. The court in Bates held that "where the transcripts of a defendant's trial are incomplete because they omit portions of the trial proceedings, such omissions do not mandate reversal unless the defendant can demonstrate specific prejudice." The court also stated that, in cases where the entire transcript could not be prepared, the parties must show compliance with Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 10(c) or show 
that error was committed by the trial court. Id. at 217, 933 
P.2d at 54. "[A] defendant has a duty to reconstruct, modify, or supplement the missing portions of the record, and a failure to make a reasonable attempt to do so precludes him or her from alleging reversible error." Id. 
HRAP Rule 10(c) states:
 
(c) Statement of the evidence of proceedings
 
when no report made or when transcript unavailable.
 
If the reporter refuses, becomes unable, or fails to
transcribe all or any portion of the evidence or oral
proceedings after proper request, the party may (i)
request that transcription of the reporter's notes be
submitted to another reporter for transcription where
feasible; or (ii) prepare a statement of the evidence
or proceedings from the best available means,
including the party's recollection or uncertified
transcripts or reporter's notes. The statement shall
be served on the opposing party(ies), who may serve
objections or propose amendments thereto within 10
days after service. Thereupon the statement and any
objections or proposed amendments shall be submitted
to the court or agency appealed from for settlement
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and approval and as settled and approved shall be
included by the clerk of the court appealed from in
the record on appeal.
 
In his Amended Opening Brief, filed on October 18,
 
2012, Baptista's appellate counsel states that he faxed a letter
 
to prior counsel on September 25, 2012, but no response was
 received by the time the Opening Brief was filed. He further
 represents that "Counsel will supplement the record when and if a
 response is received."
 
Baptista's Reply Brief, filed January 10, 2013, does
 
not mention any subsequent effort to supplement the record in
 accordance with HRAP Rule 10(c). Nearly a year after Baptista
 filed his Amended Opening Brief, the record on appeal does not
 show any attempt to supplement the record on appeal pursuant to
 HRAP Rule 10(c). There is nothing in the record to demonstrate a
 reasonable attempt to reconstruct the record. Baptista does not
 allege any specific prejudice as a result of the transcripts
 being unavailable, relying solely on the number of missing
 transcripts, without reference to the nature of the proceedings,
 court minutes, attorney's notes, or any other information or
 argument whatsoever. It appears that the testimony of all key
 witnesses is available.
2 Under these circumstances, we reject
 
Baptista's argument that the missing transcripts warrant reversal
 of his conviction.
 
(3) The State was allowed to call a rebuttal witness
 
for impeachment purposes. During cross-examination, Baptista
 denied that he offered a massage to the complaining witness, her
 aunt, or anyone else in the past. The State's rebuttal witness
 was offered to demonstrate that Baptista had given the rebuttal
 witness a massage at Baptista's home and, hence, Baptista was not
 telling the truth. The defense raised objections based on
 relevance and prejudice grounds, especially to the extent that
 testimony might be elicited as to prior bad acts by Baptista. 
The District Court, in allowing some rebuttal testimony, made
 
2
 The trial court minutes indicate that none of the missing
transcripts involve the testimony of witnesses presented during the trial.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
clear that the State would only be allowed to address Baptista's
 
truthfulness regarding not giving prior massages, but would not
 be allowed to get into any details of the encounter between
 Baptista and the rebuttal witness.
 
On appeal, Baptista argues that the testimony was
 
improper pursuant to Rule 613(b) of the Hawaii Rules of Evidence
 (HRE) and that the testimony was more prejudicial than probative.
 
HRE Rule 613(b) provides:
 
(b) Extrinsic evidence of prior inconsistent
statement of witness. Extrinsic evidence of a prior
inconsistent statement by a witness is not admissible
unless, on direct or cross-examination, (1) the
circumstances of the statement have been brought to the
attention of the witness, and (2) the witness has been asked
whether the witness made the statement.
 
Baptista did not point to where in the record he
 
objected to the testimony on the ground of HRE Rule 613(b). The
 
record on appeal does not contain an objection by Baptista to the
 rebuttal testimony on the ground that it violated HRE Rule
 613(b). Therefore, the point of error is waived as to that
 ground. HRAP Rule 28(b)(4). Even if the point of error is not
 waived, HRE Rule 613(b) is inapplicable. The rebuttal witness
 did not testify about any statements made by Baptista. She
 merely stated that Baptista had performed massage on her. See
 
also HRE Rule 608(b) ("Specific instances of the conduct of a
 witness, for the purpose of attacking the witness' credibility,
 if probative of untruthfulness, may be inquired into on cross-
examination of the witness and, in the discretion of the court,
 may be proved by extrinsic evidence.").
 
Baptista's unsupported assertion that the rebuttal
 
testimony was more prejudicial than probative is without merit.
 
(4) Baptista argues that his trial counsel was 
ineffective because: (1) trial counsel failed to object to a violation of Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 48; (2) trial 
counsel failed to call necessary witnesses to properly present Baptista's case; (3) trial counsel falsely or ineffectively counseled Baptista to waive his right to a jury trial; and (4) 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial counsel failed to raise proper objections to hearsay and
 
other inadmissible evidence.
 
Baptista provides no evidence, specific arguments,
 
names of witnesses or nature of testimony, citations to the
 record, or other support of any kind for these contentions. Upon
 review of the record, we conclude that these contentions are
 without merit.
 
For these reasons, the District Court's November 29,
 
2011 Judgment of Conviction & Sentence is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 13, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Lars Robert Isaacson 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Gregory E. GimenezDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7
 