NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
  The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided. 1NO. CAAP-15-0000532 AND CAAP-15-0000534
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
CAAP-15-0000532
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellant v.
JAYLORD PARRAS, Defendant-Appellee
(CR. NO. 14-1-0313)
AND
CAAP-15-0000534
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellant v.
JAYLORD PARRAS, Defendant-Appellee
(CR. NO. 13-1-1603)
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai #i (State) appeals
from the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting
Defendant's Motion to Suppress Statements ( FOF/COL/Order), filed
on June 19, 2015, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1
(circuit court).  By way of the FOF/COL/Order, the circuit court
ruled that Defendant-Appellee Jaylord Parras ( Parras) was
improperly arrested without a warrant on October 28, 2013, and
therefore suppressed statements Parras made following the arrest. 
In particular, the circuit court ruled that Parras's arrest did
not fall under an exception provided by Hawaii Revised Statutes
(HRS) § 803-5 (2014).NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
  HRS § 803-5 provides:2
§803-5  By police officer without warrant.
 (a) A police
officer or other officer of justice, may, without warrant,
arrest and detain for examination any person when the
officer has probable cause to believe that such person has
committed any offense, whether in the officer's presence or
otherwise.
(b) For purposes of this section, a police officer has
probable cause to make an arrest when the facts and
circumstances within the officer's knowledge and of which
the officer has reasonably trustworthy information are
sufficient in themselves to warrant a person of reasonable
caution in the belief that a crime has been or is being
committed.
2On appeal, the State contends that (1) the circuit
court abused its discretion by not allowing Detective Pinyo
Phromsiri ( Detective Phromsiri ) to testify at the hearing on the
Defendant's Motion to Suppress, such that the FOF/COL/Order
should be vacated in its entirety and remanded for an evidentiary
hearing; and (2) the circuit court's Findings of Fact ( FOF) 6, 7,
and 8 are clearly erroneous. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve the
State's points of error as follows and affirm as set forth below.
(1) Preclusion of Detective Phromsiri's testimony
In this case, the complainant contends that she was
sexually assaulted by Parras, her half-brother.  It is
uncontested that the complainant met with Detective Phromsiri on
August 26, 2013, for a tape recorded interview, and then again on
October 3, 2013, at which time she identified Parras in a
photographic lineup as the individual who had sexually assaulted
her.  The parties do not dispute that as of October 3, 2013, the
police had probable cause to arrest Parras.  It is also
undisputed that Parras was arrested twenty-five days later, on
October 28, 2013, without a warrant.
The State contends that although Parras was arrested
without a warrant, the arrest falls within a warrantless arrest
exception under HRS § 803-5.2  The State argues that Detective
Phromsiri's testimony would have shed light as to why Parras'sNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3arrest fell within the HRS § 803-5 exception.  Specifically, the
State asserts Detective Phromsiri would have testified as to the
obstacles he faced in effectuating Parras's arrest.  The State
thus argues that the circuit court abused its discretion by not
allowing Detective Phromsiri to testify.  The State also contests
the circuit court's conclusions of law ( COL) 4 through 9, which
state: 
4. Between the time the Complainant selected the
Defendant in the photographic line-up on October 3, 2013 and
the time of the Defendant's arrest on October 28, 2013, the
police had no obstacle preventing them from making the
arrest of the Defendant. 
5. By waiting until October 28, 2013 to arrest the
Defendant, the police also waited a significant amount of
time before making the warrantless arrest.
6. The warrantless arrest in this case violated the
warrant requirement of HRS § 803-1 and was therefore an
illegal arrest. 
7. The exception to the arrest warrant requirement
provided by HRS 803-5 did not apply to the arrest made in
this case. 
8. The Defendant's October 28, 2013 statement to
Detective Phromsiri, made within hours of his arrest, was
obtained as a result of the illegal, warrantless arrest. 
9. Therefore, Defendant's October 28, 2013 statement
to Detective Phromsiri must be suppressed. 
(Citation omitted.)
The crux of the State's argument is its reliance on
State v. Keawe , 107 Hawai #i 1, 108 P.3d 304 (2005), in which the
Hawai#i Supreme Court analyzed the application of HRS § 803-5. 
In Keawe, the defendant provided two "lap dances" to an
undercover police officer at a nude-dancing establishment on July
25, 2002.  Id. at 3, 108 P.3d at 306.  She was not arrested that
night, and instead was arrested twenty days later without a
warrant.  Id.  The supreme court held that the defendant's arrest
was unlawful.  Id. at 4, 108 P.3d at 307.
As explained by the supreme court in Keawe, HRS § 803-1
(2014) sets out the general rule, which provides that: "No arrest
of any person shall be made without first obtaining a warrant or
other process therefor from some magistrate, except in the casesNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4provided in this chapter or otherwise provided by law."  107
Hawai#i at 5, 108 P.3d at 308.  In turn, HRS § 803-5 provides an
exception to HRS § 803-1, but one which has a "temporal
restriction" on the police's power to make a warrantless arrest. 
Id. at 5-6, 108 P.3d at 308-09 (emphasis added).
The supreme court also reasoned that HRS §§ 803-2
through 803-4 provide exceptions to HRS § 803-1, and like those
sections, an " element of immediacy is present in HRS § 803-5 as
well, allowing a warrantless arrest where the police observe a
crime in progress or develop probable cause to believe a crime
has just occurred."  
Id. at 6, 108 P.3d at 309 (emphasis added).
As the State points out, the Keawe opinion also notes
that "[w]e limit our holding to those cases, like the instant
case, in which the police have probable cause to arrest, have no
obstacle preventing them from making the arrest, and wait a
significant amount of time before making the arrest."  Id.
(emphasis added).  The Keawe opinion further states: 
Other types of delays may be proper: for example, if the
delay between the development of probable cause and the
arrest occurs because the police are attempting to identify,
locate, or apprehend a defendant, the arrest will satisfy 
HRS § 803–5. However, if the police believe that waiting
days or weeks to arrest a defendant is the most appropriate
action under the circumstances, as occurred in the instant
case, then the police cannot rely upon HRS § 803–5 and must
obtain a warrant pursuant to HRS § 803–1.
Id. (footnote omitted).
In the instant case, the State contends that, unlike
the police officer in  Keawe, Detective Phromsiri was confronted
with obstacles in effectuating Parras's arrest after probable
cause was established because Parras could not be located.  Thus,
the State asserts Keawe is distinguishable because the defendant
easily could have been arrested after the lap dance, whereas here
Parras could not be located for some time and the delay in
arresting him was not for tactical reasons.
Although the State makes a reasonable argument given
part of the discussion in Keawe, we believe the "temporal
restriction" in allowing for a warrantless arrest under HRS NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5§ 803-5 cannot be ignored and is of primary concern.  Indeed, in
State v. Line, 121 Hawai #i 74, 214 P.3d 613 (2009), the supreme
court further analyzed its ruling in Keawe and held that police
improperly attempted to arrest an individual without a warrant
sixty-three hours after there was probable cause to arrest him,
even where the individual had clearly evaded the police efforts
to arrest him in the prior days.  The supreme court stated in
relevant part that: "63 hours between the inception of probable
cause and the July 15, 2005 attempted arrest afforded police
ample time to obtain an arrest warrant and they were plainly
required to do so before invading Petitioner's home."  Id. at 84-
85, 214 P.3d at 623-24.
Given our analysis of  Keawe and Line, and the
circumstances established in the record, we conclude that the
circuit court did not abuse its discretion in not allowing
Detective Phromsiri to testify.  The circuit court admitted into
evidence and considered exhibits that included the C.I.D. Closing
Report of Detective Phromsiri and a Judicial Determination of
Probable Cause for the Extended Restraint of Liberty of
Warrantless Arrestee (which included Detective Phromsiri's Arrest
Affidavit).  
The circuit court also received and accepted the
State's offer of proof as to the obstacles Detective Phromsiri
confronted.  The purpose of an offer of proof is to "provide an
adequate record for appellate review and to assist the trial
court in ruling on the admissibility of evidence."  State v.
Pulse, 83 Hawai #i 229, 248, 925 P.2d 797, 816 (1996) (emphasis
omitted).  Importantly, the circuit court asked the State for an
offer of proof:
THE COURT: Can I have an offer of proof. 
[STATE]: He will testify to the course of his investigation
in this case, that he did meet with the complaining witness
in August. 
It took him some time to generate a photographic lineup, and
then as soon as he -- NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6Following this exchange, the circuit court confirmed
with the parties that the complainant was interviewed on August
26, 2013, that the complainant identified Parras in a
photographic lineup on October 3, 2013, that there was probable
cause for the arrest as of October 3, 2013, and that Parras was
arrested on October 28, 2013.  The circuit court again asked the
State for an offer of proof.
THE COURT: Okay. So what's the further offer of proof? 
[STATE]: Your Honor, well basically, the detective will
testify to the facts that are included in the State's
memorandum in opposition, that he did make multiple attempts
between October 3rd and October 28th. 
THE COURT: Tried to find him at his workplace a couple of
times? 
[STATE]: That's correct, and then he tried to locate[] him
at his girlfriend's home, but then he didn't have the
address there, and when he finally received that address, he
was informed by the complainant and the mother that this
defendant was now back at home. 
THE COURT: So as you say, basically the facts you set forth
in your -- is it your statement of facts? 
[STATE]: Yes, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: That's part of your memorandum in opposition? 
[STATE]: That's correct. 
THE COURT: That's what he would testify to? 
[STATE]: That's correct, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: Anything else? 
[STATE]: Nothing further from the State on that. 
After the offers of proof, the circuit court stated
that "[b]ased on the offer that the State has made, I don't need
to hear from the detective as far as I'm concerned."
On this record, the circuit court did not abuse its
discretion when it decided it did not need to have Detective
Phromsiri testify.  Probable cause was established on October 3,
2013, and Parras was arrested without a warrant twenty-five days
later, on October 28, 2013.  Even if Detective PhromsiriNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7testified to his attempts to locate Parras during those twenty-
five days, and even though the delay in locating Parras was an
obstacle to arresting him, we cannot say that a warrantless
arrest twenty-five days later is appropriate under HRS § 803-5. 
Rather, under Keawe and Line, the police were required to obtain
a warrant by the time Parras was arrested in this case.
(2) Alleged erroneous findings of fact
As the State notes in its opening brief, its challenge
to FOF's 6, 7, and 8 appear to be immaterial to the outcome of
this appeal.  We therefore decline to address the State's
challenge to FOF's 6, 7, and 8, without prejudice to the State
addressing those issues in the future if necessary.
Therefore,
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Findings of Fact,
Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting Defendant's Motion to
Suppress Statements filed on June 19, 2015, in the Circuit Court
of the First Circuit is affirmed as set forth above.  
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 16, 2016.
On the briefs:
Brandon H. Ito, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, 
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.Presiding Judge
Taryn R. Tomasa,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge
Associate Judge