NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000985
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
PATRICK DEGUAIR, JR., Defendant-Appellant, and
MALUFAFO VITO, Defendant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-0336)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Patrick Deguair Jr. (Deguair),
 
appeals from the May 21, 2014 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
 
(Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (Circuit Court).
1
 
On appeal, Deguair argues that: (1) the admission at
 
trial of Jermaine Duckworth's (Duckworth) statements violated his
 right to confrontation, (2) the admission of hearsay from his
 alleged co-conspirators lacked sufficient indicia of reliability,
 (3) double jeopardy should have prohibited the second trial after egregious prosecutorial misconduct during the first trial denied his right to a fair trial, (4) Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) failed to show a sufficient chain of custody for 
the Chevy Blazer, and (5) the consecutive terms of imprisonment imposed by the Circuit Court constituted an abuse of discretion as well as cruel and unusual punishment. Deguair asks this Court to reverse the Judgment or, in the alternative, vacate his conviction and remand the case for a new trial. 
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
A.
 
This case arises out of the invasion of the M a'ili home 
of Robert McMeechan (Robert) and his family on November 27, 2007. Also living at the home were Aaron McMeechan (Aaron), Robert's son; Julie Ann DeRego (Julie Ann), Aaron's girlfriend; Heather McMeechan (Heather), Robert's daughter, and her boyfriend Clifford Mattos (Clifford). Marina Mattos (Marina), Clifford and Julie Ann's mother, were visiting. 
The following is taken from the evidence presented by
 
the State; Deguair testified in his own behalf and denied any
 involvement in the planning or execution of the robbery.
 
During the evening of November 26, 2007, Deguair, 
carrying a backpack, Duckworth, and Christopher Thurston (Thurston), arrived at the 
'Ewa Beach home of a friend, "Pecpec." 
Deguair spoke of a plan to take a safe "in Waianae." Malufafo Vito (Vito) who was already at Pecpec's house, was asked to participate in the robbery. Deguair's idea was to impersonate DEA agents and Vito was to go into a particular bedroom and grab the safe. Deguair, Duckworth, Thurston and Vito were to wear DEA shirts and caps. Deguair, Duckworth, and Thurston would be wearing ski masks because "they used to go there." All wore latex gloves. Deguair also supplied two guns: one was silver/chrome colored equipped with a laser sight, the other was a black revolver. They left in a black Blazer, with Deguair driving. 
At approximately 1:48 a.m. on November 27, 2007, the
 
four men, wearing ski masks and shirts and hats with "DEA"
 printed on them, drove up in the faded Chevy Blazer. Three of
 the men entered the house, pointed guns, claimed to be "DEA" and
 directed the occupants of the house to lay on the floor. One of
 the four, later identified as Deguair, holding a silver-colored
 gun with a laser sight asked Aaron for his identification and
 tried to handcuff him. Deguair pushed Julie Ann and Marina to
 the floor, gave Heather "a little shove" and told her to get on
 the ground.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The tallest intruder was seen walking out of Aaron and
 
Julie Ann's bedroom with her safe.2 This person, who had no ski
 
mask, and was later identified as Vito, carried a black revolver,
 
approached Robert, put the gun to Robert's head, and asked Robert
 if he wanted to die.
3 Deguair--the person with the laser-sighted
 
gun--told Vito to calm down and not to hurt "the old man."
 
The third intruder, described as heavyset, "sloppy
 
looking," and later identified as Duckworth, was standing by and
 guarding the door. The fourth, later identified as Thurston,
 stayed near the Blazer and took the safe from Vito, placing it in
 the car.
 
The intruders left the way they came, in the Blazer. 
As it drove off, a gunshot was heard.
4 During the trip back to 
'Ewa Beach, Deguair told them to remove the masks, caps, and 
shirts and put them in a bag. 
Police were immediately called and arrived at the scene 
within minutes. Shortly thereafter, police on patrol in the 'Ewa 
Beach area spotted a vehicle matching the witnesses' description 
5
and pursued the vehicle to "Hau Bush,"  arriving as the occupants
of the parked vehicle were in flight. Duckworth was discovered
 in the brush nearby, but the others escaped. 
Robert, Aaron, and
 
Julie Ann were taken to Hau Bush and were asked to look inside
 the vehicle and identify the items within.
6
 
2 Amongst other things, Aaron's Oakley sunglasses, car ownership
papers, money, and Christmas gifts were in the safe. Julie Ann had placed
money, watches, car ownership papers belonging to Robert and Marina, and
Clifford's coin collection into the safe. There was also marijuana and
crystal methamphetamine in the safe.
 
3
 Others testified that Vito hit Robert with the gun, but Robert
himself did not testify that he was hit. Vito denied hitting Robert at trial,
although he admitted to shoving Robert to the floor with the gun in his hand.
 
4
 Vito testified that he fired the revolver out of the Blazer window
 
during an argument with Deguair.
 
5
 Also known as Oneula Beach Park.
 
6
 Julie identified her safe, her purse, a Sony PSP handheld game
console, several jewelry items belonging to her, and "vise grip" pliers.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
On March 10, 2009, the State obtained an indictment
 
against Deguair and Vito as co-defendants. Deguair was indicted7
 
with the following offenses allegedly committed on or about
 
November 27, 2007: Counts 1-6, Robbery in the First Degree, in
 violation of HRS § 708-840 (Supp. 2012); Counts 7-12,
 Carrying/Use of Firearm in Commission of the Separate Felony of
 Robbery in the First Degree, in violation of HRS § 134-21 (2011);
 Counts 19-24, Kidnapping, in violation of HRS § 707-720 (1993);
 Counts 25-30, Carrying/Use of Firearm in Commission of the
 Separate Felony of Kidnapping, in violation of HRS § 134-21
 
8
(2011); Count 37,  Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver, in violation
of HRS § 134-25 (2011); Count 40, Burglary in the First Degree,
 in violation of HRS § 708-810 (2014); and Count 41, Carrying/Use
 of Firearm in Commission of the Separate Felony of Burglary, in
 violation of HRS § 134-21 (2011).
 
The first jury trial for Deguair commenced on July 22,

 
9 10
 2013, with the jury rendering its verdict on August 1, 2013.
7 Malufafo Vito is not a party to this appeal. Those counts in
 
which he alone was charged are omitted from this opinion.
 
8 On July 19, 2013, the Circuit Court granted the State's motion for
nolle prosequi without prejudice as to Count 37, Place to Keep Pistol or
Revolver.
 
9 On Deguair's motion, judgment of acquittal was entered on Counts
4, 6, 10, and 12.
 
10 After the first trial, the jury found Deguair guilty of Counts 1-3
and 5--Robbery in the First Degree; Counts 7-9, and 11--Carrying/Use of
Firearm in Commission of Robbery; Counts 25-30--Carrying/Use of Firearm in
Commission of Kidnapping; Counts 19-24--Kidnapping; Count 40--Burglary in the
First Degree; and Count 41--Carrying/Use of Firearm in Commission of Burglary.
 
During their deliberations, the first jury found that the
prosecution (1) did not sufficiently prove that Count 1--Robbery and Count 19­- Kidnapping were not in a continuing course of conduct or were committed with
separate intents; (2) did not sufficiently prove that Count 2--Robbery and
Count 20--Kidnapping were not in a continuing course of conduct or were
committed with separate intents; (3) did not sufficiently prove that Count 3-­Robbery and Count 21--Kidnapping were not in a continuing course of conduct or
were committed with separate intents; (4) did not sufficiently prove that
Count 5--Robbery and Count 23--Kidnapping were not in a continuing course of
conduct or were committed with separate intents. As a result, the Circuit
Court dismissed Kidnapping Counts 19, 20, 21, and 23.
 
After the close of the first trial, the Circuit Court dismissed
Use of Firearm Counts 25, 26, 27, and 29 because these Kidnapping charges were
dismissed.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Deguair moved to dismiss the case on August 9, 2013, 
arguing that by submitting an improperly redacted copy of the 
government's cooperation agreement with Vito, the trial prosecutor committed egregious misconduct that should bar retrial under the double jeopardy prohibitions of the United States and Hawai
'i Constitutions; in the alternative, Deguair asked for a 
retrial. The Circuit Court found that the prosecutor's action was "inadvertent," did not constitute misconduct, and denied the motion to dismiss. However, the Circuit Court granted Deguair's alternative request for a new trial on the basis that the jury was exposed to the fact of Duckworth's death and "the extremely prejudicial nature of such knowledge." Deguair did not appeal from the denial of his motion based on prosecutorial misconduct. 
The second jury trial commenced on February 18, 2014, 
after which Deguair was found guilty of Count 1, Robbery in the
 First Degree; Counts 7, 28, 30, and 41, Carrying/Use of Firearm
 in Commission of a Separate Felony; Counts 22 and 24, Kidnapping;
 and Count 40, Burglary in the First Degree.
11
 
On May 21, 2014, the Circuit Court sentenced Deguair as
 
follows: In Count 1--twenty years with a mandatory minimum of
 ten years for use of a firearm; Counts 7, 28, 30, and 41--twenty
 years; Counts 22 and 24--ten years with a mandatory minimum of
 five years; and Count 40--ten years with mandatory minimum of
 five years. Terms in Counts 1, 22, 24, and 40 were to run
 concurrently with each other and consecutively to terms in
 Counts 7, 28, 30, and 41 which were to run concurrent to each
 other and all terms were to run consecutively to terms imposed in
 CR. NO. 08-1-0773.
 
From this Judgment, Deguair appeals.
 
11
 The Circuit Court granted Deguair's motion for judgment of
acquittal at the close of the State's case as to Count 5--Robbery I and Count
11--Carrying/Use of Firearm in the Commission of the Separate Felony of
Robbery.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
A.
 
In his first point on appeal,12
 Deguair challenges two
orders: (1) the August 21, 2012 Order Granting in Part and
 
Denying in Part State's Motion for an Order Allowing the
 Admissibility of Certain Statements Made by Jermaine Duckworth in
 the Trial for Defendant Patrick Deguair, Jr. (Order Granting
 
13
State's Motion in Limine);  and (2) the July 25, 2013 Order
Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendant Patrick Deguair,
 Jr.'s Motion in Limine No. 1 (Order Denying Deguair's Motion in
 Limine).
14 Deguair argues that these orders violated his rights
 
12 Deguair's point on appeal does not comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4) insofar as it fails to quote the
evidence that he claims was improperly admitted. Given the multiple rulingsand the uncertain nature of the evidence challenged, it is not clear preciselywhat evidence we are reviewing and this failure alone could be the basis todisregard the point. See State v. Ortiz, 91 Hawai' i 181, 197–98, 981 P.2d
1127, 1143–44 (1999) (failure to provide record citations or substance of theevidence as basis to refuse review of point). Counsel is warned that future violations of our rules could result in sanctions, including disregard of thenoncompliant point on appeal. Nevertheless, as appellate courts in thisjurisdiction attempt to reach the merits of the appeal, we will address thispoint insofar as we are able. 
13	 The Circuit Court ruled,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the State may introduce the
following statements made by [Duckworth] during its case in
chief:
 
1. 	[Duckworth's] November 27, 2007 utterance made in the
presence of Officers Alfred Collins and Cindy
Kaneshiro under HPD report no. 07-471270.
 
2. 	[Duckworth's] two November 28, 2007 statements to
Detective Jack Snyder under HPD report no. 07-471270.
 
3. 	[Duckworth's] December 12, 2007 statement to Detective
Brian Johnson under HPD report no. 07-471270.
 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that statements made by
[Duckworth] to Julie Ann Derego, Aaron McMeechan, Heather
McMeechan, Robert McMeechan concerning the November 27, 2007
robbery are precluded.
 
The Circuit Court later reconsidered this ruling, excluding the statement in
paragraph three. See also n.16 infra.
 
14
 The Circuit Court ruled,
 
1. 	Because the Court ruled that [Duckworth's]
December 12, 2007 statement is not admissible, this
order pertains only to [Duckworth's] November 28, 2007
interviews taken at 5:19 a.m. - 5:22 a.m., and 7:17
a.m.- 7:27 a.m. 
(continued...)
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
under the Fifth, Sixth, Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendments of the 
United States Constitution and article I sections 5 and 14 of the Hawai
'i Constitution because there was insufficient evidence that 
"Deguair acted with the particular purpose of preventing Duckworth from testifying regarding" the instant robbery. 
Foundation for the admission of evidence must be shown 
by a preponderance of the evidence.
15 State v. McGriff, 76 
Hawai'i 148, 157, 871 P.2d 782, 791 (1994) (citing Bourjaily v. 
United States, 483 U.S. 171, 176 (1987)). We review the trial court's determination using the clearly erroneous standard of review. Id. 
In Giles v. California, 554 U.S. 353 (2008), the United
 
States Supreme Court reviewed the historical underpinnings of the
 "forfeiture by wrongdoing" exception to the right to confront and
 concluded that it "applies only when the defendant 'engaged or
 acquiesced in wrongdoing that was intended to, and did, procure
 the unavailability of the declarant as a witness.' Fed. Rule
 Evid. 804(b)(6). We have described this as a rule 'which
 codifies the forfeiture doctrine.'" Id. at 367 (quoting Davis v.
 
Washington, 547 U.S. 813, 833 (2006)); see also Hawaii Rules of
 Evidence Rule 804(b)(7) ("Forfeiture by wrongdoing. A statement
 offered against a party that has procured the unavailability of
 the declarant as a witness.").
 
14(...continued)
2.	 The following motions are hereby granted: paragraphs
7, 8(b), 8(c), 9, 10, 11(a)-h, and ll(j)-(k). 
3.	 The following motions are hereby denied: paragraphs
8(a), 8(d), and ll(i). 
a. 	In regard to paragraph 8(d), the motion is
denied because the State does not intend to
 present anything in particular described as
described therein.
 
15
 Deguair also argues that a higher burden of proof should be used
in determining whether or not Deguair purposely caused Duckworth's absence
when considering, de novo, whether the forfeiture by wrongdoing exception to
the rule against hearsay is applicable here. However, Deguair did not make
this argument before the Circuit Court and does not include it in his points
on appeal. HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) provides that "[p]oints not presented in
accordance with [HRAP Rule 28(b)] will be disregarded, except that the
appellate court, at its option, may notice a plain error not presented." As
 Deguair presents no binding authority for the proposition that the Circuit
Court was required to apply the clear and convincing standard of proof, we
conclude no plain error was committed.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The admissibility of Duckworth's statements was first
 
addressed by Judge Town in CR No. 08-1-0533, the prosecution of
 
Deguair for the killing of Duckworth (Murder Case). In the
 Murder Case, the prosecution moved to present statements made by
 Duckworth about the underlying facts in the instant case as
 foundation for admission of the statements and motive for the
 murder. Judge Town found, in relevant part, that:
 
12.	 On November 28, 2007, the day after his arrest,
Duckworth gave two statements to Detective Jack
Snyder. In his second statement Duckworth identified
 "Pat" as an occupant in the getaway car. "Pat" picked
him up in the same Blazer from which Duckworth and
others fled when stopped by the police. According to
Duckworth, the original plan was to commit a burglary
in Kalihi, but they eventually decided to rob Julie
Ann of a safe. Duckworth wore a black DEA shirt that
 "Pat" had given to him. All of them wore the same
 shirt. "Pat" is Defendant Patrick W. Deguair, Jr.
(Defendant).
 
13.	 On December 12, 2007, Duckworth gave a statement to
Detective Brian Johnson. In that statement Duckworth
 detailed Defendant's and [Vito's] involvement in the
robbery. After the robbery, Duckworth alleged that
Defendant broke his jaw and threatened to kill him.
Duckworth identified Defendant and Vito in separate
photographic lineups.
 
. . . .
 
15.	 On March 27, 2008, lifeguards at Yokohama Bay beach
found Duckworth's lifeless body lying on the rocks,
below a cliff, at a location several hundred yards
from Yokohama Bay beach.
 
. . . .
 
18.	 Witnesses reported to the police that during the early
morning hours of March 27, 2008, Defendant restrained
Duckworth at a Waipahu residence. At least one of
 these witnesses heard Defendant accuse Duckworth of
 speaking to the police.
 
19.	 A witness reported to the police that after Defendant
restrained Duckworth, Defendant transported Duckworth
in a sports utility vehicle to Yokohama Bay, where
Defendant shot Duckworth in the back of the head with
 a pistol equipped with a silencer and then pushed
Duckworth to the rocks below.
 
. . . .
 
21.	 The State has proved by a preponderance of the
evidence that Defendant killed Duckworth.
 
22.	 The State has proved by a preponderance of the
evidence that Defendant killed Duckworth with the
 specific intent to prevent Duckworth from cooperating
with law enforcement and/or testifying against him in
a future prosecution concerning the November 27, 2007
robbery.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Relying on Judge Town's ruling in the Murder Case, the
 
State filed its June 28, 2012 "State’s Motion for an Order
 
Allowing the Admissibility of Certain Statements Made by
 [Duckworth] in the Trial for [Deguair]" prior to the first trial
 in the instant case. Deguair also filed a motion in limine,
 seeking to preclude the introduction of Duckworth's statements in
 the first trial. The Circuit Court ruled,
 
First of all, I'm going to take judicial notice of all the
records and files in this case and also in [Deguair's] other
cases. And this is how I see it and I'm going to -- I'm
going to affirm my prior ruling again. I still don't see any
cogent reasons to -- to rule counter to what Judge Town
ruled in the first trial and what I ruled in the second
 trial, meaning both of the murder trials, both of the prior
murder trials.
 
I think the State has clearly shown by at least a
preponderance of the evidence that [Deguair] caused
[Duckworth's] death and for the specific purpose of keeping
him from testifying against [Deguair]. I think that the
State has met all the elements of the forfeiture by
wrongdoing hearsay exception under [Hawaii] Rules of
Evidence 804. And I think pursuant to the applicable case
law, mainly by the U.S. Supreme Court, these -- these
statements all qualify under that general rubric.
 
So as far as the -- the three taped statements from
Duckworth himself to the detectives, I'm going to allow the
-- the State to elicit them if it wants to at this trial for
 essentially the same reasons, under the same reasoning as
far as the general legal analysis and rubric as to
admissibility under the hearsay rule and the confrontation
clause in this case also.
 
I'm also going to allow testimony by one or both of
these officers, Collins and Kaneshiro, as to the alleged
utterances that [Duckworth] made to them and/or in their
presence on the same night of the alleged robbery, sounds
like, to me, within minutes of -- of the robbery and his own
apprehension in the case. Because I think that –- well, I'm
going to allow them.
[16]
 
Shortly before the second trial, the Circuit Court
 
reaffirmed its rulings made in the first trial.
 
On appeal, Deguair argues only that "there was no
 
evidence that Deguair knew or suspected Deguair [sic] had spoken
 
to the police about the 11/27/07 robbery. There was a lack of
 evidence that Deguair expected to be charged in connection with
 
16
 The Circuit Court excluded statements made to the complaining
witnesses in this case. Ultimately, the Circuit Court sua sponte reconsidered
 
and ruled that only certain statements made by Duckworth would be admitted.
These were (1) a November 27, 2007 statement in the presence of Officers
Alfred Collins and Cindy Kaneshiro, and (2) two statements to Detective Jack
Snyder on November 28, 2007.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the 11/27/07 robbery. There was no showing of a specific 
connection with the [M a'ili] robbery." Deguair does not 
specifically address Duckworth's statements that Deguair had threatened and assaulted him, the testimony that Deguair was overheard accusing Duckworth of speaking to the police, or why this evidence did not support, by a preponderance of the evidence, that Deguair intended to prevent Duckworth from testifying against Deguair. The findings of Judge Town and the Circuit Court were not clearly erroneous. 
B.
 
Relying on his right to confront witnesses under the
 
state and federal constitutions, Deguair challenges the admission
 of statements made by "alleged co-conspirators"
17 Duckworth and
 
Thurston18 and designates the following conclusion of law as
 
error:
 
8.	 Based on its review of the records and files of this
 
case, the court concludes that the statements made by
Thurston and Duckworth to, or in the presence of, Vito
during the planning and execution of the November 27,
2007 armed robbery . . . were made during the course
and in furtherance of a conspiracy.
 
Deguair argues on appeal only that there was no showing that the
 
statements had sufficient indicia of reliability
 
Deguair does not claim that the statements involved 
were testimonial. In State v. Fields, 115 Hawai 'i 503, 516, 168 
P.3d 955, 968 (2007), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court reasoned that, 
"to the extent that the hearsay statements in question are nontestimonial, Davis places them beyond the reach of the federal 
17	 HRE Rule 803(a)(2) provides in pertinent part,
 
The following are not excluded by the hearsay rule, even
though the declarant is available as a witness:
 
(a)	 Admissions.
 
. . . .
 
(2)	 Vicarious admissions. A statement that is
offered against a party and was uttered by . . .
(C) a co-conspirator of the party during the
course and in furtherance of the conspiracy.
 

 
18
 Again, Deguair's point on appeal does not comply with HRAP Rule
28(b)(4) as, at a minimum, it fails to quote the substance of the evidence in
issue.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
confrontation clause" and held that it would continue to apply
 
the test articulated in  Ohio v. Roberts , 448 U.S. 56 (1980) for
 
the purposes of the Hawai 'i right to confrontation. 
As regards the first part of the Roberts test, we have
remained resolute that, under the confrontation clause ofthe Hawai' i Constitution, a showing of the declarant's
unavailability is necessary to promote the integrity of thefact finding process and to ensure fairness todefendants. . . . 
Upon demonstrating that a witness is unavailable, under the
second half of the Roberts test, only statements that bear
"adequate indicia of reliability" may be admitted into
evidence. "Reliability" may be shown in two ways. First,
reliability may be inferred without more if it falls within
a firmly rooted hearsay exception.
 
Alternatively, reliability may be demonstrated upon a
showing of particularized guarantees of trustworthiness. The
United States Supreme Court has declined to endorse a
mechanical test for determining particularized guarantees of
trustworthiness under the Confrontation Clause. Instead, the
Court has determined that particularized guarantees of
trustworthiness must be shown from the totality of the
circumstances and that the relevant circumstances include
 only those that surround the making of the statement and
that render the declarant particularly worthy of belief.
 
Fields, 115 Hawai 'i at 512–13, 168 P.3d at 964–65 (citations, 
some quotation marks, and brackets omitted) (quoting State v.
 
Sua, 92 Hawai 'i 61, 71–72, 987 P.2d 959, 969–70 (1999)). One 
such "firmly rooted hearsay exception" is the co-conspirator
 exception. Bourjaily, 483 U.S. at 183; State v. McGriff, 76
 
Hawai
'i 148, 156, 871 P.2d 782, 790 (1994). 
As the proponent needs to show only one method under
 
the second half of the Roberts test and it is undisputed that the
 
evidence at issue were statements of co-conspirators, reliability
 could be inferred. The Circuit Court did not err in admitting
 the statements of co-conspirators.
 
C.

 
Relying on State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai 'i 405, 984 P.2d 
1231 (1999), Deguair argues that the Circuit Court should not
 have granted his alternative relief
19 of a new trial after
 
egregious prosecutorial misconduct was committed in his first
 
19
 Although Deguair did not seek the remedy of a retrial in his
motion, in his memorandum in support, he asked for a retrial in the
alternative.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial. In Rogan, the Supreme Court of Hawai 'i laid out a 
framework for analyzing the question of prosecutorial misconduct. 
Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are reviewed under
the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, which
requires an examination of the record and a determination of
"whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error
complained of might have contributed to the conviction."
Factors to consider are: (1) the nature of the conduct;
(2) the promptness of a curative instruction; and (3) the
strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant.
 
91 Hawai 'i at 412, 984 P.2d at 1238 (citations omitted). Deguair 
argues: (1) The misconduct was not inadvertent, and even if it 
was, a finding of inadvertence does not preclude a finding of misconduct, (2) He was denied a fair trial due to the misconduct, and (3) The misconduct was not harmless as this was not a case of overwhelming evidence. The decision to grant a new trial is reviewed for an abuse of discretion but matters of constitutional law are reviewed de novo.  Id., at 411-12, 984 
P.2d at 1237-38. 
There is no dispute that reference to the death of
 
Duckworth was not supposed to be presented to the jury. It was
 in the State's exhibit and it was due to the inaction of the
 deputy prosecutor (DPA) that it was.
 
The Circuit Court made a finding that the exposure of
 
the jury to this information was "inadvertent" and there is
 substantial evidence to support this finding. The DPA made
 representations in his memorandum in opposition to Deguair's
 motion to dismiss "that the incomplete redaction in Trial Exhibit
 121 resulted from an inadvertent oversight." The phrase, "The
 Death of Jermaine Duckworth" appeared eleven times in the
 original document but was not redacted only from the five-line
 "subject line" of the cooperation agreement memorandum. Although
 the other ten redactions were placed on the record in open court
 and agreed-to by defense counsel, a redaction of the offending
 line was not mentioned, without objection or comment by defense
 counsel. Before the Circuit Court, the defense explicitly
 eschewed the argument that the failure to completely redact was
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
intentional.20 Given the circumstances, we cannot say the
 
finding of inadvertence was clearly erroneous.
 
As the error was not discovered until after verdict,
 
there was no curative instruction given.
 
The Circuit Court concluded that "I don't think there's
 
any way that the court can find that the outside influence in
 
this case, which was the not-sufficiently-redacted cooperation
 agreement, was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." As a result,
 the Circuit Court ordered a new trial.
 
The question then becomes whether it was error for the
 
Circuit Court to order a retrial rather than dismiss the case. 
Even under Rogan,
 
the standard adopted for purposes of determining whether
double jeopardy principles bar a retrial caused byprosecutorial misconduct requires a much higher standardthan that used to determine whether a defendant is entitled to a new trial as a result of prosecutorial misconduct.Double jeopardy principles will bar reprosecution that iscaused by prosecutorial misconduct only where there is ahighly prejudicial error affecting a defendant's right to afair trial and will be applied only in exceptional
circumstances such as the instant case. By contrast,
prosecutorial misconduct will entitle the defendant to a newtrial where there is a reasonable possibility that the errorcomplained of might have contributed to the conviction[](i.e., the error was not "harmless beyond a reasonabledoubt"). See, e.g., [ State v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai' i 325, 329
n.6, 966 P.2d 637, 641 n.6 (1998)] (citations omitted). 
Rogan, 91 Hawai 'i at 423 n.11, 984 P.2d at 1249 n.11 (emphasis 
added; original emphasis omitted). Thus, the Rogan court 
acknowledged that a retrial could be ordered where the error was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt but did not rise to the level of "exceptional circumstances such as" those found in Rogan, i.e., an appeal to racial prejudice. Given the circumstances of this case, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in granting a new trial rather than dismissing the case. 
20
 Indeed, when arguing in support of Deguair's motion to dismiss,
counsel made it clear that it was not arguing the DPA did it intentionally,
taking the position that the intent of the prosecutor was irrelevant to the
analysis.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D.
 
Deguair argues that the State failed to show a
 
sufficient chain of custody for unspecified21 interior
 
photographs taken of and items found in the Blazer. We review
 
this issue under the abuse of discretion standard. See State v.
 
Nakamura, 65 Haw. 74, 81-82, 648 P.2d 183, 188-89 (1982). 
In showing chain of custody, all possibilities of
tampering with an exhibit need not be negated. Chain of
 
custody is sufficiently established where it is reasonably
certain that no tampering took place, with any doubt going
to the weight of the evidence. An accounting of
hand-to-hand custody of the evidence between the time it is
obtained and the time admitted to trial is not required in
establishing chain of custody. And despite the mere
possibility that others may have had access to the exhibits,
there exists a reasonable certainty that no tampering took
place.
 
State v. DeSilva, 64 Haw. 40, 41-42, 636 P.2d 728, 730 (1981)
 
(citations omitted). While a more elaborate foundation is
 required to identify evidence that is easily substituted, such as
 marijuana, physical evidence with unusual characteristics does
 not require such a foundation. Id., at 40, 41-42, 636 P.2d at
 
730 (citing State v. Mayes, 286 N.W.2d 387, 391 (Iowa 1979)).
 
Here, Deguair relies on several facts in support of his
 
argument that an insufficient chain of custody was established: 
the Hau Bush area where the Blazer was found was dark and remote,
 the Blazer was found during the early morning hours, the police
 could not account for about fifteen hours regarding what happened
 to the Blazer from the time the police left the vehicle at Hau
 Bush until it was brought to the police station, the police could
 not say which person actually transported the vehicle to the
 police station, and a complete inventory of the contents was not
 done until the Blazer was at the police station.
 
The Circuit Court ruled that the Blazer was a
 
distinctive vehicle that was identified by Vito, photographs
 thereof were stipulated into evidence by the defense, and
 photographs of items within the Blazer were taken while it was at
 
21
 State's Exhibits 26 through 44 are photographs of the Blazer's
exterior and interior taken at Hau Bush by then-Evidence Specialist John
Wadahara. They were received into evidence without objection by the defense.
Therefore Deguair's point of error as to these exhibits is waived, and the
admission of any other photographs taken of the interior is at best, harmless
error.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hau Bush. Julie Ann and Aaron identified some of the items found
 
in the Blazer at Hau Bush.
 
The Circuit Court's ruling that there was an adequate
 
chain of custody is supported by the evidence presented. Officer
 Tokunaga testified that he heard a "radio dispatch of a reported
 robbery", after which he saw and followed the Blazer (license
 "EFT-631") until it came to a stop at Hau Bush and the occupants
 fled. Vito identified the Blazer in a photograph as the vehicle
 used while committing the crime and identified many of the items
 the police recovered from inside the Blazer. Photographs of the
 interior and exterior of the Blazer were taken at Hau Bush and
 received into evidence without objection. Julie Ann and Aaron
 identified some of the items found in the Blazer at Hau Bush as
 their property, and identified other items after they were
 recovered by HPD evidence personnel from the Blazer while in
 their evidence locker as their property or items used by the
 robbers. Detective Snyder explained the procedures for securing
 a vehicle for evidence. The State presented substantial evidence
 to support the conclusion that, to a reasonable degree of
 certainty, the evidence had not been tampered with. Deguair
 advances no argument that there was evidence of tampering. 
Therefore, the Circuit Court's admission of items recovered from
 the Blazer was not an abuse of discretion.
 
E.
 
Deguair argues that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion by imposing consecutive terms of imprisonment as such
 a sentence constituted cruel and unusual punishment in this case.
 
Deguair argues that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion by failing to consider the fact that Deguair could be
 rehabilitated during his incarceration through drug treatment. 
We review this issue under the abuse of discretion standard.
 
A sentencing judge generally has broad discretion in
imposing a sentence. The applicable standard of review for
sentencing or resentencing matters is whether the court
committed plain and manifest abuse of discretion in its
decision. Factors that indicate a plain and manifest abuse
of discretion are arbitrary or capricious actions by the
judge and a rigid refusal to consider the defendant's
contentions. In general, to constitute an abuse it must
appear that the court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason
or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the
substantial detriment of a party litigant.
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Tauiliili, 96 Hawai 'i 195, 198, 29 P.3d 914, 917 (2001) 
(citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
Under HRS § 706-606 (2014), in determining the
 
particular sentence to be imposed, the sentencing court shall
 
consider:
 
(1) The nature and circumstances of the offense and the
history and characteristics of the defendant;(2) The need
for the sentence imposed: (a) To reflect the seriousness of
the offense, to promote respect for law, and to provide just
punishment for the offense; (b) To afford adequate
deterrence to criminal conduct; (c) To protect the public
from further crimes of the defendant; and (d) To provide the
defendant with needed educational or vocational training,
medical care, or other correctional treatment in the most
effective manner; (3) The kinds of sentences available; and
(4) The need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities among
defendants with similar records who have been found guilty
of similar conduct.
 
(Format altered.)
 
Although it appears the Circuit Court did not mention 
defense counsel's rehabilitation argument, "absent clear evidence 
to the contrary, it is presumed that a sentencing court will have considered all factors before imposing concurrent or consecutive terms of imprisonment under HRS § 706-606." State v. Hussein, 
122 Hawai
'i 495, 503, 229 P.3d 313, 321 (2010) (citations, 
internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). What is required of the court are "the reasons for imposing a consecutive sentence." Id., at 510, 229 P.3d at 328. Therefore, while it is 
important that the sentencing court explain its rationale, the court need not explicitly address every argument made by the parties. 
Here, the Circuit Court did state its reasons for the
 
sentence. Specifically, the Circuit Court focused on the
 outrageousness of Deguair's crime, that Deguair has committed
 similar crimes in the past, and that Deguair appeared to have
 been the "ringleader" in this crime. Therefore, the Circuit
 Court did not abuse its discretion in failing to expressly
 consider the argument that Deguair could be rehabilitated.
 
Deguair also appears to argue that the Circuit Court
 
abused its discretion by giving Deguair consecutive sentences
 when Vito, who, according to Deguair and the testimony of some of
 the witneses, engaged in far more egregious conduct, was only
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
given a concurrent sentence. In making this argument, Deguair
 
points to HRS § 706-606 (4), which explains that the court must
 consider, "The need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities
 among defendants with similar records who have been found guilty
 of similar conduct." Deguair argues that there is ample evidence
 that Vito was the ringleader. However, Deguair fails to
 acknowledge that Vito testified Deguair was the ringleader, came
 up with the plan and the means, and the Circuit Court found that
 it was likely that this was true.
 
The Circuit Court considered the role Deguair played in
 
the crime charged, based on the evidence provided. The Circuit
 Court did not abuse its discretion in considering the level of
 Deguair's participation in deciding on the appropriate
 sentence.
22
 
Deguair has failed to show his sentence is cruel or
 
unusual punishment.
 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, the May 21, 2014 Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 28, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
Dwight C.H. Lum,

for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Donn Fudo,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
22
 Deguair argues in his reply brief that the Circuit Court
improperly considered evidence from the first trial as it commented at
sentencing that it had "heard both trials in this case" including "the first
one." Deguair argues that, after his motion for new trial was granted, the
evidence and verdicts from the first trial were a nullity and that the Circuit
Court should not have used them as a basis for imposing the consecutive
sentences. However, as Deguair did not raise this argument in his opening
brief and a reply brief must be confined to matters presented in the answering
brief, we deem it waived. HRAP Rule 28(b)(4), (b)(7), and (d).
 
17
 