   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000065
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
RANDY L. BRASH, Claimant-Appellant, v.
PROSERVICE HAWAII, Employer-Appellee, Self-Insured, and
SEABRIGHT INSURANCE COMPANY, Third-Party Administrator-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. AB 2008-009(WH) (9-06-01212 HON))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Claimant-Appellant Randy L. Brash appeals from the
 
January 3, 2012 Decision and Order and the March 21, 2012
 
Supplemental Decision and Order, both entered by the Labor and
 Industrial Relations Appeals Board.
1 The case involves the
 
Board's consideration of appeals brought by Employer-Appellee
 Proservice Hawaii and Insurance Carrier-Appellee Seabright
 Insurance Company from the decision of the Director of Labor and
 Industrial Relations concerning the compensation available for an
 August 21, 2006 incident in which Claimant fractured the distal
 
1
 The February 2, 2012 Notice of Appeal failed to attach a copy of
the Decision and Order, while the electronic filing dated March 28, 2012, and
labeled as an "Amended Notice of Appeal," consisted of nothing but a copy ofthe Supplemental Decision and Order. Appellees did not contest either filing,and addressed the merits of each of Claimant's points of error. AlthoughClaimant's filings did not comply with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure,
the same rule provides that "[a]n appeal shall not be dismissed forinformality of form or title of the notice of appeal." H
AW. R. APP. P. 
3(c)(2). Because Claimant's intention appears evident from what he did file,and because Appellees do not appear to have been misled by the mistake, weaddress the issues raised as if Claimant had complied with all filing rules.
See Ek v. Boggs, 102 Hawai' i 289, 294, 75 P.3d 1180, 1185 (2003) (holding that
appellant's intention to appeal from an order not attached to the notice could
be "fairly inferred"). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
radius bone in his right arm.
 
In the Decision and Order, the Board considered five
 
issues:
 
(a) Whether the Director erred in ordering
Employer to continue paying temporary total
disability ("TTD") benefits after February 15,
2007;
 
(b) Whether the Director erred in not awarding
Employer a credit for TTD benefits paid from
June 11, 2007 to September 14, 2007;
 
(c) Whether Claimant's left wrist, left elbow, and
left shoulder conditions are causally related to
the August 21, 2006 work injury;
 
(d) Whether Employer is liable for a carpectomy
and surgery for right carpal tunnel syndrome
allegedly arising out of Claimant's August 21,
2006 work injury; and
 
(e) Whether Claimant is entitled to, and Employer
liable for, the surgical request and treatment by
Cathleen Godzik, M.D.
 
The Board concluded that:
 
(a) the Director did not err in ordering Employer
to continue paying TTD benefits after February 15,
2007;
 
(b) the Director did not err by declining to award
Employer credit for TTD benefits paid from
June 11, 2007 to September 14, 2007;
 
(c) Claimant's left wrist, left elbow, and left
shoulder conditions are not causally related to
the August 21, 2006 work injury;
 
(d) Employer is not liable for a carpectomy, but
is otherwise liable for the course of surgeries
for Claimant's right carpal tunnel syndrome and
for reconstructive right wrist surgery, both of
which relate to Claimant's August 21, 2006 work
injury; and
 
(e) Claimant is entitled to, and Employer liable
for, the surgical request of Cathleen Godzik, M.D.
for right wrist reconstruction.
 
In the Supplemental Decision and Order, the Board
 
considered the request by Claimant's counsel for approval of
 
$25,611.03 in attorney's fees and costs. Employer did not object
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to the request. The Board found that Claimant had prevailed on
 
issues (a), (b), (d), and (e), but Employer had prevailed on
 issue (c). Holding that Employer had appealed and prevailed upon
 the "crucial issue" on appeal, the Board reduced the fees allowed
 and approved $19,694.80 for attorney's fees, applicable taxes,
 and costs as a lien upon compensation payable by Employer. In so
 doing, the Board made Claimant responsible for payment of his own
 attorney's fees.
 
On appeal, Claimant contends that the Board erred in:
 (1)
 finding that the opinions of Employer's
medical experts were more credible than Claimant's
medical experts;
 
(2) finding that Employer presented substantial
evidence to overcome a presumption that the
subject injury is causally related to the
employment activity regarding the alleged injuries
to Claimant's left wrist, elbow and shoulder;
 
(3) concluding that Claimant's left-sided
conditions were not causally related to the
August 21, 2006 work injury;
 
(4) stating in the Decision and Order that three,
not one, of the Director's decisions were
modified;
 
(5) finding that 150 hours was a reasonable number
for purposes of calculating attorney's fees;
 
(6) reducing the requested attorney's fees by
$5,916.23 without a reasonable basis; and
 
(7) concluding that Claimant was liable for all
attorney's fees incurred in Employer's three
appeals.
 
Upon careful review of the records and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments they advance and the issues they raise, we resolve
 Claimant's points of error as follows
2
 and affirm.
2
 Because they are related, we address the first three points
together, the fourth point on its own, and the last three points together.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1–3) Claimant challenges Findings of Fact 28 and 29, 
and Conclusion of Law 3 from the Decision and Order.3 As to 
whether the Board clearly erred in FOF 28 by rejecting the 
opinions of medical experts, which stated that Claimant's left-side wrist, elbow, and shoulder conditions were caused by Claimant's overuse attributable to his right-arm work injury, it is well-established that we will decline to consider the weight of the evidence or to review an agency's findings by passing upon the credibility of witnesses or conflicts in testimony, especially when presented with the findings of an expert agency dealing with a specialized field. Moi v. State, Dep't of Pub. 
Safety, 118 Hawai
'i 239, 242, 188 P.3d 753, 756 (App. 2008) 
(quoting Nakamura v. State, 98 Hawai 'i 263, 267, 47 P.3d 730, 734 
(2002)). 
We only disturb such findings if, upon review, "of 
reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on the whole record," Igawa v. Koa House Rest., 97 Hawai
'i 402, 406, 38 P.3d 
570, 574 (2001) (citation omitted), we are left with the "definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made." In 
re Water Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai
'i 97, 119, 9 P.3d 409, 
431 (2000). Here, such a review does not lead us to this conclusion. Thus, the Board's findings on the credibility of Employer's medical experts in FOF 28 were not clearly erroneous. 
As to Claimant's contention that Employer has not
 
presented substantial evidence to overcome the presumption of
 compensability for a work-related injury, we begin by recognizing
 
3
 FOF 28 and 29 state:
 
28. The Board credits the opinions that Claimant's
left-sided symptoms were not due to an "overuse" of the left
upper extremity as a result of the right-sided wrist injury
over the opinions to the contrary.
 
29. The Board has applied the presumption of
compensability with regard to the left wrist, elbow, and
shoulder and finds that Employer has presented substantial
evidence to overcome said presumption of compensability with
regard to these alleged injuries.
 
COL 3 state:
 
3. The Board concludes that Claimant's left wrist,
left elbow and left shoulder conditions are not causally
related to the August 21, 2006 work injury.
 
4
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Hawai 'i law does, in fact, establish a presumption in favor 
of the employee who asserts a claim for workers' 
compensation—that is, we presume that such a claim relates to a covered work injury. H
AW. REV. STAT. § 386-85(1) (1993).  In order 
to overcome this presumption, an employer must first produce substantial evidence showing that the claimed injury is not, in fact, work-related. Nakamura, 98 Hawai
'i at 267, 47 P.3d at 734. 
Once the burden of production is satisfied, the Board will weigh the employer's evidence against the evidence presented by the claimant. Id. at 268, 47 P.3d at 735. 
Contrary to Claimant's characterization, Employer's 
medical expert opinions did not "opine generally" on Claimant's injuries, for they addressed the issue of whether Claimant's left-side injuries could have been caused by the August 21, 2006 work injury. Additionally, the experts offered opinions regarding alternative possible explanations for Claimant's conditions. Thus, the medical expert opinions had "a reasonable degree of specificity" and constituted specific, not "generalized," evidence sufficient to meet the employer's burden of production. See, e.g., Nakamura, 98 Hawai
'i at 269, 47 P.3d 
at 736 (medical expert opinion was not "generalized" because it identified symptoms of a pre-existing illness separate from the work injury); Nobunaga v. State, Judiciary Dep't, No. CAAP-11­0000375, 2014 WL 1271025 at *10 (Haw. Ct. App. Mar. 28, 2014) (physicians did not opine generally, but rendered opinions specifically as to whether claimant had aggravated his existing condition). 
After reviewing the record, we are not left with the 
"definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made" in the Board's finding that Employer rebutted the presumption of compensability. In re Water Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai
'i 
at 119, 9 P.3d at 431; Igawa, 97 Hawai 'i at 406, 38 P.3d at 574. 
Because Employer presented relevant and credible evidence of a quality and quantity sufficient to justify a conclusion by a reasonable person that an injury is not work connected, Nakamura, 98 Hawai
'i at 267-68, 47 P.3d at 734-35, the Board did not 
clearly err and FOF 29 stands. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Finally, as to COL 3, because neither FOF 28 nor FOF 29
 
was clearly erroneous, the Board did not err in issuing COL 3,
 
which flows directly from those factual findings. See Wisdom v.
 Pflueger, 4 Haw. App. 455, 459, 667 P.2d 844, 848 (1993) (holding
 that a conclusion which follows from findings that are not
 properly attacked and is a correct statement of law, is valid.) 
As such, Claimant's first three points of error are without
 merit.
 
(4) In his fourth point of error, Claimant contends
 
that the Board erred in its Decision and Order in stating that it
 modified three of the Director's decisions when it only modified
 one. Claimant does not explain any connection between the
 Board's misstatement in the Decision and Order and its award of
 attorney's fees in the Supplemental Decision and Order (apart
 from the contention that it "may have" been related), nor does he
 cite to any authority supporting this contention. Any error in
 the Board's misstatement appears, therefore, to be harmless and
 did not affect Claimant's substantial rights.
 
(5–7) Claimant's final three points of error challenge
 
the Board's award of attorney's fees to Claimant's
 attorney—specifically the Board's method of calculation, its
 basis for the final award, and its award of such fees in the form
 of a lien on Claimant's prospective workers' compensation award. 
The Board explained its methodology as follows:
 
Applying the [caselaw in Mitchell v. BWK Joint
 
Ventures, 57 Haw. 535, 560 P.2d 1292 (1977) and Yamada v.
 
Royal Hawaiian Macadamia Nut Co., 5 Haw. App. 521, 704 P.2d
914 (1985)], it is not sufficient to mechanically count up
the number of issues and declare which party prevailed on
the larger number of issues [in awarding attorneys' fees
under Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") § 386-93(b)]. Nor is
 it permissible to prorate some of the fees and costs based
on whether Employer, for example, lost four of five issues.
 
Hawaii's [c]ourts have made clear that the crucial
issue must be identified in order to determine whether for
 purposes of Section 386-93(b), HRS, Employer has lost or
prevailed.
 
Here, while the Board has described the January 3,
2012 Decision and Order as one which "affirms in part and
modifies in part" the Director's decision, such general
description is not entirely conclusive of whether Employer
lost for purposes of Section 386-93(b), HRS. That general
description is one factor or indicator to be considered but
is not itself entirely dispositive.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The "crucial issue" analysis requires the Board to
closely examine all issues on appeal. In doing so, it is
apparent that the nature of the modification of the
Director's decision had more than trivial consequences for
the parties. In fact, the Board on the third issue
concluded that Claimant's left wrist, left elbow and left
shoulder conditions were not causally related to the
August 21, 2006 work injury.
 
Consequently, Claimant would not be entitled to
medical treatment, services, and supplies therefor, nor
would Claimant be entitled to any temporary total or
permanent disability relative to his left wrist, left elbow
and left shoulder condition.
 
The consequences of the determination of this issue
for Claimant cannot be over emphasized. The lion's share,
as it were, of potential future benefit payments (medical
bills, temporary disability, and permanent disability)
turned on or was contingent upon the compensability of
Claimant's left wrist, left elbow and left shoulder. In the
 absence of such finding of compensability of Claimant's left
wrist, left elbow and left shoulder, the case value was
significantly diminished. This third issue, though only one
of five, is the crucial issue, and Employer prevailed on
this crucial issue. 
Because Employer prevailed on the crucial issue,
Employer did not lose for purposes of Section 386-93(b),
HRS. Any fees and costs awarded, therefore, are a lien on
compensation.
 
Claimant contends that the Board erred in considering
 
the reduction in the Employer's liability in identifying the
 
crucial issue in the case, noting that, in Yamada, "[t]he court
 did not consider the employer's reduction in liability as a
 factor to determine whether they won or lost the appeal; instead
 it determined that since it lost on both crucial appellate
 issues, it was liable for the co-employer's attorney's fees." 
Yamada, however, does not preclude consideration of potential
 future benefit payments in determining whether the Employer has
 "won" or "lost" before the Board.
 
In Yamada, appellees argued that they did not lose on
 
appeal to the Board because they succeeded in significantly
 reducing their total liability under the Director's decision. 
Yamada, 5 Haw. App. at 524, 704 P.2d at 916. While we agreed
 that the Board's decision reflected a reduction in appellees'
 liability, we applied Mitchell and concluded that because
 appellees contested liability altogether, the crucial issues were
 (1) whether Yamada's claims against his prior employer were
 barred by the statute of limitations (appellees claimed that they
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
were not barred), and (2) whether appellees were liable to Yamada
 
at all for workers' compensation benefits (appellees claimed that
 they were not). Id. at 525, 704 P.2d at 917. Because appellees
 
lost on those two crucial issues, notwithstanding that they
 succeeded in reducing the Director's TTD award, we concluded that
 appellees were responsible for fees and costs. Id.
 
Here, unlike in Yamada, Employer did not claim that it
 
was not responsible for Claimant's injury or any of his benefits. 
Employer's appeal to the Board raised a number of issues, but
 none went so far as to contend that someone else was responsible
 for the benefits or to deny all liability.
4 Whereas the crucial
 
issue in Yamada clearly related to overall liability, and thus
 the employer lost, the issues here are more targeted and their
 respective impact is less obvious. In such a case, it is not
 unreasonable, and it is not barred by Yamada, for the Board to
 incorporate "potential future benefit payments" in determining
 the "crucial issue."
 
Claimant argues that the focus of litigation before the
 
Board was Employer's denial of surgeries for Claimant's right
 wrist injury, because "the time spent in litigation before the
 Board addressing compensability of the left arm was minimal
 compared to the issues of Claimant's medical treatment," and as a
 result, "the Board erred by finding compensability to be the sole
 crucial issue[.]" None of the cases to which Claimant cited in
 support of this assertion, however, discuss this type of temporal
 criteria for use in determining the "crucial issue" before the
 Board. In Mitchell, for instance, the court noted in support of
 its crucial issue determination that almost all of the witnesses
 who appeared before the Board addressed that issue. 57 Haw. at
 551, 560 P.2d at 1301. That observation does not speak to the
 
4
 On appeal to the Board, Employer challenged three of the four
decisions issued by the Director relating to Claimant's entitlement to
workers' compensation benefits stemming from the August 21, 2006 incident.
Employer did not appeal from the Director's March 22, 2007 order, which
determined that Claimant had suffered an injury to his right wrist by an
accident arising out of and in the course of his employment, and that Employer
shall pay for such medical care, services, and supplies as the nature of the
injury may require, and awarded Claimant TTD benefits from November 9, 2006
through December 15, 2006. The order set aside the matters of permanent
disability and/or disfigurement, if any, for later determination.
 
8
    
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
amount of time spent on any particular issue, but it is
 
consistent with the evidence in this case where almost all of the
 medical experts who appeared before the Board commented on the
 causation of Claimant's left-sided conditions.
 
Accordingly, although mathematical precision is not
 
offered, the Board's conclusion that the "lion's share of
 potential future benefit payments" depended upon resolution of
 whether Claimant's left-sided conditions were causally related to
 the August 21, 2006 work injury, appears reasonable and
 distinguishes the present case from Yamada and satisfies
 Mitchell. Therefore, although we recognize the legislative
 determination reflected in HRS § 386-93(b)—that Employers should
 pay the reasonable fees and costs associated with those workers'
 
5
—such a
 compensation appeals that they take and ultimately lose 
policy determination is insufficient to support a claim that the
 Board erred in determining that Employer prevailed on the
 "crucial issue" on appeal to the Board in this case. 
Claimant contends that the Board cannot reduce
 
attorney's fees "without explanation or allocation between fees
 and costs."
6 With regard to Claimant's opposition to the Board's
 
reduction of fees awarded to Claimant's counsel by $5,916.23,7
 
and unlike the cases upon which Claimant relies in support of his
 point of error on the issue, in this case, the Board articulated
 
5
 The statute provides, in relevant part:
 
(b) If an employer appeals a decision of the director
or appellate board, the costs of the proceedings of the
appellate board . . ., together with reasonable attorney's
fees, shall be assessed against the employer if the employer
loses[.]
 
H
AW. REV. STAT. § 386-93(b) (Supp. 2014).
 
6
 With regard to the Board's alleged failure to allocate between
fees and costs, we observe that the Board here did so, stating that "[c]osts
in the amount of $61.30 are reasonable."
 
7
 Claimant contends that because Employer did not file a written
objection within ten days to his request for attorney's fees under Hawaii
Administrative Rules ("HAR") § 12-47-55, it "accepted liability and that the
requested amount was reasonable." The argument is unpersuasive. HAR § 12-47­55 also states that "[n]o request for approval of attorney's fees . . . shall
be valid until approved by the board." H
AW. ADMIN. R. § 12-47-55.  Claimant
 
fails to argue why Employer's lack of objection would validate the attorney's
fees.
 
9
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
a basis for its reduction of attorney's fees. Indeed, the Board
 
8
cited to HRS § 386-94  and followed the statutory criteria in
calculating counsel's request for fees. In FOFs 4 and 5 of the
 
Supplemental Decision and Order, the Board considered counsel's
 skill and experience in litigating workers' compensation cases. 
In FOF 6, the Board considered the hourly rate customarily
 awarded to attorneys possessing similar skills and experience.
 Moreover, in FOF 7, the Board sets out its calculation, which
 appears to account for the amount of fees awarded in similar
 cases, the amount of time and effort required by the complexity
 of the case, and the novelty and difficulty of issues involved.
 Thus, we conclude that the Board sufficiently explained its
 reasoning in reducing the attorney's fees and costs.
 
Regarding the wisdom of that reasoning, we note that
 
the Board agreed with counsel concerning the hourly rate she
 requested, but concluded that counsel had overstated the number
 of hours necessary to address the complexities of the issues
 involved on appeal. 
Therefore, the Board reduced the attorney's
 
fee award to reflect what it believed to be a more appropriate
 number of hours deserving compensation in this specific case. 
Because it provided a reasonable explanation for its 
reduction and allocated between fees and costs, the Board did not abuse its discretion in reducing the requested attorney's fees. See Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the Employees' Ret. Sys. of the State of Hawai
'i, 106 Hawai 'i 416, 431, 106 P.3d 339, 354 (2005) 
8
 The statute provides in relevant part:
 
In approving fee requests, the director, appeals board, or
court may consider factors such as the attorney's skill and
experience in state workers' compensation matters, the
amount of time and effort required by the complexity of the
case, the novelty and difficulty of issues involved, the
amount of fees awarded in similar cases, benefits obtained
for the claimant, and the hourly rate customarily awarded
attorneys possessing similar skills and experience[.]
 
H
AW. REV. STAT. § 386-94 (Supp. 2014).
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(reviewing the denial of attorneys' fees under the abuse of
 
discretion standard).
 
Therefore, 
The January 3, 2012 Decision and Order and the
 
March 21, 2012 Supplemental Decision and Order of the Labor and
 Industrial Relations Appeals Board are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 30, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Edie A. Feldman,
for Claimant-Appellant. 
Chief Judge 
Carlton W.T. Chun Leilani A. DeCourcy,for Employer-Appellee andThird-Party Administrator-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
11
 