NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000838
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ELUJINO V. ALVAREZ, III, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-216)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Elujino V. Alvarez, III (Alvarez)
 
appeals from a Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment)
 
entered September 17, 2012, in the Circuit Court of the Third
 Circuit (circuit court).
1 Judgment was entered against Alvarez
 
pursuant to a conditional "No Contest Plea" to Count 1, Promotion
 of a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree in violation of Hawaii
 
2
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1243(1) (2014),  which preserved
Alvarez's appeal of the circuit court's denial of a motion to
 suppress.
 
1
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
 
2
 HRS § 712-1243 provides
 
§712-1243 Promoting a dangerous drug in the third
degree. (1) A person commits the offense of promoting a
dangerous drug in the third degree if the person knowingly
possesses any dangerous drug in any amount.
(2) Promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree is
a class C felony.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Alvarez contends the circuit erred in
 
(1) denying his motion to suppress because there were no
 
"specific and articulable" facts during the initial traffic stop
 in this case justifying its expansion into a simultaneous drug
 investigation; (2) denying his motion to suppress because the
 traffic stop was improperly extended to allow a canine team to
 arrive and screen the vehicle; and (3) denying his right to
 testify after granting his motion to reopen the suppression
 hearing.
 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm.

 
I. Background
 
On June 13, 2011, the State charged Alvarez by
 
complaint with four counts: Count 1, Promoting a Dangerous Drug
 in the Third Degree; Count 2, Prohibited Acts Related to Drug
 Paraphernalia in violation of HRS § 329-43.5 (2010); Count 3,
 Driving Without a License (DWOL) in violation of HRS § 286-102(b)
 (Supp. 2011); and Count 4, Conditions of Operation and
 Registration of Motor Vehicles in violation of HRS
 § 431:10C-104(a) (2005). 
On February 8, 2012, Alvarez filed a Motion to Suppress
 
Evidence, alleging that crystal methamphetamine and drug
 paraphernalia discovered in his car were the fruits of an
 unlawful search. In denying Alvarez's motion, the circuit court
 made the following findings of fact (FOF): 
1. On June 9, 2011 Defendant was the driver of a
vehicle stopped by police because a passenger in his
vehicle, Jaclyn Kama, was not wearing her seatbelt.
2. Police subsequently learned that Defendant did not
have a valid driver's license.
 
3. Due to his lack of a driver's license, Defendant
was unable to legally drive the vehicle away from the
location of the traffic stop.
4. After recognizing the persons in the automobile as
being known drug users, officers at the scene of the traffic
stop called for a narcotic detection canine to screen the
vehicle.
 
5. The narcotic canine screen alerted to the presence
of illegal drugs within the vehicle prior to Detective Tod
Bello completing the traffic citations.
6. After Officer David Reis brought the narcotic
detection canine from the police station to the scene of the
traffic stop, the canine screen itself took approximately
ten seconds before there was an alert. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7. The initial detention of Defendant and the vehicle
 
was only to the degree necessary to issue traffic citations.
8. The narcotic detection canine did not enter the
 
vehicle, and sniffed only the airspace surrounding the
vehicle.
 
[8a. No law enforcement officer asked the occupants of
the stopped vehicle any questions regarding the possession
or use of illegal drugs prior to the narcotic canine
alert.]
[3]
 
9. The canine screen took place during an otherwise
valid detention for the traffic violations.
 
10. The presence of the narcotic canine was not, under
the circumstances of this case, so embarrassing or intrusive
as to constitute a search under the Hawaii or United States
 constitutions.
 
11. The use of the narcotic canine was not
 
unreasonable or abusive in this case.
 
The circuit court then made the following conclusions of law
 
(COL):
 
1. The stop of Defendant's vehicle was valid at its
inception.
2. Police did not need independent reasonable
suspicion to conduct the narcotic canine screen on
Defendant's vehicle. State v. Snitkin, 67 Haw. 168, 171
 
(1984).
3. Once the narcotic canine alerted to the presence of
illegal drugs within the vehicle, police had probable cause
to arrest the occupants of the vehicle pending the
application for a search warrant.
4. The narcotic canine screen did not constitute an
 
unreasonable search, as generally a canine sniff around the
airspace of a closed container is not a "search" under the
United States and Hawaii constitutions. State v. Snitkin,
 
67 Haw. 168, 171 (1984).
5. Suppression is not warranted in this case.
 
Following the denial of his motion to suppress, Alvarez
 
agreed to a conditional no contest plea to Count 1. In exchange
 
for the conditional plea, the State agreed inter alia to dismiss
 all other counts in the complaint.
4
 
II. Discussion
 
On appeal, Alvarez contends the circuit court's FOFs 7,
 
8a, 9, 10, and 11 are clearly erroneous and COLs 2, 4, and 5 are
 
3
 The circuit court inserted FOF 8a as an addendum to the end of the
 
"Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law Denying Defendant's Motion to
Suppress Evidence". 
4
 The State also agreed to mitigate the mandatory minimum to time
served, recommend that any sentence in this matter be served concurrently with
any other sentence Alvarez may be serving prior to, or at the time of
sentencing, including revocation of probation in Cr. No. 10-1-0097, and
refrain from making any sentencing recommendations at the parole hearing. 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
wrong. Alvarez contends the circuit court erred in denying his 
motion to suppress because the initial traffic stop was improperly extended to afford time to conduct a canine drug screen in violation of Alvarez's rights under the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution and article 1, section 7 of the Hawai
'i Constitution. Alvarez contends the 
prolonged stop and use of a canine drug screen constituted a separate seizure that was not reasonably related to the purpose of the traffic stop and lacked "specific and articulable facts" justifying the expansion into a simultaneous drug investigation. As a secondary argument, Alvarez seems to contend the canine drug screen was a search in and of itself. Alvarez argues the evidence gathered via a subsequent search of the car at the police station are "fruit of the poisonous tree" and inadmissible at trial. See State v. Poaipuni, 98 Hawai
'i 387, 392, 49 P.3d 
353, 358 (2002) ("The 'fruit of the poisonous tree' doctrine 'prohibits the use of evidence at trial which comes to light as a result of the exploitation of a previous illegal act of the police.'" (citations, quotation marks and brackets omitted)).
5 
The circuit court's denial of the motion to suppress 
is reviewed de novo to determine whether the ruling was
"right" or "wrong." The proponent of the motion to suppresshas the burden of establishing, by a preponderance of theevidence, that the statements or items sought to be excludedwere unlawfully secured and that his or her right to be freefrom unreasonable searches or seizures was violated under the fourth amendment to the United States Constitution and article I, section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution. 
State v. Estabillio, 121 Hawai 'i 261, 269, 218 P.3d 749, 757 
(2009) (citations and block format omitted). "Appellate review 
of factual determinations made by the trial court deciding 
5
 The State's assertion that Alvarez lacks standing to object to the
search of the vehicle is without merit. The Hawai' i Supreme Court has
expressly approved the United States Supreme Court's view that "a defendant's
ability to benefit from the exclusionary rule is a question of substantivelaw, rather than standing." State v. Tau' a, 98 Hawai' i 426, 435 n.19, 49 P.3d
1227, 1236 n.19 (2002) (quotation marks omitted). "Quite simply, a criminaldefendant always has standing to challenge the admission of evidenceintroduced by the state. Whether a defendant may avail him or herself of theexclusionary rule, however, is a question of substantive search and seizurelaw[.]" Id. (citations, quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pretrial motions in a criminal case is governed by the clearly
 
erroneous standard. A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when
 (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made." State v. Anderson, 84 
Hawai
'i 462, 467, 935 P.2d 1007, 1012 (1997) (citation and block 
format omitted). "[C]onclusions of law are reviewed under the right/wrong standard." Id. (citation omitted). 
A. The Canine Screen Was Not a "Search"
 
Alvarez challenges FOF 10 and COL 4 which both provide 
that the canine drug screen in this case was not a search. 
To 
show the circuit court erred, it is Alvarez's burden to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the police officers infringed on protections afforded by the federal and state constitutions. 
State v. Taua ', 98 Hawai 'i 426, 434-36, 49 
P.3d 1227, 1235-37 (2002). We conclude that the canine screen in this case did not constitute a search. 
It is undisputed that the canine in this case only

 
sniffed the exterior of the car. "[A] defendant who claims the
 protection of the Fourth Amendment must assert that he or she has
 a legitimate expectation of privacy in the invaded place." Id.
 
at 434, 49 P.3d at 1235 (citation, internal quotation marks, and
 brackets omitted). "Official conduct that does not compromise
 any legitimate interest in privacy is not a search subject to the
 Fourth Amendment." Illinois v. Caballes, 543 U.S. 405, 408
 
(2005) (citation and quotation marks omitted). Alvarez has made
 no substantive argument that he possessed a "legitimate
 expectation of privacy." Additionally, "any interest in
 possessing contraband cannot be deemed 'legitimate,' and thus,
 governmental conduct that only reveals the possession of
 contraband 'compromises no legitimate privacy interest.'" Id.
 
(citation omitted) 
In Caballes, the United States Supreme Court held that
 
a dog sniff of the exterior of a car while the defendant was
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
properly seized for a traffic violation was not a search and did
 
not violate the defendant's Fourth Amendment rights.
 
[T]he use of a well-trained narcotics-detection dog--one
that "does not expose noncontraband items that otherwise
would remain hidden from public view," [United States v.
 Place, 462 U.S. 696, 707 (1983)]--during a lawful traffic
stop, generally does not implicate legitimate privacy
interests. In this case, the dog sniff was performed on the
exterior of respondent's car while he was lawfully seized
for a traffic violation. Any intrusion on respondent's
privacy expectations does not rise to the level of a
constitutionally cognizable infringement.
 
Id. at 409 (emphasis added). The Caballes court concluded that
 
"[a] dog sniff conducted during a concededly lawful traffic stop
 that reveals no information other than the location of a
 substance that no individual has any right to possess does not
 violate the Fourth Amendment." Id. at 410.
 
As discussed further below, the canine screen in this
 
case was performed during a valid traffic stop. Moreover,
 Alvarez never raised any question challenging the training of the
 canine who performed the dog screen, and there was no indication
 that the canine revealed or exposed any non-contraband items as
 part of the screen. Pursuant to Caballes, the canine drug sniff
 was not a search under the Fourth Amendment of the United States
 Constitution.
 
In terms of the Hawai
'i Constitution, the Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court has held that although "the use of narcotics-sniffing dogs does not, in and of itself, constitute an illegal search, . . . [t]here may be situations in which the use of these dogs will be deemed unreasonable." State v. Groves, 65 Haw. 104, 
113, 649 P.2d 366, 372 (1982). In State v. Snitkin, 67 Haw. 168, 681 P.2d 980 (1984), the Hawai
'i Supreme Court noted that "in 
Groves we expressly rejected the suggestion . . . that the State may only employ drug detection dogs when it has a prior reasonable suspicion of criminal activity[.]" Id. at 171-72, 681 P.2d at 983. Further, to provide overall guidance in this area, the Snitkin court stated: 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Although in Groves we held a dog sniff is not a search, we
also noted that we would not countenance unreasonable or

 
abusive uses of narcotics dogs. 65 Haw. at 113, 649 P.2d at
372. We now hold that the reasonableness of the dog's use
in the particular circumstances should be determined by

balancing the State's interest in using the dog against the
individual's interest in freedom from unreasonable
 government intrusions.
 
67 Haw. at 172, 681 P.2d at 983.
 The State's interest in detecting and preventing the 
trafficking of drugs is a strong one. See id. at 172, 681 P.2d 
at 983-84. The mobility of vehicles compounds the State's 
interest in detecting drugs concealed within. On the other hand, Alvarez has not demonstrated a legitimate expectation of privacy in the airspace around the car. See Tau
'a, 98 Hawai 'i at 439, 49 
P.3d at 1240. The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has noted that an 
individual has a "diminished" expectation of privacy in vehicles, State v. Wong, 68 Haw. 221, 223, 708 P.2d 825, 828 (1985), and has also, similar to Caballes, noted that "[n]othing of an innocent but private nature and nothing of an incriminating nature other than the narcotics being sought can be discovered through the dog's reaction to the odor of the narcotics." Groves, 65 Haw. at 113, 649 P.2d at 372 (citation and block format omitted). In Snitkin, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that 
a canine drug screen of closed packages in a cargo holding area of a private mail carrier at the airport was not a search. 67 Haw. at 171-72, 681 P.2d at 983-84. 
In the instant case, the canine walked around the
 
outside of the vehicle that Alvarez was operating and, according
 to the undisputed finding by the circuit court, the "canine
 screen itself took approximately ten seconds before there was an
 alert." The manner of the canine screen in this case did not
 unreasonably intrude into Alvarez's privacy interests. The
 canine drug screen of the outside of the vehicle during the valid
 stop in this case was not a search.
 
Thus, Alvarez's challenge to FOF 10 and COL 4 lacks
 
merit.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B. There Was No Separate Seizure of Alvarez
 
Alvarez argues that the police unreasonably expanded 
the scope of the traffic stop into a separate and simultaneous 
drug investigation without specific and articulable facts supporting reasonable suspicion that criminal activity was afoot. In support of his argument that the circuit court erred in denying his motion to suppress the admissibility of the drug paraphernalia and meth found in the vehicle, Alvarez relies on Estabillio. In particular, Alvarez points to the two-part test utilized in Estabillio, which provides that "first, one must consider whether the . . . action was justified at its inception . . . second, one must determine whether the search as actually conducted was reasonably related in scope to the circumstances which justified the interference in the first place." 121 Hawai
'i at 272-73, 218 P.3d at 760-61 (emphases, citations, 
internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). For the reasons discussed below, we conclude that Estabillio is distinguishable because there was no separate search or seizure of Alvarez during the traffic stop in this case. 
In Estabillio, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court concluded that 
the actions of the police constituted a seizure separate and apart from the initial traffic stop. In that case, a vice squad police officer contacted a traffic enforcement officer requesting assistance in stopping the defendant's vehicle, which had an expired registration sticker and which the vice officer believed to contain drugs. Id. at 263, 218 P.3d at 751. The traffic 
officer testified that the plan was for him to stop the vehicle and then the vice officers would appear to conduct their investigation. Id. at 264, 218 P.3d at 752. As planned, the 
defendant's vehicle was stopped for traffic violations and then the vice officer appeared on the scene. Id. The defendant was 
questioned by the vice officer about drug dealing, including the officer telling the defendant that he had information from an informant that the defendant was a cocaine dealer. Id. at 265, 
218 P.3d at 753. Based on the defendant's refusal to consent to 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
a search of his vehicle, the vice officer requested that a canine
 
be brought to the scene to conduct a canine screen. Id. The
 
canine team arrived at the scene, the dog alerted to the presence
 of a controlled substance, and the defendant was arrested for
 promotion of a dangerous drug. Id.
 
As noted by the supreme court, there was no question 
that the initial stop of the vehicle in Estabillio was valid due to traffic violations. Id. at 270, 218 P.3d at 758. However, 
the crucial question in that case was "whether the search [or seizure] as actually conducted was reasonably related in scope to the circumstances which justified the interference in the first place[.]" Id. at 273, 218 P.3d at 761 (emphases, citation and 
quotation marks omitted). Significantly, the Hawai
'i Supreme 
Court had noted that the defendant's contention on appeal was that the vice officer's investigation -- not merely the canine 
screen -- violated the defendant's constitutional rights against unreasonable searches and seizures, id. at 271-72, 218 P.3d at 759-60, and "that 'inquisitive questioning' by law enforcement can constitute an unconstitutional seizure[.]" Id. at 272, 218 
P.3d at 760. The supreme court ruled that the vice officer's investigation for drugs was not reasonably related to the initial traffic stop and instead was a "separate, distinct, and unrelated investigation[]" that was not supported by reasonable suspicion. Id. at 273-74, 218 P.3d at 761-62. The supreme court concluded that the vice officer's investigation "constituted an unconstitutional seizure" and all of the evidence recovered as a result of that seizure must be suppressed. Id. at 274, 218 P.3d 
at 762. 
Estabillio applies when the additional police action
 
constitutes a separate search or seizure. Id. at 272-73, 218
 
P.3d at 761-62. As discussed above, the canine screen did not
 constitute a search. Moreover, the circuit court's FOF 8a,
 finding that no police officer questioned the vehicle occupants
 about possession or use of illegal drugs prior to the canine
 alert, was not clearly erroneous. There is substantial evidence
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
in the record to support this finding. Accordingly, this case is
 
distinguishable from Estabillio, where the vice officer
 questioned the defendant about being a drug dealer, asked for
 consent to search the vehicle, and then called out the canine
 team when consent was not given. Unlike in Estabillio, the
 police officers in this case did not engage in questioning or a
 separate investigation such that there was a separate seizure. 
Moreover, the United States Supreme Court held that a canine
 sniff does "not change the character of a traffic stop that is
 lawful at its inception and otherwise executed in a reasonable
 manner," and does not constitute a separate seizure. Caballes,
 
543 U.S. at 408-09.
 
If the action does not amount to a seizure in its own 
right "separate and distinct from the initial seizure[,]" it appears that State v. Barros, 98 Hawai
'i 337, 48 P.3d 584 (2002) 
would apply. Estabillio, 121 Hawai 'i at 272, 218 P.3d at 760. 
In Barros, the supreme court held that "an officer is not prohibited from requesting a warrant check in a traffic violation stop when the check does not prolong the length of time needed to issue the citation." 98 Hawai
'i at 338, 48 P.3d at 585. 
To address the temporal aspect of the stop, Alvarez 
argues that the traffic stop was "greater in intensity than absolutely necessary under the circumstances" because the officers improperly elongated the stop to allow time for the canine to arrive. "[A] temporary investigative detention must, of necessity, be truly temporary and last no longer than is necessary to effectuate the purpose of the detention[.]" Estabillio, 121 Hawai
'i at 270, 218 P.3d at 758 (citation and 
block format omitted); see also Caballes, 543 U.S. at 407 ("A seizure that is justified solely by the interest in issuing a warning ticket to the driver can become unlawful if it is prolonged beyond the time reasonably required to complete that mission."). 
Alvarez has not met his burden to demonstrate by the
 
preponderance of the evidence that his constitutional rights have
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
been violated by the length of the stop. As Alvarez admits,
 
there is "[n]o testimony in the record [which] objectively
 show[s] how long it would take to issue the traffic citations" in
 this case. Alvarez merely argues the traffic stop "appears
 excessive[.]" Here, the police issued two separate citations for
 three violations –- one citation to Alvarez for driving without a
 license and for driving without motor vehicle insurance; and one
 citation to fellow car occupant, Jaclyn Kama (Kama), for not
 wearing a seat belt. The testimony relied upon by Alvarez
 indicates it took Detective Tod Bello between 15-30 minutes to
 issue the three citations. Alvarez does not challenge the
 circuit court's FOFs 5 and 6, which collectively provide that the
 canine alerted to the presence of illegal drugs prior to
 
6
Detective Bello completing the citations  and the drug screen
took approximately 10 seconds to complete after the canine

 
arrived. The evidence indicates that within 30 minutes, at most,
 Alvarez was under arrest for the alleged drug offenses. Alvarez
 has not demonstrated that the length of time for the traffic stop
 was unconstitutional. The circuit court's FOF 7, that the
 initial detention was only to the degree necessary to issue
 traffic citations, is not clearly erroneous.
 
Alvarez does not dispute that the officers had the 
legal right to detain Alvarez to investigate the traffic violations. 
The canine drug screen was completed "entirely 
within the time required . . . to issue the citation[s]." Barros, 98 Hawai
'i at 343, 48 P.3d at 590. The evidence does not 
show the traffic stop was a pretext to investigate potential drug crimes. Id. The canine drug screen took place during an 
otherwise valid traffic stop. The circuit court's FOFs 9 and 11 are not clearly erroneous and COLs 2 and 5 are correct. 
6
 Even if we consider this FOF challenged due to the substance of
Alvarez's arguments, no evidence refutes Detective Bello's testimony that the
canine alerted prior to completion of the citations. The FOF is not clearly
erroneous. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court did not err in denying the motion to
 
suppress.
C.	 The Circuit Court Did Not Abuse Its Discretion In
 
Denying Alvarez's Request to Testify at the Reopened
Suppression Hearing
 
Alvarez argues that the circuit court violated his 
constitutional right to testify by denying his request to testify 
during a reopened suppression hearing. We will review for abuse of discretion. See State v. Christian, 88 Hawai
'i 407, 417, 967 
P.2d 239, 249 (1998)(applying the abuse of discretion standard in determining whether a defendant should have been allowed to reopen the evidence at trial to testify); United States v. Hobbs, 31 F.3d 918, 923 (9th Cir. 1994) (applying abuse of discretion standard regarding reopening of suppression hearing). 
As a general matter, "permitting or disallowing a party to
reopen its case for the purpose of submitting additionalevidence is a matter within the discretion of the trial court" and is subject to review for abuse of discretion.
Territory v. Rutherford, 41 Haw. 554, 558 (1957). "The 
trial court abuses its discretion when it clearly exceedsthe bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles oflaw or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant." State v. Furutani, 76 Hawai' i 172, 179, 873 P.2d
51, 58 (1994) (citations and internal quotation marks
omitted). 
Christian, 88 Hawai 'i at 417, 967 P.2d at 249 (citation and block 
format omitted). Given the circumstances of this case, the 
circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying Alvarez's request to testify at the limited reopened suppression hearing. 
The facts pertinent to the motion to suppress are as
 
follows. Two hearings were initially held on Alvarez's motion to
 suppress, on April 5, 2012 and May 11, 2012, during which Alvarez
 called six witnesses to testify. The record also indicates that
 subpoenas were issued for Kama and Angelina Mamone-McKeague
 (Mamone-McKeague), the other occupants of the car, to appear at
 these hearings, but apparently Alvarez was not able to serve the
 subpoenas on Kama and Mamone-McKeague and they did not appear. 
At the close of the May 11, 2012 hearing, defense counsel
 conferred with Alvarez and then notified the circuit court that
 Alvarez would not testify. There was no colloquy by the circuit
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
court about Alvarez's decision not to testify regarding his
 
motion to suppress.
 
After both parties submitted written closing arguments,
 
the circuit court issued its proposed ruling to the parties
 indicating it would deny Alvarez's motion to suppress.
7 After
 
receiving the circuit court's proposed ruling, Alvarez orally
 moved to reopen the evidentiary portion of the motion to allow
 for Kama and Mamone-McKeague to testify. Alvarez followed with a
 written motion to reopen the suppression hearing, which noted
 part of the grounds upon which the circuit court denied the
 motion to suppress and argued that Kama and Mamone-McKeague were
 now available to testify and would be able to testify in support
 of Alvarez's allegations. Hearings on Alvarez's motion to reopen
 the motion to suppress were subsequently held on July 18, 2012
 and August 3, 2012, during which only the testimony of Kama and
 Mamone-McKeague was discussed. The circuit court granted
 Alvarez's motion to reopen and held the reopened hearing on
 August 31, 2012.
 
At the beginning of the reopened hearing, Alvarez's
 
counsel confirmed for the circuit court that Kama and Mamone-
McKeague were the potential witnesses. At the end of the
 hearing, however, Alvarez informed the circuit court that he
 would like to testify. Alvarez's counsel told the circuit court
 that it had always been Alvarez's intention to testify but that
 the unavailability of Kama and Mamone-McKeague made him initially
 decline. Counsel made an offer of proof as to Alvarez's intended
 testimony, which basically reiterated the testimony of the other
 two occupants of the car.
8 The circuit court denied Alvarez's
 
7
 The circuit court's proposed ruling denying Alvarez's motion to
suppress is referenced in the record by both parties, and Alvarez's counsel
expressly acknowledges having received it prior to seeking a reopening of the
motion to suppress. However, it appears that the proposed ruling itself is
not contained in the record on appeal.
8
 Alvarez's counsel stated
 
Your Honor, my understanding, speaking to him, the offer of
(continued...)
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
request to testify as being outside the scope of the order
 
reopening the hearing. 
Alvarez contends the circuit court erred because he has 
an absolute right to testify that can be exercised at any time. Alvarez notes that the circuit court did not engage in a colloquy pursuant to Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai
'i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 
(1995), but Alvarez does not argue that such a colloquy is required for a suppression hearing. He also does not contend that he actually wanted to testify at the April 5, 2012 or May 11, 2012 hearings or that his decision not to testify at those hearings was not knowing, intentional and voluntary. Rather, it appears Alvarez references Tachibana to suggest that his initial decision not to testify was not final. Tachibana involved a 
defendant's right to testify at trial and did not address the right to testify at a pretrial suppression hearing. See id., 79 
Hawai
'i at 236-37, 900 P.2d at 1303-04 (holding that trial courts 
must advise criminal defendants of their right to testify and obtain an on-the-record waiver of that right, ideally to be done immediately prior to the close of the defendant's case at 
9
trial);  State v. Lewis, 94 Haw. 292, 297, 12 P.3d 1233, 1238
(2000) (mandating that trial courts also provide certain
 advisements to criminal defendants prior to the start of trial
 
8(...continued)
proof would be Mister, um, Alvarez would testify that he was

the driver when the vehicle was pulled over. That the
 
vehicle was pulled over for, uh, approximately thirty
minutes before, um, any, uh, drug screening. An arrest was
 made for him that, in his experience, uh, that time was far
in excess of what is normally, um, used to, uh, issue a
ticket. He would also state that, um, Officer Bello, he
believes, did engage, um, him in conversation, uh,
regarding, uh, didn't he know that Jaclyn Kama, uh, I guess
the whole vehicle, but he felt it was addressed to him, was
why was [Kama] out, her husband had just been arrested for
two eight balls. He would also testify as to specific acts
that occurred that, uh, buttress his belief as to the length
of time that this took place.
9
 A defendant's constitutional right to testify at trial is based on
the fifth, sixth, and fourteenth amendments to the United States Constitutionand article I, sections 5, 10, and 14 of the Hawai' i Constitution. See 
Tachibana, 79 Hawai' i at 231, 900 P.2d at 1298. 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
regarding their right to testify or not to testify). Further, 
neither of the cases cited by Alvarez, State v. Silva, 78 Hawai 'i 
115, 890 P.2d 702 (App. 1995), abrogated by Tachibana, 79 Hawai 'i 
226, 900 P.2d 1293, and Rock v. Arkansas, 483 U.S. 44 (1987), involves the right to testify at a pretrial suppression hearing. See Silva, 78 Hawai
'i at 708 and n.5, 890 P.2d at 121 and n.5; 
Rock, 483 U.S. at 48, 51 n.9. 
Given the circumstances of this case, and because
 
Alvarez presents no argument that the lack of a Tachibana
 colloquy during the April 5, 2012 or May 11, 2012 suppression
 hearings deprived him of his right to testify, we need not decide
 if Alvarez's right to testify at those initial suppression
 hearings was violated or whether the colloquy requirement in
 Tachibana should be extended to pretrial suppression hearings. 
Rather, as noted, Alvarez's contention is that he had an absolute
 right to testify at the reopened hearing.
 
With regard to reopened suppression hearings, two
 
separate jurisdictions have held that a trial court's refusal to
 allow a defendant to reverse field and request to testify during
 a reopened hearing is not a violation of a defendant's
 constitutional rights. In United States v. Childress, 721 F.2d
 1148 (8th Cir. 1982), the United States Court of Appeals, Eighth
 Circuit, held that a trial court did not err in denying a motion
 to reopen a suppression hearing solely to allow defendant to
 testify where defendant failed to establish good cause to obtain
 relief from his prior decision not to testify. 721 F.2d at 1151. 
The court noted inter alia that the defendant had a full
 opportunity to examine the witnesses testifying, that the
 defendant had already requested a continuance to decide whether
 to put on additional evidence, and the defendant identified no
 new information that would have aided his theory for suppression. 
Id. 
Similarly, in People v. Peterson, 777 N.Y.S. 2d 48
 
(App. Div. 2004), the New York Supreme Court, Appellate Division,
 held that the trial court's denial of the defendant's request to
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testify at a reopened suppression hearing did not violate the 
defendant's constitutional right to testify. Id. at 49. The 
court reasoned that the defendant had declined the opportunity to testify at the original hearing, the reopened hearing was for the limited purpose of allowing counsel to utilize previously unavailable grand jury testimony, and the defendant's proposed testimony was not related to the specific limited reason for reopening the hearing and did not provide any additional pertinent facts that could not have been presented during the original hearing. Id. Peterson and Childress are persuasive and 
appear to be consistent with Hawai
'i case law recognizing that 
the right to testify is fundamental, but can be limited for legitimate reasons. 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has stated that "[t]he right 
to a fair hearing also extends to pretrial suppression hearings. . . . [T]he due process clause requires that a defendant be afforded a fair hearing and a reliable determination on the issue of admissibility." State v. Pulse, 83 Hawai
'i 229, 
246, 925 P.2d 797, 814 (1996) (citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). "Few rights are more fundamental than that of an accused to present witnesses in his own defense." Id. (citation and quotation marks omitted). Yet, this right is not absolute as at times it can be limited to accommodate other legitimate interests. Id. 
A motion to suppress is rife with strategic decisions. 
Although the ability to testify on one's own behalf during a suppression hearing may be important to establishing the grounds to support a motion to suppress, there may be strategic reasons not to testify and thus we do not agree with Alvarez's contention that a defendant has an absolute right to testify at any time during the suppression proceedings, particularly after initially waiving the right to testify and after the trial court has issued its proposed ruling. In the circumstances of a trial, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court imposed a high standard, requiring that a 
defendant show manifest injustice, when the defendant sought to 
16
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
withdraw his waiver of his right to testify after the jury had 
returned a verdict against him. Christian, 88 Hawai 'i at 426-27, 
967 P.2d at 258-59. The court noted that the higher standard was required because 
[w]ere such not the case, defendants such as Christian would
have every incentive to seek “a second bite at the apple” by
waiving their constitutional right to testify in their own
behalf, remaining silent during the evidentiary phase of
their trials, hoping for the best, and seeking to retry
their cases in the event of an undesirable outcome by
claiming a resurrected desire to enlighten the trier of fact
with their version of the material events.
 
Id. at 427 n.15, 967 P.2d at 259 n.15.
 
Similar concerns appear in this case. Here, Alvarez
 
chose not to testify at the April 5, 2012 and May 11, 2012
 
suppression hearings, then upon learning that the circuit court
 would deny his motion to suppress, he moved for a reopened
 hearing, but only to receive the testimony of Kama and Mamone-
McKeague. Alvarez's request to reopen the hearing was narrow,
 and the circuit court granted the motion to receive the pertinent
 testimony offered by the two passengers of the vehicle. It was
 not until after Kama and Mamone-McKeague had testified and at the
 end of the reopened hearing that the defense moved to have
 Alvarez testify. Upon receiving the offer of proof, the circuit
 court determined the proffered testimony to be outside the scope
 of the reopening and declined further reopening of the hearing.
 
In these circumstances, the circuit court did not abuse 
its discretion. Alvarez has never claimed, below or on appeal, that his decision not to testify in the initial hearings on April 5, 2012 and May 11, 2012 was not knowing, intentional and voluntary; he has never claimed that his attorney usurped his right to testify in any way; and he offers no compelling reason why he could not have testified during the April 5, 2012 or May 11, 2012 hearings, especially considering his burden of proof in support of his motion. See Pulse, 83 Hawai
'i at 246, 925 P.2d 
at 814 ("[A] defendant's right to present relevant evidence [during a suppression hearing] is not without limitation and may, in appropriate cases, bow to accommodate other legitimate 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
interests in the criminal trial process." (citation and quotation 
marks omitted)); Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 611 ("The court shall exercise reasonable control over the mode and order of . . . presenting evidence so as to . . . (2) avoid needless consumption of time[.]"); HRE Rule 403 ("Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by . . . needless presentation of cumulative evidence."). A review of the record shows that the circuit court afforded Alvarez a fair hearing on his motion to suppress and a reliable determination on the issue of admissibility. Pulse, 83 
Hawai
'i at 246, 925 P.2d at 814 (citation, quotation marks and 
bracket omitted).
V. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence entered September 17, 2012, in the
 
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, April 8, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
William B. Heflin 
Brian J. De Lima (Crudele & De Lima)
for Defendant-Appellant
 Presiding Judge
Jason M. Skier Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge
Associate Judge

 
18
 