NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000659
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JAMES B. NUTTER & COMPANY,
Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
v.
 
FAUSTINO DASALLA DOMINGO,
Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
and
 
SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT,
HAWAIIAN PARADISE PARK OWNERS ASSOCIATION,
Defendants-Appellees
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10,
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, DOE ENTITIES 1-10,
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0226)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee James B. Nutter &
 
Company (JBNC) appeals and Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant
 
Faustino Dasalla Domingo (Domingo) cross-appeals from the
 
"Amended Judgment Superceding Judgements [sic] Filed on January
 
15, 2015 and February 4, 2015" entered on August 10, 2015 in the
 
1
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit  (circuit court).
 
On appeal, JBNC contends the circuit court erred by (1)
 
denying its motion for summary judgment; (2) granting summary
 judgment in favor of Domingo and awarding Domingo $24,000 plus
 
1 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attorneys' fees and costs; and (3) awarding attorneys' fees under
 
the assumpsit statute to a pro bono attorney representing
 Domingo.
 
On cross-appeal, Domingo contends the circuit court 
erred in denying Domingo's motion for Hawai
'i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 11 sanctions against JBNC and/or its 
attorneys. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments and the issues raised by the parties, as well as
 the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude that both JBNC's
 and Domingo's appeals are without merit.
I. Motion for Summary Judgment (MSJ)
A. JBNC's MSJ
 
JBNC contends the circuit court erred in denying the
 
May 17, 2013 "Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and Decree
 
of Foreclosure Against All Defendants on Complaint Filed April
 19, 2012" (JBNC's MSJ) and in concluding that there were "genuine
 
issues of material fact regarding a default of the terms of the
 
mortgage which supports the claim for foreclosure." JBNC argues, 
The Loan Agreement, the Note, and the Mortgage were
all dated December 11, 2007 and were unquestionably part of
the same reverse mortgage transaction, wherein JBNC agreed
to loan money to Domingo, to be repaid with interest upon
his death or other event of default, in exchange for a
security interest in the Property. As part of this
transaction and to protect JBNC's security interest, Domingo
was obligated to make certain repairs to the property by
June 17, 2008 as set forth in the Repair Rider to the Loan
Agreement. When Domingo failed to make the necessary
repairs by June 17, 2008, he was unquestionably in breach of
his obligations under the Loan Documents and JBNC was
entitled to call the loan due in full. Because Domingo
failed to come forward with any evidence that he did, in
fact, make the necessary repairs by June 17, 2008 (and
because he failed and refused to repay the loan in full),
JBNC was entitled to summary judgment on its Foreclosure
Complaint.
 
JBNC attached to its MSJ a "Declaration of
 
Indebtedness" signed by Bruce Huey, Vice President of JBNC. Huey
 
stated in his declaration, with no mention of the personal
 knowledge of the details of the default on which he based his
 statement, "[Domingo] defaulted in the observance and performance
 of the terms, covenants and conditions by failing to repair the
 property, as required by the Repair Rider to the Loan Agreement,
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in a timely manner." JBNC did not cite to or provide any
 
evidence showing that Domingo failed to comply with the terms of
 the Repair Rider.
 
In Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawai
'i 46, 292 P.3d 1276 
(2013), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court clarified the movant's burden 
on summary judgment in cases in which discovery has not
 concluded. The supreme court summarized:
 
[T]his court's case law indicates that a summary judgment
movant may satisfy his or her initial burden of production
by either (1) presenting evidence negating an element of the
non-movant's claim, or (2) demonstrating that the nonmovant
will be unable to carry his or her burden of proof at trial.
Where the movant attempts to meet his or her burden through
the latter means, he or she must show not only that the non­movant has not placed proof in the record, but also that the
movant will be unable to offer proof at trial. Accordingly,
in general, a summary judgment movant cannot merely point to
the non-moving party's lack of evidence to support its
initial burden of production if discovery has not concluded.
 
Id. at 60-61, 292 P.3d at 1290-91 (internal citations omitted). 
JBNC's burden, as explained in Ralston, was to prove that at
 trial Domingo would be unable to prove that the required repairs
 were done. JBNC failed to meet its burden on summary judgment
 because Huey's declaration did not prove that Domingo would be
 unable to show at trial that he did not comply with the terms of
 the Repair Rider. Huey's declaration merely contained a
 conclusive statement that "Domingo defaulted" without providing
 any proof of the default. The circuit court did not err in
 denying JBNC's MSJ.
B. Domingo's MSJ
 
JBNC also contends that the circuit court erred in
 
granting summary judgment in favor of Domingo.
2 JBNC argues that
 
2 On this point of error, JBNC fails to comply with the requirements of
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4), which provides, in
pertinent part: 
Rule 28. BRIEFS.
 
. . . .
 
(b) Opening brief. Within 40 days after the filing of
the record on appeal, the appellant shall file an opening
brief, containing the following sections in the order here
indicated:
 
. . . .
 
(continued...)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[Domingo's] Motion to Dismiss or for Summary Judgment on
 
Complaint Filed April 19, 2012, for an Award of $24,000.00, and
 for Attorneys' Fees and Costs" (Domingo's MSJ) filed August 7,
 
2014 was (1) procedurally deficient; (2) not supported by
 
admissible evidence of Domingo's repairs to the property; and (3)
 improperly requested judgment in the amount of $24,000.
 
JBNC's first argument is that because Domingo's MSJ was
 
filed over a year after the circuit court's deadline for
 dispositive motions, the circuit court was barred from granting
 Domingo's motion.
3 JBNC cites only to the circuit court's April
 
26, 2013 order setting a July 10, 2013 deadline for dispositive
 motions, arguing that the circuit court failed to comply with its
 own scheduling order. At the time the circuit court set the
 deadline in the scheduling order, Domingo was representing
 himself pro se. After the deadline had passed, the circuit court
 continued to urge Domingo to find pro bono representation, which
 Domingo secured around the beginning of December 2013.
 
The circuit court has "inherent equity, supervisory, 
and administrative powers as well as inherent power to control the litigation process before" it. Enos v. Pac. Transfer & 
Warehouse, Inc., 79 Hawai
'i 452, 457, 903 P.2d 1273, 1278 (1995) 
(quoting Richardson v. Sport Shinko (Waikiki Corp.), 76 Hawai 'i 
494, 507, 880 P.2d 169, 182 (1994)). "A court has the discretion to grant or refuse a continuance of a proceeding in the orderly 
2(...continued)
 
(4) A concise statement of the points of error set
forth in separately numbered paragraphs. Each point shall
state: (i) the alleged error committed by the court or
agency; (ii) where in the record the alleged error occurred;
and (iii) where in the record the alleged error was objected
to or the manner in which the alleged error was brought to
the attention of the court or agency. . . .
 
Points not presented in accordance with this section
will be disregarded, except that the appellate court, at its
option, may notice a plain error not presented.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
3 We note that JBNC failed to raise this argument in its opposition to
Domingo's MSJ, and made only a single reference to this argument at the
hearing on Domingo's MSJ when counsel for JBNC stated, "I believe also a
Motion to Dismiss at this point is untimely," which we consider to have
preserved the argument for appeal.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
administration of justice." Sapp v. Wong, 62 Haw. 34, 41, 609 
P.2d 137, 142 (1980). JBNC has provided no basis for this court 
to conclude that the circuit court's implied extension of its scheduling order was an abuse of discretion, and we find none, particularly in light of the circuit court's own recognition of the need for Domingo to secure pro bono representation. See 
Exotics Hawaii-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Du Pont De Nemours & Co., 116 Hawai
'i 277, 308 n.18, 172 P.3d 1021, 1052 n.18 (2007) 
(recognizing that a trial court may rule implicitly to extend a pretrial scheduling order to allow for additional discovery). 
JBNC also argues that Domingo was not entitled to
 
summary judgment because he was in default at the time the
 Domingo MSJ was filed, but no default judgment had been entered
 against Domingo. JBNC's argument is without merit.
 
JBNC's second and third arguments are raised for the 
first time on appeal and are therefore deemed waived. See Ass'n 
of Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., Ltd., 100 Hawai
'i 97, 107, 58 P.3d 608, 618 (2002) ("Legal issues not 
raised in the trial court are ordinarily deemed waived on appeal."); see also HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(D) ("Points not presented in accordance with this section will be disregarded[.]").
II. Attorneys' Fees
 
JBNC challenges the circuit court's award of attorneys'
 
fees to Domingo under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 607-14
 
(Supp. 2015). JBNC first argues that the foreclosure process
 
involves two steps, one step in the nature of assumpsit and the
 other not in the nature of assumpsit. As such, JBNC argues, "the
 Circuit Court erred when it found that the predominant character
 of the underlying foreclosure action was in the nature of
 assumpsit and failed to make any apportionment between Domingo's
 defense of the assumpsit and non-assumpsit portions of the
 action." Second, JBNC argues, there was no contractual basis for
 an attorneys' fees award because the loan documents do not
 provide for attorneys' fees. Third, JBNC argues, "it was
 fundamentally improper and constituted a conflict of interest for
 the Circuit Court to award Domingo prevailing party attorneys'
 fees at the rate of $300 an hour for an attorney that the Circuit
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court, on its own initiative, selected 'pro bono' to represent
 
Domingo."
A.	 Proportional Award Based on Assumpsit and Non-Assumpit
Portions of Action
 
JBNC argues that the circuit court failed to apportion
 
attorneys' fees based on the assumpsit and non-assumpsit portions
 
of JBNC's claims. Furthermore, JBNC argues, "[t]he remedy sought
 by JBNC was to foreclose its lien and take possession of the
 Property. Accordingly, the predominant character of the
 underlying action was not to obtain damages for non-performance
 of a contract and thus not in the nature of assumpsit."
 
The circuit court awarded attorneys' fees pursuant to
 
HRS § 607-14, which provides, in pertinent part:
 
In all the courts, in all actions in the nature of assumpsit
and in all actions on a promissory note or other contract in
writing that provides for an attorney's fee, there shall be
taxed as attorneys' fees, to be paid by the losing party and
to be included in the sum for which execution may
issue[.] . . . The court shall then tax attorneys' fees,
which the court determines to be reasonable, to be paid by
the losing party; provided that this amount shall not exceed
twenty-five per cent of the judgment.
 
"[A]ssumpsit is a common law form of action which allows for the 
recovery of damages for non-performance of a contract, either express or implied, written or verbal, as well as quasi contractual obligations." TSA Int'l Ltd. v. Shimizu Corp., 92 
Hawai
'i 243, 264, 990 P.2d 713, 734 (1999) (internal quotation 
marks omitted) (quoting Shulz v. Honsador, 67 Haw. 433, 435, 690 P.2d 279, 281 (1984)). 
"[I]n awarding attorneys' fees in a case involving both 
assumpsit and non-assumpsit claims, a court must base its award of fees, if practicable, on an apportionment of the fees claimed between assumpsit and non-assumpsit claims." Blair v. Ing, 96 
Hawai
'i 327, 332, 31 P.3d 184, 189 (2001). "In ascertaining the 
nature of the proceeding on appeal, [appellate courts look] to the essential character of the underlying action in the trial court." Id. (brackets omitted) (quoting Leslie v. Estate of 
Tavares, 93 Hawai
'i 1, 5, 994 P.2d 1047, 1051 (2000)). "The 
character of the action should be determined from the facts and issues raised in the complaint, the nature of the entire 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
grievance, and the relief sought." Blair, 96 Hawai 'i at 332, 31 
P.3d at 189 (quoting Helfand v. Gerson, 105 F.3d 530, 537 (9th 
Cir. 1997)). 
In Blair, a plaintiff sought relief on two claims, one 
for the breach of an implied contract and the second for negligence. Blair, 96 Hawai
'i at 332, 31 P.3d at 189. The 
claims were based "on the allegation that [the defendant, an accountant], in providing tax return preparation services, failed to take advantage of certain estate planning techniques that resulted in the loss of savings in excess of $200,000." Id. In 
evaluating the nature of the plaintiff's claim, the Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court concluded that even the plaintiff's tort claim arose out of the alleged implied contract between the parties because "[w]ithout the implied contract, which could create a cognizable duty, [p]laintiffs would have no negligence claim." Id. Furthermore, the supreme court noted, "the damages alleged 
were more closely akin to contract damages than to tort damages because they were economic damages arising out of the alleged frustrated expectation that [the defendant] would take advantage of certain tax-saving devices." Id. at 332-33, 31 P.3d at 189­
90. The supreme court held that because the negligence claim was
 
"inextricably linked" to the implied contract claim, the entire
 action could be considered "in the nature of assumpsit." Id. at
 
333, 31 P.3d at 190.
 
In comparison, the supreme court held in 808 Dev., LLC
 
v. Murakami, 111 Hawai
'i 349, 141 P.3d 996 (2006), that a 
mechanic's lien application is "not in the nature of assumpsit" because such an action is based on the mechanic's lien statute and does not seek damages for an underlying contract. Id. at 
366, 141 P.3d at 1013. 
JBNC urges this court to recognize a division between
 
the assumpsit portion of its claim for money damages and the non­assumpsit portion of its claim for a lien foreclosure, and to
 hold that the circuit court erred by awarding attorneys' fees for
 the entire action rather than apportioning the fees.
 
In evaluating JBNC's complaint, we look to the 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
essential nature of the underlying action and the relief sought. 
See Blair, 96 Hawai 'i at 332, 31 P.3d at 189. JBNC sought, in 
its complaint, the right to foreclose upon the property. JBNC alleged that because Domingo "defaulted in the observance and performance of the terms, covenants and conditions by failing to repair the property as required by the Repair Rider to the Loan Agreement in a timely manner[,]" "the loan has been called due and payable . . . ." JBNC failed to provide a statutory basis for its right to foreclose in its complaint.
4 JBNC presumably 
sought a judicial foreclosure of the property under HRS § 667-1.5 (Supp. 2015), which provides, "The circuit court may assess the amount due upon a mortgage, whether of real or personal property, without the intervention of a jury, and shall render judgment for the amount awarded, and the foreclosure of the mortgage. Execution may be issued on the judgment, as ordered by the court." 
Because the basis for JBNC's requested relief of the 
right to foreclose was statutory rather than contractual, the portion of JBNC's action dealing with its right to foreclose on the property does not fall within HRS § 607-14. See 808 Dev., 
111 Hawai
'i at 366, 141 P.3d at 1013. 
Aside from the right to foreclose on the property,
 
however, JBNC sought additional relief in the form of contractual
 damages, "including principal, interest, costs, expenses or
 advances, late fees and attorneys' fees[.]" A significant
 portion of JBNC's requested relief is based on an alleged breach
 
5
of the Note, Loan Agreement, and Mortgage,  and are therefore "in
the nature of assumpsit." See Santiago v. Tanaka
, 137 Hawai 'i 
137, 159 n.40, 366 P.3d 612, 634 n.40 (2016) (holding that a 
4 JBNC stated in its MSJ that it was entitled to enforce the Note 
pursuant to HRS § 490:1-201 (2008 Repl.). HRS § 490:1-201 is the "general
definitions" section of the Uniform Commercial Code adopted by the Hawai' i 
legislature and has no apparent connection to JBNC's foreclosure actionagainst Domingo. 
5 The Note, Loan Agreement, and Mortgage, copies of which were attached
to the complaint, allow JBNC, as the lender, to require immediate payment in
full of all outstanding principal and accrued interest if "[a]n obligation of
[Domingo] under the Security Instrument is not performed." The Note allows
 JBNC to include "costs and expenses, including reasonable and customary
attorneys' fees" if it "has required immediate payment in full."
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
borrower was entitled to attorneys' fees under HRS § 607-14 for a
 
breach of mortgage and breach of note counterclaims against the
 borrower).
 
Having determined that JBNC's complaint for foreclosure
 
and contractual damages includes both non-assumpsit and assumpsit
 claims, we next evaluate whether it is practicable to apportion
 attorneys' fees between the claims. Both the action for
 
6
foreclosure and for contractual damages require a default  under
the terms of the Note and Mortgage. Like the negligence and breach of implied contract claims in 
Blair, here the foreclosure 
and breach of contract claims are "inextricably linked" by the default requirement such that "it is impracticable, if not impossible, to apportion the fees between the assumpsit and non­assumpsit claims." Blair, 96 Hawai
'i at 333, 31 P.3d at 190. 
Therefore, the circuit court did not err by failing to apportion fees. 
B. Contractual Basis for Borrower's Attorneys' Fees
 
JBNC next contends the circuit court erred in awarding
 
Domingo attorneys' fees because the loan documents do not provide
 
for attorneys' fees for Domingo, the borrower. JBNC does not
 cite any authority that requires a contract provide explicitly
 for attorneys' fees before a court may enter attorneys' fees in
 an action in the nature of assumpsit under HRS § 607-14. The
 statute itself does not limit recovery of attorneys' fees to
 contracts with attorneys' fees provisions. For example, HRS
 § 607-14 provides, "Where the note or other contract in writing
 provides for a fee of twenty-five per cent or more, or provides
 for a reasonable attorney's fee, not more than twenty-five per
 cent shall be allowed." The statute clearly contemplates the
 recovery of attorneys' fees even where the underlying contract
 does not include a provision for attorneys' fees. JBNC's
 argument is without merit. 
6 "Default" is defined as, when used as a noun, "[t]he omission or
failure to perform a legal or contractual duty; esp., the failure to pay a
debt when due," or, when used as a verb, "[t]o be neglectful; esp., to fail to
perform a contractual obligation." Black's Law Dictionary, 507 (10th ed.
 
2014).
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
C. Attorneys' Fees for Pro Bono Representation
 
Finally, JBNC challenges the circuit court's award of 
attorneys' fees on the basis that Domingo's attorney was retained 
on a pro bono basis and should not be entitled to attorneys' fees. Not only does JBNC fail to cite any authority in support of its argument, the proposition that attorneys' fees cannot be recovered in pro bono cases is incompatible with the purpose of fee-shifting statutes. See Schefke v. Reliable Collection 
Agency, Ltd., 96 Hawai
'i 408, 447, 32 P.3d 52, 91 (2001) 
(discussing the necessity of enhancement under the lodestar method of calculating attorneys' fees). "[I]n many cases, a client will be unable to pay for counsel or will be unwilling to assume the risk of liability for attorney's fees, even if the public interest may be significantly aided by the private litigation." Id. (citing Pennsylvania v. Delaware Valley 
Citizens' Council for Clean Air, 483 U.S. 711, 749 (1987)); see also Hawai
'i Rules of Professional Conduct (HRPC) Rule 6.1, cmt. 
1 ("Every lawyer, regardless of professional prominence or professional work load, has a responsibility to provide legal services to those unable to pay[.]"); HRPC Rule 6.1, cmt. 4 ("[T]he award of statutory attorneys' fees in a case originally accepted as pro bono would not disqualify such services from inclusion under this section."). JBNC's argument is without merit. 
III. HRCP Rule 11 Sanctions
 
On cross-appeal, Domingo argues that the circuit court
 
abused its discretion in refusing to impose sanctions on JBNC,
 
suggesting that evidence of JBNC's violations of HRCP Rule 11
 required the circuit court grant the sanctions.
 
Domingo cites Lepere v. United Pub. Workers, Local 646, 
AFL-CIO, 77 Hawai
'i 471, 887 P.2d 1029 (1995), for the 
proposition that a circuit court has no choice but to sanction a party or its counsel where it has determined that the party or its counsel has violated HRCP Rule 11. See id. at 474, 887 P.2d 
at 1032. In 1999, however, HRCP Rule 11 was amended. The resulting amendment no longer required a court to impose sanctions where it found a violation of the rule, but left the 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
imposition of sanctions to the court's discretion.7 Domingo's
 
argument that a circuit court is required to impose sanctions
 
where it finds a violation of HRCP Rule 11 is not supported by
 Lepere or the rule itself. 
The circuit court declined to impose sanctions under
 
HRCP Rule 11 because it found "there is no procedural basis to
 impose sanctions pursuant to [HRCP] Rule 11." At the hearing on
 Domingo's HRCP Rule 11 motion, the circuit court addressed trial
 counsel for Domingo, "Now in this particular instance judgment
 has already been entered, so what needs to be corrected in terms
 of a challenged paper, claim, defense, contention, or
 allegation?" The circuit court was apparently referring to the
 provision in HRCP Rule 11(c)(1)(A) that states, "A motion for
 sanctions . . . shall not be filed with or presented to the court
 unless, within 21 days after service of the motion . . ., the
 challenged paper, claim, defense, contention, allegation, or
 denial is not withdrawn or appropriately corrected." Presumably,
 the circuit court viewed the judgments entered against JBNC on
 January 15, 2015 and February 4, 2015 as having resolved the
 claims Domingo challenged in his motion.
 
Domingo argues on appeal that JBNC continued to violate
 
HRCP Rule 11 after the January 15, 2015 and February 4, 2015
 judgments when JBNC filed a motion for reconsideration of the
 
7 In 1995, when Lepere was decided, HRCP Rule 11 stated in pertinent
 
part: 
If a pleading, motion, or other paper is signed in violation
of this rule, the court, upon motion or upon its own
initiative, shall impose upon the person who signed it, a
represented party, or both, an appropriate sanction, which
may include an order to pay to the other party or parties
the amount of the reasonable expenses incurred because of
the filing of the pleading, motion, or other paper,
including a reasonable attorney's fee.
 
(Emphasis added.) HRCP Rule 11 was amended December 7, 1999 and became
effective January 1, 2000, to read, in pertinent part:
 
(c) Sanctions.  If, after notice and a reasonable
opportunity to respond, the court determines that
subdivision (b) has been violated, the court may, subject to
the conditions stated below, impose an appropriate sanction
upon the attorneys, law firms, or parties that have violated
subdivision (b) or are responsible for the violation.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
circuit court's judgment against JBNC. JBNC's motion for
 
reconsideration of the January 14, 2015 and February 4, 2015
 judgments was filed on May 1, 2015, about a week after Domingo
 filed his HRCP Rule 11 motion on April 24, 2015, and in light of
 this discrepancy, Domingo's argument appears to be disingenuous.
 
Based on Domingo's stated bases for bringing the HRCP
 
Rule 11 motion, which were all related to JBNC's complaint, we
 agree with the circuit court's conclusion that the judgments
 dismissing JBNC's complaint before Domingo's HRCP Rule 11 motion
 was filed precluded the circuit court from entering sanctions
 against JBNC because the offending complaint had been resolved. 
See HRCP Rule 11(c)(1)(A). 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Amended Judgment
 
Superceding Judgements [sic] Filed on January 15, 2015 and
 February 4, 2015" entered on August 10, 2015 in the Circuit Court
 of the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, October 11, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
David J. Minkin 
Jesse J.T. Smith Kurt W. Klein (McCorriston Miller Mukai
MacKinnon)
for Plaintiff-Apellant/
Cross-Appellee. 
Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Rebecca A. Copeland

for Defendant-Appellee/
Cross-Appellant.
 
12
 