NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-16-0000712 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
GRACE CHEN, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JONATHAN WILLIAM MAH, D.D.S.; JONATHAN MAH, DDS, INC.,
a Hawaii corporation, Defendants-Appellants, and
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE GOVERNMENTAL
AGENCIES 1-10; DOE ENTITIES 1-10; Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 12–1-2495-10) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.) 
Defendants-Appellants Jonathan William Mah, D.D.S. (Dr. 
Mah) and Jonathan Mah, DDS, Inc. (Mah, Inc.) (collectively, Mah) 
appeal from the July 6, 2016 Final Judgment (Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)
1 in favor 
of Plaintiff-Appellee Grace Chen, D.D.S. (Dr. Chen). Mah also challenges the Circuit Court's: (1) July 6, 2016 Findings of 
Fact and Conclusions of Law (FOFs and COLs); (2) August 8, 2013 
Order Denying [Mah's] Motion to Set Aside Entry of Default 
Entered on October 31, 2012 (Order Denying Set Aside); (3) July 
1 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
6, 2016 Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Award of Attorneys' 
Fees and Costs (Attorneys' Fees Order); and (4) September 26, 
2016 Order Denying [Mah's] Motion for Reconsideration and/or for 
New Trial (Order Denying Reconsideration). 
Mah asserts four points of error on appeal, contending 
that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) refusing to set aside the entry of default; (2) excluding certain evidence of liability and/or damages; (3) denying Mah's motion for reconsideration; and (4) "adopt[ing] verbatim [Dr. Chen]'s scripted findings and conclusions." 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Mah's points of error as follows: 
(1) Hawai# i courts apply the following test to 
determine whether to set aside an entry of default: 
a motion to set aside a default entry or a default judgment
may and should be granted whenever the court finds (1) thatthe nondefaulting party will not be prejudiced by thereopening, (2) that the defaulting party has a meritoriousdefense, and (3) that the default was not the result ofinexcusable neglect or a wilful act. 
BDM, Inc. v. Sageco, Inc., 57 Haw. 73, 76, 549 P.2d 1147, 1150 
(1976) (citations omitted). If a moving party fails to establish any prong of the test, it is not an abuse of discretion to refuse to set aside the default. Citicorp Mortg., Inc. v. Bartolome, 94 
Hawai# i 422, 439 16 P.3d 827, 844 (App. 2000) citing Park v. 
Tanaka, 75 Haw. 271, 281, 859 P.2d 917, 922 (1993) (no meritorious defense); and Dillingham Inves. Corp. v. Kunio V. 
2  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Yokoyama Tr., 8 Haw. App. 226, 236, 797 P.2d 1316, 1321 (1990) 
(inexcusable neglect and wilful act)). 
Here, the Circuit Court did not find that prejudice 
would be caused by reopening. 
Regarding the issue of a meritorious defense, Mah 
argues that the Circuit Court focused exclusively on the fraud claim during the hearing, resulting in an inherently flawed conclusion as to whether Mah had a meritorious defense to the remaining eleven claims. However, this argument is unsupported 
by the record. The Circuit Court did not limit its determination 
to Mah's defenses against the fraud claim but instead stated, in general terms, that "[Mah's] arguments really go to damages which they are not precluded from litigating even if they are in default." While counsel for Mah repeatedly limited his argument 
to the fraud claims, in its ruling, the Circuit Court did not 
limit its ruling to just the fraud claim. 
However, even if Mah could establish that the Circuit 
Court erred in disregarding any of Mah's purportedly meritorious defenses, the argument that the failure to answer the Complaint was the result of excusable neglect lacks merit. 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has recognized that the typical 
circumstances that do not rise to the level of excusable neglect include, for example, a defendant's failure to answer to a properly served complaint without any reason, for an improper reason, or without seeking the approval or extension from the court, as well as circumstances in which there is a lengthy delay between the entry of default and the filing of the motion to set 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
aside the default. Cty. of Hawaii v. Ala Loop Homeowners, 123 
Hawai# i 391, 423-24, 235 P.3d 1103, 1135-36 (2010) (citing Pogia 
v. Ramos, 10 Haw. App. 411, 416-17, 876 P.2d 1342, 1345 (1994) 
(affirming a refusal to set aside default when defendant claimed that she did not answer because "she was having problems with her marriage" and "did not understand what the legal papers meant" and where the motion was not filed until more than three years after entry of default); and Hupp v. Accessory Distrib., Inc., 1 Haw. App. 174, 178-79, 616 P.2d 233, 236 (1980) (concluding that refusal to set aside default was proper when defendant's insurer failed to file an answer for nine months without seeking approval of the court)). In contrast, the supreme court has recognized that where a defendant demonstrates an immediate effort to defend against the complaint, actively seeks to retain counsel, files requests for extensions of time to answer with the court, and promptly files the motion to set aside the entry of default, such efforts constitute excusable neglect that warrant setting aside the entry of default. Id. 
Here, Dr. Mah was personally and properly served with 
the Complaint along with Dr. Chen's first discovery requests. While this may have followed various discussions with Dr. Chen's counsel "for weeks," as Mah contends, which allegedly led Dr. Mah to believe "that providing documents and information would avoid litigation," he had been made fully aware of the nature of Dr. Chen's demands and concerns, that an 
impasse had been reached, 
and that litigation was imminent. Moreover, while these several 
discussions with counsel may explain Dr. Mah's alleged surprise 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
as to the filing of the Complaint, Mah has not cited any reason 
for failing to respond to the Complaint once it had in fact been filed. Pogia, 10 Haw. App. at 416, 876 P.2d at 1345 ("defaulted party who failed to answer a complaint must make a showing why the party was justified in failing to respond to the complaint"). Notwithstanding Mah's contention that participating in continuing discussions with Dr. Chen's counsel indicated Mah's desire to resolve the dispute, Mah does not assert that there was any effort to continue these discussions after the Complaint was filed, and Mah failed to seek any extensions from the Circuit Court to, for example, obtain more time to resolve the dispute out of court. Finally, Mah filed the motion to set aside the entry of default only after Dr. Chen had filed her First Motion for Default Judgment, nearly nine months following the filing of the Complaint.  Based on Mah's failure to cite any reason for 
failing to answer the Complaint, the lack of any effort to defend 
against the Complaint or to seek an extension from the Circuit Court to do so, and the lengthy delay in filing the motion to set aside entry of default, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in determining that the failure to answer the complaint did not result from excusable neglect. See Ala Loop Homeowners, 123 Hawai# i at 423-24, 235 P.3d at 1135-36. 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in entering the Order Denying Set Aside. 
(2) Mah contends that the Circuit Court erred in 
excluding evidence, specifically declarations of Gloria L. Thompson Ogawa, William Anderson, Deenisha Lee, and Kaipo Gaspar. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
However, Mah merely asserts that "the court took numerous steps 
to cripple [Mah]'s ability to provide any defense to damages" by refusing to consider the testimony of certain witnesses who would have "refute[d] [Dr. Chen]'s purported damages." This point is waived for its failure to present argument in accordance with Hawai# i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7).
2 
Moreover, it lacks merit. "[T]rial courts have broad 
powers to control the litigation process before them, including the presentation of evidence." Weinberg v. Dickson-Weinberg, 123 
Hawai# i 68, 75, 229 P.3d 1133, 1140 (2010) (citation omitted). 
Here, the Circuit Court struck these witnesses' testimony based on Mah's failure to comply with the Court's deadline for disclosing witnesses. There is no cogent argument and nothing in the record to support a conclusion that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in doing so. 
(3) Mah contends that the Circuit Court abused its 
discretion in denying reconsideration based on newly discovered evidence that would offset the damages award.  Specifically, Mah 
submits that there is new evidence of more than fifty patients 
who "received treatment below the standard of care by [Dr. 
2 HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) provides, in pertinent part: 
(b) Opening Brief.  Within 40 days after the filing of
the record on appeal, the appellant shall file an opening
brief, containing the following sections in order hereindicated: 
. . . . (7) The argument, containing the contentions of the
appellant on the points presented and the reasons therefor,with citations to the authorities, statutes and parts of therecord relied on. . . . Points not argued may be deemedwaived. 
6  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Chen]," thus warranting reconsideration of the Circuit Court's 
ruling and calculation of damages. 
"'[T]he purpose of a motion for reconsideration is to 
allow the parties to present new evidence and/or arguments that could not have been presented during the earlier adjudicated motion.'" 
Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea 
Resort Co., 100 Hawai# i 97, 110, 58 P.3d 608, 621 (2002) 
(citation omitted). 
"Reconsideration is not a device to 
relitigate old matters or to raise arguments or evidence that could and should have been brought during the earlier proceeding." Id. 
Here, the record demonstrates that evidence of patient 
complaints could and should have been presented by Mah at trial. For instance, Mah's former counsel, in a letter to Dr. Chen dated more than one month prior to trial, describes the complaints of two of Dr. Chen's patients who allegedy required remedial treatment and alludes to "numerous other patients who also have extreme situations." Moreover, Dr. Mah testified repeatedly that 
he was made aware of the "many" patient complaints regarding Dr. 
Chen's "quality of care" and various "failed procedures" during her time with his practice, all of which necessarily occurred prior to August 2012 when she resigned, well in advance of trial. In fact, the apparent theory of Mah's defense as to damages at trial was, in part, that Dr. Chen repeatedly billed insurance providers for multiple failed procedures, resulting in an overpayment in her compensation, which the Circuit Court rejected based on, 
inter alia, Dr. Mah's lack of credibility as a witness. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Accordingly, the evidence of patient complaints that could have 
potentially offset the damages awarded to Dr. Chen was not "newly" discovered evidence that could not have been presented during the earlier proceeding and thus cannot serve as the basis for reconsideration. See, e.g., Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 27 (1992). Therefore, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Mah's Motion for Reconsideration. 
Mah also contends that the Circuit Court erred in 
denying his Motion for New Trial based on the Circuit Court's improper application of the law and in light of the substantial evidence demonstrating that Mah overpaid Dr. Chen by $161,110, directly offsetting the damages awarded to Dr. Chen.
  "[O]n a 
new trial motion, [the] movant need not convince the court to rule that no substantial evidence supports [its] opponent's case, but only that the verdict rendered for [its] opponent is against the manifest weight of the evidence." Richardson v. Sport Shinko (Waikiki Corp.), 76 3
Hawai# i 494, 503, 880 P.2d 169, 178 
(1994) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). The denial of a motion for a new trial is appropriate unless "the undisputed evidence results in a verdict that is without legal support such that justice requires a new trial[.]" Miyamoto v. Lum, 104 Hawai
#i 1, 11, 84 P.3d 509, 519 (2004) (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted). Thus, "[i]nasmuch as the 
3 To the extent Mah's motion should be construed as a motion for a 
new trial on the basis of newly-discovered evidence, as discussed above, the
evidence was not previously undiscovered despite a purported exercise of duediligence, and the Circuit Court did not err in denying the motion for Mah'sfailure to meet the applicable standard. See Kawamata Farms, Inc. v. UnitedAgri. Prods., 86 Hawai #i 214, 259-60, 948 P.2d 1055, 1100-01 (1997). 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
record evinces that evenly balanced evidence" was presented at 
trial, the circuit court has not abused its discretion in denying the motion as the verdict is not therefore against the manifest weight of the evidence. Id.
At trial, Dr. Chen presented testimonial evidence of 
her compensation formula as agreed with Dr. Mah as well as documentary evidence of her compensation checks and supporting documentation prior to the unexplained change in her compensation in November 2012.  
Additionally, Dr. Chen presented evidence of 
Dr. Mah's repeated promises to include her in a partnership as well as her increased production in reliance on those promises. In opposition, Dr. Mah testified as to a different compensation formula, failed to timely present any evidence of her purported overpayment resulting from uncollectible insurance claims, and denied making any representations to her regarding a partnership. In light of the Circuit Court's determination that Dr. Mah was not credible and did not properly present evidence of offsetting claims, the record does not demonstrate that the evidence in the record supports Mah's case to any extent or that the verdict is otherwise "against the manifest weight of the evidence." See Richardson, 76 Hawai# i at 503, 880 P.2d at 178. Accordingly, the 
Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Mah's motion for new trial. 
(4) Finally, Mah argues that the Circuit Court erred 
by signing "scripted" FOFs and COLs, "violating widespread common law rules prohibiting such a practice." The cases cited by Mah are distinguishable and Mah cites no authority for the 
9  However, it may be discerned from Mah's previous 
argument that Mah contends that the Circuit Court erred in 
entering FOF 34 and COLs FF, GG, ZZ, and AAA,  in which the court 
determined or otherwise implied that a fiduciary employer-employee relationship existed between Dr. Chen and Mah. It is clear from the Circuit Court's ruling, however, that the existence of a fiduciary or an employer-employee relationship between the parties did not serve as the basis for its determination of damages on the fraud and misrepresentation claims, which stemmed from Dr. Mah's repeated and intentionally false statements regarding a partnership with Dr. Chen. Accordingly, to the extent that the Circuit Court erred in how it construed the parties' relationship, such error is harmless and does not warrant relief. See Dupree v. Hiraga, 121 Hawai# i 297, 4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
proposition that it is improper or "prohibited" for a court to adopt FOFs or COLs drafted by a party, as directed by the court to prepare the order. To the extent that Mah makes a generic assertion that the Circuit Court erred in adopting the proposed order, this argument is disregarded. Kakinami v. Kakinami, 127 Hawai# i 126, 144 n.16, 276 P.3d 695, 713 n.16 (2012) (citing In 
re Guardianship of Carlsmith, 113 Hawai# i 
236, 246, 151 P.3d 717, 
727 (2007) (noting that this court may "disregard a particular contention if the appellant makes no discernible argument in support of that position")). 
4 Mah makes no discernible argument as to how the Circuit Court
erred in entering COLs HH, II, and LL and thus these contentions are
disregarded. Laeroc Waikiki Parkside, LLC v. K.S.K. (Oahu) Ltd. P'ship, 115Hawai #i 201, 212, 166 P.3d 961, 972 (2007) (recognizing that the appellate
court will not consider a contention unsupported by authority or analysis).  
10  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
320 n.28, 219 P.3d 1084, 1107 n.28 (2009) (recognizing as 
harmless any error in including extraneous COLs where they were not material to the ruling). 
Finally, Mah asserts that the Circuit Court 
"erroneously pierced the corporate veil."  This argument is 
inapposite to the Circuit Court's determination that Dr. Mah was 
liable for fraud and misrepresentation on the basis of his representations to Dr. Chen as an agent of Mah, Inc., which exposed him to personal liability. See, e.g., Laeroc Waikiki Parkside, LLC, 115 Hawai# i at 228 n.31, 166 P.3d at 988 n.31 
(citing Restatement (Second) Agency § 348 (2006) ("An agent who fraudulently makes representations . . . is subject to liability in tort to the injured person although the fraud occurs in a transaction on behalf of the principal.")). 
Accordingly, we 
conclude that Mah's fourth point of error is without merit.  5 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's July 6, 2016 
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 14, 2019. 
On the briefs: Mark G. Valencia, 
Matthew A. Cohen,(Case Lombardi & Pettit),for Defendants-Appellants. Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Dennis W. King,
(Deeley, King, Pang &
Van Etten),
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
5 Mah also requests that this court vacate the Attorneys' Fees
Order, but fails to cite any basis for this contention. As the Circuit Court's FOFs and COLs and other orders in this case are affirmed, and becauseMah presents no argument as to the reasonableness of the attorneys' fees andcosts, the Attorneys' Fees Order also is affirmed. 
11 