  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000184
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE INTEREST OF DW
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 13-00057)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Father-Appellant (Father) appeals from the Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights entered on March 9, 2015, in the
 
1
Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court),  which
terminated Father's parental rights to his child (
DW).
 
On appeal, Father challenges the Family Court's

 
Findings of Fact (FOFs) 62, 71, 87, 91, 92, 97, 98, 100, and 109,
 
and Conclusion of Law (COL) 10, and contends there was not clear
 
and convincing evidence that Father could not provide a safe
 
family home within a reasonable period of time, even with the
 assistance of a service plan. Father argues, inter alia, that
 due to late service of the summons and his delayed appearance in
 the proceeding, he was not provided with a reasonable opportunity
 to comply with services. 
1
 The Honorable Steven M. Nakashima presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Father's point of error as follows:
 
DW entered foster care on April 9, 2013, after being
 
taken into protective custody within days of his birth. From at
 least April 2013, Father knew that DW was in foster custody,
 there was a court case pending regarding his child, and that
 Father needed to participate in services. Although the
 Department of Human Services (DHS) filed a Summons seeking
 
Father's appearance at a June 3, 2013 hearing, DHS was unable to
 
serve Father with the Petition and Summons, even though Father
 had agreed to call the server to make arrangements to be served. 
Father made his first appearance on January 2, 2014, pursuant to
 a Summons that was served on him on October 10, 2013, while he
 was in custody at the Oahu Community Correctional Center (OCCC). 
At the time of Father's first appearance in January
 
2014, he was apparently still incarcerated in OCCC. Pursuant to
 a September 2013 Service Plan, which was explained to Father at
 the January 2014 hearing, Father stipulated to and was ordered to
 participate in the service plan which included substance abuse
 testing, remaining drug free, participation in parenting/outreach
 home based services, and completion of a psychological evaluation
 after 90 days of sobriety. Father did not participate in any
 services while he was incarcerated. After Father was released in
 April 2014, he failed to immediately contact DHS, notwithstanding
 DHS instructions to do so. Although Father participated in
 substance abuse treatment after being released, Father relapsed,
 and became homeless, until approximately September or October
 2014 when he entered residential, followed by intensive
 outpatient, substance abuse treatment. Father did not start
 regular visitation with DW until December 2014.
 
At the March 9, 2015 trial, Iwalani Lum (Lum), a DHS
 
social worker, testified that Father was not presently willing
 and able to provide a safe family home and was unlikely to become
 willing and able to provide a safe family home within a
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasonable amount of time, not to exceed two years from April 9,
 
2013, the date DW entered foster care. Lum testified that in
 order to reunify, Father would have to provide a home,
 participate in hands-on parenting, demonstrate what he learned,
 be consistent with visitation, and provide a sober lifestyle with
 supportive family members. 
Lum stated that Father had not demonstrated that he
 
could be clean and sober outside of a structured treatment
 environment and that he would need four to six months before
 being clinically discharged from substance abuse treatment.
 Father was also required to be at the clean and sober house while
 participating in his treatment program, which did not allow
 children in the house. Thus, Father could not provide a physical
 home to DW Father also missed his psychological examination,
 which had been scheduled for February 11, 2015. Father was on a
 wait list for parenting classes. In Lum's opinion, it would take
 Father a year or more to reunify with DW, roughly three years
 from when DW had been placed in foster custody, and that
 providing additional time would not be in the best interest of
 DW, who was not bonded to Father as a parent, although they had
 been beginning to develop a relationship through visitation.
 
In sum, Father failed to participate in any services
 
while incarcerated, relapsed into drug use after his release,
 failed to participate in or complete any services according to
 his service plan during the time he was not incarcerated from
 January 2014 to March 2015, was in intensive outpatient substance
 abuse treatment at the time his parental rights were terminated,
 and could not provide a family home to DW In addition, it would
 take Father an additional four to six months to be clinically
 discharged from substance abuse treatment, which would only
 address his drug use issue. Upon review, the record contains
 substantial evidence in support of the challenged FOFs. For
 these reasons, we conclude that there was clear and convincing
 evidence that Father was not willing and able to provide a safe
 family home to DW, even with the assistance of a service plan,
 and the Family Court did not err in entering COL 10. Even when
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Father's delayed service of process and appearance in the
 
proceeding is considered, given that it would take an additional
 year or more for Father to address all of DHS's concerns, there
 was also clear and convincing evidence that it was not likely
 that Father would become willing and able to provide a safe
 family home in a reasonable period of time, not to exceed two
 years from the date DW entered foster custody on April 9, 2013.
 
Therefore, the Family Court's March 9, 2015 Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 13, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Randal I. Shintani 
for Father-Appellant
 Presiding Judge
Associate JudgeAssociate JudgePatrick A. Pascual 
Mary Anne Magnier Jay K. GossDeputy Attorneys GeneralFamily Law DivisionState of Hawai
'i 
for Petitioner-AppelleeDepartment of Human Services 
4
 