NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-20-0000097 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
KALANI UYEMURA, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
NORTH AND SOUTH KONA DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 3DCW-19-0000763)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Kalani Uyemura (Uyemura
) appeals 
from the December 27, 2019 Judgment and Notice of Entry of 
Judgment and the January 27, 2020 Amended Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment, entered in the District Court of the Third Circuit, Kona Division (District Court
).1 The District Court 
found Uyemura guilty of Assault in the Third Degree (Assault 3), 
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) HRS § 707-712 
(2014);2 and Theft in the Third Degree (Theft 3), in violation of 
1 The Honorable Margaret K. Masunaga presided. 
2 HRS § 707-712 provides, in relevant part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of assault in the
third degree if the person:
(a) Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly
causes bodily injury to another person[.]
. . . . 
(2) Assault in the third degree is a misdemeanor
unless committed in a fight or scuffle entered into bymutual consent, in which case it is a pettymisdemeanor. 
(continued...) 2(...continued)NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 708-832 (Supp. 2016).3  
On appeal, Uyemura raises the following three points of 
error: (1) insufficient evidence supports the Assault 3 
conviction because no other witness corroborated complaining witness Joshua K. Waters' (Waters)
 testimony, and defense witness 
Megan Saenz (Saenz) testified that Waters was the aggressor and 
that Uyemura acted only in self defense; (2) insufficient 
evidence supports the Theft 3 conviction because, other than Waters' testimony that his phone was worth $600, there was no additional evidence of the phone's value, such as receipts or an appraisal; and (3) the District Court failed to consider mutual affray as a mitigating defense to Assault 3. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we affirm. 
(1) The appellate court reviews a sufficiency-of-the-
evidence challenge as follows: 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution
when the appellate court passes on the legalsufficiency of such evidence to support aconviction[.] . . . The test on appeal is notwhether guilt is established beyond a reasonabledoubt, but whether there was substantial evidence tosupport the conclusion of the trier of fact. Indeed,even if it could be said in a bench trial that the conviction is against the weight of the evidence, aslong as there is substantial evidence to support therequisite findings for conviction, the trial courtwill be affirmed. . . .  "Substantial evidence" . . . is credible evidence which is of sufficient qualityand probative value to enable a person of reasonablecaution to support a conclusion. 
State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai# i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 
(2007). 
As set forth in HRS §707-700 (2014), "bodily injury" is defined as
"physical pain, illness, or any impairment of physical condition." 
3 HRS § 708-832 provides, in relevant part: "A person commits the
offense of theft in the third degree if the person commits theft: (a) Ofproperty or services the value of which exceeds $250[.]" 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  The District Court found Waters credible and Saenz not 
credible. Waters and Saenz testified to very different versions 
of events occurring on March 25, 2019. 
Waters testified he observed Uyemura in the parking lot 
of the condominium complex where they both were living and Uyemura did a "hand-off" exchange with a vehicle occupant. Waters approached Uyemura, asked for his name, they did a fist bump, and Waters walked towards the complex's smoking pavilion. A few minutes later, Uyemura approached Waters yelling and in response Waters told Uyemura he and others were tired of the traffic that comes in and out of Uyemura's unit all hours of the day, and to take his business outside the fence because there are kids in the area. Uyemura spat in Waters' face and took some 
swings at Waters, who jumped backwards and his phone fell out of 
his pocket. Uyemura then took the phone and ran, Waters chased Uyemura but he ran across the road to a commercial parking lot, where Uyemura started throwing rocks at Waters, one of which hit Waters in the shin and broke some skin. Waters returned to the condominium complex where he was followed by a woman he believed to be Uyemura's girlfriend or roommate, who was belligerent and yelling at him. Waters then encountered Uyemura again at the condominium complex and told Uyemura to return his phone. Uyemura was belligerent, started wildly jumping around, spat in Waters' face again, and swung his fists at Waters, with one of the swings hitting Waters in the cheekbone breaking skin. Waters then fought back, hit Uyemura with a left hook, and they ended up wrestling until a neighbor came out, at which point Uyemura went to his unit. Waters subsequently called the police. 
Saenz testified that Uyemura is her friend, that she 
had witnessed an incident between Uyemura and another person from his apartment complex, during which the other person was chasing Uyemura while holding a big rock on his shoulders and yelling at Uyemura. Uyemura ran to a parking lot across the street, and the other person returned to the area of the apartments. Eventually, Uyemura, Saenz and the other person ended up near Uyemura's apartment where the other person started pushing Uyemura and 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
there was a little scuffle. Saenz testified that the other 
person hit Uyemura first. 
The District Court also noted the testimony of Hawai# i 
County police officer Chandler Nacino (
Officer Nacino), who 
responded to the incident and testified that Waters' face was bloody and his left shin was cut and bleeding. Officer Nacino also testified that Uyemura had an abrasion to one of his hands. 
"It is well-settled that an appellate court will not 
pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trial judge." State v. Gella, 92 Hawai# i 135, 142, 988 P.2d 200, 207 
(1999) (citation omitted). 
Further, "[t]he testimony of one 
percipient witness can provide sufficient evidence to support a conviction." State v. Pulse, 83 Hawai# i 229, 244, 925 P.2d 77, 
812 (1996) (citations omitted). 
Thus, we do not pass on the 
District Court's credibility assessment finding Waters credible and finding Saenz to be not credible. 
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the 
prosecution, as we must, there is substantial evidence in the record supporting Uyemura's conviction for Assault 3. 
(2) Sufficient evidence supports the Theft 3 conviction 
because Waters testified that he believed his phone, an iPhone 6, was worth $600 in 2019. 
He based the amount on what he purchased 
his iPhone 5 for in 2017. There is no legal requirement that a stolen item's value be proved by a receipt or appraisal. 
Even if we assume Waters' testimony about the phone was 
somehow incompetent, Uyemura did not object or move to strike Waters' testimony regarding the value of the phone.
4 "[T]he rule 
4 Uyemura does not dispute any element of Theft 3 other than the
phone's value. HRS § 708-801 (2014) provides, in relevant part: 
Whenever the value of property or services is
determinative of the class or grade of an offense, or
otherwise relevant to a prosecution, the followingshall apply:
(1) Except as otherwise specified in thissection, value means the market value ofthe property or services at the time andplace of the offense, or the replacement
(continued...) 
4 4(...continued) NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is well settled that evidence even though incompetent, if 
admitted without objection or motion to strike, is to be given the same probative force as that to which it would be entitled if it were competent," and its admission "will not constitute ground for reversal." State v. Wallace, 80 Hawai# i 382, 410, 910 P.2d 
695, 723 (1996). 
The District Court properly considered Waters' 
testimony. 
Moreover, contrary to Uyemura's contention, Hawai# i 
courts do not require an appraisal or receipt to establish the value element of a stolen item in a theft charge. See, e.g., 
State v. Carroll, 146 Hawai# i 138, 153, 456 P.3d 502, 517 (2020); 
State v. Kahele-Bishop, No. CAAP-14-0001361, 2017 WL 430844, at *6 (App. Jan. 31, 2017) (mem.); 
State v. Thorp, No. CAAP-13-
0000414, 2014 WL 4914623, at *1 (App. Sept. 30, 2014) (SDO). 
Viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution, 
there is substantial evidence in the record supporting Uyemura's conviction for Theft 3. 
(3) Uyemura argues that the District Court failed to 
consider mutual affray as a mitigating defense to Assault 3, as evidenced by the District Court's "fail[ure] to make any findings as to whether mutual affray occurred." 
Uyemura only cites State v. Kikuta
, 125 Hawai# i 78, 96, 
253 P.3d 639, 657 (2011), where the Hawai# i Supreme Court held 
that "the [trial] court must submit a mutual affray instruction to the jury where there is any evidence in the record that the injury was inflicted during the course of a fight or scuffle entered into by mutual consent, as indicated in [Hawai# i Jury 
Instructions Criminal] 9.21." Uyemura provides no explanation for how the ruling in 
Kikuta
 can or should apply to a bench trial 
where there is no jury to instruct. Moreover, he fails to show how the District Court erred in not entering specific findings on the record as to the mutual affray defense. 
Hawai# i Rules of 
Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 23 requires the trial court in a 
cost if the market value of the property
or services cannot be determined. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
bench trial to enter special findings when requested by a party,5 
but Uyemura made no such request here. Accordingly, his argument 
lacks merit. 
For the reasons set forth above, the December 27, 2019 
Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment and the January 27, 2020 Amended Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment, entered in the District Court of the Third Circuit, Kona Division, are hereby affirmed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 25, 2021. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate JudgeAshlyn L. Whitbeck,Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Stephen L. Frye, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
5 HRPP Rule 23(c) provides: 
(c) Trial without a jury . In a case tried 
without a jury the court shall make a general findingand shall in addition, on request made at the time ofthe general finding, find such facts specially as arerequested by the parties. Such special findings maybe orally in open court or in writing at any timeprior to sentence. 
6 