 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000707 22-OCT-2024 07:50 AM Dkt. 50 SO 
NO. CAAP-21-0000707  
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
CITIBANK, NA AS TRUSTEE FOR WAMU SERIES 2007-HE2 TRUST, 
Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
WILLIAM GASPAR and JOYAL GASPAR, Defendants-Appellants,  
and  
 HAWAIIAN OCEAN VIEW ESTATES ROAD MAINTENANCE CORPORATION, 
Defendant-Appellee,  
and  
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50;  
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; DOE ENTITIES 1-50; and  
DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50, Defendants  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 3CC171000137)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION  ORDER  
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and Guidry, JJ.)  
This is a judicial foreclosure case . Self-represented 
Defendant s-Appellant s William Gaspar and Joyal Gaspar (the 
Gaspars), appeal fro m (1) the Findings of Fact ; Conclusions of 
Law; Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment , and 
for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure Against All Parties   
 
 
  
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
      
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Filed September 7, 2021 (Foreclosure Order), and (2) Judgment, 
both entered on November 19, 2021 by the Circuit Court of the 
Third Circuit ( circuit court ). 1 The Foreclosure Order and 
Judgment were entered in favor of Plaintiff -Appellee Citibank, 
NA as Trustee for WAMU Series 2007 -HE2 Trust ( Citibank ). 
On appeal, the Gaspars appear to contend that the 
circuit court's Judgment was barred by res judicata , and the 
circuit court erred by granting Citibank's third Motion for 
Summary Judgment ( MSJ), filed on September 7, 2021 , because 
Citibank lacked standing to bring the foreclosure action . 
Upon careful review of the record and relevant legal 
authorities , and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve the 
Gaspars' points of error as follows: 
(1) The Gaspars appear to contend in their points of 
error 1, 3, 4, and 7 that this appeal is barred by res judicata . 
They contend that the circuit court erred in granting Citibank's 
third MSJ "on similar issues already adjudicated on the 1st and 
2nd MSJ." They also contend that the circuit court erred in 
accepting testimony from Sherry Benight ( Benight) because she 
had previously testified in support of Citibank's first and 
second MSJs , "the parties and their privies" to this appeal are 
1 The Honorable Henry T. Nakamoto presided. 
2   
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
  
    
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the same as in the underlying circuit court proceeding, and "the 
ICA[] previously [r]uled in this [f]oreclosure [a]ction." The 
Gaspars' contentions lack merit . 
"Application of res judicata is a question of law. 
Questions of law are reviewed de novo under the right/wrong 
standard." PennyMac Corp. v. Godinez, 148 Hawaiʻi 323, 327, 
474  P.3d 264, 268 (2020)  (citation omitted). As the Hawai ʻi 
Supreme Court instructs,  
We have often recognized that according to the doctrine of 
res judicata, the judgment of a court of competent 
jurisdiction is a bar to a new action in any court between 
the same parties or their privies concerning the same 
subject matter. A party assertin g res judicata has the 
burden of establishing: (1) there was a final judgment on 
the merits, (2) both parties are the same or in privity 
with the parties in the original suit, and (3) the claim 
decided in the original suit is identical with the one 
presented in the action in question. 
Id. (cleaned up). 
The Gaspars have not met their burden of establishing 
that there was a final judgment on the merits. In No. CAAP-18-
0000493, this court vacated the circuit court's May 18, 2018 
judgment in favor of Citibank --which had awarded summary 
judgment in favor of Citibank --and remanded this case to the 
circuit court for further proceedings. Citibank , NA v. Gaspar , 
No. CAAP -18-0000493, 201 9 WL 2714820 (Haw. App. June 28, 201 9) 
(SDO). Citibank subsequently moved twice more for summary 
judgment, and the circuit court's granting of Citibank's third 
MSJ resulted in the present appeal. 
3   
 
 
  
 
   
   
 
  
 
   
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court proceedings underlying this appeal 
are, therefore, along with the circuit court proceedings 
underlying No. CAAP-18-0000493, part of a single case, docketed 
as Case No. 3CC171000137, to which res judicata does not apply . 
Citibank was not precluded on remand from once again submitting 
a declaration drafted by Benight in support of its third MSJ. 
Godinez, 148 Hawaiʻi at 327, 474 P.3d at 268 ("By definition, the 
doctrine of res judicata only applies to new suits : It is 
inapplicable in a continuation of the same suit.") (citation s 
omitted). 
(2) The Gaspars appear to contend, in points of error 
6, 8 and 9,  that the circuit court erred in granting Citibank's 
third MSJ because Citibank lacks standing  to bring its 
foreclosure claim.   We review the circuit court's grant of 
summary judgment de novo, applying the following standard,  
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the 
moving party is entitled to jud gment as a matter of law. A 
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the 
effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential 
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the 
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most 
favorable to the non -moving party. In other words, we must 
view all of the evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in 
the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion. 
Ralston v. Yim , 129 Hawaiʻi 46, 55-56, 292 P.3d 1276, 1285 -86 
(2013) (citations omitted). 
4   
 
 
   
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Citibank, as the foreclosing party, "must [inter alia] 
also prove its entitlement to enforce the note and mortgage." 
Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai ʻi 361, 367, 390 P.3d 
1248, 1254 (2017). In Reyes-Toledo, the Hawai ʻi Supreme Court 
held that,  
A foreclosing plaintiff's burden to prove entitlement to 
enforce the note overlaps with the requirements of standing 
in foreclosure actions as standing is concerned with 
whether the parties have the right to bring suit. 
Typically, a plaintiff does not have standing to invoke the 
jurisdiction of the court unless the plaintiff has suffered 
an injury in fact. A mortgage is a conveyance of an 
interest in real property that is given as security for the 
payment of the note. A foreclosure action is a legal 
proceeding to gain title or force a sale of the property 
for satisfaction of a note that is in default and secured 
by a lien on the subject property. Thus, the underlying 
"injury in fact" to a foreclosing plaintiff is the 
mortgagee's failure to satisfy its obligation to pay the 
debt obligation to the note holder. Accordingly, in 
establishing standing, a foreclosing plaintiff must 
necessarily prove its entitlement to enforce the note as it 
is the default on the note that gives rise to the action. 
Id. at 367-68, 390 P.3d at 1254 -55 (cleaned up). 
The  summary judgment record reflects that Citibank  
attached  Benight's declaration  to its third MSJ.   Benight 
testified, in her capacity as a  Select Portfolio Servicing, Inc. 
(SPS) Document Control Officer, of her familiarity with SPS's 
practices, procedures, and business records (which include 
Citibank's loan level business records):  
2. In my duties, I am familiar with the practices and 
procedures of SPS. I am familiar with the systems of 
record that SPS uses to create and record information 
related to residential mortgage loans that it services, 
including the process by which inform ation is entered into 
those systems and how those records are maintained. I am 
familiar with these systems because I utilize them on a 
regular basis as a routine function of my employment. I am 
authorized and trained to access these records. . . . 
5   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3. As servicing agent and custodian of the servicing 
business records for the loan at issue for [Citibank], SPS 
holds and maintains all of the business records related to 
the servicing of this loan. [Citibank] does not hold or 
maintain any of the loan le vel business records, and thus 
[Citibank] does not have loan level business records to 
integrate into SPS's records. 
4. . . . I have access to SPS's business records, including 
the business records for and relating to the subject loan. 
I make this Declaration based upon my review of those 
records relating to the Borrowers' loan and from my own 
personal knowledge of how the records are kept and 
maintained. The loan records are maintained by SPS in the 
course of its regularly conducted business activities and 
are made at or near the time of the event, by or from 
information transmitted by a person with personal 
knowledge. It is the regular practice to keep such records 
in the ordinary course of a regularly conducted business 
activity. 
Because SPS was not the original servicer of the 
Gaspars' loan, Benight testified as to SPS's  process for  
incorporating original loan servicers'  business records  into 
SPS's business records:  
5. To the extent that the business records of the loan in 
this matter were created by a prior servicer, the prior 
servicer's records for the loan were incorporated and 
boarded into SPS's systems, such that the prior servicer's 
records concerning the loan are now part of SPS's business 
records. SPS conducts quality control and verification of 
the information received from the prior servicer as part of 
the boarding process to ensure the accuracy of the boarded 
records. It is the regular practice of SPS to integrate 
prior servicers' records into SPS's business records, and 
to rely upon the accuracy of those boarded records in 
providing its loan servicing functions. These prior 
servicer records are incorporated and relied upon by SPS as 
part of SPS's busines s records. 
See generally  U.S. Bank  Trust, N.A. v. Verhagen, 149 Hawaiʻi 315, 
325, 489 P.3d 419, 429 (2021)  ("[W]hen a record is treated as 
'created' by the receiving business, a person is qualified to 
authenticate it if the person has enough familiarity with the 
6   
 
 
   
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
record-keeping system of the business that 'created' the record, 
i.e., the receiving or incorporating business .") (cleaned up) . 
Benight further testified as to SPS's authority to 
service the loan  as attorney-in-fact for Citibank, SPS's 
possession of the original indorsed in blank Note at the time 
the Complaint was filed, and SPS's possession of the Note at the 
time Citibank filed its third MSJ :  2
5. . . . As part of its boarding process, meetings are 
established with prior servicer 's key personnel and 
systems, method of delivery of the records, and the timing 
of the delivery of the records are identified. Further, 
SPS employs a proprietary system to board the prior 
servicer records. This system validates the prior servicer 
records using over 600 logical and financial checks. In 
the event that any prior servicer records are identified as 
being illogical or incorrect, SPS will work with the prior 
servicer and review loan documentation to resolve the 
record. 
 . . . . 
7. This loan was serviced by another entity. SPS 
currently services the loan as attorney -in-fact for 
[Citibank]. SPS acquired the servicing rights for this 
loan from JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association. The 
business records from the prior servicers have been 
verified and incorporated into SPS ' business records. 
8. In consideration of a loan in the principal amount of 
$282,600.00 , defendant(s), William Gaspar and Joyal Gaspar 
(the "Defendants") executed and delivered to Washington 
Mutual Bank a note dated January 10, 2007 (the "Note"). A 
true and correct copy of the Note, including its 
endorsement, is attached hereto as Exhibit "1" and made a 
part of this Declaration by reference. 
9. To secure the obligations under the Note, the [Gaspars] 
executed and delivered to Washington Mutual Bank a mortgage 
dated January 10, 2007, recorded on January 24, 2007 in the 
Bureau of Conveyances of the State of Hawaii as Document 
Number 2007 -014073. A true and correct copy of the 
2 The Gaspars failed to make the transcript of the October 6, 2021 
hearing on Citibank's third MSJ a part of the record on appeal. The circuit 
court minutes of the hearing, however, reflect that Citibank's counsel 
represented that it possessed the "original note if [the] court wants to see 
it," and that the circuit court "reviewed [the] entire file." 
7   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mortgage is attached hereto as Exhibit "2" and made a part 
of this Declaration by reference. 
10. The Mortgage was subsequently assigned to CITIBANK, NA 
AS TRUSTEE FOR WAMU SERIES 2007 -HE2 TRUST by virtue of an 
assignment of mortgage (the "Assignment of Mortgage") 
recorded on April 27, 2009 in the Bureau of Conveyances of 
the State of Hawaii as Do cument Number 2009 -063098. A true 
and correct copy of the Assignment of Mortgage is attached 
hereto as Exhibit "3" and made a part of this Declaration 
by reference. 
 . . . . 
12. According to SPS's business records, [Citibank], 
through its servicing agent SPS, has possession of the 
Original note in this instant action ("Note"), which has 
been duly endorsed, and [Citibank], through its servicing 
agent SPS, was in possession of the Original Note at the 
time of the filing of the complaint at the offices of SPS. 
Therefore, [Citibank] has the right to enforce the Note. A 
true and correct copy of the documentation supporting note 
possession at the time of the filing of the complain t is 
attached as Exhibit "4" and made a part of this Declaration 
by reference.3 
13. . . . SPS on behalf of [Citibank] was and is in 
possession of the Original Note, not [Citibank] , because 
[Citibank] does not hold or maintain any of the loan level 
business records. 
 . . . . 
17. Select Portfolio Servicing, Inc. has authority to 
execute this Declaration on behalf of [Citibank] pursuant 
to a Limited Power of Attorney dated April 20, 2021. A 
true and correct copy of the Limited Power of Attorney is 
attached as Exhibit "8" and m ade part of this Declaration 
by reference. 
18. The Limited Power of Attorney dated November 9, 2016 
was effective at the time the Complaint was filed on April 
21, 2017. The Limited Power of Attorney contains a Limited 
Power of Attorney from Citibank to JPMorgan signed on 
October 28, 2016. On page 3 of 7 in the first full 
3   Exhibit 4, attached to Benight's declaration, reflects the 
location of the Note on April 12, 2017 as "note in file @ SPS." Citibank 
filed its complaint in this foreclosure action nine days later, on April 21, 
2017. See  Verhagen, 149 Hawai ʻi at  327-28, 489 P.3d at  431-32 ("[T]here is 
admissible documentary evidence showing that U.S. Bank possessed the Note 
both a mere six weeks before the filing of the complaint and at the time of summary judgment. Collectively, the evidence presented by U.S. Bank thus 
establishes the bank's possession of the Note on the day the complaint was 
filed.").  
8   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
paragraph, it states that "This limited power of attorney 
has been executed and is effective as of this 28th day of 
October 2016...". It also states on the same page in the 
last paragraph, "This [L]imited Power of Attorney 
supersedes all prior powers of attorney given by the 
undersigned to JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association 
for the Loans, and all such powers and authority granted 
thereunder are hereby revoked effective as of the date of 
recording of this Limited Power of Attorney." The 
recording date was November 14, 2016, as shown with the 
recording information clearly stamped in the upper right 
corner of the 1st page of the exhibit.  It states 9 pages 
were recorded which includes the Limited Power of Attorney 
from Citibank to JPMorgan. A true and correct copy of the 
Limited Power of Attorney is attached as Exhibit "9" and 
made part of this Declaration by reference. 
19. The Limited Power of Attorney s for this Pooling and 
Servicing Agreement has a one -year expiration which is 
stated in the Exhibit "B" of the Limited Power of 
Attorneys. Therefore, a new one is drafted, executed, and 
recorded each year. 
 . . . . 
21. [Citibank] submits Exhibit "9" in response to the 
Hawaii Intermediate Court of Appeals questioning whether 
SPS had possession of the Note at the time of filing the 
Complaint on April 21, 2017. Exhibit "9" shows that SPS 
had the power of attorney effective October 28, 2016 for 
one year which would corroborate that SPS had authority to 
possess the Note on behalf of [Citibank] at the time of 
filing the Complaint.[4] 
22. Servicing of the loan transferred from JPMorgan Chase 
Bank, N.A. to Select Portfolio Servicing, Inc. effective 
May 1, 2014. A true and correct copy of the Hello Letter 
is attached as Exhibit "10" and made part of this 
Declaration by reference. 
The record reflects that  Citibank satisfied its 
initial burden on summary judgment  of establishing that it 
possessed, through its authorized servicing agent SPS, the 
original Note -- and therefore had standing -- at all relevant 
4   Exhibit 9 is a Limited Power of Attorney, executed by JPMorgan  
Chase Bank (JPMorgan)  as Master Servicer for Citibank  and dated November 9, 
2016, through which JPMorgan appointed SPS as its sub -servicer in connection 
with all mortgage or other loans serviced by JPMorgan for Citibank.  
9   
 
 
    
 
   
 
  
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
times. The burden then shifted to the Gaspars , but the Gaspars 
did not meet their burden of establishing that there is a 
genuine issue of material fact for trial. See Verhagen , 149 
Hawaiʻi at 328, 489 P.3d at 432 ("[A] defendant may counter this 
inference of possession at the time of filing with evidence 
setting forth 'specific facts showing that there is a genuine 
issue' as to whether the plaintiff actually possessed the 
subject note at the time it filed suit.") (citing Hawai ʻi Rules 
of Civil Procedure Rule 56(e)). The Gaspars offered no evidence 
that Citibank , through its counsel, did not possess the Note at 
the time Citibank's foreclosure complaint was filed. 
We conclude that Citibank had standing to bring its 
foreclosure action, and the circuit court did not err in 
granting the Plaintiff's Motion for S ummary Judgment. 
(3) The Gaspars  contend, in points of error 2  and 5  
that the circuit court erred "in its [d]ecision [a]warding 
[Citibank] [m]inute [o]rder dated December 28, 2020," and in 
denying the Gaspars' July 2020 Motion to Dismiss.   They fail to 
present any discernible argument on these points. We therefore 
decline to address these points of error. See  Kahoʻohanohano  ex 
rel.  Morales-Kahoʻ ohanohano v. Dep't of Hum. Servs., State, 
117  Hawaiʻi 262, 297 n.37, 178 P.3d 538, 573 n.37 (2008) (stating 
that the Hawaiʻ i Supreme Court will "disregard a particular 
contention if the appellant makes no discernible argument in 
10   
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
support of that position")  (cleaned up); see also  Hawaiʻi Rules 
of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be 
deemed waived.").  
For the foregoing reasons, we  affirm  the circuit 
court's  Foreclosure Order and Judgment, filed November 19, 2021.  
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, October 22,  2024. 
On the briefs:  /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka  
 Presiding Judge  
William Gaspar and   
Joyal Gaspar,  /s/ Karen T. Nakasone  
Self-represented  Associate Judge  
Defendants-Appellants.   
 /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Justin S. Moyer,  Associate Judge  
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
11 