NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000061
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
STEVE CARRILLO and MELODY CARRILLO,
Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
v.
 
RE/MAX KAUAI and ELAINE SCHAEFER,
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants
and
 
VISION PROPERTIES, INC,
Defendant/Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellee
and
 
MONA EWALD, BARBARA SMITH, et al,
Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0021)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees Steve and Melody
 
Carrillo (Plaintiffs) appeal from the "Order (1) Granting in part
 
and denying in part Plaintiffs' motion to confirm arbitration
 
award and for entry of judgment, filed July 27, 2010, and (2)
 
Granting in part and denying in part Defendants Re/Max Kauai and
 
Elaine Schaefer's cross-motion to vacate, modify, correct and/or
 
clarify partial final award of arbitrator dated April 15, 2010
 
and final award of arbitrator, dated June 24, 2010, filed August
 
12, 2010" (Order) filed in the Circuit Court of the Fifth
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1 2
Circuit (circuit court) on December 20, 2010.  The circuit 
court granted Plaintiffs' motion "to the extent that the Partial 
Final Award of Arbitrator, dated April 15, 2010 is confirmed in 
favor of Plaintiffs and against Re/Max and Vision [Properties, 
Inc.] in the total amount of . . . []$
542,087.57[] and the Final 
Award of Arbitrator, dated June 24, 2010 is confirmed in favor of Plaintiffs and against Re/Max and Vision [Properties, Inc.] in 
the total amount of . . . []$150,996.70[]; but is denied in all 
other respects." The circuit court granted the Cross-Motion of 
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants Re/Max Kauaf i and Elaine 
Schaefer (collectively, Re/Max) "to the extent of clarifying that the Final Award of Arbitrator, dated June 24, 2010, awards 
Plaintiffs attorneys' fees and costs in the total amount of 
. . . []$150,996.70[] which shall be paid by Re/Max and Vision 
[Properties, Inc.] in equal amounts of . . . []$75,498.35[] each, 
but is denied in all other respects." 
On appeal, Plaintiffs contend:
 (1) The circuit court erred in concluding retired Judge
 
Patrick K.S.L. Yim (Arbitrator) intended to apportion the award
 of attorney's fees and costs equally between Re/Max and
 
Defendant/Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellee Vision Properties, Inc.
 
(Vision) and did not intend the award to be a joint and several
 
obligation.
 
(2) Assuming arguendo the Final Award was ambiguous or
 
otherwise inconsistent with the Partial Final Award of Arbitrator
 (Partial Award), the circuit court erred in not remanding the
 
issue of apportionment of attorney's fees and costs to Arbitrator
 
for clarification.
 
1
 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.
 
2
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 658A-28(a) (Supp. 2010) authorizes,
inter alia, an appeal from an order confirming or denying confirmation of an
award, or a final judgment. Thus, the parties may appeal from the order, even
though it has not been reduced to a final judgment.
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On cross-appeal, Re/Max contends the circuit court
 
erred when it failed to vacate, modify, correct, or clarify
 
Arbitrator's awards despite the evidence Arbitrator exceeded his
 
scope of authority 
(1) as established and defined by the Settlement
 
Agreement and the "Stipulation Regarding the Scope of the
 
Arbitration" (Stipulation);
 
(2) by not applying the provisions of the Settlement
 
Agreement that delineated and limited the items and amounts of
 
damages that comprised the "Carrillo Reimbursement" as defined in
 
paragraph 4B of the Settlement Agreement;
 
(3) by not applying the provisions of the Settlement
 
Agreement that provided for certain set-offs for advance payments
 
and rental income received by Plaintiffs;
 
(4) by granting damages for "loss of value" of the
 
Property, which was not provided for as an item of damages in the
 
Settlement Agreement and was not shown to be proximately caused
 
by the acts or omissions of Re/Max; and
 
(5) by imposing joint and several liability against
 
Re/Max in the absence of any tort claims at arbitration.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On May 25, 2004, Plaintiffs submitted an offer on real 
property (Property) on the island of Kauaf i through Vision and 
its real estate agent, Barbara Smith (Smith).3 The owner of the 
4
Property, Mona Ewald (Ewald),  accepted Plaintiffs' counter-offer
through Re/Max and its real estate agent, Elaine Schaefer. 
Escrow closed on August 4, 2004.
 
3
 On June 13, 2007, the circuit court filed a "Final Order of
 
Dismissal (Rule 28)(Initial Complaint 02-14-2007) As to: Smith, Barbara."
Smith is not a party to this appeal and cross-appeal.
4
 Ewald did not appear or otherwise defend against this action.
Default was apparently entered against her on or about April 30, 2007,
although no default judgment was ever entered. Ewald is not a party to this
appeal and cross-appeal.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On August 24, 2004, Plaintiffs allegedly "discovered
 
for the first time that there were serious County Code
 
violations, including illegal dwelling units,
 
additions/alterations and placement of kitchen facilities." 
Plaintiffs alleged these violations impacted their ability to
 
lease the rental units and generate anticipated income. In
 
December 2005, following mediation, Plaintiffs, Ewald, Re/Max,
 
and Vision entered into a Settlement Agreement. Re/Max and
 
Vision agreed to co-list the Property for sale, cooperate with
 
Plaintiffs in bringing the Property up to code, advance $10,000
 
each to Plaintiffs (Advance Payments), and reimburse Plaintiffs
 
for various costs associated with the purchase and ownership of
 
the Property and legal proceedings. There was to be a set-off
 
for monies received by Plaintiffs for rental income, mortgage
 
interest deductions, and the Advance Payments.
 
On February 14, 2007, Plaintiffs filed a complaint in
 
circuit court, claiming Re/Max and Vision had breached the
 
Settlement Agreement. Plaintiffs sought compensatory and
 
punitive damages against Re/Max and Vision, jointly and
 
severally, in connection with the purchase, maintenance, and
 
holding of the Property. On May 27, 2009, Re/Max, joined later
 
by Vision, moved to compel binding arbitration pursuant to the
 
Settlement Agreement. On July 13, 2009, the circuit court filed
 
an order compelling arbitration.
 
The parties selected Arbitrator, met for a status
 
conference, and on September 16, 2009 entered into the
 
Stipulation regarding the scope of the arbitration and
 
Arbitrator's authority. The Stipulation had the effect of
 
expanding the scope of arbitration beyond that provided in the
 
Settlement Agreement. On April 15, 2010, Arbitrator issued his
 
Partial Award, addressing the issues of who breached the
 
Settlement Agreement and what damages or remedies were to be
 
awarded the non-breaching party. He reserved his jurisdiction to 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
award attorney's fees and costs after submission of Plaintiffs'
 
fees and costs request and Re/Max's and Vision's objections.
 
On May 5, 2010, Re/Max filed a "Motion for
 
Modification, Correction and Clarification of [Partial Award],"
 
which Arbitrator denied on the grounds the motion was an attempt
 
to re-argue and re-litigate the case.
 
On June 24, 2010, Arbitrator issued the Final Award,
 
awarding attorney's fees and costs to Plaintiff, with Re/Max and
 
Vision directed to each pay half the total amount.
 
On July 27, 2010, Plaintiffs filed their "Motion to
 
Confirm Arbitration Award and for Entry of Judgment" (Motion to
 
Confirm). On August 12, 2010, Re/Max filed their "Cross-Motion
 
to Vacate, Modify, Correct and/or Clarify [Partial Award] and
 
[Final Award]" (Cross-Motion).
 
On September 2, September 23, and November 16, 2010,
 
the circuit court heard oral argument on Plaintiffs' Motion to
 
Confirm and Re/Max's Cross-Motion. On October 6, 2010, the
 
circuit court entered an order granting Re/Max's motion to obtain
 
clarification from Arbitrator as to the disposition of the
 
Property. Arbitrator clarified his intent that Plaintiffs retain
 
ownership and possession of the Property in addition to receiving
 
any monetary awards.
 
The circuit court entered its Order on December 20,
 
2010. Plaintiffs timely filed their appeal on January 18, 2011. 
Re/Max timely cross-appealed on February 2, 2011.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. ARBITRATION AWARD
 
The appellate court reviews "the circuit court's ruling 
on an arbitration award de novo" and is also "mindful that the 
circuit court's review of arbitral awards must be extremely 
narrow and exceedingly deferential." Tatibouet v. Ellsworth, 
99 Hawaif i 226, 233, 54 P.3d 397, 404 (2002) (internal quotation 
marks, citation, and brackets omitted). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The appellate court's review of arbitration awards is
 
guided by the following principles:
 
It is well settled that because of the legislative policy to
encourage arbitration and thereby discourage litigation,
judicial review of an arbitration award is confined to the
strictest possible limits. As such, a court has no business
weighing the merits of the arbitration award. Indeed, the
legislature has mandated that a court may vacate an
arbitration award only on the four grounds specified in HRS
§ 658-9,
[5] and may modify or correct an award only on the
three grounds specified in HRS § 658-10. Therefore, HRS
§ 658-8 contemplates a judicial confirmation of the award
issued by the arbitrator, unless the award is vacated,
modified, or corrected in accord with HRS §§ 658-9 and
658-10.
 
Based upon the policy limiting judicial review of
arbitration awards, [the Hawaif i Supreme Court] has held
that parties who arbitrate a dispute assume all the hazardsof the arbitration process including the risk that thearbitrators may make mistakes in the application of law andin their findings of fact. Where arbitration is made in good faith, parties are not permitted to prove that anarbitrator[] erred as to the law or the facts of the case. 
Id. (internal quotation marks, citations, ellipses, and brackets 
in original omitted) (quoting Wayland Lum Constr., Inc. v. 
Kaneshige, 90 Hawaif i 417, 421, 978 P.2d 855, 859 (1999)). 
B. SCOPE OF ARBITRATOR'S AUTHORITY
 
"The scope of an arbitrator's authority is determined 
by agreement of the parties. An arbitrator must act within the 
scope of the authority conferred upon him by the parties and 
cannot exceed his power by deciding matters not submitted." 
Clawson v. Habilitat, Inc., 71 Haw. 76, 78, 783 P.2d 1230, 1231 
(1989). "[W]here an arbitrator has exceeded his or her powers by 
deciding matters not submitted, [the Hawaif i Supreme Court] has 
held, pursuant to HRS § 658-9(4),[6] that the resulting 
arbitration award must be vacated." Tatibouet, 99 Hawaif i at 
235, 54 P.3d at 406. 
5
 HRS Chapter 658 was repealed in 2001 when the Hawaif i Legislature
adopted Chapter 658A, based on the Uniform Arbitration Act. 2001 Haw. Sess. 
Laws Act 265, § 1 at 810 & § 5 at 820. The former § 658-9 (Vacating Award) isnow § 658A-23, § 658-8 (Award and Confirming Award) was split into § 658A-19and § 658A-22, and § 658-10 (Modifying or Correcting Award) is now § 658A-24.
6
 Now HRS § 658A-23(4). See supra note 5.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. Plaintiffs' Appeal
 
On appeal, Plaintiffs argue when viewed in light of the
 
Settlement Agreement, the Stipulation, and the Partial Award, the
 
language of the Final Award is not ambiguous as to whether Re/Max
 
is jointly and severally liable for payment of attorney's fees
 
and costs. Plaintiffs argue Re/Max must pay the total amount if
 
Vision is unable to pay its portion. Finding otherwise would
 
suggest an ambiguity, in which case the circuit court should have
 
referred the matter back to Arbitrator for clarification.
 
Re/Max asserts the terms of the Final Award are
 
unambiguous and where terms are clear and unambiguous, the court
 
"should look no further than the four corners of the document." 
Additionally, argues Re/Max, even though Arbitrator states Re/Max
 
and Vision "shall pay to the Plaintiffs the total amount,"
 
Arbitrator then specifies each "shall pay to the Plaintiffs one
 
half of the total amount." Re/Max contends where there is a
 
general directive and a specific directive, the specific
 
directive should be followed.
 
"We review the circuit court's ruling on an arbitration 
award de novo, but we also are mindful that the circuit court's 
review of arbitral awards must be extremely narrow and 
exceedingly deferential." Tatibouet, 99 Hawaif i at 233, 54 P.3d 
at 404 (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets omitted). "[B]ecause of the legislative policy to encourage 
arbitration and thereby discourage litigation, judicial review of 
an arbitration award is confined to the strictest possible 
limits." Id. "[W]here the parties agree to arbitrate, they 
thereby assume all the hazards of the arbitration process, including the risk that the arbitrators may make mistakes in the 
application of law and in their findings of fact." Kona Village 
Realty, Inc. v. Sunstone Realty Partners, XIV, LLC, 121 Hawaif i 
110, 112, 214 P.3d 1100, 1102 (App. 2009) (quoting Schmidt v. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Pac. Benefit Servs., Inc., 113 Hawaif i 161, 165-66, 150 P.3d 810, 
814-15 (2006)). 
The circuit court will confirm an arbitration award 
unless certain grounds are met to support a decision to vacate, 
modify, correct, or clarify. Kona Village Realty, 121 Hawaif i at 
112-13, 214 P.3d at 1102-03. "Under HRS Chapter 658A, an arbitration award can be vacated only on the six grounds 
7
specified in HRS § 658A–23(a),  and modified and corrected only
on the three grounds specified in HRS § 658A–24."
8 Kona Village
 
7
 HRS § 658A-23(a) (Supp. 2011) provides:
 
§658A-23 Vacating award.  (a) Upon motion to the court by
a party to an arbitration proceeding, the court shall vacate an
award made in the arbitration proceeding if:
 (1) The award was procured by corruption, fraud, or other
undue means;
 (2) There was:
 (A) Evident partiality by an arbitrator appointed as a
neutral arbitrator;
 (B) Corruption by an arbitrator; or
 (C) Misconduct by an arbitrator prejudicing the rights
of a party to the arbitration proceeding;
 (3) An arbitrator refused to postpone the hearing upon
showing of sufficient cause for postponement, refused to consider
evidence material to the controversy, or otherwise conducted the
hearing contrary to section 658A-15, so as to prejudice
substantially the rights of a party to the arbitration proceeding;
 (4) An arbitrator exceeded the arbitrator's powers;
 (5) There was no agreement to arbitrate, unless the person
participated in the arbitration proceeding without raising the
objection under section 658A-15(c) not later than the beginning of
the arbitration hearing; or
 (6) The arbitration was conducted without proper notice of
the initiation of an arbitration as required in section 658A-9 so
as to prejudice substantially the rights of a party to the
arbitration proceeding.
8
 HRS § 658A-24 provides, in relevant part:
 
§658A-24 (Supp. 2011) Modification or correction of award.
(a) Upon motion made . . . after the movant receives notice of a
modified or corrected award pursuant to section 658A-20, the court
shall modify or correct the award if:
 (1) There was an evident mathematical miscalculation or an
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Realty, 121 Hawaif i at 113, 214 P.3d at 1103. There are also two 
non-statutory exceptions to confirmation: "one, to allow remand 
to the arbitrator to clarify an ambiguous award; another, to 
allow vacation of an arbitration award clearly violative of 
public policy." Gepaya v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 94 
Hawaifi 362, 365, 14 P.3d 1043, 1046 (2000) (internal citations 
omitted). 
"Ambiguity is said to exist when there is doubt as to
 
the meaning of written words." Gov't Employees Ins. Co. v.
 
Franklin for Franklin, 66 Haw. 384, 386, 662 P.2d 1117, 1119
 (1983). When an award is ambiguous, the circuit court is
 
9
authorized, pursuant to HRS § 658A-20 (Supp. 2011),  to remand
the case back to the arbitrator for clarification. United Public
 
Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO v. Dawson Intern., Inc., 113
 Hawai'i 127, 147, 149 P.3d 495, 515 (2006); see also Weinberg v.
 
Silber, 140 F.Supp.2d 712, 722 (N.D. Tex. 2001) ("[W]hen
 
statements or directives in an arbitration award are ambiguous,
 
remand to the arbitrator for clarification is proper."). 
The power of the court to remand an ambiguous award to
 
the arbitrator for clarification reflects the "policy in favor of
 
clear final awards that completely resolve the dispute originally
 
evident mistake in the description of a person, thing, or property
referred to in the award;
 (2) The arbitrator has made an award on a claim not
 
submitted to the arbitrator and the award may be corrected without
affecting the merits of the decision upon the claims submitted; or
 (3) The award is imperfect in a matter of form not affecting
the merits of the decision on the claims submitted.
9
 HRS § 658A-20 (Supp. 2011) provides, in relevant part:
 
(d) If a motion to the court is pending under section
658A-22, 658A-23, or 658A-24, the court may submit the claim to
the arbitrator to consider whether to modify or correct the award:
 
(1)(2) 
(3)
 Upon a ground stated in section 658A-24(a)(1) or (3);
Because the arbitrator has not made a final and definite award upon a claim submitted by the partiesto the arbitration proceeding; orTo clarify the award. 
(Emphasis added.) 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
submitted to the arbitrator." Weinberg, 140 F.Supp.2d at 722-723
 
(N.D. Tex. 2001) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
"Where questions arise as to how an award should be implemented
 
due to ambiguity in the award or intervening circumstances,
 
judicial enforcement of the award is inappropriate and the matter
 
should be remanded to the arbitrator for guidance." Nat'l Post
 
Office Mail Handlers, Watchmen, Messengers and Grp. Leaders Div.
 of the Laborers Intern. Union of N. America, AFL-CIO, Local 311
 
v. U.S. Postal Service, 741 F.Supp. 1267, 1269 (N.D. Tex. 1990).
 
Here, the question is whether the Final Award is
 
ambiguous as to Re/Max's and Vision's responsibility for payment
 
of the attorney's fees and costs. If an ambiguity exists, the
 
circuit court may, and indeed should, seek clarification from
 
Arbitrator. 
Section 4B of the Settlement Agreement set forth the
 
obligations of Re/Max, Vision, and Ewald. They agreed to the
 
following:
 
(1) Re/Max and Vision to co-list the Property for sale
 
without commission charges to Plaintiffs; 
(2) Re/Max and Vision to work with Plaintiffs to
 
implement remedial work to bring the Property into compliance
 
with zoning and building code requirements; 
(3) Ewald, at her own cost and expense, to have the
 
exterior of the Property painted;
 
(4) Re/Max and Vision to each advance $10,000 to
 
Plaintiffs to be set off against the final amount owed by Re/Max
 
and Vision to the Plaintiffs (Advance Payments); 
(5) upon closing of the resale of the Property, Re/Max,
 
Vision, and Ewald to reimburse Plaintiffs for such reasonable
 
sums of money which Plaintiffs have expended for (a) the purchase
 
of the Property which includes down payment, mortgage payments,
 
taxes, improvements costs (not to exceed $35,000), utilities, and
 
reasonable attorney’s fees (not to exceed $15,000 expended in
 
relation to Plaintiffs' claims), and (b) with a set-off for money 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
received by Plaintiffs from rental of the Property, mortgage
 
interest deductions, and the Advance Payments (Carrillo
 
Reimbursement).
 
The parties agreed the Carrillo Reimbursement would be
 
paid from the net proceeds of the sale of the Property. If the
 
net proceeds from the Property sale and Advance Payment were not
 
sufficient to reimburse the Plaintiffs under the Carrillo
 
Reimbursement, "then Re/Max, Vision and Ewald shall pay the
 
[Plaintiffs] the shortfall in an equal amount subject to an
 
allocation among Re/Max, Vision and Ewald of such sums of money
 
or services previously provided."
 
Pursuant to the Settlement Agreement, "[i]n the event
 
there is a dispute regarding the reasonable amount to be
 
reimbursed to the [Plaintiffs] for their purchase of the
 
Property," the parties agreed to submit to binding arbitration.
 
On February 14, 2007, Plaintiffs filed a complaint in circuit
 
court, alleging Re/Max and Vision had breached the Settlement
 
Agreement. On May 19, 2009, Re/Max, subsequently joined by
 
Vision, moved to compel binding arbitration pursuant to the
 
Settlement Agreement. On July 13, 2009, the circuit court
 
granted the motion to compel.
 
Because the parties disagreed as to the scope of the
 
arbitration, Arbitrator had the parties enter into the
 
Stipulation regarding the scope of the arbitration and his
 
authority. The parties stipulated to the following:
 
1. At a minimum, the scope of the Arbitration shall
encompass the arbitrator deciding whether the Settlement
Agreement was breached by any of the Parties. The
 arbitrator is also specifically authorized to award the
appropriate remedy to the non-breaching party or parties if
he determines that the Settlement Agreement was breached.
 
2. The Arbitrator shall further determine the amount
 
of the Carrillo Reimbursement as defined in Section 4B of
 the Settlement Agreement.
 
3. The Parties to this Stipulation are unable to agree
on any other matters regarding the subject matter scope of
the Arbitration.
 
4. Accordingly, the arbitrator shall in the exercise
of his discretion decide what other issues, claims and/or
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
controversies, if any, are also within the scope of the
Arbitration.
 
The arbitration proceedings were held on December 14,
 
15, 16 and 18, 2009. The parties submitted post-arbitration
 
briefs and reply briefs, after which Arbitrator entered the
 
Partial Award on April 15, 2010. The Settlement Agreement, the
 
Stipulation, and any pre-arbitration rulings of Arbitrator were
 
incorporated by reference into the Partial Award. Arbitrator
 
made an award on all issues except Plaintiffs' attorney's fees
 
and costs.
 
Pertinent to the argument before us are the following
 
findings and conclusions of Arbitrator in the Partial Award:
 
99.	 Since all of the Defendants are deemed to have
 
breached the Agreement, which superseded any and all
underlying claims, only the Defendants herein are
deemed to be equally liable for satisfying the
totality of any monetary amount awarded in favor of
the Plaintiffs.
 
100.	 The Arbitrator is not required to apportion between
the Defendants, the payment of any award found owing
to the Plaintiffs.
 
101.	 Both Defendants are found to have breached the
 
Agreement.
 
102.	 Though the Arbitrator is not required to apportion the
payment of any award owing to the Plaintiffs by the
Defendants, it is determined that the Defendants
herein, Re/Max and Vision, are both responsible for
the breach of the Agreement, and therefore, are both
responsible for satisfying any monetary award in favor
of the Plaintiffs in this arbitration.
 . . . . 
AWARD
 
. . . .
 
D.	 The Defendants, Re/Max and Vision, are the non
prevailing party in this arbitration.
 
E.	 The Plaintiffs are awarded the amount of $542,087.57.
 
F.	 The Defendants shall pay the total amount awarded to
the Plaintiffs within 30 days after the date of this
Partial Final Award of Arbitrator.
 
G.	 Any amounts not paid by the 31st day after the date of
this Partial Final Award of Arbitrator shall accrue
 interest in the amount of 10 per cent simple per
 annum.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
H.	 The Arbitrator reserves jurisdiction in this matter to
[sic] solely to determine the amounts to be awarded to
the Plaintiffs, as the prevailing party, for their
reasonable attorney’s fees and costs.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
On May 5, 2010, Re/Max submitted a post-award "Motion
 
for Modification, Correction and Clarification of [Partial 
Award]." Among other objections, Re/Max contended Paragraph 99
 
"requires clarification as to whether the Arbitrator is declaring
 
the Defendants jointly and severally liable for the entire
 
award." Without providing any clarification, Arbitrator denied
 
Re/Max's motion.
 
On June 24, 2010, Arbitrator entered the Final Award,
 
stating that 
Based upon the all of the above and the totality of the
record, the Arbitrator AWARDS as follows:
 
A.	 The Defendants Re/Max Kauai and Elaine
Schafer, [sic] and the
Defendant/Third-Party Plaintiff Vision
Properties, Inc. shall pay to the
Plaintiffs the total amount of
 $150,996.70, consisting of the following:
 
a.	 As and for attorneys fees
$135,521.89,
 
b.	 As and for costs $15,474.81.
 
B.	 The Defendants Re/Max Kauai and Elaine
Schafer [sic] shall pay to the Plaintiffs
one half of the total amount of
 $150,966.70 within 30 days of the date of
this Final Award of Arbitrator.
 
C.	 Defendant/Third-Party Plaintiff Vision
Properties, Inc. shall pay to the
Plaintiffs one half of the total amount of
 $150,966.70 within 30 days of the date of
this Final Award of Arbitrator.
 
D.	 The Defendants shall pay interest of 10
per cent simple per annum on any amounts
unpaid as of the 31 day after the date of
this Final Award of Arbitrator, until this
award is satisfied.
 
E.	 The Partial Final Award of Arbitrator
 dated April 15, 2010 is incorporated by
reference herein.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
On July 27, 2010, Plaintiffs filed their Motion to
 
Confirm. Plaintiffs contended that notwithstanding the language
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the Final Award, Re/Max and Vision were jointly and severally
 
liable for the attorney's fees and costs. Before the circuit
 
court, Plaintiffs stated "Vision has been a shell company for
 
several years. There's no money." Unless Re/Max was held
 
jointly liable, Plaintiffs would be denied one-half the award for
 
attorney's fees and costs. 
Plaintiffs argued Re/Max and Vision were jointly liable
 
for the total amount owed because, in the Partial Award,
 
Arbitrator had found Defendants "deemed to be equally liable for
 
satisfying the totality of any monetary amount awarded in favor
 
of plaintiffs." Plaintiffs pointed to paragraph 102 of the
 
Partial Award, which provided: "Re/Max and Vision are both
 
responsible for the breach of Agreement and, therefore, are both
 
responsible for satisfying any monetary award in favor of
 
plaintiffs in this arbitration." Plaintiffs also pointed to
 
paragraph A in the Final Award, where Arbitrator stated Re/Max
 
and Vision "shall pay to the Plaintiffs the total amount" of the
 
attorney's fees and costs. Plaintiffs acknowledged Arbitrator
 
went on to state Re/Max and Vision are each responsible for one-
half of the total amount. But Plaintiffs argued the allocation
 
statement merely meant if Vision did not pay, Re/Max had a cause
 
of action against Vision. Plaintiffs asserted that because
 
Arbitrator incorporated the Partial Award by reference, which
 
stated Re/Max and Vision were "both responsible for satisfying
 
any monetary award," then the plain meaning of the awards was
 
Re/Max and Vision were jointly and severally liable.
 
Re/Max cites to contract case law for the proposition 
that a court should not look for an ambiguity outside the four 
corners of the Final Award. See State Farm Fire and Cas. Co. v. 
Pacific Rent-All, Inc., 90 Hawaif i 315, 324, 978 P.2d 753, 762 
(1999) ("The court should look no further than the four corners 
of the document to determine whether an ambiguity exists."). 
"Hawaii looks only to the document to determine whether an 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
ambiguity exists, and strictly applies the parole evidence rule." 
KL Group v. Case, Kay & Lynch, 829 F.2d 909, 916 (9th Cir. 1987) 
(citing to Hawaif i contract law). Absent an ambiguity, 
"contractual terms should be interpreted according to their plain, ordinary meaning and accepted use in common speech." 
State Farm Fire and Cas. Co., 90 Hawaif i at 324, 978 P.2d at 762. 
In the instant case, the Settlement Agreement is the
 
contract. The subsequent Stipulation and awards seek to remedy a
 
breach of that contract. Arbitrator specifically ruled the 
Settlement Agreement and Stipulation were to be incorporated by
 
reference into the Partial Award. The Final Award incorporated
 
by reference all the previous documents. Thus, the documents
 
must be read together.
 
We hold the Final Award is not ambiguous when read in
 
context with the preceding, related documents. Pursuant to the
 
Stipulation, Arbitrator was "specifically authorized to award the
 
appropriate remedy to the non-breaching party" and to "determine
 
the amount of the Carrillo Reimbursement as defined in Section 4B
 
of the Settlement Agreement." The parties also authorized
 
Arbitrator to exercise his discretion in deciding "what other
 
issues, claims and/or controversies" were within his scope of
 
authority.
 
The Partial Award determined all issues except for
 
attorney's fees and costs. In the Partial Award, Arbitrator
 
identified Re/Max and Vision as the responsible defendants. At
 
times, Arbitrator referred to the defendants separately as Re/Max
 
or Vision, and at other times, collectively as "Defendants." 
Arbitrator determined that "Vision is deemed to be bound by any
 
and all actions and omissions of Re/Max in any determination of
 
whether both fulfilled any obligations of the Defendants under
 
the Agreement, and vice versa." Arbitrator further determined
 
"Defendants are required to reimburse the Plaintiffs all of the
 
items set forth in paragraph 94.b [in the Partial Award
 
referencing paragraph 4B of the Settlement Agreement]."
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In the Partial Award, Arbitrator referred to Defendants
 
Re/Max and Vision as one party. Defendants were to pay "the
 
total amount awarded to the Plaintiffs within 30 days[.]" This
 
amount did not include the award of attorney's fees and costs.
 
On its face, the Final Award apportions payment of
 
attorney's fees and costs between Defendants Re/Max and Vision. 
Arbitrator determined Re/Max and Vision were to pay Plaintiffs
 
"the total amount of $150.996.70" in attorney's fees and costs. 
Arbitrator then specified Re/Max and Vision were each to pay 
one-half the total amount.
 
Arbitrator incorporated by reference the Partial Award,
 
the award Re/Max had argued needed clarification as to joint and
 
several liability. In the Partial Award, Arbitrator concluded
 
"the Defendants herein are deemed to be equally liable for
 
satisfying the totality of any monetary amount awarded in favor
 
of the Plaintiffs." (Emphasis added.) Arbitrator also
 
"determined that the Defendants herein, Re/Max and Vision, are
 
both responsible for the breach of the Agreement, and therefore,
 
are both responsible for satisfying any monetary award in favor
 
of the Plaintiffs in this arbitration." (Emphasis added.)
 
In keeping with the responsibilities defined in the
 
Partial Award, Arbitrator determined in the Final Award both
 
Re/Max and Vision were responsible for satisfying the monetary
 
award related to attorney's fees and costs. Arbitrator defined
 
how the responsibility would be met -- by each defendant paying
 
one-half the total amount. Had Arbitrator intended Re/Max and
 
Vision to be responsible for the other party's obligation as it
 
related to attorney's fees and costs, he would not have
 
specifically limited each defendant's responsibility to one-half
 
the total amount. 
There is no ambiguity as to what Arbitrator intended,
 
even in light of the Partial Award. The Partial Award determined
 
Re/Max and Vision were "both responsible for the breach" and "for
 
satisfying any monetary award." In satisfying the monetary award
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
for attorney's fees and costs, Arbitrator determined Re/Max's and
 
Vision's responsibilities would be satisfied by each paying 
one-half the total amount.
 
Regarding the attorney's fees and costs, the circuit
 
court initially stated: "I guess there's ambiguity. The only
 
thing I can do is ask Judge Yim to clarify that again." However,
 
after argument, the circuit court found there was no ambiguity, 
on the premise the specific award took priority over the general
 
award.
 
In the instant case, Arbitrator, in plain and 
unambiguous language, allocated responsibility for payment of the
 
attorney's fees and costs equally between Re/Max and Vision, with
 
no intention to make either party responsible for the other's
 
payment. We conclude the circuit court did not err when it found
 
no ambiguity and declined to seek clarification from Arbitrator.
 
B. Re/Max's Cross-Appeal
 
On cross-appeal, Re/Max contends the circuit court
 
erred when it failed to vacate, modify, correct, or clarify
 
Arbitrator's awards despite alleged evidence that Arbitrator
 
exceeded his scope of authority.
 
"The scope of an arbitrator's authority is determined 
by agreement of the parties. An arbitrator must act within the 
scope of the authority conferred upon him by the parties and 
cannot exceed his power by deciding matters not submitted." 
Clawson, 71 Haw. at 78, 783 P.2d at 1231. "[T]he parties may 
modify the agreement defining the scope of the arbitrator's 
powers and authority." Id. Arbitrators are accorded broad 
discretion in resolving disputes, and "where the parties agree to arbitrate, they thereby assume all the hazards of the arbitration 
process, including the risk that the arbitrators may make 
mistakes in the application of law and in their findings of 
fact." Schmidt, 113 Hawaif i at 165, 150 P.3d at 814 (citation 
omitted)). "[C]orrelatively, judicial review of an arbitration award is confined to the strictest possible limits." Id. 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"Moreover, the courts have no business weighing the merits of the
 
award." Id. at 166, 150 P.3d at 815.
 
Regarding arbitration, the Hawaif i Supreme Court has 
recognized "(1) the freedom and autonomy of parties to enter into 
an agreement for arbitration; (2) their right to provide the 
scope of the arbitrators' authority within such agreements; and 
(3) the broad discretion afforded to, and the limited judicial 
review of, the arbitrator in rendering awards." Kona Village 
Realty Inc. v. Sunstone Realty Partners, XIV, LLC, 123 Hawaif i 
476, 477, 236 P.3d 456, 457 (2010). 
Re/Max, Vision, and Plaintiffs entered into a
 
Settlement Agreement that provided for binding arbitration "[i]n
 
the event there is a dispute regarding the reasonable amount to
 
be reimbursed to the [Plaintiffs] for their purchase of the
 
Property." Subsequently, the parties stipulated to the scope of
 
Arbitrator's authority, giving Arbitrator the authority to decide
 
what issues, claims, and controversies were within the scope of
 
arbitration. The parties also stipulated to Arbitrator's
 
authority to "award the appropriate remedy to the non-breaching
 
party . . . if he determines that the Settlement Agreement was
 
breached."
 
Re/Max argues Arbitrator is limited by the 
considerations set forth in the Settlement Agreement. But, based 
on the Stipulation which broadly expanded his authority, 
Arbitrator is not so limited. Re/Max cites to no authority 
enabling the circuit court to ignore the effect of the 
Stipulation on the Settlement Agreement. Furthermore, "parties 
are not permitted to prove that an arbitrators [sic] erred as to 
the law or the facts of the case." Tatibouet, 99 Hawaif i at 233, 
54 P.3d at 404 (quoting Wayland Lum Constr., Inc., 90 Hawaif i 
417, 422, 978 P.2d 855, 860 (1999)). Therefore, the circuit 
court did not err when it determined Arbitrator did not exceed 
his scope of authority, even though the court believed it might 
have come up with a different result. 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The "Order (1) Granting in part and denying in part
 
Plaintiffs' motion to confirm arbitration award and for entry of
 
judgment, filed July 27, 2010, and (2) Granting in part and
 
denying in part Defendants Re/Max Kauai and Elaine Schaefer's
 
cross-motion to vacate, modify, correct and/or clarify partial
 
final award of arbitrator dated April 15, 2010 and final award of
 
arbitrator, dated June 24, 2010, filed August 12, 2010" filed in 
the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit on December 20, 2010 is
 
affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, May 3, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Richard E. Wilson 
for Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees. 
Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Sidney K. Ayabe
Ronald T. Michioka (Ayabe, Chong, Nishimoto,Sia & Nakamura)for Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants Re/MaxKauafi and Elaine Schaefer. 
Keith K. Hiraoka Jodie D. Roeca (Roeca Luria Hiraoka)for Third-PartyPlaintiff-AppelleeVision Properties, Inc. 
19
 