NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000482
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
STATE OF HAWAI» I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KEVIN MEDEIROS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 11-1-1346)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Kevin Medeiros (Kevin) appeals from 
the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) filed on May 
27, 2011, in the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).
1 Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai» i (State) charged 
Medeiros with intentionally or knowingly violating an Order for Protection, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ÿÿ 586­
1 The Honorable Wilson M.N. Loo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
11(a) (Supp. 2011).2 The Order for Protection had been obtained
 
by Kevin's wife, Genoa K. Medeiros (Genoa), and provided in
 
relevant part:
 
1.	 [Kevin] is prohibited from contacting [Genoa].
 
. . . .
 
3.	 [Kevin] is prohibited from coming or passing within
100 yards of any residence or place of employment or
school of [Genoa]. [Kevin] must not violate this
Order even if [Genoa] invites [Kevin] over.
 
4.	 [Kevin] is prohibited from coming or passing within
100 feet of [Genoa] at all other neutral locations.
If the parties run into each other, [Kevin] must leave
immediately.
 
. . . .
 
6.	 [Genoa] is prohibited from soliciting or aiding
[Kevin] in violating this Order.
 
(Emphasis added; emphasis in original omitted.) The Order for
 
Protection also provided that "[Kevin] is allowed visitation with
 the minor children. Visitation arrangements, as well as pickup
 and/or drop off exchanges shall be conducted by and through
 [Kevin's] parents . . . and [Genoa]." 
After a jury-waived bench trial, the Family Court found
 
Kevin guilty as charged. The Family Court sentenced Kevin to a
 one-year term of probation and one day
 of imprisonment, with credit for time served.
 
I.
 
On appeal, Kevin contends that the Family Court erred
 
in finding him guilty because there was insufficient evidence to
 
prove that he intentionally or knowingly violated the Order for
 Protection. We affirm. 
2 HRS ÿÿ 586-11(a) provides in relevant part:
 
(a) Whenever an order for protection is granted
pursuant to this chapter, a respondent or person to be
restrained who knowingly or intentionally violates the
order for protection is guilty of a misdemeanor.
 
2
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
In reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence, we view 
the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution. 
State v. Tamura , 63 Haw. 636, 637, 633 P.2d 1115, 1117 (1981). 
"The test on appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact." 
State v. Richie , 
88 Hawai» i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) (block quote format 
and citation omitted). "It is the province of the jury, not the appellate courts, to determine the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence." State v. Smith , 106 Hawai» i 365, 
372, 105 P.3d 242, 249 (App. 2004). 
Based on the applicable standard of review, we conclude
 
that there was sufficient evidence to support the Family Court's
 
guilty verdict. 
When viewed in the light most favorable to the
 
State, the evidence showed the following:
 
Kevin and Genoa's three minor children, a two-year-old,
 
a kindergartener, and a first-grader, were with Kevin for the
 weekend. On Sunday, Genoa texted Kevin's mother that Genoa would
 be picking up the children that afternoon because the children
 needed to get ready for school, but Kevin's mother texted back
 that the children would be "staying here." Because the children
 
did not have their backpacks, Genoa went to their school on
 Monday with their backpacks and waited in the cafeteria,
 intending to give the children their backpacks, eat breakfast
 with them, and take them to class. Genoa did not know that Kevin
 
would be dropping the children off or that he would be walking
 
them to class. Genoa believed that someone else would be
 dropping off the children because Kevin normally left home at
 3:00 a.m. to go the gym and then to work. The children had also
 told Genoa that when Kevin did drop them off, he would drop them
 off in front of the school and did not walk them to class. 
However, on the Monday in question, Kevin parked the
 
car and walked with the children towards the cafeteria. The
 children ran to Genoa, and Genoa took them into the cafeteria to
 
3
   State v. Mitchell,NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
eat breakfast. Genoa told Kevin that he could go and that she
 
would "take [the children] from here." Kevin refused to leave
 and stated that he was taking the children to their classes. 
From a distance of about two feet, Kevin also told Genoa that
 from now on, she would only be able to see the children from
 Friday through Sunday and that he would have the children from
 Monday through Thursday. When Genoa disputed Kevin's assertion,
 he replied, "I don't give a shit, I'm taking them, I don't care
 what you say." 
After Genoa ate breakfast with the children, she walked
 
the two school-aged children to their classes. Kevin followed
 close behind Genoa, within one or two feet, and kept telling her
 that the children would be staying with him and that he was
 
picking them up from school from now on. He also kept trying to
 take their two-year-old daughter out of Genoa's hands. Genoa
 walked back to the car with the two-year-old, but eventually
 surrendered the child to Kevin so that Kevin would "get away"
 from Genoa. 
Relying on the evidence he presented, Kevin argues that 
Genoa deliberately caused the encounter with him at the children's school and that there was no substantial evidence that he intentionally or knowingly violated the Order for Protection. However, the Family Court was not required to accept Kevin's version of the events. See  94 Hawai» i 388, 
393, 15 P.3d 314, 319 (App.2000) ("Matters related to the credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given to the evidence are generally left to the factfinder. The appellate 
court will neither reconcile conflicting evidence nor interfere with the decision of the trier of fact based on the witnesses' credibility or the weight of the evidence." (citations omitted)). Viewed in the light most favorable to the State, we conclude that there was substantial evidence to support a finding 
by the Family Court that Kevin knowingly violated the Order of 
Protection by failing to leave immediately after he "ran into" 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Genoa at a neutral location. Accordingly, we cannot say that the
 
Family Court erred in finding Kevin guilty. 
III.
 
We affirm the May 27, 2011, Judgment of the Family
 
Court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai» i, June 28, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Scott Stuart Brower 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 