NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001246
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
KAZUKO IRIE ST. ROMAIN, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ROBERT FRANCES ST. ROMAIN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 11-1-1233)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Robert Frances St. Romain (Robert)
 
appeals from the Order Regarding Plaintiff's Motion for
 
Attorney's Fees and Costs per Family Court Rule 68, filed on
 October 3, 2014 (Order Regarding Fees) in the Family Court of the
 
1
First Circuit (Family Court).  The Order granted attorney's fees 
to Plaintiff-Appellee Kazuko Irie St. Romain (Kazuko), pursuant 
to Hawai 'i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 68, after Robert 
rejected Kazuko's Rule 68 Offer of Settlement (the Offer), but obtained a judgment that was patently not more favorable than the 
Offer.  
1
 The Honorable Kevin A. Souza presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Robert challenges the Family Court's
 
findings of fact (FOFs) and conclusions of law (COLs), and argues
 
that the court erred in ordering him to pay $11,393.99 in
 
attorney's fees and costs to his ex-wife, Kazuko.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Robert's points of error as follows:
 
HFCR Rule 68 (2014) provides, in relevant part:

 
At any time more than 20 days before any contested
hearing held pursuant to HRS sections 571-11 to 142 . . . is
 
scheduled to begin, any party may serve upon the adverse
party an offer to allow a judgment to be entered to the
effect specified in the offer. Such offer may be made as to
all or some of the issues . . . . If the judgment in its
entirety finally obtained by the offeree is patently not
more favorable than the offer, the offeree must pay the
costs, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred after
the making of the offer, unless the court shall specifically
determine that such would be inequitable. . . .
 
On March 8, 2013, the parties were divorced by settled
 
and stipulated terms, memorialized in a Family Court Decree
 
Granting Absolute Divorce (Decree). Pursuant to the Property
 
Division section of the Decree, Robert was awarded certain
 
personal property, including clothing, jewelry, memorabilia,
 musical and recording equipment, fishing gear, business records,
 boats, cars, and motorcycles. Robert was denied access to
 
Kazuko's house due to a temporary restraining order (TRO) filed
 against him on February 2, 2012, but successfully moved to have
 
2
 HRS ยง 571-14 (2014) provides that the Family Court "shall have
exclusive original jurisdiction" over HRS Chapter 580, which governs
"Annulment, Divorce, and Separation." See HRS ยง 571-14(a)(3) (2006) and
 
Chapter 580 (2006).
 
2
    
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3
the TRO lifted  so he could retrieve his awarded property.  On
 
August 17, 2013, Robert went to the house to collect the awarded

 
property, but he claimed that certain awarded items were missing
 
or that Kazuko failed to make them available. On October 17,
 
2013, Robert filed a Motion and Declaration for Post-Decree
 
Relief (Relief Motion) seeking enforcement of the property
 
division/awards of the Decree. Robert asserted that Kazuko had
 
disposed of many of the personal belongings he was specifically
 awarded, and that many items that were made available were in a
 poor state of repair because Kazuko left them outside and exposed
 to the elements. An evidentiary hearing on the motion was set
 
for May 27, 2014.
 
On March 10, 2014, Kazuko conveyed the aforementioned

 
Rule 68 Offer of $5,000 to settle the case, which was rejected by
 
Robert. On May 30, 2014, the court entered its Decision and
 Order, stating, inter alia, that, "based on the credible and
 reliable evidence adduced at trial, . . . all of the items being
 sought by Defendant's motion were either: (1) already returned to
 Defendant, (2) not located at the marital residence at the time
 of the divorce; or (3) never existed to begin with" that Robert
 did not present any evidence at trial to establish the value or
 damage to the items; that, based on the "credible and reliable
 evidence issued at trial," the list of items to be collected was
 handwritten by Robert, himself, and constituted his own claim as
 to what items were located at Kazuko's residence; and that, even
 
3
 On August 7, 2013, the Honorable Catherine H. Remigio issued an
order amending the TRO to allow Robert to retrieve his personal property.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
assuming that Robert established at trial that Kazuko failed to
 
comply with the terms of the Decree or the order amending the
 TRO, he still failed to meet his burden of establishing value for
 the items he sought. The Decision and Order accordingly denied
 Robert's Relief Motion.
 
On July 16, 2014, Kazuko filed a Rule 68 Motion for
 
Attorney's Fees and Costs (Fee Motion), seeking $11,393.99 in
 
fees and costs incurred after the making of the March 10, 2014
 
Offer. After a hearing was held on September 17, 2014, on
 December 2, 2014, the court entered its FOFs and COLs, granted
 Kazuko's Fee Motion, and concluded, inter alia, that the Rule 68
 Offer was properly presented by Kazuko to Robert, that the
 judgment finally obtained by Robert, which awarded him nothing,
 was not patently more favorable to Robert than Kazuko's Offer,
 that an award of attorney's fees and costs to Kazuko would not be
 inequitable in accordance with HRS Chapter 580-47, and that the
 attorney's fees and costs being requested are reasonable and
 supported by appropriate time sheets and documentation.
 
Robert's further arguments are unavailing. Robert
 
points to no facts or evidence addressing, inter alia, the
 "relative abilities of the parties," "the condition in which each
 party will be left by the divorce," or "the concealment of or
 failure to disclose income or an asset." Without any specific
 references to the matters that were allegedly wrongly considered
 by the Family Court, or any other citations to the record
 supporting his argument, Robert has not shown that the record
 lacks substantial evidence to support its findings. Robert
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
failed to identify support in the record for his contentions, and
 
thus, this court has no basis to find error in the Family Court's
 challenged FOFs and COLs. 
Pursuant to HFCR Rule 68, attorney's fees may be
 
awarded when the "judgment in its entirety finally obtained by
 the offeree is patently not more favorable than the offer." HFCR
 Rule 68. Here, the Family Court awarded Robert nothing, whereas
 pursuant to the Offer, Kazuko would have given him $5,000. 
Accordingly, the Family Court's October 3, 2014 Order
 
Regarding Fees is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 14, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Michael A. Glenn,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Everett Cuskaden,Ryan C. Cuskaden,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 