NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000048 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF 
PACIFIC MONARCH, INC., a Hawai# i non-profit corporation,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
CLARENCE O. FURUYA and LONA LUM FURUYA,
D
efendants-Appellants,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE ENTITIES 1-10;
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-2344) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: 
Ginoza, Chief Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.) 
Defendants-Appellants Clarence O. Furuya (Clarence
) and 
Lona Lum Furuya (collectively, the Furuyas) appeal from the 
"Judgment," filed on October 6, 2017, by the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 The Furuyas challenge the 
following: (1) an "Order Denying Defendants Clarence O. Furuya and Lona Lum Furuya's Motion for Summary Judgment," filed April 20, 2017 (Order Denying Summary Judgment to Furuyas); (2) an 
"Order Granting Plaintiff Association of Apartment Owners of 
Pacific Monarch, Inc.'s Motion for Summary Judgment Against Defendants Clarence O. Furuya and Lona Lum Furuya on Plaintiff's First Amended Complaint," filed May 24, 2017 (Order Granting 
1 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Summary Judgment to AOAO);2 and (3) an "Order Granting in Part 
and Denying in Part 'Plaintiff Association of Apartment Owners of 
Pacific Monarch, Inc.'s Motion for Award of Attorney's Fees and Costs Against Defendants Clarence O. Furuya and Lona Lum Furuya'," filed December 27, 2017 (Award of Fees and Costs). 
On appeal, the Furuyas contend the Circuit Court erred 
by granting summary judgment to Plaintiff-Appellee Association of Apartment Owners of Pacific Monarch, Inc. (AOAO) based on 
preclusion grounds, thereby voiding the Furuyas' transfer of 106 
parking stalls that are appurtenant to a unit in which the Furuyas have a leasehold interest, to a unit in which they own the fee interest. The Furuyas also contend the Circuit Court improperly granted attorneys' fees and costs to the AOAO.
I. Background 
The present suit is part of a lengthy battle between 
the Furuyas and the AOAO over the parties' respective rights to Apartment Unit 3206 (Unit 3206) and 106 parking stalls 
appurtenant to Unit 3206 at the Pacific Monarch, a condominium 
project in Waikîkî.
3 
In a prior lawsuit, the Furuyas filed suit against the 
AOAO, claiming they had a right to purchase the AOAO's leased fee interest in Unit 3206 and the 106 parking stalls, pursuant to a contract. Clarence Furuya, et al, v. Ass'n of Apartment Owners 
of Pacific Monarch, Inc., et al., Civil No. 06-1-1057-06 (Furuya 
I).
4 The circuit court ruled against the Furuyas in a jury-
2 An amended order and amended judgment were issued by the Circuit
Court to correct an inadvertent error in the initial order and judgment.
Therefore, the Furuyas also appeal the "First Amended Order Granting PlaintiffAssociation of Apartment Owners of Pacific Monarch, Inc.'s Motion for SummaryJudgment Against Defendants Clarence O. Furuya and Lona Lum Furuya onPlaintiff's First Amended Complaint," filed on July 24, 2018, and the "AmendedFinal Judgment," filed on July 25, 2018. 
3 Pursuant to the Declaration of Horizontal Property Regime
(Declaration ) and Restated Declaration of the Association of Apartment Owners
of Pacific Monarch ( Restated Declaration ), parking elements, including parking
stalls, are appurtenant to a unit. Thus, the 106 parking stalls areappurtenant to Unit 3206. 
4 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
waived trial, finding that although the Furuyas own the fee to 
Apartment Unit 3207 (Unit 3207) at the Pacific Monarch, they only 
acquired a leasehold interest in Unit 3206 and the appurtenant 
106 parking stalls because they failed to "purchase the fee interest for 3206 and the 106 parking stalls attached to it." Moreover, the circuit court found the AOAO was "the rightful owner of the leased fee interests that were not purchased by the FURUYAS[,]" i.e., Unit 3206 and the 106 parking stalls. 
The Furuyas appealed in Furuya I, and while that appeal 
was pending in this court, the Furuyas sought to transfer the 106 parking stalls to Unit 3207 through an "Amendment of Restated Declaration of the Association of Apartment Owners of Pacific Monarch and Condominium Conveyance Documents To Reflect Transfer of Parking Stalls and Parking Elements from Apartment No. 3206 to Apartment No. 3207" (Transfer Amendment).
5 The Transfer 
Amendment did not specify whether the Furuyas were purporting to transfer a leasehold or fee simple interest in the stalls to Unit 3207.
6 
5 The Transfer Amendment provides, in relevant part: 
WHEREAS, CLARENCE O. FURUYA and LONA LUM FURUYA
(hereinafter collectively referred to as the "Furuyas"), are
the owners of those certain Apartments Nos. 3206 and 3207(together with the undivided interests in the commonelements) in the Pacific Monarch condominium project . . . . 
. . . . 
NOW, THEREFORE, the Furuyas, as grantor and as
grantee, hereby join in agreement that the Declaration andthe CCDs are hereby amended as follows: 
1.
 The Parking Stalls be and are hereby transferred
and conveyed from Apartment No. 3206 together with theRemaining Portions of the Parking Element theretoappurtenant to Apartment No. 3207. 
2. Pursuant to Section lA of the CCD for Apartment No.
3206, the Furuyas, in their capacity as the owners ofApartment No. 3207 hereby assume the pro rata additionalrental obligation for the Parking Stalls. 
6 Pursuant to the terms of the Transfer Amendment, it became effective
upon recordation in the Bureau of Conveyances of the State of Hawai #i on 
September 22, 2011. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On August 27, 2013, the AOAO initiated this lawsuit, 
filing a Complaint (2013 Complaint) against the Furuyas in the 
Circuit Court. On February 7, 2014, the AOAO filed a First 
Amended Complaint. The 2013 Complaint and First Amended Complaint both asserted claims for declaratory and injunctive relief and sought, among other things, a determination that the Transfer Amendment did not convert the Furuyas' leasehold interest in the parking stalls to a fee simple interest and that the Transfer Amendment be amended to reflect the Furuyas' actual interest in the stalls. Alternatively, the First Amended Complaint requested that the Transfer Amendment be deemed null and void. 
In their answer to the First Amended Complaint, the 
Furuyas denied that the AOAO was the fee simple owner of Unit 3206 and that the Condominium Conveyance Document (CCD) for Unit 
3206 conveyed only a leasehold interest in the unit and parking 
stalls to the Furuyas. The Furuyas further denied they could only convey a leasehold interest in the parking stalls via the Transfer Amendment. 
The Furuyas alleged that the interest in Unit 3206 and 
the appurtenant parking stalls "conveyed by the Building Conveyance [section of the CCD] including the parking and parking easements was in fee and the interest conveyed by the Ground Conveyance was leasehold" and "den[ied] that the Parking Elements [would] revert to the Association" upon expiration of the leasehold in 2054. 
Two months after the AOAO filed the First Amended 
Complaint in this case, this court decided Furuya I by affirming in part the circuit court's decision and holding that the AOAO had no obligation to sell the leased fee interest in Unit 3206 and the parking stalls.
7 Furuya v. Ass'n of Apartment Owners of 
Pac. Monarch, Inc., No. 30485, 2014 WL 1658331, at *16 (Haw. Ct. App. Apr. 25, 2014) (mem.). On further appeal to the Hawai# i 
7 This court vacated a portion of the circuit court's Findings of Fact,
Conclusions of Law and Order only as it pertained to the Furuyas' claim for
unjust enrichment from the use of certain parking stalls. Furuya I, 2014 WL
1658331, at *16 (mem. op.). 
4   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Supreme Court in Furuya I, the Furuyas maintained they had an 
enforceable contract with the AOAO to purchase the leased fee interest in Unit 3206 and the 106 parking stalls. Furuya v. 
Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Pac. Monarch, Inc., 137 Hawai# i 371, 
374, 383, 375 P.3d 150, 153, 162 (2016). 
The supreme court 
affirmed the ICA's decision, concluding the record supported the circuit court's findings that the Furuyas were not ready, willing and able to perform on the contract to purchase the AOAO's leased fee interest in Unit 3206 and the stalls. Furuya I, 137 Hawai# i 
at 384-86, 375 P.3d at 163-65. 
On November 23, 2016, following the Hawai# i Supreme 
Court's decision in Furuya I
, the Furuyas and the AOAO each filed 
motions for summary judgment in the present case. The Circuit Court granted summary judgment for the AOAO and denied summary judgment for the Furuyas. In the Order Granting Summary Judgment to the AOAO, the Circuit Court ordered that the Transfer Amendment be "abrogated, set aside, invalidated, and rendered void and of no legal force and effect, ab initio." The Circuit Court further concluded that "the Transfer Amendment was never authorized" and never "had the force or effect of transferring the ownership of any or all 106 parking stalls or parking elements, to which the Transfer Amendment referred, from Apartment No. 3206 to Apartment No. 3207 . . . ."
II. Discussion 
A. The Furuyas Are Precluded from Relitigating
Their Interest in Unit 3206 and the 106 Parking Stalls 
On appeal, the Furuyas allege the Circuit Court erred 
in basing the Order Granting Summary Judgment to the AOAO on res judicata grounds and for "other good cause[.]" The Furuyas argue the Circuit Court abused its discretion by granting summary judgment on res judicata grounds sua sponte because the Furuyas 
did not have an opportunity to brief the issue. The AOAO contends the Furuyas misstate the Circuit Court's ruling because the court "did not sua sponte limit its decision to the doctrine of res judicata or claim preclusion." 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Furuyas also argue the Circuit Court erred in 
granting summary judgment to the AOAO on collateral estoppel 
(issue preclusion) grounds, contending the AOAO failed to establish all the elements of collateral estoppel.
1. The Circuit Court did not err in ruling based on
collateral estoppel (issue preclusion) 
The Circuit Court stated during the hearing on both 
motions for summary judgment: 
Okay. This case is a little odd, because the
plaintiffs are urging upon the Court some theories, like
estoppel, that are not classically applicable here, becausewe have in this case not one single proceeding, but we havemultiple proceedings. We have a 2006 case, and the instant2013 case. So there are some difficulties applying theclassic judicial estoppel principles. 
Then you have res judicata. And I suppose -- and
collateral estoppel. And I suppose it is the offensive useof collateral estoppel as a sword against the Furuyas inthis case, because the Association is the plaintiff in thiscase, trying to use the prior adjudication. 
And I am not foreclosing the possibility that
judicial estoppel may very well apply. But I did want tonote the reservation that we have multiple proceedings here.And I'm not seeing authority that applies judicial estoppelto multiple or successive proceedings. So it may or may notapply. But I'm looking at collateral estoppel, and 
res 
judicata more particularly. 
When we look at the identity of issues, I think
that you have to bear in mind the rationale behind the resjudicata or collateral estoppel doctrines. And the purposeof the -- those doctrines are to preclude multiplicity oflitigation, et cetera. And we have two cases that are veryclosely related. 
(Emphasis added.) In making its ruling, the Circuit Court then 
stated: 
So I do believe that the question of the ownership of
the parking stalls was essential to the final judgment. It
definitely was essential to the final judgment at trial. Andeven on appeal, there were enough references to at least thebylaws, the restated bylaws, to satisfy the element ofidentity of issues. And, of course, all of the otherrequirements of res judicata are met as well. 
So I am not confining the Court's ruling only to
res judicata, but any other good cause, including perhapsthe doctrine of judicial estoppel. I'm not foreclosing thatas a basis to uphold this decision. 
(Emphases added.) The Circuit Court did not base its decision to 
grant summary judgment to the AOAO on res judicata grounds alone, 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
but on other grounds as well, including judicial estoppel and 
collateral estoppel (issue preclusion), both of which the AOAO argued below and which the Furuyas had the opportunity to brief.
2. The AOAO established the elements of collateral 
estoppel 
"Res judicata, or claim preclusion, and collateral 
estoppel, or issue preclusion, are [separate] doctrines that 
limit a litigant to one opportunity to litigate aspects of the case to prevent inconsistent results and multiplicity of suits and to promote finality and judicial economy." Bremer v. Weeks, 
104 Hawai# i 43, 53, 85 P.3d 150, 160 (2004) (citing Dorrance v. 
Lee, 90 Hawai# i 143, 148-49, 976 P.2d 904, 909-10 (1999)). 
"Issue preclusion . . . applies to a subsequent suit between the parties or their privies on a different cause of action and prevents the parties or their privies from relitigating any issue that was actually litigated and finally decided in the earlier action." Dorrance, 90 Hawai# i at 148, 976 P.2d at 909 (citation 
omitted). The elements of issue preclusion are: 
(1) the issue decided in the prior adjudication is identical
to the one presented in the action in question; (2) there isa final judgment on the merits; (3) the issue decided in theprior adjudication was essential to the final judgment; and(4) the party against whom [issue preclusion] is assertedwas a party or in privity with a party to the prioradjudication. 
Bremer, 104 Hawai# i at 54, 85 P.3d at 161. 
The central focus of whether issue preclusion is 
satisfied here is whether the issue in the prior suit and the 
case at bar are identical and whether the issue in the prior suit was essential to the final judgment.
8 The Furuyas argue that the 
8 The second element of the issue preclusion test, i.e., a final
judgment on the merits, is satisfied. The Furuyas fully litigated Furuya I
through a bench trial in the circuit court and then in appeals to this courtand the supreme court. See Dorrance v. Lee, 90 Hawai #i at 150, 976 P.2d at
911 (final judgment from previous proceeding was "on the merits" whereappellant had opportunity to fully defend claims). 
The fourth element, i.e., the party against whom issue preclusion
is asserted was a party or in privity with a party to the prior adjudication,is also satisfied. The Furuyas are the parties against whom issue preclusionis asserted and were the plaintiffs-appellants in Furuya I. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit Court did not actually decide an identical and 
dispositive issue because the Circuit Court's decision here pertained to the Furuyas' ability to transfer the 106 parking stalls, which the lower court did not address in Furuya I. According to the Furuyas, although the Circuit Court "noted the Furuyas' argument that 'the Association does not have a leased-fee interest in parking,'" the court "[did] not clearly identify any issue decided relating to that claim" and further "failed to connect a precise issue in the fee sale dispute with any matter dispositive of the Furuyas' rights in the transfer suit." 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has determined that an issue 
is identical for the purposes of issue preclusion where an issue had to be decided in a previous action and the court would need to decide that same previously addressed issue in the present case. Santos v. State, Dep't of Transp., Kauai Div., 64 Haw. 
648, 646 P.2d 962 (1982) (per curiam). In Santos, the appellant failed to follow the required grievance process in a collective bargaining agreement when claiming he was improperly denied a promotion over a junior employee. Id. at 649, 646 P.2d at 963-
64. Appellant appealed to the Hawaii Public Employment Relations 
Board (HPERB) after his first appeal was declined by the civil 
service commission for failure to follow the proper grievance 
procedure and the time to file a proper grievance had expired. Id. After a hearing on the merits, HPERB determined that denying 
the appellant the promotion violated the collective bargaining agreement and ordered the state to redo the selection. Id. at 
649-50, 646 P.2d at 964. On appeal, however, the circuit court reversed HPERB's decision in favor of the state on grounds that HPERB should have deferred to the grievance process of the collective bargaining agreement. Id. at 650, 646 P.2d at 964. The appellant did not further appeal the case. Id. at 650-51, 
646 P.2d at 964. 
The appellant then initiated a new action, claiming 
the state breached the collective bargaining agreement by failing 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to remove the junior employee from the position for allegedly 
falsifying his application, intentionally causing the appellant emotional distress, and denying the appellant due process. Id. 
at 653, 646 P.2d at 966. The defendants filed motions for summary judgment on grounds of, among other things, issue preclusion, which the lower court granted. Id. at 651, 646 P.2d 
at 965. The Hawai# i Supreme Court determined issue preclusion 
applied where the issue at bar was whether the appellant was required to exhaust contractual remedies in bringing the new suit, which was "the very issue that HPERB had to decide before making any ruling against the State on the prohibited practice breach of contract charge, and which the First Circuit had to examine before reversing HPERB." Id. at 655-56, 646 P.2d at 967. 
Here, a key issue in this case is the same as a 
previously litigated issue in Furuya I, specifically the Furuyas' rights to the 106 parking stalls. In Furuya I, the circuit court determined, in relevant part: 
2. . . . . 
[O]n Plaintiffs' Count V for declaratory
relief . . . the Court hereby declares that: (I) the
Association is the legal and beneficial owner of the leasedfee interests to the Apartment Unit 3206 and the 106 ParkingStalls; and (ii) the Association is not legally or morallyobligated to sell the leased fee interests to the ApartmentUnit 3206 and the 106 Parking Stalls to Plaintiffs[.] 
. . . . 
5. . . . . [T]he Association is the legal andbeneficial owner of the leased fee interests to the Apartment Unit 3206 and the 106 Parking Stalls
 and that the
Association is not obligated to sell the leased feeinterests to the Apartment Unit 3206 and the 106 ParkingStalls to Plaintiffs that the counterclaim for Breach of Contract/Promissory Estoppel (Counterclaim IV)is moot[.] 
(Emphases added.) 
In affirming the ICA's review of Furuya I, the Hawai# i 
Supreme Court quoted Plaintiff's Proof of a Prima Facie Case 
§ 7:2.50 for the following proposition: "[i]f real estate is encumbered by a lease, the ownership interest in that property is considered a leased fee interest rather than a fee simple interest because 'the possessory interest has been granted to another party by creation of a contractual landlord-tenant 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
relationship (i.e., a lease).'" Furuya I, 137 Hawai# i at 373 
n.2, 375 P.3d at 152 n.2. 
In explaining the issue in the appeal, the supreme 
court stated: 
The heart of the dispute in this case is whether there was
an enforceable contract for the purchase of the leased feeinterest in unit 3206 and the parking stalls, and whetherfollowing the signing of the DROA, the Furuyas elected notto purchase the leased fee interest in the parking stalls. 
Id. at 374, 375 P.3d at 153. 
The supreme court also explained: 
In sum, because—based on the circuit court's findings—theFuruyas failed to demonstrate they were ready, willing, andable to perform on the contract throughout the contractterm, their claim for specific performance fails. . . . Thefact that the Furuyas came forward in 2004, approximatelyseven years after the initial closing date of the DROA, andstated that they were ready to close on the DROA and thatthey had always wanted to purchase the leased fee interestin unit 3206 along with the appurtenant stalls wasconsidered and rejected by the circuit court. Substantialevidence in the record supports the circuit court'sconclusion that prior to the closing of the DROA, theFuruyas changed their minds and were not prepared to pay the$459,131.19 for the parking stalls. Accordingly, the Furuyashave failed to demonstrate error in the circuit court's decision. 
Id. at 386, 375 P.3d at 165. In Furuya I, the supreme court 
rejected the Furuyas' claim that the AOAO had breached a contract to sell the leased fee interest in Unit 3206 and the appurtenant 106 parking stalls to the Furuyas, and also rejected the Furuyas' claim that they were entitled to specific performance. The supreme court's decision in Furuya I thus clearly established that the Furuyas did not have any rights to the leased fee interest in Unit 3206 and the appurtenant 106 parking stalls. 
In the instant case, before reaching the issue of 
whether the Furuyas could transfer the leased fee interest in the 106 parking stalls from Unit 3206 to Unit 3207, it is necessary to address the Furuyas' rights to the parking stalls.  The 
9
9 Although the Transfer Amendment does not explicitly state the
interest in the 106 parking stalls being transferred to Unit 3207, the
Furuyas' answer to the AOAO's First Amended Complaint expresses the Furuyas'position that they transferred a leased fee interest in the stalls. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Furuyas claim the transfer is proper because "the apartments and 
the appurtenant parking were conveyed in fee simple [to them] and the only interest leased was the land . . . ." 
Section 6 of article IV in the CCD provides, in 
relevant part: 
6. Assignment and Subletting. The Apartment Owner may
assign, mortgage or sublet the interests conveyed hereunder,without approval or consent of Developer; and the assigneeor sublessee shall have the same rights and obligationshereunder as the original Apartment Owner; PROVIDED,HOWEVER, that any assignment or sublease shall provide thatthe assignee or sublessee undertakes to perform all theobligations of Apartment Owner hereunder. 
(Emphases added) (format altered). Although the Declaration10 
and Restated Declaration  permit the transfer of the 106 parking 
stalls to another unit, the CCD explicitly states that the 
Furuyas' assignee(s) can only possess the same rights as the 11
10 The Declaration provides, in relevant part: 
(2) Parking Elements. The following limited common elements
("parking elements") are shown in green on the Condominium Map: 
a. parking stalls on the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th floorsof the building numbered 1 through 106 on the CondominiumMap, which are appurtenant to and for the exclusive use ofApartment 3206. The Apartment Owner of any apartment towhich any parking stall is appurtenant shall have the rightfrom time to time with the consent of his mortgagee, if any,to transfer such parking stall to another Apartment in theProject by joining, with the Apartment Owner of such otherApartment, in an amendment of this Declaration and theirrespective condominium conveyance documents. Such amendmentshall be effective only upon recording the same of record inthe Bureau of Conveyances. Developer hereby gives itsirrevocable consent to all such parking stall transfers. 
11 The Restated Declaration provides, in relevant part: 
(B) Parking Elements. The following 1imited common elements("parking elements") are shown in green on the Condominium Map: 
a. parking sta1ls on the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th floors of the
building numbered 1 through 106 on the Condominium Map, which areappurtenant to and for the exclusive use of Apartment 3206. TheApartment Owner of any apartment to which any parking stall isappurtenant shall have the right from time to time with theconsent of his mortgagee, if any, to transfer such parking stallto another Apartment in the Project by joining, with the ApartmentOwner of such other Apartment, in an amendment of this Declarationand their respective condominium conveyance documents. Suchamendment shall be effective only upon recording the same of therecord in the Bureau of Conveyances. Developer hereby gives itsirrevocable consent to al1 such parking stall transfers. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Furuyas. Given the Hawai# i Supreme Court's decision in Furuya I, 
the Furuyas do not possess the leased fee interest in the 106 
parking stalls. Thus, to the extent the Furuyas purport to convey a leased fee interest in the parking stalls to Unit 3207, they have no right to do so because they only possess a leasehold interest in those parking stalls. 
The issue of the Furuyas' rights to the leased fee 
interest in the 106 parking stalls was decided in Furuya I. It is the identical issue that was required to be decided in this case to ultimately determine the Furuyas' rights to transfer the parking stalls. Thus, the issue decided in the prior adjudication is identical to the one presented in this case, and the first element for issue preclusion is met. 
Further, the issue of the Furuyas' rights to the leased 
fee interest in the 106 parking stalls was essential to the prior suit. Notwithstanding the Furuyas' arguments to the contrary, the central issue in Furuya I was whether the Furuyas had a right to specific performance, i.e., to purchase the leased fee interest in Unit 3206 and the appurtenant 106 parking stalls. Deciding this issue was essential to the final judgment in that case, and thus the third element of issue preclusion is met. 
Inasmuch as the four elements of the issue preclusion 
test have been satisfied, we hold the Furuyas were precluded from re-litigating whether they had rights to the leased fee interest to the 106 parking stalls. See Dorrance, 90 Hawai# i at 150, 976 
P.2d at 911. Thus, the Circuit Court properly granted summary judgment for the AOAO.
12 Moreover, the Circuit Court did not err 
in rejecting the Furuyas' claim that the governing documents permitted transfer of the parking stalls, because the CCD only allows the transfer of the same rights the assignor possesses and the Furuyas do not hold a leased fee interest in the parking stalls. 
12 Because we affirm the Circuit Court's ruling based on the
application of collateral estoppel (issue preclusion), we do not address the
Furuyas' claims that the Circuit Court erred in ruling against them on groundsof judicial estoppel and Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 514A-14. 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B. The Circuit Court Properly Awarded the AOAO Attorneys' Fees 
We review the Circuit Court's award of attorneys' fees 
and costs for abuse of discretion. Booker v. Midpac Lumber Co., 
Ltd., 65 Haw. 166, 171, 649 P.2d 376, 379-80 (1982). 
In a brief one-paragraph argument that fails to cite 
any legal authority, the Furuyas summarily assert the Circuit 
Court erred in awarding the AOAO attorneys' fees because the Circuit Court's Judgment was in error and the award was excessive and inadequately described. They cite only their memorandum in opposition to the AOAO's motion for attorney's fees (Memorandum 
in Opposition to Motion for Attorney's Fees) filed in the Circuit 
Court, without further elaboration. The Furuyas essentially fail 
to support this point of error with any substantive argument. See
 
Hawai#i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points 
not argued may be deemed waived"). 
Even if we consider the Furuyas' Memorandum in 
Opposition to Motion for Attorney's Fees filed in the Circuit Court, they argued that because the AOAO's Complaint and First Amended Complaint failed to seek enforcement of a provision in the Declaration, the AOAO is not entitled to attorney's fees and costs pursuant to HRS § 514B-157(a)(3) (2006). 
HRS § 514B-157(a)(3) provides: 
(a) All costs and expenses, including reasonable attorneys'
fees, incurred by or on behalf of the association for: 
. . . . 
(3) Enforcing any provision of the declaration,
bylaws, house rules, and this chapter, or the rules ofthe real estate commission; 
against an owner, occupant, tenant, employee of an owner, orany other person who may in any manner use the property,shall be promptly paid on demand to the association by suchperson or persons; provided that if the claims upon whichthe association takes any action are not substantiated, allcosts and expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees,incurred by any such person or persons as a result of theaction of the association, shall be promptly paid on demandto such person or persons by the association. 
(Emphasis added.) Pertaining to the application of the CCD, the 
Declaration and Restated Declaration both provide: 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
13. Administration of Project. The 
administration of the Project shall be governed by this
Declaration, the Bylaws, and the Condominium Conveyance Documentconveying to each owner his interest in his apartment. Each . . .owner shall comply strictly with the Declaration, Bylaws andCondominium Conveyance Document. 
Based on the 2013 Complaint, in which the AOAO sought 
declaratory relief regarding the Furuyas' purported conveyance of 
the 106 parking stalls, it was reasonable for the Circuit Court to award attorneys' fees and costs. The 2013 Complaint alleges the following in Count I for declaratory relief: 
19. Pursuant to the Project 's governing documents , the 
Parking Elements are limited common elements of the
Project.[] 13
20. The Condominium Conveyance Document for Apartment No.3206 included the Parking Elements as easements appurtenantto that apartment. 
21. The Defendants possess the right to use the limited common 
element Parking Elements pursuant to their leasehold ownership
of Apartment No. 3206. 
22. Thus, the Defendants' property ownership interest in the
Parking Elements was leasehold. 
23. Therefore, the Defendants could not, and cannot in the
future, convey anything more than a leasehold interest inthe Parking Elements via their Transfer Amendment. 
24. Defendants disagree with the Association's position
regarding such conveyance of the Parking Elements. 
25. The Association is therefore entitled to a ruling by the
Court that the transfer of the Parking Stalls and RemainingPortions from Apartment No. 3206 to Apartment No. 3207 viathe Transfer Amendment did not convert the Defendants' property interest in the limited common element ParkingElements from leasehold to "fee simple." 
26. The Association is further entitled to a ruling by the
Court that the Transfer Amendment must be amended to contain restrictive covenants that: (a) Apartment No. 3207 holds aleasehold interest in the Parking Stalls and RemainingPortions of Apartment No. 3206; (b) any future transfer(s)of the Parking Elements will not affect the leasehold natureof such property interests; (c) all future transfers mustinclude a provision expressly stating that the leaseholdinterest in the Parking Elements reverts back to theAssociation as the leased fee owner upon the expiration ofthe term at midnight on April 27, 2054; and (d) suchcovenants will be binding on all successors and assigns tosuch property interests. 
13 The Declaration and Restated Declaration provide that the Parking
Elements, including the subject 106 parking stalls appurtenant to Unit 3206,are limited common elements. 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Emphases added.) Considering that the Declaration and Restated 
Declaration both provide that the Pacific Monarch is partly governed by the CCD and that the CCD should be strictly complied with, it is a fair assessment that the AOAO sought enforcement of provisions of the declarations in the 2013 Complaint when it challenged the Furuyas' attempt to convey more than a leasehold interest in the 106 parking stalls without the necessary restrictive covenants as required by the CCD. See Article IV, 
Section 6 of CCD. 
To the extent the Furuyas claimed in the Circuit Court 
that the AOAO should not have been awarded attorneys' fees and costs based on the First Amended Complaint, this argument is without merit considering the First Amended Complaint is virtually identical to the 2013 Complaint except that it includes an alternative request for relief: 
As alternative relief, the Association is entitled to a
ruling that the Transfer Amendment is null and void, and theCourt should issue an order or writ directing the Bureau ofConveyances, State of Hawai #i, to take any and all necessary
action to expunge the Transfer Amendment from it [sic]records. 
This alternative request for relief also seeks enforcement of the 
declarations. It requests that the Circuit Court void the Transfer Amendment, rather than amend it as in the 2013 Complaint, because the Transfer Amendment fails to comply with the CCD, which in turn does not adhere to the express provision in the declarations. 
We conclude the Circuit Court did not err in awarding 
attorneys' fees to the AOAO.
III. Conclusion 
Based on the above, the following entered by the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit are affirmed: 
(1) "Judgment," filed October 6, 2017; (2) "Order Denying Defendants Clarence O. Furuya and 
Lona Lum Furuya's Motion for Summary Judgment," filed April 20, 2017; 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) "Order Granting Plaintiff Association of Apartment 
Owners of Pacific Monarch, Inc.'s Motion for Summary Judgment 
Against Defendants Clarence O. Furuya and Lona Lum Furuya on Plaintiff's First Amended Complaint," filed May 24, 2017; and 
(4) "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part 
'Plaintiff Association of Apartment Owners of Pacific Monarch, Inc.'s Motion for Award of Attorney's Fees and Costs Against Defendants Clarence O. Furuya and Lona Lum Furuya'," filed December 27, 2017. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 23, 2023. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate JudgeGeorge W. Van Buren,John B. Shimizu, (Van Buren & Shimizu LLP) for Defendants-Appellants 
Matt A. Tsukazaki, 
(Li & Tsukazaki) andLance S. Fujisaki (AndersonLahne & Fujisaki LLP)for Plaintiffs-Appellees 
16 