  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
CAAP-11-0000736
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
LARRY K. OHASHI, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR NO. 10-1-1188)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Larry K. Ohashi ("Ohashi") appeals
 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) filed on
 
September 12, 2011, in Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (Circuit Court).
1 A jury found Ohashi guilty of: (1) kidnapping,
 
by intentionally or knowingly restraining the complaining witness
 (CW), with intent to inflict bodily injury upon her, in violation
 of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-720(1)(d) (Supp. 2012);
2
 
1
 The Honorable Richard W. Pollack presided.
 
2
 HRS § 707-720(1)(d) provides in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of kidnapping if the person
intentionally or knowingly restrains another person with intent
to:
   
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and (2) second-degree theft, in violation of HRS § 708­
831(1)(a)(Supp. 2012).3
 
On appeal, Ohashi argues that (1) his conviction for
 
kidnapping must be reversed because there was insufficient
 evidence that he intentionally or knowingly restrained the CW;
 and (2) his conviction for second-degree theft must be reversed
 because there was insufficient evidence that he intended to
 deprive the CW of her cellular telephone. We affirm. 
I.
 
The CW testified that she had been in a dating
 
relationship with Ohashi for seven or eight months. On July 13,
 2010, the CW met Ohashi at around 9:00 p.m. at a van (in which
 Ohashi was living) parked on Makiki Street to tell him that she
 wanted to break up. As the CW approached Ohashi, her cell phone
 rang. Ohashi, who had been drinking, became mad and accused the
 CW of receiving a call from another man. Ohashi grabbed the
 phone out of the CW's hand and tossed it away, toward a vacant
 lot. Ohashi then grabbed the CW, pushed her into the van, and
 closed the door behind them.
 
The CW yelled at Ohashi and tried to get out, but
 
Ohashi stopped her, pushed her down, and got on top of her to
 prevent her from leaving. Ohashi ripped off the CW's dress and
 underwear and attempted to sexually assault her, while the CW
 fought and struggled to "block" Ohashi. Ohashi later began
 punching the CW in the head. The punching continued through the
 night, as Ohashi drank from a bottle of hard liquor. When the CW
 
. . . 
(d) Inflict bodily injury upon that person . . . . 
3
 HRS § 708-831(1)(a) provides:
 
1) A person commits the offense of theft in the second
degree if the person commits theft:
 
(a)
 Of property from the person of another[.] 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
tried to scream, Ohashi choked her using two hands and told the
 
CW to "shut up." At some point, the CW lost consciousness.
 
When the CW regained consciousness, it was daytime. 
Ohashi was on top of her, and he told the CW that he loved her. 
The CW tried to leave, but Ohashi stopped her and began punching
 her again. Ohashi would punch the CW, tell her he was sorry, and
 then resume punching her. The CW finally escaped when Ohashi
 left the van after telling her that he knew he was to go to jail
 and that he "might as well him go do drugs and go fuck somebody
 before that[.]" The CW ran to her car and drove to the house of
 a friend, who took the CW to the hospital. 
II.
 
In evaluating the sufficiency of the evidence, we view 
the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution. State v. Tamura, 63 Haw. 636, 637, 633 P.2d 1115, 1117 (1981). "The test on appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact." State v. Richie, 
88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) (block quote format 
and citation omitted). 
Substantial evidence is "evidence which a reasonable mind
 
might accept as adequate to support the conclusion of the
fact finder." Matters related to the credibility of
witnesses and the weight to be given to the evidence are
generally left to the factfinder. The appellate court will
neither reconcile conflicting evidence nor interfere with
the decision of the trier of fact based on the witnesses'
 credibility or the weight of the evidence.
 
State v. Mitchell, 94 Hawai' i 388, 393, 15 P.3d 314, 319 (App. 
2000) (citations omitted). We give "full play to the right of 
the fact finder to determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw justifiable inferences of fact." State v. Yabusaki, 58 Haw. 
404, 411, 570 P.2d 844, 848 (1977). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
We resolve Ohashi's arguments on appeal as follows: 
1. With respect to Ohashi's kidnapping conviction, we
 
conclude that there was sufficient evidence that he intentionally
 or knowingly restrained the CW. The CW testified that Ohashi
 grabbed her, pushed her into his van, attempted to sexually
 assault her, and prevented her from leaving by holding her down
 and punching and choking her. The CW's testimony was
 corroborated by the doctor who examined her at the hospital and
 the friend who took her there, with these two witnesses
 describing multiple fresh injuries and bruising to the CW's face
 and neck, as well as by photographs depicting injuries to the CW.
 The CW's testimony was also corroborated by evidence that a
 whiskey bottle and a torn dress were found during a search of the
 van.
 
Ohashi argues that there was insufficient evidence
 
because the CW was not credible. We disagree. It was up to the
 jury to assess the CW's credibility and the weight to give her
 testimony. We conclude that based on the CW's testimony and the
 corroborating evidence presented, there was substantial evidence
 to support the jury's finding that Ohashi intentionally or
 knowingly restrained the CW.
 
2. With respect to Ohashi's second-degree theft
 
conviction, we conclude that there was sufficient evidence that
 Ohashi intended to deprive the CW of her cellular telephone. 
Theft is defined to include obtaining or exerting "unauthorized
 control over the property of another with intent to deprive the
 other of the property." HRS § 708-830(1) (Supp. 2012). The term
 "deprive," in turn, is defined in pertinent part as follows: 
"Deprive" means:
 
(1)	 To withhold property or cause it to be withheld
from a person permanently or for so extended a
period or under such circumstance that a
significant portion of its economic value, or of
the use and benefit thereof, is lost to the
 person; or 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2)	 To dispose of the property so as to make it
unlikely that the owner will recover it[.]
 
HRS § 708-800 (1993).
 
The CW testified that Ohashi grabbed her telephone and
 
tossed it away, toward a vacant lot, after accusing her of
 
receiving a call from another man. Ohashi then pushed the CW
 into a van and kept her there all night. A defense witness also
 testified that she saw Ohashi obtain a phone and "[h]e fly the
 phone." Because intent can rarely be proved by direct evidence,
 courts have recognized that "the mind of an alleged offender may
 be read from his acts, conduct and inferences fairly drawn from
 all the circumstances." State v. Sadino, 64 Haw. 427, 430, 642
 
P.2d 534, 536–37 (1982). 
We conclude that there was substantial evidence to
 
support the jury's finding that Ohashi intended to deprive the CW
 of her cellular telephone. Evidence that the cellular telephone
 was returned to the CW the following day by a stranger who found
 it does not detract from this conclusion.
 
IV.
 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, March 28, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Jon N. Ikenaga
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Donn Fudo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 