NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000362 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
TERI WAINANI PEDRO, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
KONA DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 3DTA-17-00495) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, C.J., and Wadsworth and Nakasone, JJ.) 
The State of Hawai# i (State) charged Defendant-
Appellant Teri Wainani Pedro (
Pedro) with Operating a Vehicle 
Under the Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1).  After a bench 
trial, the District Court of the Third Circuit, Kona Division 
(District Court), found Pedro guilty as charged of OVUII.   2/1/
1/ HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2016) provides as follows: 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle
under the influence of an intoxicant if the person operates or
assumes actual physical control of a vehicle: 
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair the person's normalmental faculties or ability to care for theperson and guard against casualty[.] 
2/ The Honorable Margaret K. Masunaga presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Pedro appeals from the Judgment and Notice of Entry of 
Judgment (Judgment), entered on March 29, 2019, in the District 
Court. On appeal, Pedro contends that: (1) the District Court 
erred in admitting at trial the results of her horizontal gaze nystagmus (HGN) test as substantive evidence of intoxication; and 
(2) there was insufficient evidence to support her conviction. 
As explained below, we affirm the District Court's Judgment. 
We resolve Pedro's arguments on appeal as follows. 1. Pedro argues that the District Court erred in 
admitting her HGN test results at trial on the sole ground that evidence of HGN test results is admissible only to determine probable cause for arrest, and not as substantive evidence of intoxication. 
In State v. Jones, 148 Hawai# i 152, 468 P.3d 166, 
(2020), the Hawai
#i Supreme Court recently addressed the question 
of whether standard field sobriety tests (SFSTs), which include 
the HGN test, "were admissible for the purpose of establishing 
substantive evidence of intoxication beyond probable cause." Id. 
at 171, 468 P.3d 185. The supreme court held that "evidence of a driver's conduct and physical actions while performing a SFST is not only relevant to probable cause for an arrest, but is also admissible as indicia of whether a driver was OVUII beyond a reasonable doubt." Id. at 172, 468 P.3d 186. 
Based on Jones, we 
conclude that Pedro's argument that evidence of HGN test results is categorically inadmissible as substantive evidence of intoxication is without merit.
3/ 
2. Pedro argues that there was insufficient evidence 
to support her OVUII conviction because the State failed to show that: (1) she had been the driver of the subject vehicle 
3/ Pedro does not contend that her HGN test results were otherwise 
inadmissible at trial due to lack of foundation. To the extent that Pedro 
intended to raise such a claim, we conclude that she waived it by failing topresent any argument to support it. See Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure
Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived."); State v. Guidry,105 Hawai #i 222, 236-38, 96 P.3d 242, 256-58 (2004); State v. Fitzwater, 122
Hawai #i 354, 370 n.10, 227 P.3d 520, 536 n.10 (2010). Indeed, in her reply
brief, Pedro appears to confirm that she did not intend to raise a lack-of-
foundation argument, stating: "[Pedro] does not concede that [the arrestingofficer] was properly trained and properly administered the HGN test, but 
argues that the HGN test should not have been admitted and relied upon assubstantive evidence of [Pedro's] intoxication ." (Emphasis added.) 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
(operator element); and (2) assuming that she had been the 
driver, that she was under the influence of alcohol in an amount 
sufficient to impair her normal mental faculties or ability to care for herself and guard against casualty (alcohol impairment
element).  We disagree. 
With respect to the operator element, the State 
presented evidence that on July 18, 2016, at about 5:00 a.m., 
Pedro was outside an overturned pick-up truck involved in a single-vehicle accident; she admitted that "she was the driver;" she said she had come from a Jack-in–the Box; and the arresting officer detected the smell of Jack-In-the–Box food coming from Pedro and the vehicle. 
With respect to the alcohol impairment element, the 
State, among other things, presented evidence that the arresting officer detected the odor of an "intoxication beverage" coming from Pedro; her eyes were "red, glassy, . . . slightly watery[,]" and "kind of half closed," and she appeared to be "fazed[ and] a little confused"; the arresting officer had been trained to look for indicators of alcohol intoxication, which included red, watery, and glassy eyes, and the smell of alcohol; Pedro's truck appeared to have gone off the road, hit an embankment, and overturned before coming to rest upside-down in the middle of the highway; and Pedro performed poorly on the SFSTs. In particular, the arresting officer observed nystagmus in both of Pedro's eyes during the tracking, maximum deviation, and forty-five degree phases of the HGN test; during the walk-and-turn test, Pedro could not keep her balance while receiving instructions and swayed heavily from left to right; in performing the test, Pedro failed to walk heel to toe as instructed, leaving gaps of one to four inches on every step, kept her arms raised the entire time, and made an improper turn; during the instructional phase of the one-leg stand test, Pedro heavily swayed from front to back and left to right; in performing the test, Pedro swayed, hopped, put her foot down, and raised her arms. When viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution, State v. Ildefonso, 72 Haw. 573, 576-77, 827 P.2d 648, 651 (1992), we conclude that there was sufficient evidence to support Pedro's OVUII conviction. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment and 
Notice of Entry of Judgment, entered on March 29, 2019, in the 
District Court of the Third Circuit, Kona Division, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 20, 2021. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge Andrew I. Kim,Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Stephen L. Frye,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Hawai# i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
4 