 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000575
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
DEN VAN NGUYEN, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P. NO. 11-1-0014 (CR. NO. 90-1391))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Den Van Nguyen (Nguyen) appeals 
from the "Amended Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order 
Denying Petition to Set Aside Judgment" (Amended Order Denying Petition) that was filed on July 25, 2011, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 Approximately twenty 
years after he was sentenced on his conviction for Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Second Degree, Nguyen filed a "Petition to Set Aside Judgment" (Petition) pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 (2006). Nguyen sought to vacate his judgment on the ground that during his no-contest plea, he did not recall being advised by the trial court of the immigration consequences of his plea as required by Hawaii Revised Statutes 
1
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided over the proceedings resulting
in the Amended Order Denying Petition.
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(HRS) § 802E-2 (1993).2 By the time Nguyen filed his Petition,
 
the court reporter's records of Nguyen's no-contest plea hearing
 
had been destroyed in accordance with the applicable records
 retention schedule for the circuit courts, and no transcript of
 the hearing was available. Nguyen argued that based on HRS 
3
§ 802E-3 (1993),  he was entitled to have his judgment set aside,
2
 HRS § 802E-2 provides:
 
Court advisement concerning alien status required.  Prior to
 
acceptance of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any offense
punishable as a crime under state law, except offenses designated
as infractions under state law, the court shall administer the
following advisement on the record to the defendant:
 
If you are not a citizen of the United States, you are
hereby advised that conviction of the offense for which you
have been charged may have the consequences of deportation,
exclusion from admission to the United States, or denial of
naturalization pursuant to the laws of the United States.
 
Upon request, the court shall allow the defendant additional
time to consider the appropriateness of the plea in light of the
advisement as described in this section.
 
3 HRS § 802E-3 provides:
 
Failure to advise; vacation of judgment. If the court fails
 
to advise the defendant as required by section 802E-2 and the
defendant shows that conviction of the offense to which the
 defendant pleaded guilty or nolo contendere may have the
consequences for the defendant of deportation, exclusion from
admission to the United States, or denial of naturalization
pursuant to the laws of the United States, on defendant's motion,
the court shall vacate the judgment and permit the defendant to
withdraw the plea of guilty or nolo contendere, and enter a plea
of not guilty. Absent a record that the court provided the
advisement required by this section, the defendant shall be
presumed not to have received the required advisement.
 
In HRS § 802E-1 (1993), the Legislature explained its intent and purpose
in enacting HRS §§ 802E-2 and 802E-3 as follows:
 
Legislative findings and intent. The legislature finds that
in many instances involving an individual who is not a citizen of
the United States charged with an offense punishable as a crime
under state law, a plea of guilty or nolo contendere is entered
without the defendant knowing that a conviction of such offense is
grounds for deportation, exclusion from admission to the United
States, or denial of naturalization pursuant to the laws of the
United States. Therefore, it is the intent of the legislature in
enacting this section to promote fairness to such accused
individuals by requiring in such cases that acceptance of a guilty
plea or plea of nolo contendere be preceded by an appropriate
warning of the special consequences for such a defendant which may
(continued...)
 
2
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to withdraw his no-contest plea, and to have his case reset for
 
trial.
 
The Circuit Court denied Nguyen's Petition without a
 
hearing, denied Nguyen's motion for reconsideration, and issued
 the Amended Order Denying Petition. On appeal, Nguyen argues
 that the Circuit Court erred in denying his Petition without a
 hearing and in denying his motion for reconsideration. For the
 reasons discussed below, we affirm the Circuit Court.
 
I.
 
In the underlying criminal case, Nguyen was charged in
 
1990 with Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Second Degree. 
During status conferences with the trial court, Nguyen's counsel
 indicated that he needed to consider immigration laws in
 connection with the plea negotiations. On February 26, 1991,
 
Nguyen pleaded no contest to the charged offense, and he signed a
 
"No Contest" form in which he acknowledged that "I know that if I
 am not a citizen of the United States, a conviction for this or
 these offenses may have the consequences of deportation,
 exclusion from admission to the United States, or denial of
 naturalization pursuant to the laws of the United States." In
 April 1991, Nguyen was sentenced to a term of probation for five
 years. Nguyen did not appeal his conviction or sentence. 
Approximately twenty years after his conviction and
 
sentence became final, Nguyen filed the instant Petition. In
 support of his Petition, Nguyen submitted the declaration of his
 current counsel. Nguyen's current counsel stated, among other
 things, that: (1) "[Nguyen] does not recall being informed by the
 Court that as a result of his plea, he may be subject to
 
3(...continued)
result from the plea. It is also the intent of the legislature
that the court in such cases shall grant the defendant a
reasonable amount of time to negotiate with the prosecuting agency
in the event the defendant or the defendant's counsel was unaware
 of the possibility of deportation, exclusion from admission to the
United States, or denial of naturalization as a result of
conviction. It is further the intent of the legislature that at
the time of the plea no defendant shall be required to disclose
the defendant's legal status to the court.
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
deportation, denial of naturalization and denied re-entry into 
the United States"; (2) "[Nguyen's] status is that of a Legal Permanent Residence [sic]," and as a result of his conviction, he is subject to these immigration consequences; (3) in about December 2010, counsel contacted the court reporter for Nguyen's February 26, 1991, no-contest plea hearing; and (4) the court reporter informed counsel that the trial court had disposed of the court reporter's original shorthand notes and other records of the February 26, 1991, hearing, when the records were ten years old, and therefore, a transcript of the proceedings could not be prepared. The court reporter's records had been disposed of after ten years in accordance with the record retention schedule applicable to the circuit courts. See "Order Governing 
Retention and Disposition of Judiciary Records" filed in the Supreme Court of the State of Hawai' i on December 10, 1999.
4 
Nguyen argued that pursuant to HRS §§ 802E-2 and 802E-3, his judgment of conviction should be vacated, and he should be allowed to withdraw his no-contest plea. 
The Circuit Court denied Nguyen's Petition without a
 
hearing, denied Nguyen's motion for reconsideration, and issued
 its Amended Order Denying Petition. 
II.
 
We resolve the arguments Nguyen raises on appeal as
 
follows:
 
1. The Circuit Court did not err in denying Nguyen's 
Petition without a hearing. Nguyen relies on the Hawai' i Supreme 
Court's decision in State v. Sorino, 108 Hawai' i 162, 118 P.3d 
645 (2005). In that case, Sorino moved to withdraw his no contest plea after the Immigration and Naturalization Service served him with a notice to appear at removal proceedings. Id. 
at 164-65, 118 P.3d at 646-47. Attached to Sorino's motion was 
4
 The supreme court's December 10, 1999, order permitted court
reporters' shorthand notebooks and stenographic notes for felonies in the
circuit courts to be destroyed "10 years after trial, unless transcribed." 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the transcript of his no-contest plea hearing, which showed that
 
the trial court failed to advise him of the immigration
 consequences of his plea pursuant to HRS § 802E-2. Id. at 164,
 
118 P.3d at 647. The supreme court held that Sorino was entitled
 to withdraw his plea because the trial court had failed to
 provide the advisement required by HRS § 802E-2. Id. at 168, 118
 
P.3d at 651.
 
We conclude that Sorino is distinguishable and does not 
control the outcome of this case. The supreme court in Sorino did not decide the procedural requirements for filing a motion to vacate a judgment and withdraw a plea pursuant to HRS §§ 802E-2 and 802E-3. HRPP Rule 40 establishes the procedural requirements for post-conviction proceedings, including any collateral attack on a judgment. See HRPP Rule 40(a) (2006) ("The post-conviction 
proceeding established by this rule shall encompass all common law and statutory procedures for the same purpose . . . ."); HRPP Rule 32(d) (2006) (providing that motions to withdraw a plea of guilty or nolo contendere submitted more than ten days after imposition of sentence shall be made by petition pursuant to HRPP Rule 40). We conclude that the procedural requirements of HRPP Rule 40 apply to Nguyen's Petition. See Hawai' i Const. art. VI, 
§ 7 ("The supreme court shall have power to promulgate rules and regulations in all civil and criminal cases for all courts relating to process, practice, procedure, and appeals, which shall have the force and effect of law."). 
Nguyen does not assert that the trial court failed to
 
comply with HRS § 802E-2, but only asserts, through his counsel,
 that he "does not recall" the trial court providing the
 advisement required by HRS § 802E-2. Nguyen did not file a
 direct appeal from his conviction and did not seek to withdraw
 his plea for approximately twenty years. Instead, he waited
 until after the court reporter's records were disposed of, in
 conformity with the records retention schedule for circuit 
courts, and a transcript of his no-contest plea hearing could not
 be produced, to file his Petition. Nguyen provides no
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
explanation, much less extraordinary circumstances, to justify
 
his inordinate delay in raising the issues asserted in his
 Petition. We conclude that under the circumstances presented by
 this case, Nguyen waived his right to seek relief based on HRS 
§§ 802E-2 and 802E-3. See HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) (providing that
 
relief under HRPP Rule 40 shall not be available when the issues
 sought to be raised have been waived).
 
In addition, unlike the defendant in Sorino, Nguyen
 
does not claim that he has been contacted by the federal
 immigration authorities or that he is facing any actual, non-
speculative immigration consequences as a result of his
 conviction. See People v. Superior Court (Zamudio), 96 Cal.
 
Rptr. 2d 463, 477 (2000) (concluding, under a statute virtually
 identical to HRS § 802E-3, that to be entitled to relief, the
 defendant must show at the time of the motion to vacate that "he
 faced more than just a remote possibility of deportation,
 exclusion, or denial of naturalization") (internal quotation
 marks omitted)). We conclude that the Circuit Court properly
 denied Nguyen's Petition without a hearing.
 
2. Based on the foregoing analysis, we also conclude
 
that the Circuit Court did not err in denying Nguyen's motion for
 reconsideration.
 
III.
 
We affirm the Circuit Court's decision in the Amended
 
Order Denying Petition to deny Nguyen's Petition without a
 hearing.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 26, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Emmanuel G. Guerrero 
(Law Offices of Emmanuel G. Guerrero)
for Petitioner-Appellant
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Brandon H. Ito
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu for Respondent-Appellee
 
6
 