NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-000512
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
SCARLETT A. TAYLOR, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
THE KAHALA HOTEL INVESTORS, LLC, et al., OWNERS dba THE KAHALA
HOTEL AND RESORT; TRINITY KAHALA, LLC; SMH KAHALA, LLC;
GENERAL MANAGER, KAHALA HOTEL AND RESORT; SECURITY DIRECTOR,
KAHALA HOTEL AND RESORT, Defendants-Appellees and
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; and
DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0845)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellant Scarlett A. Taylor ( Taylor) appeals
from two post-judgment orders entered against her, and in favor
of Defendants-Appellees Kahala Hotel Investors LLC, et al.,
Owners dba The Kahala Hotel and Resort, Trinity Kahala, LLC, SMH
Kahala, LLC, General Manager, Kahala Hotel and Resort, and
Security Director, Kahala Hotel and Resort (the Kahala
Defendants ), on July 12, 2017, in the Circuit Court of the First
Circuit ( Circuit Court):1  (1) the Order Granting Defendants
1The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided.  Taylor, at various
times throughout the record, mentioned The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang; however,  
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Kahala Hotel Investors, LLC dba The Kahala Hotel and Resort,
Trinity Kahala, LLC, SMH Kahala, LLC, General Manager, Kahala
Hotel and Resort and Security Director, Kahala Hotel and Resort's
Motion to Designate Pro Se Plaintiff Scarlett A. Taylor as a
Vexatious Litigant Pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS)
Chapter 634J, filed March 14, 2017 ( Order Designating Plaintiff
as a Vexatious Litigant);2 and (2) the Order Denying Plaintiff
Scarlett A. Taylor's Motion to Designate Attorney Michael H.
Tsuchida, a DTRIC Agent, as Vexatious and Ask for an Injunction
and Sanction Against Phony Litigant Michael H. Tsuchida for
Misusing the Kahala Hotel Case Filing Countless Frivolous Motions
for the Purpose of Concealing HIPAA Violations and Violations of
the Hawaii Rules of Professional Conduct, Rules 3.1, 3.2, 8.1(A),
8.2, 8.4, and Many Other Violations and Suppressing the
Plaintiff's Personal Injury Claim and Concealing the March 25,
2011 Accident Video, Filed April 5, 2017 ( Order Denying Motion to
Designate Defense Counsel as a Vexatious Litigant ).3
1(...continued)
Judge Chang was not involved in this case, but apparently presided over
another case in which Taylor was involved.
2The Order Designating Plaintiff as a Vexatious Litigant is not
referenced in Taylor's Notice of Appeal, but the transcript where this motion
was orally granted is attached to the Notice of Appeal, and she argues against
it in her Opening Brief.  The omission from the Notice of Appeal is not
jurisdictional and is not fatal to the appeal.  See Credit Assocs. of Maui,
Ltd. v. Montilliano, 51 Haw. 325, 328, 460 P.2d 762, 764 (1969). 
3The Order Denying Motion to Designate Defense Counsel as a
Vexatious Litigant is referred to in the Notice of Appeal, insofar as the
Notice of Appeal refers to the oral denial of the motion.  However, it is not
discernibly referred to in the Opening Brief.  This court does not have
appellate jurisdiction over the December 12, 2017 Judgment or other pre-
judgment or post-judgment orders that Taylor appears to address in her briefs,
as Taylor's June 23, 2017 Notice of Appeal was untimely with respect to these
matters.  On October 27, 2017, this court entered its Order Granting in Part
and Denying in Part the September 25, 2017 Motion to Dismiss Appellate Court
Case Number CAAP-17-0000512 for Lack of Appellate Jurisdiction.  In it, this
(continued...)
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The index of Taylor's Opening Brief does not contain
page references or a table of authorities as required by Hawai# i
Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP) Rule 28(b)(1).  Nor does the
Opening Brief contain record references as required by HRAP Rule
28(b)(3) or a "concise statement of the points of error" as
required by HRAP Rule 28(b)(4).  However, the Hawai# i Supreme
Court "has consistently adhered to the policy of affording
litigants the opportunity to have their cases heard on the
merits, where possible."  Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai# i
225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995) (internal quotation marks and
citation omitted).  Thus, we will attempt to address Taylor's
arguments.
In her Opening Brief, Taylor argues that the Circuit
Court erred when it granted the Kahala Defendants' Motion to
Designate Plaintiff as a Vexatious Litigant.  Although it is not
entirely clear whether Taylor argues that the Circuit Court erred
in denying her Motion to Designate Defense Counsel as a Vexatious
Litigant, we address it below.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the
relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Taylor's appeal as
follows:
(1) Taylor contends that the Circuit Court erred in
granting the Kahala Defendants' Motion to Designate Plaintiff as
3(...continued)
court dismissed the appeal in part, for lack of appellate jurisdiction, with
regard to all orders except for the two post-judgment orders addressed herein. 
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
a Vexatious Litigant because:  (1) HRS § 634J-1 (2016) applies to
cases, not motions within a case; (2) the Circuit Court was
biased against her; and (3) it appeared that the Circuit Court
had "coached, possibly recommended" that the Kahala Defendants
file such a motion.
The term "vexatious litigant" means, inter alia: 
[A] plaintiff who does any of the following:
. . . 
(2) After litigation has been finally resolved against the
plaintiff, relitigates or attempts to relitigate in
propria persona and in bad faith, either:
(A) The validity of the determination against the
same defendant or defendants as to whom the
litigation was finally determined; or
(B) The cause of action, claim, controversy, or any
of the issues of fact or law, determined or
concluded by the final determination against the
same defendant or defendants as to whom the
litigation was finally determined;
(3) In any litigation while acting in propria persona,
files, in bad faith, unmeritorious motions, pleadings,
or other papers, conducts unnecessary discovery, or
engages in other tactics that are frivolous or solely
intended to cause unnecessary delay[.]
HRS § 634J-1 (2016).
The supreme court has adopted the abuse of discretion
standard in reviewing vexatious litigant determinations.  See Ek
v. Boggs, 102 Hawai #i 289, 294, 75 P.3d 1180, 1185 (2003)
("Although we have not heretofore adopted a standard for
reviewing a vexatious litigant determination, we believe it
should be an abuse of discretion standard").  
"[A]n abuse of discretion occurs where the trial court has
clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules
or principles of law or practice to the substantial
detriment of a party litigant." Association of Apartment
Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawai #i 97,
119, 58 P.3d 608, 630 (2002) (quoting Molinar v. Schweizer,
95 Hawai #i 331, 335, 22 P.3d 978, 982 (2001)). Furthermore,
"'[t]he burden of establishing abuse of discretion is on
appellant, and a strong showing is required to establish
it.'" 
 Lepere v. United Pub. Workers, Local 646, 77 Hawa #i
471, 474 n. 5, 887 P.2d 1029, 1032 n. 5 (1995) (quoting
State v. Estencion, 63 Haw. 264, 267, 625 P.2d 1040, 1043
(1981) (citations omitted)).
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Id. at 294–95, 75 P.3d at 1185–86 (2003).   
In Boggs, the supreme court held that the circuit court
did not abuse its discretion where it found that the plaintiff,
William Ek, was a vexatious litigant because:
Ek failed in separate incidents to serve and/or
inappropriately served separate documents on Boggs, as in
the case of the NOPA. Second, Ek "failed to produce
documents to Defendant Steven Boggs'[s] attorney and also
committed inappropriate service of documents." Finally,
according to the court, Ek filed at least one motion that
was without merit. Therefore, we cannot conclude that the
court's declaration of Ek as a vexatious litigant was
outside the bounds of reason and the principles of law and,
thus, an abuse of discretion.  
Id. at 297, 75 P.3d at 1188.  
Likewise, here, we cannot find that the Circuit Court
abused its discretion by finding that Taylor was a vexatious
litigant due to Taylor's conduct regarding her deposition and
other discovery matters, Taylor's filing of numerous, repetitive,
unmeritorious motions, and Taylor's numerous attempts to
relitigate the case.  
Taylor's conduct with respect to her deposition, for
example, supported the determination that she was a vexatious
litigant.  The phrase "vexatious litigant" includes plaintiffs
who while acting in propria persona , "[engage] in . . . tactics
that are frivolous or solely intended to cause unnecessary
delay[.]"  HRS § 634J-1(3).  It appears that Taylor, in the first
instance, did not respond to a letter requesting a deposition,
even though her claims are based principally on her accounts of
her fall at the Kahala Hotel.  After a second letter was sent,
along with a Notice of Taking Videotaped Deposition Upon Oral
Examination, she replied by email, stating her refusal to being
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
deposed.  After the Circuit Court granted a motion to compel
Taylor's deposition, Taylor filed a motion to quash the order
compelling her deposition.  Upon reviewing a video recording of
the deposition, the Circuit Court noted that when having her
deposition taken, Taylor objected to proper questions from the
outset, refused to answer questions, and terminated the
deposition early.  Finally, it appears that Taylor attempted to
relitigate her motion to quash roughly four more times, including
after the video deposition was taken.  
Taylor's filing of her December 2016 motions also
supported the determination that Taylor was a vexatious litigant. 
Most notably, Taylor's December 2016 motions relating to the
granting of motions in limine  (MILs) Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and
the motion to quash were word-for-word identical to Taylor's
September 2016 motions regarding the same matters.  Further yet,
in her December 2016 motions relating to the granting of MILs
Nos. 9-11, Taylor did not include any arguments, but simply
attached her previous April 2016 responses to the Kahala
Defendants' original motions in limine .  Taylor's December 2016
motions relating to the granting of MILs Nos. 4 and 8, although
containing slightly different wording, were substantially similar
and contained no new relevant arguments.  Moreover, these motions
were filed after judgment had already been entered against
Taylor.  It appears from the record that the December 2016
motions were an unnecessary attempt to relitigate the same
issues.  
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Taylor's filing of her February 2017 motions also
supported the determination that she was a vexatious litigant. 
In her February 2017 motions regarding MILs Nos. 9-11, Taylor
submitted nearly word-for-word copies of her June-July 2016
motions on the same matters.  Several of Taylor's February 2017
motions, including those regarding MILs Nos. 9-11, added the
argument that the Kahala Defendants did not oppose Taylor's
December 2016 motions, and that therefore the motions should have
been granted.  However, Taylor provided no legal support for her
contentions and either knew or should have known her motions were
not meritorious.  Furthermore, her February 2017 motion relating
to the granting of MILs Nos. 1-8 consisted of only two sentences
and did not include any argument.  Again, these motions were
filed well after judgment had been entered against Taylor and
after the Circuit Court entered its order denying her December
23, 2016 motion objecting to the Judgment.
Based on the record in this case, we cannot conclude
that the court's declaration of Taylor as a vexatious litigant
was outside the bounds of reason and the principles of law and,
thus, an abuse of discretion.  Furthermore, the Circuit Court's
order, which precluded Taylor from filing further documents in or
related to this case without prior leave of court, was narrowly
tailored to address the specific vexatious conduct and did not
constitute an abuse of discretion.  See Boggs , 102 Hawai #i at
296-97, 75 P.3d 1187-88.
(2) Taylor makes no discernible argument regarding the
Order Denying Motion to Designate Defense Counsel as a Vexatious
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Litigant at all in her opening brief, but referenced the oral
denial of the motion in her Notice of Appeal, and submits in her
opening brief that "[a]ll of [the Circuit Court's] orders must be
undone[.]"  To the extent that this constitutes a challenge to
the Order Denying Motion to Designate Defense Counsel as a
Vexatious Litigant, we conclude it is without merit.
Pursuant to HRS § 634J-1, the term "vexatious litigant"
applies to plaintiffs acting " in propria persona," or on behalf
of themselves.  Here, Tsuchida was counsel for the Kahala
Defendants.  He was not a plaintiff, and he did not act in
propria persona .  Therefore, HRS § 634J-1 did not apply to
Tsuchida.  Even if the statute applied, Taylor identifies no
grounds warranting such designation and we find none. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its
discretion in denying Taylor's Motion to Designate Defense
Counsel as a Vexatious Litigant.
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's July 12, 2017 
orders are affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 19, 2018.
On the briefs:
Scarlett A. Taylor,
Plaintiff-Appellant, Pro Se.Presiding Judge
Michael H. Tsuchida,
(Myhre, Tsuchida, Richards &
 Storm),
for Defendants-Appellees.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
8