NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000493
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MICHAEL CASH, JR., also known as MICHAEL W. CASH,
Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(FC-CR. NO. 14-1-0003)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Michael Cash, Jr., also known as
Michael W. Cash (Cash) appeals from the June 3, 2015 Judgment of
Conviction and Probation Sentence entered by the Family Court of
the First Circuit (Family Court).1  Cash was convicted of Abuse
of Family or Household Member in violation of Hawai #i Revised
Statutes (HRS) § 709-906 (Supp. 2013) and sentenced to probation
for two years, subject to certain terms and conditions, including
imprisonment for ten days.
Cash raises three points on appeal:  (1) the Family
Court erred by instructing the jury on the included offense of
Abuse of a Family or Household Member as a misdemeanor
(Misdemeanor Abuse) as he argues there was no evidence in support
of that offense; (2) the judgment and conviction is invalid
because applying pressure to a family member's throat or neck
without impeding normal breathing or circulation of blood, and
without bodily injury, is not a crime under the Hawai
#i Penal
Code; and (3) the Family Court committed plain error when it
1The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
removed a juror for cause after all of the regular jurors had
been passed for cause and both sides had exercised or waived all
of their peremptory challenges.
After a careful review of the points raised, the
arguments presented by the parties, the record, and the
applicable authority, we resolve Cash's points on appeal as
follows and affirm.
1. There was a rational basis in the evidence to
support an instruction on the lesser included offense of
Misdemeanor Abuse.  Cash was charged under HRS § 709-906(1) and
(8) for Abuse of a Household Member by impeding breathing or
circulation as a class C felony (Felony Abuse).2  The challenged
instruction was based on HRS § 709-906(1), Misdemeanor Abuse. 
See HRS § 709-906(5).  Cash does not dispute that Misdemeanor
Abuse is a lesser included offense of Felony Abuse.  State v.
Caldwell, 127 Hawai #i 413, 279 P.3d 78, No. 30204, 2012 WL
1959575 *1 (App. May 31, 2012) (SDO).  Rather, Cash argues there
was no rational basis in the evidence to acquit him of Felony
Abuse and convict him of Misdemeanor Abuse because the testimony
supported either the Felony Abuse charge or acquittal. 
There was clear evidence that the complaining witness
(CW) had suffered physical abuse.  CW testified that her throat
hurt when she tried to swallow for a few hours after the
altercation.  The emergency room nurse testified that CW had a
slight swelling to the left side of her throat and complained of
a headache.  The emergency room doctor testified that CW reported
a sore throat.  Three days later, a second doctor noticed redness
of the skin, mild bruising, tenderness, and swelling on CW's
neck.
2709-906. Abuse of family or household members;
penalty.   (1)  It shall be unlawful for any person,
singly or in concert, to physically abuse a family or
household member[.]
. . . .
(8)  Where the physical abuse consists of
intentionally or knowingly impeding the normal breathing or
circulation of the blood of the family or household member
by applying pressure on the throat or the neck, abuse of a
family or household member is a class C felony.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
There was also evidence that could have led the jury to
conclude that there had been no impediment of the normal
breathing or circulation of the blood, supporting an acquittal of
the Felony Abuse charge.  Because "jurors are at liberty to
believe all, none, or part of the evidence as they see fit," 
State v. Kaeo , 132 Hawai# i 451, 465, 323 P.3d 95, 109 (2014) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted), there was a
"rational basis in the evidence" because the jury could conclude
that CW sustained injuries or felt pain as a result of Cash's
putting his hands around her neck and squeezing, yet also
conclude that her normal breathing or blood circulation was not
impeded.  See Caldwell, SDO at *1.  See also State v. Canady , 80
Hawai#i 469, 474, 911 P.2d 104, 109 (App. 1996) (stating that to
"physically abuse" someone is to "maltreat in such a manner as to
cause injury, hurt or damage to that person's body") (citation
and internal quotation marks omitted);  State v. Nomura , 79
Hawai#i 413, 416, 903 P.2d 718, 721 (App. 1995) (stating that to
physically abuse is to cause "bodily injury to another person");
and HRS § 707–700 (2014) (including "physical pain" in the
definition of "bodily injury").  In addition, on the date of the
offense, the emergency room doctor diagnosed CW with a neck
contusion but found no visible injuries or signs of
strangulation, and the x-rays indicated no internal injuries. 
Therefore, there was "a rational basis in the evidence for a
verdict acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and
convicting the defendant of the included offense," and the Family
Court was therefore required to instruct the jury on the included
offense.  State v. Flores , 131 Hawai #i 43, 51, 314 P.3d 120, 128
(2013) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
2. Cash argues that the instruction given to the jury
on the lesser included offense of Misdemeanor Abuse was plain
error because
the behavior defined by the trial court cannot constitute
[Misdemeanor Abuse] under HRS § 709-906(1) because it would
lead to an absurd result.  As defined by the [Family Court],
a defendant who recklessly applies pressure to the throat or
neck of a family or household member cannot be convicted of
a misdemeanor if he impedes the normal breathing or
circulation of the blood.  In addition, the behavior defined
as a misdemeanor abuse by the [Family Court] would permit
the State to convict a defendant who applied pressure to a
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
family member's neck or throat even  [if] the family member
does not suffer bodily injury.
We disagree.
The jury was instructed regarding Misdemeanor Abuse as
follows:
If and only if you find the defendant not guilty of
Abuse of Family or Household Members by Impeding Breathing
or Circulation, or you are unable to reach a unanimous
verdict as to this offense, then you must consider whether
the defendant is guilty or not guilty of the offense of
Abuse of Family or Household Members.
A person commits the offense of Abuse of Family or
Household Members if he intentionally, knowingly, or
recklessly physically abuses a household member by applying
pressure on the throat or neck without impeding the normal
breathing or circulation of blood.
There are four material elements of the offense of
Abuse of Family or Household Members, each of which the
prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
These four elements are:
1. That, on or about February 10, 2014, on the
island of Oahu, the Defendant physically abused
[CW]; and 
2. That the Defendant did so by applying pressure
on her throat or neck without impeding the
normal breathing or circulation of blood; and
3. That, at that time, the Defendant and [CW] were
household members; and
4. That the Defendant acted intentionally,
knowingly, or recklessly as to each of the
foregoing elements.
"Household member" means persons jointly residing in
the same dwelling unit.
Cash challenges the instruction, arguing that it
erroneously told the jury that even if it found Cash impeded
normal breathing or circulation of blood by the application of
pressure to the throat or neck, it could not find Cash guilty of
Misdemeanor Abuse if the jury only found he acted with a reckless
state of mind.  Cash fails to explain why this instruction caused
him prejudice, as a jury that so found would return a verdict of
not guilty.  See State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai# i 327, 334, 141 P.3d
974, 981 (2006) ("When jury instructions or the omission thereof
are at issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when
read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
prejudicially  insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
misleading.") (citation omitted and emphasis added)).
Cash also argues that the behavior defined by this
instruction would permit the State to convict a defendant who
applied pressure to a family member's neck or throat even if the
family member does not suffer bodily injury.  However,
Misdemeanor Abuse requires proof of physical abuse, not
necessarily bodily injury.  Nomura, 79 Hawai #i at 416, 903 P.2d
at 721 ("to 'physically abuse' someone means to maltreat in such
a manner as to cause injury, hurt, or damage to that person's
body").  The challenged instruction directed that, to convict of
Misdemeanor Abuse, the jury must find Cash "physically abused"
the CW and thus was a correct statement of the law.
3. Cash argues that a juror may not be removed for
cause after the juror has been passed for cause and both parties
have exhausted their peremptory challenges, and that the removal
of the prospective juror benefitted the State and did not benefit
him.
Cash did not object to removing the prospective juror
for cause and specifically responded to the Circuit Court when
asked, "I have no objection.  I will defer to the Court as to
dismissing the juror."  Thus, Cash did not preserve this error
for appeal.
On plain error review, we find none.  The Family Court
clearly stated its reason for excusing the juror for cause:  "[A]
juror who is making a judgment on the case based on an attorney's
performance in such a short period cannot be fair."  The Family
Court's rationale could apply to both the prosecution and the
defense.  In any event, Cash provides no authority for the
proposition that it is error to excuse a juror for cause where
the bias is against only one party.
The information regarding this juror's bias came to
light during a break after the regular jury panel had already
been selected and after the parties had exercised or waived their
original three peremptory challenges.  The Family Court gave both
counsel an additional peremptory challenge, which both counsel
waived.  The circumstances in this case are unlike those in State
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
v. Ho, 127 Hawai #i 415, 279 P.3d 683 (2012) and State v.
Carvalho, 79 Hawai# i 165, 880 P.2d 217 (1994), the cases that
Cash cites.  Cash argues that the Family Court did not allow
counsel to exercise this additional peremptory challenge with
regard to the entire panel.  We note that Cash's counsel had
already waived the second and third of his original three
peremptory challenges and Cash does not allege, let alone
identify, who he would have challenged had he been allowed to
exercise his fourth challenge against the entire seated panel.  
The Family Court's procedure in replacing the juror for
cause was not plain error.
Based on the foregoing, the June 3, 2015 Judgment of
Conviction and Probation Sentence entered by the Family Court of
the First Circuit is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawaii, February 28, 2018. #
On the briefs:
William H. Jameson, Jr.,
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant.
Donn Fudo,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
6