 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000157
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
BARBARA SUZUKI, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, TED SAKAI, EDWIN SHIMODA,
ROY YAMAMOTO, MAY ANDRADE, JOHN MANUMALEUNA,
FRANCIS SEQUERI and DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CV. NO. 02-1-002708)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Barbara Suzuki (Suzuki) appeals
 
from the Final Judgment filed on February 28, 2011, in the
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 The Final
 
Judgment was entered after a bench trial held by the Circuit
 Court. We affirm the Final Judgment.
 
I.
 
Suzuki is an African–American woman who was employed by 
Defendant–Appellee State of Hawai' i (the State) as an Adult 
Correctional Officer (ACO) in the Department of Public Safety (DPS). Suzuki was 65 years old and working at the Oahu Community Correctional Center (OCCC). While at OCCC, she was observed walking very slowly and having to stop and rest after short distances. A fitness-for-duty physical examination revealed that 
1
 The Honorable R. Mark Browning presided over the proceedings relevant
to this appeal.
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Suzuki was suffering from non-work-related degenerative arthritis
 
in her knees and lower back that was unlikely to improve. 
Suzuki's treating physician opined that due to Suzuki's
 degenerative arthritis condition, she could not meet the physical
 requirements of an ACO. The State barred Suzuki from working as
 an ACO because of her inability to physically perform her duties. 
Suzuki was not reassigned to another position, and her employment
 with the DPS eventually ended. 
2
Suzuki filed suit against the State  alleging: (1)
race, gender, and age discrimination; (2) retaliation; (3)
 disability discrimination; (4) negligent hiring and retention;
 (5) infliction of emotional distress; and (6) negligence. The
 Circuit Court granted the State's motion for summary judgment on
 all claims asserted in Suzuki's complaint and entered judgment
 against Suzuki and in favor of Defendants.
 
Suzuki appealed. On appeal, this court affirmed the 
Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment in favor of the State on all of Suzuki's claims, except for Suzuki's claims that the DPS discriminated against her on the basis of race and gender in failing to reassign her to a light-duty position. Suzuki v. 
State, 119 Hawai' i 288, 291, 304, 196 P.3d 290, 293, 306 (App. 
2008).
3 We also held that the that Circuit Court had erred in 
refusing to compel any portion of the personnel file of Alberta Maglinti (Maglinti), who had been removed from her ACO position due to a non-work-related disability, and in its blanket refusal to compel production of the personnel files of other ACOs who were given light-duty work. Id. We remanded the case for 
further proceedings. Id. 
2
 Suzuki's complaint also named the Director of the DPS and five of her
supervisors at the DPS. Suzuki's claims against the five supervisors were
dismissed for failure to serve them with the complaint, and her claims against
the Director of the DPS were dismissed because the service of the complaint on
him was untimely.
 
3
 In her appeal, Suzuki did not challenge the dismissal of her complaint
against the other Defendants besides the State. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On remand, the Circuit Court held a bench trial on
 
Suzuki's claims that the DPS discriminated against her on the
 
basis of race and gender in failing to reassign her to a light-
duty position. After a three-day trial, the Circuit Court filed
 its "Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law; and Decision and
 Order" (Trial Decision) on November 15, 2010. The Circuit Court
 concluded that the DPS had not discriminated against Suzuki
 because of her race or gender in failing to reassign her to a
 light-duty position. The Circuit Court subsequently issued its
 Final Judgment on February 28, 2011, and this appeal followed.
 
II.
 
On appeal, Suzuki asserts points of error which contend
 
that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) entering its Trial Decision,
 which denied her relief; (2) denying her request for a jury
 trial; (3) preventing her from questioning a witness about his
 overhearing racial slurs directed at her; and (4) preventing her
 from questioning a witness and presenting evidence about workers'
 compensation claims relating to smoking in the prison.
 
We resolve Suzuki's points of error as follows:
 1. The Circuit Court did not err in concluding that
 
the DPS had not discriminated against Suzuki because of her race
 or gender in failing to reassign her to a light-duty position. 
The State presented evidence that the DPS had a "light-duty"
 policy, which was race and gender neutral on its face, that
 limited light-duty assignments to ACOs who could not discharge
 their regular duties because of a work-related injury or
 condition. The State explained that Suzuki was not eligible for
 a light-duty assignment under this policy because her disability
 was not work-related, and thus its failure to give her a light-
duty assignment was not based on race or gender discrimination.
 
Suzuki presented evidence which purported to show that
 
the DPS frequently violated its light-duty policy. She also
 presented evidence that Maglinti, who like Suzuki had a non-work­related disability, had been placed in a clerical position. The
 State, however, introduced evidence that Maglinti, a non-African­
3
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
American woman, was not reassigned pursuant to the light-duty
 
policy, but pursuant to a job search program for which Suzuki was
 also eligible. 
Suzuki's primary argument on appeal is that the Circuit
 
Court erred in denying her claims of discrimination because she
 presented evidence that the DPS treated Maglinti more favorably
 than Suzuki. The Circuit Court, however, considered conflicting
 evidence presented by the parties on whether Maglinti was
 similarly situated to Suzuki, whether Maglinti had been treated
 more favorably, and whether the evidence regarding Maglinti's
 treatment supported Suzuki's claims of discrimination.
4 After
 
considering the evidence, the Circuit Court found that Suzuki had
 failed to prove her discrimination claims.
 
As the Hawai' i Supreme Court has stated: 
In cases of conflicting evidence, the credibility of
the witnesses and the weight to be given their testimony are
within the province of the trial court and, generally, will
not be disturbed on appeal. It is not the function of
 appellate courts to second-guess the trier of fact where
there is substantial evidence in the record to support its
conclusion.
 
Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111 Hawai' i 286, 
296-97, 141 P.3d 459, 469-70 (2006) (citation omitted). We 
decline to second-guess the Circuit Court's determination that Suzuki failed to prove that the DPS had discriminated against her on the basis of race or gender by failing to reassign her to a light-duty position, because there was substantial evidence to support that conclusion.
5 
4
 We note that Maglinti is a woman and thus Maglinti's treatment would
only be relevant to Suzuki's claim of race discrimination, and not her claim
of gender discrimination. 
5
 We note that Suzuki appears to argue that the DPS's failure to place
her in a vacant receptionist position constitutes evidence of disabilitydiscrimination. We previously affirmed the Circuit Court's grant of summaryjudgment on Suzuki's disability discrimination claim, and therefore this claimwas not in issue on remand. The only vacant position that Suzuki identifiedat the summary judgment stage was the receptionist position, and Suzuki hadasserted in the summary judgment proceedings that Maglinti had been placed inthe vacant receptionist position. See Suzuki, 119 Hawai' i at 295, 301, 196
(continued...)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. Suzuki contends that the Circuit Court erred in 
denying her request for a jury trial. Suzuki, however, fails to 
present any argument to support this point of error. We therefore deem this point to have been waived. See Hawai' i Rules 
of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7) (2010) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived."); Hawaii Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, Inc., 114 Hawai' i 438, 478–79, 164 P.3d 696, 736–37 (2007) ("[A]n 
appellate court is not obliged to address matters for which the appellant has failed to present discernable arguments.") 
In any event, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 661-1 
(1993), which establishes the jurisdiction of the circuit courts over "[a]ll claims against the State founded upon any statute of the State," provides that the circuit courts, "unless otherwise provided by law, shall determine all questions of fact involved without intervention of a jury." (Emphasis added.) Although HRS Chapter 378 authorizes suits against the State for employment discrimination, it does not contain an unequivocal expression of the right to a jury trial against the State in employment discrimination actions. Accordingly, the HRS § 661-1 restriction on the right to a jury trial against the State was applicable to Suzuki's discrimination claims against the State, which were founded on HRS Chapter 378, and Suzuki was not entitled to a jury trial on these discrimination claims. See Taylor-Rice v. State, 
105 Hawai' i 104, 109-11, 94 P.3d 659, 664-66 (2004); Lehman v. 
Nakshian, 453 U.S. 156, 160-62 (1981); Skinner v. Angliker, 559 A.2d 701, 702-07 (Conn. 1989). 
5(...continued)
P.3d at 297, 303. We reasoned that because Magliniti was also disabled,
Suzuki's assertion that Maglinti was placed in the vacant receptionist
position did not support Suzuki's claim of disability discrimination. Id. at
 
301, 196 P.3d at 303. It appears that on remand, evidence was presented that
Maglinti was placed in a clerical position, rather than the vacant
receptionist position. Suzuki also argued on remand that in failing to place
Suzuki in the vacant receptionist position, the DPS failed to follow
administrative rules regarding the placement of disabled employees, an
argument she failed to make at the summary judgment stage. As noted, we
affirmed the Circuit Court's dismissal of Suzuki's disability discrimination
claim in her first appeal, and this claim could not be revived by evidence or
arguments presented on remand. 
5
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3. The Circuit Court prevented Suzuki from: (1)
 
questioning a witness about his overhearing racial slurs directed
 
at her; and (2) questioning the same witness and presenting
 evidence about workers' compensation claims relating to smoking
 in the prison. The State argues that the Circuit Court did not
 err in excluding such evidence because a "stray remark" by an
 employee with no employment authority over Suzuki was not
 probative of her discrimination claim and because workers'
 compensation claims relating to smoking in the prison were
 irrelevant. 
Although Suzuki identifies the Circuit Court's 
exclusion of this evidence in her points of error, she fails to present argument to support these points. We therefore deem these points to have been waived and decline to address them. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7); , 114 Hawai' i at 478–79, 
164 P.3d at 736–37. Hawaii Ventures
III.
 
We affirm the February 28, 2011, Final Judgment of the
 
Circuit Court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i October 31, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Andre S. Wooten
 
for Plaintiff-Appellant Chief Judge
 
James E. Halvorson
 Nelson Y. Nabeta
 Deputy Attorneys General Department of the Attorney General
State of Hawai' i 
for Defendant-Appellee
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
6
 