_________________________ NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-16-0000178 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
DEBORAH LYN KEKUAWELA RAMIREZ, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
AURORA LOAN SERVICES, LLC, a Delaware Limited Liability
Company, Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc.,
Defendants-Appellees,
and 
DOES 1-50, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-1767) 
AURORA LOAN SERVICES, LLC, A Delaware Limited Liability Company,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
DEBORAH LYN KEKUAWELA RAMIREZ, Defendant-Appellant,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-50, AND JANE DOES 1-50, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-2150) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.) 
I. Introduction 
Plaintiff-Appellant Deborah Lyn Kekuawela Ramirez 
(Ramirez) appeals from the consolidated "Final Judgment" entered 
on March 14, 2016 by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(circuit court).1 Ramirez also challenges the Final Judgment's 
underlying orders: the "Order Granting Defendants Aurora Loan 
Services, LLC [(Aurora)] and Mortgage Electronic Registration 
Systems, Inc.'s [(MERS)] Motion for Summary Judgment, Filed 
August 29, 2013" entered on April 16, 2014 in Civil No. 11-1-
1767-08 (Quiet Title Action) and the "Order Granting [Aurora's] 
Motion for Summary Judgment and Writ of Possession Filed November 
7, 2014" entered on July 13, 2015 in Civil No. 11-1-2150-09 BIA (Possession Action).
2 
On appeal, Ramirez contends that the circuit court 
erred when it (1) granted Appellees' August 29, 2013 Motion for Summary Judgment in the Quiet Title Action because Aurora failed to meet its initial burden to establish that the non-judicial foreclosure sale was conducted in a manner that was fair, reasonably diligent, and in good faith, and to demonstrate that an adequate price was procured for the property; (2) granted Aurora's November 7, 2014 "Motion for Summary Judgment and Writ of Possession" (MSJ for Possession) in the Possession Action 
because there were genuine issues of material fact as to whether 
Aurora breached a contract upon the completion of a Trial Period Plan; (3) granted Aurora's MSJ for Possession because there were genuine issues of material fact as to whether Aurora had the authority to conduct a power of sale non-judicial foreclosure under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 667-5 (Supp. 2010) 
(repealed 2012); (4) granted Aurora's MSJ for Possession where 
Ramirez requested additional time to conduct discovery into whether the alleged non-judicial foreclosure was effectuated by fraud; (5) granted Aurora's MSJ for Possession because there were genuine issues of material fact as to whether Aurora acted with dishonest purpose and conscious wrongdoing constituting a breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing; (6) granted Aurora's MSJ for Possession because there were genuine 
1 The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided over all circuit court matters
in this case. 
2 On July 13, 2012, the circuit court granted Ramirez's motion to
consolidate both cases under Civil No. 11-1-1767-08, the Quiet Title Action. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
issues of material fact as to whether Aurora was estopped from 
foreclosing upon Ramirez's home while simultaneously promising her it would process her loan modification application in good faith; and (7) granted Aurora's MSJ for Possession because there were genuine issues of material fact as to whether Aurora engaged in unfair and deceptive acts and practices in violation of HRS §§ 480 et seq., by making deceptive and misleading representations to Ramirez regarding her eligibility for a permanent loan modification. 
II. Background
A. Facts 
On or about July 11, 2006, Ramirez refinanced the 
purchase of her property located on Kulala Place in Wai# anae, 
Hawai# i (the property) by executing a promissory note in favor of 
First National Bank of Arizona (the Note). The Note was secured by a mortgage on the property dated July 11, 2006 in favor of 
MERS, solely as nominee for First National Bank of Arizona and its successors and/or assigns, recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances of the State of Hawai# i (BOC) on July 24, 2006 
(Mortgage) (with the Note, the Loan). 
Around May 2008, Ramirez became delinquent on her Loan. On January 9, 2009, a notice of default was sent to 
Ramirez, stating that she had thirty days to cure the default. It does not appear from the record that Ramirez cured her default in that time frame. 
On April 6, 2009, a Corporate Assignment of Mortgage 
was executed transferring the Mortgage from MERS to Aurora. Aurora's Notice of Mortgagee's Intention to Foreclose Under Power of Sale was recorded in the BOC the same day. 
Also in April 2009, in order to avoid foreclosure, 
Ramirez applied for a loan modification (First Application) with 
Aurora. However, Aurora denied Ramirez's First Application, 
stating Ramirez was ineligible under federal Home Affordable Modification Program (HAMP) guidelines. 
In September 2009, pursuant to a September 3, 2009 
letter from Aurora, Ramirez applied for another loan modification 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Second Application) with Aurora and entered into a HAMP Trial 
Period Plan, also overseen by Aurora. Pursuant to the Trial 
Period Plan, Ramirez was required to make three monthly payments and provide updated financial documentation to Aurora. Ramirez made the monthly payments but, according to Aurora, did not provide the requested documentation, despite being granted two extensions to do so. As a result, on August 5, 2010, Aurora denied Ramirez's Second Application. 
On September 10, 2010, Aurora conducted a public 
auction of the property. Aurora or its designee bid the amount of $265,000.00 and was declared the highest bidder. 
On October 4, 2010, Aurora's Affidavit of Foreclosure 
Sale Under Power of Sale (Affidavit of Foreclosure Sale) was 
recorded in the BOC. 
On February 25, 2011, Aurora's "Mortgagee's Grant Deed 
Pursuant to Power of Sale" (Grant Deed) was recorded by the BOC, 
thus transferring ownership of the property to Aurora.
B. Procedural History 
On February 15, 2012, in the Quiet Title Action, 
Ramirez filed her First Amended Complaint against Aurora and MERS 
(collectively, Appellees), asserting claims of beach of contract, 
breach of implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing, 
promissory estoppel as an alternative theory, unfair and deceptive acts and practices, wrongful foreclosure, and quiet title. 
On September 19, 2011, in the Possession Action, Aurora 
filed its "Complaint for Ejectment" against Ramirez. 
On June 7, 2012, the circuit court granted Ramirez's 
motion to consolidate both the Quiet Title and Possession Actions. 
On August 29, 2013, Appellees moved for summary 
judgment in the Quiet Title Action with respect to Ramirez's First Amended Complaint. Attached to Appellees' motion was a partial transcript of Ramirez's October 22, 2012 deposition, taken by Appellees. 
On November 26, 2013, Ramirez filed her opposition to 
Appellees' motion for summary judgment in the Quiet Title Action. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Attached to this motion was, inter alia , a declaration from
Ramirez's counsel requesting a continuance to conduct further
discovery pursuant to Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule
(HRCP) 56(f).  
On April 16, 2014, the circuit court entered its Order
granting Appellees' motion for summary judgment in the Quiet
Title Action.
On November 7, 2014, Aurora filed its MSJ for
Possession against Ramirez with respect to its Complaint in the
Possession Action.  Attachments to this motion included, inter
alia, Aurora's Affidavit of Foreclosure Sale and Aurora's Grant
Deed. 
On July 13, 2015, the circuit court entered its Order
granting Aurora's MSJ for Possession. 
On March 14, 2016, the circuit court entered its
consolidated Final Judgment. 
On March 17, 2016, Ramirez timely filed her notice of
appeal from the consolidated Final Judgment.  
III. Standard of Review
The appellate court reviews "the circuit court's grant
or denial of summary judgment de novo."  Querubin v. Thronas, 107
Hawai#i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005) (citing Hawai# i Cmty.
Fed. Credit Union v. Keka, 94 Hawai #i 213, 221, 11 P.3d 1,9
(2000))
The Hawai #i Supreme Court has often articulated that: 
[s]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.  A
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties.  The
evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party.  In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
Id. (citation omitted).
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV. Discussion 
A. Point of Error 1 
In support of her first point of error, Ramirez argues 
that JPMorgan Chase Bank, Nat. Ass'n v. Benner, 137 Hawai# i 326, 
372 P.3d 358 (App. 2016) should be applied retroactively to show 
that mortgagee-purchaser Aurora failed to meet its initial burden to establish that the non-judicial foreclosure sale of the property was conducted in a manner that was fair, reasonably diligent, and in good faith, and that an adequate price was procured for the property. 
"Although judicial decisions are assumed to apply 
retroactively, such application is not automatic. . . . Where substantial prejudice results from the retrospective application of new legal principles to a given set of facts, the inequity may be avoided by giving the guiding principles prospective application only." Catron v. Tokio Marine Mgmt., Inc., 90 Hawai# i 407, 411, 978 P.2d 845, 849 (1999) (emphasis added) 
(brackets omitted) (citing State v. Ikezawa, 75 Haw. 210, 219-21, 857 P.2d 593, 597-98 (1993) (footnote omitted)). 
In Benner, this court relied on the Supreme Court of 
Hawai# i's opinion in Kondaur Capital Corp. v. Matsuyoshi, 136 
Hawai# i 227, 361 P.3d 454 (2015), which "clarified" that the 
duties set forth in Ulrich v. Sec. Inv. Co., 35 Haw. 158 (Haw. Terr. 1939) remain viable law and are applicable to non-judicial foreclosures of real property mortgages. 137 Hawai# i at 327, 372 
P.3d at 359 (citing Kondaur, 136 Hawai# i at 229, 361 P.3d at 
456). "Ulrich requires mortgagees to exercise their right to non-judicial foreclosure under a power of sale in a manner that is fair, reasonably diligent, and in good faith, and to demonstrate that an adequate price was procured for the property." Id. (quoting Kondaur, 136 Hawai# i at 240, 361 P.3d at 
467). 
In Kondaur, the supreme court stated that, to maintain 
an ejectment action, the plaintiff must (1) prove that he or she owns the parcel in issue, meaning that he or she must have the title to and right of possession of such parcel, and (2) establish that possession is unlawfully held by another. Kondaur 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
136 Hawai# i at 241, 361 P.3d at 468 (citations omitted). When a 
party receives title to a property through a non-judicial 
foreclosure sale, the strength and validity of the title "is unavoidably intertwined with the validity of the foreclosure sale." Id. (citation omitted). The court in Kondaur additionally clarified that: 
In instances where the mortgagee assumes the role of a
purchaser in a self-dealing transaction, the burden is onthe mortgagee, or its quitclaim transferee or non-bona fidesuccessor, to establish its compliance with theseobligations. Its failure to do so would render the foreclosure sale voidable and could therefore be set aside at the timely election of the mortgagor. 
Id. at 240, 361 P.3d at 467 (citations and footnotes omitted). 
Thus, in a self-dealing transaction, where the mortgagee is the purchaser in a non-judicial foreclosure sale, the mortgagee has the "burden to prove in the summary judgment proceeding that the foreclosure 'sale was regularly and fairly conducted in every particular.'" Id. at 241, 361 P.3d at 468 (citation omitted). 
Applying these principles to the facts of the case, the 
supreme court held that Kondaur, as a quitclaim transferee of a self-dealing mortgagee, failed to satisfy its initial burden because: 
[t]he only evidence produced by Kondaur with respect to the
manner in which the sale was conducted was derived from RLP's Affidavit of Sale prepared by Leu, [mortgagees's]attorney. The Affidavit of Sale merely "certifies that incompliance with and pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes667–5 through 667–10 and th[e] . . . Mortgage, Mortgagees orits representative, or Affiant or her representative"conducted the non-judicial foreclosure sale in compliancewith all statutory requirements and the terms of theMortgage. But the Affidavit of Sale fails to provide anyaverments as to the fairness and regularity of theforeclosure sale or as to whether [mortgagee] conducted theforeclosure sale in a diligent and reasonable manner. . . .Although the Affidavit of Sale states that the Property wassold for $416,900.20 at the foreclosure sale, it does notmake any declaration concerning the adequacy of this price. 
Id. at 242-43, 361 P.3d at 469-70 (footnotes omitted). 
Similarly, in Benner, this court held: 
Here, JPMorgan Chase assumed the role of a purchaser in aself-dealing transaction because JPMorgan Chase was themortgagee and the highest bidder at the non-judicialforeclosure sale. Thus, pursuant to Kondaur and Ulrich,JPMorgan Chase had the initial burden to establish that thenon-judicial foreclosure sale was conducted in a manner that 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was fair, reasonably diligent, and in good faith, and to
demonstrate that an adequate price was procured for theproperty. 
Like in Kondaur, the Affidavit of Sale prepared by JPMorgan
Chase's attorney was the only evidence produced in this caseto show the manner in which the non-judicial foreclosuresale was conducted, and it provides that JPMorgan Chasecomplied with the mortgage and HRS §§ 667–5 through 667–10.However, similar to the affidavit in Kondaur, the Affidavitof Sale does not attest to anything concerning the adequacyof the purchase price. Thus, given Kondaur, JPMorgan Chasedid not satisfy its initial burden of showing that theforeclosure sale was conducted in a manner that was fair,reasonably diligent, in good faith, and would obtain anadequate price for the property. Because JPMorgan Chase didnot satisfy its initial burden for summary judgment, theburden never shifted to Benner to raise any genuine issue ofmaterial fact. Thus, we need not address Benner's points oferror as they relate to defenses to the ejectment action.Under Kondaur, the grant of summary judgment for JPMorganChase was in error. 
137 Hawai# i at 328-29, 372 P.3d at 360-61. 
In Kondaur, the supreme court expressed that it was 
clarifying that the principles previously set forth in Ulrich 
were applicable to non-judicial foreclosures. 136 Hawai# i at 
239-40, 361 P.3d at 466-67.  Thus, Kondaur and Benner may apply 
properly to the instant case. See Catron, 90 Hawai# i at 411, 978 
P.2d at 849; Ikezawa, 75 Haw. at 219-21, 857 P.2d at 597-98. 
In the instant case, the only evidence attached to 
Aurora's MSJ for Possession with respect to the manner in which the non-judicial foreclosure sale was conducted were Aurora's Affidavit of Foreclosure Sale and Grant Deed. Aurora's Affidavit of Foreclosure Sale does not describe the manner in which the non-foreclosure sale was conducted. Aurora's Grant Deed only provides that: 
pursuant to Grantor's foreclosure rights under power of sale
as provided in Sections 667-5 through 667-10, Hawaii RevisedStatutes, and that certain Mortgage . . . and duly noted asTransfer Certificate Title No. XX, and in accordance withthe terms of said Notice, the Grantor herein duly held apublic auction on September 10, 2010[.] 
Furthermore, although Aurora's Affidavit of Foreclosure Sale 
states that the highest bid on Ramirez's property was $265,000 and that the highest bidder was Aurora or its designee, neither the Affidavit nor the Grant Deed attest to anything concerning the adequacy of the purchase price. 
Consequently, under Kondaur and Benner, Aurora has not 
satisfied its initial burden of showing that the non-judicial 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
foreclosure sale was conducted in a manner that was fair, 
reasonably diligent, in good faith, and would obtain an adequate price for the property. In turn, the burden never shifted to Ramirez to raise any genuine issue of material fact in this regard. Therefore, the circuit court erred in granting Aurora's MSJ for Possession. 
B. Points of Error 2-6 
Ramirez next argues that the circuit court erred in 
granting summary judgment for Appellees in the Quiet Title 
Action, specifically with regards to her claims for breach of contract, breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing, promissory estoppel as an alternative theory, unfair and deceptive acts and practices, and wrongful foreclosure. Ramirez's First Amended Complaint sets out her general theory regarding these claims, asserting that she applied for a loan modification under HAMP and entered into a Trial Period Plan with Aurora, that she complied with the terms of the Trial Period Plan, but Aurora did not. She alleges generally in the First Amended Complaint that: 
[d]espite the fact that [Ramirez] fully complied with the
terms of the HAMP Trial Period Plan by making the requiredmonthly payments and providing her financial information,[Aurora] failed to permanently modify [Ramirez's] loan afterthe initial three months of payments as required under theHAMP Trial Period Plan. [Aurora] subsequently denied[Ramirez's] permanent HAMP loan modification it had promisedin August 2010 after accepting over 11 payments totalingover $30,000.00. 
The Trial Period Plan provides, in relevant part: 
I understand that the Plan is not a modification of the Loan Documents and that the Loan Documents will not be modified unless and until (I) I meet all of the conditionsrequired for modification, (II) I receive a fully executedcopy of a Modification Agreement, and (III) the ModificationEffective Date has passed. I further understand and agreethat the Lender will not be obligated or bound to make anymodification of the Loan Documents if I fail to meet any oneof the requirements under this Plan. 
. . . . 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
If I comply with the requirements in Section 2 and my
representations in Section 1[3] continue to be true in all
material respects, the Lender will send me a ModificationAgreement for my signature which will modify my LoanDocuments as necessary to reflect this new payment amountand waive any unpaid late charges accrued to date. 
(Emphasis added). 
The parties agree that terms of the Trial Period Plan 
required Ramirez to (1) make three monthly payments; and (2) 
submit updated financial information and documentation. The parties also agree that Ramirez made the three monthly payments. 
However, the parties dispute whether Ramirez in fact 
provided the required documentation pursuant to the Plan. 
Aurora's Motion for Summary Judgment in the Quiet Title 
action includes a Declaration of Laura McCann (McCann), a Vice 
President of Aurora Commercial Corp., successor entity to Aurora 
Bank FSB. McCann's Declaration states that Ramirez failed to provide Aurora with the required documentation pursuant to the Trial Period Plan, and cites to attached Exhibits I and J which are letters from Aurora to Ramirez, stating that Aurora has not received all the documentation necessary to finalize their review of her qualifications for the loan modification. 
In Ramirez's Declaration attached to her opposition to 
Aurora's motion for summary judgment in the Quiet Title Action, Ramirez attests that: 
23. In compliance with the Trial Period Plan, I made
the required three monthly payments of $925.30 from October
2009 to December 2009, and provided my updated financialinformation and documentation to Aurora Loan Services justas I had previously done.
24. However, according to Aurora Loan Services,
because I did not provide the financial information, itextended the HAMP Trial Period Plan, whereby I made monthlypayments of $925.30 in January 2010 and February 2010, andcontinued to make payments of $960.00 from March 2010 toAugust 2010. The accounting of my payments during theperiod I was considered under HAMP from May 2009 to August2010 is documented in Aurora Loan Services letter to me dated December 1, 2010, which is attached as Exhibit 12.
25. Despite the fact that I fully complied with the
terms of the HAMP Trial Period Plan by making the requiredmonthly payments and providing my financial information, 
3 Section 1 of the Trial Period Plan requires that the applicant
certify certain facts regarding the applicant's financial situation, i.e.  that 
applicant is unable to afford his or her mortgage payments, and providedocumentation regarding income. Section 2 of the Trial Period Plan requiresthat the applicant make three monthly payments pursuant to the Plan. 
10   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Aurora Loan Services failed to permanently modify the loan
after the initial three months of payments as required underthe HAMP Trial Period Plan. Aurora Loan Services subsequently denied my permanent HAMP loan modification ithad promised in August 2010 after accepting over 11 paymentstotaling over $30,000.00. 
(Emphasis added). 
In its Answering Brief, Aurora argues that the 
"undisputed facts" in the instant case show that "Ramirez did not 
comply with the terms of the HAMP Trial Period Plan and she was denied permanent modification because of it." (Emphasis in original). Aurora further argues: 
Ramirez submitted no evidence to overcome the fact that she 
was denied a permanent modification for her failure toprovide the required documentation. While Ramirez's affidavit [sic] stated that she did submit the requesteddocumentation, self-serving and conclusory statements -–without supporting or corroborative evidence -– are
insufficient to create a genuine issue of material fact. 
Aurora cites to this court's decision in Chuck Jones & MacLaren 
v. Williams, 101 Hawai# i 486, 71 P.3d 437 (App. 2003) for the 
proposition that conclusory statements, in and of themselves and devoid of specific supporting facts, are not sufficient to raise genuine issues of material fact. 
However, the Hawai# i Supreme Court recently addressed 
how courts must accord the weight given to a declaration submitted in opposition to summary judgment in Nozawa v. Operating Eng'rs Local Union No. 3, 142 Hawai# i 331, 418 P.3d 
1187 (2018), stating in relevant part: 
Pursuant to HRCP Rule 56(e) (2000), affidavits supporting or
opposing a motion for summary judgment "shall be made onpersonal knowledge, shall set forth such facts as would beadmissible in evidence, and shall show affirmatively thatthe affiant is competent to testify to the matters statedtherein." Thus, affidavits that state ultimate orconclusory facts cannot be used in support of or inopposition to a motion for summary judgment. 
. . . . HRCP Rule 56(e) provides that affidavits shall set forth
facts based on personal knowledge. Thus, an affidavit byits nature includes an affiant's own perception of thematter. 
HRCP Rule 56(e) does not preclude an affidavit from being
self-serving. Indeed, . . . "most affidavits submitted [inresponse to a summary judgment motion] are self-serving."Thus, a party's self-serving statements that otherwise 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
comply with HRCP Rule 56(e) can be utilized to defeat
summary judgment. 
Additionally, HRCP Rule 56(e) does not require a statement
in an affidavit to be corroborated in order to be a qualifying affidavit under the rule. Nor has this court ever held that an uncorroborated statement by a party to thelitigation is insufficient to raise a dispute as to amaterial fact. 
. . . . "Conclusory" is defined as "[e]xpressing a factual inference
without stating the underlying facts on which the inferenceis based." 
An "inference" in turn is "a conclusion reached 
by considering other facts and deducing a logicalconsequence from them." Thus, when an assertion in anaffidavit expresses an inference without setting forth theunderlying facts on which the conclusion is based or statesa conclusion that is not reasonably drawn from theunderlying facts, the assertion is considered conclusory andcannot be utilized in support of or against a motion forsummary judgment. On the other hand, an inference within anaffidavit that is based on stated facts from which the conclusion may reasonably be drawn is not conclusory and maybe used to support or oppose a motion for summary judgment. 
Id. at 338-39, 418 P.3d at 1194-95 (emphasis added) (citations 
and footnotes omitted); see also Wakefield v. Bardellini, No. CAAP-16-0000821, 2018 WL 2316510, at *3-4 (Hawai# i App. May 22, 
2018) (SDO). 
Here, Ramirez's statement in her Declaration that she 
"provided [her] updated financial information and documentation to Aurora" pursuant to her Second Application constitutes specific, factual information personally known to her. Although Ramirez did not include any additional evidence to support this statement, the statement did not amount to legal conclusion because it was essentially factual in nature and did not attempt to apply a legal standard. Ramirez's conclusion that she "fully complied" with the terms of the HAMP Trial Period Plan because she had submitted the required documentation is a conclusion which could reasonably be drawn from the stated underlying facts. Therefore, under Nozawa, Ramirez's statement that she submitted the required documentation was not conclusory and was in compliance with HRCP Rule 56(e). See Nozawa, 142 Hawai# i at 338-
40, 418 P.3d 1194-96. 
The factual issue of whether Ramirez sent the required 
documentation is material to all of Ramirez's points of error related to the Quiet Title Action. Had Ramirez sent the required 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
documentation, it appears she would have been in compliance with 
the Trial Period Plan, and Aurora would have been obligated to send the Modification Agreement to Ramirez for her signature, which would modify her loan documents. Therefore, the circuit court erred in granting summary judgment in the Quiet Title Action in favor of Aurora. 
Given our ruling above, we need not address Ramirez's 
point of error related to HRCP Rule 56(f).
V. Conclusion 
Therefore, the consolidated "Final Judgment" entered by 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit on March 14, 2016, is 
vacated. This case is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 27, 2018. 
On the briefs: 
Gary Victor Dubin,
Richard T. Forrester,for Appellant. Chief Judge 
Jade Lynne Ching,Lori King Stibb,for Defendants-Appellees. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
13 