NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000012
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN RE: HAWAI 'I STATE ASBESTOS CASES
 
This Document Applies To:
GAIL K. DIAS, Individually and as Personal Representative
of the Estate of MANUEL ALTON SOUZA DIAS, Deceased,
Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
 
1) CRANE COMPANY, a Delaware corporation,
2) CLEAVER-BROOKS, INC., as successor to
AQUA-CHEM, INC., a Delaware corporation,
3) ELECTROLUX HOME PRODUCTS, successor to
COPES VULCAN, INC., an Illinois corporation,
4) FLSMIDTH, INC., successor to EIMCO PROCESS
EQUIPMENT, a Delaware corporation,
5) ELLIOTT TURBOMACHINERY COMPANY, INC., a subsidiary
of EBARA CORPORATION, a Delaware corporation,
6) ALSTOM, a French corporation,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
7) FISHER CONTROLS INTERNATIONAL, LLC, a Missouri
corporation,
Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
8) FOSTER WHEELER LLC, a Delaware corporation,
9) GARDNER DENVER, INC., individually and as successor
by merger to THE NASH ENGINEERING COMPANY, a
Delaware corporation,
10) GENERAL ELECTRIC COMPANY, INC., a New York
corporation,
11) INGERSOLL RAND CO., individually and as
successor-in-interest to ALDRICH PUMPS and as
 successor-in-interest to TERRY STEAM TURBINE CO.,
a New Jersey corporation,
12) MAXIM EVAPORATORS, LLC, a Louisiana Limited
Liability Company,
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
13) SFS (USA) HOLDING, INC., dba PEERLESS PUMP COMPANY,
a Delaware corporation,
14) ROPER INDUSTRIES, INC., a Delaware corporation,
15) ROTH PUMP COMPANY, a Delaware corporation,
16) SHIN NIPPON MACHINERY CO., LTD., a Japanese
corporation,
17) BAYER AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT, a German corporation,
18) KOCH INDUSTRIES INC., JOHN ZINK COMPANY,
a Kansas corporation,
19) CBS CORPORATION, fka VIACOM INC., successor by
merger to CBS CORPORATION, fka WESTINGHOUSE
ELECTRIC CORPORATION, a Delaware corporation,
20) JOHN CRANE, INC., a Delaware corporation,
21) THE LYNCH CO., INC., a Hawaii corporation,
22) PUGET SOUND COMMERCE CENTER, INC.,
fka TODD SHIPYARDS CORPORATION, a Delaware
corporation,
23) KAANAPALI LAND, LLC, as successor by merger to
NORTHBROOK CORPORATION, successor by merger to
AMFAC, INC., a Hawaii corporation,
24) FLOWSERVE CORPORATION, successor-in-interest to
ROCKWELL MANUFACTURING COMPANY,
successor-in-interest to EDWARD VALVE AND
 MANUFACTURING COMPANY, and successor-in-interest
to EDWARD VALVES, INC., a New York corporation,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
DOES 3 to 25,
Defendants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-2196-08)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In this asbestos litigation case, Defendant-Appellant
 
Fisher Controls International LLC (Fisher) appeals from an
 
interlocutory order granting Defendant-Appellee Shin Nippon
 
Machinery Co., Ltd.'s (Shin Nippon) petition for a determination
 
of good faith settlement (Petition) pursuant to Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 663-15.5 (2016), filed on December 21, 2015, in
 
1
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Fisher contends that the circuit court erred
 
because: (1) there was a lack of compliance with requirements
 
under HRS § 663-15.5; (2) there was a failure to comply with
 requirements under the Asbestos Litigation Case Management Order
 
2
No. 1 (CMO-1);  (3) the circuit court's interpretation and
enforcement of CMO-1 did not comply with HRS § 663-15.5; and (4)
 
the Petition, substantive joinders, and the hearing on the
 Petition did not provide the circuit court with sufficient
 information to determine the propriety of the settlements.
 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm.

 
I. Background
 
In this case, Plaintiff-Appellee Gail K. Dias,
 
Individually and as Personal Representative of the Estate of
 Manuel Alton Souza Dias (Dias), asserts claims against twenty­
3
 four (24) defendants (collectively, the defendants). The Second
 
Amended Complaint alleges that decedent Manuel Dias was exposed
 
2 In its opening brief, Fisher requests that we take judicial notice of
a certified copy of CMO-1, attached as Appendix B to the opening brief and
Declaration of Counsel. We hereby take judicial notice of CMO-1 and note thatboth Fisher and Dias make several references to CMO-1. See
 Hawaii Rules of 
Evidence (HRE) Rule 201; State v. Abdon , 137 Hawai' i 19, 26, 364 P.3d 917, 924
(2016) ("The most frequent use of judicial notice of ascertainable facts is innoticing the content of court records.") (citation omitted).
3 The defendants are as follows: (1) Crane Company (Crane ); Cleaver-
Brooks, Inc.; (2) Cleaver-Brooks, Inc., as successor to Aqua-Chem, Inc.; (3)
Electrolux Home Products, successor to Copes Vulcan, Inc.; (4) FLSMIDTH Salt
Lake City, Inc., f/k/a FLSmith Dorr-Oliver Eimco. f/k/a Dorr-Oliver Eimco USA,
Inc., improperly named "FLSmidth, Inc., successor to EIMCO Processing
Equipment" (FLSMIDTH); (5) Elliot Turbomachinery Company, Inc., a subsidiary
of EBARA Corporation (Elliot); (6) Alstom; (7) Fisher; (8) Foster Wheeler LLC;
(9) Gardner Denver, Inc., individually and as successor by merger to the Nash
Engineering Company; (10) General Electric Company, Inc.; (11) Ingersoll Rand
Co., individually and as successor-in-interest to Aldrich Pumps and as
successor-in-interest to Terry Steam Turbine Co. (Ingersoll); (12) Maxim
Evaporators, LLC; (13) Sterling Fluid Systems (USA) LLC, improperly named "SFS
(USA) Holding Inc. dba Peerless Pump Company" (Sterling); (14) Roper
Industries, Inc.; (15) Roth Pump Company; (16) Shin Nippon; (17) Bayer
Aktiengesellschaft; (18) Koch Industries Inc., John Zink Company; (19) CBS
Corporation, f/k/a Viacom Inc., successor by merger to CBS Corporation, f/k/a
Westinghouse Electric Corporation; (20) John Crane, Inc.; (21) The Lynch Co.,
Inc.; (22) Puget Sound Commerce Center, Inc., FKA Todd Shipyard Corporation;
(23) Kaanapali Land, LLC, as successor by merger to Northbrook Corporation,
successor by merger to AMFAC, Inc. (Kaanapali); and (24) Flowserve
Corporation, successor-in-interest to Rockwell Manufacturing Company,
successor-in-interest to Edward Valve and Manufacturing Company, and
successor-in-interest to Edward Valves, Inc. (Flowserve).
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to asbestos during his employment at Hamakua Sugar Company while
 
he worked there from 1973 to 1993. The complaint alleges that
 the asbestos exposure caused Manuel Dias to develop malignant
 mesothelioma and other asbestos-related diseases and injuries
 which caused and/or contributed to his death. 
On October 28, 2015, Shin Nippon filed the Petition,
 
seeking a determination of good faith settlement pursuant to HRS
 § 663-15.5 as to a settlement between Dias and Shin Nippon. On
 November 10, 2015, Elliot, Sterling, and Kaanapali joined the
 
Petition. On November 17, 2015, Flowserve joined the Petition.
 
On November 20, 2015, Fisher filed its statement of position
 objecting to the Petition. 
On November 20, 2015, Dias filed an Ex Parte Motion to
 
file a document under seal in support of the Petition. On
 November 23, 2015, the circuit court granted the motion and, on
 the same date, L. Richard DeRobertis, counsel for Dias, filed a
 Declaration under seal (DeRobertis Declaration) which identified
 
five (5) settling defendants and the aggregate amount of the
 
settlements with the five defendants. Fisher received the
 DeRobertis Declaration and, on November 30, 2015, subsequently
 filed a supplemental statement of opposition to the Petition. 
On December 21, 2015, the circuit court granted the
 
Petition, and Fisher timely appealed.
II. Discussion
 
Fisher contends that "[a] plain reading of HRS § 663­
15.5 makes clear that non-settling alleged joint tortfeasors such
 as Fisher must be provided sufficient information to evaluate   
 
whether the proposed settlements were reached in good faith."
 Fisher contends it should have been provided with more specifics
 about the settlement, particularly the settlement amounts for
 
4
each settling defendant. Dias  responds that Fisher was aware of
the five settling defendants and the aggregate amount of the
 settlement for these defendants. Dias further argues that, given
 
4
 Shin Nippon, Sterling, Elliot, and Kaanapali joined in Dias'
answering brief.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the discovery and prior motions in the case, Fisher was aware of
 
the relative merits of the case. 
In Troyer v. Adams, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
interpreted HRS § 663-15.5 and adopted a "totality of the circumstances" approach for trial courts to determine if settlements involving joint tortfeasors or co-obligors are made in good faith. 102 Hawai
'i 399, 425, 77 P.3d 83, 109 (2003). As 
recognized by the supreme court, the intent behind the uniform law upon which HRS § 663-15.5 is modeled, is "to provide the court with an opportunity to prevent collusive settlements aimed at injuring the interests of a non-settling joint tortfeasor[,]" and the drafters of the uniform law "clearly were more interested in encouraging settlements than making an attempt of doubtful effectiveness to prevent inequitable settlements." Id. at 426, 
77 P.3d at 110 (internal quotation marks omitted). 
The supreme court stated:
 
In sum, we conclude that the legislature's goals of
simplifying the procedures and reducing the costs associated
with claims involving joint tortfeasors, while providing
courts with the opportunity to prevent collusive settlements
aimed at injuring non-settling tortfeasors' interests, are
best served by leaving the determination of whether a
settlement is in good faith to the sound discretion of the
trial court in light of the totality of the circumstances
surrounding the settlement.
 
Id. at 427, 77 P.3d at 111. Under Troyer, we review the trial 
court's good faith determination for abuse of discretion. Troyer, 102 Hawai
'i at 434, 77 P.3d at 118. 
HRS § 663-15.5(b) provides in relevant part:

 
The petition shall indicate the settling parties and, except
for a settlement that includes a confidentiality agreement
regarding the case or the terms of the settlement, the
basis, terms, and settlement amount.
 
. . .

 
Where a confidentiality agreement has been entered into
regarding the claim or settlement terms, the court shall
hear the matter in a manner consistent with preventing
public disclosure of the agreement while providing other
joint tortfeasors and co-obligors sufficient information to
object to a proposed settlement.
 
HRS § 663-15.5(b) (emphasis added).
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
It appears the settlements by the five settling
 
defendants were confidential.5 The term "sufficient information"
 
when there is a confidential settlement agreement is not defined. 
However, the plain language of HRS § 663-15.5(b) suggests that
 "sufficient information" does not necessarily encompass the
 "basis, terms, and settlement amount[.]" Put differently, the
 "basis, terms, and settlement amount" should be indicated in the
 petition, "except for a settlement that includes a
 confidentiality agreement[.]" HRS § 663-15.5(b).
 
Here, Fisher was informed of the five settling 
defendants and the aggregate settlement amount. Fisher's primary contention in this appeal is that to appropriately object to the settlement agreement, it should have been provided with the individual settlement amounts. However, as noted in Troyer, "[t]he price of a settlement alone rarely appears to be the outcome-dispositive factor regarding a settlement's bad faith." 102 Hawai
'i at 427, 77 P.3d at 111. 
The Troyer court also stated that determining the good
 
faith of a petition did not require the trial courts to "conduct
 'mini-trials' in order to determine the parties' likely
 proportionate liability." Id. at 426, 77 P.3d at 110. As noted
 
in Troyer, the legislature was "more interested in encouraging
 settlements than ensuring the equitable apportionment of
 liability." Id. Fisher's assertion that it must receive
 
disclosure of the individual settlement amounts is relevant to
 apportioning liability, which is not consistent with Troyer or
 HRS § 663-15.5 where the settlement amounts are confidential. 
Thus, in the circumstances of this case, the circuit court did
 
5
 Dias contends the settlements are confidential, and the joinders to
the Petition filed by Flowserve and Kaanapali expressly state that the
settlement amounts for these defendants are confidential. Moreover, under the
procedures for settlement as set forth in CMO-1, a settled defendant may join
an aggregate, joint petition for good faith settlement if they have entered
into a release that substantially conforms to Exhibit 5 to CMO-1. Exhibit 5
 is a form "Joint Tortfeasor Release and Indemnity Agreement" which contains
provisions related to confidentiality, including confidentiality of the
settlement amount.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
not err in allowing disclosure of the aggregate settlement amount
 
for the five settling defendants, as opposed to requiring
 disclosure of the particular settlement amounts for each settling
 defendant.
 
Fisher also appears to argue that the circuit court did 
not ensure that Fisher was afforded "notice and an opportunity to be heard regarding the determination whether a settlement has been given in good faith" pursuant to HRS § 663-15.5(b) as discussed in Troyer. 102 Hawai
'i at 433, 77 P.3d at 117. The 
Troyer court stated that "[t]he basic elements of procedural due process of law require notice and an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner." Id. at 434, 77 P.3d at 118 (citations omitted). Fisher does not contest that it filed a statement of position and, after receiving the DeRobertis Declaration, subsequently filed a supplemental opposition to the Petition. Fisher was aware of the aggregate amount, the settling parties, and the terms under the CMO-1 for the settlement. Fisher was present during the hearing on the Petition and argued, among other things, that the settling parties should disclose the individual settlement amount. Given these circumstances, it appears that Fisher was provided an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner.
6 
The circuit court also did not interpret or enforce
 
CMO-1 in a manner inconsistent with HRS § 663-15.5, or fail to
 comply with its terms.
7 Under CMO-1, a party who settles with a
 
6 Fisher argues it did not receive service of Elliot and Sterling's
substantive joinders to the Petition. We certainly do not condone lack of
service if that is what occurred. However, Fisher indicates it became aware
of the joinders and does not assert prejudice due to lack of service.
 
7 Section H(2) of CMO-1 addresses "Petitions for Good Faith Settlement
Determination" and states in pertinent part:
 
The settled defendants may join in an aggregate, joint
petition for a good faith determination if they have entered
into a release which substantially conforms to Exhibit 5
hereto. In such circumstances, plaintiff's counsel must
submit to the Court, under seal, an affidavit listing (1)
all defendants who have received signed releases which
(continued...)
 
7
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
plaintiff and wishes to petition the court for a good faith
 
determination must have a release that substantially conforms
 with Exhibit 5 of CMO-1. In turn, Exhibit 5 to CMO-1 is a form
 "Joint Tortfeasor Release and Indemnity Agreement" that contains
 confidentiality provisions related to, inter alia, the settlement
 amount. Consistent with HRS § 663-15.5 regarding confidential
 settlements, CMO-1 does not require that the settling parties
 reveal the settlement amount for individual defendants. The CMO­1 provides that settling defendants may join in an aggregate or
 joint petition for good faith settlement and in that
 circumstance, the plaintiff's counsel must submit under seal to
 the court "(1) all defendants who have received signed releases
 which conform to Exhibit 5, and (2) the aggregate amount paid in
 settlement by all such defendants." The record indicates this is
 what occurred in this case.
8
 
We note, as Fisher contends, that the circuit court
 
apparently did not review the releases executed by the five
 settling defendants. CMO-1, section H(2) provides that "the
 plaintiff's counsel shall present to the Court for an in camera
 inspection the releases entered into with all settling parties
 and the individual settlement amounts so that the Court can
 
7(...continued)
conform to Exhibit 5, and (2) the aggregate amount paid in
settlement by all such defendants. This sealed affidavit
 
shall be served on all non-settled defendants and on all
 defendants who join in the joint good faith petition. In
 
addition, the plaintiff's counsel shall present to the Court
for an in camera inspection the releases entered into with
all settling parties and the individual settlement amounts
so that the Court can verify the total amount revealed in
plaintiff's counsel's affidavit. The joint good faith
petition may be filed nineteen (19) days prior to the trial
date.
 
(Emphasis added.)
8
 We do not find merit in Fisher's argument that it should have also
received disclosure about other defendants that apparently had reached a
settlement with Dias, had executed releases, but had not joined in the
Petition. Rather, it appears that the disclosure required under Section H(2)
of CMO-1 refers to defendants that have joined in an aggregate, joint petition
for good faith determination.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
verify the total amount revealed in plaintiff's counsel's
 
affidavit." DeRobertis, counsel for plaintiff Dias, stated at
 the hearing on the Petition that if Fisher is "requesting this
 Court do an in camera inspection of the five releases to make
 sure I added correctly, or to see if these do or do not conform
 to CMO No. 1, Exhibit 5, I have brought them with me so the Court
 could view them in camera[.]" The record does not reflect that
 the court took the releases or examined them. At minimum,
 however, the releases were made available to the circuit court
 for its review. Fisher did not thereafter request that the
 circuit court review the releases in camera. Ideally, the
 circuit court should have reviewed the releases. However, under
 the circumstances, where the court had a declaration from counsel
 as to the aggregate settlement amount and the releases in the
 asbestos cases must substantially comply with Exhibit 5 to CMO-1,
 we cannot say that a failure to review the releases here equates
 or would equate to an abuse of discretion in granting the
 Petition.
 
Finally, in Troyer, the supreme court listed nine 
factors that trial courts could, but were not required, to consider in reviewing a petition for good faith settlement. 102 Hawai
'i at 427, 77 P.3d at 111. The supreme court further noted 
that the trial court could consider any other factor that was relevant to whether a settlement was made in good faith. Id. 
Fisher argues that there is no indication that the
 
circuit court considered the Troyer factors and, even if the
 circuit court considered the factors, it could not have conducted
 an appropriate analysis because the Petition, the substantive
 joinders, and declarations submitted in support of the Petition
 were insufficient. Given the record in this case, we do not
 agree. As Dias argues, the parties engaged in discovery relating
 to product identification and deposed witnesses. The circuit
 court had also previously considered Fisher's motion for summary
 judgment, which it granted in part and denied in part, as well as
 other substantive motions in the case. Thus, the circuit court's
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
knowledge of the case was not limited to what was contained in 
the Petition, the joinders, and the DeRobertis Declaration. The circuit court could consider any "factor that is relevant to whether a settlement" was made in good faith including factors beyond the Petition and affidavits. Id. The circuit court was 
not required to demonstrate that all of the factors listed in Troyer were considered. Rather, the Troyer court emphasized that the determination of a good faith settlement rests in the discretion of the trial court and that appellate review would be for abuse of discretion. 102 Hawai
'i at 427, 77 P.3d at 111. We 
do not conclude in this case that the circuit court abused its discretion. 
III. Conclusion
 
Based on the above, the "Order Granting Defendant Shin
 
Nippon Machinery Co., Ltd.'s Petition for Determination of Good
 Faith Settlement and Substantive Joinders Thereto Filed by
 Elliott Turbomachinery Company, Inc.; Sterling Fluid Systems
 (USA) LLC, improperly sued as SFS (USA) Holding Inc. dba Peerless
 Pump Company; Kaanapali Land LLC, successor by merger to
 Northbrook Corp., successor by merger to AMFAC Inc.; and
 FLOWSERVE US INC." filed on December 21, 2015, in the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 16, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Thomas Benedict,
Dawn T. Sugihara,(Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel)for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Gary O. Galiher,
L. Richard DeRobertis,Ilana K. Waxman,Alyssa R. Segawa,(Galiher DeRobertis Waxman)for Plaintiffs-Appellees. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Joinders on the answering brief:
 
Jeffrey S. Portnoy,
for Defendant-Appellee
Shin Nippon Machinery Co., Ltd.
 
Steven K. Hisaka,
for Defendant-Appellee
Sterling Fluid Systems (USA), LLC.
 
11
 