NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000170
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CHRISTOPHER M. PIEPER, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1P111-2241)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Christopher M. Pieper (Pieper)
 
appeals from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order entered
 
on January 10, 2012 (Judgment) by the District Court of the First
 
1
Circuit, Honolulu Division (District Court).  Pieper was charged
 
with and convicted of assault in the third degree in violation of
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (
HRS) § 707-712(1)(a) (Assault 3rd).
 
On appeal, Pieper raises a single point of error,
 
contending that there was insufficient evidence to convict him of
 
Assault 3rd because the State failed to adduce substantial
 
evidence to prove that (1) Pieper was involved with the incident
 
at issue, and (2) that his conduct, as opposed to the other co­
defendant, caused bodily injury to Lance Corporal Travis Benton
 
(Benton
).
 
1
 The Honorable Melanie Mito May presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Pieper's point of
 
error as follows:
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has 
long held that evidence adduced in the trial court must be
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution when
the appellate court passes on the legal sufficiency of such
evidence to support a conviction; the same standard applies
whether the case was before a judge or a jury. The test on
 appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a
reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence
to support the conclusion of the trier of fact. Indeed,
even if it could be said in a bench trial that the
 conviction is against the weight of the evidence, as long as
there is substantial evidence to support the requisite
findings for conviction, the trial court will be affirmed.
 
"Substantial evidence" as to every material
element of the offense charged is credible evidence
which is of sufficient quality and probative value to
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a
conclusion. And as trier of fact, the trial judge is
free to make all reasonable and rational inferences
 under the facts in evidence, including circumstantial
evidence.
 
State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 248-49, 831 P.2d 924, 931
(1992).
 
State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai' i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 
(2007). 
In addition, "[a]n appellate court will not pass upon 
the trial judge's decisions with respect to the credibility of 
witnesses and the weight of the evidence, because this is the 
province of the trial judge." Porter v. Hu, 116 Hawai' i 42, 60, 
169 P.3d 994, 1012 (App. 2007) (quoting State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai'i 131, 139, 913 P.2d 57, 65 (1996)); see also State v. 
Mattiello, 90 Hawai' i 255, 259, 978 P.2d 693, 697 (1999). 
We conclude that there was sufficient evidence to
 
support Pieper's conviction. The evidence included testimony
 from the State's witness Lance Corporal Katherine Stoneycypher
 
(StoneyCypher), identifying Pieper and his twin brother (Brother)
 
as the two individuals who assaulted Benton. She described the
 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
punches of both assailants as being "[w]ith their fists, pretty
 
heavy, heavy blows." She also described Benton's injuries,
 
including that he had a cut under his eye, his eye was almost
 
swollen shut, the side of his face was swollen, and he had marks
 
on the back of his head. State's witness Lance Corporal Jeffrey
 
Slingluff (Slingluff) also gave testimony that both assailants
 
hit Benton in the face, but that the first assailant hit him
 
approximately ten times and the second assailant hit him
 
approximately five to six times, that Benton was "trying to curl
 
to protect himself", that Slingluff could hear "[t]huds from
 
contact to the body."
 
Although Benton could not identify the assailants
 
because he was in a defensive position, he testified to his
 
injuries, including a contusion and a cut below his right eye and
 
the pain from the initial hit, and how "the next day [he] felt
 
the ten or so punches."
 
The District Court found the State's witnesses to be
 
credible. 
Notwithstanding Pieper's argument that he was the
 
second assailant, and that Benton's injuries were caused by the
 first assailant,
2
 considering the evidence in light most
favorable to the prosecution, we conclude that substantial
 evidence supported the District Court's finding that Pieper, as
 
well as his Brother, was involved in assaulting Benton and that
 
Pieper's conduct caused bodily injury to Benton. See HRS § 707­
700 (1993) (defining bodily injury as "physical pain, illness, or
 any impairment of physical condition").
 
2
 Apparently, Brother made the same claim.
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Accordingly, the District Court's January 10, 2012
 
Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, April 30, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Evan S. Tokunaga
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Sonja P. McCullenDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4 