FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I

---o0o--­
HOKU LELE, LLC, a Hawai' i limited liability company;
DONN EISELE, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.

CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU,
a Hawai'i municipal corporation, Defendant-Appellee
and

DOES 1-10, Defendants

NO. CAAP-11-0001064

APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

(CIVIL NO. 10-1-1448)

JANUARY 25, 2013

FOLEY, PRESIDING J., FUJISE AND REIFURTH, JJ.

OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.

Plaintiffs-Appellants Hoku Lele, LLC and Donn Eisele

(Hoku Lele) appeal from the November 25, 2011 Judgment entered in

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court) in favor
 
of Defendant-Appellee City and County of Honolulu (City) pursuant

to the October 20, 2011 "Order Granting Defendant, City and

County of Honolulu's Motion to Dismiss the Complaint Filed July

2, 2010."

On appeal, Hoku Lele contends the circuit court erred

in dismissing the case because Hoku Lele failed to exhaust all

available administrative remedies.

I. BACKGROUND

Hoku Lele owns real property of approximately 1.05

acres in Waimanalo in the City and County of Honolulu (Waimanalo

property). 
There are four structures on the Waimanalo property,
 
referred to by the City as Buildings A, B, C, and D. Buildings C
 
and D, the subject of the underlying dispute, were two bungalows

from the Hilton Hawaiian Village in Waikiki, built around 1954. 
 
In 1963, the City issued two building permits for the relocation

of Buildings C and D from Waikiki to the Waimanalo property.

In 2005, Hoku Lele sought to rebuild Buildings A, B, C,

and D and applied for building permits to do so. Apparently as
 
part of the permit application process, Hoku Lele submitted a

"zoning verification" request to the City's Department of

Planning and Permitting (DPP) on November 2, 2005. The request
 
sought confirmation of the Waimanalo property's legality and

confirmation that the existing structures could be rebuilt. In

response, Hoku Lele received a letter from the director of the

DPP (director) dated November 21, 2005 stating as follows: 
 
Neither Building C nor Building D is a lawful dwelling unit.
This is because they were constructed (relocated onto the
property) contrary to the underlying zoning district
regulations in effect in 1963, despite obtaining the
necessary permits. 
 
1

The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.

2

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
To be legally established, a use must have been allowed by
the zoning code at the time it was constructed. The

1.05-acre site was located in the Agricultural Subdivision
in 1963, when the building (relocation) permits were issued
for Buildings C and D. As noted above, the zoning code at
that time stated that no dwelling unit in excess of one (1)
unit per acre of/and could be built in an Agricultural
Subdivision. Buildings C and D were thus not established in
accordance with the zoning regulations then in effect, and
the relevant building permits appear to have been issued in

error. Therefore, our conclusion is that Building C and
Building D were not legally established.

At the closing of the letter, the director advised Hoku

Lele, "[i]f you have additional information that supports a

different determination concerning the status of Buildings C and

D, please provide it to us as soon as possible. Your other

option would be to apply for a variance from the provisions of

the Land Use Ordinance[.]" The director further described what

needed to be established to receive variance approval. However,
 
the letter made no mention of the possibility of appealing to the

DPP's Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA).

Hoku Lele then submitted additional documents to the

DPP, including building permits and documents from City building

inspectors stating that all structures on the Waimanalo property

were "existing nonconforming." Hoku Lele argued Buildings C and
 
D were legally established "nonconforming dwelling units," as

provided under Land Use Ordinance (LUO) § 21-4.110(d) (2003)

(codified as Chapter 21 of the Revised Ordinances of Honolulu

(ROH) (1990)). In a letter to Hoku Lele dated December 20, 2005,
 
the director analyzed the additional documents and concluded they

had been erroneously issued. Consequently, the director refused
 
to recognize Buildings C and D as nonconforming dwelling units. 
 
The letter again informed Hoku Lele of the option to apply for a

variance and directed further contact to DPP staff, but made no

mention of the possibility of an appeal to the ZBA.

Hoku Lele sent another letter to DPP staff dated

February 22, 2006, attempting to persuade DPP that Buildings C

3

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and D were legal nonconformities. Neither the letter itself nor

DPP's response (if any) are part of the record, and the record

does not indicate any further communication between Hoku Lele and

DPP. It is undisputed that Hoku Lele did not file an appeal to

the ZBA.

On October 18, 2007, Hoku Lele filed a complaint 
against the City in the circuit court, seeking declaratory relief 
and asserting claims of equitable estoppel, vested rights, and 
violation of Hoku Lele's rights to due process under the Hawai' i 
Constitution and the United States Constitution. In January 2008, the parties stipulated to dismiss the suit without 
prejudice in return for the City's agreement to reconsider its 
previous decision. Although Hoku Lele submitted a request for 
reconsideration to the DPP, DPP did not issue a decision on the 
request. 
On July 2, 2010, Hoku Lele filed a second complaint

against the City in the circuit court, again seeking declaratory

judgment and asserting the same claims as in its October 18, 2007

complaint. On January 10, 2011, the City filed a motion to
 
dismiss. Following oral argument on April 27, 2011, the circuit

court granted the City's motion, concluding the circuit court

lacked subject matter jurisdiction. On October 20, 2010, the
 
circuit court entered its "Order Granting Defendant, City and

County of Honolulu's Motion to Dismiss the Complaint Filed July

2, 2010" with the following conclusions of law:

1. The Director's response to Plaintiffs' request for
zoning confirmation on November 21, 2005 was an action of
the Director in the administration of the City's
Zoning Ordinance.

2. The City Zoning Board of Appeals has jurisdiction
over appeals from the actions of the director in the
administration of the City's Zoning Ordinance.

3. Plaintiffs [sic] failure to exhaust all available
administrative remedies by not filing an appeal of the
Director's November 21, 2005 decision with the City's Zoning

4

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Board of Appeals divests the Circuit Court of any
jurisdiction over Plaintiffs Complaint.

4. Without jurisdiction, the Court cannot take any
action other than to dismiss the Complaint.

The circuit court entered its Judgment on November 25,

2011, from which Hoku Lele timely appealed.

II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW

The existence of jurisdiction is a question of law
that we review de novo under the right/wrong standard.
Questions regarding subject matter jurisdiction may be
raised at any stage of a cause of action. When reviewing a
case where the circuit court lacked subject matter
jurisdiction, the appellate court retains jurisdiction, not
on the merits, but for the purpose of correcting the error
in jurisdiction. A judgment rendered by a circuit court
without subject matter jurisdiction is void.

Lingle v. Hawai' i Gov't Emps. Ass'n, AFSCME, Local 152, AFL-CIO, 
107 Hawai' i 178, 182, 111 P.3d 587, 591 (2005) (quoting Amantiad 
v. Odum, 90 Hawai' i 152, 158-59, 977 P.2d 160, 166-67 (1999)). 
A trial court's ruling on a motion to dismiss is
reviewed de novo. The court must accept plaintiff's
allegations as true and view them in the light most
favorable to the plaintiff; dismissal is proper only if it
appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff can prove no set of
facts in support of his or her claim that would entitle him
or her to relief. 
 
Wong v. Cayetano, 111 Hawai' i 462, 476, 143 P.3d 1, 15 (2006) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). 
III. DISCUSSION

The circuit court concluded it did not have 
jurisdiction over Hoku Lele's July 2, 2010 complaint because Hoku 
Lele was required to exhaust its administrative remedies by 
appealing to the ZBA first before it could properly appeal to the 
circuit court. Because the claims Hoku Lele asserts are 
originally cognizable in the circuit court, the doctrine of 
exhaustion of administrative remedies is inapplicable. See 
Pavsek v. Sandvold, 127 Hawai' i 390, 400 n.7, 279 P.3d 55, 65 n.7 
(App. 2012). 
5

 
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Revised Charter of the City and County of Honolulu

(RCCCH) § 6-1516 (2001) establishes the ZBA's jurisdiction and

states in relevant part:

Section 6-1516. Zoning Board of Appeals -­
The zoning board of appeals shall hear and determine appeals
from the actions of the director in the administration of

2
the zoning ordinances, including variances therefrom,
subdivision ordinances and any rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to either.

RCCCH § 6-1516. See also LUO § 21-1.40 (1999) ("Appeals from the

actions of the director in the administration of the provisions

of the LUO shall be to the zoning board of appeals as provided by

Section 6-1516 of the charter.").

The ZBA Rules further address the scope of the ZBA's

jurisdiction, stating as follows:

§22-1 Petition. (a) Any person who is specially,
personally, or adversely affected by an action of the
director may appeal the director's action to the board by
submitting a written petition to the board[.]

§21-1 Definitions. 
 
"Action of the director" means a decision rendered on an 
 
application pursuant to the [LUO] or the Subdivision
Ordinance; a decision rendered on a request for a zoning variance;
a decision rendered on a petition for declaratory ruling; a
decision rendered on a request for reconsideration pursuant to
part 1, chapter 4, Rules of Practice and Procedure of the
department of land utilization; and an enforcement order pursuant
to section 8.60-2 of the [LUO].

ZBA Rules §§ 21-1, 22-1 (1998).

2 LUO § 21-1.10 (1999) states:

Sec. 21-1.10 Title.

The provisions of this chapter, inclusive of any
amendments, shall be known as the [LUO] of the City and
County of Honolulu. The provisions may also be referred to
as the zoning ordinance and may, to the extent practicable,
contain other ordinances regulating the utilization of land
pursuant to Section 6-1504 of the charter.

6

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
When interpreting the RCCCH, municipal ordinances, and 
administrative rules, the general principles of statutory 
construction apply. Windward Marine Resort, Inc. v. Sullivan, 86 
Hawai'i 171, 180-81, 948 P.2d 592, 601-02 (App. 1997); Paul v. 
Dep't of Transp., State of Hawai' i, 115 Hawai' i 416, 426, 168 P.3d 
546, 556 (2007). When construing a statute, our foremost obligation is to ascertain and give effect to the intention of 
the legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the 
language contained in the statute itself, read in the context of 
the entire statute and construed in a manner consistent with its 
purpose. Paul, 115 Hawai' i at 426, 168 P.3d at 556. 
The City argues the language of the ZBA's authority is

of broad import and grants the ZBA authority to review any

decision by the director regarding the applicability or

application of the LUO. The City also characterizes the
 
director's November 21, 2005 and December 20, 2005 letters as

decisions rendered on "an application pursuant to the [LUO]," "a

petition for declaratory ruling," and "a request for

reconsideration." Because the City's arguments are not supported

by the LUO, case law, or the DPP's actions, however, we disagree.

"The purpose of the LUO is to regulate land use in a

manner that will encourage orderly development" and to "provide

reasonable development and design standards[.]" LUO § 21-1.20
 
(1999). The LUO contains extensive and detailed provisions
 
addressing the processing of specific applications, particularly

applications for permits and for particular land uses. The LUO

dedicates an entire Article setting forth the procedures and

standards for processing permit applications (Article 2) and

another for certain land uses (Article 5). The other

applications specifically identified in the LUO have, at minimum,

one section informing applicants of what must be included in the

applications, the process for reviewing applications, and the

7

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
standards by which a decision is made on the application. See,

e.g., LUO § 21-3.50-3 (1999) ("[Establishment of] Agricultural

cluster - Application requirements"); §§ 21-8.20-1, 8.50-3,

8.50-9, 8.50-10 (1999) (procedures and requirements for housing

developments). In contrast, nothing in the RCCCH, the LUO, or
 
the DPP's Rules of Practice and Procedure (DPP Rules) (1999)

expressly addresses or even mentions the director's ability to

render decisions on requests for a zoning verification. Thus,
 
the LUO itself does not support the City's argument that Hoku

Lele's zoning verification request was an "application pursuant

to the [LUO]." 
 
The City also characterizes the director's November 21, 
2005 letter as a determination that Buildings C and D were not 
lawful "nonconforming dwelling units" pursuant to the LUO. 
However, in all of the cases the City cites, the director's 
decisions regarding nonconforming uses were made pursuant to 
authority expressly granted by the LUO and as an "action of the 
director" appealable under the ZBA Rules. For example, in Save 
Diamond Head Waters LLC. v. Hans Hedemann Surf, Inc., 121 Hawai' i 
16, 211 P.3d 74 (2009), the director rendered a decision on a petition for a declaratory ruling, which is specifically listed 
as an appealable "action of the director" under ZBA Rules §§ 21-1 
and 22-1. See also Colony Surf, Ltd. v. Dir. of Dep't of 
Planning and Permitting, 116 Hawai' i 510, 174 P.3d 349 (2007) 
(appeal of director's decision on petition for declaratory 
ruling); Korean Buddhist Dae Won Sa Temple of Hawai' i v. 
Concerned Citizens of Palolo, 107 Hawai' i 371, 114 P.3d 113 
(2005) (appeal of director's denial of request for variance); 
McPherson v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals, 67 Haw. 603, 699 P.2d 26 
(1985) (appeal of director's decision granting a request for 
variance to enlarge an existing nonconforming use); Windward 
Marine Resort, Inc. v. Sullivan, 86 Hawai' i 171, 948 P.2d 592 
8

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(App. 1997) (appeal of director's issuance of cease and desist

3
order ).
 
The cases the City cites do not stand for the broad

principle that all of the director's decisions regarding

nonconformities are within the ZBA's jurisdiction. Moreover,
 
nothing in the case law or the ordinances and rules indicates a

"zoning verification" request is equivalent to an application to

continue a nonconformity. Rather, the case law illustrates that
 
the proper courses of director action on a nonconformity are to

render decisions on petitions for a variance or a declaratory

ruling or to issue enforcement orders, all of which are specific

"actions of the director" appealable to the ZBA pursuant to the

ZBA Rules. 
 
3 The LUO grants the director the authority to issue cease and
desist orders. LUO § 21-2.150-2 states, in pertinent part:

Sec. 21-2.150-2 Administrative enforcement.

[I]f the director determines that any person is violating
any provision of this chapter, any rule adopted thereunder
or any permit issued pursuant thereto, the director may have
the person served, by mail or delivery, with a notice of
violation and order pursuant to this section.

....

(b) 	 
Contents of Order.

(1) 	 The order may require the person to do any or
all of the following:

(A) 
Cease and desist from the violation;

. . . . 
 
(2) 	 
The order shall advise the person that the order
shall become final 30 days after the date of its
mailing or delivery. The order shall also advise
that the director's action may be appealed to
the [ZBA].

(c) 	 Effect of Order-Right to Appeal. . . . The person may
appeal the order to the [ZBA] as provided in Section
6-1516 of the city charter.

The ordinance applied in Windward Marine Resort (LUO § 21-8.6-2) stated
substantially the same.

9

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Assuming arguendo the ZBA had jurisdiction to review

the director's letters, we note the procedure employed by the DPP

in this case creates a substantial risk of permanently depriving

Hoku Lele of its ability to seek review either at the ZBA or in

court. LUO § 21-1.40 (1999)4
 and ZBA Rules §§ 22-2 and 22-7
 
(1998)5
 establish a mandatory, exclusive, and short thirty-day
 
period within which a director's action can be appealed to the

ZBA; once the thirty-day period has passed, the director's action

becomes final and binding. Thus, Hoku Lele contends the
 
directors' letters did not satisfy due process requirements

because the letters failed to give any notice of the right to

appeal or of the thirty-day period. Other jurisdictions have
 
concluded under similar circumstances that statutory notice of

the right to appeal was inadequate and that due process required

4 LUO § 21-1.40 (1999) provides:

Sec. 21-1.40 Appeals.

Appeals from the actions of the director in the
administration of the provisions of the LUO shall be to the
zoning board of appeals as provided by Section 6–1516 of the
charter. Appeals shall be filed within 30 days of the
mailing or service of the director's decision.

5 ZBA Rules § 22-2 provides:

§22-2 Mandatory appeal filing deadline. (a) A written 
 
petition appealing an action of the director must be received at
the department of land utilization within 30 days of the date of
mailing or personal service of the director's written decision
except that in the case of an appeal relating to the
administration of the subdivision ordinance, the petition must be
received within 15 days after receipt of the notice of the action.

(b) If the appeal is not timely filed, it shall be
dismissed by the board upon the board's own motion or the
motion of any party to the proceeding.

ZBA Rules § 22-7 provides:

§22-7 Waiver or suspension of rules. The board may
waive or suspend any procedure in chapter 22 for good cause,
except that the mandatory appeal filing deadline and any other
provisions mandated by law, shall not be waived.

10

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the government to provide affirmative notice.6 In this case, the

director's letters included several paragraphs explaining the

variance application process but failed to mention the ZBA. The
 
DPP did not consider a ZBA appeal to be an option available to

Hoku Lele. The director's advice actively discouraged Hoku Lele

from appealing to the ZBA by suggesting the director could take

further action and could change his position regarding Hoku

Lele's right to retain Buildings C and D through a determination

on a variance application (which, as noted above, would have been

appealable to the ZBA). 
 
The City's attempt to characterize the director's

letters as decisions "rendered on a petition for declaratory

ruling" is also unavailing. DPP Rules § 3-1 (1993) provides:
 
"Any interested person may petition the director for a

declaratory ruling as to the applicability of any statute or

ordinance[.]" On its face, the zoning verification request form
 
provided by the DPP is clearly not a petition for a declaratory

ruling and does not conform with or give notice of the

requirements for a petition as stated in DPP Rules § 3-2 (1993). 
 
The purpose of a petition for declaratory ruling is to address

questions regarding a specific provision, rule, or order, see DPP

Rules § 3-2 (1993), and therefore it differs from the zoning

verification request, which seeks acknowledgment of compliance

with applicable statutes, ordinances, or rules. 
 
6 See, e.g., Brody v. Village of Port Chester, 434 F.3d 121 (2d Cir.
2005) (concluding that where a condemnor provides an exclusive thirty-day
period for challenging a public use determination, the notice sent to affected
property owners must include a "conspicuous mention" of the challenge period);
Aacen v. San Juan Cnty. Sheriff's Dep't, 944 F.2d 691 (10th Cir. 1991) (notice
to judgment debtor following seizure of her truck violated due process because
it failed to inform her that hearing for asserting exemptions was available);
Town of Randolph v. Estate of White, 693 A.2d 694 (Vt. 1997) (town's notice of
zoning violation violated due process clause by failing to inform owner of his
statutory right to contest administrator's decision by filing notice with
secretary of board of adjustment within 15 days).

11

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Nor is the director's December 20, 2005 letter a

decision "rendered on a request for reconsideration." Although
 
the director's November 21, 2005 letter advised Hoku Lele it

could provide additional information concerning the status of

Buildings C and D, the director never clearly notified Hoku Lele

of his intent to reconsider (as required by DPP Rules § 4-5

7
(1993) ), nor did he inform Hoku Lele of the specific
 
requirements and procedures for filing a formal petition for

reconsideration (provided in DPP Rules Chapter 4 (1993)). 
More

importantly, the DPP Rules are clear that the reconsideration

must be of "the director's original decision to approve or deny

an application[.]" DPP Rules § 4-1 (1993). Because the zoning
 
verification request was not an application under the LUO and was

not appealable to the ZBA, the director's review of the request

cannot be considered an appealable "decision rendered on a

request for reconsideration."

By expanding its definition of "actions of the

director," the ZBA Rules could have granted the ZBA the power to

review a broader range of the director's functions, such as the

director's issuance of responses to zoning verification requests. 
 
Instead, however, the ZBA Rules expressly limit its jurisdiction

to deciding appeals from four specifically enumerated actions,

none of which apply to the director's letters in this case. 
 
Because the ZBA lacked jurisdiction over Hoku Lele's claims, the

doctrine of exhaustion of administrative remedies is

7 DPP Rules § 4-5 ("Procedure [for reconsideration]") states:

§4-5 Procedure. (a) The director shall notify the current
landowner(s), the applicant of record, and persons who
participated in the previous action, of his intent to reconsider a
action; and shall provide them with a copy of the petition, if one
has been submitted. 
 
(b) The notice shall inform the owner, applicant and other
interested persons that they have 15 days from the date of the
notice to submit a written response.

12

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
inapplicable, and the circuit court erred in dismissing the case

for Hoku Lele's failure to exhaust all administrative remedies. 
 
IV. CONCLUSION

The November 25, 2011 Judgment entered in the Circuit

Court of the First Circuit is vacated and this case is remanded

to the circuit court.

On the briefs:

Robert H. Thomas

(Damon Key Leong Kupchak Hastert)
for Plaintiffs-Appellants.

Brad T. Saito

Krishna K.F. Jayaram
Deputies Corporation Counsel,
City and County of Honolulu
for Defendant-Appellee.

13

