 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000555 25-JUN-2025 08:09 AM Dkt. 56 SO 
NO.  CAAP-22-0000555
   
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I   
MEILING K. AKUNA, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.  
ANDY STEHL and JIM FALK MOTORS OF MAUI,
Defendants-Appellees   
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT  COURT OF THE SECOND  CIRCUIT  
WAILUKU DIVISION  
(CASE NO. 2DRC-21-0000972)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION  ORDER  
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.)  
Self-represented Plaintiff -Appellant Meiling K. Akuna 
(Akuna) appeals from the District Court of the Second Circuit's 
(district court )1 May 3, 2023 Judgment, entered in favor of 
1 The Honorable Blaine J. Kobayashi presided.   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendants-Appellees Andy Stehl (Stehl ) and Jim Falk Motors of 
Maui  (Falk Motors)  (collectively,  the  Defendants).   Akuna raises 
three issues on appeal,  contending that the district court: (1) 
"erred in giving nominal concern in [Akuna's]  case"; (2) "erred 
on the manner in which the trials  were conducted"; and (3) 
"applied the wrong legal standard in finding [Akuna's] case 
unmerited."  2
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Akuna's 
appeal as follows. 
In August 2021, Akuna filed the operative Amended 
Complaint, alleging that the Defendants committed fraud by 
selling her a "truck [that] was previously damaged in a rollover 
accident" that had been represented as being "a new truck." The 
case proceeded to a bench trial. After Akuna rested her case , 
the Defendants moved for a directed verdict. The district court 
ruled as follows, 
Ms. Akuna, the [c]ourt in this case has listened to the 
testimony of the witnesses that you've called to support 
your claim. 
2 We note that Akuna's opening brief does not , among other things, 
include a statement of points of error or arguments on appeal as required by 
Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28 . We will nevertheless address 
Akuna's contentions of error to the extent they are discern ible. See U.S. 
Bank Nat 'l Ass'n v. Wright , Nos. CAAP -19-0000545, CAAP -19-0000879, & CAAP -20-
0000364, 2023 WL 4104953 , at *2 (Haw. App. June 21, 2023) (SDO) ("[W]e 
interpret pleadings prepared by self -represented litigants liberally and 
attempt to afford them appellate review even though they fail to comply with 
court rules.") (citation omitted) . 
2   
 
  
   
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ah, the [c]ourt has also had the opportunity to 
review the exhibits which were received in evidence.  
You know, unfortunately the [c]ourt [ cannot]  see or 
find any evidence of your claim that the vehicle that was 
sold to you on April 4th, 2013 was, in fact, a used vehicle 
as opposed to a new vehicle .  
Ah, because of that, your claim fails and you have 
not proven by a preponderance of the evidence th e  claim set 
forth in your complaint.  
So unfortunately, at this time the [c]ourt has no 
alternative but to rule in favor of the [D]efendant[s] . 
The [c]ourt is granting the defense's motion for directed 
verdict. Judgment is entered in favor of the [D]efendants 
and against [Akuna].  
(Emphasis added.) 
A motion for a directed verdict in a district court  
trial shall be considered as a motion to dismiss under District 
Court  Rules of Civil Procedure ( DCRCP) Rule 41(b).   Cf.  Ontai v. 
Straub Clinic & Hosp. Inc., 66 Haw. 237,  252,  659 P.2d 734, 745  
(1983) ("A motion for a directed verdict  [under Hawaiʻ i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP ) Rule 50(a) 3
]  in a nonjury case will be 4
3 DCRCP Rule 41(b) states, in relevant part, 
After the plaintiff has completed the presentation of the 
plaintiff's evidence, the defendant, without waiving the 
defendant's right to offer evidence in the event the motion 
is not granted, may move for a dismissal on the ground that 
upon the facts and the law the plaintiff has shown no right 
to relief. The court as trier of the facts may then 
determine them and render judgment against the plaintiff or 
may decline to render any judgment until the close of all 
the evidence. 
4 HRCP Rule 50(a) states, in relevant part, 
If during a trial by jury a party has been fully heard on 
an issue and there is no legally sufficient evidentiary 
basis for a reasonable jury to find for that party on that 
issue, the court may determine the issue against that party 
and may grant a motion for judgment as a matter of law 
against that party with respect to a claim or defense that 
cannot under the controlling law be maintained or defeated 
without a favorable finding on that issue. 
3   
 
   
  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
treated as if it were a motion to dismiss under [HRCP] Rule 
41(b)[.]") (citation omitted) ; Aluminum Shake Roofing, Inc. v. 
Hirayasu , 110 Hawaiʻi 248, 251, 131 P.3d 1230, 1233 (2006) ("It 
is well settled that a trial court's rulings on motions for 
judgment as a matter of law [under HRCP Rule 50(a)] are reviewed 
de novo.") (citation omitted) . "A trial court's ruling on a 
motion to dismiss is reviewed de novo ." Ryan v. Herzog , 142 
Hawai‘i 278, 284, 418 P.3d 619, 625 (2018) (citations omitted) . 
At trial, Akuna called four witnesses: Manuel  Nunez, a 
former Falk Motors service manager; Terry Tinsley, a former Falk 
Motors finance manager; Ryan Westberg, a Falk Motors  service 
department employee; and Stehl, the Falk Motors salesperson who sold Akuna the vehicle. The record reflects that Akuna did not, 
through the testimonies  of these witnesses and the trial 
exhibits Akuna  introduced, produce any  evidence to support her 
claim that the Defendants sold her a damaged  vehicle  that was 
not new. We  determine  that the district court did not err in 
finding that Akuna had not met her burden of proving her claim 
by a preponderance of the evidence, and, on that basis, in 
granting the Defendants' motion for a directed verdict.  
4   
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We therefore affirm the Judgment . 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, June 25, 2025.  
On the briefs:  /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka  
 Presiding Judge  
Meiling K. Akuna,   
Self-represented  /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth  
Plaintiff-Appellant.  Associate Judge  
  
Scott W. O'Neill,  /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
for Defendants-Appellees.  Associate Judge 
 
5 