NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0001412
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JOHN JAMES ARRUDA, JR., Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 10-1-0044)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Leonard, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant John James Arruda, Jr. (Arruda) by indictment 
with four counts of sexual assault in the first degree and one count of sexual assault in the third degree. The alleged victim and complaining witness (CW) was a child who was living with Arruda as part of his family. The CW was six years old to eight years old during the period that the alleged sexual assaults occurred. 
The indictment charged that during a period spanning
 
thirty months, Arruda, as the parent, guardian, or other person
 having legal or physical custody of the CW, committed first-
degree sexual assault by knowingly engaging in sexual penetration
 with the CW, who was less than fourteen years old, by inserting
 his penis into her mouth (Count 1); inserting his penis into her
 genital opening (Count 2); inserting his penis into her anal
 opening (Count 3); and inserting his finger into her genital
 opening (Court 4). Arruda was also charged with committing
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
third-degree sexual assault during this period by knowingly
 
subjecting the CW to sexual contact or causing the CW to have
 sexual contact with Arruda by placing her hand on his penis. 
After Arruda was arrested, he waived his Miranda
 
1
rights and agreed to answer questions posed by Detective Brandon
Nakasone (Detective Nakasone). 
During the course of his first
 
interview with Detective Nakasone, Arruda stated that he was
 willing to take a polygraph test. The following day, Detective
 Nakasone asked Arruda if he was still willing to take the
 polygraph test, and Arruda said he was. Arruda signed a
 polygraph waiver form and was then re-
Mirandized by a polygraph
 
examiner, Detective Michael Doole (Detective Doole), before the
 test was administered. Arruda subsequently confessed to
 Detective Doole and then confessed again to Detective Nakasone
 after receiving a third set of Miranda warnings.
 
The Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court)
2
 
denied Arruda's motion to suppress his confessions to Detective
 Doole and Detective Nakasone. After a jury trial, Arruda was
 found guilty as charged on all counts. He was sentenced to
 concurrent terms of imprisonment of twenty years on Counts 1
 through 4 and five years on Count 5.
 
On appeal, Arruda argues that the Family Court erred
 
in: (1) denying his motion to suppress his confessions because he
 claims that the failure of Detective Nakasone to re-Mirandize him
 after the first interview and before Detective Nakasone asked
 whether he still wanted to take the polygraph test invalidated
 his subsequent confessions; (2) denying his motion for mistrial
 after the CW's therapist was observed in the gallery attempting
 to catch the CW's attention with a stuffed animal and appeared to
 be mouthing words; and (3) failing to instruct the jury with
 respect to Counts 2 and 4 on the lesser-included offense of
 third-degree sexual assault. We affirm.
 
1Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966).
 
2The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
The CW was born in 2002. The CW and her brother, who 
was a year older, were placed in foster care in New Mexico at an 
early age due to abuse and neglect by their biological parents and other family members. When the CW was three years old, 
Arruda's wife, who is related to the CW and her brother, gained 
foster custody of the two children. The CW and her brother moved to Hawai
'i and lived together with Arruda, his wife, and their 
son in their home in Waianae. Arruda essentially became and served the role of the CW's father. 
Arruda's wife worked for a bank in Honolulu and
 
commuted from Waianae to work. Arruda worked in construction. 
During periods where construction work was not available, Arruda
 was responsible for picking up the children after school and
 taking care of them until his wife returned home from work.
 
When the CW was eight years old, she disclosed to a
 
school counselor that she had been subjected to sexual abuse by
 Arruda. The CW and her brother were taken to the Children's
 Justice Center and interviewed separately by a forensic
 interviewer. The children were temporarily and then permanently
 removed from Arruda's household and placed in protective custody.
 After Arruda was arrested, he confessed to sexually assaulting
 the CW. Arruda was indicted and charged with committing multiple
 acts of sexual abuse against the CW.
 
II.
 
Prior to trial, Arruda moved to suppress the
 
confessions he made to the police. The Family Court held a
 hearing on Arruda's motion, and the following evidence was
 presented. 
A.
 
Detective Nakasone of the Honolulu Police Department
 
(HPD) arrested Arruda at about 1:00 in the afternoon while
 executing a search warrant on Arruda's residence. Later that
 evening, at about 9:21, Detective Nakasone interviewed Arruda at
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the main police station. Prior to asking Arruda questions about
 
the investigation, Detective Nakasone advised Arruda of his
 Miranda rights, using the HPD's waiver of rights form. Arruda
 acknowledged understanding his rights, waived his rights, and
 signed the waiver form. 
The State introduced a DVD containing the audio and
 
visual recording of Detective Nakasone's interview with Arruda as
 well as a transcript of the interview.
3 During the first portion
 
of the interview, Arruda denied having sex with the CW. When
 asked why he would not do what the CW said he did, Arruda replied
 that having sex with someone that small would be "totally wrong."
 When asked what should happen to someone who had sex with a child
 that age, Arruda stated that the person should "[j]ust go to
 jail" and should not be given a second chance." 
Detective Nakasone then asked Arruda whether he would
 
be willing to take a polygraph or "lie detector" test, and Arruda
 said he would do so:
 
Q	 Okay, John, if it's -- if it's necessary, would you be
-- be willing to take a polygraph? 
You know what a
 
polygraph test is?
 
A	 Yes.
 
Q	 It's also called a lie detector test.
 
A	 Lie detector test, yes.
 
Q 	Would you take one -­
A	 Yes.
 
Q 	-- just to verify what you told me is true?
 
A 	Yes, I'll take one, I mean I don't do good in tests,

but I'll take one.
 
Q	 And how -- how do you think you would do if you were
take a test?

 
A 	I -- I -- I think I would do good. 
I would like to
 
hope so.
 
3The quoted material in this section is taken from the transcript of
this interview.
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Detective Nakasone next asked Arruda if there was any
 
reason why "another person would tell me on tape that they know
 
that you've been having sex with [the CW]?" Arruda replied,
 "No." At that point, Detective Nakasone left the interview room
 and Arruda was left alone for a few minutes.
 
When Detective Nakasone returned, he told Arruda: "I
 
have the file here" and that the results of the police's
 investigation "clearly" show "that you had sex with her." After
 twice responding "What?" to Detective Nakasone's statements,
 Arruda covered his face with his hands and began sobbing and
 crying. Detective Nakasone proceeded to made statements to
 Arruda, such as "you didn't mean to do any harm, right?"; this
 was "completely out of character" for you; it "wasn't planned" or
 "premeditated"; and it was a "spur-of-the-moment kind of thing." 
Arruda continued to sob and cry and said over and over, "Oh God"
 and "Oh my God" while Detective Nakasone made these statements.
4
 
4For example, the transcript of the interview reveals the following:
 
Q 
-- you didn't mean to do any harm, right?
 
A (sobbing)

 
Q 
Am I right, John?
 
A (sobbing)

 
Q 
John . . .
 
A (sobbing)

 
Q 
John, look at me . . .
 
A 
Oh God. (sobbing) Oh God.
 
Q 
Come on, John, you didn't mean to hurt her at all, right, John?
 
A (No audible response.) 
Q I know that I talked to you. 
A 
Oh God. 
Q This is not your nature typically. John, this just happened one 
time and . . . 
A (sobbing) 
(continued...) 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After this went on for a while, Detective Nakasone
 
referred to finding "fluids" during the execution of the search
 
warrant. Toward the end of the interview, Detective Nakasone
 told Arruda that Arruda's neighbors had sought out the detective
 and had volunteered information to him. In response, Arruda
 
4(...continued)
Q Am I right, John? 
A Oh God . . . (sobbing) 
. . . . 
Q This is a one-time thing that happened, and now -­
A Oh God. (sobbing) 
Q -- you wish you could take it back? 
A Oh God. (sobbing) 
Q John? 
A (inaudible) Q Wasn't planned, wasn't premeditated, was -­
A (sobbing) Q -- spur-of-the-moment kind of thing, yeah? 
A (sobbing) 
. . . . 
Q 
. . . And it's just something else out of character for you. And 
you didn't plan to hurt anyone, right, John? 
A No. 
(sobbing) 
Q John . . . 
A Oh my God. (inaudible) 
. . . . 
Q You weren't trying to hurt anybody, right, John? 
A (sobbing) 
Q You weren't trying to hurt anyone. This is something out of
character for you, completely out of character. 
A (sobbing) Oh my God. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
asked, "My neighbors?"5 Detective Nakasone concluded the
 
interview by confirming Arruda's willingness take a polygraph
 
test:
 
Q Well, the polygraph test then, can we move onto that,
John?
 
A (crying)
 
Q We'll go onto the next step, you'll do the polygraph
then? Are you willing to do that? 
A Yeah.
 
Q Okay, I'll conclude the interview. Time now is 2244 
hours. 
B. 
The next day, at about 4:25 p.m., Detective Nakasone
 
went to the cell block and escorted Arruda to the polygraph
 
examination room. While escorting Arruda, Detective Nakasone
 asked Arruda if he was still willing to take the polygraph test,
 and Arruda said he was. 
The polygraph examination was conducted by HPD
 
Detective Doole. Pursuant to the HPD's practice, the first thing
 Detective Doole did was to present Arruda with a "Polygraph
 Waiver/Information Form" (Polygraph Waiver Form) and review the
 form with him.  The Polygraph Waiver Form contained the following
 
statement:
 
I am taking this polygraph examination without any
promise of reward or hope of immunity. I have not been
 
forced, coerced, or threatened into taking this polygraph
examination. I am taking this examination of my own free
will and realize that the results will be given to me at the
end of this examination. The results will also be given to
the investigator and other persons whose official duties
require them to have this information.
 
In reviewing the Polygraph Waiver Form with Arruda, Detective
 
Doole did not ask Arruda any questions about the case or attempt
 
5Detective Nakasone's references to finding "fluids" during the
execution of the search warrant, apparently to create the impression that DNA
analysis could be performed, and to receiving incriminating information from
Arruda's neighbors were false. The police did not recover fluids that could
be used to perform DNA analysis and Arruda's neighbors had not provided
incriminating information to Detective Nakasone. 
7
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to elicit any incriminating information from him. Arruda signed
 
the Polygraph Waiver Form at 4:35 p.m.
 
Immediately after Arruda signed the Polygraph Waiver
 
Form, Detective Doole advised Arruda of his Miranda rights
 through the use of the HPD's waiver of rights form. Arruda
 waived his Miranda rights and signed the waiver of rights form at
 4:40 p.m. 
A polygraph examination consists of three phases: pre­
test, in-test, and post-test.  After obtaining Arruda's waiver of
 
his Miranda rights and as part of the pre-test phase of the
 
polygraph examination, Detective Doole discussed the specific
 allegations of sexual assault that the CW had made against
 Arruda. Arruda denied the CW's allegations. 
During the in-test phase of the polygraph examination,
 
Arruda was asked the following three relevant questions, and he
 gave the following responses:
 
Q: SINCE THIS MONTH BEGAN, HAVE YOU HAD ANY SEXUAL
CONTACT WITH [THE CW] THAT I REVIEWED WITH YOU TODAY? 
R: "NO" 
Q: HAVE YOU HAD ANY SEXUAL CONTACT WITH [THE CW] THAT
ENDED WITH YOU EJACULATING? 
R: "NO" 
Q: HAVE YOU EVER TOLD [THE CW] NOT TO TELL HER MOTHER
ABOUT ANY SEX THE TWO OF YOU HAVE ENGAGED IN? 
R: "NO" 
Detective Doole determined that "the result of the examination
 
was DECEPTION INDICATED, regarding [Arruda's] responses to the
 
relevant questions." (Emphasis in original.)
 
In the post-test phase, Detective Doole informed Arruda
 
of, and gave Arruda the opportunity to explain, the "deception
 
indicated" results of the polygraph examination. Arruda admitted
 
to Detective Doole that the CW had told the truth about Arruda's
 
penis having been inside her mouth and genital opening. Arruda
 also admitted that his finger had been inside the CW's genital
 
8
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
opening, but denied that his penis had ever been inside the CW's
 
anus. Finally, Arruda admitted that the CW had told the truth
 about him ejaculating in her presence.
 
Detective Doole then drew an outline a hand on a piece
 
of paper and asked Arruda to draw a line to indicate what finger
 Arruda had inserted into the CW's genital opening and how far the
 finger had gone inside. Arruda drew a line through the middle
 finger of the hand about one inch from the tip of the finger. 
Detective Doole also drew a figure representing a penis and asked
 Arruda to draw two lines, one indicting how far he had inserted
 his penis into the CW's genital opening and the other indicating
 how far he had inserted his penis into the CW's mouth. Arruda
 drew a line about a quarter inch from the tip of the penis to
 show how far he had inserted his penis into the CW's genital
 opening and a line a little over one inch from the tip of the
 penis to show how far he had inserted his penis into the CW's
 mouth. Arruda told Detective Doole that the CW did not like his
 penis in her mouth and "so he stopped." Arruda initialed the
 lines he had drawn on the figures representing his hand and
 penis. 
In Arruda's presence, Detective Doole informed
 
Detective Nakasone of the results of the polygraph examination,
 including Arruda's statements during the post-test phase. 
Detective Doole also showed Detective Nakasone the paper
 containing the figures of the hand and penis and the lines Arruda
 had drawn to show how far he had inserted his penis into the CW's
 genital opening and mouth and his finger into her genital
 opening. 
C.
 
Detective Nakasone then conducted his second interview
 
with Arruda. Detective Nakasone again advised Arruda of his
 
Miranda rights using the HPD's waiver of rights form. Arruda
 
waived his rights and signed the form.  An audio recording of 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Detective Nakasone's second interview and a transcript of the
 
second interview were introduced at the suppression hearing.6
 
During the second interview, Arruda made a tracing of
 
his own hand and marked the portion of his middle finger that he
 had inserted into the CW's "punani."
7 Arruda also drew a
 
representation of his penis and made markings indicating how far
 he had inserted it into the CW's mouth and "punani." Arruda
 stated that when he put his penis in the CW's mouth, "[s]he
 didn't like it" so he stopped. 
Arruda described three specific incidents of sexual
 
assault that he had committed against the CW: (1) inserting his
 finger in her "punani" when she was taking a shower; (2)
 inserting his penis in her mouth in a bedroom; and (3) inserting
 his penis in her "punani" in her bedroom. With respect to the
 shower incident, Arruda stated that while the CW was taking a
 shower, he helped her shampoo her hair and he "just played with
 her punani that's it." In describing where he had placed his
 finger, Arruda stated:
 
Q And the finger one about how . . . 
A Only right there, was just right by her clitoris and
stuff, right there. 
Q Did she say anything to you while all this washappening? 
A No, I mean she just was standing there. 
Arruda further described the shower incident as follows:
 
Q Just so that I have it clear, the first time was when
she was taking a shower.
 
A Yes, you know, I just put my finger here.
 
Q It was -- 'cause she was -- she had her hair soaped
and then . . .
 
A And then I was holding her hair and then . . .
 
6The quoted material in this section is taken from the transcript of the
second interview.
 
7During his interview, Arruda used the slang words "punani" to refer to
female genitalia and "boto" to refer to penis.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q Just got a little aroused by it. 
A Yeah. 
Q And then, okay. 
A I just (inaudible). 
Q Okay, that was real quick then? 
A Yeah. Q Okay, and it didn't go inside, right, you said-
A No. Q -- was just on the outside. 
A No, no, no. 
With respect to incident in the bedroom during which he
 
inserted his penis in the CW's mouth, Arruda stated that the CW
 
was staring at his penis through his clothes, he was standing up,
 he removed his shorts, and then "she put her -- my [penis] in her
 mouth and that was it." Arruda elaborated:
 
Q	 Okay, and then she didn't like the taste. What did -­
what did she say?
 
A 	She said, yuck (phonetic), and then that was it.

 
With respect to the incident in the bedroom during
 
which he inserted his penis into the CW's "punani," Arruda stated
 that while the CW was in her bedroom changing her clothes, he
 took off his shorts, and he put his penis in the CW's "punani"
 while she was lying on the bed facing him. 
During his first interview with Detective Nakasone,
 
Arruda related that he was impotent, had erectile disfunction,
 and could not get an erection. Detective Nakasone asked Arruda
 about his ability to ejaculate during the sexual assaults:
 
Q 	I know you have erectile dysfunction, but any of these 
times that I don't know -- I don't know too much about
 
E D, but were you able to -- were you able to
ejaculate?
 
A 	I mean, really, I mean I couldn't -- I -- maybe had

some come out maybe, but other than that, I really
couldn't ejaculate, I mean . . .
 
Q 	Excuse me, like I said, I don't know anything about E

D, so . . .
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A 	I mean I would play -- play -- play, get some feeling,
and then only maybe whatever was inside.
 
Q 	Just wet -- little bit wet?
 
A 	Yeah.
 
Q 	And then how far when you're . . . How . . . I knowyou showed on your finger, but, so if you -- if, let's

say this was the -- this was the -- the lips of the
vagina, like how, can you show me how . . .
 
A 	Just like right there.
 
Q 	Okay.

 
A	 It didn't -­
Q 	Didn't go all the way.
 
A 	-- didn't get anything, it didn't go through, it was
just right there.

 
Q	 And that was with the penis, right?
 
A 	Yes.

 
Arruda denied the CW's allegation that he had inserted
 
his penis into her anal opening. During the interview, Arruda
 
admitted that he had lied to his wife about the sexual assaults,
 stated that he was willing to seek help, and expressed remorse
 for his actions:
 
A And my wife asked me and I didn't tell her I lied to
her. I -- I know it's going to break her heart andmake her feel shame. And she's going to be(inaudible). 
Q Nobody knows about it. 
A Everybody knows about the situation. Everybody knowswhat happened.
 
Q 
But tell me honestly, you willing to -- you willing to
see some kind -- get some kind of help for this?
 
A Yes, yes.
 
Q I know you, just from talking to you, I know.
 
A Yes. (sobbing)
 
. . . .
 
Q Then you are willing to -- to get help?
 
A Yes, yes. Oh God.
 
Q Is there anything else you want to add?
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A (No audible response.) 
Q And this is only the three times, right? 
A. Yes. 
Q And when -- when this is all happening it's not like
you're videotaping her, right? 
A No, I mean it just happened -- it just something thathappened. And I regret it now. 
D. 
In arguing his suppression motion, Arruda conceded that 
he was not challenging the admissibility of his first recorded 
interview with Detective Nakasone. However, relying on State v. Eli, 126 Hawai
'i 510 (2012), Arruda argued that his statements to 
Detective Doole and his second recorded interview with Detective Nakasone should be suppressed. The Family Court distinguished Eli, rejected Arruda's arguments, and denied his suppression motion. The case proceeded to trial. 
III.
 
A.
 
At trial, the CW, who was then ten years old, testified
 
that she was subjected to sexual abuse by Arruda while she was
 between the ages of six and eight years old. The CW testified
 that Arruda "put his private into my punani."
8 This happened at
 
their home while Arruda's wife was at work and the CW's brother
 and Arruda's son were not there. Arruda was in the bathroom with
 the CW and told her to lay on the floor. Arruda then "put his
 private into . . . [the CW's] punani." It felt "[s]ore," and
 Arruda's "private" was "[h]ard." "White stuff" came out of
 Arruda's "private" and went onto the floor and the CW's body. 
The CW wiped off the "white stuff" from her body. This happened
 "[m]ore than one time." 
8The prosecutor asked the CW if she had another word that she used for
"punani" and the CW responded, "[p]rivate." The prosecutor also showed the CW
a diagram of a girl and asked her to color in the area she was calling the
"punani." The CW colored in the genital area of the girl on the diagram. The
 prosecutor also showed the CW a diagram of a man and asked her to color in the
area the CW was calling "his private." The CW colored in the penis of the man
on the diagram.
 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Also in the bathroom, Arruda would tell the CW to lean
 
over the bathtub and he would put his "private" into her "[w]here
 
the doo-doo comes out." The CW called that part of her body her
 "butt hole." It was "[s]ore" when Arruda put his "private" into
 the CW's "butt hole," and it made her cry. Arruda did this to
 her on more than one occasion. 
Arruda told the CW "to suck his private . . . like a
 
lollipop." The CW did not want to do that, but she obeyed Arruda
 because she was afraid of him and because he "would give [her]
 lickens" if she refused. Arruda told the CW to sit on her knees
 and to suck his "private" while he sat on the toilet. Arruda put
 his penis in the CW's mouth and "[w]hite stuff" came out in her
 mouth and also dripped on the ground. The CW spit it out in the
 sink and washed her mouth. This happened more than once. 
Arruda told the CW to hold and rub his "private," which
 
he referred to as his "dick," with her hand. The CW told Arruda
 that she did not want to do these things, but he did not listen
 to her, and she complied with Arruda's instructions. Arruda also
 put his finger inside the CW's "punani" and "[h]e rubbed it up
 and down." The CW described how this made her feel as
 "[h]urtful." There were times in which Arruda put lotion on the
 CW's "punani" before putting his "private" or finger inside. In
 
addition to sexually assaulting the CW in the bathroom, Arruda
 
also sexually assaulted her in his bedroom, the kids' bedroom,
 the livingroom, and the kitchen. 
B.
 
The CW's brother, who was eleven years old at the time
 
of trial, testified that he would see Arruda and the CW go into
 the bathroom, and the door would be closed. The CW's brother
 would hear his sister screaming and Arruda telling her to be
 quiet. The CW's brother heard these things while doing chores
 outside, picking up rubbish near the bathroom. The CW told him
 that she screamed because Arruda "raped her." The CW's brother
 heard the CW screaming in the bathroom "a lot," and he did not
 know what to do. At some point, the CW's brother told his
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
teacher and his friends. After he and the CW were initially
 
removed from Arruda's residence, they were allowed to return
 home. At that time, Arruda's wife told the CW's brother that
 "[t]here's not going to be any Halloween or Christmas until
 [Arruda] comes back." Arruda's wife also told the CW to tell the
 prosecutors that what the CW said about Arruda raping her was a
 lie. 
Detective Nakasone subsequently learned about the
 
statements made by Arruda's wife to the CW and her brother, and
 they were again removed from Arruda's residence and placed in
 foster care. 
Both Detective Nakasone and Detective Doole testified
 
at trial. The Family Court precluded any mention of Arruda's
 polygraph examination but otherwise permitted Detective Nakasone
 and Detective Doole to testify about the statements that Arruda
 had made to them.
9 The Family Court admitted into evidence the
 
DVD of Arruda's first interview with Detective Nakasone and the
 audio recording of Arruda's second interview with Detective
 Nakasone, which were redacted to remove the references to the
 polygraph examination. The redacted DVD and audio recording of
 Detective Nakasone's interviews with Arruda were played for the
 jury at trial. The Family Court also admitted into evidence the
 drawings prepared during the interviews with the detectives on
 which Arruda had marked how far he had inserted his penis and
 finger into the CW's genital opening and his penis into the CW's
 mouth. Aside from the references to the polygraph examination,
 the evidence presented at trial regarding Arruda's statements to
 Detective Nakasone and Detective Doole and Arruda's markings on
 the drawings prepared during the interviews with the detectives 
9Detective Doole testified that Arruda admitted that the CW had told the
 
truth about Arruda inserting his penis into the CW's genital opening and her
mouth and about Arruda's finger being inside the CW's genital opening.
Detective Doole also testified that Arruda had marked on a drawing of a hand
and penis how far Arruda had inserted his finger into the CW's genital opening
and his penis into the CW's genital opening and mouth.
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
was basically the same as the previously discussed evidence
 
presented at the suppression hearing.10
 
Dr. Stanton Michels, M.D., a pediatrician who worked
 
with the Sexual Abuse Treatment Center, examined the CW after the
 allegations of sexual abuse came to light. Dr. Michels did not
 attempt to collect DNA from the CW because the CW said that she
 had bathed and gone swimming, and because of the amount of time
 that had passed, since the last time the CW said that Arruda had
 sexually abused her, which made it unlikely that any evidence
 would have been preserved.
11 Dr. Michels' examination of the
 
CW's genitalia and anus showed "no physical findings," which Dr.
 Michels opined was consistent with the CW's report of sexual
 penetration and also consistent with "no penetration." 
C.
 
Arruda testified in his own defense at trial. Arruda
 
testified that he has erectile disfunction and cannot get an
 erection or ejaculate. He stated that he did not seek medical
 help for his condition because he was embarrassed. Arruda
 maintained that he confessed to Detective Doole and Detective
 Nakasone because Detective Nakasone told him that if he told the
 truth and admitted the allegations, he could go home. According
 to Arruda, Detective Nakasone made this statement while taking
 Arruda to see Detective Doole.
12 Arruda specifically denied ever
 
putting his penis in the CW's mouth, putting his penis in the
 CW's "punani," putting his penis in the CW's anus, putting his
 finger in the CW's "punani," and putting the CW's hand on his
 penis. 
10With respect to Arruda's use of slang words while Detective Nakasone
was interviewing him, Detective Nakasone testified that based on his
experience as a sex crimes detective, "punani" refers to female genitalia and
"boto" refers to male genitalia or the penis. During his testimony, Detective
Nakasone also referred to Arruda's use of "punani" as synonymous with
"vagina." 
11Dr. Michels also stated that obtaining a sample would cause physical
discomfort and he did not want to further traumatize the CW. 
12Detective Nakasone denied making a statement of this nature when he
testified at trial.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV.
 
The jury found Arruda guilty as charged on all counts. 
Arruda was sentenced to concurrent terms of imprisonment on all
 
counts, resulting in his being sentenced to twenty years of
 incarceration. The Family Court entered its Judgment on April 17, 2013. 
DISCUSSION 
I. A. 
Arruda argues that the Family Court erred in denying
 
his motion to suppress his confession to Detective Doole and his
 confession to Detective Nakasone during their second recorded
 interview. Arruda does not dispute that he was properly advised
 of, and validly waived, his Miranda rights in his first recorded
 interview with Detective Nakasone. Arruda, however, claims that
 Detective Nakasone's first interrogation had ceased by the time
 Detective Nakasone came to Arruda's cell block the following day
 to escort him to Detective Doole for the polygraph examination. 
Arruda argues that the police were required to re-Mirandize him
 before Detective Nakasone asked him whether he was still willing
 to take the polygraph test (while escorting him to the polygraph
 room) and before Detective Doole presented him with the Polygraph
 Waiver Form. Arruda contends that the police's failure to do so
 requires that his statements to Detective Doole and his second
 recorded interview with Detective Nakasone be suppressed. We
 disagree.
 
We conclude that asking Arruda whether he still wanted 
to take the polygraph test and memorializing his consent to take the test by obtaining his signature on the Polygraph Waiver Form did not constitute interrogation for purposes of Miranda. See 
State v. Naititi, 104 Hawai
'i 224, 87 P.3d 893 (2004); State v. 
Rippe, 119 Hawai 'i 15, 193 P.3d 1215 (App. 2008). Accordingly, 
the police were not required to re-Mirandize Arruda before asking whether he still wanted to take the polygraph test and obtaining his written consent to take the test. 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In Naititi, before providing Miranda warnings to
 
Naititi, who had been arrested on sexual assault charges,
 
Detective Lavarias asked Naititi "if he wanted to make a
 statement to me today." Id. at 229, 87 P.3d at 898.
13 When
 
Naititi responded, "I'm sorry. I'm sorry." Detective Lavarias
 asked Naititi if he wanted an attorney at that time. Id. 
Naititi replied, "I'm sorry . . . . I only touched her vagina." 
Id. 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that Detective 
Lavarias's questions did not constitute interrogation and that Naititi's statements were not the product of interrogation as envisioned by Miranda. Id. at 235, 237, 87 P.3d at 904, 906. 
The supreme court stated: 
Detective Lavarias asked Naititi whether he wished to make a 
statement and be afforded the assistance of an attorney. By
no stretch of the imagination could these preliminary"yes-or-no" questions be construed as the type thatDetective Lavarias "should have known were reasonably likelyto elicit an incriminating response" from Naititi. See[State v.] Ketchum, 97 Hawai' i [107,] 121, 34 P.3d [1006,]
1020 [2001]; [State v.] Ikaika, 67 Haw. [563,] 567, 698 P.2d[281,] 284 [1985]. 
Id. at 237, 87 P.3d at 906 (emphasis added; ellipsis points
 
omitted). The supreme court vacated the trial court's ruling
 which had suppressed Naititi statements, in part, on Miranda
 grounds. Id. at 238, 87 P.3d at 907.
 Here, as in Naititi, asking Arruda whether he still 
wanted to take the polygraph test and whether he would memorialize his consent to take the test by signing the Polygraph Waiver Form did not constitute interrogation for Miranda purposes. "By no stretch of the imagination" were such preliminary "yes-or-no" questions the type of questions that Detective Nakasone or Detective Doole "should have known were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response" from Arruda. See Id. at 237, 87 P.3d at 906; Rippe, 119 Hawai
'i at 
13Naititi was deaf and mute, and the questions posed by Detective
Lavarias and the answers given by Naititi were made through an interpreter.
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
22-24, 193 P.3d at 1222-24 (joining the vast majority of courts
 
in holding that a request for consent to search does not
 constitute interrogation for Miranda purposes). Indeed, Arruda
 did not make any incriminating statements in response to the
 preliminary questions asked by Detective Nakasone and Detective
 Doole, which Arruda claims violated Miranda. Moreover, Detective
 Doole re-Mirandized Arruda and obtained his waiver of rights
 before asking any questions in the in-test and post-test phases
 of the polygraph examination and before Arruda confessed to
 Detective Doole. Detective Nakasone gave Arruda a third set of
 Miranda warnings and obtained his waiver of rights at the
 beginning part of their second recorded interview. Under these
 circumstances, we conclude that Arruda's statements to Detective
 Doole and the statements he made during the second recorded
 interview with Detective Nakasone were properly obtained and were
 not obtained in violation of Miranda.
14
 
B.
 
Arruda relies on Eli in support of his argument. 
However, we conclude that Eli is distinguishable and does not
 control our decision in this case. 
In Eli, before advising Eli of his Miranda rights, a
 
detective told Eli that he was under arrest for assaulting his
 daughter (who was in the hospital), and then "'asked [Eli] if he
 wanted to give a statement,' as it was 'his chance to give his
 
14Because we conclude that the actions of Detective Nakasone and 
Detective Doole challenged by Arruda did not constitute interrogation, we need
not decide whether the Miranda warnings provided by Detective Nakasone inconnection with his first interview had become stale by the time DetectiveNakasone retrieved Arruda from the cell block the following day and escortedArruda to the polygraph examination. We simply note that the approximatelynineteen-hour time span between Detective Nakasone's original Miranda warningsand his retrieving Arruda from the cell block and escorting Arruda to thepolygraph examination did not necessarily render the original Miranda warningsstale. See State v. Kong, 77 Hawai' i 264, 269, 883 P.2d 686, 691 (App. 1994)
(citing authority that renewed Miranda warnings are not required when a prioradequate warning was given "within a reasonably contemporaneous period oftime" and that the passage of several days could be acceptable under somecircumstances); United State v. Pruden, 398 F.3d 241, 246-47 (3d Cir. 2005)(concluding that an estimated twenty-hour time lapse did not render priorMiranda warnings stale). 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
side of the story.'" Eli, 126 Hawai 'i at 522, 273 P.3d at 1208 
(brackets omitted). By doing so, the detective implied that the 
other side of the story supported Eli's arrest for assault and thereby invited Eli to respond to that other side. Id. Under 
these circumstances, the supreme court held that the detective's actions in inviting Eli to tell his side of the story and obtaining Eli's commitment to give a statement before informing Eli of his rights violated Miranda and rendered invalid Eli's subsequent waiver of his Miranda rights. Id. at 522-23, 126 
Hawai
'i at 1208-09. 
We agree with the Family Court that Eli is
 
distinguishable because the police in this case did not seek or
 obtain Arruda's commitment to take the polygraph examination
 before advising him of his Miranda rights.
15 Arruda agreed to
 
take a polygraph examination during the middle of his first
 interview with Detective Nakasone after Arruda had been advised
 of and waived his Miranda rights, and Arruda confirmed his
 willingness to take the polygraph test at the end of the first
 interview. Accordingly, a key basis for the supreme court's
 decision in Eli -- the failure of the police to inform Eli of his
 Miranda rights before inducing him to commit to telling his side
 of the story -- is absent from this case. For this reason, Eli
 is inapposite. 
In addition, Eli did not overrule Naititi. As
 
previously discussed, asking Arruda whether he still wanted to
 take the polygraph test and obtaining his written consent to take
 the test involved yes-or-no type questions that were not
 reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response and thus
 did not constitute interrogation. Unlike in Eli, the actions of
 the police in seeking to reconfirm and memorialize Arruda's prior
 
15In denying Arruda's motion to suppress evidence, the Family Court
concluded that: "There is no violation of State v. Eli, 126 Haw. 510 (2012).
Eli, supra, is distinguishable as Detective Brandon Nakasone did not seek
Defendant Arruda's commitment to take the polygraph examination until after
the first set of Miranda warnings were given.
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
consent to take the polygraph examination did not involve
 
invitations and entreaties to tell his side of the story. We
 conclude that Naititi, and not Eli
, is the relevant precedent for
 
this case.
 
II.

 
Arruda contends that the Family Court erred in denying
 
his motion for a mistrial after the CW's therapist was observed
 in the gallery attempting to catch the CW's attention with a
 stuffed animal and appeared to be mouthing words. The Family
 Court, with Arruda's concurrence, excused Juror F who believed he
 had witnessed the therapist's actions and indicated he could no
 longer be fair and impartial. At trial, Arruda moved for a
 mistrial on the sole ground that the Family Court's actions in
 excusing Juror F would cause the remaining jurors to speculate
 about the reason Juror F was excused, which may influence the
 jury in some unknown manner. However, on appeal, Arruda raises a
 completely different ground, one that he did not argue at trial,
 in contending that the Family Court erred in failing to grant a
 mistrial. On appeal, Arruda argues that the Family Court should
 have granted a mistrial because the therapist's actions could
 have influenced and tainted the CW's testimony.
 
We conclude that Arruda waived this argument by failing
 
to raise it in the Family Court. Arruda had the opportunity to
 address any prejudice resulting from the therapist's actions
 during the trial. Having failed to pursue or take advantage of
 such opportunities at trial, Arruda is not entitled to relief on
 the new claim he raises on appeal.
 
A.
 
The factual background for Arruda's mistrial motion is
 
as follows. 
Shortly after defense counsel began his cross-
examination of the CW, the Family Court abruptly stopped the
 proceedings, held a short bench conference, and called a recess
 because it had just observed a person in the gallery pull out and
 brandish a stuffed animal. After the Family Court excused the
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
jury for lunch, the Family Court questioned the person who
 
disclosed that her name was Natalia Lopez (Lopez) and that she
 was the CW's therapist with Catholic Charities Hawaii.  When
 
asked why she had been brandishing a stuffed animal, Lopez
 
replied, "Comfort." The Family Court told Lopez to step outside
 the courtroom. The Family Court informed counsel: "All right. 
Counsel did not see it, but I saw it. She brought it out, she
 was waiving it in an attempt to show it to the witness. It
 lasted about 30 seconds, I believe. It was fairly brief." The
 Family Court banned Lopez from the proceedings, informed counsel
 that it planned to individually voir dire the jurors to see if
 any of them saw what happened, and then recessed for lunch. 
 
When the proceedings resumed after lunch, the Family
Court made the following statements on the record concerning the
 incident:
 

 
Please be seated. Let the record reflect the presence
of counsel and the defendant without the jury. All right.
I want to put on record exactly what I saw before I begin
speaking to the jurors 'cause I'm in the funny position of
being the only eyewitness to this, it seems.
 
The woman, I forget her name now, at issue though was
sitting in the second row on the right side of the courtroom
as I look out at the gallery. So I guess that would be the
left side looking at me. She was sitting right next to the
aisle. And she was there for most, if not all, of the
witness's testimony.
 
About no longer than a minute before I stopped the
proceedings, I saw her pull out of -- either she had it next
to her or she pulled it out of a bag. I'm not sure. But I
 didn't see it prior to that and then I saw it. And I wasn't
 even sure what it was at first except that it was very
colorful. And at first she sort of just held it in her lap.
And then shortly thereafter she held it in one hand and was
extending it into the aisle in what seemed to me an obvious
attempt to catch the attention of the witness. And at that
 time I also saw clearly that it was some kind of stuffed
animal. And that's when I stopped the proceedings. So
 that's the record as far as what I saw. All right?
 
The Family Court conducted an individual voir dire of
 
each juror. Most of the jurors stated that they either did not
 
look out into the gallery during the CW's testimony or, if they
 did, they did not notice anything unusual or noteworthy. The
 Family Court instructed each juror not to speculate on or think
 
22

  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
about the questions asked or discuss them with their fellow
 
jurors.
 
Four jurors observed the incident to varying degrees.
 
Juror R stated that he looked into the gallery because the CW
 appeared to be looking at someone in the gallery, but did not see
 anything in the gallery. 
Juror V stated that when the Family Court stopped the
 
proceedings, he looked into the gallery and believed that he saw
 a woman briefly take out a piece of cloth or fabric, "like a
 little flag or something." Juror V stated that the incident did
 not raise any thoughts in his mind and did not affect his ability
 to be a fair and impartial juror.
 
Juror K stated that when the Family Court stopped the
 
proceedings, he looked in the gallery and saw someone holding a
 doll or a stuffed animal. Juror K speculated that this person
 
was trying to get the CW's attention and "showing some kind of
 
support for the little girl." Juror K stated that he believed
 that the person's actions were foolish and were not part of the
 normal decorum of a courtroom. Juror K further stated that his
 observations would have no bearing on his job as a juror in
 evaluating the CW's credibility and that he had no doubt he could
 remain a fair and impartial juror in the case. 
Juror F informed the Family Court that "[r]ight before
 
when [the Family Court] called everybody up front," he looked out
 into the gallery. This was "pretty much" the only time he
 observed the gallery during the CW's testimony. Juror F stated
 that "just on a fast glance" he saw a lady sitting near the
 aisle, "[l]ike kind of talking like, but silently. . . . Like
 kind of coaching or something, I guess. I don't know." Although
 Juror F was not sure because his observations were based on a
 fast glance "on the side of [his] eyesight," he thought the lady
 was mouthing words to the CW.
16 He did not see anything in the
 
16Later, Juror F stated that he noticed the person in the gallery
mouthing words after the Family Court called counsel to the bench and did not
(continued...)
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
lady's hands. Based on his observations, Juror F thought that
 
"maybe" the person could have been coaching the witness on "the
 yes or no questions," but was "not really sure." He stated that
 he had doubts about the CW's answers on the yes-no questions and
 that he "probably" may not be fair and impartial.
 
When it completed voir dire, the Family Court noted
 
that Juror F's statements had "refreshed my recollection that in
 fact [Lopez] was mouthing words also . . . when I was watching
 her. She had that thing in her hand and she was mouthing words."
 The Family Court advised the parties that Juror F would be
 excused. The State moved to excuse Juror K, and Arruda objected. 
Arruda moved for a mistrial on the ground that the
 
removal of Juror F would cause the remaining jurors to speculate
 about the reason Juror F was excused, which may influence the
 jury in some unknown manner. Arruda stated the basis for his
 mistrial motion as follows:
 
[Defense counsel]:  I'm moving for a mistrial at this
point based on what has happened. 
I know that Your Honor
 
has --
THE COURT:  
Again, flesh that our for me. Why do I
have to mistry the case?
 
[Defense counsel]:  
I know that Your Honor has voir
 
dired each of the jurors, but to the extent that [Juror F
is] going to be gone and they all have an idea something
transpired, they don't know what, they've been told not to
speculate about it, but they're going to see a juror's now
gone. And I don't know what type of influence that's going
to have in their minds. They are at least aware something
occurred. Most of them didn't see anything, so they're not
going to know what. But they're aware that something must
have transpired, something suspicious happened, and now one
of the jurors is out. And I think it does call into
 question the credibility of the process itself.
 
The Family Court denied Arruda's motion for a mistrial, ruling
 
that it did not believe that a mistrial was "anywhere remotely
 necessary." The Family Court also denied the State's motion to
 excuse Juror K, and it noted that an alternate juror would be
 
16(...continued)
notice anything before the Family Court called counsel to the bench. 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
seated in place of Juror F. The Family Court asked both parties
 
whether they wanted to make any other record or request regarding
 its rulings, and both parties said no. 
When it recalled the jury, and before resuming the
 
trial, the Family Court made the following announcement:
 
And one more time, ladies and gentlemen. Let me tell
 
you don't speculate as to why [Juror F] is not going to be
with us any longer. It doesn't concern you and it's not a
matter that you should speculate about or that should play
any role in your consideration of this case. All right?
 
The trial then proceeded with defense counsel continuing his
 
cross-examination of the CW.
 
B.
 
On appeal, Arruda contends that the Family Court "erred 
in denying [his] motion for mistrial because the unknowable extent to which [the CW's] testimony had been influenced by her therapist mouthing words to her during her testimony irreparably tainted her entire testimony[.]" (Formatting altered.) Arruda did not raise this argument as a basis for his motion for a mistrial in the Family Court.
17 We conclude that Arruda waived 
this argument by failing to present it to the Family Court. See 
State v. Hoglund, 71 Haw. 147, 150, 785 P.2d 1311, 1313 (1990) ("Generally, the failure to properly raise an issue at the trial level precludes a party from raising that issue on appeal."); State v. Ildefonso, 72 Haw. 573, 584, 827 P.2d 648, 655 (1992) ("Our review of the record reveals that [the defendant] did not raise this argument at trial, and thus it is deemed to have been waived."); State v. Moses, 102 Hawai
'i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 
(2003) ("As a general rule, if a party does not raise an argument at trial, that argument will be deemed to have been waived on appeal[.]"); State v. Matias, 57 Haw. 96, 101, 550 P.2d 900, 904 
17As noted, at trial, the sole argument that Arruda raised in support of
his motion for a mistrial was that the Family Court's actions in excusing
Juror F would cause the remaining jurors to speculate about the reason Juror F
was excused and thereby influence the jury in some unknown manner. Arruda has
 apparently abandoned his trial argument, and he does not contend on appeal
that the Family Court erred in rejecting his trial argument in denying his
motion for a mistrial.
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1976) ("[T]here can be no doubt that the making of an objection
 
upon a specific ground is a waiver of all other objections."
 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)).
 
Our conclusion that Arruda waived his new argument is
 
particularly appropriate under the circumstances of this case. 
The record indicates that the therapist's actions in brandishing
 a stuffed animal to attract the CW's attention and apparently
 mouthing words were very brief and quickly stopped by the Family
 Court. The Family Court stated that it saw the therapist pull
 out the stuffed animal "[a]bout no longer than a minute" before
 it stopped the proceedings and that the period of time during
 which it observed the therapist waiving the stuffed animal in an
 attempt to show it to the CW was brief, lasting about thirty
 seconds. Juror F stated that "[r]ight before" the Family Court
 stopped the proceedings, he looked out into the gallery and, at a
 fast glance, saw a lady appear to be mouthing words, which led
 Juror F to think that maybe the lady could have been coaching the
 CW on yes or no questions. Although defense counsel's cross-
examination, which had just begun, consisted primarily of leading
 yes or no questions, the CW's direct examination, and in
 particular her description of the sexual assaults, required the
 CW to provide details that went beyond answering yes or no to the
 questions posed. Thus, the record does not indicate that the
 therapist's actions had any ability to influence the CW's
 testimony in any meaningful manner. 
In addition, although Arruda contends that a mistrial
 
was required because of the "unknowable extent" to which the CW's
 testimony had been influenced by the therapist's actions, Arruda
 made no attempt at trial to determine whether the therapist's
 actions had any influence on the CW's testimony or to address any
 alleged prejudice resulting from the therapist's actions. If
 Arruda believed that the therapist had improperly influenced the
 CW's testimony, he could have asked the Family Court to permit
 him to interview the therapist to explore this issue. He then
 could have called the therapist as a witness if he believed the
 
26
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
therapist's testimony would have been helpful. Arruda could have
 
cross-examined the CW on whether the therapist had "coached" the
 CW or about what influence, if any, the therapist's actions had
 on the CW's testimony. He also could have sought other means of
 introducing evidence of the therapist's actions if he believed it
 would advance his defense. Instead, Arruda did not pursue any of
 these actions but rather attempts to rely on the "unknowable
 extent" to which the therapist's actions might have influenced
 the CW's testimony. We conclude, under the circumstances
 presented, that Arruda is not entitled to relief on his newly
 raised argument.
18
 
III.
 
At trial, Arruda objected when the State asked the
 
Family Court to instruct the jury on the lesser-included offense
 of third-degree sexual assault with respect to Counts 2 and 4.
19
 
Defense counsel represented to the Family Court that he did not
 see a basis for the lesser-included offense instruction on these
 counts, stating: "I don't see it. I don't[,]
" and he responded
 
"Yes" when the Family Court asked if he objected to such an
 instruction. Nevertheless, on appeal, Arruda contends that the
 Family Court erred in failing to instruct the jury on the lesser-
included offense of third-degree sexual assault with respect to
 Counts 2 and 4.
 
We conclude that assuming arguendo that the Family
 
Court erred in failing to give a lesser-included offense
 
18Arruda's contention that the Family Court erred in excusing Juror F
because he had relevant information on which to evaluate the CW's testimony is
without merit. Arruda agreed with the Family Court's decision to excuse Juror
F. When the Family Court asked counsel whether they had any problem with
discharging Juror F, Arruda's counsel responded, "Based on his testimony, it
has to happen." Moreover, Juror F's observations of the therapist's actions
while the therapist was in the gallery were not part of the evidence admitted
at trial. It was not an abuse of discretion for the Family Court to determine
that Juror F and the other jurors should limit their consideration to the
evidence presented at trial. 
19The prosecutor stated that there was a basis in Arruda's statements in
his second recorded interview with Detective Nakasone for an instruction on
 the lesser-included offense of third-degree sexual assault with respect to
Counts 2 and 4. 
27
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
instruction on Counts 2 and 4, any such error was harmless beyond 
a reasonable doubt and did not contribute to Arruda's convictions. Although the tests for giving a lesser-included offense instruction and harmless error are similar, they are not the same. The test for giving a lesser-included offense instruction focuses on whether under "any view of the evidence[,]" there is a rational basis for the jury to acquit on the charged offense and convict on the lesser-included offense. State v. Flores, 131 Hawai
'i 43, 53, 314 P.3d 120, 130 (2013). 
On the other hand, the harmless error test focuses on the effect of the error in light of the entire proceedings and the record as a whole in determining whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error in omitting the lesser-included offense instruction may have contributed to the conviction. State v. 
Rapoza, 95 Hawai
'i 321, 326, 22 P.3d 968, 973 (2001). 
In Flores, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court overruled the 
portion of State v. Haanio, 94 Hawai 'i 405, 16 P.3d 246 (2001), 
that had previously held that an error in failing to instruct on a lesser-included offense was always harmless error when the jury convicted of the charged offense. Flores, 131 Hawai
'i at 44, 314 
P.3d at 121. We assume that the supreme court would have spoken with greater clarity if it intended to change the law from an error in failing to instruct on a lesser-included offense always being harmless error to always being harmful error that requires the conviction to be vacated.
20 
20We note that in Flores, the supreme court concluded that "[t]he
failure to instruct the jury on a lesser included offense for which the
evidence provides a rational basis warrants vacation of [Flores's]conviction." Flores, 131 Hawai' i at 58, 314 P.3d at 135. However, more
recently, in State v. Kaeo, 132 Hawai' i 451, 460-61, 323 P.3d 95, 104-05
(2014), the supreme court stated: 
Pursuant to Flores, if assault in the first degree is a lesser
included offense of murder in the second degree, and there was a
rational basis in the evidence for acquitting [Kaeo] of murder in
the second degree and convicting him of the included offense of
assault in the first degree, then the court's failure to instruct
on the included offense is subject to a harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt standard.
 
(continued...)
 
28
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A.
 
We conclude that viewing the Family Court's alleged
 
error in the context of the entire proceedings and the record as
 
a whole, any error in failing to instruct on the lesser-included
 offense of third-degree sexual assault as to Counts 2 and 4 did
 not contribute to Arruda's convictions.
 
Arruda was charged with first-degree sexual assault for
 
inserting his penis (Count 2) and inserting his finger (Count 4)
 into the CW's genital opening. First-degree sexual assault
 requires "sexual penetration," which is defined, in relevant
 part, to mean:
 
Vaginal intercourse, anal intercourse, fellatio, deviate
sexual intercourse, or any intrusion of any part of a
person's body or of any object into the genital or anal
opening of another person's body; it occurs upon any
penetration, however slight, but emission is not required.
As used in this definition, "genital opening" includes the
anterior surface of the vulva or labia majora[.] 
HRS § 707-700 (2014) (emphasis added). Third-degree sexual
 
assault requires "sexual contact," which is defined, in relevant
 part, to mean "any touching, other than acts of 'sexual
 penetration', of the sexual or other intimate parts of a person
 not married to the actor, or of the sexual or other intimate
 parts of the actor by the person[.]" Id.
 
In this case, the evidence that Arruda had engaged in 
"any penetration, however slight," of the CW's genital opening
 with his penis and finger as respectively charged in Counts 2 and
 4 was strong and compelling. The CW testified that while in the
 bathroom, with the door closed, Arruda "put his private into my
 punani"; that this felt "[s]ore"; that Arruda's "private" was
 "[h]ard"; and that "[w]hite stuff" came out of Arruda's "private"
 and went onto the floor and the CW's body. To show what she
 meant by "punani," the CW colored in the genital area of a
 diagram of a girl. To show what she meant by "his private," the
 
20(...continued)
(Emphasis added.) Kaeo indicates that standards for giving a lesser-included
offense instruction and for harmless error are different.
 
29
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
CW colored in the penis of a diagram of a man. The CW testified
 
that Arruda put his finger inside her "punani" and "[h]e rubbed
 it up and down," which made her feel "[h]urtful." 
The CW also testified that Arruda put his "private"
 
into her "butt hole," which made her feel "[s]ore" and made her
 cry, that Arruda made her suck on his "private" "like a
 lollipop," and that "white stuff" came out, which she spit out in
 the sink and then washed her mouth. The CW testified that the
 sexual assaults happened multiple times and occurred in the
 bathroom, Arruda's bedroom, the kids' bedroom, the livingroom,
 and the kitchen. 
The CW's brother corroborated the CW's testimony. The
 
CW's brother testified that he would see Arruda and the CW go
 into the bathroom, and the door would be closed. He heard his
 sister screaming in the bathroom on many occasions, and he could
 also hear Arruda telling her to be quiet. The CW's brother
 testified that the CW told him that Arruda "raped her." 
In addition, Arruda's statements and confessions to the
 
police provided powerful corroboration and confirmation of the
 CW's testimony. The jury saw the DVD of Arruda's first interview
 with Detective Nakasone. While Arruda did not explicitly admit
 the sexual assaults during this interview, his reaction to
 Detective Nakasone's statements provided dramatic evidence of his
 consciousness of guilt. In response to Detective Nakasone
 telling Arruda that the investigation clearly showed that he had
 sex with the CW, Arruda covered his face with his hands, began
 sobbing and crying, and repeatedly moaned, "Oh God" and "Oh my
 God." 
Arruda also explicitly admitted the CW's allegations of
 
sexual assault and sexual penetration to Detective Doole and
 separately to Detective Nakasone in the second recorded
 interview. Arruda confessed to Detective Doole that the CW had
 told the truth about Arruda putting his penis inside the CW's
 mouth and genital opening, putting his finger inside the CW's
 genital opening, and ejaculating in her presence. In his second
 
30
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
recorded interview with Detective Nakasone, Arruda described the
 
circumstances surrounding three separate acts of sexual
 penetration: inserting his finger in the CW's genital opening in
 the shower; inserting his penis in the CW's mouth in a bedroom;
 and inserting his penis in the CW's genital opening in her
 bedroom. The State also introduced compelling evidence of
 Arruda's sexual penetration through Arruda's own markings on
 drawings of a hand and penis made during his interviews with
 Detective Doole and Detective Nakasone. Through these markings,
 Arruda showed how far he admitted to inserting his penis into the
 CW's genital opening and mouth and how far he admitted to
 inserting his finger into the CW's genital opening. 
In the face of this evidence, Arruda theory of defense
 
was not that he engaged in sexual contact short of penetration,
 but rather Arruda strongly denied the CW's allegations of sexual
 assault. His theory was that the CW fabricated the allegations
 because she was jealous of the greater attention that Arruda and
 his wife were paying to the CW's brother and their son. Arruda
 testified that his confessions to Detective Doole and Detective
 Nakasone were false and that he falsely confessed because he just
 wanted to go home. In his testimony, Arruda also denied the
 specific allegation of sexual assault set forth in each count of
 the indictment. After the close of the evidence, Arruda's
 counsel represented to the Family Court that he did not see any
 basis in the evidence for a lesser-included offense instruction
 on Counts 2 and 4, and in closing argument, defense counsel
 argued that Arruda "never touched [the CW] in a sexual manner."
 
B.
 
Arruda's claim of instructional error is based on two
 
short excerpts from his second recorded interview with Detective
 Nakasone. In the first excerpt, Arruda argues that he is saying
 that his finger and penis were "right there," that is, not inside
 
31
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the CW's genital opening.21 In the second excerpt, Arruda
 
asserts that he is telling Detective Nakasone that his finger
 
"didn't go inside" the CW's genital opening.22
 
21The first excerpt referenced by Arruda contains the following
statements:
 
Q	 And then how far when you're . . . How . . . I know you
showed on your finger, but, so if you -- if, let's say this
was the -- this was the -- the lips of the vagina, like how,
can you show me how . . .
 
A 	Just like right there.

 
Q 
	Okay.
 
A	 It didn't -­
Q 	Didn't go all the way.

 
A 
	-- didn't get anything, it didn't go through, it was just
right there.
 
Q And that was with the penis, right?
 
A Yes.
 
Q And the finger one about how . . .
 
A Only right there, was just right by her clitoris and stuff,
right there.
 
22The second excerpt referenced by Arruda contains the following
statements:
 
Q Just so that I have it clear, the first time was when she
was taking a shower.
 
A Yes, you know, I just put my finger here.
 
Q It was -- 'cause she was -- she had her hair soaped and then
. . .
 
A And then I was holding her hair and then . . .
 
Q Just got a little aroused by it.
 
A Yeah.
 Q And then, okay.
 
A I just (inaudible).
 
Q Okay, that was real quick then?
 
(continued...)
 
32

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We conclude that these two brief excerpts pale in
 
comparison to the strong and compelling evidence of penetration
 
presented at trial. Given the powerful evidence of Arruda's
 guilt, including his separate confessions to two HPD detectives,
 his recorded interviews, and his own markings on drawings showing
 the extent to which his penis and finger penetrated the CW's
 genital opening, and the nature of Arruda's defense, we conclude
 that any error in the Family Court's failure to give a lesser-
included offense instruction with respect to Counts 2 and 4 was
 harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. There is no reasonable
 possibility that any error by the Family Court in failing to give
 a lesser-included offense instruction on third-degree sexual
 assault may have contributed to Arruda's convictions on these
 counts. 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Family Court's 
Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 4, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Phyllis J. Hironaka
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Brian R. Vincent Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
22(...continued)
A Yeah.
 
Q Okay, and it didn't go inside, right, you said -­
A No.
 
Q -- was just on the outside.
 
A No, no, no.
 
Although Arruda is repeatedly saying "no" at the end of this passage, it
appears upon listening to the recording that he is agreeing with Detective
Nakasone's statement that "it didn't go inside[.]"
 
 
33
 