NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000670 14-APR-2026 07:51 AM Dkt. 97 MO 
NO. CAAP-23-0000670 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI#I 
ANN SAKAGUCHI, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI#I; DENISE KONAN,
individually and in her capacity as Dean of the
University of Hawai# i at Mânoa College of Social Sciences,
Defendants-Appellees,
and DOE INDIVIDUALS AND ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CC181000321) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Nakasone, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Ann 
Sakaguchi appeals from the Final Judgment for the 
University of Hawai#i (UH) and Denise Konan, entered by the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit.1 
We hold: (1) Sakaguchi's claim for intentional 
infliction of emotional distress was barred by the exclusive 
remedy provision of the Workers' Compensation Law; (2) claims 
based on separate, distinguishable violations of the Hawai#i 
Whistleblowers' Protection Act (HWPA) that occurred over two 
years before she sued were time-barred, but claims for alleged 
violations that occurred within the two years before she sued, and her claims for pay differential and earning disparity beginning two years before she sued, were not time-barred; (3)(a) 
her claim for not being named department chair was not subject to 
1 The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a collective bargaining agreement and should have been allowed, 
but only for pay differential beginning two years before she sued, and (b) her earning disparity claim was subject to a 
collective bargaining agreement, but should have been allowed 
under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 378-66(b), and limited to 
disparity beginning two years before she sued; and (4) the 
Circuit Court did not err by granting summary judgment for UH on 
claims (other than for pay differential and earning disparity) based on alleged HWPA violations that occurred within two years before she filed her complaint. 
We affirm the Final Judgment in part and vacate it in 
part, and remand for further proceedings. 
I. BACKGROUND 
Sakaguchi sued UH and Konan on February 28, 2018. 
Konan was sued as an individual and as Dean of the University of Hawai#i M
 ânoa College of Social Sciences. Sakaguchi's amended 
complaint asserted four claims: (1) violation of HRS § 378-62 (part of the HWPA); (2) tortious interference with prospective economic/business advantage; (3) interference with prospective contractual relations; and (4) intentional infliction of emotional distress (
IIED). 
Claims 2 and 3 were dismissed by stipulation. In a 
series of orders, the Circuit Court dismissed or entered summary judgment against Sakaguchi on Claim 1 (HWPA) and Claim 4 (IIED). The Final Judgment was entered on October 9, 2023. This appeal followed. Only the HWPA and IIED claims against UH are at issue.
 2
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Sakaguchi contends  the Circuit Court erred by: 
(1)
 dismissing her IIED claim based on the workers' compensation 
exclusive remedy statute, HRS § 386-5; (2) dismissing her "Pre-3
2 Sakaguchi has not appealed the summary judgment on her HWPA claim,
or the dismissal of her IIED claim, against Konan. 
3 We have re-ordered and partially consolidated Sakaguchi's points
of error. 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
February 28, 2016 Retaliatory Claims" based on the statute of 
limitations and treating UH's statute of limitations defense as a jurisdictional issue; (3) entering summary judgment for failure 
to exhaust her remedies under the University of Hawai# i 
Professional Assembly collective bargaining agreements (CBAs); 
and 
(4) granting summary judgment on her post-February 28, 2016 
HWPA claims. 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Motion to Dismiss 
Orders granting motions to dismiss are reviewed de 
novo
. Kealoha v. Machado, 131 Hawai# i 62, 74, 315 P.3d 213, 225 
(2013). 
We assume the facts alleged in the complaint are true 
and view them in the light most favorable to the plaintiff to see 
if they warrant relief under any legal theory. Id.We are not 
required to accept conclusions about the legal effect of the facts alleged, id., but we bear in mind that Hawai# i is a notice-
pleading jurisdiction where legal theories need not be pleaded with precision, Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 143 Hawai# i 
249, 259, 428 P.3d 761, 771 (2018), overruled on other grounds by Wilmington Savs. Fund Soc'y v. Domingo, 155 Hawai# i 1, 556 P.3d 
347 (2024). 
B. Motion for Summary Judgment 
We review a grant of summary judgment de novo. Ralston 
v. Yim, 129 Hawai#i 46, 55, 292 P.3d 1276, 1285 (2013). Summary 
judgment is appropriate if the evidence shows there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Id. A fact is material if proof of that fact would establish or refute an essential element of a party's cause of action or defense. Id. at 55–56, 292 P.3d at 1285–86. The evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Id. at 56, 292 P.3d at 1286. 
"[F]indings of fact made by a trial court in relation 
to a summary judgment ruling are not binding on appeal, nor do 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
they alter our de novo standard of review regarding a summary 
judgment ruling." Hilo Bay Marina, LLC v. State, 156 Hawai# i 
478, 487, 575 P.3d 568, 577 (2025). 
IV. DISCUSSION 
A. Sakaguchi's IIED claim, which was not based
on sexual harassment or sexual assault, wasbarred by HRS § 386-5. 
Sakaguchi was employed by UH. UH moved to dismiss her 
IIED claim,  arguing it was barred by the 
4Hawai#i Workers 
Compensation Law's exclusive remedy provision. The motion was 
filed under Hawai# i
 Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 12(b)(6) 
and presented no evidence outside the pleadings. Sakaguchi's opposition presented no evidence outside the pleadings. We disregard the declarations and exhibits attached to UH's reply memorandum. 
HRS § 386-5 (2015) provides: 
The rights and remedies herein granted to an employee . . .
on account of a work injury suffered by the employee shallexclude all other liability of the employer to the employee,. . . at common law or otherwise, on account of the injury,except for sexual harassment or sexual assault andinfliction of emotional distress  or invasion of privacy
related thereto , in which case a civil action may also be
brought. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The supreme court has held: 
Based on a plain reading, HRS § 386-5 unambiguously
provides that claims for infliction of emotional distress. . . are not subject to the exclusivity provision when suchclaims arise from claims for sexual harassment  or sexual 
assault, in which case a civil action may be brought.
Inasmuch as [plaintiff] has alleged a claim for emotionaldistress, that does not arise out of sexual harassment or 
sexual assault, such claim is, pursuant to HRS § 386-5,barred. 
4 A plaintiff claiming IIED must show that the defendant's conduct:
(1) was intentional or reckless; (2) was outrageous; and (3) caused extremeemotional distress. Goran Pleho, LLC v. Lacy, 144 Hawai i # 224, 237, 439 P.3d
176, 189 (2019). The term "outrageous" has been construed to mean "withoutjust cause or excuse and beyond all bounds of decency." Id.
4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai# i 92, 109, 
176 P.3d 91, 108 (2008) (bold italics added). 
Here, the allegations in Sakaguchi's amended complaint, 
viewed in the light most favorable to her, do not allege she was 
sexually harassed or sexually assaulted. 
Sakaguchi argues HRS § 386-5 does not bar her IIED 
claim because her amended complaint alleged she was discriminated against "after she complained about suspected Equal Pay Act violations[.]" She relies on Furukawa v. Honolulu Zoological Society, 85 Hawai# i 7, 936 P.2d 643 (1997) and Takaki v. Allied 
Machinery Corp., 87 Hawaii # 57, 951 P.2d 507 (App. 1998). 
The claims in Furukawa were for discriminatory 
employment practices in violation of HRS § 378-2 (Supp. 1996).
5 
The Hawai# i Civil Rights Commission (HCRC) has jurisdiction over 
claims under HRS § 378-2. See HRS § 378-4 (Supp. 1996 & 2015). 
The supreme court actually ruled: "The law is explicit that 'a workers' compensation claim or remedy does not bar relief on claims filed with the [HCRC].'" 85 Hawai# i at 19, 936 P.2d at 
655 (quoting HRS § 368–17(b)). Sakaguchi's amended complaint does not allege that UH violated HRS § 378-2. 
Takaki also involved an alleged violation of HRS 
§ 378-2. There, we held that "
Furukawa would permit Takaki to 
maintain an action against Appellees for intentional infliction of emotional distress caused by terminating him in violation of HRS § 378–2." 87 
Hawai#i at 68, 951 P.2d at 518. 
5 HRS § 378-2 (Supp. 1996) provided, in relevant part: 
It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice: 
(1) Because of race, sex, sexual orientation, age,
religion, color, ancestry, disability, maritalstatus, or arrest and court record: 
(A) For any employer to refuse to hire or
employ or to bar or discharge fromemployment, or otherwise to discriminateagainst any individual in compensation orin the terms, conditions, or privileges ofemployment[.] 
Furukawa
, 85 Hawai #i at 9 n.1, 936 P.2d at 645 n.1. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Sakaguchi's amended complaint did not allege she was 
discriminated against in violation of HRS § 378-2. It alleged 
she was discriminated against, in violation of the HWPA, because she complained about UH violating the Equal Pay Act. Her IIED claim against UH was barred by HRS § 386-5.  Kamaka, 117 Hawai# i 
at 109, 176 P.3d at 108. 
6
B. The Circuit Court lacked jurisdiction over
Sakaguchi's claims based on separate,distinguishable HWPA violations that occurredbefore February 28, 2016; her claims for paydifferential and earning disparity afterFebruary 28, 2016 are not time-barred. 
Sakaguchi filed her complaint on February 28, 2018. UH 
moved for summary judgment on the HWPA claims that accrued before 
February 28, 2016. UH relied on the HRS § 661-5 two-year statute of limitations. The Circuit Court treated the motion as one to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction,  and granted it. 
7
Sakaguchi argues that the Circuit Court erred by basing 
its ruling on lack of jurisdiction, and that her claims for pre-February 28, 2016 discrimination were not time-barred under the continuing tort doctrine. 
HRS § 378-62 (2015) provides, in relevant part: 
An employer shall not discharge, threaten, or otherwise
discriminate against an employee regarding the employee'scompensation, terms, conditions, location, or privileges ofemployment because: 
(1) The employee . . . reports or is about to reportto the employer, or reports or is about toreport to a public body, verbally or in writing,a violation or a suspected violation of: 
(A) A law, rule, ordinance, or regulation,
adopted pursuant to law of this State, apolitical subdivision of this State, orthe United States; or 
6 Sakaguchi did not argue, to the Circuit Court or on appeal, that
she asserted an IIED claim against Konan under HRS § 386-8(k). 
7 A court deciding an HRCP Rule 12(b)(1) motion to dismiss for lack
of subject matter jurisdiction may review evidence outside the pleadings toresolve factual disputes over the existence of jurisdiction. Yamane v. 
Pohlson, 111 Hawai #i 74, 81, 137 P.3d 980, 987 (2006). 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(B) A contract executed by the State, a
political subdivision of the State, or theUnited States, 
unless the employee knows that the report isfalse[.] 
The HWPA is a remedial statute, liberally construed to 
accomplish the purpose for which it was enacted. Crosby v. Dep't 
of Budget & Fin., 76 Hawai# i 332, 341–42, 876 P.2d 1300, 1309–10 
(1994). Sakaguchi has the burden to prove she engaged in 
protected conduct, and that it was a "substantial or motivating factor" for UH engaging in prohibited conduct. Id.
 at 342, 876 
P.2d at 1310. If she sustains her burden of proof, the "employer can defend affirmatively by showing that the [prohibited conduct] would have occurred regardless of the protected activity." Id. 
(1) HRS § 661-5 imposes a jurisdictional
limitation on the State's consent to be sued. 
UH is a department of the State. 
HRS § 26-4(7) (2009). 
It is an "employer" under the HWPA. HRS § 378-61 (2015). The 
circuit courts have jurisdiction over HWPA claims against UH under HRS § 304A-108(a)
8 (2007) and HRS § 661-1(1) (2016). "HRS 
§ 661-1 . . . contains a limited waiver of sovereign immunity for claims against the State of 
Hawai#i that are founded upon a 
statute[.]" Garner v. State
, 122 Hawai#i 150, 160, 223 P.3d 215, 
225 (App. 2009). 
HRS § 661-5 (2016) provides, in relevant part: 
Every claim against the State, cognizable under this part,
shall be forever barred unless the action is commenced within two years after the claim first accrues[.] 
8 HRS § 304A-108(a) (2007) provides, in relevant part: 
Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, all claims
arising out of the acts or omissions of the university . . .its officers, or its employees, including claims permittedagainst the State under chapter 661, part I, . . . may bebrought only pursuant to this section and only against theuniversity. . . . All defenses available to the State, aswell as all limitations on actions against the State, shallbe applicable to the university. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
An HWPA claim accrues when the employee knows or should 
have known, Blair v. Ing, 95 Hawai# i 247, 264, 21 P.3d 452, 469 
(2001), that their employer has taken adverse action because of 
the employee's protected activity, 
Andrade v. County of Hawai# i, 
145 Hawai# i 265, 277, 451 P.3d 1, 13 (App. 2019). 
The legislature did not consent to UH being sued for 
violating the HWPA over two years after the claim first accrued. The time bar is jurisdictional. Cf. Okutsu v. State, 153 Hawai# i 
192, 196, 528 P.3d 956, 960 (App. 2023) (holding that State Tort Liability Act statute of limitations, HRS § 662-4 (2016), "is a term of the legislature's consent for the State to be sued in tort"). 
Thus, if a lawsuit alleging UH violated the HWPA is 
filed "more than two years after the claim accrued, state courts have no subject matter jurisdiction over the claim." Cf. id. at 
199, 528 P.3d at 963. 
(2) The Circuit Court lacked jurisdiction
over HWPA claims based on separate,distinguishable violations that occurredbefore February 28, 2016. 
Sakaguchi does not controvert that she knew, before 
February 28, 2016, that she was excluded from specific grant 
applications, funding opportunities, projects, meetings, conferences, legislative hearings, and initiatives. 
The Circuit 
Court lacked jurisdiction over the HWPA claims based on those alleged violations. The Circuit Court also lacked jurisdiction over Sakaguchi's claim based on Konan allegedly threatening to take away her project space and causing her computer servers to become intermittently inaccessible in 2015. 
The continuous tort doctrine does not apply to those 
claims under the circumstances of this case, because Sakaguchi alleged a series of separate, distinguishable violations by UH and Konan. See Boyd v. Univ. of Haw., No. 30547, 2012 WL 503797, 
at *3 (Haw. App. Feb. 13, 2012) (mem. op.) (holding that continuous tort doctrine did not apply where HWPA claimant alleged "a series of separate and distinguishable acts"), cert. rejected, No. SCWC-30547, 2012 WL 2026001 (Haw. June 4, 2012). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) Sakaguchi's claims for pay differential
and earning disparity after February 28,2016 are not time-barred. 
Sakaguchi's amended complaint alleged that her 
Department of Anthropology colleagues recommended she become 
department chair in February 2014, but Konan rejected the recommendation, which deprived her of a pay increase. 
Although the alleged HWPA violation occurred over two 
years before Sakaguchi sued UH, the statute of limitations for her periodic pay claim begins to run on each paycheck as it becomes due. Garner, 122 Hawai# i at 169, 223 P.3d at 234. 
Sakaguchi's claim for pay differential (for being wrongfully not selected department chair) before February 28, 2016 is barred by HRS § 661-5, but her claim for additional pay due from February 28, 2016 onward is not time-barred. Id.
Sakaguchi's amended complaint also alleged: 
37. Despite Dr. Sakaguchi's contributions,
experience, and state, national and international
recognition in her field, her earnings are near the bottom10th percentile compared to similarly situated UHM faculty,who are paid at rates in the 75th percentile or higher. 
The claim for earnings disparity after February 28, 
2016, caused by UH's violation of the HWPA is not time-barred. 
Garner
, 122 Hawai#i at 169, 223 P.3d at 234. 
C. Sakaguchi's claim for not being named
department chair was not subject to a CBA;her claim for earnings disparity was subjectto a CBA but was actionable under HRS § 378-66. 
UH argued that Sakaguchi "fail[ed] to exhaust all 
administrative remedies with respect to submitting a request for 
pay increases for merit, equity or market as a Special Salary Adjustment ("SSA") pursuant to the Collective Bargaining Agreement ("CBA") between the University of 
Hawai#i Professional 
Assembly and the University of Hawai# i Board of Regents." Copies 
of the CBAs were appended to UH's motion for summary judgment. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
UH argues that Sakaguchi "could have submitted an SSA 
request if she sought an increase in her salary from the 
University based on merit and equity principles." But Sakaguchi's amended complaint did not allege she was entitled to, or wrongfully deprived of, an SSA based on merit, equity, or market. Her claim for back- and front-pay was made under HRS § 378-64, as a remedy for Konan wrongfully rejecting her colleagues' recommendation she be named department chair. The CBAs do not provide for an award of back- or front-pay for UH's violation of the HWPA. The exhaustion-of-administrative-remedies requirement does not apply to that claim. 
Sakaguchi's earnings disparity claim is covered by the 
CBAs. But HRS § 378-66 (2015) provides, in relevant part: 
(b) . . . Where a collective bargaining agreement
provides inferior rights and remedies to those provided in
this subpart, the provisions of this subpart shall supersedeand take precedence over the rights, remedies, andprocedures provided in collective bargaining agreements. 
The HWPA provides remedies including "injunctive 
relief, or actual damages, or both within two years after the 
occurrence of the alleged violation[,]" HRS § 378-63(a) (2015), and "payment of back wages, full reinstatement of fringe benefits and seniority rights, actual damages, or any combination of these remedies. . . . [and] all or a portion of the costs of litigation, including reasonable attorney's fees and witness fees," HRS § 378-64 (2015). Sakaguchi was not required to exhaust the remedies available to her under the CBAs before proceeding with her earnings disparity claim under the HWPA, which provides rights and remedies superior to those provided by the CBAs. 
D. The Circuit Court did not err by granting
summary judgment for UH on Sakaguchi's otherpost-February 28, 2016 HWPA claims. 
UH moved for summary judgment on Sakaguchi's remaining 
HWPA claims — those based on alleged violations occurring after 
February 28, 2016. Because Sakaguchi had the burden of proof at 
10  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial, Crosby, 76 Hawai# i at 342, 876 P.2d at 1310, UH had the 
burden to show (1) there was no genuine issue of material fact on 
the essential elements of the claim addressed by the motion, and (2) the uncontroverted facts entitled it to judgment as a matter of law. Ralston, 129 
Hawai#i at 56, 292 P.3d at 1286. 
If UH satisfied its burden, Sakaguchi had to 
"demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial." 
Ralston, 129 
Hawai#i at 56-57, 292 P.3d at 1286-87. 
UH's motion dealt with nine alleged violations of the 
HWPA that occurred after February 28, 2016.
(1) Sakaguchi claimed to have been "excluded" from the 
Pacific Pandemic Preparedness Hui workshop in March 2016. 
Her 
response to a UH interrogatory stated: 
I am talking about the Pacific Pandemic Preparedness
Conference that has been noted in our previous documents.This conference was held on March 14-15, 2016 in SaundersHall in the same building that my office is in, four floorsabove, in the SSRI office. She was the opening speakerbecause it is in the Social Sciences building, however, andnot because of her expertise. I had designed pandemic avianinfluenza training and worked with the College of TropicalAgriculture in 2006 and am probably the only one in myCollege with that experience. I thought I could havebenefited [sic] from attending and contributed to thedialogue. My colleagues in the field from out-of-statevisited me at my office so we could walk together to theconference, not knowing that I had not even been invited bythe College to attend. They were surprised. However, theyinformed me that they paid several hundred dollars inconference fees to attend but were required to write partsof the grant and a matching powerpoint [sic] presentationfor Kim to obtain funding from a granting agency for twodays. 
In September 2016, Konan states she was a co-organizer
and the event was public so anyone could attend. She misses the point. There was a fair day dedicated to preparednesswhere disaster information and documents were shared. NDPTC [(the National Disaster Preparedness Training Center)] andothers were present at the fair. I was unable to participate in the fair and share my work, which would helppublicize my program. Konan continues to involve only Kimwhile denying all opportunities for me to participate in
this field at the college and campus level. 
UH submitted Konan's declaration, which stated that 
Sakaguchi "was never intentionally excluded from any workshop, 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
projects or opportunities between 2016 between [sic] March 2016 
to October 14, 2018 as she alleges." Konan specifically stated: 
5. With respect to the March 2016 Pacific Pandemic
Preparedness Health Hui workshop at [sic] occurred at the
Saunders Building at the University of Hawaii at Manoa, Iwas invited to give some opening remarks in my capacity asthe Dean of the College of Social Sciences by the PacificRisk Management Ohana (also known as PRiMO), but was notinvolved in organizing this two day event or inviting theparticipants who were members of PRiMO as it was beingcoordinated by Gregg Nakano whose organization I understoodextended invitations to individuals who had maintained and/or requested a professional affiliation with ormembership in PriMO. This would apply to the October 4,2018 Pacific Pandemic Preparedness Summit (1918 Centennial)which was organized by PRiMO over which I had absolutely noinvolvement, participation, or control over any invitationsto that event to PRiMO members. 
Konan's declaration satisfied UH's burden of production 
under Ralston. 
Sakaguchi submitted a declaration in opposition. It 
stated: 
14. In March 2016, I was excluded from a special
workshop held at UH entitled the Pacific PandemicPreparedness Hui that was organized by the Pacific RiskManagement Ohana, even though the subject matter of theworkshop was directly related to my Pacific EMPRINTS work.Defendant Konan was a key speaker at this workshop. 
. . . . 
34. Defendant Konan continues to engage in
gaslighting. Certain faculty members of the College of
Social Sciences were personally invited to the March 2016Health [sic] Hui workshop, whereas I was not, even though myprogram, Pacific EMPRINTS, provided training in pandemicsand is recognized at the nationa1 level for this training. 
35. The UN-UH Pacific Preparedness Summit in October
2018 is a collaboration on Human Security Studies degreeprogram. Denise Konan claims it involved PRIMO. It is a degree program therefore the UH is involved. PRIMO is involved with natural hazards in the Pacific Island communities. 
. . . . 
38. . . . Not informing me of workshops . . . denies
me the chance to participate as an expert in workshops
relevant to my field, and diminishes my reputation in thefield that I have built up. 
Sakaguchi did not show specific material facts by, for 
example, submitting declarations from other faculty members 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stating Konan had invited them to the March 2016 Pacific Pandemic 
Preparedness Hui workshop but said to not include Sakaguchi. She did not sustain her burden to "demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial." Ralston, 129 Hawai# i at 56-57, 292 P.3d at 
1286-87. 
(2) Sakaguchi claimed to have been "excluded" from the 
Great Tsunami in Japan Conference in September 2016. UH submitted a declaration from its College of Social Sciences Systems Manager, Harry Partika, stating that on September 7, 
2016, he "transmitted a College of Social Sciences' Event Notice 
on 'The Great Tsunami in Japan['] documentary premiere scheduled for September 17, 2016 to the entire faculty of the College of Social Sciences which included Ann Sakaguchi." 
Sakaguchi did not deny receiving Partika's event 
notice. Her declaration in opposition stated: "In September 2016, I was excluded from the Great Tsunami in Japan Conference held at UH which I understand was organized in part by Defendant Konan." This general allegation did not present a genuine issue of material fact about whether UH excluded her from the event. 
(3) Sakaguchi claimed to have been "excluded" from 
(a) a 2016 Lloyd's Register Foundation event, (b) public hearings on Senate Bill No. 257 and House Bill No. 2582, and (c) an April 2018 Memorandum of Understanding between the Commander of the United States Navy Pacific Command and the UH President.
(a) Konan's declaration stated: 
6. As for [Sakaguchi]'s claim that she was
personally excluded from the Lloyd's Register Foundation
("Foundation") in March 2016, there was no workshop and mysole involvement in 2016 was responding to a March 9, 2016email from Michael Bruno stating that he had personal hopesthat University of Hawai #i could obtain "some funding from
Lloyd's to convene a workshop and jump-start this activityat UH." In my email to Michael Bruno, I had attached aUniversity of Hawai #i Disaster Risk Reduction & Resiliency
Landscape Assessment that included [Sakaguchi]'sbiographical information as the Director of Pacific EMPRINTSand her role in emergency management and preparedness. But there was no activity on March 9, 2016 that [Sakaguchi] wasexcluded or denied an opportunity from and there were nogrant or funding opportunities offered by this Foundation in2016 that I am aware of. 
13  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
UH Mânoa Provost Michael S. Bruno submitted a 
declaration stating: 
10. I am also personally familiar with the Lloyd's
Register Foundation ("Foundation") as I served as the Chair
of the Advisory Board and do remember passing alonginformation about the Foundation  to several faculty members
in the College of Social Sciences which could have includedboth Dr. Karl Kim and Dr. Ann Sakaguchi. 
11. Unfortunately, the Foundation did not offer any
grants or funding opportunities to the University of Hawai #i 
at Manoa. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Sakaguchi declared: 
36. Provost Bruno mentions the possibility of
involving me in the Lloyd [sic] Foundation initiatives inOctober 2016  but Denise Konan or her staff did not contact 
me and therefore excluded me from a potential opportunity.I did not know that Provost Bruno had suggested my nameuntil after 2018 , i.e., after discovery of this case. 
. . . . 
40. As the dean of the College of Social Sciences,
Denise Konan is kept in the loop of various funding
opportunities by the administration, not me. Konan declared herself as the "POC" (point of contact) based on an informaldeclaration from former University president Greenwood toestablish a University disaster management discipline.Attached as Exhibit "15" is a true and correct copy of anemail from Defendant Konan to Michael Bruno dated March 14,2016, reflecting that Konan is the POC.[
9] She used that 
informal authority to unilaterally determine the level ofparticipation by faculty in the initiative, even though sheherself was not knowledgeable in the discipline. Given this POC designation, it is part of her responsibility as the POC 
9 Sakaguchi's Exhibit 15, a copy of an email from Konan to Bruno
"Re: Lloyd's and Resilience Engineering" dated March 14, 2016, stated: 
Hi Michael,It was a pleasure to chat the other day! I'm really gladthat you have a strong interest in disaster resilience.When I first started as Dean, President Greenwood wanted torally our combined assets in this area to develop a newfield of disaster sciences, and I was her POC. Velma and I put together the attached landscape assessment todemonstrate our considerable expertise in the field. At the time, we were launching the APDR3, which has since become"R3ady Asia Pacific," funded by Ford, Rockefeller, andChevron. Of course, it is a few years old now! 
We have significant capacity and there would be strong
benefits of having a campus led effort. Your suggestion ofa workshop is very good. 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the university to notify faculty of these upcoming
opportunities, well in advance of the date. None of the participants she selected possessed the scope and degree ofdisaster management that I could offer. 
41. I would not be able to fully and actively
participate as a speaker in a workshop, submit a proposal,or set up a booth if I was not advised or invited to thesegrants or workshops, in a timely manner. 
42. I have expressed interest to attend workshops
and related activities to Denise Konan a number of times,contrary to what she states in her declaration. The first such episode I recall was on April 25, 2012 when I metDenise Konan, with one of my instructors, Dr. ElizabethChar, the Medical Director of the National Disaster LifeSupport Regional Training Center-Pacific, and currentDirector of the Department of Health in Denise Konan'soffice. It was at that meeting where Dr. Char and I bothexpressed interest in getting more involved with activities. 
43. There were other workshops that I never knew
about until discovery in this case, such as but not limitedto the Rockefeller Foundation, Tohoku initiatives, PACOMinitiatives, Lloyd Foundation and the Ford Foundation. 
Sakaguchi's general allegations did not show Konan knew 
of specific events that Sakaguchi did not. Nor did Sakaguchi 
explain why, despite being the "Director of Pacific Emergency Management, Preparedness, and Response Information Network and Training Services ('Pacific EMPRINTS') since 2005 and Director of the National Disaster Life Support Regional Training Center-Pacific ('NDLS RTC-Pacific') since 2007[,]" Konan would have better access to information about third-party sponsored events related to Sakaguchi's own field of expertise.
(b) Konan's declaration stated: 
8. On February 15, 2017 I did testify before the
Senate Committees on Agriculture & Environment, Public
Safety, Intergovernmental, [sic] & Military Affairs, & [sic]Higher Education to respond to Senate Bill No. 257, whichproposed to establish a temporary food security task forceat the national disaster preparedness training center at theUniversity of Hawaii and deferred all comments to NDPTC, butrequested that the Legislature "look into extending thereporting period as funding and coordination may take timeto formalize", but this Bill never passed. Since this was a public hearing, I cannot exclude anyone from testifying orparticipating. 
9. House Bill 2582 proposed a task force to make
recommendations for the Hawaii Disaster Preparedness Plan,requiring NDPTC to assist the task force in preparing thatPlan and at a February 8, 2018 Public Hearing, I merelyprovided information on the costs that would be incurred forNDPTC to carry out that request, but otherwise was never 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
involved in the drafting of this legislation or proposal of
this Bill. Since this was a public hearing, I could notexclude anyone from testifying or participating. 
Sakaguchi's declaration stated: 
39. I did not state that Defendant Konan prevented
me from testifying at the legislature for Senate Bill 257 in2017. This is entirely fabricated. I stated that it was yet another example that I was excluded from a potentialfunding opportunity by Dean Konan. The fact that it received funding or not is irrelevant to the issue. It's the ability to have the same opportunity as any otherfaculty that is involved in the discipline. She claims the same for House Bill 2582 that she did not prevent me from
testifying. I did not claim this either and it is another gaslighting fabricated statement by Denise Konan todiscredit me. 
Sakaguchi did not show she was prevented from 
testifying at public hearings, or from offering written 
testimony, on legislation relating to her own field of expertise.
(c) Konan's declaration stated: 
10. Finally, on April 20, 2018, a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) between the United States Pacific
Command and the University of Hawai #i was signed by
President David Lassner and the Admiral Harry B. Harris Jr,the U.S. Navy Commander for USPACOM to develop strategiesand plans for collaborative research activities, identifyshared educational opportunities, promote ongoingcommunications to identify opportunities for expandingfuture education and project related activities and
collaborate on emerging technologies, research and
innovation. This process began before I became Dean of theCollege of Social Sciences and involved then PresidentsDavid McClain and subsequently MC Greenwood. The MOU did not exclude [Sakaguchi] from engagements with PACOM. I did not participate in the formation of this MOU. 
Sakaguchi's declaration does not mention the Memorandum 
of Understanding, or explain how she could have been "excluded" 
from a document signed only by President Lassner and Admiral Harris. 
Sakaguchi did not sustain her burden to show, by 
admissible evidence, a genuine issue of material fact about UH excluding her from these events.
(4) Sakaguchi's amended complaint alleged: 
34. In May 2017, Dr. Sakaguchi complained to her
union regarding Dr. Konan's failure to comply with the
union's collective bargaining agreement, by failing torespond to Dr. Sakaguchi's request for sabbatical leave. 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
35. After Dr. Sakaguchi filed the December 2014
Grievance and made additional complaints in 2016 and 2017,
her workplace environment became progressively more hostile.Instances of such hostility and retaliation that occurredfrom January 2015 to present include the following: 
. . . . 
h. In April 2017, Defendant Konan purported
to have "lost" Dr. Sakaguchi's request for sabbaticalpaperwork that was submitted in January 2017. 
UH Human Resources Specialist Patti Au submitted a 
declaration stating: 
4. It is my recollection that after Dr. Sakaguchi
submitted her request in February, 2017, the paperwork forthe sabbatical was approved by Dr. Christian Peterson, butit was misplaced and when Dr. Peterson reminded me of thesabbatical request on April 6, 2017, I had informed him thatI did not recall seeing the paperwork for Dr. Sakaguchi'ssabbatical request and would check with the other staff inmy office but that if there was a copy available, would heplease send it over and our office could work off the copy. 
5. After I received a copy of the paperwork for
Dr. Sakaguchi's sabbatical request sometime after April 6,2017 but prior to April 19, 2017, I handed the request toDean Denise Konan and she approved it immediately. 
6. On April 19, 2017 I notified Christian Peterson
that "Ann's sabbatical leave has been approved for theperiod 11-01-17 to 04-30-18" and that a notification letterwas forthcoming. 
7. I do not believe that Dr. Sakaguchi's sabbatical
request was intentionally delayed by Dean Denise Konanbecause when I handed her the copy of Dr. Sakaguchi'ssabbatical request, she signed it immediately and this wasslightly less than seven (7) months before Dr. Sakaguchi'splanned sabbatical. 
Sakaguchi's declaration stated: 
17. In April 2017, Defendant Konan purported to have
"lost" my request for sabbatical paperwork that I submittedin February 2017. Approximately six months prior to theFebruary 2017 sabbatical request, I submitted anothersabbatical request which Denise Konan rejected because therequest had to be submitted six months before the start dateof the sabbatical so the submission timeline is critical. Denise Konan responded to my request for a status of thesabbatical only after I called the union and notified themthat I did not get a response to my sabbatical request. 
. . . . 
23. Patti Au's declaration states she recalls I 
submitted my sabbatical leave request in February 2017,which was misplaced for two months, and was found only afterthe Anthropology Department Chair Christian Peterson 
17 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reminded her about it. Patty Au's declaration is
inexplicable. It does not explain how a document asimportant as a sabbatical leave request can be misplaced fora period of two months. If not for my initiative, therequest would never have been processed within the requireddeadlines denying my faculty rights to sabbatical leave. 
Sakaguchi's declaration admits the sabbatical issue was 
covered under the CBA. See HRS § 378-66. It appears, however, 
that pursuing her administrative remedies was unnecessary because her sabbatical leave was approved well before it was scheduled to be taken. She did not meet her burden to show she was unlawfully deprived of sabbatical leave.
(5) Paragraph 35 of Sakaguchi's amended complaint 
alleged: 
j. In the later part of 2017, Dr. Sakaguchi
attempted to hire a part-time, entry-level employee.
Dr. Sakaguchi's routine request was sent to Vassilis L.Syrmos, UH Vice President for Research and Innovation, forapproval. The College of Social Sciences Fiscal Officerremarked to Dr. Sakaguchi that the necessity of formalapproval from Mr. Syrmos was highly unusual and was notrequired for other similar faculty requests. 
In response to an interrogatory about that allegation, 
Sakaguchi stated: 
ANSWER:  No hire was identified when the Research Associate 
position was requested to SSRI in late 2017. [Sakaguchi]later decided not to go forward with this hire, so therecruitment was promptly closed without making an offer toan individual. 
Sakaguchi failed to show she was "discriminate[d] 
against . . . regarding [her] compensation, terms, conditions, 
location, or privileges of employment" when she attempted to obtain approval for a part-time research associate position. She did not show approval was denied, and she admitted deciding not to hire anyone for that position.
(6) Paragraph 35 of Sakaguchi's amended complaint 
alleged: 
i. Beginning in July 2017, Pacific EMPRINTS
servers are again malfunctioning, likely at the direction of
UH Administrators. 
18  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
UH College of Social Sciences Systems Manager Partika's 
declaration stated: 
4. Back in 2007, I personally assisted in
configuring to two web servers, SQL server and file/print
serve [sic] for Ann Sakaguchi and Pacific EMPRINTS andAttachment "1" is a true and correct list of the Pacific EMPRINTS sever [sic] Planning Document prepared on March 20,2007 that I helped set up. 
. . . . 
6. Sometime in April or May 2015, Ann Sakaguchi had
informed me that the Pacific EMPRINTS servers became 
inaccessible and the website had "crashed." 
7. The multiple problems with Pacific EMPRINTS'
computer servers were not caused because any UHAdministrator had allegedly "redirected the servers to otherIP and MAC addresses" but rather were attributable to the need to upgrade the hardware, replace the main computerservers that were at least 7 or more years old and performbackup of the website data.. [sic] 
8. I had identified the particular computer
components and servers as of July 6, 2015 that were existingand failing in Attachment "2". 
9. On July 7, 2015, Ann Sakaguchi received a quote
of $14,969.60 for the estimated costs to purchase andmaintain the virtual servers based on the items identified in Attachment "2" that recommended an upgrade of thehardware and Operating Systems for Microsoft Server 2013what [sic] was not on warranty and lacked support fromMicrosoft. 
10. After Pacific EMPRINTS website returned online 
on July 7, 2015, Ann Sakaguchi reported that the estimatedcosts were too high and did not perform the recommendedupgrades. 
11. On September 12, 2017 I reported to the UH
hostmaster that Pacific EMPRINTS' webservers had "crashed due to significant hardware failure" of which Attachment "3"[is] a true and correct copy of said email that I sent. 
12. On October 18, 2017, the Pacific EMPRINTS'
website went down again and I had informed her that thenetwork switch was not the problem and instructed her tocheck the SQL server. 
13. On February 14, 2018, I had informed Ann
Sakaguchi that "last August-September that the productionweb serve [sic] and data storage array were inoperablecausing the SQL data to be lost because of no back up andneeded to be replaced or upgraded but that the networkswitch did 'indeed work'". 
14. The multiple problems with Pacific EMPRINTS'
computers are not attributable [sic] any failed networkswitch or redirection by UH Administrators to other IP andMAC addresses as claimed by Ann Sakaguchi. 
19 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Sakaguchi's declaration stated: 
18. Beginning in July 2017, Pacific EMPRINTS servers
were malfunctioning, likely at the direction of UH
Administrators. I asked the UH IT Desk for help in late2017 for a network switch recommendation but was informed that the protocol was to go through the College of SocialSciences IT Manager. However, the College of Sciences ITManager reports to Dean Konan, and would not assist me.This is similar to how, beginning in April 2015, the PacificEMPRINTS servers became intermittently inaccessible,sometimes for as long as three months at a time. In one instance, the UH Help Desk and other UH IT personnelinformed me that the servers had been "redirected" by UHAdministrators to other IP and MAC addresses. During theseperiods, those interested in Pacific EMPRINTS courses wereunable to enroll. 
. . . . 
30. As the IT "manager" for the College of Social
Sciences, Harry Partika is a gatekeeper and acts for Dean
Konan in allocating resources to support informationtechnology needs of faculty. His technical skills are limited to that necessary to procure, install or repairdesktop computers and related equipment typically requiredby faculty. He does not possess the skills required toinstall, operate and trouble shoot complex servers. 
31. Harry Partika did not tell me that the network
switch was fine. I know this because he never responded tomy calls and emails, so he couldn't have told me the networkswitch was fine. 
32. With regards to Pacific EMPRINTS server rack
disclosure (Attachment 2 to the Motion), Harry Partika'sstatement of a non-working RAID Disk Storage as asignificant problem exhibits his lack of technical knowledgeof the server configuration. He probably thought it wascritical because the name contained the term, "Storage". He was unaware that it did not contain any production sitedata. The SQL server was operational and that is why itcontinued to work until 2017, when the network switch issueoccurred. 
33. These are some of the computer specialists I
hired to build my servers: 
a. Phil Page holds an IT and GIS (GeographicInformation Systems) degree; 
b. Randy Glidden, a computer science graduate withSQL database background and programmingexperience; 
c. Chuan Su was my webmaster programmer who has amaster's degree in computer programming. 
d. ArcGIS server specialists from ESRI in Redlands,California, who did the initial install andinitial transfer of the "ESRI/GIS" server in2007. 
The UH IT team also assisted as necessary. 
20 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court correctly sustained UH's hearsay 
objection to Sakaguchi's statement in paragraph 31 that the "IT 
HELP desk said it might be a switch issue[.]" 
We disregard the conclusory statements and opinions in 
paragraphs 30, 31, and 32 of Sakaguchi's declaration because she failed to show she had the education, training, or experience necessary to comment on the technical issues she purported to address, see Rule 702, Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE), 
Chapter 626, Hawaii Revised Statutes (2016), and she did not show 
she had personal knowledge of Partika's technical ability or what he "thought," see HRE Rule 602. 
Sakaguchi did not rebut Partika's testimony that she 
did not perform the server upgrades he had recommended in 2015. Nor did Sakaguchi show, through declarations by Phil Page, Randy Glidden, Chuan Su, any "ArcGIS server specialists from ESRI in Redlands, California," or any other admissible evidence, that Pacific EMPRINTS' servers malfunctioned "at the direction of UH Administrators." 
Partika's supplemental declaration authenticated 
several emails to and from Sakaguchi between October 2017 and February 2018. On October 18, 2017, Sakaguchi emailed Partika that "Chuan looked into this and thought this is a network switch issue and that it was likely not the server itself." Sakaguchi submitted no declaration by Chuan stating that a network switch was the problem, or that it was UH's responsibility. On February 14, 2018, Partika emailed Sakaguchi, with an attachment, explaining why "your network switch does in deed [sic] work" and that the problem "is with your SQL server and data storage array." 
Sakaguchi failed to sustain her burden to show a 
genuine issue of material fact through admissible evidence that Pacific EMPRINTS' servers malfunctioned in 2017 "at the direction of UH Administrators." 
21 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(7) Paragraph 35 of Sakaguchi's amended complaint 
alleged: 
k. In the later part of 2017, Dr. Sakaguchi
attempted to hire a research assistant from Japan. The 
Research Corporation of UH ("RCUH") Administrators informedDr. Sakaguchi that RCUH policy dictates she must hiresomeone in Hawai #i. There was no such RCUH policy and this
residential hiring restriction has not been imposed on anyfaculty member other than Dr. Sakaguchi. 
Sakaguchi's declaration similarly stated: 
20. In the later part of 2017, I attempted to hire a
research assistant from Japan. The Research Corporation ofUH ("RCUH") Administrators informed me that RCUH policydictates she [sic] must hire someone in Hawai #i. There was 
no such RCUH policy and this residential hiring restrictionhas not been imposed on any faculty member. 
Sakaguchi submitted no evidence that "there was no such 
RCUH policy" that she hire someone in Hawai# i. 
And even if Sakaguchi's allegation were true, she did 
not sue RCUH. HRS § 304A-3001 (2007) establishes RCUH "as a body 
corporate[.]" Its affairs are managed and controlled by a board of directors, which elects a chair. HRS § 304A-3002 (Supp. 2017). It has the power to sue and be sued in its own name. HRS § 304A-3003 (2007). RCUH's alleged conduct is irrelevant because RCUH is not a defendant, and Sakaguchi offered neither evidence nor argument that RCUH's alleged conduct should be attributed to UH. 
(8) Paragraph 35 of Sakaguchi's amended complaint 
alleged: 
l. In February 2018, Dr. Sakaguchi's faculty
colleague informed Dr. Sakaguchi that when said colleague
requested to do a training project with Dr. Sakaguchi in thefield of disaster management, the UH Vice Chancellor forResearch and UH Interim Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs discouraged the colleague and informed her she must workwith Dr. Kim instead. 
Provost Bruno was Vice-Chancellor for Research and 
Interim Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs in February 2018. 
His declaration stated: 
22 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5. I have personal familiarity with the operation
and judging of the 2017 Strategic Investment Initiative
campus-wide competition for research funding to facultymembers for the past six (6) years as I had personallystarted it and there have been three (3) awards over thattime period. 
6. During the Fall of 2017, I am informed and
believe that Dr. Kristine Qureshi served as one of thecommittee judges for the 2017 Strategic InvestmentInitiative campus-wide research funding competition todecide which grant proposal would receive an award. 
7. I did not serve as either a judge or
decision-maker on which faculty members' grant proposalwould receive an award from the 2017 Strategic InvestmentInitiative campus-wide competition. 
8. I never asked nor suggested to Dr. Kristine
Qureshi that she should work on a research grant proposalwith Dr. Karl Kim for the 2017 Strategic InvestmentInitiative campus-wide competition. 
9. Between 2017-2018, I never attempted to
discourage Dr. Kristine Qureshi from working on a researchgrant proposal with Dr. Ann Sakaguchi on the 2017 StrategicInvestment Initiative as that would have been directlycontrary to the process of how the campus-wide researchcompetition operated and/or was judged. 
Sakaguchi's declaration stated: 
21. In February 2018, my faculty colleague John
Casken informed me that when said colleague requested to doa training project with me in the field of disastermanagement, the UH Vice Chancellor for Research and UHInterim Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs, Michael Bruno,discouraged the colleague and informed her she must workwith Dr. Kim instead. 
The Circuit Court correctly sustained UH's objection to 
hearsay. Sakaguchi did not offer a declaration or other 
testimony from John Casken or Kristine Qureshi. She failed to sustain her burden to show a genuine issue of material fact through admissible evidence.
(9) Sakaguchi's amended complaint alleged: 
36. Dr. Sakaguchi's salary can be greatly enhanced
depending on successful grant submissions that result in
external funding. By excluding Dr. Sakaguchi from fundingand grant opportunities and jeopardizing Dr. Sakaguchi'sgrant submissions, Defendants suppress her salary and denyher current and prospective economic and contractualopportunities. 
23  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
UH submitted the declaration of John (Jack) Barile, the 
Interim Director of the Social Science Research Institute in the 
UH College of Social Sciences. Barile stated: 
3. On June 10, 2020, I conducted a search of all
grant and contract proposals by faculty members of the
College of Social Sciences, UHM as Principal Investigators(PI) or Co-Investigators (who are the lead from theUniversity of Hawai #i) (Co-I) from January 1, 2010 to
present. 
. . . . 
5. From January 1, 2010 to present, Ann Sakaguchi
only submitted two grant or contract proposals as PI or
Co-I. One proposal was for a non-research grant processedon April 11, 2011 and titled "Certified Training of RMIMinistry of Health Medical Staff in Basic Life SupportSkills" and in which she was awarded a total of $50,375.00. The other proposal for a research sub-grant processed onJanuary 23, 2013 and titled, "Enhancing Hazard Mitigationand Resiliency in Complex Emergencies and Disasters UsingPoint of Care, Cyberinfrastructure, and Cultural Outreach"
which was rejected . This grant was for $430,781.00. 
Sakaguchi's declaration stated: 
28. John Barile makes a false statement in his June 
2020 declaration that I have a record of only two (2) grants
since 2011 and of that one was rejected. I have providedcounter evidence to the UH Office of the General Counsel of applying for (i) a $25 million U.S. Agency for InternationalDevelopment grant that I applied with Dr. Shirley Daniel in2012; (ii) a U.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesHRSA grant for $1.3 million in 2013; (iii) a $386,100 Centerfor Disease Control and Prevention grant with San DiegoState University in 2019; and (iv) approximately $860,000 inNational Disaster Life Support trainings [sic]. The competitive grants mentioned above were "eliminated" from myuniversity records at the Office of Research Services, whereall faculty pursued grants, received or rejected, arerecorded. I did not know this information was eliminated until John Barile had submitted his declaration in 2020. 
Sakaguchi's declaration contradicts her allegation that 
she was excluded from grant opportunities after February 28, 
2016. And her memorandum opposing UH's motion did not explain how or why, if her competitive grants were applied for and received, the grants being "eliminated" from UH's records caused her harm. She failed to sustain her burden to show a genuine issue of material fact on this issue. 
24 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
V. CONCLUSION 
The Circuit Court's October 9, 2023 Final Judgment 
against Sakaguchi on all claims asserted against Konan is 
affirmed; the Final Judgment for UH and against Sakaguchi on Claim 4 for IIED is affirmed; the Final Judgment for UH and against Sakaguchi on Claim 1 is affirmed in part as to all claims under the HWPA except those for pay differential from February 28, 2016 onward for not being selected department chair in alleged violation of the HWPA, and for earnings disparity from February 28, 2016 onward caused by UH's alleged violation of the HWPA, as discussed in sections IV.B.3. and IV.C. above. 
This case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further 
proceedings consistent with this memorandum opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 14, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
Margery S. Bronster, 
Rex Y. Fujichaku,Skylar G. Lucas, for Plaintiff-Appellant Ann Sakaguchi. 
Carrie K.S. Okinaga, 
Derek T. Mayeshiro,for Defendants-AppelleesUniversity of Hawai# i 
and Denise Konan in her capacity as Dean of theUniversity of Hawai# i at 
Mânoa College of SocialSciences. 
Gary Y. Takeuchi,
Justin M. Luney,for Defendant-AppelleeDenise Konan, individually. /s/ Karen T. NakasoneChief Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
25 