NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000766
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ROBERT L. MANNING, also known as
Robert L. Manning, Sr., Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 13-1-0721)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Robert L. Manning, also known as 
Robert L. Manning, Sr. (Manning) appeals from the April 1, 2014
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) entered by the
 
1
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court) , convicting
Manning of the crime of Robbery in the Second Degree pursuant to
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-841(1)(a) (2014).
2
   
Manning argues the Circuit Court (1) erred in denying
 
his motion to dismiss a defective charge; (2) plainly erred when
 it failed to instruct the jury on the defense of force used in
 
1
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided. 
2
 §708-841 Robbery in the second degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of robbery in the second degree if, in the
course of committing theft or non-consensual taking of a motor
vehicle:
 
(a)	 The person uses force against the person of
anyone present with the intent to overcome that
person's physical resistance or physical power
of resistance[.]
 
"In the course of committing a theft" includes "the flight after
the attempt or commission." HRS § 708-842 (2014).
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
self-protection; (3) plainly erred in failing to instruct the
 
jury on the defense of mistake-of-fact; (4) erred when it failed
 to properly instruct the jury as to the requisite intent; and
 (5) erred in denying his motion for judgment of acquittal.
 
After a careful review of the issues raised and
 
arguments made by the parties, the record and the applicable
 authority, we resolve Manning's points on appeal as follows and
 affirm.
 
1. 
The Circuit Court did not err in denying Manning's
 
motion to dismiss. Manning argues, 
In its order denying the motion to dismiss, the
circuit court held that the phrase "with intent to overcome
[complaining witness' (CW)] physical resistance or power of
resistance," sufficiently specified the state of mind as
"intent."  However, "intent" is not one of the applicable
states of mind for penal offenses set forth in HRS § 702-206
(i.e. "intentionally", "knowingly", "recklessly" or"negligently"). Since HRS § 708-841 fails to specify theapplicable state of mind, the provisions of HRS § 702-204apply and "that element is established if, with respectthereto, a person acts intentionally, knowingly, orrecklessly." HRS § 708-841 (1993); 
Nesmith , 127 [Hawai' i]
at 53, 276 P.3d at 622. As such, the charge was required tospecify that the offense was committed if Manning acted"intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly." As the chargefails to include the requisite state of mind, the circuitcourt erred in denying the defense's motion to dismissbecause the omission of the state of mind from the chargeviolated Manning's right to due process. Armitage, 132 
[Hawai'i] at 51, 319 P.3d at 1059. 
We reject Manning's interpretation. The word "intent"
 
is the noun from which the adjective "intentionally" is derived. 
3
There is nothing in the language of the charge  that implies that
"with intent to" has a different meaning than the word
 "intentionally." 
2. The Circuit Court did not plainly err in omitting a
 
self-defense instruction. HRS § 701-115 (2014) provides that
 
3
 The part of the charge challenged by Manning stated, 
On or about the 15th day of February, 2013, in the
City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, ROBERT L.
MANNING, also known as Robert L. Manning, Sr., while in the
course of committing theft from Foodland Super Market,
Limited, did use force against the person of [CW], a person
who was present, with intent to overcome [CW's] physical
resistance or physical power of resistance, thereby
committing the offense of Robbery in the Second Degree, in
violation of Section 708-841(1)(a) of the Hawaii Revised
Statutes.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[n]o defense may be considered by the trier of fact unless
 
evidence of the specified fact or facts has been presented." 
Manning testified that he did not have any physical contact with
 the CW throughout the entire incident. CW testified that after
 Manning left the store, CW announced he was security from the
 store and approached Manning, who was the first to use force by
 pushing a shopping cart at CW, hitting the latter's leg. As
 there was no evidence to support Manning's defense, there was no
 error when an instruction on self-defense was not given. 
3. Similarly, based on the evidence presented, the
 
omission of a mistake-of-fact instruction, HRS § 702-218 (2014),
4
 
was not plain error. HRS § 701-115. Manning's mistake of fact
 would have to negative the state of mind required to commit
 Robbery in the Second Degree; i.e., committing theft and then
 intentionally using physical force to overcome the resistance or
 power of resistance of another protecting that property or while
 in flight from the commission of the theft. Manning argues that
 the jury could have believed he used force to resist CW's attempt
 to detain him because Manning was under the mistaken impression
 that CW was "a suspicious individual with malicious intentions"
 and presumably not store personnel trying to prevent the theft. 
However, Manning testified that he never used force against CW,
 making Manning's mistaken belief regarding CW's identity
 irrelevant. 
Even if we consider the alternative scenario presented
 
by the CW, that Manning used force against CW--pushing a shopping
 cart against CW to aid Manning's escape--it matters not whether
 Manning thought CW was a store employee. The offense of Robbery
 in the Second Degree is committed if force is used against "a
 person present" without regard to whether that person is the
 owner of the property or its agent if the force is used in the
 
4
 HRS § 701-218 provides in pertinent part, 
Ignorance or mistake as a defense.  In any prosecution for
an offense, it is a defense that the accused engaged in the
prohibited conduct under ignorance or mistake of fact if: 
(1) 	The ignorance or mistake negatives the state of mind
required to establish an element of the offense[.]
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
course of committing a theft, which includes the flight after the
 
commission of the theft. 
Therefore, there was insufficient evidence establishing
 
facts that would have invoked the mistake of fact instruction. 
State v. Taylor , 130 Hawai 'i 196, 205, 307 P.3d 1142, 1151 
(2013). 
4. The Circuit Court's instruction regarding the
 
elements of the offense was not "prejudicially insufficient,
 erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." State v. Aganon, 97
 
Hawai
'i 299, 302, 36 P.3d 1269, 1272 (2001) (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted). The instructions regarding
 the elements of Robbery in the Second Degree was as follows: 
A person commits the offense of Robbery in the Second
Degree if, in the course of committing theft, he uses force
against the person of anyone present, with intent to
overcome the person's physical resistance or physical power
of resistance.
 
There are two material elements of the offense of
 
Robbery in the Second Degree, each of which the prosecution
must prove beyond a reasonable doubt. 
These two elements are:

 
1) that on or about the 15th day of February, 2013,
in the City and County of Honolulu, the defendant, Robert L.
Manning, also known as Robert L. Manning, Sr., was in the
course of committing theft; and 
2) that, while doing so, the defendant, Robert L.
Manning, also known as Robert L. Manning, Sr., used force
against [CW], with intent to overcome [CW's] physical
resistance or physical power of resistance.
 
A person commits theft if he intentionally obtains or
exerts unauthorized control over the property of another
with intent to deprive the person of the property.
 
In addition, the Circuit Court provided the jury with
 
instructions on the state of mind required: 
A person acts intentionally with respect to his
conduct when it is his conscious object to engage in such
conduct. 

A person acts intentionally with respect to attendant
circumstances when he is aware of the existence of such
 circumstances or believes or hopes that they exist.
 
A person acts intentionally with respect to a result
of his conduct when it is his conscious object to cause such
a result.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Manning argues that the instruction failed to specify
 
that Manning must have intentionally used force against CW. 
Manning maintains that, as a result, the jury instruction was
 "prejudicially erroneous and misleading and his conviction must
 be vacated and the case remanded for a new trial." However, the
 instruction plainly reads that the jury must find Manning used
 force against CW "with intent to overcome [CW's] physical
 resistence or physical power of resistance" and were told
 explicitly what it means to act intentionally. 
5. The Circuit Court did not err in denying Manning's
 
motion for judgment of acquittal as there was sufficient evidence
 to support Manning's conviction. Manning contends "the circuit
 court erred in denying the defense's motions for judgment of
 acquittal where there was no substantial evidence that Manning
 had committed theft or that he had used force against Paulson."
 
When reviewing denials of motions for judgment of 
acquittal we determine whether "upon the evidence viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution and in full recognition of the province of the trier of fact, [that] the evidence is sufficient to support a prima facie case so that a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a reasonable doubt." State v. Foster, 128 Hawai
'i 18, 25, 282 P.3d 560, 567 (2012). 
CW testified that he watched Manning enter the Foodland
 
store on the morning of February 15, 2013, witnessed Manning
 place ramen noodles in the waistband of his pants, and watched
 Manning pass cash registers and exit the store without paying for
 the item. CW said he approached Manning, identified himself, and
 showed Manning his work badge. CW testified that Manning ran 
from the store entrance and used a shopping cart to push CW out
 of the way, hitting his leg. CW also recalled Manning punched
 him in the chest three times while Manning was trying to enter
 Manning's vehicle in the parking lot. Foodland office clerk Alan
 Kim also testified that he witnessed CW holding on to the door of
 Manning's vehicle to prevent Manning from entering the vehicle. 
Despite any discrepancies Manning alleges, a reasonably minded
 juror could have found CW and Kim presented testimony sufficient
 to make a prima facie case against Manning. "[A]n appellate court
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
will not pass upon the jury's decisions with respect to the 
credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence, because this is the province of the jury as the trier of fact." State v. 
Jhun, 83 Hawai
'i 472, 483, 927 P.2d 1355, 1366 (1996). 
Based on the foregoing, April 1, 2014 Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 28, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
Jeffrey A. Hawk,

(Hawk Sing & Ignacio),
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Donn Fudo,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
6
 