NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-10-0000027
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JANIS OKAWAKI, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CRIMINAL NO. 10-1-1817)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Janis Okawaki (Janis) appeals from
 
the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) filed on
 
1
August 24, 2010 in Family Court of the First Circuit  (family
court). Family court found Janis guilty of one count of Criminal
 
Contempt of Court, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 710-1077(1)(g) and (3)(b) (1993).2
 
1
 The Honorable Darryl Y.C. Choy presided.
 
2
 HRS § 710-1077 provides, in pertinent part:
 
§710-1077 Criminal contempt of court.  (1) A person commits
the offense of criminal contempt of court if:
 
. . . .
 
(g)	 The person knowingly disobeys or resists the process,
injunction, or other mandate of a court;
 
. . . .
 
(3)
 The court may treat the commission of an offense under
subsection (1) as a petty misdemeanor, in which case:
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Janis contends family court (1) committed 
reversible error when it found Janis guilty of Criminal Contempt 
of Court and (2) abused its discretion when it failed to suspend 
trial proceedings for a mental examination to determine penal 
responsibility, or in the alternative, the failure to do so was 
plain error. Janis also contends defense counsel provided 
ineffective assistance of counsel by (1) failing to move for a 
mental examination to determine penal responsibility and (2) 
failing to object to the closing argument of the State of Hawai' i 
(the State) when it argued, based on excluded evidence, that Janis acted knowingly. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Irene Okawaki (Irene), Janis's mother, filed a
 
"Petition for an Order of Protection" (Petition) against Janis in
 
family court on May 17, 2010. Family court issued a Temporary
 
Restraining Order (TRO), effective until August 15, 2010,
 
prohibiting Janis from contacting Irene or entering Irene's home. 
Police Officer David Deitschman (Officer Deitschman) served the
 
TRO on Janis at Castle Medical Center's Behavioral Health Ward on
 
May 18, 2010.
 
Service included notice of a hearing scheduled for June
 
1, 2010, where Janis could show cause why the TRO should not be
 
in effect. Janis failed to appear at the hearing. Family court
 
took "no further action" and ordered the TRO to remain in effect
 
until August 15, 2010. Irene received a copy of the "Order
 
Regarding Temporary Restraining Order," but there is no proof of
 
service that Janis received a copy.
 
. . . .
 
(b)	 If the offense was not committed in the immediate view
 
and presence of the court, nor under such
circumstances that the court has knowledge of all of
the facts constituting the offense, the court shall
order the defendant to appear before it to answer a
charge of criminal contempt of court; the trial, if
any, upon the charge shall be by the court without a
jury; and proof of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt
shall be required for conviction.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On August 9, 2010, Janis called Irene several times in
 
the middle of the night, leaving three phone messages. These
 
phone calls allegedly violated the TRO and Irene filed a report
 
with the Honolulu Police Department. Janis was arrested later
 
that day. 
The State filed a Complaint on August 10, 2010,
 
charging Janis with the petty misdemeanor of Criminal Contempt of
 
Court, in violation of HRS § 710-1077(1)(g) and (3)(b). The
 
State alleged Janis "did knowingly disobey or resist the process,
 
injunction, or other mandate of a court, to wit, the [TRO] issued
 
in FC-DA No. 10-1-0856 on the 17th of May, 2010[.]"
 
A bench trial was held on August 23 and 24, 2010. At
 
its conclusion, family court found Janis guilty of violating the
 
TRO and entered judgment, sentencing Janis to jail for a term of
 
ten days with credit for time served. Because she had been in
 
jail longer than ten days, she was subject to immediate release.
 
On September 15, 2010, Janis timely appealed from the
 
Judgment.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Sufficiency of the Evidence
 
The appellate court reviews the sufficiency of evidence
 
on appeal as follows:
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
case was before a judge or jury. The test on appeal is not
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) 
(quoting State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai' i 128, 145, 938 P.2d 559, 576 
(1997)). "'Substantial evidence' as to every material element of 
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient 
quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable 
caution to support a conclusion." Richie, 88 Hawai' i at 33, 960 
P.2d at 1241 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.	 Plain Error
 
"Normally, an issue not preserved at trial is deemed to 
be waived. But where plain errors were committed and substantial 
rights were affected thereby, the errors may be noticed although 
they were not brought to the attention of the trial court." 
State v. Fagaragan, 115 Hawai' i 364, 367-68, 167 P.3d 739, 742-43 
(2007) (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets omitted). 
C.	 Fitness to Stand Trial
 
"[A] trial court's ruling with regard to a defendant's 
fitness to proceed is appropriately reviewed on appeal for an 
abuse of discretion." State v. Castro, 93 Hawai' i 424, 426 n.1, 
5 P.3d 414, 416 n.1 (2000) (hereinafter, Castro II). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 Family court did not commit reversible error when
it found Janis guilty of Criminal Contempt of
Court.
 
Janis contends family court's verdict went against the 
weight of the evidence and was not supported by substantial 
evidence that she "knowingly" violated the TRO. On appeal, Janis 
argues her psychiatric condition influenced her belief that the 
TRO was not in effect at the time she allegedly violated it. She 
also argues her psychiatric condition led her to believe service 
was not valid. Based on those beliefs, Janis argues there was 
not substantial evidence that she "knowingly" violated the TRO, 
as required by statute. "The test on appeal is not whether guilt 
is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was 
substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of 
fact." Richie, 88 Hawai' i at 33, 960 P.2d at 1241. 
At trial, Officer Deitschman testified he personally
 
served the TRO on Janis at Castle Medical Center's Behavioral
 
Health Ward. He explained he did not serve the TRO until after a
 
doctor confirmed Janis was "stable enough to be served." Officer
 
Deitschman testified that he told Janis the TRO meant she could
 
not go home after she was released from the hospital. He
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
attested that he did not threaten her in order to obtain her
 
signature on the proof of service form. The TRO, with Janis's
 
signature of proof of service, was admitted into evidence.
 
While Janis was on the stand, she testified that when
 
she was released from the hospital, she went with a case manager
 
to pick up belongings from her mother's house "because of the
 
temporary restraining order." Janis confirmed she did not attend
 
the June 1, 2010 hearing at which she could have contested the
 
TRO. She contended that because no papers were served telling
 
her what transpired at the hearing, she didn't know "whether or
 
not the restraining order was valid."
 
Janis testified she could not go home on August 9, 2010
 
because "my mom in her mind thinks there's a TRO." In the August
 
9, 2010 phone messages Janis left on her mother's answering
 
machine, she specifically stated that "if I'm violating the
 
temporary restraining order, why aren't you calling the
 
police[?]." On the other hand, Janis testified the police told
 
her she would not be violating the TRO if she called Irene or
 
went home.
 
Janis also asserted at trial that the TRO was a
 
contract that required a "meeting of the minds." She argued the
 
TRO was invalid because she signed it while she was in the
 
"psych. ward" and "[h]ow can you have meeting of the minds if
 
you're in a psych. ward?" which "out of definition tells you I
 
wasn't in my right mind."
 
When Janis testified she did not believe the TRO was
 
valid, she was apparently presenting a "mistake of law" defense. 
"Mistake of law" is an affirmative defense, pursuant to HRS
 
§ 702-220 (1993).3 However, Janis points to no erroneous
 
3
 HRS § 702-220 provides:
 
§702-220 Ignorance or mistake of law; belief that conduct
not legally prohibited. In any prosecution, it shall be an
affirmative defense that the defendant engaged in the conduct or
caused the result alleged under the belief that the conduct or
result was not legally prohibited when the defendant acts in
reasonable reliance upon an official statement of the law,
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"official statement of law" upon which she relied. Janis's
 
argument at trial suggests that even though she knew there was a
 
TRO, she decided it was not valid and therefore, she did not
 
"knowingly" violate it. However, testimony from Officer
 
Deitschman suggests Janis understood she was served with a TRO. 
Other acts indicating Janis was aware a TRO was in effect
 
included going with a case manager to the house to pick up
 
belongings and telling the police she could not call or go home
 
because of the TRO. On the other hand, her belief that the
 
police told her there was no valid TRO suggests she might not
 
have "knowingly" violated the TRO when she called her mother.
 
Viewing the evidence in the strongest light for the 
prosecution, there was substantial evidence that Janis knowingly 
violated the TRO. Richie, 88 Hawai' i at 33, 960 P.2d at 1241. 
B.	 Family court abused its discretion when it failed
to suspend trial and appoint an examiner to report
on the physical and mental condition of Janis
before determining her fitness to stand trial.
4
 
Janis contends family court had a duty to order sua 
sponte a hearing to determine Janis's fitness to stand trial. 
Family court's determination that Janis was fit to stand trial is 
reviewed on appeal for an abuse of discretion. Castro II, 93 
Hawai'i at 425, 5 P.3d at 415. 
afterward determined to be invalid or erroneous, contained in:
 (1)	 A statute or other enactment;
 (2)	 A judicial decision, opinion, or judgment;
 (3)	 An administrative order or administrative grant of
permission; or
 (4)	 An official interpretation of the public officer or body
charged by law with responsibility for the interpretation,
administration, or enforcement of the law defining the
offense.
4
 Although Janis refers to family court's duty to "determine penal
responsibility," she argues the court's duty to determine "fitness to
proceed." Therefore, we analyze family court's duty to determine Janis's
fitness to proceed to trial.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
To have been competent to stand trial, Janis must have 
had the capacity to understand the proceedings against her and to 
assist in her own defense. HRS § 704-403 (1993);5 State v. 
Janto, 92 Hawai' i 19, 28 n.3, 986 P.2d 306, 315 n.3 (1999). If a 
trial court has "reason to doubt the defendant's fitness to 
proceed, or reason to believe that the physical or mental 
disease, disorder, or defect of the defendant will or has become 
an issue in the case, the court may immediately suspend all 
further proceedings in the prosecution." HRS § 704-404(1) (Supp. 
2011) (emphasis added). At that point, the court "shall appoint 
. . . one qualified examiner in nonfelony cases to examine and 
report upon the physical and mental condition of the defendant." 
HRS § 704-404(2) (2011) (emphasis added). 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has observed that "only some 
rational basis for convening a panel is necessary to trigger the 
[trial] court's ... power to stay the proceedings and, 
thereafter, to appoint examiners." Castro II, 93 Hawai' i at 427, 
5 P.3d at 417 (internal quotation marks omitted). Where there is a rational basis to have reason to doubt a defendant's fitness to 
proceed and reason to believe defendant is suffering from a 
physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect that had affected 
his ability to assist in his own defense, the court must sua 
sponte order a competency hearing. State v. Castro, 93 Hawai' i 
454, 462, 5 P.3d 444, 452 (App. 2000) (hereinafter, Castro I) 
(Acoba, J., concurring opinion, adopted in its entirety in Castro 
II, 93 Hawai' i at 427, 5 P.3d at 417). 
5
 HRS § 704-403 provides:
 
§704-403 Physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect
excluding fitness to proceed.  No person who as a result of a
physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect lacks capacity to
understand the proceedings against the person or to assist in the
person's own defense shall be tried, convicted, or sentenced for
the commission of an offense so long as such incapacity endures.
(Emphasis added.)
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Where a question of fitness to stand trial is raised, 
it is best resolved at the pretrial stage. The Hawai' i appellate 
courts have reasoned that 
[s]uch a practice removes from trial the concern that
incapacity which is not readily apparent to lay observation
will surface during trial proceedings or, much worse, after
trial has ended. Obviously, if a defendant is found fit to
proceed based upon expert testimony in the record, the
question of whether an examination should have been
judicially ordered or not is largely removed from judicial
re-examination.
 
Castro I, 93 Hawai' i at 462, 5 P.3d at 452. 
Here, family court abused its discretion when it failed 
to stay the proceedings and appoint a qualified examiner to 
examine and report on Janis's physical and mental condition. 
Either in response to the State's concerns about Janis's fitness 
to proceed or sua sponte, the court had a rational basis to have 
"reason to doubt [Janis's] fitness to proceed, or reason to 
believe that a physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect 
will or has become an issue in the case[.]" See Castro I, 93 
Hawai'i at 462, 5 P.3d at 452 (brackets and ellipsis omitted). 
Prior to trial, the State noted before family court
 
that Janis had been uncooperative with previous counsel "and was
 not participating meaningfully in her defense." The State
 
pointed out that it had "certain concerns because she does suffer
 
from mental illness and she may not be having all of the
 
medications available to her at OCCC. [The State] understand[s]
 
that [Janis] may be just taking a mood stabilizer, but there are
 
other medications she does need to take." The State also
 
mentioned that Janis "was not able to be rational in court at the
 
last court date such that Judge Loo had to kick her out of the
 
courtroom because she was not able to follow court orders . . .
 
or remain silent." The State then requested a "one-panel
 
colloquy."
 
In response, family court entered into a brief colloquy
 
with Janis, in which the court established that Janis "was
 
feeling fine today" and she understood she was charged with 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
contempt of court. The court explained to Janis that she needed
 
to be able to assist her counsel, stating:
 
THE COURT: That’s what we talk about being able to
assist in your defense, able to listen to what the witnesses
against you are saying, and of course I’m not saying that
what they’re saying is true now, but you’re able to look at
it, hear it, and tell your lawyer, nah, that’s untrue, this
is what happened.
 
THE DEFENDANT: Uh—huh.
 
THE COURT: Okay. That’s what I call assisting the
defense. In other words, you can understand what’s going on
and you can understand the strategy and tactic of how to win
the case.
 
THE DEFENDANT: Right.
 
THE COURT: Okay. And my understanding is that you’re
okay, you can understand this stuff.
 
THE DEFENDANT: Right. Uh-huh, I not going get a
one-panel?
 
THE COURT: well, wait, wait
 THE DEFENDANT: I just wanna
 THE COURT: no, wait –
 THE DEFENDANT: prove them wrong.
 THE COURT: -- no, no, no. No. We're not even gonna do
a one-panel. Okay.
 
THE DEFENDANT: Okay.
 THE COURT: Okay. If I understand that's fine, okay,
that you can handle this and you can help your lawyer fight
the case, -­
THE DEFENDANT: Uh-huh.
 
THE COURT: -- no need one-panel.
THE DEFENDANT: Okay.
 
. . . .
 THE COURT: But we cannot have the trial though if
you’re unfit. Because as -—
 
THE DEFENDANT: No, I’m fine.
 THE COURT: -- I speak to you -- okay. And being feisty
don’t count.
 
THE DEFENDANT: Uh-huh.
 THE COURT: It’s okay. Feisty is cool.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE DEFENDANT: I know. Every time I get feisty, I’m
told I’m mentally ill.
 
THE COURT: Well –
 
THE DEFENDANT: I don’t know what’s wrong with people.
 THE COURT: -- well, [Janis], I know there’s a
difference.
 
THE DEFENDANT: Uh-huh.
 THE COURT: Okay. But sometimes you get too feisty, you
might kinda fall into unfit. I don’t know.
 
THE DEFENDANT: Uh-huh.
 THE COURT: All right, so at this point now, if you
think you can handle, we can proceed to trial. 
Trial commenced later that day. When Irene testified,
 
she stated Janis had mental illness and had been committed at
 
various times to the mental health unit at Castle Medical Center. 
Irene had indicated in her Petition that Janis was "diagnosed as
 
being bipolar" and became aggressive during "manic" periods. 
Irene also testified that when the TRO was served, Janis was in
 
Castle Medical Center "because of her mental illness." Irene
 
confirmed Janis did not have a multi-million dollar trust fund,
 
but did note that a trust would come into existence upon Irene's
 
death.
 
Officer Deitschman testified he served the TRO on Janis
 
at Castle Medical Center's Behavioral Health Ward after a doctor
 
confirmed Janis was "stable enough to be served."
 
During the testimony of Irene and Officer Deitschman,
 
Janis made several loud, inappropriate comments. At one point
 
while Irene was on the stand, Janis stated, loud enough to be
 
captured in the transcript, that "I'm just gonna fuckin' sue her
 
personally." During Officer Deitschman's testimony, she
 
interjected the following comments: "This is so bad[;]" "She's
 
such a bad mother[;]" "See, how come they know so much of my
 
business[;]" and "Tell him I wasn't in my right mind."
 
After the State rested its case, family court read
 
Janis her Tachibana rights, which Janis indicated she understood. 
After consulting with defense counsel, Janis took the stand. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
While Janis was on the stand, she testified that the police and
 
her personal banker told her she has a multi-million dollar trust
 
fund, but she was "thrown in the psychiatric ward" any time she
 
asked about it; "the police, secret service, and the FBI" filed
 
reports against her mother "all the time;" she "own[s] the bank;"
 
and she has a law degree, even though she only completed one year
 
of law school. She also testified she had been committed to a
 
psychiatric ward at least fifty times. She said the police told
 
her she would not be violating the TRO if she called Irene. She
 
claimed the police hated Irene, told Janis the TRO was "bogus,"
 
and assured her that "if your mom doesn't let you in the house,
 
call us back and we'll kick her out." Janis also claimed that
 
someone from Queen's Medical Center assaulted her and "stole
 
$2,000" from her.
 
On cross-examination, Janis entered into a protracted
 
discussion with the State regarding the charge against her. The
 
State appears to have had renewed concerns about her capacity
 
because it attempted to reaffirm Janis's understanding of the
 
proceedings.
 
PROSECUTOR: Okay. So, [Janis], I just want to establish
your understanding of what is going on right now. Okay?
What is currently the charge that is against you that
you are facing trial against right now?
 
DEFENDANT: Again, I don't know. I don't understand
what a con -- restraining order contempt of court is because
I was told when I talk -- when I looked it up in the law
library at the OCCC 'cause you guys gave me too much time to
think about it, I found out contempt of court means I didn't
show up or the judge gives me a contempt of court, not the
prosecutor. So I don't -- I have absolutely no idea what you
guys are talking about.
 
. . . . 
DEFENDANT: Look. I don't know what you talking about,
okay? 'Cause seriously, I looked it up in the law library.
 
PROSECUTOR: I –
 DEFENDANT: I don't know what you talking about. So I'm
-- I'm -- I'm gonna answer you again, I don't know what you
talking about. That is a defense. I don't know what you
talking about.
 
. . . .
 
11
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
PROSECUTOR: Okay. [Janis], right before this trial
started I read you the charges against you, -­
DEFENDANT: Yeah, -­
[PROSECUTOR]: -- the charge –
 
[DEFENDANT]: -- the charges. That's different from the
law. Don't you understand that? The law is the -- what's in
the text books and what's in case law. That's the law. 
Where in your brief do you have any laws? There is none. 
You just wrote any kinda stuff you felt like it. And then
 you expect everybody to agree with you. I -- that's what my
ar -- my attorney's arguing against. There is no law. You
 have to base it on something. Statute, Hawaii Revised
Statutes -- um, not -- section something. Or -- or case law.
Brown v. Board of Education . 95 whatever ver -- that -- I
 
mean, didn't you pass legal -- legal re -- research and
writing? That's basic procedures. I don't understand what
 you're asking me.
 
[PROSECUTOR]: Okay. I'm not even·asking about –
 
[DEFENDANT]: You asked about the law. I don't know.
You're the lawyer. Why are you asking me?
 
[PROSECUTOR]: Because I'm trying to make sure you
understand the proceedings against you right now.
 
[DEFENDANT]: I do understand the proceedings.
 [PROSECUTOR]: Okay.
 . . . .
 [PROSECUTOR]: I'm asking you do you understand why you
are here today –
 
[DEFENDANT]: Right.
 [PROSECUTOR]: -- and why you're fighting this case.
 [DEFENDANT]: And I'm asking you the same thing.
 [PROSECUTOR]: This is not a question and answer where
you get to ask me questions. I'm asking you the questions,
answer it.
 
Family court intervened to halt the exchange and
 
attempt to establish again that Janis understood the charge
 
against her.
 
THE COURT: Okay. I know now there's a big discussion
with you and the prosecutor that this is bogus, this is all
screwed up, not written properly.
 
THE DEFENDANT: Right.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Be that as it may though, -­THE DEFENDANT: Okay.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: Okay? You understand –
 
THE DEFENDANT: Uh-huh.
 THE COURT: -- now?
 THE DEFENDANT: Uh-huh.
 THE COURT: Okay. So we don't go through the wisdom of
this. We just go through what it says.
 
THE DEFENDANT: Okay.
 THE COURT: Okay. With that understanding now can the
prosecutor ask the question?
 
The State then asked a series of questions that
 
elicited responses from Janis to suggest she understood the
 
following: the charge against her; the proceedings; the identity
 
of the State's counsel, the defense attorney, and the judge; the
 
role of the defense attorney; and the fact that she was at her
 
trial.
 
Family court issued its oral verdict finding Janis
 
guilty of Criminal Contempt of Court for violating the TRO. The
 
court noted it was concerned "because as you well know, there
 
seems to be sometimes when you kinda slip in and out of the
 
mental health dimension[]" and asked Janis whether she needed a
 
mental health assessment. In response, Janis stated that OCCC
 
assessed her, found there was nothing wrong with her, and told
 
her she could stop taking medications. Even so, she stated, "I
 
have to take Lithium, Abilify, and Propanolol." She also
 
informed family court she had a court order from Las Vegas
 
specifically stating that she could choose whatever medications
 
she thought she needed. Finally, Janis observed that OCCC had
 
not been able to transfer her to "Module 20" because the
 
prosecutor had wanted "a one-panel," apparently indicating she
 
was confined to a mental health ward while at OCCC.
 
Janis's mental health history, the uncertainty as to
 
whether she had access to necessary medication, her behavior at
 
trial, her unrealistic beliefs, and her unwillingness to
 
cooperate with her attorney or the State's attorney are all
 
relevant to family court's determination of the need for further
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
inquiry to determine fitness. During the course of the trial,
 
the State and family court both appeared to question Janis's
 
fitness to proceed, as evidenced by the additional questions
 
to confirm Janis's understanding of the charge and her awareness
 
of the trial, its purpose, and assistance being provided by
 
defense counsel.
 
We conclude there was substantial evidence and a
 
rational basis to have reason to doubt Janis's competency to
 
stand trial. Therefore, family court abused its discretion when
 
it failed to suspend the proceedings and order a qualified
 
examiner to examine and report on Janis's physical and mental
 
condition before a determination was made as to her fitness to
 
stand trial. HRS § 704-404(1), (2).
 
Because we vacate the Judgment and remand this case for
 
an examination to evaluate Janis's fitness to proceed, we need
 
not address Janis's contention that defense counsel provided
 
ineffective assistance of counsel.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed on August
 
24, 2010 in Family Court of the First Circuit is vacated and
 
remanded to family court for proceedings consistent with this
 
opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 31, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Glenn D. Choy
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
Clinton G. Piper
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City & County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
14
 