NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000744 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
KL, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
RL, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
(FC-D NO. 14-1-0083) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant RL (
Father) appeals from the 
September 4, 2018 Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion to Dismiss 
Defendant's Motion and Affidavit for Order to Show Cause (
Order 
Dismissing Motion) and the February 21, 2019 Order Denying 
Defendant's Second Motion for Reconsideration Filed September 12, 
2018 and Awarding Attorney's Fees (Order Denying Second Motion 
for Reconsideration), both entered by the Family Court of the Fifth Circuit (Family Court).
1 Father also seeks to challenge 
the Family Court's September 25, 2018 Memorandum (Memorandum Striking Motion), which appears to have been signed but unfiled 
1 The Honorable Edmund D. Acoba presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and which stated that Father's August 8, 2018 Motion to 
Reconsider [the Order Dismissing Motion] is stricken. The Memorandum Striking Motion further stated that Plaintiff-Appellee KL (Mother) shall prepare the order and be awarded attorney 
fees.
2 
Father raises three points of error on appeal, 
contending that the Family Court erred when it: (1) entered the 
Order Dismissing Motion predicated on a finding that Father 
failed to comply with Hawai# i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 10; 
(2) issued the Memorandum Striking Motion, directing that Father's August 8, 2018 Motion to Reconsider be stricken; and (3) awarded Mother attorney's fees in the amount of $4,770, in conjunction with the Order Dismissing Motion. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Father's points of error as follows: 
(1) On May 29, 2018, Father filed a post-decree Motion 
and Affidavit for Order to Show Cause and Relief After Order or Decree (Third Motion for Post-Decree Relief) in which he sought 
relief related to custody, visitation, and child support for the 
parties' children. On July 3, 2018, Mother filed pro se Plaintiff's Motion to Dismiss Defendant's Motion and Affidavit for Order to Show Cause and Relief After Order or Decree (Mother's Motion to Dismiss), which requested that the Family 
2 It appears from the record on appeal that a form of order was
submitted to the court, but never entered. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court "dismiss" the Third Motion for Post-Decree Relief and 
impose sanctions on the grounds that Father had not made a good-faith effort to complete mediation, mediation had resulted in a signed agreement which could be reduced to an order by stipulation, Mother was willing to further mediate outstanding issues, and that Father's desire to resolve disputed issues through litigation is burdensome. Thereafter, it appears that Mother engaged counsel. On July 24, 2018, through counsel, Mother filed a further Declaration including various factual assertions, her opposition to Father's requests for relief, and her request that Father be sanctioned. On July 27, 2018, through counsel, Mother filed a memorandum in support of Mother's Motion to Dismiss. In this memorandum, Mother argued essentially the same grounds for dismissal, with greater specificity and emphasis on her assertion that Father was improperly trying to relitigate custody instead of resolving issues through previously-ordered mediation. In a single sentence in the memorandum, Mother asserted: "There is no affidavit or declaration in support of the Motion." 
The August 2, 2018 hearing on the motions began as 
follows: 
THE COURT: . . . 
There are two matters on the calender this morning.
The Court had a chance to review defendant's motion and affidavit for order to show cause and relief after order or decree, filed, May 29th, 2018; the plaintiff's responsefiled [on] July 3rd, 2018. And also [to Mother's counsel],Mr. Diehl, you filed -- I guess it's a supplementmemorandum in support --
MR. DIEHL: I did, your Honor. 
THE COURT: -- of the motion to dismiss the --
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
MR. DIEHL: I filed a memorandum in support on July
the 27th and we filed a declaration of [Mother] on July
24th. 
THE COURT: The Court had a chance to review all of 
those documents. 
MR. DIEHL: Thank you. 
THE COURT [to Father's counsel]: Mr. Farrell, did you
have a chance to -- did you receive all of those documents
also? 
MR. FARRELL: I have and I've reviewed them. 
THE COURT: Okay. I want to deal with the motion to
dismiss first. And I think, Mr. Diehl, your memorandum in
support, I guess, addresses the compliance with Rule 10 --
MR. DIEHL: Yes. 
THE COURT: -- no declaration or affidavit. 
Mr. Farrell, do you want to address that --
MR. FARRELL: Your Honor --THE COURT: -- because Rule 10 says -- I mean, it's
pretty clear what Rule 10 says, if there are facts --
MR. FARRELL: -- put my client under oath and he'll --
or just let me make an offer of proof that if called to
testify, he would testify that the facts related in mydeclaration are true -- my memorandum in opposition are true-- memorandum in support are all true, to the best of hisknowledge and ability. 
THE COURT: But shouldn't that be in the motion 
according to Rule 10? 
MR. FARRELL: Not necessarily. I mean, if you do
that, you'll just be exalting form over substance. I mean,you know, I could retype my memorandum as a declaration.What would that tell you that you wouldn't already know;right? Why make me do that drill. I don't know. Is there some point to it? 
. . . . 
MR. FARRELL:
 Well, you know, your Honor, I would ask
that the Court interpret the rules in light of common senseand what the purpose of those rules are, and it's simply toensure that the plaintiff or the movant, you know, is awareof the facts that are being asserted on his behalf and istestifying himself as to the truth of those facts. 
So when I've got the guy sitting right here and he's
prepared to testify under oath and say yeah, sure, Ireviewed the memorandum in support. In fact, I reviewed thedraft of it. I made corrections to errors of fact made byMr. Farrell to make sure that everything was true andcorrect before it was submitted to the Court, and thedocument that you have before you is what I would testifyto. That has satisfied the purpose of the rule. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After further arguments of counsel in the same vein, 
the Family Court announced that the Third Motion for Post-Decree 
Relief was dismissed, without prejudice, and that attorney's fees would be awarded to Mother. 
HFCR Rule 10 provides, in part: 
Rule 10. MOTIONS. 
(a) Form of motions.  All motions, except when made
during a hearing or trial, shall be in writing, shall state
the grounds therefor, shall set forth the relief or ordersought, and if involving a question of law shall beaccompanied by a memorandum in support of the motion. Everymotion, except one entitled to be heard ex parte, shall beaccompanied by a notice of hearing or setting for hearingthereof. If a motion requires the consideration of facts
not appearing of record, it shall be supported by affidavitor declaration.  All written motions shall comply with the
requirements of Rule 7.1 of these rules. 
(b) Declaration in lieu of affidavit. In lieu of an 
affidavit, an unsworn declaration may be made by a person,in writing, subscribed as true under penalty of law, anddated, in substantially the following form: 
I, (name of person), do declare under penalty of law
that the foregoing is true and correct.
Dated: _____________________
Signature______________ 
(Emphasis added). 
The Third Motion for Post-Decree Relief clearly 
required the Family Court to consider facts not appearing in the 
record. For example, Father requested a modification of the parties' basic timesharing schedule. The memorandum in support of the Third Motion for Post-Decree Relief referenced a change in Father's employment from when the existing schedule had been adopted by the court. HFCR Rule 10 required Father to attest to the facts related to his new job and his modified work schedule, if Father wanted the Family Court to consider these facts in conjunction with Father's request for a modification in the custody schedule. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Essentially, Father argued to the Family Court that, 
under the circumstances of this case, the court's rigid 
enforcement of HFCR Rule 10 was unduly harsh and inflexible. Later, when seeking reconsideration, and on appeal, Father submits that the Third Motion for Post-Decree Relief did in fact comply with HFCR Rule 10 and that Father's counsel was caught off-guard at the August 2, 2018 hearing as he was prepared to argue the merits of the motion. From the transcript, it appears that counsel had not taken note of the sentence in Mother's supplemental memorandum asserting "[t]here is no affidavit or declaration in support of the Motion," perhaps because Father did in fact sign and swear to the contents of the Third Motion for Post-Decree Relief, which begins with "The Undersigned Affiant Moves . . . ," and Father's signature was certified and sealed by a notary public. At no time during the August 2, 2018 hearing did the Family Court acknowledge that there was in fact an affidavit of sorts before the court; however, at no time during the August 2, 2018 hearing did Father's counsel point out this fact to the court or argue that the existing affidavit was sufficient or request an opportunity to submit a further or more substantial affidavit. Instead, Father argued that, as a practical matter, the failure to file an affidavit was curable, the court should let Father affirm the factual assertions, and the court should consider the substance of the motion. 
We review the Family Court's action for an abuse of 
discretion. The Family Court is afforded "wide discretion in making its decisions and those decision[s] will not be set aside 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion." Fisher v. 
Fisher, 111 Hawai# i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) (quoting In 
re Doe, 95 
Hawai# i 183, 189-90, 20 P.3d 616, 622-23 (2001)). 
"Thus, we will not disturb the family court's decisions on appeal unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of reason." Id. (quoting Doe, 95 Hawai# i at 189, 20 P.3d at 622). 
This is somewhat of a close call. The Family Court did 
not acknowledge the affidavit that was in fact part of the Third Motion for Post-Decree Relief, which was filed utilizing the Family Court's pre-printed form. The Family Court did not rule – for example – based on insufficiencies in the contents of Father's affidavit.
3 The corrective action suggested by Father's 
counsel, or perhaps allowing an alternative corrective action (such as a continuance or a supplemental declaration), would have been within the discretion of the court. Yet, the affidavit did not itself contain factual averments. Instead, pre-printed statements that "[t]he best interest of the minor child(ren) of the parties require that the existing orders regarding custody and/or visitation be modified as follows" and "[c]hange in the circumstances of the parties require that existing orders regarding support payments be modified as follows," were followed with "See Memorandum in Support attached hereto." The statement 
3 Although not sufficient to establish all of the facts Father was
asserting in support of the Third Post-Decree Motion, the motion was also
supported by contemporaneous Income and Expense Statement and Asset and DebtStatement, both of which were declared and certified by Father under penaltyof perjury. 
7  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that "[t]he adverse party has violated existing orders of the 
Court as follows" was similarly followed with "See Continuation Sheet, attached hereto."
4 The affidavit itself was devoid of 
substantive content of any kind. On the other hand, Mother did not argue that form of affidavit was improper; she asserted that 
there was no affidavit and that "all we have is the testimony of counsel."
5 
We note that Father's two prior post-decree motions 
were similarly prepared on the court's pre-printed form, with reference to attachments and no substantive assertions typed onto the form affidavit itself. On the record before us, it does not appear that there was any issue or concern raised with this form of submission. It is unclear whether this is a common practice in the Family Court, but given the limited space on the court's form, and the similar, widely-used practice of, for example, referencing, averring to, and incorporating by reference exhibits to declarations or affidavits, such a practice would not seem to be per se inadequate or in violation of the rule. But here, Father's affidavit made no attempt to, for example, attest to the truthfulness of statements made in the referenced memorandum in support. The Third Motion for Post-Decree Relief required consideration of facts not appearing in the record, and Father's affidavit did not directly or indirectly attest to facts 
4 No continuation sheet was attached. 
5 On appeal, Mother also argues that the memorandum in support of
the Third Motion for Post-Decree Relief was signed and dated by Father's
attorney several days after Father's affidavit was signed and notarized.However, that argument was not made to the Family Court. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
necessary to support the requested relief as required by HFCR 
Rule 10. 
Finally, we note that the dismissal of the Third Post-
Decree Motion was not to Father's substantial detriment, with respect to the court addressing the merits of the motion, as the Family Court's dismissal was without prejudice to the re-filing of a properly supported motion. 
On balance, in consideration of the above, as well as 
the entire record of the proceedings before the Family Court, we cannot conclude that the Family Court abused its discretion in dismissing the Third Motion for Post-Decree Relief without prejudice. 
(2) Father argues that the Family Court erred when it 
issued the Memorandum Striking Motion, directing that Father's August 8, 2018 Motion to Reconsider be stricken. Father submits that his August 8, 2019 Motion to Reconsider was timely filed because HFCR Rule 59 imposes only an outer limit on the service of a motion to alter or amend a judgment, citing Saranillio v. Silva, 78 Hawai# i 1, 7, 889 P.2d 685, 691 (1995). 
Notwithstanding the merits of Father's argument, the Memorandum Striking Motion is not in the record on appeal (an unfiled copy is submitted with Father's brief); it appears that neither Mother (as apparently directed) nor Father submitted a form of order to the court, and no order otherwise appears to have been entered consistent with the Memorandum Striking Motion. Thus, it appears that the Memorandum Striking Motion is a nullity and is unreviewable on this appeal. 
Instead, we conclude that Father's 
9  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
August 8, 2018 Motion to Reconsider was deemed denied pursuant to 
Hawai# i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 4(a)(3). Father makes 
no other arguments and no other requests for relief with respect to the August 8, 2018 Motion to Reconsider.
6 
(3) Father challenges the award of attorney's fees 
against him in the amount of $4,770, as ordered in the Order Dismissing Motion. HRS § 580-47(f) (2018) provides, in relevant part: 
(f) Attorney's fees and costs. The court hearing any
motion for orders either revising an order for the custody,
support, maintenance, and education of the children of theparties . . . may make such orders requiring either party topay or contribute to the payment of the attorney's fees,costs, and expenses of the other party relating to suchmotion and hearing as shall appear just and equitable afterconsideration of the respective merits of the parties, . . .and all other circumstances of the case. 
We therefore review the award of attorney's fees in a 
post-decree motion for relief for abuse of discretion. 
Father contends that the award of attorney's fees 
should be reduced because the amount of time Mother's attorney 
worked on the matter, 16.9 hours, is excessive. Upon review of counsel's declaration regarding the attorney's fees incurred, as well as the related record in this case, we cannot conclude that the Family Court abused its discretion in awarding $4,770 in attorney's fees. 
6 Father makes no substantive argument regarding the Order Denying
Second Motion for Reconsideration. We conclude that the Family Court did not
plainly err in entering the Order Denying Second Motion for Reconsideration. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, the Family Court's September 4, 2018 
Order Dismissing Motion and February 21, 2019 Order Denying 
Second Motion for Reconsideration are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 22, 2019. 
On the briefs: Thomas D. Farrell,
(Farrell & Perrault),for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Richard J. Diehl,
(Diehl & Weger),for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
11 