NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-15-0000385
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
CHARLES P. LATHROP, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
KONA DIVISION

 
(CASE NO. 3DCW-14-0001981)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)

 
After a bench trial, Defendant-Appellant Charles P.
 
Lathrop (Lathrop) was found guilty of violating a temporary
 
restraining order (Count 3) and third-degree assault (Count 4). 
The District Court of the Third Circuit (District Court)
1
 
sentenced Lathrop to concurrent terms of one-day of imprisonment
 with credit for time served and also imposed a $55 crime victim
 fee on each count. The District Court entered its Judgment on
 April 6, 2015. 
On appeal, Lathrop contends that his right to the
 
effective assistance of counsel was violated because his trial
 counsel: (1) failed to learn before trial the elements necessary
 to convict Lathrop of violating a temporary restraining order
 
1The Honorable Margaret K. Masunaga presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(TRO); and (2) failed to present evidence that Lathrop did not
 
understand the terms of the TRO.2
 
Lathrop bears the burden of establishing that his trial
 
counsel provided ineffective assistance of counsel. State v.
 
Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 348, 615 P.2d 101, 104 (1980). To meet this
 burden, Lathrop must satisfy the following two-part test: (1) he
 "must establish specific errors or omissions of [his trial]
 counsel reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment or
 diligence"; and (2) he "must establish that these errors or
 omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial
 impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." Id. at 348–49;
 
615 P.2d at 104.
 
As explained below, we conclude that Lathrop has failed
 
in this appeal to meet his burden of establishing that his trial
 counsel provided ineffective assistance, and we therefore affirm
 the District Court's Judgment. 
I.
 
We resolve Lathrop's arguments on appeal as follows:
 1. Lathrop does not provide any basis for believing
 
that his trial counsel did not know the elements necessary to
 prove the offense of violating a TRO before Lathrop's trial. 
Lathrop suggests that his counsel did not know the mens rea
 required to prove a criminal violation of a TRO. However, the
 record demonstrates that Lathrop's trial counsel clearly knew
 that the prosecution was required to prove that Lathrop acted
 intentionally or knowingly in violating the TRO. We conclude
 that Lathrop's contention that his trial counsel failed to learn
 the elements of the TRO offense before trial is without merit,
 and we therefore reject his claim of ineffective assistance that
 is premised on that contention.
 
2Lathrop's arguments on appeal do not challenge his
conviction for third-degree assault, and we therefore do not
address this conviction. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2. Lathrop argues that his trial counsel was
 
ineffective for failing to present evidence that Lathrop did not
 
understand the terms of the TRO. He suggests that trial counsel
 should have presented evidence "such as testimony from Defendant-
Appellant Lathrop that he had not read the TRO after being served
 with it, or similar testimony from one of the other people
 present when Defendant-Appellant Lathrop was served [with the
 TRO]."
 
The record shows that Lathrop's trial counsel did

 
elicit testimony in support of a defense that Lathrop did not
 knowingly violate the TRO. At trial, defense counsel elicited
 testimony from Richard Rose (Rose), the person who served the TRO
 on Lathrop, that Rose did not read the TRO to Lathrop and that
 Lathrop did not sign the TRO because Lathrop was occupied
 cleaning fish with some other people when the TRO was served. In
 addition, evidence was presented through Officer Coley Rowe
 (Officer Rowe), who contacted Lathrop in response to complaints
 that he had violated the TRO, that Lathrop said he did not know
 that the TRO was in effect. Officer Rowe testified on direct
 examination by the prosecution that Lathrop said the person who
 served him with the TRO had not explained what it was and that
 Lathrop assumed that the TRO did not go into effect until his
 court date (which had not yet taken place). On cross-
examination, defense counsel elicited testimony from Officer Rowe
 that Lathrop said the "[TRO] was not explained to him and that he
 did not think it was in effect until his court date."
3
 
3On the other hand, the prosecution presented evidence from
the complaining witnesses that shortly after the TRO was served
on Lathrop, Lathrop confronted the complaining witnesses in
separate incidents at or near their work place, threatened them,
and assaulted one of the complaining witnesses and that Lathrop
stated that the TRO was "worthless," that it was "BS," and that
"[y]our restraining order doesn't mean shit to me." The
 prosecution also presented evidence that Lathrop violated the
terms of the TRO (1) after he was told by one of the complaining
witnesses that the TRO was "in effect," that Lathrop had to leave
the complaining witness alone, and that the complaining witness
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Although Lathrop argues that his trial counsel was 
ineffective for failing to introduce additional testimony to 
support his lack-of-knowledge defense, he fails to provide reliable evidence of what specific testimony was available. See 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998) 
("Ineffective assistance of counsel claims based on the failure to obtain witnesses must be supported by affidavits or sworn statements describing the testimony of the proffered witnesses."). For example, the record does not include affidavits describing the proffered testimony of those present when Lathrop was served with the TRO. The record also does not contain an affidavit or other reliable evidence specifically describing what Lathrop would have said if asked about his understanding of the TRO when he testified at trial. Moreover, the record does not contain Lathrop's trial counsel's explanation for not directly questioning Lathrop on this subject. Prior to Lathrop's testimony, evidence had already been introduced to support a lack-of-knowledge defense. There may have been strategic or other reasons for defense counsel to avoid questioning Lathrop about his understanding of the terms of the TRO. 
Based on the existing record, we conclude that Lathrop
 
has failed to satisfy his burden of establishing that his trial
 counsel provided ineffective assistance. We therefore affirm the
 District Court's Judgment. We note, however, that substitute
 counsel was not appointed for Lathrop until after the notice of
 appeal was filed and this case was already pending on appeal. 
Thus, it does not appear that Lathrop had a fair opportunity to
 develop a record to support his claim of ineffective assistance
 of counsel. Accordingly, our decision to deny Lathrop's claim of
 ineffective assistance of counsel is without prejudice to Lathrop
 
was calling the police and (2) after the other complaining
witness told Lathrop that Lathrop was not supposed to be there
because the complaining witnesses had a restraining order against
him.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
raising an ineffective assistance of counsel claim on a more 
developed record in a subsequent proceeding under Hawai 'i Rules 
of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40. See State v. Silva, 75 Haw. 
419, 439, 864 P.2d 583, 592-93 (1993).
 II.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the District
 
Court's Judgment without prejudice to Lathrop filing a petition
 under HRPP Rule 40 that raises a claim of ineffective assistance
 of counsel.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 29, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Robert Curtis 
(Law Office of Robert
Curtis)
for Defendant-Appellant
 Chief Judge
Associate JudgeAssociate JudgeDale Yamada Ross 
First Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyLinda L. Walton Deputy Prosecuting Attorney County of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
5
 