NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000528 02-JUN-2026 07:54 AM Dkt. 45 SO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000528 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI#I 
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
JASON KAPENA WOOD, Defendant-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 3CPC-20-0000454) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Guidry, JJ.) 
On March 10, 2020, a Third Circuit grand jury indicted 
Jason Kapena 
Wood on two counts of sexual assault in the first 
degree and two counts of kidnapping. The indictment alleged two 
incidents involving different complaining witnesses. The circuit court granted Wood's motion to sever. Counts 3 and 4 involving the second complaining witness (CW) were refiled under a new case 
number. 
On April 26, 2024, Wood moved to dismiss counts 3 
and 4. He argued they "fail to state an offense and are 
defective." The Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Motion to Dismiss Counts 3-4 of the Indictment for Failure to State an Offense was entered on July 2, 2024.
1 The 
State of Hawai#i appeals. We have jurisdiction under Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 641-13(1) (2016). We vacate and remand 
for further proceedings. 
1 The Honorable Robert D.S. Kim presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Count 3 
HRS § 707-730 (2014) provides: 
(1) A person commits the offense of sexual assault in the
first degree if: 
(a) The person knowingly subjects another person to
an act of sexual penetration by strong
compulsion[.] A charge is supposed "to safeguard an accused's 
fundamental right to know what they must defend against to avoid 
conviction." State v. Aquino, 154 Hawai# i 388, 393, 550 P.3d 
1246, 1251 (2024). 
Its sufficiency is determined "by whether it 
contains the elements of the offense intended to be charged, and sufficiently apprises the defendant of what he or she must be prepared to meet." State v. Jardine, 151 Hawai# i 96, 100, 508 
P.3d 1182, 1186 (2022) (cleaned up). 
We review the dismissal of an indictment de novo.  
State v. Kaakimaka, 156 Hawai# i 302, 309, 574 P.3d 767, 774 
(2025). 
In addition to the charge, we look at other information 
provided to the defendant "to the point where the court passes upon the contention that his right has been violated[,]" State v. Treat, 67 Haw. 119, 120, 680 P.2d 250, 251 (1984), "to determine whether the defendant had actual knowledge of what the defendant alleges was missing from a charge." Kaakimaka, 156 Hawai# i at 
313, 574 P.3d at 778. 
Count 3 alleged: 
On or about the 5th day of April, 2014, in the County
and State of Hawai i, # JASON KAPENA WOOD knowingly subjected
[CW] to an act of sexual penetration by strong compulsion,
thereby committing the offense of Sexual Assault in theFirst Degree, in violation of Section 707-730(1)(a), Hawai #i 
Revised Statutes, as amended. 
"Strong compulsion" means the use of or attempt to use oneor more of the following to overcome a person: 
(1) A threat, express or implied, that places a
person in fear of bodily injury to the individual or anotherperson, or in fear that the person or another person will bekidnapped; 
(2) A dangerous instrument; or 
(3) Physical force. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wood argued the indictment was defective because 
count 3 failed to allege the statutory definitions of "bodily 
injury," "dangerous instrument," and "sexual penetration," and did not specify the kind of "sexual penetration" he allegedly perpetrated. HRS § 707-700 (2014) contains these definitions: 
"Bodily injury" means physical pain, illness, or any
impairment of physical condition. 
. . . . 
"Dangerous instrument" means any firearm, whether loaded ornot, and whether operable or not, or other weapon, device,instrument, material, or substance, whether animate orinanimate, which in the manner it is used or is intended tobe used is known to be capable of producing death or seriousbodily injury. 
. . . . 
"Sexual penetration" means: 
(1) Vaginal intercourse, anal intercourse, fellatio,
deviate sexual intercourse, or any intrusion of anypart of a person's body or of any object into thegenital or anal opening of another person's body; itoccurs upon any penetration, however slight, butemission is not required. 
As used in this definition,
"genital opening" includes the anterior surface of thevulva or labia majora; or 
(2) Cunnilingus or anilingus, whether or not actualpenetration has occurred. 
The State argues that Wood had a copy of the grand jury 
transcripts. Its brief doesn't quote from the transcripts or 
identify where in the record they appear. We don't know what Wood could have learned from them. 
The State argues that Wood attended the Hawaii Rules of 
Evidence Rule 104 hearing in the case involving the other complaining witness, during which CW testified about what Wood did to her. Its brief doesn't quote CW's testimony or identify where in the record the transcript appears. We don't know what Wood could have learned from hearing CW's testimony. 
Wood did have a copy of CW's handwritten statement, 
which was sealed and filed with the State's memorandum opposing Wood's motion to dismiss. CW wrote: 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
During a supervised visitation with Jason Wood me and my
children I was kidnapped and raped this happened in 2014.. . . he entered my home at K and held me and my two kidsagainst our will. Eventually he raped me all night untilthe morning. . . . 
When Jason was raping me all night long he pushed me down on
the bed held me down with his body he would cover my mouthso I could not yell for help I could barely breathe. He forced his dick in my vagina and would thrust very hard andviolently with his pubic bone hitting my pubic bone it feltlike I was being killed down there. he would force with his arms when he my legs to be spread wide like I'm doing thesplits. He would would say sick things about all the[unreadable] that fucks me and he would get more turned onand thrust with his dick in my vagina harder. He would drool all over me. He constantly would suffocate me to getme to fight for my life. He would get turned off on when I would struggle more. I would disassociate to not suffer. He slapped me to get more present so he could enjoy it more. 
"The purpose of notice requirements is not . . . about 
what statutory definitions should be included in a charging 
document — it is, rather, to safeguard an accused's fundamental right to know what they must defend against to avoid conviction." Kaakimaka, 156 
Hawai#i at 312, 574 P.3d at 777. CW's statement 
sufficiently apprised Wood of the manner of "strong compulsion" he is alleged to have used, and the particular "sexual penetration" he allegedly perpetrated. It "state[d] the species . . . and descend[ed] to particulars." Id. at 311, 574 P.3d at 776. The statutory definition of "dangerous instrument" was superfluous because CW did not claim Wood used a dangerous instrument. Under these circumstances, the circuit court erred by dismissing count 3. 
Count 4 
HRS § 707-720 (2014) provides: 
(1) A person commits the offense of kidnapping if the
person intentionally or knowingly restrains another
person with intent to: 
. . . . 
(c) Facilitate the commission of a felony or flight
thereafter; 
(d) Inflict bodily injury upon that person orsubject that person to a sexual offense; [or] 
(e) Terrorize that person or a third person[.] 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Count 4 alleged: 
On or about the 5th day of April, 2014, in the County
and State of Hawai #i, JASON KAPENA WOOD intentionally or
knowingly restrained another person, [CW], with intent to
facilitate the commission of a felony, to wit, felony sexualassault, or flight thereafter and/or inflict bodily injuryupon [CW] and/or subject [CW] to a sexual offense and/orterrorize [CW] thereby committing the offense of Kidnapping,in violation of Section 707-720(1)(c), (d), and/or (e),Hawai #i Revised Statutes, as amended. 
Wood argued count 4 failed to allege the statutory 
definition of "restrain" or allege the means used to "restrain" 
CW. HRS § 707-700 (2014) provides: 
"Restrain" means to restrict a person's movement in such a
manner as to interfere substantially with the person'sliberty: 
(1) By means of force, threat, or deception; or 
(2) If the person is under the age of eighteen or
incompetent, without the consent of the
relative, person, or institution having lawfulcustody of the person. 
CW's statement sufficiently apprised Wood of the force 
she claimed he used to restrain her while subjecting her to a 
sexual offense. Under these circumstances, the circuit court erred by dismissing count 4. 
The July 2, 2024 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law 
and Order Granting Motion to Dismiss Counts 3-4 of the Indictment for Failure to State an Offense is vacated. This case is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings not inconsistent with this summary disposition order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai#i, June 2, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry
Associate JudgeKelden B.A. Waltjen, Prosecuting Attorney,Charles E. Murray III, Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, County of Hawai# i,
for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Keith S. Shigetomi,
for Defendant-Appellee. 
5 