  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000338
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
LUIS GOMEZ-LOBATO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR NO. 10-1-279K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Luis Gomez-Lobato ("Gomez-Lobato")1
 
appeals from the Judgment; Guilty Conviction and Sentence
 
("Judgment") filed on March 15, 2011, in the Family Court of the
 Third Circuit ("Family Court").
2 After a bench trial, the Family
 
Court convicted Gomez-Lobato of one count of Abuse of Family or
 Household Members, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 ("HRS") § 709-906 (Supp. 2011).
3 The Family Court sentenced
 
Gomez-Lobato to two years of probation with special terms and
 conditions, including thirty days of incarceration, and suspended
 his term of incarceration for two years if certain conditions
 were met.
 
1
 Throughout the record on appeal, the defendant is alternatively
referred to as "Luis Gomez-Lobato," "Luis Gomez," and "Luis Gomes Lobato."
In line with his designation in the Complaint and Judgment, we refer to him as
"Gomez-Lobato."
 
2
 The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo, Jr. issued the Judgment.
 
3
 HRS § 709-906 provides in relevant part, "It shall be unlawful for
any person, singly or in concert, to physically abuse a family or household
member . . . ." H
AW. REV. STAT. § 709-906(1). 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Gomez-Lobato argues that (1) he did not
 
validly waive his right to a jury trial, and (2) the Family Court
 
erroneously imposed a sentence for uncharged conduct. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Gomez-Lobato's points of error as follows:
 
(1) The Family Court did not err in concluding that 
Gomez-Lobato's jury-trial waiver was knowing, intelligent, and voluntary. Where the record indicates that a defendant voluntarily waived his right to a jury trial, the defendant "carries the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that [his] waiver was involuntary." State v. Friedman, 
93 Hawai' i 63, 69, 996 P.2d 268, 274 (2000) (emphasis omitted). 
Gomez-Lobato argues that the Family Court "never
 
ascertained if [he] truly understood the waiver" where the court
 asked him only "yes or no" questions and that there was a
 language barrier. Gomez-Lobato posits that, at a minimum, the
 Family Court should have asked him "what the document in English
 he signed meant to him and have that response translated from
 Spanish into English[.]" Gomez-Lobato provides no authority to
 support the proposition that the court was prohibited from asking
 or needed to do more than ask him "yes or no" questions regarding
 his waiver, and, under the circumstances, we find none.
 
"[W]e review the validity of a defendant's waiver of
 
his/her right to a jury trial under the totality of the
 circumstances surrounding the case, taking into account the
 defendant's background, experience, and conduct." Id. at 70, 996
 
P.2d at 275 (emphasis omitted). While the record shows that a
 language barrier existed, it also plainly demonstrates that
 Gomez-Lobato had the assistance of an interpreter. Court was
 recessed so that the interpreter could review the waiver form
 with Gomez-Lobato, and when court reconvened, Gomez-Lobato's
 counsel stated that Gomez-Lobato had reviewed the form. The
 Family Court asked Gomez-Lobato in open court if he understood
 what he was doing and what he was signing when he put his
 
2
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
initials and signature on the waiver form, whether it was
 
explained to him in Spanish, and whether he discussed it with his
 attorney. Gomez-Lobato responded "Yes" to all questions. 
Gomez-Lobato failed to demonstrate by a preponderance
 
of the evidence that his waiver was involuntary.
4 Under the
 
totality of the circumstances, Gomez-Lobato's jury-trial waiver
 was knowing and voluntary. 
(2) There is no evidence in the record on appeal that
 
the Family Court sentenced Gomez-Lobato for attempted murder or
 accused him of committing that offense. In explaining the
 sentence that it was imposing, the court noted that Gomez­Lobato's conduct could have formed the basis of an attempted
 murder charge to emphasize the seriousness of his offense, which
 the court is required to consider in fashioning a sentence. H
AW.
 
REV. STAT. § 706-606(2) (1993) ("The court, in determining the
 
particular sentence to be imposed, shall consider . . . [t]he
 need for the sentence imposed . . . [t]o reflect the seriousness
 of the offense, to promote respect for law, and to provide just
 punishment for the offense . . . ."). 
The Family Court's determination of a sentence is 
reviewed for abuse of discretion. State v. Gaylord, 78 Hawai' i 
127, 143–44, 890 P.2d 1167, 1183–84 (1995). Contrary to the cases offered by Gomez-Lobato in support, the Family Court here did not base its sentence on its belief that Gomez-Lobato's conduct constituted attempted murder. Therefore, the Family Court did not abuse its discretion in sentencing Gomez-Lobato. 
4
 Gomez-Lobato signed the jury-waiver form before the State amended
its complaint to alter the date of the alleged offense. Gomez-Lobato,
however, did not thereafter re-sign or affirm his waiver. Although Gomez-
Lobato notes the "importance" of the sequence of events, he does not explain
the significance or argue that his waiver was invalid as a result. Even if we
 consider the point to have been raised, a point not argued may be deemed
waived. Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(7).
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the Judgment; Guilty
 
Conviction and Sentence filed on March 15, 2011, in the Family
 Court of the Third Circuit, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 25, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Shawn A. Luiz
 
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 Linda L. Walton,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Hawai
'i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
4
 