  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000413
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
KU, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
CS, Defendant-Appellee
 
IN THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 13-1-1737)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.) 
 
Plaintiff-Appellant KU (
KU) appeals from the March 7,
 
2017 Amended Order Re: Defendant's Motion and Declaration for
 
Post-Decree Relief Filed May 2, 2016 and Plaintiff's Motion and
 Declaration for Post-Decree Relief Filed June 22, 2016 (Amended
 
Order), and the April 13, 2017 Order Denying Plaintiffs Motion
 for Reconsideration of [Amended Order] (Order Denying Motion for
 Reconsideration), both entered against him and in favor of
 Defendant-Appellee CS (CS) in the Family Court of the First
 Circuit (Family Court).
1
 
1
 The Honorable William J. Nagle, III, presided. 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
KU raises six points of error on appeal: 
(1) KU challenges Findings of Fact (FOFs) 5, 7-9, 11,
 
12, 14, 15, 23-31, 33-36, 38-44, 46-51, 53-59, and 62-69, and
 Conclusions of Law (COLs) 3, 6, 7, 8, 11-15, 17-20, 22, 23, and
 
26,
2 contending that the Family Court abused its discretion when
 
it raised the issue of legal custody sua sponte and awarded sole
 
legal custody to CS;
 
(2) KU challenges FOFs 12 and 13, and COLs 26 and 27,
 
contending that the Family Court abused its discretion when it
 awarded attorneys' fees to CS;
 
(3) KU challenges FOFs 9-11, 15, 33, 34, 36, 46, 53,
 
54, 56, and 69, and COLs 6-8, and 22, contending that the Family
 Court abused its discretion when it ordered Robert Simon, Ph.D.
 (Dr. Simon), to remain as the Custody Evaluator, despite Dr.
 
Simon having lost his interview notes from two days of interviews
 
conducted with KU and the parties' children; 
(4) KU challenges FOFs 3-5, 7, 14, 31, 34, 49, 57, and
 
58, and COLs 8 and 15, contending that the Family Court abused
 its discretion when it failed to exclude privileged, irrelevant,
 and inadmissible testimony by the parenting coordinator, Rhesa
 Kaulia, MFT (Kaulia);
 
(5) KU challenges FOFs 7, 12, 13, 26, 27, 28, 30, 38,
 
39, 40, 41, 42, 44, 57, 58, 64, 65, 66, and 68, and COLs 14, 15,
 26, and 27, contending that the Family Court exhibited bias
 against KU; and 
2
 The Family Court's FOFs and COLs were entered on August 31, 2017.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(6) KU challenges FOF 15 and COL 19, contending that
 
the Family court abused its discretion when it denied KU's Motion
 
for Reconsideration.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the
 relevant statutory and case law, we resolve KU's contentions as
 follows:
 
(1) KU contends that the Family Court erred in raising
 
the issue of legal custody sua sponte and in granting sole legal
 custody of the children to CS because: (1) legal custody was not
 an issue set for trial; and (2) it was in the best interests of
 the children for CS and KU to have joint legal custody.
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571-46 (Supp. 2017)
 
provides, in relevant part:
 
(a) In actions for divorce, separation, annulment, separate
maintenance, or any other proceeding where there is at issue
a dispute as to the custody of a minor child, the court,
during the pendency of the action, at the final hearing, or
any time during the minority of the child, may make an order
for the custody of the minor child as may seem necessary or
proper. . . .
. . . . 
(6)	 Any custody award shall be subject to
modification or change whenever the best
interests of the child require or justify the
modification or change . . . 
.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
HRS § 571-46.1(c) (2006) provides that "[a]ny order for
 
joint custody may be modified or terminated upon the petition of
 
one or both parents or on the court's own motion if it is shown
 that the best interests of the child require modification or
 termination of the order." (Emphasis added). 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, according to the Family Court's Pretrial Order
 
No. 1, the issue of legal custody was marked as "Agreed," meaning
 
that it was not in dispute at that time. However, the Family
 Court raised the issue sua sponte at the end of trial. Thus,
 
whether or not the Family Court properly exercised its authority
 and discretion to "terminate" joint legal custody "on its own
 motion," depends on whether or not such action was required by
 the best interests of the parties' children. See HRS § 571­
46.1(c). 
There is substantial evidence in the record supporting
 
the Family Court's determination that it was in the best
 interests of the children to award sole legal custody to the
 parent with primary physical custody. As the Family Court noted,
 the parties were not able to "discuss issues concerning the
 children productively and cooperatively, with consensus decisions
 within reasonable timeframes, resulting in uncertainty, delay and
 upset for the children." Dr. Simon reported that during a
 recorded encounter, the parties verbally denigrated each other
 with their two younger children in the vicinity, but Dr. Simon
 could not determine if the parties were within earshot of the
 children when the inappropriate comments were made. Dr. Simon
 also reported that "[the parties'] ability to communicate and
 discuss matters in a neutral, let alone collegial manner, is
 essentially absent." At trial, Dr. Simon testified that it was
 his belief that KU was "raging or angry" at CS and that CS was
 also angry at KU. However, Dr. Simon also cautioned that "[CS]
 needs to work on her provocativeness, her inclusiveness and the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
promotion of the children's relationship with [KU]." Dr. Simon
 
also testified that KU's relationship with the parties' oldest
 child was severely broken, that it would be risky and
 inappropriate to separate the siblings, and that KU was rigid and
 uncooperative.
 
Kaulia, the court-appointed Parenting Coordinator,
 
testified regarding KU's lack of cooperation and hostility toward
 her on multiple occasions, including that the mail she sent to
 him was repeatedly rejected, even when sent to the confirmed
 correct address. Kaulia reported that when she asked both
 parties to begin using an online communication platform by April
 27, 2016, KU registered for it over one month after the deadline. 
Kaulia stated that KU repeatedly challenged her authority
 throughout the parenting coordination process, that he was not
 polite to her, that he made comments that what Kaulia had to say
 was "utterly irrelevant" and that he was not bound by her
 decisions. Kaulia further testified that when CS and KU came to
 an agreement regarding the children, KU generally did not abide
 by the agreement. 
CS also testified as to the high level of conflict
 
between her and KU. CS testified that KU had contacted her
 employer with a false story about a pregnant girlfriend being a
 patient at CS's place of employment, "with the intention of being
 damaging," and had done something similar to the man she was
 dating. CS testified that she was afraid to tell KU that she was
 submitting applications for the children to attend schools in
 another state on the grounds that he might try to contact the
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
schools and sabotage the children's chances of attending those
 
schools. She testified that she later learned that KU had in
 fact contacted one of the schools. KU himself admitted
 contacting one of the schools upon finding out, and he testified
 that he was "absolutely not" consenting to the children's
 attendance at those schools. 
We conclude that the Family Court did not err in 
addressing and terminating joint legal custody on its own motion, and then awarding sole legal custody to CS. See HRS § 571­
46.1(c); HRS § 571-46(a)(6). We further conclude that the related FOFs and COLs are not clearly erroneous or wrong, and the Family Court did not abuse its discretion in granting sole legal custody to CS, the parent with primary physical custody. See In 
re Jane Doe, 101 Hawai' i 220, 227, 65 P.3d 167, 174 (2003). 
(2) KU contends that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion in awarding $3,651.21 in attorneys' fees and costs to
 CS, claiming that the award was a sanction against him for
 "running afoul" of the Family Court's schedule.
 
HRS § 580-47(f) (Supp. 2017) provides:
 
(f) Attorney's fees and costs. The court hearing any
motion for orders either revising an order for the custody,
support, maintenance, and education of the children of the
parties . . . may make such orders requiring either party to
pay or contribute to the payment of the attorney's fees,
costs, and expenses of the other party relating to such
motion and hearing as shall appear just and equitable after
consideration of the respective merits of the parties, the
relative abilities of the parties, the economic condition of
each party at the time of the hearing, the burdens imposed
upon either party for the benefit of the children of the
parties, the concealment of or failure to disclose income or
an asset, or violation of a restraining order issued under
section 580-10(a) or (b), if any, by either party, and all
other circumstances of the case.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Here, CS submitted a request for $73,117.11 in
 
attorneys' fees and costs. She stated that the fees included
 
amounts for litigating the Post-Decree Motions, attending several
 court hearings, preparing exhibits and witnesses for trial, and
 writing closing arguments. The Family Court awarded only a
 fraction of the requested sum. The Family Court's Order
 Regarding Attorneys' Fees and Costs did not state the court's
 reasoning. However, it appears from the record that the Family
 Court considered "the respective merits of the parties, the
 relative abilities of the parties, the economic condition of each
 party at the time of the hearing, and the burdens imposed upon
 either party for the benefit of the children[.]" HRS § 580­47(f). We find no evidence to support KU's argument that the
 attorneys' fees were an improper "sanction" for his extensive
 cross-examination of CS's witnesses. 
Thus, we conclude that the Family Court did not abuse
 
its discretion in ordering KU to contribute to CS's attorneys'
 fees and costs in the amount of $3,651.21, and that the related
 FOFs and COLs are not clearly erroneous or wrong. 
(3) KU contends that the Family Court erred by
 
granting CS's Motion to Retain Appointment of Dr. Simon even
 though Dr. Simon lost his notes from his interview with KU.
3 CS
 
3
 KU also appears to argue vaguely that the Family Court should have
excluded Dr. Simon's report and testimony because Dr. Simon allegedly did not
contact many of KU's collateral contacts and because Dr. Simon was biasedagainst KU. However, KU did not move the Family Court to exclude Dr. Simon'sreport or testimony based on these allegations, and these arguments arewaived. See Asato v. Procurement Policy Bd., 132 Hawai 'i 333, 354 n.22, 322
P.3d 228, 249 n.22 (2014) ("As a general rule, if a party does not raise anargument at trial, that argument will be deemed to have been waived onappeal[.]" (citation omitted)). 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argues that KU was not prejudiced by Dr. Simon losing his notes
 
because Dr. Simon re-interviewed KU. 
HRS § 571-46(a)(4) provides in relevant part:
 
Whenever good cause appears therefor, the court may require
an investigation and report concerning the care, welfare,
and custody of any minor child of the parties. When so
 directed by the court, investigators or professional
personnel attached to or assisting the court, hereinafter
referred to as child custody evaluators, shall make
investigations and reports that shall be made available to
all interested parties and counsel before hearing.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Here, Dr. Simon had already completed his interviews
 
with the family members and was about to fly home to California,
 
when he realized that he was missing the notes from his
 interviews with KU. He stated that his memory was sufficient to
 complete his report without his notes, but offered to step down
 and refund all monies paid to him. KU requested that Dr. Simon
 step down. At the hearing on the matter, Dr. Simon stated that
 the only tasks he had left were to interview the parties'
 collateral contacts and to re-review his notes to see if he had
 any remaining unanswered questions for the parties, to have any
 such questions answered quickly, and to write his report. The
 Family Court stated that it viewed the loss of Dr. Simon's notes
 as a credibility issue and not something that would merit
 terminating Dr. Simon's appointment. When granting the Motion to
 Retain Appointment of Dr. Simon, the Family Court ordered Dr.
 Simon to re-interview KU, and Dr. Simon did. 
Although KU asked the Family Court to proceed to trial
 
without a custody evaluation, the Family Court had the discretion
 to require a custody evaluation, and had the discretion to direct
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dr. Simon to perform the evaluation. See HRS § 571-46(a)(4); 
Tri-S Corp. v. W. World Ins. Co., 110 Hawai' i 473, 489, 135 P.3d 
82, 98 (2006) (holding that the word "may" implies discretion). 
The Family Court's actions were reasonable, and we
 
conclude that the Family Court did not abuse its discretion in
 
retaining the appointment of Dr. Simon as the Custody Evaluator,
 and that the related FOFs and COLs are not clearly erroneous or
 wrong.
 
(4) KU contends that the Family Court erred in: (1)
 
denying his Motion in Limine and allowing Kaulia to testify
 although legal custody was not supposed to be at issue at trial;
 (2) allowing Kaulia to testify as to matters that fell within
 attorney-client privilege; and (3) allowing Kaulia to testify as
 to matters that were inadmissible under Hawaii Rules of Evidence
 (HRE) Rule 408 because they were part of compromise negotiations.
 
CS submits that: (1) Kaulia's testimony was relevant to the
 
issues at trial; and (2) KU does not point to any specific
 statements by Kaulia that were either privileged or inadmissible
 under HRE Rule 408. 
In his Motion in Limine, KU sought an order that
 
"excludes the testimony at trial of . . . RHESA R. KAULIA,
 MC/MFT, Parent Coordinator, as modification of joint legal
 custody has not been raised by either party[.]" The Family Court
 denied the motion, stating: "Ms. Kaulia's efforts to mediate
 between the parties can be raised by objection at the time of her
 testimony. And so as far as striking the entirety of her
 testimony as a witness, the Court is disinclined to do that[.]" 
9
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The issues set for trial included, inter alia, physical
 
custody, relocation, and visitation. In her memorandum in
 
opposition, CS argued that the parties' cooperation or lack
 thereof was relevant to the issue of relocation. At the hearing
 on the Motion in Limine, CS argued that Kaulia was a "percipient
 witness" who had worked with the parties. As the Family Court
 decided not to preclude all testimony from Kaulia, but instead to
 allow KU to object if Kaulia testified as to allegedly
 inadmissible matters, it appears that the court determined that
 Kaulia might have had relevant testimony as to physical custody,
 relocation, or visitation. 
On this record, we cannot conclude that the Family 
Court abused its discretion in denying the Motion in Limine to exclude all testimony from Kaulia. State v. Kealoha, 95 Hawai' i 
365, 379, 22 P.3d 1012, 1026 (App. 2000). 
KU's second and third arguments, that the trial court
 
allowed Kaulia to testify to matters that were privileged under
 attorney-client privilege or inadmissible under HRE Rule 408, are
 waived. 
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 
28(b)(4) states in relevant part that an appellant's opening brief must contain: 
(4) A concise statement of the points of error set
forth in separately numbered paragraphs. Each point shall
state: (I) the alleged error committed by the court or
agency; (ii) where in the record the alleged error occurred;
and (iii) where in the record the alleged error was objected
to or the manner in which the alleged error was brought to
the attention of the court or agency. Where applicable, each
point shall also include the following:
(A) when the point involves the admission or
rejection of evidence, a quotation of the grounds urged for
the objection and the full substance of the evidence
admitted or rejected.
 
10
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Emphasis added). It further states that "[p]oints not presented
 
in accordance with this section will be disregarded, except that
 the appellate court, at its option, may notice a plain error not
 presented. Lengthy parts of the transcripts that are material to
 the points presented may be included in the appendix instead of
 being quoted in the point." Id. 
In Kaho'ohanohano v. Dep't of Human Servs., State of 
Haw., 117 Hawai' i 262, 297 n.37, 178 P.3d 538, 573 n.37 (2008), 
Appellant Department of Human Services (DHS) did not list which 
of the 249 FOFs it was challenging, but stated generally that 
"'to the extent that the [trial] court's application of the facts to the law raises mixed questions of fact and law, the court's findings are clearly erroneous.'" Id. The supreme court held 
that DHS had made no discernible argument and therefore waived any dispute as to the trial court's findings. Id. 
Here, KU does not identify any specific testimony by 
Kaulia that revealed privileged information or that was inadmissible under HRE Rule 408. He merely refers this court to 130 pages of testimony, much of which was his own cross-examination of Kaulia. Because KU has not identified any specific testimony that was erroneously admitted, he has waived his argument. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(D). Furthermore, in 
failing to identify any specific erroneously admitted testimony, KU has failed to present any discernible argument. Cf. 
Kaho'ohanohano, 117 Hawai' i at 297 n.37, 178 P.3d at 573 n.37.
4 
4
 Upon review of the transcript of the proceedings, we find no
instance in which KU objected to specific testimony by Kaulia on the grounds
(continued...)
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Accordingly, we reject this point of error.
 
(5) KU argues that the Family Court exhibited bias
 
against him when the judge: (1) failed to disclose on the record
 that KU was an attorney who had previously appeared before the
 Family Court in other cases; (2) struck KU's Motion to Strike
 Amended Order; (3) tardily filed the FOFs and COLs; (4)
 denigrated KU for his lack of monetary resources and ruled in
 favor of CS due to her greater financial resources; and (5)
 misstated in FOF 11 that Dr. Simon opined that the best interests
 of the children would be best served by awarding legal custody of
 the children to CS.
5
 
Somewhat similarly, in Aga v. Hundahl, the appellants
 
contended that the trial court was biased against them because
 it: 
4(...continued)
of attorney-client privilege. Attorney-client privilege was brought up once,
but not directly related to Kaulia's testimony. 
When CS questioned Kaulia
about a meeting that Kaulia had with KU and his counsel, KU's counsel objected
on the grounds that she (counsel) might personally have to be called as a
rebuttal witness, and in doing so, she herself might be asked to reveal
privileged information. This concern never materialized, and KU's counsel was
not called as a witness. 
Moreover, according to the Stipulated Order Appointing Parenting
Coordinator, the parties stipulated that "[c]ommunications between the parties
(and their agents) and the parenting coordinator are not confidential."
Therefore, those communications are not protected under Attorney-Client
privilege. See HRE Rule 503(b) ("[a] client has a privilege to refuse to
disclose and to prevent any other person from disclosing confidential
communications").
It appears that KU did object (once) at trial to Kaulia's
testimony on HRE Rule 408 grounds. 
However, Kaulia's testimony did not appear
to violate HRE Rule 408. Her testimony as to some of the agreements regarding
permissible changes in time sharing were not admitted to prove liability or
lack thereof for the matters being agreed to. See HRE Rule 408. The Family
Court admitted the testimony for the purpose of showing whether KU adhered to
the agreements he made.
 
5
 We agree that Dr. Simon recommended joint legal custody, and
therefore FOF 11 is, in part, clearly erroneous. However, KU's argument here
is that this is evidence of bias. KU does not rely on Dr. Simon's
recommendation in arguing that the Family Court erred in awarding CS full
legal custody.
 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) precluded them from conducting adequate
cross-examination; (2) refused to treat the parties' expert
witnesses evenhandedly when he excluded Appellants' expert
from the courtroom during bench conferences, but allowed
Appellee's witness to remain; (3) admitted Appellee's
unmarked and undisclosed exhibits into evidence; (4) refused
to compel Appellee to produce documents in his possession
that he allegedly purposely withheld in pre-trial discovery;
and (5) made inconsistent rulings favoring Appellee.
 
78 Hawai' i 230, 242, 891 P.2d 1022, 1034 (1995). However, the 
supreme court stated: 
we have long adhered to the general rule that, standingalone, "mere erroneous or adverse rulings by the trial judgedo not spell bias or prejudice[.]" Appellants offer noproof of the trial judge's alleged bias against them otherthan the circumstantial evidence of the court's adverse rulings. Such evidence, without more, is insufficient tosupport a claim of judicial bias. 
Id. (internal citation omitted). 
KU's argument that Judge Nagle should be disqualified
 
because he failed to disclose on the record that KU had appeared
 
as an attorney at family court, in other cases, is meritless. KU
 does not specifically allege that he has appeared before Judge
 Nagle in other cases. Nor does he allege that Judge Nagle had
 any other sort of conflict in presiding over the trial. It
 appears that KU is arguing that because Judge Nagle did not
 affirmatively state that KU's past representation of clients
 before the family courts would not create a conflict or affect
 Judge Nagle's rulings, as some other family court judges have
 stated, that Judge Nagle's "nondisclosure" is evidence of bias
 against KU. KU provides no authority for this assertion, and we
 find none.
 
KU's other allegations are simply that the Family Court
 
entered its FOFs and COLs late and made adverse or erroneous
 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rulings. KU's allegations are insufficient to support a claim
 
of judicial bias. 
Accordingly, we conclude that this point of error has
 
no merit.
 
(6) In denying KU's Motion for Reconsideration, the
 
Family Court stated, in part, that "[t]he [Motion for
 Reconsideration] contains no new evidence from which the Court
 may reconsider its ruling on the merits. While [KU] attached his
 Declaration to the instant Motion, the Declaration simply refers
 to discussion in the body of the instant Motion, without any
 attached documents, testimony or other evidence." 
KU argues that he "provided the Trial Court with
 
information about Defendant's conduct since the filing of the
 Minute Order[.]"
6 CS argues that KU was merely trying to
 
relitigate old matters. 
"If a motion requires the consideration of facts not 
appearing of record, it shall be supported by affidavit or declaration." Hawai' i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 10(a). 
Such an affidavit or declaration is necessary to establish a factual basis for the motion. See State v. Tierney, No. 29993, 
2010 WL 5407351, at *2 (Haw. App. Dec. 29, 2010) (SDO) ("Having presented no affidavit or declaration, and unable as a result to establish the factual basis for any of his claims, Tierney is 
6
 In his Motion for Reconsideration, KU also included a request for
a new trial. In his opening brief, KU mentions that the Family Court erred in
concluding that KU "failed to show good cause for a new trial." However, KUadvances no discernible argument regarding the Family Court's denial of hisrequest for a new trial, and therefore any such argument is waived. See 
Kakinami v. Kakinami, 127 Hawai 'i 126, 144 n.16, 276 P.3d 695, 713 n.16 (2012)
(citation omitted). 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unable to make a prima facie case showing that he is entitled to
 
dismissal."). "In lieu of an affidavit, an unsworn declaration
 may be made by a person, in writing, subscribed as true under
 penalty of law, and dated[.]" HFCR Rule 10(b). 
Here, KU stated in his declaration: "I have personal
 
knowledge of the statements made herein and I am competent to
 testify regarding said statements, except where such statements
 are made upon information and/or belief; as to those statements,
 I believe them to be true." However, he did not submit any new
 evidence contained in or attached to his declaration. See Tagupa
 
v. Tagupa, 108 Hawai' i 459, 465, 121 P.3d 924, 930 (App. 2005). 
Neither did he subscribe his declaration as "true under penalty of law." See HFCR Rule 10(b). Thus, we conclude that the Family 
Court did not abuse its discretion in denying KU's Motion for Reconsideration. 
Even assuming, arguendo, that KU's declaration was an
 
attempt to attest to the factual assertions contained in his
 memorandum in support of reconsideration, those factual
 allegations concerned CS's post-ruling conduct and the post-
ruling circumstances of the children that purportedly arose
 following the children's move out-of-state and KU's loss of joint
 legal custody. We conclude that such factual allegations would
 not necessarily warrant reconsideration of the Family Court's
 ruling on CS's post-decree motion. We note, however, that any
 custody award, including the award of both legal and physical
 custody to CS as set forth in the Amended Order, remains subject
 to modification or change "whenever the best interests of the
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
child require or justify the modification or change[.]" See HRS
 
§ 571-46(b). Our conclusion that the Family Court did not abuse
 
its discretion in denying reconsideration should not be construed
 as a bar to a further modification or change of custody, if the
 best interests of the parties' children required a further
 modification or change.
 
To the extent that FOF 11 states that Dr. Simon opined
 
that the best interests of the children would be best served by
 awarding legal custody to CS, it is clearly erroneous and is
 hereby stricken. See supra note 5. In all other respects, the
 
Family Court's June 22, 2016 Amended Order and April 13, 2017
 Order Denying Motion for Reconsideration are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 23, 2018. 
On the briefs: Klemen Urbanc,
Plaintiff-Appellant, Pro Se. Presiding Judge 
Paul A. Tomar,Lynne Jenkins McGivern,Gemma-Rose Poland Soon,(Ashford & Wriston, LLLP),for Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
16
 