NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000801
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
GINA GILLUM, Appellant-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES,
Appellee-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0532-02 RAN)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
In this secondary appeal, Appellant-Appellant Gina
 
Gillum (Gillum) appeals from the Judgment (Judgment) entered in
 
favor of Appellee-Appellee State of Hawai 'i Department of Human 
Services (DHS), on April 3, 2014, in the Circuit Court of the
 First Circuit (
1
Circuit Court).  In the proceedings below, a DHS
 
investigation determined that Gillum neglected an 81-year-old
 
woman (Client or Client A  ) at Gillum's community care foster
 
2
family home (CCFFH).  Based on its determination of caregiver
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided. 
2
 A community care foster family home is "a home issued a
certificate of approval by [DHS] to provide, for a fee, twenty-four-hour
living accommodations, including personal care and homemaker services, for notmore than two adults at any one time, at least one of whom shall be a medicaidrecipient, who are at the nursing facility level of care, are unrelated to thefoster family, and are being served in the home by a licensed home andcommunity-based case management agency." Hawai' i Administrative Rules (HAR)
§ 17-1454-2 (2005). NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
neglect, DHS revoked Gillum's CCFFH certificate. After an
 
evidentiary hearing, a hearing officer submitted two Notice of
 Administrative Hearing Decisions (Hearing Decisions), which
 
concluded that DHS had correctly confirmed neglect and revoked
 
Gillum's CCFFH certificate. The Circuit Court affirmed the
 Hearing Decisions. 
On appeal, Gillum argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
when it affirmed the Hearing Officer's conclusions that: (1)
 Gillum engaged in abuse, and (2) DHS correctly revoked Gillum's
 CCFFH certificate. Gillum asks this court to vacate the Judgment
 and the Order Affirming Administrative Hearing Decision Dated
 January 25, 2013 (Order), and remand the case for further
 
proceedings. We affirm.
 
I. BACKGROUND 
Client was admitted to Gillum's CCFFH on June 18, 2012. 
On July 16, 2012, the Adult Protective and Community Services
 Branch of DHS (APS) received a report alleging that Client had
 
fallen and sustained a broken hip on June 24, 2012 (Abuse
 Report). The Abuse Report included a statement from Client's
 daughter (Daughter), who reported that Gillum had informed her
 that she had left Client alone in the bathroom in order to check
 
on other residents. Gillum told Daughter that Client "was in a
 lot of pain and when [Gillum] tried to lift [Client] up, [Client]
 screamed." The Abuse Report was accepted for investigation by
 DHS, and an APS social worker conducted an investigation. 
On July 17, 2012, APS visited Gillum's CCFFH to
 
interview Gillum about Client's fall. Gillum explained that on
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the morning of June 24, 2012, she assisted Client with "her
 
toileting." Gillum informed Client that she needed to go to the
 bathroom herself, and instructed Client to remain seated. Gillum
 related that Client assured her that she would remain seated. 
Shortly after leaving Client, Gillum heard a loud sound. Gillum
 returned to Client's room and found Client on the ground. Gillum
 related that she did not call 911 because Client stated that she
 did not need to go to the hospital. Gillum lifted Client from
 the floor and Client stated that her left hip hurt; Gillum and
 her aunt then transported Client to a hospital by car.
3 Gillum
 
reportedly told the APS workers that she should not have left
 Client alone, and that she should have asked her mother, who was
 at home but asleep, to supervise Client. 
On the same day, APS visited Case Management
 
Professionals (CMP) to review records. Pursuant to Client's
 
service plan, Client needed standby assistance and was to be
 
supervised at all times. The service plan also provided that
 Client had a history of falls, Alzheimer's disease, and poor
 short term memory. The service plan identified Client's
 "potential for falls and injuries due to: weakness/fatigue,
 unsteady gait, cognitive impairment/dementia, history of falls,
 and orthostatic hypotension." The corresponding "goal/outcome
 statement" for Client's potential for falls was that: (1) Client
 would remain home safely and will not suffer falls or injuries on
 a daily basis; (2) Client would be supervised at all times, and
 
3
 Client's health condition deteriorated further in the hospital,
she was transferred to hospice care on July 10 or 11, 2012, and she died on
July 14, 2012.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(3) Client was to sit up slowly and sit for awhile before
 
standing. 
Following the investigation, DHS issued a Notice of
 
Disposition Adult Protective Services Investigation (Notice of
 
Disposition) on July 24, 2012. The Notice of Disposition
 confirmed caregiver neglect by Gillum under HAR § 17-1421-9.1(c)
 
(2009).
 
On July 24, 2012, DHS and Community Ties of America, a
 
case management, therapy and consulting service provider,
 notified Gillum via letter that her CCFFH certificate was revoked
 in accordance with HAR § 17-1454-11.1(c) (2005). The letter
 informed Gillum that she was in violation of HAR § 17-1454-7.1
 (2005) based on DHS's confirmation of caregiver neglect. The
 letter provided that Gillum had the right to appeal DHS's
 decision. 
On October 17, 2012, Gillum requested an administrative
 
hearing to contest DHS's determination of caregiver neglect. On
 November 8, 2012, DHS issued its Notice of Hearing notifying
 Gillum that the hearing was scheduled for November 27, 2012. On
 November 27, 2012, an administrative hearing (Hearing) was held
 
before Charles H. Hurd (Hearing Officer). The issues before the
 Hearing Officer were whether DHS correctly (1) confirmed the
 
allegation of caregiver neglect, and (2) revoked Gillum's CCFFH
 certificate. 
Liza Badua-Dumbrique (Badua), an APS Social Worker,
 
presented evidence on behalf of APS. Badua read portions of the
 November 1, 2012 Internal Communication Form (ICF) into the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
record. Badua stated that DHS's position is that Client meets
 
the definition of a vulnerable adult, and that Gillum committed
 neglect because she did not properly supervise Client. Badua
 explained that Client's service plan "clearly states that Client
 A is to be supervised at all times and is susceptible to falls." 
Client's service plan also provides that the "on-call RN was to
 be contacted in case of urgent matters." Badua noted that Gillum
 did not notify the case manager of Client's fall and
 hospitalization until the day after Client's fall. 
Badua also read portions of the September 4, 2012 ICF
 
into the record. Badua stated that DHS's position is that it
 correctly revoked the CCFFH certificate under HAR § 17-1454-11.1. 
Badua explained that when a "caregiver has been determined by APS
 to be a perpetrator of adult abuse, DHS must take action to
 protect the vulnerable adults in the CCFFH program[.]" 
Gillum's counsel also questioned Badua. Badua related
 
that she did not review Client's autopsy because she was
 investigating the "neglect part[.]" Badua explained that a level
 one patient is one who needs "assistance with certain daily
 living skills or activities." Badua related that Client
 "[n]eeded assistance with toileting . . . [and that] she needed a
 walker." Badua explained that a level two patient required a
 "higher level of care, with the client being fed, being on the
 bed, feeding." Badua reiterated that Client's service plan
 "states that [Client] should be supervised at all times." 
Rainbow Aquino (Aquino) also testified at the Hearing. 
On the day of Client's admission, Aquino conducted a three hour
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
assessment. As part of her assessment, Aquino questioned Client
 
about her children and current location. Aquino testified that
 Client was not able to recall the number of children she had, and
 also "did not know that she was in a foster home or what city she
 was in." Aquino testified that she discussed Client's dementia
 and fall history with Gillum prior to Client's admission. Aquino
 also informed Gillum that Client needed "supervision and total
 assistance[.]" Aquino explained that Client needed assistance
 ambulating due to her risk of falls caused by orthostatic
 hypotension. Aquino provided Gillum with a copy of Client's
 service plan. When asked, "[w]as Ms. Gillum informed that the
 client needed supervision while on the toilet[,]" Aquino
 
responded "[n]ot in that exact words. My teaching was more on
 
the overall bigger picture, not specifically just sitting on the
 toilet. . . . [Client] needs supervision with her transferring
 and ambulation." When asked "if the client was told to remain on
 the toilet, would she remember to remain on the toilet, given
 that she has dementia," Aquino answered in the negative. Aquino
 related that Gillum could have asked another person to supervise
 Client while she was on the toilet. 
Sandra Joy Eastlack (Eastlack), a DHS program
 
specialist, also testified at the Hearing. Eastlack related that
 the basis for revocation of Gillum's CCFFH certificate was DHS's
 determination of caregiver neglect. Eastlack related that if the
 finding of caregiver neglect was erroneous, then the revocation
 of the CCFFH certificate would also be erroneous.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kimberly Hayashi (Hayashi), an APS Registered Nurse,
 
also testified at the Hearing. Hayashi and Badua interviewed
 
Gillum on July 17, 2012. In the interview, Gillum reported that
 she informed Client that "she had to use the restroom and to just
 sit and wait for her[.]" Hayashi noted that Client was "given a
 bell to use when she needs assistance. . . . but [Client didn't]
 like the bell[.]" Hayashi related that Client had "diagnoses of
 dementia and low blood pressure, extremely low blood pressure
 with movement changes, as well as her oral intake was severely
 poor[.]" Hayashi explained that orthostatic hypotension is a
 "sudden decrease with movement of blood pressure which causes
 dizziness[.]" Given Client's orthostatic hypotension, dementia,
 poor eating habits, and the presence of substitute caregivers,
 Hayashi testified "that there were options available to have
 prevented [Client's] fall that occurred in the restroom." 
Gillum also testified at the Hearing. Gillum related
 
that she had cared for seven or eight patients in her CCFFH over
 the course of nine years. Prior to Client's admission, Gillum
 testified that she was not aware of Client's history of falls. 
Gillum stated that she would not have admitted Client had she
 known about Client's history of falls. Gillum related that
 Aquino informed her of Client's diagnosis and medication. Gillum
 stated that Aquino did not discuss Client's service plan. Gillum
 also testified that she admitted Client without reading Client's
 service plan. Gillum did not review Client's service plan during
 the six days between Client's admission and her fall. Prior to
 Client's fall, Gillum was aware that Client suffered from
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dementia, impaired memory, weakness, unsteady gait, hypotension,
 
and dizziness. Gillum was also aware that Client required more
 care than a level one patient.
 
On the morning of the fall, Gillum entered Client's
 
room and asked if she needed to use the bathroom. While Client
 was on the toilet, Gillum had an urge to use the bathroom. 
Gillum instructed the Client to ring the bell if she needed help,
 and Client responded that she would call for Gillum because the
 bell was too loud. Prior to this day, Gillum related that Client
 "normally" followed her instructions. Gillum then placed the
 walker and bell in front of Client, and left to use the bathroom. 
Shortly thereafter, she heard a bang. Gillum related that Client
 did not call for help or ring the bell. When Gillum arrived at
 Client's room, she saw Client on the floor lying down. Gillum
 and her mother helped Client into her wheelchair and then placed
 her in bed. Gillum informed Client's daughter that she was
 taking Client to the emergency room. Gillum testified that she
 called her agency the day after Client's fall. When asked,
 "[p]rior to the fall, did [Client] ever exhibit anything that you
 would have a concern to just leave her alone in a sitting
 position for a few minutes[,]" Gillum answered in the negative. 
On January 25, 2013, the Hearing Officer issued the
 
Hearing Decisions. The Hearing Officer determined that DHS
 properly confirmed that Gillum had committed caregiver neglect. 
The Hearing Officer concluded that DHS correctly revoked Gillum's
 CCFFH certificate under HAR §§ 17-1421-2 (2009), 17-1454-41
 (2005), and Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 346-222 (2015).
 
8
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On February 22, 2013, Gillum filed a Notice of Appeal
 
to Circuit Court. After briefing, oral argument was held on
 
February 28, 2014. Gillum's counsel asserted that the Hearing
 Officer's decision was clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
 probative, and substantial evidence. Gillum's counsel argued
 that there "was nothing instructed to [Gillum] that [Client] must
 be supervised at all times while seated[.]" DHS contended that
 Client's service plan indicated that Client suffered from
 "weakness, fatigue, unsteady [gait], cognitive impairment,
 dementia, [and] history of falls." The Circuit Court orally
 affirmed the Hearing Officer's decision "in finding caregiver
 neglect under these circumstances, given the service plan, given
 as to where the incident occurred." 
On April 3, 2014, the Circuit Court entered the Order,
 
which included that the "hearing officer's decision to affirm
 DHS' confirmation of caregiver neglect by Ms. Gillum is supported
 by the reliable, probative, and substantial evidence in the
 record[.]" On the same day, the Circuit Court entered the
 Judgment. Gillum filed her notice of appeal on May 2, 2014.
 II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Gillum argues that the Circuit Court erred when it
 
affirmed the Hearing Officer's conclusions that: (1) Gillum
 engaged in abuse, which includes caregiver neglect; and (2) DHS
 correctly revoked Gillum's CCFFH certificate. 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
"The review of a circuit court's decision regarding its
 
review of an administrative agency's decision is a secondary
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
appeal." Pila'a 400, LLC v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 132 Hawai 'i 
247, 262, 320 P.3d 912, 927 (2014) (citing Haw. Teamsters & 
Allied Workers, Local 966 v. Dep't of Labor & Indus. Relations, 110 Hawai
'i 259, 265, 132 P.3d 368, 374 (2006)). 
"On secondary judicial review of an administrative
decision, Hawaii appellate courts apply the same standard of
review as that applied upon primary review by the circuit
court." 
Kaiser Found. Health Plan, Inc. v. Dep't of Labor &
Indus. Relations, 70 Haw. 72, 80, 762 P.2d 796, 800-01
(1988). For administrative appeals, the applicable standard
of review is set forth in HRS § 91-14(g) (2004), which
provides:
 
Upon review of the record the court may affirm the

decision of the agency or remand the case with
instructions for further proceedings; or it may
reverse or modify the decision and order if the
substantial rights of the petitioners may have been
prejudiced because the administrative findings,
conclusions, decisions, or orders are:
 
(1) 	In violation of constitutional or
 
statutory provisions; or
 
(2) 	In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or 
(3) 	Made upon unlawful procedure; or
 
(4) 	Affected by other error of law; or
 
(5) 	Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the
whole record; or 
(6) 	Arbitrary, capricious, or characterized by
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted
exercise of discretion. 
Pursuant to HRS § 91-14(g)(5), 
administrative findings of fact are reviewed
under the clearly erroneous standard, which
requires [the appellate] court to sustain its
findings unless the court is left with a firm
and definite conviction that a mistake has been
 made. Administrative conclusions of law,
however, are reviewed under the de novo standard
inasmuch as they are not binding on an appellate
court. Where both mixed questions of fact and
law are presented, deference will be given to
the agency's expertise and experience in the
particular field and the court should not
substitute its own judgment for that of the
agency. To be granted deference, however, the
agency's decision must be consistent with the
legislative purpose. 
Peroutka v. Cronin, 117 Hawai' i 323, 326, 179 P.3d 1050, 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
111053 (2008) (citations and internal quotation marks
omitted).
AlohaCare v. Ito, 126 Hawai# i 326, 341, 271 P.3d 621, 636 (2012)
(brackets in original).
IV.DISCUSSION
A.Caregiver Neglect
Gillum argues that the Circuit Court erred when it
affirmed the Hearing Officer's conclusion that she engaged in
abuse.  DHS submits that the confirmation of caregiver neglect 
is supported by the reliable, probative, and substantial evidence
in the record.
In the Hearing Decisions, the Hearing Officer
determined that DHS properly confirmed that Gillum had committed
caregiver neglect as defined by HRS § 346-222 and HAR § 17-1421-2
because she failed "to provide the required care, as a reasonable
caregiver would have done and as specified in Client A's personal
service plan, to which [Gillum] had committed in accepting Client
A as a resident in [Gillum's] CCFFH." 
 HAR § 17-1421-2 specifies that the terms "caregiver
neglect" and "vulnerable adult" shall be construed as defined in
HRS § 346-222.  HRS § 346-222 defines "caregiver neglect" and
"vulnerable adult" as: 
"Caregiver neglect" means the failure of a caregiver
to exercise that degree of care for a vulnerable adult that
a reasonable person with the responsibility of a caregiver
would exercise within the scope of the caregiver's assumed,
legal or contractual duties, including but not limited to
the failure to:
(1)Assist with personal hygiene; 
(2)Protect the vulnerable adult from abandonment; 
(3)Provide, in a timely manner, necessary food,
shelter, or clothing;NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(4)	 Provide in a timely manner, necessary health
care, access to health care, prescribed
medication, psychological care, physical care,
or supervision;
(5)	 Protect the vulnerable adult from dangerous,
harmful, or detrimental drugs, as defined in
section 712-1240; provided that this paragraph
shall not apply to drugs that are provided to
the vulnerable adult pursuant to the direction
or prescription of a practitioner, as defined in
section 712-1240;
(6)	 Protect the vulnerable adult from health and
 safety hazards; or
(7)	 Protect the vulnerable adult from abuse by third
parties.
 
. . . .
 
"Vulnerable adult" means a person eighteen years of
age or older who, because of mental, developmental, or
physical impairment, is unable to:
(1)	 Communicate or make responsible decisions to
manage the person's own care or resources;
(2)	 Carry out or arrange for essential activities of
daily living; or
(3)	 Protect oneself from abuse, as defined in this
 part. 
Gillum also contends that DHS's position that she was
 
required to supervise Client at all times is contradicted by
 
specific intervention requirements in the service plan.
 
Gillum contends that the Hearing Officer's decision is
 
not supported by reliable, probative, and substantial evidence. 
In particular, Gillum argues that she did not act negligently
 because she had no prior knowledge that Client would not follow
 instructions to stay in a seated position on the bathroom toilet. 
Gillum asserts that she was not informed by Aquino or Client's
 family members that Client was at risk when in a seated position. 
In essence, Gillum challenges the Hearing Officer's assessment of
 the testimony and service plan, and asks the court to reweigh the
 evidence and reassess the credibility of witnesses presented at
 the Hearing.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"An agency's findings, if supported by reliable, 
probative and substantial evidence, will be upheld." In re 
Hawaii Elec. Light Co., 60 Haw. 625, 630, 594 P.2d 612, 617 
(1979) (citing HRS § 91-14(g) (1976)). "Substantial evidence is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Jou v. Schmidt, 117 Hawai
'i 477, 482, 184 P.3d 792, 
797 (App. 2008) (citation omitted). Furthermore, 
[i]t is well established that courts decline to consider the
weight of the evidence to ascertain whether it weighs in
favor of the administrative findings, or to review the
agency's findings of fact by passing upon the credibility of
witnesses or conflicts in testimony, especially the findings
of an expert agency dealing with a specialized field. 
 
Moi v. Dep't of Pub. Safety, 118 Hawai 'i 239, 242, 188 P.3d 753, 
756 (App. 2008) (quoting Nakamura v. State, 98 Hawai 'i 263, 268, 
47 P.3d 730, 735 (2002)). 
At the Hearing, Aquino testified that she provided
 
Gillum with a copy of Client's service plan. The service plan
 
identified, inter alia, Client's "potential for falls and
 injuries due to: weakness, fatigue, unsteady gait, cognitive
 impairment/dementia, history of falls, and orthostatic
 hypotension." 
Aquino testified that she discussed Client's dementia
 
and fall history with Gillum prior to Client's admission. 
Aquino also testified she informed Gillum that Client needed
 "supervision and total assistance[.]" Aquino explained to Gillum
 that Client needed assistance ambulating due to her risk of falls
 caused by orthostatic hypotension. 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Gillum testified that Aquino informed her of Client's
 
diagnosis and medication, but did not discuss the specifics of
 
Client's service plan. Gillum also testified she admitted Client
 into her care without reviewing the service plan and did not
 review the service plan during the six days between Client's
 admission and her fall. Gillum said that it was only after
 Client's fall that she became aware of Client's history of falls.
 
The Hearing Officer found Aquino's testimony,
 
specifically her testimony regarding the review of the service
 plan, to be credible. The Hearing Officer also determined that
 Gillum's "lack of recollection about the same service plan review
 on June 18, 2012 is not credible." The Hearing Officer concluded
 that Gillum was "adequately informed about Client A's risk of
 falling and should have had this in mind, as would a reasonable
 person in a caregiving role, when [Gillum] was dealing with
 Client A on the morning of June 24, 2012." Additionally, the
 Hearing Officer determined that: 
[Gillum] chose not to awake her substitute caregivers,
her mother and her aunt, or other members of the household,
as she was beginning her day with the toileting of Client A.
This choice not to awake others for help with Client A, when
[Gillum] was experiencing some stomach ache, was a decision
that lacked good common sense; moreover, [Gillum's] story
that she set the bell near Client A on that morning does not
ameliorate the poor quality of [Gillum's] choices, for she
herself stated that Client A didn't like the bell and had
 said to [Gillum] that she (Client A) didn't want to use it.
[Gillum's] reliance on such poor alternatives are a faint
gesture toward quality care - especially when it would've
been quite easy to call her mother for help, before [Gillum]
went to the second bathroom herself. [Gillum's] choices
underscore that [Gillum] was simply not mindful of her
duties to provide quality care to Client A, to which she was
committed by virtue of the job she had undertaken. 
Finally, [Gillum] did not properly handle the
situation she confronted, when she returned to Client A's
bathroom to find Client A lying on her left side. [Gillum]
described to Client A's daughter, that Client A had
"screamed" in pain, when [Gillum] telephoned [Client A's
daughter] a short time after Client A's fall. This Hearing
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Officer finds that [Gillum's] later denial [of] this
statement is not credible. The condition of Client A was
 not properly assessed before [Gillum] moved the patient,
with the help of [Gillum's] mother, by lifting Client A back
to her bed. [Gillum] should have immediately called 911 and
covered Client A to keep the patient warm. [Gillum's]
choice, once again was wanting and in this regard, is a
separate and sufficient reason to find that she was
neglectful of her patient's wellbeing. 
 
We decline to disturb the Hearing Officer's assessment 
of the credibility of the witnesses and the weight given to the 
evidence. Moi, 118 Hawai 'i at 242, 188 P.3d at 756. Viewing the 
reliable, probative, and substantial evidence, with the Hearing Officer determining credibility, we cannot conclude that the Hearing Officer erred when he determined that Gillum committed caregiver neglect. 
B. CCFFH Certificate
 Gillum argues that the Circuit Court erred when it 
affirmed the Hearing Officer's conclusion that DHS correctly revoked her CCFFH certificate. Gillum fails to cite to any authority to support her argument. This is insufficient under Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7), and we 
deem this argument waived. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) (stating that 
the opening brief should include an argument section "containing the contentions of the appellant on the points presented and the reasons therefor, with citations to the authorities, statutes and parts of the record relied on" and that "[p]oints not argued may be deemed waived"). In addition, Gillum's argument concerning the CCFFH Certificate relies on her argument that the Hearing Officer erred when he concluded that she committed caregiver neglect. As we have found no error in the determination of 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
caregiver neglect, we conclude that Gillum's argument concerning
 
revocation of her CCFFH Certificate is also without merit.
 V.	 CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, we affirm the Circuit Court's April
 
3, 2014 Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 24, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Shawn A. Luiz,
for Appellant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Heidi M. Rian,Candace J. Park,Deputy Attorneys General,for Appellee-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
16
 