 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000473
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
THEODORE KAWIKA KAOHU, JR., Defendant-Appellant_
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 11-1-1756)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Theodore Kawika Kaohu, Jr., (Kaohu)
 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment)
 
filed on May 19, 2015, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
1
(Circuit Court).  Following a jury trial, Kaohu was convicted of
 
two counts of Sexual Assault in the First Degree, in violation of

 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-730(1)(b) (2014) (Counts 1
 and 2); and three counts of Sexual Assault in the First Degree,
 
in violation of HRS § 707-730(1)(a) (2014) (Counts 4, 5, and 6).
2
 
1
 The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai presided over the hearing on the
motion to reconsider, and the sentencing. The Honorable Michael D. Wilson
 
presided over the trial, and all other matters. 
2
 HRS § 707-730 provides in relevant part: 
§ 707-730 Sexual assault in the first degree. (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the first
degree if: 
(continued...)
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kaohu was sentenced to consecutive twenty-year terms of
 
imprisonment as to Counts 1, 2, and 4, and concurrent twenty-year
 terms as to Counts 5 and 6, to be served concurrently to the term
 imposed for Count 4.
 I.	 BACKGROUND
 
On December 7, 2011, Plaintiff-Appellee the State of 
Hawai
'i (State) filed an indictment against Kaohu on the 
following counts: two counts of Sexual Assault in the First Degree in violation of HRS § 707-730(1)(b) (Counts 1 and 2); Sexual Assault in the Third Degree in violation of HRS § 707­732(1)(b) (Count 3); five counts of Sexual Assault in the First Degree in violation of HRS § 707-730(1)(a) (Counts 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8); and one count of Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree in violation of HRS § 707-733(1)(a) (Count 9) (Indictment).
3 
On January 23, 2013, Kaohu moved to dismiss Counts 3
 
and 9 on the grounds that the Indictment failed to allege all
 essential elements of the offenses (Motion to Dismiss), arguing
 
that the charges set forth in Counts 3 and 9 are fatally
 
defective in that the essential element that Kaohu is not married
 to the actor is not stated. The State argued that "'a person not
 
2(...continued)
(a)	 The person knowingly subjects another person to
an act of sexual penetration by strong
compulsion;
(b)	 The person knowingly engages in sexual
penetration with another person who is
less than fourteen years old;
. . . .
 (2) Sexual assault in the first degree is a class A
felony.
 
3
 The Indictment is based on allegations of sexual assault committed
against a minor complainant, who we will refer to as the CW. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
married to the actor' cannot be an essential element" of Count 3
 
because Count 3 is specific to minor victims under fourteen years
 of age and thus, the "complaining witness could not legally marry
 within the State of Hawaii[.]" As to Count 9, the State conceded
 that the phrase "a person not married to the actor" is an
 essential element of Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree and
 thus, should have been included in the Indictment. The Motion to
 Dismiss was denied.
 
On February 5, 2013, Kaohu filed a Motion to Sever
 
Counts 1-3 from Counts 4-9, which was also denied.
 
On May 8, 2013, the State filed a Motion to Determine
 
Voluntariness of Statement to the Police by Defendant (Motion to
 
Determine Voluntariness). The State declared that Officer Kaina
 observed CW "talking to [Kaohu] on her cellular phone. [CW] was
 
crying and told [Kaohu], 'I am tired of all this sex shit!'
 Officer Kaina then put the phone to her ear and heard [Kaohu]
 respond, 'I haven't touched you in a long time, Baby.'" The
 State submitted that Kaohu's statement was voluntary, and not the
 result of custodial interrogation. On May 22, 2013, Kaohu filed
 an opposition to the State's Motion to Determine Voluntariness. 
The Circuit Court held a hearing on August 7, 2013. Following
 Officer Kaina's testimony and the parties' arguments, the Circuit
 Court stated: 
Looking at the issue of voluntariness pursuant to HRS
Section 621-26 and considering the totality of the
circumstances and the testimony of the officer in this case
and the records and the files which I take judicial notice
of, I do find that at the time the statement was made, it
was sufficiently reliable to be identified as [Kaohu's]
statement. And [Kaohu] at that time was not in custody, was
not subjected to questioning, and made the accordingly
voluntary statement on the telephone that was overheard by
 
3
    
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the police officer so the statement is deemed voluntary at
this time.
 
In addition, after the Circuit Court posed a question
 
to the State about what the State's response would be to an
 
objection that CW's statement – "I'm tired of all this sex shit"
 – was hearsay, the court ruled that was an excited utterance, and
 that it was "relevant to the government's response to the defense
 in this case." 
On July 30, 2013, the State filed a Motion in Limine 
 
requesting, inter alia, an order:
 
3.   Excluding and precluding from use at trial any
past sexual history evidence of the [CW] as irrelevant and

unfairly prejudicial. Specifically, any reference to and
questioning regarding a prior incident when [CW] was about
thirteen to fourteen years old and she was raped by several
boys at school; and any reference to and questioning
regarding [CW's] relationship and/or sexual history with her
step-brother. Any inquiry into the [CW's] past sexual
history and/or incidents of past sexual abuse should be
precluded based upon [Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE)] Rule
412. Additionally, any mention of [CW's] promiscuity is
irrelevant and unduly prejudicial under HRE Rule 403.
 
4. Excluding and precluding from use at trial any
files, reports, and/or letters pertaining to the [CW's]

schooling and/or employment history as irrelevant and
unfairly prejudicial under HRE Rule 403. Specifically, any
behavior assessment and performance assessment tests
administered at school, and any conclusions and results of
these tests. This includes statements about [CW's]
emotional behavioral difficulties and ability to associate
with her peers as they affect her emotional, educational,
and career life goals.
 
5. Excluding and precluding from use at trial any
reference to or questioning regarding [CW's] prior
hospitalization and the reasons for the hospitalization.
This includes any mention of [CW's] psychological history
and mental health treatment for her bipolar, Attention
Deficit Hyperactive Disorder, and Oppositional Defiant
Disorder diagnoses. It also includes any references to
[CW's] depression, attempts to kill herself, and incidents
cutting her arm, as well as [CW's] prescription medication.
 
6. Excluding and precluding from use at trial any
reference to [CW] breaking the glass jealously [sic] windows
and acting violently. 
At an October 16, 2013 hearing, as to paragraph 3, the
 
Circuit Court ruled that any testimony regarding CW "reporting of
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
rapes to the school by boys" was excluded. In reaching its
 
determination, the Circuit Court found that such testimony was
 not "sufficiently relevant to justify admission in this case and
 would be a violation of Rule 412[.]" The court also granted the
 State's request as to paragraphs 4, 5 and 6, stating: 
I don't find a sufficient relevance between the [CW's]
mental health history as recited in paragraphs four and five
and the facts that are alleged in this case. The prior
incidents that might have involved breaking of jalousies or
acting out violently do not appear to be identified in a
particular time that would pertain to the incidents in this
case, nor do those actions seem to be relevant to her state
of mind just regarding the allegations in this case.
 
Her mental health disorder, if she did have one, has
not been identified to include a habit of misrepresentation,
or the diagnosis doesn't include her being unable to
identify the difference between telling the truth and not[.]
 
Jury selection occurred on August 7 and 8, 2013. The
 
case proceeded to trial on November 6, 2013. The State elicited
 
testimony from CW, Officer Kaina, Star Kaohu-Scorse (Star),
 
Christina Wolcott (Wolcott), and Detective Elizabeth Rockett. 
Kaohu elicited testimony from Deidra Kaohu (Deidra), and Desiree
 Kaohu (Desiree). Kaohu testified on his own behalf.
 
At the time of trial, CW was twenty years old. CW
 
related that Kaohu was her mother's boyfriend, and that she
 
viewed him as a "father figure." CW testified that Kaohu
 subjected her to acts of sexual penetration and sexual contact. 
The first incident reportedly occurred when she was about twelve
 years old. CW testified that she was sleeping next to her
 sister, and "woke up with somebody touching my thigh area." CW
 stated that Kaohu touched her thigh and vaginal area.
4 CW did
 
4
 Detective Rockett testified that when CW used the word "vagina,"
she was referring to "the female genitalia." Detective Rockett also referred
 
to CW's use of "butt" as synonymous with "anus" or "anal opening."
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not say anything because Kaohu did not know she was awake. The
 
next day, CW told Kaohu's sisters, Deidra and Desiree, about what
 happened the previous night. CW said she felt "as if they didn't
 believe [her.]" 
The second incident also occurred between August 23,
 
2005 and June 7, 2007, when CW was roughly twelve years old. CW
 testified that Kaohu called CW into her sister's room. CW
 related that Kaohu grabbed her butt area, removed her clothes,
 and placed his fingers and penis into her vaginal opening. CW
 testified that Kaohu threatened to "hurt [her] and [her] mom" if
 she told anyone what happened. 
The third incident occurred between April 1, 2011 and
 
May 31, 2011 when CW was seventeen years old. CW testified that
 Kaohu entered her room while she was playing video games. Kaohu
 instructed CW to remove her clothes. CW testified that she felt
 "scared and alone[,]" and "knew [she] couldn't say anything." CW
 testified that Kaohu placed his fingers into her vaginal opening. 
CW testified that Kaohu inserted his penis into her mouth. 
Shortly thereafter, Kaohu inserted his penis into her vaginal
 opening and anal opening. 
The fourth incident occurred between August 30, 2011
 
and August 31, 2011 when CW was eighteen years old. CW testified
 that Kaohu provided alcohol at her birthday party. After the
 party ended, CW testified that Kaohu touched her thigh and vagina
 area, and then inserted his penis into her vaginal opening and
 anal opening.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The fifth incident occurred between September 21, 2011
 
and September 22, 2011 when CW was eighteen years old. CW
 
testified that Kaohu was drinking with friends to celebrate his
 birthday. When Kaohu returned home, he entered CW's room,
 instructed CW to remove her clothes, and told CW that "he wanted
 [her] for his birthday." CW testified that Kaohu touched her
 vaginal area with his hand, and then inserted his penis into her
 vaginal opening and anal opening.
 
CW testified that on December 2, 2011, she filed a
 
police report at the Waianae police station. Early on the day
 Kaohu was arrested, CW returned to Kaohu's house to retrieve
 clothes. While at the house, she heard Kaohu "getting up" and
 immediately left the house. CW testified that Kaohu chased her
 in his car and then on foot, but was not able to catch her. CW
 called the police, and was instructed to get onto a nearby bus. 
The police stopped the bus on Farrington Highway and CW got off
 the bus. CW testified that, at that time, a female police
 officer overheard a portion of her telephone conversation with
 Kaohu. 
Officer Kaina also testified at trial. Officer Kaina
 
testified that on December 3, 2011, she was sent to Haleakala
 Avenue to investigate a sexual assault case. Upon her arrival,
 Officer Kaina observed a female, later identified as CW, "really
 upset, crying, and on the phone, talking." Officer Kaina
 testified that she asked CW "who she was talking to, and then she
 blurted out someone named Theodore." Officer Kaina testified
 that she overhead CW state "I'm tired of all this sex shit." 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Officer Kaina then testified that "I asked again, you know, Hang
 
the phone up; Give me the phone, or whatever. And then I
 overheard a voice on the phone say, Well, I haven't touched you
 long time, baby." Officer Kaina did not introduce herself to the
 individual on the other end of the phone. Officer Kaina
 testified that CW informed her that the individual on the other
 end of the phone was Kaohu. Shortly thereafter, Officer Kaina
 and her partners went to Kaohu's house. Upon arrival at the
 house, Officer Kaina heard Kaohu speaking with another HPD
 officer, and recognized Kaohu's voice as "the same voice that was
 on the phone that [CW] just . . . was talking to." Officer Kaina
 testified that it was "about ten minutes" between the time she
 met with CW and the time that she arrived at Kaohu's house. 
Wolcott, CW's mother, also testified at trial. 
Wolcott testified that she moved into Kaohu's house around 2002. 
Wolcott testified, inter alia, about their various children,
 especially CW, who had at one point ran away from home and then
 was removed from the home for a period of time. She noted that
 Kaohu did not approve of CW's boyfriend. Wolcott also testified
 that she and Deidra opened Kaohu's safe with a crowbar, after his
 arrest, and found, inter alia, his wallet containing a picture of
 CW, at an early age, but no picture of his own children.
 
Deidra and Desiree, Kaohu's sisters, also testified at
 
trial. Deidra and Desiree testified that they were both present
 in the courtroom during portions of CW's testimony. Deidra
 related that she lived in Kaohu's home from 2007 to 2008. 
Deidra testified that CW never told her that she was sexually
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
assaulted by Kaohu. Desiree also testified that CW never told
 
her that she was sexually assaulted by Kaohu. 
Kaohu also testified at trial. Kaohu denied all CW's
 
allegations of sexual penetration and sexual contact. 
Kaohu also
 
denied that he said over the phone, "I haven't touched you in a
 
5
long time baby." When the prosecutor  asked if CW had lied about
the sexual assault allegations, Kaohu responded affirmatively. 
Kaohu also testified that he never threatened CW. 
On November 12, 2013, the jury returned a verdict
 
finding Kaohu guilty of Counts 1 through 6, and not guilty of
 Count 9. The Circuit Court entered a judgment of acquittal as to
 Count 9. The Circuit Court declared a mistrial as to Counts 7
 and 8 because the jury could not reach a unanimous verdict.
 
On November 21, 2013, Kaohu filed a Motion for a New
 
Trial (Motion for New Trial). Kaohu contended that the State
 
failed to properly provide him with all discovery, specifically,
 
Wolcott's written statement to the police about items recovered
 from Kaohu's safe. Second, Kaohu contended that CW violated the
 in limine order by testifying as to uncharged prior bad acts,
 asserting that, although Counts 7 and 8 referenced anal
 penetration, CW testified that Kaohu penetrated both her anal and
 genital openings. After further briefing and a hearing, the
 Circuit Court entered an Order Denying Kaohu's Motion for New
 Trial on December 13, 2013. 
On November 21, 2014, Kaohu filed a Motion to
 
Reconsider Motion to Dismiss Count 3 of the Indictment and For
 
5
 The prosecutor is also referenced herein as the DPA.
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
New Trial (Motion to Reconsider), arguing that Count 3 fails to
 
allege an essential element of Sexual Assault in the Third
 
Degree, i.e., that Kaohu was not married to CW.  Kaohu also
 
requested a new trial as to Counts 2, 4, 5, and 6, on the grounds
 
that he was prejudiced by the defective Indictment. Although the
 State conceded that "a person not married to the actor" was an
 essential element to Sexual Assault in the Third Degree, and
 therefore Count 3 was dismissed with prejudice, the court
 rejected Kaohu's request for a new trial, stating that it "is not
 convinced that the rest of the case has been tainted to the point
 that everything must be vacated and this case tried again." The
 court explained that the "hung verdicts" in Counts 7 and 8
 suggests that the "jury listened to their instructions and
 considered each [count] separately and apart." Accordingly, the
 court denied Kaohu's request for a new trial for Counts 1, 2, 4,
 5, and 6. 
On May 19, 2015, Kaohu was sentenced to consecutive
 
twenty-year terms of imprisonment as to Counts 1, 2, and 4, and
 concurrent twenty-year terms as to Counts 5 and 6, to be served
 concurrent to Count 4. On the same day, the Circuit Court
 entered its Judgment, and Findings of Fact (FOFs), Conclusions of
 
Law (COLs), and Order Imposing Consecutive Term Sentencing
 (Sentencing Order).
 
On June 16, 2015, the State filed a Motion for Nolle
 
Prosequi without Prejudice as to Defendant Kaohu, Jr., in Counts
 
7 and 8, which the Circuit Court granted. 
On June 18, 2015, Kaohu filed a notice of appeal. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
On appeal, Kaohu contends that the Circuit Court erred  
 
when it: (1) precluded evidence of CW's prior sexual assault
 
allegations; (2) precluded evidence of CW's psychological and/or
 mental health history; (3) refused to allow defense counsel to
 cross-examine CW about whether she made false accusations against
 Kaohu's son; (4) allowed HPD Officer Kaina to testify about
 hearing Kaohu's voice on the telephone; (5) allowed CW's
 statement on the telephone as an excited utterance; (6) allowed
 the DPA to question Kaohu and Desiree about the truth of CW's
 testimony; (7) denied Kaohu's motion for new trial; (8) denied
 Kaohu's motion to reconsider; and (9) imposed consecutive
 sentencing.
 III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
The granting or denying of a motion in limine is
reviewed for abuse of discretion. The denial of a motion in
 
limine, in itself, is not reversible error. The harm, if
any, occurs when the evidence is improperly admitted at
trial. Thus, even if the trial court abused its discretion
in denying a party's motion, the real test is not in the
disposition of the motion but the admission of evidence at
trial.
 
Kobashigawa v. Silva , 129 Hawai 'i 313, 320, 300 P.3d 579, 586 
(2013) (quoting State v. Eid, 126 Hawai 'i 430, 440, 272 P.3d 
1197, 1207 (2012)). 
[D]ifferent standards of review must be applied to trial
court decisions regarding the admissibility of evidence,
depending on the requirements of the particular rule of
evidence at issue. When application of a particular
evidentiary rule can yield only one correct result, the
proper standard for appellate review is the right/wrong
standard. However, the traditional abuse of discretion
standard should be applied in the case of those rules of
evidence that require a "judgment call" on the part of the
trial court.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kealoha v. Cty. of Hawaii, 74 Haw. 308, 319-20, 844 P.2d 670, 676 
(1993). An abuse of discretion "occurs if the trial court 'clearly exceed[ed] the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.'" State v. Hicks, 113 Hawai
'i 60, 69, 148 P.3d 
493, 502 (2006) (quoting State v. Yamada, 108 Hawai 'i 474, 478, 
122 P.3d 254, 258 (2005)) (brackets in original). 
When a defendant alleges prosecutorial misconduct, this
 
court must decide: (1) whether the conduct was improper; (2) if
 improper, whether the misconduct was harmless beyond a reasonable
 doubt; and (3) if not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, whether
 the misconduct was so egregious as to bar reprosecution. State
 
v. Maluia, 107 Hawai
'i20, 26, 108 P.3d 974, 980 (2005); State v. 
Agrabante, 73 Haw. 179, 198, 830 P.2d 492, 502 (1992). 
"[T]he granting or denial of a motion for new trial is
 
within the sound discretion of the trial court and will not be
 disturbed absent a clear abuse of discretion." 
Hicks, 113
 
Hawai'i at 69, 148 P.3d at 502 (quoting Yamada, 108 Hawai 'i at 
478, 122 P.3d at 258).
 
A sentencing judge generally has broad discretion in
imposing a sentence. The applicable standard of review for
sentencing or resentencing matters is whether the court
committed plain and manifest abuse of discretion in its
decision. Factors which indicate a plain and manifest abuse
of discretion are arbitrary or capricious action by the
judge and a rigid refusal to consider the defendant's
contentions. And, generally, to constitute an abuse it must
appear that the court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason
or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the
substantial detriment of a party litigant.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Pecpec, 127 Hawai 'i 20, 32, 276 P.3d 589, 601 (2012) 
(quoting State v. Rauch, 94 Hawai 'i 315, 322, 13 P.3d 324, 331 
(2000)). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 A. Prior Sexual Assault Allegations 

 
Kaohu argues that the Circuit Court erred when it
 
precluded defense counsel from presenting evidence of CW's
 history of making false rape allegations.
 
Hawaii's rape shield statute "generally precludes a
 
defendant from introducing evidence of an alleged victim's past 

 
sexual behavior." State v. Moisa, No. 30712, 2012 WL 247963 at
 
*3 (Haw. App. Jan. 25, 2012) (SDO) (citing Hawaii Rules of

 
6
Evidence (HRE) Rule 412).  However, "evidence of false 
statements of unrelated sex assaults are not excluded by the rape 
shield statute because they are not evidence of sexual conduct." State v. West, 95 Hawai
'i 452, 458, 24 P.3d 648, 654 (2001). 
[7]
"Under HRE Rule 608(b) , evidence of specific acts, if probative
6 HRE 412 provides in relevant part:
 
Rule 412 Sexual offense and sexual harassment cases;
relevance of victim's past behavior. (a) Notwithstanding
any other provision of law, in a criminal case in which a
person is accused of a sexual offense, reputation or opinion
evidence of the past sexual behavior of an alleged victim of
the sexual offense is not admissible to prove the character
of the victim to show action in conformity therewith. 
7
 HRE Rule 608 (2016) provides in relevant part: 
Rule 608 Evidence of character and conduct of
 
witness. (a) Opinion and reputation evidence of character.
The credibility of a witness may be attacked or supported by
evidence in the form of opinion or reputation, but subject
to these limitations:
 
(continued...)
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of truthfulness, may be introduced for the purposes of attacking 
the credibility of a witness." Id. The Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
held that "where a defendant seeks to admit allegedly false statements made by a complainant regarding an unrelated sexual assault, the trial court must make a preliminary determination based on a preponderance of the evidence that the statements are false." Id. at 460, 24 P.3d at 656. Moreover, "where the trial 
court is unable to determine by a preponderance of the evidence that the statement is false, the defendant has failed to meet his or her burden, and the evidence may be properly excluded." Id. 
In the instant case, in paragraph 3 of its motion in
 
limine, the State requested, inter alia, an order excluding and
 precluding from use at trial any past sexual history evidence of
 CW as irrelevant and unfairly prejudicial. At the hearing on the
 State's motion, defense counsel notified the court that he might
 seek to introduce evidence of CW's prior sexual assault
 allegations at trial. The following exchange took place: 
7(...continued)
(1)	 The evidence may refer only to character for
truthfulness or untruthfulness, and
(2)	 Evidence of truthful character is admissible
 only after the character of the witness for
truthfulness has been attacked by opinion or
reputation evidence or otherwise.
(b) Specific instances of conduct. Specific instances
of the conduct of a witness, for the purpose of attacking
the witness' credibility, if probative of untruthfulness,
may be inquired into on cross-examination of the witness
and, in the discretion of the court, may be proved by
extrinsic evidence. When a witness testifies to the
 character of another witness under subsection (a), relevant
specific instances of the other witness' conduct may be
inquired into on cross-examination but may not be proved by
extrinsic evidence.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT:  What would be the purpose of introducing
that evidence? 

[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Well, it would go to the fact that

-- I mean, this particular case, she's made allegations
before. It's our position that an allegation was made
previously, but those allegations resulted in no charges,
and the case here will be an issue of credibility. 
It is our position that the witness has lied before in

a similar and same circumstance, and she's doing it again,
and that would be our position. Not because she is sexually
active or was sexually active or had prior partners, simply
to the point that she's made allegations before, the same
type of allegations, and she'll make it against anyone, and
it has been unfounded, and that there's a reason for that -­because she's lied and she's lied before. 
THE COURT:
 [Defense counsel], what evidence is there

that her allegations were unfounded? 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Well, we've asked the government to

see -- well, Mr. Kaohu as I think you are aware of, was in
fact the stepfather of the [CW] in this case, they lived in
the same household. And to Mr. Kaohu's knowledge, no
convictions were ever obtained, the charges were never
upheld. That's to his knowledge. 
THE COURT:  All right. If I understand correctly, I

think your position is that the defendant would testify that
the complaining witness had reported these things before? 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Yes, the allegations in school. 

THE COURT:  And as far as he knew, they were not

substantiated? 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: That's correct. 

THE COURT:  Any other relevance that you're seeing with

that evidence; any other relevance as to the purpose of that
evidence? 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Well, when the [CW] is angry at

somebody, when the [CW] has issues with other individuals,
that she makes certain allegations, and these types of
allegations being one of them, and that that is the same
circumstances that we have here, that Mr. Kaohu and the [CW]
for whatever reason had some issues, and that's why she made
up these allegations. 
I'm not sure if the Court is aware through the hearing

throughout the trial, Mr. Kaohu confronted the [CW] when the
[CW] was with an adult male, and then the allegations
against Mr. Kaohu occurred. So it's our position that
whenever the [CW] has an issue with someone, she makes these
types of allegations to the point that she'll call the
authorities, and that's what happened in this case. 
THE COURT:
 Well, thank you for clarifying that,

because I do not understand this motion that's being brought
 
15

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
by the government to exclude Mr. Kaohu's testimony that he
had these conversations with the [CW] in which he talked to
her about her personal life and he believes that she became
angry at him. I wouldn't exclude that if that's the
 statement as to what he communicated to the [CW] about
during the time that the alleged incidents took place. 
But with respect to these specific incidents that she
reported regarding the individuals that raped her, I did not
find that to be sufficiently relevant to justify admission
in this case and would be a violation of Rule 412; and,
accordingly, that testimony or any testimony regarding her
reporting of rapes to the school by boys would be excluded.
 
 
Defense counsel appeared to offer the lack of "charges" 
and "convictions" as evidence of the falsity of CW's allegations. 
However, "the failure to investigate or prosecute does not establish the falsity of the statements." West, 95 Hawai
'i at 
461, 24 P.3d at 657. Upon review of the record, at most, Kaohu demonstrated that the truth or falsity of CW's prior sexual assault allegations was unknown. Therefore, Kaohu failed to meet his burden to show by a preponderance of the evidence that CW's statements were false. Id. Accordingly, we cannot conclude that 
the Circuit Court erred in determining that CW's prior sexual assault allegations would violate HRE Rule 412 and should be excluded from trial. See id. at 459, 24 P.3d at 655. 
B. CW's Psychological History
 Kaohu argues that the Circuit Court's grant of the
 
State's motion in limine, and refusal to allow defense counsel to
 present "evidence of [CW's] history of emotional, psychological
 and mental health problems affecting her credibility" violated
 his right to confrontation under the Sixth Amendment to the
 United States Constitution and article I, section 14 of the
 
16
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i Constitution.8 Citing State v. Balisbisana, 83 Hawai 'i 
109, 115, 924 P.2d 1215, 1221 (1996), Kaohu contends that CW's 
psychological history and mental health treatment were relevant to show her bias and motive.
 The supreme court has recognized that "bias, interest, 
or motive is always relevant" under HRE Rule 609.1. State v. 
Levell, 128 Hawai
'i 34, 40, 282 P.3d 576, 582 (2012) (citation 
and brackets omitted). Under HRE Rule 609.1, "[t]he credibility of a witness may be attacked by evidence of bias, interest or motive." "The trial court's determination that the proffered evidence is probative of bias, interest or motive is reviewed under the right/wrong standard." Balisbisana, 83 Hawai
'i at 114, 
924 P.2d at 1220. 
In Balisbisana, defendant was convicted of abuse of a
 
family or household member. Id. at 111, 924 P.2d at 1217. On
 
appeal, defendant contended that the trial court violated his
 right to confrontation when it excluded references to the
 complaining witness's conviction for harassing the defendant. 
Id. at 113, 924 P.2d at 1219. The supreme court recognized that
 "the trial court's discretion in exercising control and excluding
 evidence of a witness's bias or motive to testify falsely becomes
 operative only after the constitutionally required threshold
 
8
 The Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides in
relevant part, "[i]n all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the
right to . . . be confronted with the witnesses against him[.]" U.S. Const. amend. VI. Article I, section 14 of the Hawai' i Constitution provides in
relevant part that "[i]n all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoythe right . . . to be confronted with the witnesses against the accused[.]"Haw. Const. art. I, § 14. 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
level of inquiry has been afforded the defendant." Id. at 114, 
924 P.2d at 1220. The appropriate inquiry "is whether the jury 
had sufficient information from which to make an informed appraisal of [the complaining witness's] motives and bias, absent evidence of her conviction for harassing [defendant]." Id. at 
116, 924 P.2d at 1222. Once a defendant is afforded the threshold level of inquiry under the confrontation clause, a trial court may exclude evidence of bias, interest, or motive "under HRE 403 if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence." Levell, 128 Hawai
'i at 39, 282 P.3d at 581 (citing Balisbisana, 
83 Hawai 'i at 114, 924 P.2d at 1220). The trial court's 
prohibition of all inquiry into the complaining witness's conviction in Balisbisana was an abuse of discretion "because, in the absence of that evidence, the jury did not have a sufficient basis from which to make an informed appraisal of the complaining witness's alleged bias and motive." Id. (citing Balisbisana, 83 
Hawai
'i at 116, 924 P.2d at 1222). 
Here, Kaohu argued that "[w]henever [CW] doesn't get
 
her way, she gets angry. But more important, besides being
 angry, she knows what to do, she knows how to play the system,
 and she takes it out by making accusations against other
 individuals." The Circuit Court granted the State's request as
 to paragraphs 4, 5, and 6 of the State's motion in limine (set
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
forth above).  The Circuit Court determined that CW's mental
 
health history was not relevant and found that the "prior
 
incidents that might have involved breaking of jalousies or
 acting out violently do not appear to be identified in a
 particular time that would pertain to the incidents in this case,
 nor do those actions seem to be relevant to her state of mind[.]"
 
During cross-examination, Wolcott was asked about CW's
 
removal from the home. Defense counsel asked to approach the
 bench, and requested that the court reconsider "the issue of
 . . . the [CW's] state of mind, her bipolar, her other actions
 that the Court prohibited," explaining: 
I need to get [Wolcott] to say what she has told the
detective, that the reason [CW] was behaving the fashion she
was behaving is because she's bipolar, she was taken to Kahi
Mohala, that she acts -- she behaves in that fashion.
Without being able to ask these questions, Your Honor, it
hinders my ability to cross-examine the witness and
resulting in Mr. Kaohu's right to a fair trial. As the Court
can see from the [CW] itself, the first witness, it's very
difficult to represent and to get the facts and the truth
out when we are prohibited from asking relevant questions as
to why a person would make these allegations, which are the
person's state of mind, the person's medical state of mind,
physical appearance, and all of those things which the Court
has prohibited.  
The Circuit Court ruled:
 
The witness's opinion as to why the [CW] was behaving
in a certain way would be irrelevant. But questions about
how the [CW] was behaving certainly is something that you've
got into and you can get into. And the questions about her
opinion -- that is, the witness's opinion of the complaining
witness's mental health -- would also be irrelevant. And I
 don't think she's qualified to speak about an actual
diagnosis of mental illness. But again, you can describe an
emotional state of the [CW] through this witness. I wouldn't
limit you in that way.
 
 
Kaohu contends that CW's psychological history and
 
mental health treatment was relevant to establish her bias and
 
motive, and thus, the exclusion of this evidence violated his
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
right to confrontation. However, the Circuit Court allowed 
cross-examination of CW about her bias or motive to fabricate her claims against Kaohu. Specifically, the Circuit Court allowed the defense to establish, inter alia, through CW's testimony: that she would get into arguments with her mother and Kaohu; that 
Kaohu would restrain her when she physically resisted her mother; 
that the police removed CW from the home; that she would run away from home because she didn't want to see Kaohu; that Kaohu would 
threaten her; that Kaohu had hit her with his car; and that she was upset that Kaohu told her that she could not be with her 
boyfriend. As such, "the jury had sufficient information from which to make an informed appraisal of [CW's] motives and bias, absent evidence of" CW's psychological history and mental health treatment. See Balisbisana, 83 Hawai
'i at 116, 924 P.2d at 1222. 
Therefore, Kaohu was afforded a level of inquiry on cross-examination sufficient to satisfy the Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
As Kaohu was afforded the threshold level of inquiry
 
under the Confrontation Clause, the Circuit Court was permitted
 to "exercise its discretion under HRE 403 and balance the
 prejudicial effect against the probative value of exposing the
 jury to evidence" of CW's psychological history and mental health
 treatment. Kaohu failed to explain how CW's psychological
 history and mental health treatment showed CW's bias or motive to
 fabricate her allegations. Moreover, the potential prejudicial
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
effect of CW's psychological history and mental health treatment
 
is significant. As such, we conclude that the Circuit Court did
 not err when it excluded evidence of CW's psychological history
 and mental health treatment.
 
C. Allegations Against Kaohu's Son
 Kaohu argues that the Circuit Court erred when it 
precluded defense counsel from cross-examining CW on whether she made false allegations against Kaohu's son. As discussed above, "where a defendant seeks to admit allegedly false statements made by a complainant regarding an unrelated sexual assault, the trial court must make a preliminary determination based on a preponderance of the evidence that the statements are false." West, 95 Hawai
'i at 460, 24 P.3d at 656. Furthermore, "where the 
trial court is unable to determine by a preponderance of the evidence that the statement is false, the defendant has failed to meet his or her burden, and the evidence may be properly excluded." Id. 
Here, the Circuit Court granted the State's motion in
 
limine "with respect to the relationship or sexual history with
 the stepbrother." Then, during cross-examination of CW, defense
 counsel asked whether there were "any issues between you and
 [Kaohu's son]?" The State objected and the court sustained the
 objection. At the bench, defense counsel explained that, when CW
 was interviewed by the detective, CW alleged that "Kaohu's son
 had done the same thing to her but nothing came out of it. There
 was no arrest." Counsel argued that CW's allegations about
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kaohu's son was relevant to CW's "credibility, bias, and motive." 
The court asked the DPA about the nature of the information in
 the interviews, the DPA answered, "I'm not sure if it was in
 [CW's] or if it was in the mom's, that there might have been
 something going on between [CW] and her stepbrother." The court
 then sustained the State's objection. Defense counsel requested
 that he be allowed to "get the transcripts and place it on the
 record as to the statement made by the witness to the detective
 so that we have a more clear record." 
Later that day, outside of the jury's presence, defense
 
counsel stated: 
[T]he offer of proof would have been, with respect to
the cross-examination regarding [Kaohu's son], that had
nothing to do with sexual behavior, had nothing to do with
whether the [CW] had engaged in sexual encounters that has
no relation to this case. It simply had to do with the
credibility of the witness and the motive and bias of the
witness. Because upon review of the discovery here, [CW] was
interviewed by Detective Rockett, and the question did come
up. The detective asked the [CW], Did you have anything
going on with your stepbrother? And that's on page 127 of
the police reports. And the answer was, Yes, yeah. 
. . . .
 
How long ago? When did he move out? 
My -- I think my ninth grade year he moved out. 

So when you had this thing -- when you had your thing

with him, you were what? You were 14? 
I was 11. 
So the reference and the line of questioning there is
consistent with the CW saying that something happened
between me and someone else in the household. But we do
 know, as an officer of court, upon review of all the
records, talking to the witness, that there was no arrest
made of [Kaohu's son], but we do know that the nature and
line of the questioning clearly implicates that she and the
son, Kaohu son, had engaged in something. And the fact that
 no investigation was made and no arrest was made goes
directly to the heart of she's made accusations before and 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
those accusations were not true. So it goes straight to
credibility, has nothing to do with her past sexual behavior. 
Kaohu contends that CW's statements to Detective 
Rockett regarding his son "show[ed] that [CW] had a history of 
making false allegations." However, CW's response to Detective Rockett's vague question does not support Kaohu's proposition that CW made a false allegation against Kaohu's son. Kaohu also argued that the lack of investigation evidenced the falsity of CW's allegations. However, "the failure to investigate or prosecute does not establish the falsity of the statements." West, 95 Hawai
'i at 461, 24 P.3d at 657. The truth or falsity of 
CW's purported prior sexual assault allegation was unknown. Therefore, we cannot conclude that the Circuit Court erred when it precluded defense counsel from cross-examining CW regarding her allegations against Kaohu's son. 
D. Kaohu's Statement on the Telephone
 On appeal, Kaohu argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
when it allowed Officer Kaina to testify regarding Kaohu's 
statement to CW, "I haven't touched you in a long time, baby."
9
 
Kaohu argues that Officer Kaina's testimony should have been
 excluded under HRE 403. 
HRE Rule 403 provides that "[a]lthough relevant,
 
evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially
 outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the
 
9
 According to Officer Kaina's testimony, this statement was made by
Kaohu in response to CW's statement that, "I'm tired of this sex shit."
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue 
delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence." This balance is based on "the need for the evidence, the efficacy of alternative proof, and the degree to which the evidence will probably rouse the jury to overmastering hostility." State v. Bates, 84 Hawai
'i 211, 228, 933 P.2d 48, 65 
(1997) (quoting State v. Renon, 73 Haw. 23, 38, 828 P.2d 1266, 1273, reconsideration denied, 73 Haw. 625, 858 P.2d 734 (1992) (citations and footnote omitted)). The admissibility of relevant evidence under HRE 403 "is eminently suited to the trial court's exercise of its discretion because it requires a cost-benefit calculus and a delicate balance between probative value and prejudicial effect." State v. McCrory, 104 Hawai
'i 203, 207, 87 
P.3d 275, 279 (2004) (quoting Sato v. Tawata, 79 Hawai 'i 14, 19, 
897 P.2d 941, 946 (1995)). 
The probative value of Officer Kaina's testimony
 
regarding Kaohu's statement was high, given the nature of the
 charges against him. At trial, CW testified that Kaohu subjected
 her to multiple acts of sexual penetration and sexual contact. 
Kaohu denied all incidents of sexual penetration and sexual
 contact. As Professor Bowman notes, "[i]f probative value is
 great, the evidence will be admitted even though equally great
 prejudice must be risked." Addison M. Bowman, Hawaii Rules of
 Evidence Manual § 403-1 (2016-17 ed). Given the broad discretion
 afforded to a trial court, we conclude that the Circuit Court did
 not abuse its discretion in permitting Officer Kaina's testimony. 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
E. CW's Statement To Kaohu
 
Kaohu contends that the Circuit Court erred when it
 
allowed Officer Kaina's testimony regarding CW's statement, "I'm
 tired of this sex shit" as an excited utterance. 
HRE Rule 802 (2016) states in relevant part that
 
"[h]earsay is not admissible except as provided by these
 rules[.]" One of the exceptions to the exclusion of hearsay, set
 forth in HRE Rule 803(b)(2) (2016), is that an "excited
 utterance" is not excluded.
 
Before addressing whether this hearsay exception
 
applies, however, we consider whether CW's statement was
 admissible as non-hearsay, i.e., admissible for reasons other
 than to prove the truth of the matter asserted. Numerous courts
 have held that statements providing context for other admissible
 statements are not hearsay because they are not offered for their
 truth. See, e.g., United States v. Cruz-Diaz, 550 F.3d 169, 176
 
(1st Cir. 2008); United States v. Neuman, 406 F. App'x 847, 850
 (5th Cir. 2010); United States v. Wilson, 653 F. Appx 433, 443
 (6th Cir. 2016); United States v. Woods, 301 F.3d 556, 561 (7th
 Cir. 2002); United States v. Tolliver, 454 F.3d 660, 666 (7th
 Cir. 2006); United States v. Cooke, 675 F.3d 1153, 1156 (8th Cir.
 2012); United States v. Echeverry, 759 F.2d 1451, 1457 (9th Cir.
 1985); United States v. Valdes-Fiallo, 213 F. App'x 957, 959-60
 (11th Cir. 2007); Estes v. State, 249 P.3d 313, 315-16 (Alaska
 Ct. App. 2011); State v. Norris -- N.E.3d --, 2016 WL 4728447 at
 *8 (Ohio Ct. App., 2nd Dist., Sept. 9, 2016); Kimball v. State,
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
24 S.W.3d 555, 564 (Tex. App. 2000). That analysis applies in
 
this case.
 
Here, the admission of CW's statement that "I'm tired
 
of this sex shit" was necessary to provide context to Kaohu's
 response that "I haven't touched you in a long time, baby." 
Thus, Officer Kaina's testimony regarding CW's statement was
 admissible as non-hearsay to provide context to Kaohu's response. 
Accordingly, we find no reversible error in the admission of CW's
 statement and need not address whether the requirements for the
 excited utterance exception to the hearsay rule were met.
 
F. Prosecutorial Misconduct
 Kaohu contends that the DPA committed prosecutorial
 
misconduct when she repeatedly asked Desiree and Kaohu whether CW
 lied in her testimony. We agree.
 
In Maluia, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court specifically 
addressed this issue and held that "the prosecution may not ask a defendant to comment on another witness's veracity." Maluia, 107 
Hawai
'i at 24, 108 P.3d at 977. The supreme court enumerated and 
explained several reasons why "were-they-lying" question are improper, including, inter alia, that such questions invade the province of the jury and they are argumentative, they are inherently unfair, and they create a "no-win" situation for the defendant. Id. The supreme court further held that such 
questions constitute prosecutorial misconduct, requiring analysis of whether the conduct was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Id. at 25, 27, 108 P.3d at 978, 980. 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, during the DPA's cross-examination of Desiree,
 
the DPA asked Desiree, roughly six times, whether she was saying
 
that CW had lied at trial and to the police. This was
 impermissible under Maluia. However, the DPA's cross-examination
 appears to have been, at least in part, an attempt to address
 Desiree's direct testimony. Desiree had been asked by defense
 counsel about CW's trial testimony, wherein CW testified that she
 had told Desiree about Kaohu's alleged sex abuse. In reference
 to CW's testimony, Desiree testified, "[t]hat was not true."
 
During the DPA's cross-examination of Kaohu, the
 
following colloquy took place:
 
[DPA]: You never touched [CW] on the vagina? 
[Kaohu]: No. 
[DPA]: You're saying she lied about that? 
[Kaohu]: Yes. 
[DPA]:
 . . . you never inserted your finger into her
vagina? 
[Kaohu]: Nope. 
[DPA]: So she lied about that, too? 
[Kaohu]: Yes. 
[Defense counsel]: Your Honor, argumentative. 
THE COURT: Objection is overruled. 
[DPA]: You never inserted your penis into her vagina? 
[Kaohu]: No. 
[DPA]: So she lied about that, as well? 
[Kaohu]: Yes. 
[DPA]: You never threatened to kill her? 
[Kaohu]: No. 
[DPA]: Or her mom? 
27
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[Kaohu]: No. 
[DPA]:
 So she's lying about all of that? 
[Kaohu]: Yes, she is. 
. . . . 
[DPA]: You never put your penis in [CW's] mouth? 
[Kaohu]: No. 
[DPA]: She lied about that, as well? 
[Kaohu]: Yes. 
[DPA]: You never put your penis into her anal opening?
 [Kaohu]: No. 
[DPA]: She lied about that? 
[Kaohu]: Yes. 
The prosecutor's numerous "did-she-lie" questions 
violated the supreme court's holding in Maluia and constituted 
prosecutorial misconduct. Thus, the Circuit Court erred in overruling Kaohu's objections. Accordingly, we turn to whether the prosecution's misconduct was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Maluia, 107 Hawai
'i at 27, 108 P.3d at 980. 
"In order to determine whether the alleged
 
prosecutorial misconduct reached the level of reversible error,
 we consider the nature of the alleged misconduct, the promptness
 or lack of a curative instruction, and the strength or weakness
 of the evidence against defendant." Agrabante, 73 Haw. at 198,
 
830 P.2d at 502. We consider the Agrabante factors as follows.
 
Here, the prosecutor's conduct was in direct violation
 
of the supreme court's holding in Maluia. However, in discussing
 the nature of this type of misconduct, the supreme court in
 Maluia also stated that:
 
28
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the conduct was less egregious than that presented in those
cases where we vacated the defendants' convictions and remanded for new trials. See, e.g., State v. Wakisaka, 102Hawai'i 504, 78 P.3d 317 (2003) (vacating and remanding
where the prosecution improperly commented on thedefendant's failure to testify); State v. Pacheco, 96Hawai'i 83, 95, 26 P.3d 572, 584 (2001) (vacating and
remanding where "the [prosecution's] characterization of[the defendant] as an 'asshole' strongly conveyed hispersonal opinion and could only have been calculated toinflame the passions of the jurors and to divert them, byinjecting an issue wholly unrelated to [the defendant's]guilt or innocence into their deliberations, from their dutyto decide the case on the evidence"); State v. Marsh, 68Haw. 659, 728 P.2d 1301 (1986) (vacating and remanding wherethe prosecutor, in closing, repeatedly stated her personalbelief that the defendant was guilty). 
Maluia, 107 Hawai 'i at 27, 108 P.3d at 981. 
In this case, the main theory of Kaohu's defense was
 
that CW was lying about the sexual abuse. The testimony elicited
 
by his attorney was directed principally at undermining CW's
 credibility, casting her as a defiant, difficult, and angry child
 who lied about the abuse. Thus, although the DPA improperly
 engaged in did-she-lie questions, even without the improper
 questions, it was clear that Kaohu was in fact asserting that CW
 was lying about the alleged incidents of sexual assaults. 
As to the second Agrabante factor, there were no
 
curative instructions, as Kaohu's objections were overruled and
 the improper questions were permitted. 
Finally, we consider the strength of the evidence in 
this case. We are mindful that, "[i]n close cases involving the credibility of witnesses, particularly where there are no disinterested witnesses or other corroborating evidence, [the supreme] court has been reluctant to hold improper statements harmless." State v. Tuua, 125 Hawai
'i 10, 17, 250 P.3d 273, 280 
29
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2011). However, in this case, in addition to the conflicting
 
testimony of CW and Kaohu, there is, inter alia, Star's testimony
 and Officer Kaina's testimony, which corroborated CW's testimony. 
Star, who is Kaohu's daughter and not related by blood to CW,
 observed that her father was "more affectionate" to CW, described
 by Star as "more hugging, [he would] touch her more . . . [j]ust
 touch her more, I guess[.]" She also testified about a time
 that:
 
[W]e were in the car and we were driving home from his
job and a conversation came about boyfriends, and dad was
stating how he thought we could have a lot of boyfriends,
have a lot of sex because we'd have loose pussies, and he
said something about [CW's] pussy being tight compared to my
stepmom, whose pussy was loose."
 
As discussed above, Officer Kaina testified that she
 
observed CW talking to Kaohu on her cellular phone. CW was crying
 
and told Kaohu, "I'm tired of all this sex shit!" Officer Kaina
 then put the phone to her ear and heard Kaohu respond, "Well, I
 haven't touched you [in a] long time, baby.'" In addition, there
 was various circumstantial evidence, such as CW's picture in
 Kaohu's wallet, and reasonable inferences therefrom, that
 supported the jury's verdict.
 
After carefully considering the Agrabante factors in
 
light of the entire record in this case, we conclude that the
 DPA's prosecutorial misconduct was harmless beyond a reasonable
 doubt. 
30
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
G. Motion for New Trial and Motion to Reconsider
 
Kaohu asserts that the Circuit Court erred when it
 
denied Kaohu's motion for new trial, as well as his motion to
 reconsider his request for a new trial. 
Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 33 provides in 
relevant part that "[t]he court on motion of a defendant may grant a new trial to the defendant if required in the interest of justice." 
As to Counts 7 and 8, CW testified that Kaohu
 
penetrated her genital as well as her anal opening, which was
 contrary to her prior statements. Although the Circuit Court
 declared a mistrial as to Counts 7 and 8, because the jury could
 not reach a unanimous verdict, Kaohu contends that the jury took
 into account CW's testimony as to Counts 7 and 8 in its
 consideration of Counts 1 through 6, and therefore he was
 prejudiced. 
The Circuit Court, however, instructed the jury that: 
The Defendant, Theodore Kawika Kaohu, Jr., is charged
with more than one offense under separate counts in the
indictment. Each count and the evidence that applies to
that count is to be considered separately. The fact that
 you may find the defendant not guilty or guilty of one of
the counts charged does not mean that you must reach the
same verdict with respect to any other count charged. 
It is presumed that the jury adhered to the Circuit 
Court's instructions. State v. Webster, 94 Hawai 'i 241, 248, 11 
P.3d 466, 473 (2000). There is no reason to believe that the 
jury was unable to consider the evidence for each count without reference to the other counts. In fact, given the mixed verdict, 
31
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
it appears that the jury did in fact heed the court's
 
instruction. We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse
 its discretion in denying Kaohu's motion for new trial. 
Similarly, Kaohu contends that the jury improperly
 
heard evidence regarding Counts 3 and 9, and that this evidence
 tainted the remaining counts. Again, the jury's verdict
 demonstrated its ability to properly apply the evidence adduced
 to each count. We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse
 its discretion in denying a new trial based on this argument.
 
H. Sentencing
 Kaohu argues that the Circuit Court erred when it
 
imposed consecutive sentences in this case, contending that
 punishment was so disproportionate to the criminal conduct that
 it constituted constitutionally infirm cruel and unusual
 punishment, that the Circuit Court's findings were clearly
 erroneous, and that the lengthy sentence was not warranted
 because CW did not suffer an actual physical injury. The Circuit
 Court's reasoning, after considering the HRS § 706-606 factors,
 was sound, supported by these factors, and stated on the record. 
We conclude that these arguments are without merit. 
Likewise, Kaohu's argument that his consecutive 
sentences were in violation of Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466, 490 (2000), is without merit. See State v. Kahapea, 111 
Hawai
'i 267, 279-80, 141 P.3d 440, 452-53 (2006). 
Nevertheless, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court's recent 
decision in State v. Barrios, 139 Hawai 'i 321, 337-38, 389 P.3d 
32
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
916, 932-33 (2016), requires that "sentencing courts must state
 
on the record the HRS § 706-606 factors that support each
 consecutive sentence." (Emphasis added.) Here, the Circuit Court
 ordered that the twenty-year sentence for Count 2 be consecutive
 to the twenty-year sentence for Count 1 and that the twenty-year
 sentence for Count 4 be consecutive to both Counts 1 and 2. The
 Circuit Court did not, as required by Barrios, adequately
 articulate the factors that support each of the multiple
 consecutive sentences. Therefore, we must vacate the portion of
 the Judgment sentencing Kaohu to multiple consecutive terms of
 imprisonment.
 V. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate in part the 
Circuit Court's May 19, 2015 Judgment, to the extent that it imposed consecutive sentences, and remand to the Circuit Court for resentencing before a different judge. See Barrios, 139 
Hawai
'i at 339, 389 P.3d at 934. The Judgment is otherwise 
affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, April 28, 2017. 
On the briefs: Dwight C.H. Lum,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
33
 