FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAI# I 
---o0o---
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
CYRINA HEWITT, Defendant-Appellant 
NO. CAAP-16-0000460 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
KONA DIVISION 
(CASE NUMBER 3DTA-15-00745) 
F
EBRUARY 16, 2021 
GINOZA, CHIEF JUDGE, LEONARD AND HIRAOKA, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY HIRAOKA, J. 
After a bench trial, Defendant-Appellant Cyrina Hewitt 
(Hewitt)
 was convicted of operating a vehicle under the influence 
of an intoxicant (OVUII) in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes 
(HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1),1 and driving without a license in 
1 HRS § 291E-61 (2007) provides, in relevant part: 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle
under the influence of an intoxicant if the person operates
or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle: 
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an 
(continued...) FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1 (...continued)violation of HRS § 286-102(b).2 Hewitt appeals from the 
"Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment" (Judgment) entered by 
the District Court of the Third Circuit, Kona Division,3 on 
May 20, 2016. She contends that the district court erred by
(1) denying her motion to suppress her statement to a police 
officer that she was driving and failing to determine the 
voluntariness of her statement; (2) denying her motion to 
suppress the result of her warrantless blood draw; and
(3) admitting her blood test result into evidence. 
We hold that the district court did not err by denying 
Hewitt's motion to suppress her statement, but did err by overruling Hewitt's HRS § 621-26 trial objection and failing to conduct a hearing on the voluntariness of her statement. In addition, the district court erred by denying Hewitt's motion to suppress her blood test result because the State did not develop the record to justify the warrantless blood draw. Accordingly, we vacate the Judgment and remand for a new trial; we need not decide Hewitt's third point of error. 
BACKGROUND 
At 1:00 a.m. on July 3, 2014, Hawai# i County Police 
amount sufficient to impair the person's normal
mental faculties or ability to care for theperson and guard against casualty[.] 
2 HRS § 286-102 (Supp. 2013) provides, in relevant part: 
(b) A person operating the following category or
combination of categories of motor vehicles shall beexamined as provided in section 286–108 and duly licensed bythe examiner of drivers: 
. . . . 
(3) Passenger cars of any gross vehicle weight
rating, buses designed to transport fifteen orfewer occupants, and trucks and vans having agross vehicle weight rating of eighteen thousandpounds or less[.] 
3 The Honorable Margaret K. Masunaga presided. 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Department (HCPD) police officer Chandler Nacino was assigned to 
contact a possible assault victim at the Kona Community Hospital 
emergency room. The possible victim was Hewitt. Hospital staff told Officer Nacino that Hewitt had been dropped off at the emergency room by an unknown male. The male was not present when Officer Nacino made contact with Hewitt. A nurse was present, but left the room as Officer Nacino entered. HCPD police officer Kaea Sugata was also present in the emergency room, but Officer Nacino "did the majority of the talking[.]" 
Hewitt was lying in a hospital bed, awake, and wearing 
a medical gown. She appeared to be disoriented. Neither Officer Nacino nor Officer Sugata remembered whether Hewitt was hooked up to an intravenous line. Hewitt had large contusions on her face. Her eyes were swollen shut. She had a laceration on her ear. She gave Officer Nacino her name and date of birth. She did not know where she was, and did not know why she was in the hospital. Officer Nacino then served her with "legal documents" for "an unrelated case[,]" for which she had to sign.
4 
Officer Nacino testified that when he asked Hewitt if 
she had been assaulted, "She gave me incoherent answers like, you know, that she's a big girl, she can handle her stuff, and kinda undecipherable, really, what she was saying." Officer Nacino observed that Hewitt "appeared to be out of it and had slurred speech." 
Officer Nacino asked Hewitt why her eyes were swollen. 
Hewitt said she had pink eye, and later said she had stye eye. Officer Nacino did not think her injuries were consistent with either medical condition. Officer Nacino suspected that Hewitt was under the influence of alcohol or some kind of intoxicant, but he did not testify whether he knew if Hewitt had been given any medication in the emergency room that might have affected her level of consciousness. 
4 The record does not show what the document was, to what case it
pertained, or why Officer Nacino had possession of the document at the time he
was assigned to investigate an unidentified potential assault victim. 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At that time, some paramedics walked by and asked what 
was happening. Officer Nacino told the paramedics he was 
investigating whether Hewitt was an assault victim. 
The 
paramedics told Officer Nacino they had seen a pickup truck in the bushes near the intersection of Queen Ka# a
humanu Highway and 
Kuakini Highway. 
The paramedics gave Officer Nacino the truck's 
license plate number. 
Officer Nacino left Hewitt in the emergency room, 
contacted his sergeant, Mekia Rose, and relayed the information provided by the paramedics. Sergeant Rose went to the location described by the paramedics and found a pickup truck in the bushes. 
The truck had front-end damage and both front airbags 
had been deployed. Sergeant Rose told Officer Nacino that the registered owner of the truck was named Cyrus Hewitt, and that Cyrina Hewitt's state identification card was found in a wallet inside the truck. Sergeant Rose took a photograph of Hewitt's identification card and sent it to Officer Nacino in a text message. 
Officer Nacino returned to Hewitt in the emergency 
room. Up to that time, Officer Nacino had not placed Hewitt under arrest or told her she was not free to terminate their conversation. Officer Nacino told Hewitt the pickup truck had been found. He asked Hewitt if she was driving. Hewitt stated that she was driving to a friend's house and parked the truck in the bushes. She then stated she was going to the doctor. Officer Nacino stopped asking questions, placed Hewitt under arrest for OVUII, told her a blood draw would be conducted, and told her she would be released after her blood was drawn. Hewitt's blood was drawn at around 3:30 a.m. 
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
Hewitt was charged by complaint with OVUII and driving 
without a license. She filed motions to suppress her statement that she was driving and evidence of her blood alcohol concentration. Both motions were denied. At trial, Officer 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nacino testified that Hewitt told him she was driving. Hewitt's 
father, Cyrus Hewitt, testified that a friend of his named Bill Thomas was the driver. Hewitt testified that "Uncle Bill" was driving, she fell asleep in the passenger seat, and woke up in the hospital. Hewitt was convicted of OVUII and driving without a license; when announcing the verdict, the district court stated it "heard the testimony of Mr. Cyrus Hewitt and defendant, Cyrina Hewitt, and does not find their testimonies to be credible." This appeal followed. 
STANDARD OF REVIEW 
A trial court's ruling on a motion to suppress is 
reviewed de novo to determine whether the ruling was right or wrong. State v. Vinuya, 96 Hawai# i 472, 480, 32 P.3d 116, 124 
(App. 2001). 
[W]hen the defendant's pretrial motion to suppress is denied
and the evidence is subsequently introduced at trial, thedefendant's appeal of the denial of the motion to suppressis actually an appeal of the introduction of the evidence attrial. Consequently, when deciding an appeal of the pre-trial denial of the defendant's motion to suppress, theappellate court considers both the record of the hearing onthe motion to suppress and the record of the trial. 
Id. at 481, 32 P.3d at 125 (cleaned up). 
DISCUSSION 
1. The district court did not err by denyingHewitt's motions to suppress, but erred whenit overruled her trial objection. 
A. Motions to suppress. 
Hewitt's motions to suppress argued that she was 
interrogated by Officer Nacino while in custody without being 
advised of her Miranda rights.
5 A person in police custody may 
not be subjected to interrogation without first being advised of their Miranda rights. State v. Melemai, 64 Haw. 479, 481, 643 
5 See Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966). 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.2d 541, 543 (1982). But the Hawai# i Supreme Court has also 
noted that "application of the Miranda
 rule is limited." Id. at 
481, 643 P.2d at 544. "It does not preclude the police, in the 
exercise of their investigatory duties or functions, from making general on-the-scene inquiries as to facts surrounding a crime or other general questions in the fact-finding process." Id. at 
481-82, 643 P.2d at 544 (citation omitted). 
In Melemai, a jogger was struck by a pickup truck. 
Eyewitnesses gave a police officer the license number and a description of the truck, which contained two occupants. The officer radioed the license number to the police station and obtained Melemai's name and address. The officer went to Melemai's address and waited. A truck arrived, driven by Melemai. It matched the description given by the witnesses, and contained one other occupant. At the officer's request, Melemai came out of the truck and produced his driver's license. The officer asked Melemai if he had hit anyone with his truck. Melemai answered affirmatively. The officer then asked Melemai why he ran away. Melemai responded that he got angry when he saw the jogger and "went for him." Melemai, 64 Haw. at 480, 643 P.2d 
at 543. Both questions were asked before Melemai was given Miranda warnings. 
Melemai was indicted. He filed a motion to suppress 
the statements he made to the police officer and a motion to dismiss the indictment. The trial court granted both motions, ruling that Miranda warnings were required before the police officer could question Melemai. The State appealed. The Hawai# i 
Supreme Court reversed in part. The supreme court held that the determination of whether a defendant was in custody "is to be made by objectively appraising the totality of the circumstances[,]" including 
the place and time of the interrogation, the length of the
interrogation, the nature of the questions asked, theconduct of the police, and all other relevant circumstances.Among the relevant circumstances to be considered arewhether the investigation has focused on the suspect and 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
whether the police have probable cause to arrest [the
suspect] prior to questioning. While focus of the investigation upon the defendant, standing alone, will nottrigger the application of the Miranda rule, it is animportant factor in determining whether the defendant wassubjected to custodial interrogation. Probable cause to arrest is also not determinative, but it may play asignificant role in the application of the Miranda rule. 
Melemai, 64 Haw. at 481, 643 P.2d at 544 (citations omitted). 
The supreme court described "the outer parameters beyond whichon-the-scene interviews may not proceed without Miranda warnings":  
Persons temporarily detained for brief questioning by police
officers who lack probable cause to make an arrest or bringan accusation need not be warned about incrimination and their right to counsel, until such time as the point ofarrest or accusation has been reached or the questioning hasceased to be brief and casual and become sustained and coercive[.] 
Id. at 482, 643 P.2d at 544 (cleaned up). The court ultimately 
held: 
In the instant case, the officer knew that the jogger
had been struck by a pickup truck with two occupants and
also knew the vehicle's license number and its description.After obtaining the name and address of defendant, who wasthe vehicle's registered owner, the officer proceeded todefendant's address, and he waited for the defendant. Upondefendant's arrival, the officer noticed that the truck metthe description given to him and was occupied by twopersons. On the basis of the officer's knowledge andobservation, we conclude that the investigation had focusedupon the defendant, and that, after defendant admitted his 
participation in the accident , the police had probable cause
to arrest. 
Inasmuch as the totality of circumstances created the
kind of coercive atmosphere that Miranda warnings weredesigned to prevent, custody attached and Miranda warningswere required. Based upon our analysis, defendant's answer 
to the first question [if he had hit anyone with his car]was admissible while  his answer to the second [why he ran
away] was not . 
Id. (emphasis added) (footnote omitted). 
In this case, Officer Nacino initially interviewed 
Hewitt as a potential assault victim. Hewitt argues that she was 
not free to leave the hospital emergency room while being questioned by Officer Nacino because she was physically 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
incapacitated and heavily sedated. 
Her inability to leave was 
not the result of being detained by Officer Nacino or any other 
law enforcement authority. Cf. State v. Kazanas, 138 Hawai# i 23, 
375 P.3d 1261 (2016) (police officer asking defendant how his Halloween went, while defendant was under arrest and being transported to hospital, constituted custodial interrogation); and State v. Pebria, 85 Hawai# i 171, 174-75, 938 P.2d 1190, 1193-
94 (App. 1997) (holding that defendant's statement to police officer, in response to question if defendant knew why he was being detained by hospital security guards, that "I [wen'] grab the girl[,]" was result of custodial interrogation). 
Even after Officer Nacino received information that 
Hewitt's identification had been found in a pickup truck that had apparently been involved in an accident, he did not have probable cause to arrest Hewitt for OVUII. Hewitt was not seen in the driver's seat, and her injuries could have been caused when the front-passenger-seat airbag deployed. We hold that Hewitt was not in custody when Officer Nacino asked her if she was driving. Once Hewitt said she was driving the pickup truck, Officer Nacino appropriately stopped asking Hewitt questions. Because Hewitt was not in custody while she was being questioned by Officer Nacino, we need not decide whether Officer Nacino's questions "were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the person in custody." Kazanas, 138 Hawai# i at 26, 375 P.3d at 
1264 (citation omitted). 
Hewitt argues that Officers Nacino and Sugata 
interrogated her for almost three hours. Hewitt admittedly did not remember speaking to either officer. All of the evidence in the record indicates that Officer Nacino initially questioned Hewitt to determine whether she was the victim of an assault. After the paramedics mentioned seeing a pickup truck in the bushes, Officer Nacino left the emergency room to follow up with Sergeant Rose. It was only after Sergeant Rose texted Hewitt's identification card to Officer Nacino that he returned to the emergency room to ask if Hewitt was driving. The record does not 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
establish that Hewitt was subjected to "sustained and coercive" 
questioning by Officer Nacino. Melemai
, 64 Haw. at 482, 643 P.2d 
at 544. Given this record, the district court did not err by denying Hewitt's motion to suppress. See also State v. 
Kaleohano, 99 Hawai# i 370, 377, 56 P.3d 138, 145 (2002) ("[I]f 
neither probable cause to arrest nor sustained and coercive interrogation are present, then questions posed by the police do not rise to the level of 'custodial interrogation' requiring Miranda warnings.") (quoting State v. Ah Loo, 94 Hawai# i 207, 
210, 10 P.3d 728, 731 (2000)). 
B. Trial objection. 
Hewitt did not cite HRS § 621-26 in her motion to 
suppress or during the hearing on the motion. The statute 
provides: 
No confession shall be received in evidence unless it is 
first made to appear to the judge before whom the case isbeing tried that the confession was in fact voluntarilymade. 
HRS § 621-26 (1993). At trial, after Officer Nacino testified he 
asked Hewitt whether she had been in a traffic accident, the State asked "what was her response?" Defense counsel objected, citing HRS § 621-26. The district court overruled the objection. Officer Nacino then testified: "She informed me that she was driving the vehicle and had parked it there[ in the bushes]." 
Rather than overruling the objection, the district 
court should have conducted an evidentiary hearing to determine whether Hewitt's statement was voluntarily made, in light of the evidence that Hewitt had sustained significant head trauma, did not know where she was, and was incoherent. Although Hewitt's statement to Officer Nacino was not a confession of OVUII, HRS § 621-26 applies to inculpatory statements as well as confessions. See State v. Kelekolio, 74 Haw. 479, 501 n.13, 849 
P.2d 58, 69 n.13 (1993) ("we perceive no meaningful distinction between a 'confession' and 'inculpatory statements' for purposes 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the right against self-incrimination.") 
The district court 
erred by not conducting an evidentiary hearing to determine 
whether Hewitt's inculpatory statement was voluntarily made. 
2. The district court erred by denying Hewitt's
motion to suppress her blood test result. 
The State argued that Hewitt's motion to suppress 
evidence of the alcohol content of her blood was not timely filed 
under Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 12(c). The 
district court recognized the issue, but proceeded to rule on the merits. 
The district court had discretion to so proceed, and the 
denial of the motion on its merits is properly before us. See 
State v. Przeradski, 5 Haw. App. 29, 32, 677 P.2d 471, 474-75 (1984) (noting that HRPP Rule 12(f) gives the trial court discretion to rule on an untimely pretrial motion). 
Hewitt contends that the district court should have 
suppressed evidence of her blood alcohol content because it was the result of a warrantless search and seizure in violation of her constitutional rights. 
She acknowledges that the blood draw 
was performed pursuant to HRS § 291E-21(a) (2007), which authorizes a law enforcement officer to obtain a sample of blood "from the operator of any vehicle involved in a collision resulting in injury to . . . any person, as evidence that the operator was under the influence of an intoxicant." 
A warrantless [blood alcohol concentration] test . . .
pursuant to HRS § 291E–21 . . . does not offend the Hawai #i 
Constitution "so long as (1) the police have probable cause
to believe that the person has committed a DUI offense andthat the blood sample will evidence that offense,(2) exigent circumstances are present , and (3) the sample is
obtained in a reasonable manner." 
State v. Won, 137 Hawai# i 330, 344 n.26, 372 P.3d 1065, 1079 n.26 
(2015) (emphasis added) (quoting State v. Entrekin, 98 Hawai# i 
221, 232, 47 P.3d 336, 347 (2002)). 
In Entrekin, the Hawai# i Supreme Court discussed 
Schmerber v. California, 384 U.S. 757 (1966), where the United 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
States Supreme Court held that the fourth amendment to the 
Constitution does not prohibit a nonconsensual, warrantless blood extraction from a person suspected of driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol (DUI
) if: "(1) the police have probable cause 
to believe that the person is DUI; (2) exigent circumstances are present under which the delay necessary to obtain a warrant would result in the loss of evidence; and (3) the procedures employed to extract the blood are reasonable." Entrekin, 98 Hawai# i at 
231, 47 P.3d at 346. 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court then held: 
The exigent circumstances exception is present when the
demands of the occasion reasonably call for an immediatepolice response. More specifically, it includes situationspresenting an immediate threatened removal or destruction ofevidence. However, the burden, of course, is upon thegovernment to prove the justification, and whether therequisite conditions exists [sic] is to be measured from thetotality of the circumstances. And in seeking to meet thisburden, the police must be able to point to specific andarticulable facts from which it may be determined that theaction they took was necessitated by the exigencies of thesituation. 
. . . . 
. . . [E]xigent circumstances were clearly present . 
It is undisputed that the percentage of alcohol in the bloodbegins to diminish shortly after drinking stops, as the bodyfunctions to eliminate it from the system. [T]he arrestedperson's blood-alcohol level by its very nature dissipatesand is forever lost as time passes, and any alcohol ingestedby the arrested person is digested and its effects on thebody pass[.] 
Id. at 232-33, 47 P.3d at 347-48 (cleaned up) (emphasis added). 
In this case the district court relied upon Schmerber 
in denying Hewitt's motion to suppress. But in Missouri v. 
McNeely, 569 U.S. 141 (2013) (decided after Entrekin), the United States Supreme Court held "that in drunk-driving investigations, the natural dissipation of alcohol in the bloodstream does not constitute an exigency in every case sufficient to justify conducting a blood test without a warrant." Id. at 165. The Supreme Court reasoned: 
It is true that as a result of the human body's
natural metabolic processes, the alcohol level in a person's
blood begins to dissipate once the alcohol is fully absorbed 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and continues to decline until the alcohol is eliminated. 
. . . Regardless of the exact elimination rate, it issufficient for our purposes to note that because an indi-vidual's alcohol level gradually declines soon after [theperson] stops drinking, a significant delay in testing willnegatively affect the probative value of the results. This fact was essential to our holding in Schmerber, as we recog-nized that, under the circumstances, further delay in orderto secure a warrant after the time spent investigating thescene of the accident and transporting the injured suspectto the hospital to receive treatment would have threatenedthe destruction of evidence. 
But it does not follow that we should depart from
careful case-by-case assessment of exigency and adopt thecategorical rule proposed by the State and its amici. In those drunk-driving investigations where police officers canreasonably obtain a warrant before a blood sample can bedrawn without significantly undermining the efficacy of thesearch, the Fourth Amendment mandates that they do so. We do not doubt that some circumstances will make obtaining awarrant impractical such that the dissipation of alcoholfrom the bloodstream will support an exigency justifying aproperly conducted warrantless blood test. That, however,is a reason to decide each case on its facts, as we did inSchmerber, not to accept the "considerable overgenerali-zation" that a per se rule would reflect. 
The context of blood testing is different in critical
respects from other destruction-of-evidence cases in whichthe police are truly confronted with a "'now or never'"situation. In contrast to, for example, circumstances inwhich the suspect has control over easily disposableevidence, [blood alcohol concentration] evidence from adrunk-driving suspect naturally dissipates over time in agradual and relatively predictable manner. . . . 
The State's proposed per se rule also fails to account
for advances in the 47 years since Schmerber was decidedthat allow for the more expeditious processing of warrantapplications, particularly in contexts like drunk-drivinginvestigations where the evidence offered to establishprobable cause is simple. The Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure were amended in 1977 to permit federal magistratejudges to issue a warrant based on sworn testimony communi-cated by telephone. As amended, the law now allows afederal magistrate judge to consider "information communi-cated by telephone or other reliable electronic means."Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 4.1. States have also innovated. Well over a majority of States allow police officers orprosecutors to apply for search warrants remotely throughvarious means, including telephonic or radio communication,electronic communication such as e-mail, and videoconferencing. 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Id. at 152-54 (cleaned up) (citing, among other states' court
rules, Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 41(h)–(i)
(2013)).6
We cited McNeely in State v. Niceloti-Velazquez, 139
Hawai#i 203, 386 P.3d 487 (App. 2016), in which we held:
In the case before this court, the record does not
support a finding that, given the totality of the circum-
stances, the police officers could not have reasonably
obtained a search warrant before drawing Velazquez's blood
sample.  Because the district court only cited the risk of
blood alcohol dissipation to support its finding of exigency
and because the prosecution failed to adequately develop the
record to demonstrate that the police officers were justi-
fied to act without a warrant, the district court clearly
erred in holding that exigent circumstances existed to
justify the warrantless extraction of Velazquez's blood
sample.
Niceloti-Velazquez, 139 Hawai#i at 205, 386 P.3d at 489 (emphasis
added) (citation omitted).
6HRPP Rule 41 has not been amended since it was cited in McNeely. 
It provides, in relevant part:
Rule 41. SEARCH AND SEIZURE.
. . . .
(c) Issuance and contents.   A warrant shall issue
only on an affidavit or affidavits sworn to before the judge
and establishing the grounds for issuing the warrant. . . .
. . . .
(h) Warrant issuance on oral statements.   In lieu of
the written affidavit required under section (c) of this
rule, a sworn oral statement, in person or by telephone, may
be received by the judge, which statement shall be recorded
and transcribed, and such sworn oral statement shall be
deemed to be an affidavit for the purposes of this rule.
Alternatively to receipt by the judge of the sworn oral
statement, such statement may be recorded by a court
reporter who shall transcribe the same and certify the
transcription.  In either case, the recording and the
transcribed statement shall be filed with the clerk.
(i) Duplicate warrants on oral authorization.   The
judge may orally authorize a police officer to sign the
signature of the judge on a duplicate original warrant,
which shall be deemed to be a valid search warrant for the
purposes of this rule.  The judge shall enter on the face of
the original warrant the exact time of issuance and shall
sign and file the original warrant and, upon its return, the
duplicate original warrant with the clerk.
13FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The facts of this case illustrate why more than just 
"the risk of blood alcohol dissipation" should be required to 
justify a warrantless blood draw. 
Officer Nacino 
testified: 
Q. Okay. And can you just tell us what you based,
uh, the breath or why you conducted that blood draw? What 
information did you base it on? 
A. Um, slurred speech. She seemed to be completely
out of it, unaware of her surroundings. 
Q. Uh-huh. 
A. And the fact that she had been in a traffic 
accident that involved injuries. 
On cross-examination, Officer Nacino was asked: 
Q. Okay.
 Now it wasn't until she had made the statement 
that "I had been driving the truck" that you informed herthat she would be arrested for suspicion of a DUI, correct? 
A. Yes, sir. 
State's Exhibit 11, admitted into evidence at trial without 
objection, was Officer Nacino's sworn statement of probable cause for Hewitt's arrest. Officer Nacino stated: 
[Hewitt] stated she was the operator of [the truck].
[Hewitt] had slow speech, when asked question[s] [Hewitt]
would go off topic and ramble on about things unrelated to[the] question. [Hewitt] appeared to be disoriented and wasunaware of injuries sustained from traffic casualty. This lead [sic] me to believe [Hewitt] was under the influence ofdrugs and or alcohol. 
Officer Nacino did not testify that he detected an odor similar 
to that of an alcoholic beverage on Hewitt's breath or body. There was no evidence that empty or open containers of liquor, or a bar or restaurant tab or other receipt evidencing the recent consumption of alcohol, were found in the cab of Cyrus Hewitt's truck, or with Cyrina Hewitt's identification card. Hewitt's apparent disorientation could have been explained by a concussion (as evidenced by Hewitt's significant head trauma). Although she 
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
knew who she was, she did not know where she was. 
There was no 
evidence that Officer Nacino attempted to determine if Hewitt was 
oriented to time (as one would to attempt to diagnose or rule out a concussion). Hewitt's disorientation could also have been the result of prescription medication administered to her in the hospital emergency room. Under the totality of these circumstances, it would not have been unreasonable for a judge to require more information before issuing a warrant for a blood draw. There was no evidence that Officer Nacino, Officer Sugata, Sergeant Rose, or any other police officer attempted to contact a judge to obtain a warrant before requesting the blood draw. We hold that the State failed to adequately develop the record to demonstrate the existence of exigent circumstances that would have justified Officer Nacino requesting a warrantless blood draw. The district court erred in denying Hewitt's motion to suppress the blood test results. 
CONCLUSION 
Based upon the foregoing, the "Judgment and Notice of 
Entry of Judgment" entered by the district court on May 20, 2016, is vacated. This case is remanded for a new trial consistent with this opinion. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
15 Charles E. Murray III,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, State of Hawai# i, 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Taryn R. Tomasa, 
Deputy Public Defender,State of Hawai# i,
for Defendant-Appellant. 