NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000852
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Planitiff-Appellee, v.
BRANDON J. OANIA, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 16-1-0163(1))
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Brandon J. Oania (Oania) appeals
from the November 15, 2017 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit
Court).   After a jury trial, the Circuit Court convicted Oania
of Arson in the First Degree, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
§ 708-8251(1)(b) (2014).21
1 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.
2 HRS § 708-8251 provides,
(1) A person commits the offense of arson in the first
degree if the person intentionally or knowingly sets fire to
or causes to be burned property and:
(a) Knowingly places another person in danger of
death or bodily injury; or
(b) Knowingly or recklessly damages the property of
another, without the other's consent, in an
amount exceeding $20,000.
(2) Arson in the first degree is a class A felony.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Oania contends that (1) the jury should have
received an instruction on causation of damage and, therefore, on
the lesser-included crime of Arson in the Second Degree, HRS
§ 708-8252 (2014), which has a lower damage threshold amount;
(2) the judge should have, sua sponte, held a competency hearing
for Oania's father, who testified for the State; (3)  the State
committed prosecutorial misconduct by editorializing questioning
and leading its witness on direct and re-direct examination, as
well as mischaracterizing a witness's statement during closing
argument; and (4) Oania's counsel provided ineffective assistance
by failing to challenge Oania's father's competency to testify
and request mental health records from the prosecution.3
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues
raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve
Oania's appeal as follows:
When jury instructions or the omission thereof are at
issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when
read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
misleading.  Erroneous instructions are presumptively
harmful and are a ground for reversal unless it
affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the
error was not prejudicial.  However, error is not to be
viewed in isolation and considered purely in the abstract.
It must be examined in the light of the entire proceedings
and given the effect which the whole record shows it to be
entitled.  In that context, the real question becomes
whether there is a reasonable possibility that error might
have contributed to conviction.  If there is such a
reasonable possibility in a criminal case, then the error is
not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, and the judgment of
conviction on which it may have been based must be set
aside.
. . . . Once instructional error is demonstrated, we
will vacate, without regard to whether timely
objection was made, if there is a reasonable
possibility that the error contributed to the
defendant's conviction, i.e., that the erroneous jury
instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable
doubt.
3HRS § 708-8252 is identical to HRS § 708-8251, except the damage
amount need only exceed $1,500, and violation is a class B felony.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
State v. Pond, 118 Hawai#i 452, 461-62, 193 P.3d 368, 377-78
(2008) (brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai# i
327, 335, 337, 141 P.3d 974, 982, 984 (2006)).
Here, the Circuit Court instructed the jury on the
elements of the offense as follows:
There are six material elements of the offense the
[sic] Arson in the First Degree, each of which the
prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.  These six
elements are:
One.  That on or about January 24th, 2016, in the
County of Maui, State of Hawaii, the defendant, Brandon J.
Oania, as a principal and/or accomplice, set fire to or
caused to be burned property; and two, that the defendant
did so intentionally or knowingly; and three, that the
defendant knowingly or recklessly damaged the property of
another, to wit, Tesoro Gas Express by such conduct; and
that the defendant did so without the consent of the other
person, to wit, Tesoro Gas Express; and five, that the
defendant was aware that damage exceeded $20,000 or
consciously disregarded a substantial and unjustifiable risk
that the damage exceeded $20,000; and six, that the damage
to the property exceeded $20,000.
Oania stipulated at trial that the amount of the damage
caused in this incident exceeded the statutory minimum of
$20,000.  There was also testimony that after Oania set the fire,
the flames traveled to the gas dispenser and the dispenser
exploded, blowing off a handle.  However, there was also
testimony that, in putting out the fire, a bystander injected
chemicals from a fire extinguisher into one of the nozzles
attached to the dispenser.  It was later determined that the
dispenser was too damaged to repair, and that the damage was
caused by the fire and the extinguisher's chemicals.
Thus, one critical issue at trial was whether Oania's
conduct caused damage in excess of $20,000.
Proof of causation, as it pertains to the crime of
Arson in the First Degree, is governed by HRS §§ 702-215  and4
4HRS § 702-215 provides, in pertinent part, 
Intentional or knowing causation; different result from that
intended or contemplated.   In the following instances
intentionally or knowingly causing a particular result shall
be deemed to be established even though the actual result
(continued...)
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
702-216  (2014).5  
As the court's charge to the jury did not contain any
instruction on the critical issue of causation, the jury was left
without guidance regarding whether the evidence was sufficient to
establish that Oania caused the damage at issue.  See State v.
Abella, 145 Hawai# i 541, 556-60, 454 P.3d 482, 497-501 (2019)
(holding the failure to instruct on intervening causation was
plain error in a manslaughter prosecution).  Thus, we cannot say
that the instruction's omission was harmless beyond a reasonable
doubt.  Furthermore, because a jury, properly instructed, could
find that Oania did not cause more than $20,000 in damage,
instructions on any lesser included offenses supported by the
evidence were also warranted.  Therefore, we must vacate the
conviction and remand for a new trial.  Pond, 118 Hawai#i at 462,
193 P.3d at 378.
4(...continued)
caused by the defendant may not have been within the
defendant's intention or contemplation: 
. . . .
(2)The actual result involves, the same kind of
injury or harm as the intended or contemplated
result and is not too remote or accidental in
its occurrence or too dependent on another's
volitional conduct to have a bearing on the
defendant's liability or on the gravity of the
defendant's offense.
5HRS § 702-216 provides, in pertinent part,
Reckless or negligent causation; different result from that
within the risk.   In the following instances, recklessly or
negligently causing a particular result shall be deemed to
be established even though the actual result caused by the
defendant may not have been within the risk of which the
defendant was . . . aware:
 . . . .
(2)The actual result involves the same kind of
injury or harm as the probable result and is not
too remote or accidental in its occurrence or
too dependent on another's volitional conduct to
have a bearing on the defendant's liability or
on the gravity of the defendant's offense.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Given our conclusion on this first issue, we do not
reach Oania's other points on appeal.
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the November 15,
2017 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered by the Circuit
Court of the Second Circuit and remand for further proceedings.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 26, 2020.
On the briefs:
Matthew S. Kohm,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Renee Ishikawa Delizo,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
5