NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000429
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
BLUE MOUNTAIN HOMES, LLC,
Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant/Appellee,
v.
PENNY PAGE, Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff/
Third Party Plaintiff/Appellant,
and
JOHN DOES 1-5 AND JANE DOES 1-5, Defendants
and
THE BANK OF NEW YORK MELLON FKA THE BANK OF
NEW YORK AS TRUSTEE ON BEHALF OF THE CERTIFICATEHOLDERS
CWALT, INC., ALTERNATIVE LOAN TRUST 2005-69 MORTGAGE
PASS THROUGH CERTIFICATE SERIES 2005-69, Third Party
Defendant/Appellee, 
and 
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-20, Third Party Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-0037(2))
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, C.J., Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant/Counterclaim-Plaintiff/Third Party 
Plaintiff/Appellant Penny Page (Page ) appeals from the Judgment
for Possession and Writ of Possession, and challenges the
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting
Plaintiff Blue Mountain Homes, LLC's Motion for Summary Judgment"
(Summary Judgment Order) all filed on March 20, 2015, in theNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (circuit court ).1  The
circuit court entered judgment in favor of Blue Mountain Homes,
LLC (Blue Mountain).
Page also challenges an "Order Denying [Page's] Motion
to Reconsider the Court's Orders Granting Plaintiff's Motion for
Summary Judgment and Order Granting Third Party Defendant's
Motion to Dismiss After Hearing on February 6, 2015"
(Reconsideration Order ) filed on April 27, 2015.
On appeal, Page contends the circuit court erred when
it granted summary judgment because Blue Mountain did not meet
its initial burden to demonstrate "that the [nonjudicial]
foreclosure sale was conducted in a manner that was fair,
reasonably diligent, and in good faith, and to demonstrate that
an adequate price was procured for the property" in accordance
with Kondaur Capital Corp. v. Matsuyoshi , 136 Hawai #i 227, 361
P.3d 454 (2015) and JPMorgan Chase Bank, Nat'l Ass'n v. Benner,
137 Hawai #i 326, 372 P.3d 358 (App. 2016).
 Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Page's
single point of error as follows and vacate as set forth below.
In this case, the circuit court issued the Judgment for
Possession and Writ of Possession in favor of Blue Mountain,
which had purchased the subject property from Appellee The Bank
of New York Mellon fka The Bank of New York as Trustee on behalf
of the CertificateHolders CWALT, Inc., Alternative Loan Trust
2005-69 Mortgage Pass-Through Certificate Series 2005-69 (Bank of
New York).  Specifically, pursuant to a Special Warranty Deed
dated June 4, 2013, and recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances on
July 30, 2013, Bank of New York conveyed the property to Blue
Mountain. 
Subsequently, on January 27, 2014, Blue Mountain
initiated this action by filing a Complaint for Ejectment against
1  The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided. 
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Page.  On December 9, 2014, Blue Mountain filed its motion for
summary judgment.  On March 20, 2015, the circuit court entered
its Summary Judgment Order, concluding that Blue Mountain was a
bona fide good faith purchaser and granting summary judgment for
Blue Mountain.
We review the circuit court's grant or denial of
summary judgment de novo .  Kondaur Capital Corp., 136 Hawai #i at
240, 361 P.3d at 467.  "[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the
pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show
that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that
the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." 
Id. (citation omitted).  "The moving party has the initial burden
of 'demonstrating the absence of a genuine issue of material
fact.'"  Id.  (citation omitted).  Only if the initial showing is
satisfied, the burden shifts to the nonmoving party to provide
"specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial."
Id. at 240-41, 361 P.3d at 467-68 (citation and emphasis
omitted).  Moreover, "in reviewing summary judgment decisions, an
appellate court steps into the shoes of the trial court and
applies the same legal standard as the trial court applied." 
Koga Eng'g & Const., Inc. v. State, 122 Hawai #i 60, 78, 222 P.3d
979, 997 (2010) (citations and original brackets omitted).
To maintain an ejectment action, the plaintiff must (1)
"'prove that he or she owns the parcel in issue,' meaning that he
or she must have 'the title to and right of possession of' such
parcel" and (2) "establish that 'possession is unlawfully
withheld by another.'"  Kondaur Capital Corp., 137 Hawai #i at
241, 361 P.3d at 468 (citations and brackets omitted). 
In Kondaur Capital Corp., the Hawai #i Supreme Court
ruled as follows: 
In Ulrich v. Security Investment Co. , 35 Haw. 158 (Haw.
Terr. 1939), we held that a personal property mortgagee
seeking to enforce a non-judicial foreclosure sale bears the
burden of establishing that the sale was conducted in a
manner that is fair, reasonably diligent, and in good faith
and that an adequate price was procured for the property. In
the years after Ulrich was decided, the legislature made
several amendments to the non-judicial foreclosure statute,
and the viability of Ulrich in light of these amendments, as
well as Ulrich's applicability to real property non-judicial
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
foreclosures, has recently been questioned, with federal
courts in Hawai #i reaching conflicting results. 
We hold that the duties set forth in Ulrich remain viable
law and are applicable to non-judicial foreclosures of real
property mortgages.  Additionally, in situations where a
mortgagee acts as both the seller and the purchaser of the
subject property at a non-judicial foreclosure sale, that
mortgagee, or its quitclaim transferee or non-bona fide
successor, bears the burden of proving compliance with the
requirements of Ulrich.
136 Hawai #i at 229, 361 P.3d at 456 (footnotes omitted and
emphasis added). 
Bank of New York and Blue Mountain argue that Kondaur
is inapplicable in this case because Blue Mountain is a bona fide
purchaser of the property, whereas Kondaur provides that a
mortgagee who acts as both the seller and purchaser of property
at a non-judicial foreclosure, a quitclaim transferee or "non -
bona fide successor" bears the burden of demonstrating that the
non-judicial foreclosure sale was conducted in a manner that was
"fair, reasonably diligent, and in good faith and that an
adequate price was procured for the property."  Id.   In short,
Blue Mountain maintains that because it is a bona fide purchaser
of the property, the initial burden to show that the non-judicial
foreclosure sale was conducted in a manner that was fair,
reasonably diligent, and in good faith, and that an adequate
price was procured for the property does not fall upon Blue
Mountain.  Id. at 229, 361 P.3d at 456.
We recognize that this case is different from Kondaur
to the extent that the deed transferring the property to Blue
Mountain does not contain any limitations to the transfer based
on any of Page's rights, the party who was subject to the non-
judicial foreclosure.  In Kondaur, the mortgagee that conducted
the non-judicial foreclosure on the property was Resmae
Liquidation Properties LLC (RLP ) and at auction, RLP was the
highest bidder and thereby obtained title to the property.  Id.
at 230, 361 P.3d at 457.  RLP then executed a quitclaim deed
conveying the property to Kondaur and Kondaur brought an
ejectment action.  Id. at 230–31, 361 P.3d at 457–58.  The
quitclaim deed provided that RLP conveyed the property to Kondaur
but made "no representations, warranties or promises regarding
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
any claims by LEIGH MATSUYOSHI, her heirs, successors or
assigns."  Id. at 241, 361 P.3d at 468 (emphasis omitted).  The
supreme court noted that:
 [t]he certified copy of the quitclaim deed and all of its
attachments suffice to establish only that Kondaur has an
ownership interest in and right of possession of the
Property, subject to Matsuyoshi's title and ownership
interest in the same Property.  This conditional status of
Kondaur's title originates from the language of Kondaur's
quitclaim deed, which specifically carves out from Kondaur's
interest any claims that Matsuyoshi may still have on the
Property. It is therefore clear from the language of the
deed that it does not convey a title superior to that of
Matsuyoshi's title and interest because it goes so far as
acknowledging that Matsuyoshi may have some ownership claim
on the Property.
Id. (Emphasis added.).
In this case, to the contrary, it is undisputed that
Bank of New York executed a Special Warranty Deed, recorded in
the Bureau of Conveyances on July 30, 2013, which provides that:
Grantor [Bank of New York] does hereby covenant with Grantee
[Blue Mountain] that the Grantor has not heretofore done,
committed or willingly suffered to be done or committed any
act or thing whatsoever whereby the title and estate hereby
conveyed, or any part thereof, are or shall be charged or
encumbered, except as set forth in Exhibit A and except for
the lien of real property taxes not yet by law required to
be paid.
Exhibit A to the Special Warranty Deed does not establish any
relevant exceptions that diminish the interest conveyed to Blue
Mountain.  Thus, in that respect, this case is distinguishable
from Kondaur.
However, to fully distinguish this case from Kondaur,
Blue Mountain must demonstrate that it actually is a bona fide
purchaser for value.  The circuit court determined in its Summary
Judgment Order that "Plaintiff is a bona fide good faith
purchaser."  However, because we review the circuit court's grant
of summary judgment de novo, we are not bound by the circuit
court's conclusions and must determine whether Blue Mountain met
its initial burden to establish that there are no genuine issues
of material fact that it was a bona fide good faith purchaser
from Bank of New York.    
A non-bona fide purchaser is one who does not pay adequate
consideration, "takes with knowledge that his transferor
acquired title by fraud[,] or . . . buys registered land
with full notice of the fact that it is in litigation
between the transferor and a third party."  Akagi v. Oshita,
33 Haw. 343, 347 (1935); Achiles v. Cajigal, 39 Haw. 493,
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
499 (1952); see generally 92A C.J.S. Vendor and Purchaser
§ 547 (2010) (defining a bona fide purchaser as "one who
acquires an interest in a property for valuable
consideration, in good faith, and without notice of any
outstanding claims which are held against the property by
third parties").  
Kondaur Capital Corp., 136 Hawai# i at 240 n.27, 361 P.3d at 467
n.27 (emphasis added); see also Fair Horizon LLC v. Agard, No.
CAAP–12–0000437, 2015 WL 315488, at *1 (Haw. App. Jan. 26, 2015)
(SDO); Seiger v. Standard Oil Co., 318 P.2d 479, 484 (Cal. Dist.
Ct. App. 1957) ("To become a bona fide purchaser one must have
acquired title without notice, actual or constructive, of
another's rights and also must have paid value for the same.").
In this case, the Special Warranty Deed provides
"[t]hat for Ten Dollars ($10.00) and other good and valuable
consideration paid by the Grantee [Blue Mountain], the receipt of
which is hereby acknowledged, the Grantor [Bank of New York] does
hereby grant, bargain, sell and convey unto the Grantee [Blue
Mountain] all of the property[.]"  There is no other evidence in
the record as to the amount Blue Mountain paid to acquire title
to the property.  Both Blue Mountain and Bank of New York assert
that the property was acquired by way of the Special Warranty
Deed but do not provide what "valuable consideration" or payment
of value was exchanged.  Achiles v. Cajigal, 39 Haw. 493, 498-99
(1952) (buyer "was not a bona fide purchaser for value" because
conveyance was without adequate consideration); Fair Horizon LLC ,
2015 WL 315488, at *1-*2 (affirming summary judgment in favor of
appellee because appellee purchased the property in good faith
for value and without notice of any title defects and thereby was
entitled to possession of the property); 92A C.J.S. Vendor and
Purchaser § 550 (2010) ("The term 'valuable consideration' means
something of substantial value, including money or something that
is worth money, such as legal or other services.") (footnotes
omitted).
Thus, based on our review of the record, Blue Mountain
did not carry its initial burden to establish that it was a bona
fide purchaser.  There are genuine issues of material fact as to
whether it purchased the property in good faith for valuable
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
consideration.  Hence, summary judgment was not warranted in
favor of Blue Mountain.  
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment for
Possession filed on March 20, 2015, in the Circuit Court of the
Second Circuit is vacated.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 22, 2018.
On the briefs:
Gary Victor Dubin,
Frederick J. Arensmeyer,
Richard T. Forrester,
for Penny Page.Chief Judge
Matson Kelley,
Alex Wilkins,
for Blue Mountain Homes, LLC.Associate Judge
Patricia J. McHenry,
for The Bank of New York Mellon, 
fka The Bank of New York, as Trustee
on Behalf of The Certificateholders
CWALT, Inc., Alternative Loan Trust 
2005-69, Mortgage Pass Through 
Certificate Series 2005-69.Associate Judge
7