NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
  
NO. CAAP-17-0000588
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
HSBC BANK USA, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION,
A NATIONAL BANKING ASSOCIATION, AS TRUSTEE FOR THE
HOLDERS OF ACE SECURITIES CORP. HOME EQUITY LOAN TRUST,
SERIES 2006-CW1 ASSET BACKED PASS-THROUGH CERTIFICATES,
SERIES 2006-CW1, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
CHRISTOPHER BARTOLOME, AS SPECIAL ADMINISTRATOR
OF THE ESTATE OF LUZ CUI BARTOLOME, DECEASED;
CHRISTOPHER CUI BARTOLOME, Defendants-Appellants,
and
 
VILLAGES OF KAPOLEI ASSOCIATION,
BENEFICIAL HAWAII, INC., NOW KNOWN AS
BENEFICIAL FINANCIAL I INC., Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; DOE ENTITIES 2-50;
AND DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-3050)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Christopher Cui Bartolome
 
(Bartolome), Special Administrator of the Estate of Luz Cui
 
Bartolome, in his personal capacity, appeals from the Judgment
 
entered on July 7, 2017, in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee HSBC Bank
 USA, National Association, a National Banking Association, as
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Trustee for the Holders of Ace Securities Corp. Home Equity Loan
 
Trust, Series 2006-CW1 Asset Backed Pass-Through Certificates,
 Series 2006-CW1 (HSBC Bank) and against all defendants
 
(Judgment), in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 Court).
1 Bartolome also challenges the Circuit Court's Findings
 
of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion
 
for Summary Judgment for Foreclosure Against All Defendants and
 for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure, also entered on July 7,
 2017 (Foreclosure Decree).
 
Bartolome raises a single point of error on appeal,
 
arguing that the Circuit Court erred in granting HSBC Bank's
 November 30, 2016 Motion for Summary Judgment for Foreclosure
 Against All Defendants and for Interlocutory Decree of
 Foreclosure (Motion for Summary Judgment).
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the
 relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Bartolome's point of
 error as follows: 
Bartolome argues that HSBC Bank failed to present 
admissible evidence sufficient to establish that it had standing to bring this foreclosure action and relies on the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court's decisions in Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai' i 361, 390 P.3d 1248 (2017) and U.S. Bank, N.A. v. 
Mattos, 140 Hawai' i 26, 398 P.3d 615 (2017). We agree.  
1
 The Honorable Jeannette H. Castagnetti presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Reyes–Toledo, the supreme court held that in order 
to establish a right to foreclose, the foreclosing plaintiff must 
establish standing or entitlement to enforce the subject note at the time the action was commenced. 139 Hawai' i at 367–71, 390 
P.3d at 1254–58. The supreme court stated, inter alia, that a foreclosing plaintiff must typically "prove the existence of an agreement, the terms of the agreement, a default by the mortgagor under the terms of the agreement, and giving of the cancellation notice." Id. at 367, 390 P.3d at 1254 (citing Bank of Honolulu, 
N.A. v. Anderson, 3 Haw. App. 545, 551, 654 P.2d 1370, 1375
 (1982)). Furthermore, "[a] foreclosing plaintiff must also prove
 its entitlement to enforce the note and mortgage." Id.
 
(citations omitted). In concluding that the foreclosing bank
 failed to satisfy its burden as the movant for summary judgment,
 the court reasoned, "[a]lthough Bank of America produced evidence
 that it possessed the blank-indorsed Note at the time it sought
 summary judgment, a material question of fact exists as to
 whether Bank of America possessed the Note, or was otherwise the
 holder, at the time it brought the foreclosure action." Id. at
 
370, 390 P.3d at 1257. 
In Mattos, 140 Hawai' i at 29, 398 P.3d at 618, summary 
judgment was granted in favor of the foreclosing bank, U.S. Bank. On appeal, the supreme court addressed whether relevant loan documents had been properly admitted through the declaration of an individual named Richard Work (Work), as records of regularly 
conducted activity under Hawai' i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 
803(b)(6). Id. at 28, 30–33, 398 P.3d at 617, 619–622. In his 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
declaration, Work attested, inter alia, that he was a "Contract
 
Management Coordinator" of OCWEN Loan Servicing, LLC (Ocwen), the
 
"servicer" for U.S. Bank on the subject loan. Id. at 30–31, 398
 
P.3d at 619–20. Because Work did not attest that he was the
 
custodian of records for either U.S. Bank or Ocwen, the supreme
 court noted that "the documents attached to his declaration are
 admissible under the HRE 803(b)(6) hearsay exception only if he
 is a 'qualified witness' with respect to those documents." Id.
 
at 32, 398 P.3d at 621. The supreme court applied its analysis
 in State v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawai' i 354, 365–66, 227 P.3d 520, 
531–32 (2010) and ruled as follows:
 
To the extent the ICA ruled that Work's declaration
 
established him as a "qualified witness" with respect to
Ocwen's records, we agree. To the extent the ICA opinion
concluded that Work met the requirements to be a "qualified
witness" with respect to U.S. Bank's records, however, we
disagree. Fitzwater addresses situations in which one
business receives documents created by another business and
includes them in its own records. Work's declaration does
 not indicate that U.S. Bank's Records were received by Ocwen
and incorporated into the Ocwen Records. Work's declaration
also does not establish that Work is familiar with the
 record-keeping system of U.S. Bank. Rather, Work merely
states that he has access to and is familiar with U.S.
 Bank's records. Thus Work's declaration does not satisfy
foundational requirements to make him a "qualified witness"
for U.S. Bank's records pursuant to Fitzwater.
 
Id. at 32–33, 398 P.3d at 621–622.
 
In light of its prior ruling in Reyes–Toledo, the
 
supreme court in Mattos further held that:
 
[s]ince [an] allonge was apparently used to specifically
indorse the note to U.S. Bank, admissible evidence was
needed to demonstrate that U.S. Bank was in possession of
the note and allonge at the time of the filing of this
foreclosure complaint for U.S. Bank to be entitled to
summary judgment.
 
Id. at 33, 398 P.3d at 622. The supreme court noted that Work's
 
declaration did not attest that U.S. Bank possessed the original
 note and allonge when the foreclosure complaint was filed. Id. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The supreme court thus ruled that "Work's declaration failed to
 
meet U.S. Bank's burden of establishing facts necessary for a
 grant of summary judgment." Id. 
In Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. Behrendt, 142 Hawai' i 37, 
40, 414 P.3d 89, 92 (2018), summary judgment was granted in favor of the foreclosing bank, Wells Fargo. Wells Fargo had attached a copy of the subject note to its unverified complaint together with an allonge indorsing the note in-blank. Id. at 39-40, 414 
P.3d at 91-92. The supreme court reviewed the admissibility of these documents under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) through a similar declaration as in Mattos attached to Wells Fargo's motion for summary judgment. Id. at 44-45, 414 P.3d at 96-97. This 
declaration was made by Vanessa Lewis (Lewis), who was also a 
"contract management coordinator" for Ocwen, Wells Fargo's loan-
service provider. Id. Because Lewis did not attest that she was 
the custodian of records for either Wells Fargo or Ocwen, the supreme court again observed that the documents attached to her declaration were admissible under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) only if her declaration demonstrated that she was a "qualified witness." Id. 
at 45, 414 P.3d at 97 (citing Mattos, 140 Hawai' i at 32, 398 P.3d 
at 621). The supreme court stated the rule regarding necessary qualifications to admit records under Mattos and Fitzwater as follows: 
The court in Mattos held that a witness may be
qualified to provide the testimony required by HRE Rule
803(b)(6) even if the witness is not employed by the
business that created the document or lacks direct, personal
knowledge of how the document was created. "There is no
requirement that the records have been prepared by the
entity that has custody of them, as long as they were
created in the regular course of some entity's business."
The witness, however, must have enough familiarity with the
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
record-keeping system of the business that created the
record to explain how the record was generated in the
ordinary course of business.
Records received from another business and
 
incorporated into the receiving business' records may in
some circumstances be regarded as "created" by the receiving
business. Incorporated records are admissible under HRE Rule
803(b)(6) when a custodian or qualified witness testifies
that the documents were incorporated and kept in the normal
course of business, that the incorporating business
typically relies upon the accuracy of the contents of the
documents, and the circumstances otherwise indicate the
trustworthiness of the document.
 
Id. (citing and quoting Mattos, 140 Hawai' i at 32, 398 P.3d at 
621). 
In holding that Lewis was not a "qualified witness"
 
under its decision in Mattos, the Behrendt court stated:
 
Here, as in Mattos, the Lewis Declaration does not
establish that the loan documents were received by Ocwen and
then incorporated into Ocwen's records. In addition,
although Lewis averred that Ocwen's records relating to the
loan were made and maintained in the regular course of
Ocwen's business, Lewis asserted only that she had "access
to and [was] familiar" with Wells Fargo's records and
documents relating to this case. The Lewis Declaration does
not establish that Lewis was familiar with Wells Fargo's
record-keeping system. It also makes no assertions as to
Lewis's familiarity with the record-keeping systems of
Funding Group or Option One, which first created the Note
and allonges. Thus, the Lewis Declaration satisfies the
foundational requirements to make Lewis a qualified witness
only with respect to Ocwen's original records about the loan
and not any records of Wells Fargo or the loan documents
themselves.
 
The Lewis Declaration also refers only to the Note and
not the allonges that Wells Fargo asserts were used to
endorse the Note in blank. As noted, the Lewis Declaration
does not establish that Lewis was a qualified witness, and
thus she could not have satisfied the requirements of HRE
Rule 803(b)(6) with respect to the allonges. But, as with
the declaration in Mattos, the Lewis Declaration did not
attempt to admit the allonges under the business records
exception. Thus, even if the Note fell within the bounds of
HRE Rule 803(b)(6), the allonges endorsing it in blank did
not because the declaration did not provide the requisite
foundation. This is to say that the documents purporting to
allow Wells Fargo to enforce the Note were not admissible
under the business record exception. Since the documents
were not admissible as asserted, Wells Fargo did not meet
its burden of establishing facts necessary for a grant of
summary judgment.
 
Id. at 46, 414 P.3d at 98 (citing Mattos, 140 Hawai' i at 32-33, 
398 P.3d at 621-22).
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In the instant case, HSBC Bank filed a Verified
 
Complaint for Foreclosure on November 18, 2013 (Complaint). The
 
Complaint alleged that on March 24, 2006, Luz Cui Bartolome (Luz)
 executed a promissory note in favor of Countrywide Home Loans,
 
Inc. (Countrywide) for $400,000.00 (Note), secured by a mortgage
 
on real property executed by Luz and Christopher Cui Bartolome,
 
which was recorded in the Office of the Assistant Registrar of
 the Land Court on March 30, 2006. HSBC Bank alleged that it was
 the owner of the mortgage by virtue of a May 12, 2010 Assignment
 of Mortgage, that Luz was in default, and that HSBC Bank "is
 entitled to enforce the Note[.]"
 
Attached to the Complaint was, inter alia, a
 
Verification of Complaint for Foreclosure, executed under penalty
 of perjury on November 7, 2013, by Dustin Stephenson
 (Stephenson), a "Document Control Officer" for Select Portfolio
 
Servicing, Inc. (Select Portfolio), "the loan servicing agent"
 for HSBC Bank at that time. Therein, Stephenson declared, inter
 
alia, that "[a] true and correct copy of the Indorsed Note is
 attached as Exhibit 'A'" and that HSBC Bank "is in possession of
 the Note."
2 Attached to Stephenson's declaration was a copy of
 
2 The Stephenson declaration more fully provides: 
1. I have knowledge of and I am competent to
testify to the matters stated herein by virtue of my
employment for Select Portfolio Servicing, Inc., the loan
servicing agent for [HSBC Bank] ("Plaintiff"). I have been
 
trained to use and understand the record keeping system
utilized for this loan. I know that pursuant to normal
business practices, the entries in the business records are
made at or near the time of the occurrence by the person
with actual knowledge of the occurrence being recorded in
the business record. I have also been trained to use and
 understand the entries in the record and am familiar with
 the same. My knowledge is based on my review of the business
(continued...)
 
7
 ________________________NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Note containing an undated, blank indorsement stamp on the
 
third and final page, apparently executed by a Managing Director
 for Countrywide.
3
 
2(...continued)
records and files related to the mortgage loan which is the
subject of this foreclosure.
2. On or about March 24, 2006, Defendant [Luz]
("Borrower"), for value received, duly made, executed and
delivered to Countrywide Home Loans, Inc., a New York
Corporation a promissory note ("Note") in the amount of
$400,000.00. A true and correct copy of the Indorsed Note is
attached as Exhibit "A". . . .
 
. . . .
 5. Plaintiff is in possession of the Note. . . .
. . . . 
9. All documents, memoranda, reports and records of
data compilation (collectively, "Records of Acts") that are
attached as Exhibits "A" - "E" to my Verification, as well
as all other factual information contained herein, represent
records of regularly conducted business activity relating to
the subject loan.
10. The Records of Acts were and are made in the
 
course of Plaintiff's and Plaintiff's servicing agent's
regularly conducted business activity of mortgage lending
and mortgage servicing.
11. All herein referenced Records of Acts were and
 
are made at or near the time of the acts reported. Entries
into these records are made by persons having personal
knowledge of such event, and are reviewed by me from time to
time to ensure accuracy and completeness, and are relied
upon by Plaintiff and its servicing agent in the conduct of
its business.
 
12. I am familiar with the referenced Records of
 
Acts, which is used to record and track events and documents
by Plaintiff and its servicing agent that are relevant to
this loan. These records are routinely made in the ordinary
course of business in a filing and computer system that I
have access to, have been trained to use and understand, and
with which I am familiar. 
13. I reviewed the Verified Complaint for
Foreclosure prepared by RCO Hawaii LLLC, including the
attached exhibits and I have confirmed the factual accuracy
of the allegations set forth therein.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
3
 The indorsement stamp reads:
 
PAY TO THE ORDER OF
 
WITHOUT RECOURSE
 
COUNTRYWIDE HOME LOANS, INC.
BY [signature]
David A. Spector
Managing Director
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Below and on appeal, HSBC Bank has maintained that it
 
was the holder of the blank-indorsed Note at the time it filed
 
the Complaint. HSBC Bank relies on the following, submitted with
 the Complaint: (1) the Stephenson declaration, and (2) a "true
 and correct copy of the Indorsed Note" attached thereto. HSBC
 Bank also relies on the following, submitted with its Motion for
 Summary Judgment: (3) a "Declaration of Indebtedness and on Prior
 Business Records" executed under penalty of perjury on October
 19, 2016 by Minh Nghiem (Nghiem), a "Document Execution
 
Specialist" and "authorized signer" of Nationstar Mortgage LLC
 
(Nationstar), "the current loan servicer" for HSBC Bank
 
indicating that "Plaintiff has possession of the Note;"
4 (4) 
4 The Nghiem declaration more fully provides: 
1. I am authorized to sign this Declaration on
behalf of Plaintiff, [HSBC Bank], as an authorized signer of
Nationstar Mortgage LLC ("Nationstar"), which is Plaintiff's
servicing agent for the subject loan ("the loan").
2. Nationstar maintains records for the loan in its
 
capacity as Plaintiff's servicer. As part of my job
responsibilities for Nationstar, I am familiar with the type
of records maintained by Nationstar in connection with the
Loan. As such, I am authorized to make this Declaration.
3. Nationstar is the current loan servicer for
 
Plaintiff and acts as the exclusive representative and agent
of Plaintiff in the servicing and administering of mortgage
loans referred to Nationstar, including the Loan being
foreclosed in this action.
 
4. The information in this Declaration is taken
 
from Nationstar's business records. I have personal
knowledge of Nationstar's procedures for creating these
records. They are: (a) made at or near the time of the
occurrence of the matters recorded by persons with personal
knowledge of the information in the business record, or from
information transmitted by persons with personal knowledge;
(b) kept in the course of Nationstar's regularly conducted
business activities; and (c) created by Nationstar as a
regular practice.
5. . . . . A true and correct copy of the Note is
attached as Exhibit "1" and is incorporated herein by this
reference.
 
6. Plaintiff has possession of the Note. The Note
has been duly indorsed. In anticipation that the original
(continued...)
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4(...continued)
Note is required for these foreclosure proceedings,
Nationstar has since caused the original Note to be
delivered to the Plaintiff's attorney . . .
. . . .
 9. The owner of the Note and Mortgage for a
particular a [sic] mortgage loan is commonly referred to in
the loan servicing industry as the Investor. The Investor
for this mortgage loan is the Plaintiff.
10. Nationstar maintains all the day to day loan
documents, records and accounting of payments on the Loan
being foreclosed in this action including all documents and
business records acquired by Plaintiff when it purchased the
subject mortgage loan.
11. Under the terms of Nationstar's servicing
arrangement, Plaintiff does not participate in, keep and
maintain any of the day to day loan documents, inputting of
accounting data, saving of business records and all
communications with borrowers.
 
12. The Plaintiff, as the Investor, has a passive
role with the primary emphasis on tracking its return on
investment. In terms of routine business records on the
 Loan, Nationstar acts as the sole custodian of Plaintiff's
records.
 
13. Nationstar became Plaintiff's loan servicer for
 
the Loan being foreclosed in this action on 04/01/2014.
. . . .
 18. Finally, the loan servicer records, maintains
and takes custody of all such daily business records and all
loan documents, including taking possession of the note and
mortgage records on behalf of the Investor.
. . . .
 21. The prior loan servicer for this mortgage loan
was Select Portfolio Servicing ("Prior Servicer").
22. Upon becoming Plaintiff's loan servicer,
Nationstar took custody and control of loan documents and
business records of the Prior Servicer and incorporated all
such records into the business records of Nationstar. 
23. Before the Prior Servicer's records were
 
incorporated into Nationstar'[s] own business records, it
conducted an independent check into the Prior Servicer's
records and found them in keeping with industry wide loan
servicing standards and only integrated them into
Nationstar'[s] own business records after finding the Prior
Servicer's records were made as part of a regularly
conducted activity, met industry standards and determined to
be trustworthy.
24. In performing its services to the Plaintiff,
Nationstar relies upon the accuracy of the Prior Servicer's
records and those records are now part of and used for all
purposes in the conduct of Nationstar's regularly conducted
activity of keeping and maintaining its own business
records. 
. . . .
 26. To the extent the Prior Servicer's records are
 
not accurate, Nationstar, on its own behalf and behalf of
Plaintiff, has a contractual right of recourse against the
Prior Servicer for any loss or damage caused by the Prior
Servicer's records. 
(continued...)
 
10
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
another copy of the Note indorsed-in-blank attached thereto; and
 
(5) an affirmation by HSBC Bank's attorney filed pursuant to
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 667-17 declaring, inter alia,
 
that the Complaint and "other papers filed or submitted to the
 
Court" contain no false statements of fact or law. 
However, we conclude that there is no admissible
 
evidence in the record, including the documents and declarations
 relied upon by HSBC Bank, showing that it was the holder of the
 Note indorsed-in-blank at the initiation of the suit. 
Stephenson attested that the documents attached to his
 
declaration, including the Note, were "made in the course of
 Plaintiff's and Plaintiff's servicing agent's regularly conducted
 business activity," which contradicts the Note that was executed
 in favor of, and apparently indorsed by, Countrywide and not HSBC
 Bank or Select Portfolio. Although Stephenson declared, "I have
 been trained to use and understand the record keeping system
 utilized for this loan," and "[t]hese records are routinely made
 in the ordinary course of business in a filing and computer
 system that I have access to, have been trained to use and
 understand, and with which I am familiar," these statements do
 not establish that Stephenson was familiar with the record-
keeping system of HSBC Bank. See HSBC Bank USA, N.A. v. Moore,
 
CAAP-17-0000478, 2018 WL 2148599 at *1 n. 2, *7 (Haw. App. May
 
4(...continued)
27. Nationstar did review and determine the Prior
 
Servicer's business records were trustworthy otherwise it
would not have incorporated it into its own records.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
10, 2018) (slip op.) (holding that identical language is
 
insufficient to establish declarant's familiarity with HSBC
 Bank's record-keeping system); see also HSBC Bank USA, N.A. v.
 Yamashita, CAAP-17-0000026, 2017 WL 6048908 (Haw. App. Dec. 7,
 2017) (SDO) (same). Nor does the Stephenson declaration attest
 that Select Portfolio received and incorporated HSBC Bank's
 records into its own. 
Thus, like in Mattos and Behrendt, the Stephenson 
declaration satisfies the foundational requirements to make Stephenson a qualified witness only as to Select Portfolio's original records about the loan and not any of HSBC Bank's records or the loan documents themselves. See Behrendt, 142 
Hawai'i at 46, 414 P.3d at 98. And as the Stephenson declaration 
did not lay adequate foundation as to HSBC Bank's records, his statement that "Plaintiff is in possession of the Note," which he made prior to the filing of the Complaint, is not admissible. See Mattos, 140 Hawai' i at 33, 398 P.3d at 622 ("Even if Work's 
declaration had stated that the U.S. Bank records contain the original note, this statement would not be admissible because, as noted, Work's declaration is insufficient to render him a 'qualified witness' as to U.S. Bank's records."). 
Nghiem's declaration does not establish that HSBC was
 
the holder of the blank-indorsed Note at the commencement of this
 case. Nghiem's sworn statement, made at the summary judgment
 stage and attesting that "Plaintiff has possession of the Note,"
 does not show that HSBC Bank was the holder of the Note when HSBC
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bank filed the Complaint. See Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai' i at 370­
71, 390 P.3d at 1257-58. 
Nor does the attorney affirmation establish HSBC Bank's
 
entitlement to enforce the Note for summary judgment purposes. 
See U.S. Bank Tr., N.A. v. Busto, CAAP-16-0000334, 2017 WL
 2579070 at *2 (Haw. App. June 14, 2017) (SDO) (with Ginoza, J.,
 dissenting on grounds that a majority of this court disregarded a
 similar attorney affirmation filed pursuant to HRS § 667-17); 
Wilmington Savings Fund Society v. Yasuda, CAAP-17-0000433, 2018
 WL 1904909 (Haw. App. Apr. 23, 2018 (SDO) (with Ginoza, J.,
 concurring based on Behrendt).
 
Lastly, we briefly address HSBC Bank's arguments that
 
(1) Reyes-Toledo is distinguishable because HSBC Bank filed a verified Complaint; (2) "the fact that a copy of the note indorsed in blank was attached to the complaint . . . alone demonstrated that HSBC Bank was the holder of the note at the time the complaint was filed;" and (3) Mattos is distinguishable because "the Complaint containing the Note was verified." These arguments ignore the rule central to Mattos and Behrendt that "[i]nadmissible evidence 'cannot serve as a basis for awarding or denying summary judgment.'" Behrendt, 142 Hawai' i at 44, 414 
P.3d at 96 (quoting Haw. Cmty. Fed. Credit Union v. Keka, 94 Hawai'i 213, 221, 11 P.3d 1, 9 (2000)). Both below and on 
appeal, HSBC Bank relies on, inter alia, the Stephenson declaration and the copy of the Note attached thereto to support its argument that it was the holder of the Note at the time it filed the Complaint. Therefore, for this evidence to serve as a 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
basis for granting summary judgment, it must be admissible. It
 
was not. 
As HSBC Bank raises no other arguments about the 
sufficiency of its evidence, we conclude that HSBC Bank did not satisfy its burden to produce admissible evidence demonstrating that it was entitled to enforce the Note at the time this action was commenced. See Mattos, 140 Hawai' i at 32-33, 398 P.3d at 
621-22. As such, viewing the facts and inferences in the light most favorable to Bartolome, as we must for purposes of a summary judgment ruling, there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether HSBC Bank was entitled to enforce the Note at the time this foreclosure action was commenced. Therefore, the Circuit Court erred in granting HSBC Bank's Motion for Summary Judgment. 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Circuit
 
Court's Foreclosure Decree and Judgment, both entered on July 7,
 2017, and remand this case for further proceedings consistent
 with this Summary Disposition Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 26, 2018. 
On the briefs: Gary Victor Dubin,
Frederick J. Arensmeyer,for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Andrew J. Lautenbach,Kukui Claydon,(Starn O'Toole Marcus &
Fisher),
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
14
 