NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000870
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
COLLEEN MICHELE HAMILTON, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 15-1-0147K)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Colleen Michele Hamilton (Hamilton) through 
an amended complaint with second-degree reckless endangering of M.R. (Count 1); first-degree criminal property damage relating to
 M.R. and her car (Count 2); third-degree assault of A.L. (Count
 3); and third-degree assault of O.R. (Count 4). The amended
 complaint was based on allegations that Hamilton deliberately
 rammed her car into the car driven by M.R., who was representing
 Hamilton's husband in divorce proceedings, causing bodily injury
 to O.R., a minor, who was a passenger in M.R.'s vehicle, and then
 assaulted A.L., while A.L. was attempting to serve Hamilton with
 a temporary restraining order (TRO) obtained by M.R. against
 Hamilton. Hamilton's theory of defense was that M.R. was chasing
 her, that M.R. caused the collision by abruptly turning in front
 of Hamilton without giving Hamilton time to stop, and that
 Hamilton acted in self-defense after A.L. assaulted her.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After a jury trial, Hamilton was found guilty of Count
 
1, acquitted of Count 2, found guilty of the lesser offense of
 
third-degree assault as a mutual affray on Count 3, and found
 guilty of Count 4. The Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
 (Circuit Court)
1/ sentenced Hamilton to concurrent terms of one
 
year of imprisonment as to Counts 1 and 4 and thirty days of
 imprisonment as to Count 3, with credit for time served. The
 Circuit Court entered its Judgment on October 20, 2015. 
On appeal, Hamilton, proceeding pro se,2/ asserts the
 
following points of error:
 
1. "Evidence was not presented at trial for
the Defendant[']s defense."
 
2. "Witnesses were not used at trial to defend
 
the Defendant."
 
3. "Special Jury Instruction was requested by the
Defendant and was not presented at trial."3/
 
4. "False testimony and evidence was used against
the Defendant by her appointed attorney Dean Kauka, the
prosecutors' witnesses and evidence and the States'
investigator Donald Rudny."
4/
 
1/ The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided.
 
2/ Hamilton was represented by appointed counsel Dean Kauka (Kauka) in
the Circuit Court until the Circuit Court granted Hamilton's request to
proceed pro se during the trial. The minutes entered by the Circuit Court
clerks indicate that after the State had rested its case-in-chief at trial and
 during the testimony of the first witness called by the defense, the Circuit
Court granted Hamilton's request to represent herself and appointed Kauka as
stand-by counsel. After Hamilton filed her notice of appeal pro se, this
court remanded the case to the Circuit Court to determine whether counsel
 should be appointed on appeal for Hamilton. On remand, the Circuit Court,
after holding a hearing, found that Hamilton wanted to continue representing
herself as a pro se litigant in this case, and it ruled that Hamilton
knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily waived her right to an attorney.
 
3/ It appears that Hamilton refers to the following special jury
instructions with respect to this point of error: (1) "Jury may indict Melvin
Fujino"; (2) "Jury is to make statement on who is responsible for the
accident"; (3) "Jury may submit questions"; (4) "I am allowed to speak pro
se"; and (5) "Unanimous verdict rule and jury may ask for further
instructions." 
4/ The record indicates that Donald Rudny was an accident reconstruction
expert hired by the defense thorough funds authorized by the Circuit Court.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5. "Defendant had ineffective counsel."
 
6. "Defendant was not given a choice for change
of venue through attorney Dean Kauka."
 
7. "Defendant was not allowed an impartial jury.
Dean Kauka refused on October 13, 2015 to remove four
jurors as requested by the Defendant. This request
included the Foreperson. . . . Defendant seeks
verification from Dean Kauka if her testimony to this
fact does not suffice."
 
8. "Defendant was given impartial [sic], unfair
treatment, by law enforcement."
 
9. "All preceding points of error were assisted
through Judge Melvin Fujino who rejected his recusal,
the motion to withdraw given by Dean Kauka and the
motion to withdraw counsel and replace counsel given by
the Defendant."
 
As explained below, we affirm the Circuit Court's
 
Judgment.
 
I.
 
At the outset, we observe that our ability to rule on
 
the merits of Hamilton's claims of error is severely hampered by

 
her failure to provide transcripts of relevant court proceedings. 
As stated by the Hawai 'i Supreme Court, "When an appellant 
desires to raise any point on appeal that requires the
 consideration of the oral proceedings before the court appealed
 from, the appellant bears the burden to show error by reference
 to matters in the record, and he or she has the responsibility of
 providing the relevant transcript." State v. Hoang, 93 Hawai
'i 
333, 334, 3 P.3d 499, 500 (2000).
 
The burden is upon appellant in an appeal to show
error by reference to matters in the record, and he or she
has the responsibility of providing an adequate transcript.
The law is clear in this jurisdiction that the appellant has
the burden of furnishing the appellate court with a
sufficient record to positively show the alleged error.
 
Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai 'i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 
558 (1995) (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
omitted).5/ There is a "presumption that the trial court acted 
without error" that the appellant must overcome. Hoang, 93 
Hawai'i at 336, 3 P.3d at 502. 
Hamilton did not request or provide any transcripts of
 
the Circuit Court proceedings in this case.6/ Without relevant
 
transcripts, we cannot review many of the claims of error raised
 
by Hamilton, including her claims relating to the evidence,
 witnesses, jury instructions, and lack of an impartial jury at
 her trial (points of error 1, 2, 3, 4, and 7) and her claim of
 unfair treatment by law enforcement (point of error 8). Because
 we cannot verify these claims of error by Hamilton without the
 relevant transcripts, and because "we will not presume error
 based on a silent record, the presumption that the trial court
 acted without error must prevail." Id. Accordingly, we conclude
 
that Hamilton did not satisfy her burden of establishing that the
 Circuit Court erred with respect to her points of error 1, 2, 3,
 4, 7, and 8.
 
II.

 
We will proceed to address Hamilton's remaining points
 
of error, to the extent we can, given the record provided. 
A.
 
Hamilton contends that her appointed counsel, Dean
 
Kauka (Kauka), provided ineffective assistance on a number of
 grounds, including that he failed to request a change of venue,
 
5/
 The Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) clearly place the
obligation on the appellant to request transcripts and provide a record that
is sufficient to enable the appellate court to review the appellant's pointsof error. See HRAP Rule 10(b)(1)(A) (2012) ("When an appellant desires to
raise any point on appeal that requires consideration of the oral proceedingsbefore the court appealed from, the appellant shall file with the appellateclerk, within 10 days after filing the notice of appeal, a request or requeststo prepare a reporter's transcript of such parts of the proceedings as theappellant deems necessary that are not already on file in the appeal."); HRAPRule 11(a) (2010) ("It is the responsibility of each appellant to provide arecord . . . that is sufficient to review the points asserted and to pursueappropriate proceedings in the court or agency from which the appeal is takento correct any omission."). 
6/ The only transcript of proceedings in the record is an excerpt of
Hamilton's preliminary hearing testimony, which the State attached as an
exhibit to a motion in limine. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to adequately consult with her, to adequately investigate and
 
prepare for trial, to obtain and call witnesses she requested, 
and to competently represent her at trial. Hamilton bears the
 burden of establishing that Kauka provided ineffective
 assistance. State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 348, 615 P.2d 101, 104
 
(1980). To meet this burden, Hamilton must satisfy the following
 two-part test: (1) she "must establish specific errors or
 omissions of [her] counsel reflecting counsel's lack of skill,
 judgment or diligence"; and (2) she "must establish that these
 errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or
 substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." 
Id. at 348–49, 615 P.2d at 104.
 
Hamilton's claim that Kauka provided ineffective 
assistance for failing to request a change of venue is without merit. Hamilton argues that she sought a change of venue because she knew many members of the Kona and Waimea legal community as the result of her use of self-help centers and her divorce proceedings, and therefore, another venue, such as Hilo, would have been a fair setting for the trial. Hamilton was not entitled to a mandatory change of venue because there is no indication that there was "so great a prejudice" against her that she could not "obtain a fair and impartial trial" where the prosecution was pending. Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) 
Rule 21(a) (2012); see State v. Pauline, 100 Hawai 'i 356, 365-67, 
60 P.3d 306, 315-17 (2002). In addition, there is no indication that Hamilton was entitled to a discretionary change of venue because the circumstances she describes did not compel the need for a change of venue. See United States v. Hunter, 672 F.2d 
815, 816 (10th Cir. 1982) (construing federal rule analogous to HRPP Rule 21 and stating that "[c]hange of venue in a criminal case is discretionary, and a trial judge's decision on the matter is entitled to deference. The facts must compel and not merely support venue transfer before an abuse of discretion will be found by an appellate court." (citation omitted)). Hamilton has not met her burden of showing that Kauka's failure to request a 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
change of venue constituted deficient performance or resulted in
 
the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
 meritorious defense.
 
We further conclude that based on the current record,
 
Hamilton has failed to meet her burden of showing that her
 remaining challenges to Kauka's representation constitute
 ineffective assistance of counsel. We note, however, that
 Hamilton has alleged facts that, if proven, may support a claim
 of ineffective assistance of counsel. We therefore deny these
 remaining claims of ineffective assistance without prejudice to
 Hamilton raising them in an HRPP Rule 40 proceeding and under a
 more developed record. See State v. Silva, 75 Haw. 419, 439, 864
 
P.2d 583, 592-93 (1993).
 
B.
 
Hamilton argues that Judge Melvin H. Fujino (Judge 
Fujino) erred in denying her motions seeking his recusal. We review a trial judge's denial of a motion for recusal under the abuse of discretion standard. State v. Ross, 89 Hawai
'i 371, 
375-76, 974 P.2d 11, 15-16 (1998). In Ross, the Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court noted: 
Decisions on recusal or disqualification present perhaps the
ultimate test of judicial discretion and should thus lie
undisturbed absent a showing of abuse of that discretion.
As one court stated:
 
The jurist requested to recuse himself [or herself] is
the most capable to determine those factors hidden in
the recesses of the mind and soul which would bear
 upon his or her capability to maintain the
impartiality that each matter must receive. The
 decision of that judge is final, subject to review
only for an abuse of that discretion.
 
Id. (brackets, ellipsis points, and citation omitted). 
The record indicates that prior to this case, Judge
 
Fujino presided over Hamilton's divorce case against her husband;
 
that after she disregarded repeated warnings, Judge Fujino found
 Hamilton in criminal contempt of court for her disorderly or
 contemptuous behavior and her breach of peace or disturbance with
 intent to disrupt the court's proceedings during a hearing in the
 divorce case; that Judge Fujino sentenced Hamilton to thirty days
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of incarceration for her criminal contempt, but later amended the
 
sentence to twenty-two days; and that Judge Fujino signed the TRO
 issued in favor of M.R. and against Hamilton that M.R. was trying
 to serve when the collision between Hamilton's vehicle and M.R.'s
 vehicle occurred. Judge Fujino also increased Hamilton's bail
 from $2,750 to $70,000 after the complaint against Hamilton was
 amended to charge first-degree criminal property damage, a class
 B felony, in Count 2, instead of second-degree criminal property
 damage, a class C felony. 
Hamilton moved in this case to recuse Judge Fujino and
 
also moved for reconsideration of his denial of her recusal
 motion, alleging that Judge Fujino was biased because he had
 heard evidence in the divorce case and ruled in favor of her
 husband in that case; that Judge Fujino had warned her and then
 found her in contempt in the divorce case; that M.R., a
 complaining witness in this case, was the lawyer for Hamilton's
 husband in the divorce case; and that Judge Fujino had raised
 Hamilton's bail after the amended complaint was filed. Hamilton
 also claimed that she wanted to call Judge Fujino as a witness at
 trial because he had signed the TRO that M.R. was trying to serve
 when the collision occurred and because "she is 'emotionally
 challenged in her reactions whenever Judge Fujino is in the same
 courtroom.'" 
Judge Fujino denied Hamilton's motion for recusal and
 
for reconsideration. Among other things, Judge Fujino found that
 Hamilton failed to make a showing that he was biased or
 prejudiced against her; that his sitting in prior proceedings
 involving Hamilton was insufficient grounds for him to recuse or
 be disqualified; that there were no contested matters regarding
 the TRO before the court and his role as the judge who signed the
 TRO did not make him a relevant witness in this case; and that he
 would not be sitting as a fact-finder in the case because
 Hamilton's case was set for a jury trial. 
We conclude that Hamilton has not demonstrated that
 
Judge Fujino abused his discretion in denying Hamilton's requests
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that he recuse himself. In Ross, the supreme court concluded 
that parties "may not predicate their claims of disqualifying bias on adverse rulings, even if the ruling are erroneous." Ross, 89 Hawai
'i at 378, 974 P.2d at 18. In holding that the 
trial judge did not abuse his discretion in denying Ross's motion for disqualification, the supreme court reasoned that the "'evidence' offered by Ross 'does not even involve matters of any personal interest to the judge. They concern primarily matters affecting his exercise of judicial discretion.'" Id. (citation 
and brackets omitted). The supreme court in Ross also addressed whether the circumstances created an appearance of impropriety requiring the trial judge's recusal. The supreme court held that "the test for disqualification due to the 'appearance of impropriety' is an objective one, based not on the beliefs of the petitioner or the judge, but on the assessment of a reasonable impartial onlooker apprised of all the facts." Id. at 380, 974 
P.2d at 20. 
Here, Hamilton's claims of bias are predicated on
 
adverse rulings made by Judge Fujino during judicial proceedings
 and do not involve any extrajudicial actions or "matters of any
 personal interest" to Judge Fujino. See id. at 378, 974 P.2d at
 
18. In addition, we conclude that viewed objectively, a
 
reasonable impartial onlooker apprised of all the facts would not
 find that Judge Fujino's presiding over this case created an
 appearance of impropriety. See id. at 379-81, 974 P.2d at 19-21;
 
United States v. Vasquez, 638 F.2d 507, 523 n.8 (2d Cir. 1980)
 (describing as "meritless" the defendant's contention that the
 judge should have recused himself because the defendant had
 previously been convicted before the same judge); United States
 v. Scaccia, 514 F.Supp. 1353 (N.D. N.Y. 1981) (concluding that
 the court's presiding over the defendant's sentencing and
 probation revocation in a prior case did not require recusal in a
 subsequent criminal prosecution where the court's alleged bias
 stemmed from information learned and actions taken during
 judicial proceedings and a jury would be the fact-finder in the
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
subsequent prosecution); State v. Boffa, 513 F.Supp. 505, 511 (D.
 
Del. 1981) (concluding that the judge's finding that the
 defendant's testimony was not credible in a prior case did not
 require the judge's recusal in the instant prosecution). We
 affirm Judge Fujino's denial of Hamilton's recusal requests.
7/
 
III.
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court's
 
Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, March 31, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
Colleen Michele Hamilton
 
Defendant-Appellant pro se.
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 David Blancett-Maddock 
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
7/ To the extent that Hamilton contends that the Circuit Court erred in 
ruling on Kauka's motion to withdraw or her motion for withdrawal and
substitution of counsel, we note that Hamilton did not make the transcriptsrelevant to these rulings part of the record on appeal. We therefore are unable to review these claims, and Hamilton has failed to overcome thepresumption that the Circuit Court acted without error. See Hoang, 93 Hawai' i 
at 336, 3 P.3d at 502. 
9
 