NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000492
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
LARRY CASS RAGASA, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 10-1-0317)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Larry Cass Ragasa ( Ragasa) appeals
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence ( Judgment) filed on
June 1, 2016, in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit ( Circuit
Court).1  Following a jury trial, Ragasa was convicted of two
counts of Sexual Assault in the First Degree, in violation of
Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 707-730(1)(c) (2014)2 (Counts 1
1The Honorable Kathleen N. A. Watanabe presided.
2HRS § 707-730 provides in relevant part: 
§ 707-730.  Sexual assault in the first degree.   (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the first
degree if:
. . . . 
(c) The person knowingly engages in sexual
penetration with a person who is at least
fourteen years old but less than sixteen years
old; provided that:
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and 2); and one count of Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree, in
violation of HRS § 707-733(1)(b) (2014)3 (Count 4).  Ragasa was
sentenced to concurrent, twenty-year terms of imprisonment as to
Counts 1 and 2, and a concurrent, one-year term of imprisonment
as to Count 4.
Ragasa raises five points of error on appeal,
contending that the Circuit Court erred when it:  (1) admitted
evidence of uncharged allegations of sexual contact; (2) admitted
the expert testimony of Dr. Alexander Bivens ( Dr. Bivens ); (3)
did not instruct the jury on the requirement of unanimity as to a
specific act; (4) denied Ragasa's motion for judgment of
acquittal on Counts 1 and 2; and (5) denied Ragasa's motion for a
new trial.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
2(...continued)
(i) The person is not less than five
years older than the minor; and
(ii) The person is not legally married to
the minor[.]
. . . .
(2) Sexual assault in the first degree is a class A
felony.
3HRS § 707-733 provides in relevant part:
§ 707-733.  Sexual assault in the fourth degree.   (1)
A person commits the offense of sexual assault in the fourth
degree if:
. . . . 
(b) The person knowingly exposes the person's
genitals to another person under circumstances
in which the actor's conduct is likely to alarm
the other person or put the other person in fear
of bodily injury[.]
. . . .
(2) Sexual assault in the fourth degree is a
misdemeanor.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Ragasa's points of error as follows: 
(1) Ragasa argues that the Circuit Court erred when it
admitted testimony about uncharged allegations of sexual contact
with the complaining witness ( CW), which allegedly occurred both
before and after the alleged criminal conduct, on the grounds
that the testimony constituted inadmissible character evidence
and that it was highly prejudicial and minimally probative. 
Rule 404(b) of the Hawai #i Rules of Evidence ( HRE) provides:
Character evidence not admissible to prove conduct;
exceptions; other crimes . . . . (b) Other crimes, wrongs, or
acts.  Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not
admissible to prove the character of a person in order to
show action in conformity therewith.  It may, however, be
admissible where such evidence is probative of another fact
that is of consequence to the determination of the action,
such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation,
plan, knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of
mistake or accident.  In criminal cases, the proponent of
evidence to be offered under this subsection shall provide
reasonable notice in advance of trial, or during trial if
the court excuses pretrial notice on good cause shown, of
the date, location, and general nature of any such evidence
it intends to introduce at trial.
This rule prohibits "the admission of evidence
introduced for the sole purpose of establishing that a defendant
possesses a criminal character and acted in conformity with that
character.  Although such evidence may not be used solely for the
purpose of establishing criminal propensity, under certain
circumstances it may be offered to prove other facts of
consequence."  State v. Behrendt , 124 Hawai# i 90, 102, 237 P.3d
1156, 1168 (2010).  "To the extent evidence of crimes, wrongs, or
acts is being offered for a permissible purpose, it is only
admissible if the evidence is both relevant and its probative
value is not substantially outweighed by its prejudicial effect." 
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
State v. Calara, 132 Hawai #i 391, 406, 322 P.3d 931, 946 (2014)
(citation omitted).
In Behrendt , the Hawai# i Supreme Court addressed the
admissibility of the defendant's prior sexual interaction with
the complaining witness in a case of child sexual abuse.  124
Hawai#i at 102-08, 237 P.3d 1168-74.  There, the defendant was
convicted of three counts of sexual assault in the third degree
for sexually assaulting his sister-in-law when she was between
fourteen and sixteen years old.  Id.  at 93, 237 P.3d at 1159.  At
trial, the victim described how the sexual abuse developed,
starting when she was eleven, and the things the defendant said
to keep her from telling anyone.  Id.  at 95-96, 237 P.3d at 1161-
62.  The victim's sister also testified about her observations of
the victim and the defendant during the years prior to the
criminal offenses.  Id. at 97-98, 237 P.3d at 1163-64.  The
defendant testified and denied any sexual contact.  Id.  at 99,
237 P.3d at 1165.  The supreme court held that this evidence of
uncharged allegations of sexual conduct was relevant to show the
defendant's opportunity to commit the charged sexual assaults
without being detected.  Id. at 104, 237 P.3d at 1170.  Dr.
Bivens also testified in Behrendt, about delayed reporting and
the four "primary processes" abusers use (i.e. , seduction and
testing, masking sex as a game, emotional and verbal coercion,
and taking advantage of a child in a vulnerable position).  Id.
at 98-99, 237 P.3d at 1164-65.  The supreme court explained that
the testimony of the victim and Dr. Bivens "provided the
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
evidentiary foundation for that non-character use of the
evidence."  Id. at 105, 237 P.3d at 1171.
Here, the prior sexual contacts between CW and Ragasa
were relevant to establish Ragasa's opportunity to engage in sex
acts with CW when she was in ninth grade (Counts 1 & 2) and when
she was in her early twenties (Counts 3 & 4) without her
protesting, running for help, or immediately reporting the
incidents.  CW testified that Ragasa first explored CW's
willingness to engage in sexual conduct when CW was in middle
school by exposing himself to her when she hid a television
remote from him, then he repeatedly exposed his penis to her,
acting "[l]ike it was fun," then he touched her breasts and her
vagina, and he later progressed to vaginal penetration and
fellatio.  CW's testimony also suggested that Ragasa used
coercion to keep CW from telling her family when he implied that
their families would be hurt if anyone found out and when he told
her not to write in her journal about it.  The testimony included
that Ragasa approached CW when she was in a "vulnerable position"
- when she was sleeping.  In sum, the evidence of uncharged
sexual contacts was relevant to show that by the time of the
charged offenses, CW had become acclimated to the sexual contact,
and explained her failure to run away, protest, or report the
incidents right away.  Therefore, the State articulated a
permissible purpose for the evidence, i.e. , establishing Ragasa's
opportunity to commit the offenses without being detected.
We reject Ragasa's assertion that Behrendt is
distinguishable because "the fact that [Ragasa] and CW had sexual
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
contact was not even disputed in this case."  The record shows
that Ragasa did not present any evidence and did not stipulate to
any facts.  Although Ragasa's defense counsel stated, during
opening statements, that Ragasa and CW had an "affair," the
Circuit Court properly instructed the jury that the lawyers'
opening and closing statements were not evidence.  The State had
the burden of proving beyond a reasonable doubt every element of
the offenses charged against Ragasa and Ragasa's assertion on
appeal that there was no need for the State to prove the sexual
contact is without merit.  See HRS § 701-114 (2014).
We also reject Ragasa's argument that the State 
elicited testimony about extensive uncharged legal, sexual
contact that happened well after the alleged offenses.  We find
no testimony regarding sex acts occurring after the incidents
alleged in Counts 3 and 4.
We next consider whether the probative value of the
evidence was "substantially outweighed" by the danger of unfair
prejudice to Ragasa.  See Haw. R. Evid. 403.  When weighing
probative value versus prejudicial effect in this context, a
court must consider a variety of factors, including:
the strength of the evidence as to the commission of the
other crime, the similarities between the crimes, the
interval of time that has elapsed between the crimes, the
need for the evidence, the efficacy of alternative proof,
and the degree to which the evidence probably will rouse the
jury to overmastering hostility.
Behrendt, 124 Hawai #i at 106, 237 P.3d at 1172 (citation
omitted).
It appears that the evidence of uncharged sex acts was
necessary in this case to establish the progression of Ragasa's
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
behaviors and to explain CW's delayed reporting of the sexual
acts charged in Counts 1 and 2, including Ragasa's "playful"
seduction and testing of CW and his development of a relationship
of trust and control over her as the sexual conduct evolved.  In
addition, the prior sexual activity between Ragasa and CW helped
explain why, in 2010, Ragasa would aggressively expose himself to
CW, pulling away a blanket she used to cover her face, and
masturbate.  The evidence of the uncharged sexual conduct gave
context to the charged incidents and helped explain why CW's
memory of the first incidents and the most recent incidents were
most clear.
Contrary to Ragasa's argument that the Behrendt  case
and Dr. Bivens's testimony are applicable only to cases involving
young children, rather than 16 year-old adolescents, Behrendt and
Ragasa were both charged for incidents that occurred when the
complaining witness was fourteen or fifteen years old, but not
charged for prior abuse, which allegedly began in middle school. 
See Behrendt, 124 Hawai# i at 93, 237 P.3d at 1159.  Although
Behrendt did not involve additional charges or sexual assault
allegations after the complaining witness was sixteen, we reject
Ragasa's argument that the presence of those facts here render
the prior bad act evidence inadmissible, as it appears that CW's
testimony was highly probative, as discussed above, and more
probative than prejudicial, as the Circuit Court necessarily
determined in denying Ragasa's motion in limine .  Therefore, we
conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion, or
otherwise err, in allowing this testimony.
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(2) Ragasa argues that the Circuit Court erred when it
admitted the testimony of Dr. Bivens because, Ragasa argues, the
defense did not contest the fact of sexual contact, only the age
of CW at the time the charged felony conduct allegedly occurred.
First, it does not appear that Ragasa objected to Dr.
Bivens's testimony, generally, on the grounds that it was
irrelevant because Ragasa admitted that all of the acts of sexual
contact occurred and only disputed when they occurred.  In
addition, as noted above, there is no evidentiary stipulation in
this case.  Nor did Ragasa file an opposition to the State's
Notice of Intent regarding Dr. Bivens's testimony.  The "general"
concern raised by Ragasa was that Dr. Bivens's answers should not
exceed the scope of the prosecution's questions.  The court
instructed the State to caution Dr. Bivens.
HRE Rule 103(a)(1) requires a "specific" objection or a
motion to strike if the ground is "not apparent from the
context."  State v. Kony, 138 Hawai #i 1, 10, 375 P.3d 1239, 1248
(2016).  We reject Ragasa's contention that his objection to the
"general relevance" of Dr. Bivens's testimony was apparent from
the context of the proceedings.  Ragasa did not seek to exclude
Dr. Bivens's testimony, in whole or in part, before trial in his
motion in limine or otherwise.  Ragasa's comment to the Circuit
Court that he did not want Dr. Bivens to testify about "all areas
of child sex assault, only the ones relevant to this case" did
not notify the Circuit Court of what testimony Ragasa found
objectionable. 
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Ragasa argues that Dr. Bivens's testimony was both
irrelevant and not recognized science.  The supreme court has
recognized that expert testimony assists the trier of fact by
providing "a resource for ascertaining truth in relevant areas
outside the ken of ordinary laity."  State v. Batangan , 71 Haw.
552, 556, 799 P.2d 48, 53 (1990) (citation omitted)).  In
Batangan, the supreme court held that "sexual abuse of children
is a particularly mysterious phenomenon, and the common
experience of the jury may represent a less than adequate
foundation for assessing the credibility of a young child who
complains of sexual abuse."  Id. at 557, 799 P.2d at 51
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted).  The supreme
court explained that child victims can exhibit behavior
"seemingly inconsistent with behavioral norms of other victims of
assault[,]" such as delayed reporting and recantation of abuse
allegations, which would normally "be attributed to inaccuracy or
prevarication."  Id.  In such situations, the supreme court
stated, "it is helpful for the jury to know that many child
victims of sexual abuse behave in the same manner."  Id. at 557,
799 P.2d at 52.  In this way, expert testimony can explain to the
jury "the unique interpersonal dynamics involved in prosecutions
for intrafamily child sexual abuse" and correct "widely held
misconceptions . . . so that [the jury] may evaluate the evidence
free of the constrains of popular myths."  Id.  at 557-58, 799
P.2d at 52 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted;
ellipses in original).  The supreme court concluded that expert
testimony explaining "'seemingly bizarre' behavior of child sex
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
abuse victims is helpful to the jury and should be admitted." 
Id. at 558, 799 P.2d at 52.4
Here, the record contains ample evidence that Dr.
Bivens was qualified to opine on the dynamics of sexual abuse of
children.  Dr. Bivens testified, inter alia, that he has a Ph.D.
in clinical psychology, professional experience in counseling and
treating children and adolescents, some of whom were victims of
sexual abuse, that he keeps current on research and articles in
the field of child sexual abuse, and that his expert testimony
was based on multiple scientific studies.  We note that Hawai #i
courts have recognized the valuable assistance to the trier-of-
fact of such expert testimony and Dr. Bivens has been qualified
many times as an expert in cases involving child sexual abuse
victims.  See, e.g., Behrendt , 124 Hawai #i at 98-99, 237 P.3d at
1164-65; Kony, 138 Hawai #i at 9, 375 P.3d at 1247; State v.
McDonnell, No. SCWC-14-0000355, 2017 WL 3700812, *4 (Haw. Aug.
28, 2017); State v. Moisa , No. 30712, 2012 WL 247963, *2 (Haw.
App. Jan. 25, 2012)(SDO); State v. Pacheco , No. CAAP-11-0000571,
2012 WL 5990275, *2 (Haw. App. Nov. 30, 2012)(SDO).
Ragasa further argues that Dr. Bivens's testimony was
irrelevant because it was based, in part, on a study involving
prepubescent girls, likely under the age of thirteen, and that it
improperly bolstered CW's credibility about the dates of the
uncharged and/or charged conduct.  Again, Ragasa did not object
to Dr. Bivens's testimony about this study or move to strike it. 
4In Kony, the supreme court confirmed that Batangan  does not exempt
expert testimony concerning child sexual abuse victims from the weighing
required by HRE Rule 403.  Kony, 138 Hawai #i at 11, 375 P.3d at 1249. 
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Thus, any error in the admission of this evidence was waived. 
See, e.g., Kony, 138 Hawai #i at 10-11, 375 P.3d at 1248-49.  In
any case, Dr. Bivens's testimony was helpful in understanding,
inter alia , delayed reporting of abuse, recognized abuse
processes, and common memory patterns among child sexual abuse
victims.  See, e.g., Behrendt , 124 Hawai #i at 105, 237 P.3d at
1171 (acknowledging Dr. Bivens's testimony regarding delayed
reporting and four "abuse processes" provided foundation for
evidence of prior, uncharged sexual conduct with victim).
Finally, we reject Ragasa's argument that Dr. Bivens's
testimony usurped the role of the jury by improperly bolstering
CW's credibility about the dates of the uncharged and/or charged
conduct.  Dr. Bivens specifically testified that he had no
knowledge about the facts of this case and was testifying to
provide a general framework for understanding what can happen in
a case of child sexual abuse.  Ragasa cites nothing in the record
supporting his assertion that Dr. Bivens opined on the facts of
this case and we find no such testimony.
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not
abuse its discretion in allowing Dr. Bivens's testimony.
(3)  Ragasa contends that the Circuit Court violated
his constitutional right to a unanimous jury verdict when it did
not properly tailor an instruction to the jury that it must
unanimously agree on which act constitutes the conduct element,
i.e. the specific sexual act, for Count 1 and Count 2, under
State v. Arceo , 84 Hawai #i 1, 928 P.2d 843 (1996).  In Arceo, the
supreme court held: 
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
[W]hen separate and distinct culpable acts are subsumed
within a single count charging a sexual assault—any one of
which could support a conviction thereunder—and the
defendant is ultimately convicted by a jury of the charged
offense, the defendant's constitutional right to a unanimous
verdict is violated unless one or both of the following
occurs: (1) at or before the close of its case-in-chief, the
prosecution is required to elect the specific act upon which
it is relying to establish the 'conduct' element of the
charged offense; or (2) the trial court gives the jury a
specific unanimity instruction, i.e., an instruction that
advises the jury that all twelve of its members must agree
that the same underlying criminal act has been proved beyond
a reasonable doubt.
Id. at 32–33, 928 P.2d at 874–75.
Here, the Circuit Court provided the jury with a
specific unanimity instruction as follows:
The law allows the introduction of evidence for the
purpose of showing that there is more than one act,
omission, or item upon which proof of an element of an
offense may be based.  In order for the prosecution to prove
an element, all twelve jurors must unanimously agree that
the same act, the same omission, or possession of the same
item has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
(Emphasis added).
Ragasa does not acknowledge this instruction on appeal
and agreed to it without comment before the Circuit Court. 
Instead, he points to his objection to the State's Instructions 1
and 2, which stated the charges and set forth the elements of
Counts 1 and 2.  We conclude that the Circuit Court's instruction
meets the requirements set forth in Arceo.5  The jurors were
instructed to "consider all the instructions as a whole and
5We note that the Circuit Court's instruction is nearly identical
to Instruction 8.02 of the Hawai #i Standard Jury Instructions—Criminal, which
states:
UNANIMITY INSTRUCTION—GENERIC
The law allows the introduction of evidence for the purpose
of showing that there is more than one [act]
[omission][item] upon which proof of an element of an 
offense may be based. In order for the prosecution to prove
an element, all twelve jurors must unanimously agree that
[the same act] [the same omission][possession of the same
item] has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
consider each instruction in light of all the others."  We
presume that the jury adhered to the Circuit Court's
instructions.  State v. Webster , 94 Hawai #i 241, 248, 11 P.3d
466, 473 (2000).  Ragasa does not explain why this instruction,
when read with the charging instructions on Count 1 and 2, is
insufficient to instruct the jury regarding the specific
unanimity requirement.  The State did not need to make an
election of which acts it was relying on for Counts 1 and 2
because the jury was properly instructed as to specific
unanimity.  Cf. State v. Jones, 96 Hawai# i 161, 29 P.3d 351
(2001).
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
instructing the jury as to specific unanimity.
(4) Ragasa contends that the Circuit Court erred in
denying his motion for judgment of acquittal on Counts 1 and 2.  
Regarding Count 1, Ragasa argues that "there was no evidence of
any specific act of digital penetration during the relevant time
frame."  In her testimony at trial, CW distinguished between
vaginal touching when she was thirteen and vaginal penetration
when she was in ninth grade.  Specifically, CW testified that
Ragasa "put his finger in [her] vagina" during her ninth-grade
year in high school, when she was fourteen or fifteen years old.  
She distinguished this act from other vaginal touching where
Ragasa "did not really put his finger inside of [her]."  She also
testified that she knew certain acts occurred during ninth grade
based on her recollection concerning school uniforms.  Further
detail regarding the time, place, or circumstance of the assault
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
goes to CW's credibility and "it is well-settled that an
appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the
credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence[.]" 
State v. Buch, 83 Hawai# i 308, 321, 926 P.2d 599, 612 (1996)
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted).  Credibility
determinations are strictly within the province of the trier of
fact.  See State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai #i 131, 139, 913 P.2d 57, 65
(1996).  Viewed in a light most favorable to the State, CW's
testimony was sufficient to support the jury's conviction of
Ragasa as to the charge of Sexual Assault in the First Degree in
Count 1.
There was also sufficient evidence to support Ragasa's
conviction on the charge of Sexual Assault in the First Degree
for penetration by fellatio in Count 2.  CW testified that during
ninth grade, Ragasa "wanted me to start giving him blow jobs"
meaning "oral sex[,] [h]is penis in my mouth."  She testified
about a specific incident where Ragasa had CW give him a blow
job, stating "[m]y sister left for work.  He'd come wake me up
and have me come to the room and he wanted me to do oral sex." 
CW stated that this happened in front of her sister's and
Ragasa's bed.  CW also testified that she told the police officer
that the first act of fellatio occurred "maybe it was during my
freshman year."  Viewed in a light most favorable to the State,
CW's testimony was sufficient to support the jury's conviction of
Ragasa as to the charge of Sexual Assault in the First Degree in
Count 2.
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(5) Ragasa contends that the Circuit Court abused its
discretion in denying his motion for new trial, which was based
on post-conviction testimony by Ragasa's wife.   Hawai#i Rules of
Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 33 provides, in relevant part, that
"[t]he court on motion of a defendant may grant a new trial to
the defendant if required in the interest of justice."  A motion
for new trial based on newly discovered evidence will only be
granted if:   
(1) the evidence has been discovered after trial; (2) such
evidence could not have been discovered before or at trial
through the exercise of due diligence; (3) the evidence is
material to the issues and not cumulative or offered solely
for purposes of impeachment; and (4) the evidence is of such
a nature as would probably change the result of a later
trial.
 State v. Mabuti, 72 Haw. 106, 112-13, 807 P.2d 1264, 1268
(1991).
"In determining whether evidence is, in truth, newly
discovered and whether sufficient diligence was used to learn of
such evidence, the composite knowledge of both the accused and
his counsel will be considered."  State v. McNulty , 60 Haw. 259,
268, 588 P.2d 438, 445 (1978) (overruled on other grounds by
State v. Eberly , 107 Hawai #i 239, 249, 112 P.3d 725, 735 (2005)). 
Thus, "evidence known to defendant's counsel before or at trial
does not constitute newly discovered evidence justifying a new
trial."  Id.   In McNulty, evidence of a witness's violent
character was not "newly discovered" where defendant's trial
counsel was aware that a witness's former counsel possessed
information related to the witness's character, but chose not to
call the former counsel to testify at the defendant's trial.  Id. 
15NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Here, based on the post-trial testimony given by
Ragasa's wife, Ragasa had access to the paperwork she produced
after trial.  The record also shows that Ragasa was not in
custody pending trial and that Ragasa and his counsel were fully
aware of the issues raised by the proffered post-trial testimony
of Ragasa's wife.  The Circuit Court did not err in concluding
that Ragasa failed to show that the proffered evidence could not
have been discovered before or at trial through the exercise of
due diligence.  We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse
its discretion in denying Ragasa's motion for new trial on the
record in this case. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's June 1, 2016
Judgment is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaii, October 30, 2017. #
On the briefs:
Daniel G. Hempey,
(De Costa Hempey Meyers, LLC),
for Defendant-Appellant.Chief Judge
Tracy Murakami,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Kauai,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
16