NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000647
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I,
Plaintiff-Appellee, 
v.
 BRONSON KANEAIAKALA,
Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CRIMINAL NO. 15-1-0108)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Bronson Kaneaiakala (Kaneaiakala)
appeals from the "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" entered on
September 20, 2016 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
(circuit court).1  The State of Hawai #i (State) charged
Kaneaiakala with one count of Burglary in the First Degree in
violation of Section 708-810(1)(c) of the Hawaii Revised Statutes
(HRS).2  After a jury trial, Kaneaiakala was found guilty as
1The Honorable Shirley M. Kawamura presided.
2HRS § 708-810 (2014) provides in relevant part:
§ 708-810 Burglary in the first degree .  (1) A person
commits the offense of burglary in the first degree if the
person intentionally enters or remains unlawfully in a
building, with intent to commit therein a crime against a
person or against property rights, and:
. . . .NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
charged.  The circuit court sentenced Kaneaiakala to a term of
imprisonment of ten years.
On appeal, Kaneaiakala contends (1) the circuit court
erred in denying Kaneaiakala's "Motion to Suppress Identification
of the Defendant" (Motion to Suppress); (2) there was
insufficient evidence to support the conviction of Burglary in
the First Degree where the evidence failed to establish the
requisite identity of the alleged perpetrator; and (3) the
prosecutor engaged in prosecutorial misconduct in her rebuttal
argument when she expressed her own personal opinion, which is
prohibited under State v. Marsh , 68 Haw. 659, 728 P.2d 1301
(1986).
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve
Kaneaiakala's points of error as follows, and affirm.
(1)  In his first point of error, Kaneaiakala contends
that the circuit court erred in denying his Motion to Suppress
because the field show-up identification of Kaneaiakala by Mari
Laraway (Laraway) was impermissibly suggestive and unreliable. 
Therefore, Kaneaiakala argues that Laraway's identification
should have been suppressed.
When the defendant challenges admissibility of eyewitness
identification on the grounds of impermissibly suggestive
pre-trial identification procedure, he or she has the burden
of proof, and the court, trial or appellate, is faced with
two questions: (1) whether the procedure was impermissibly
or unnecessarily suggestive; and (2) if so, whether, upon
viewing the totality of the circumstances, such as
opportunity to view at the time of the crime, the degree of
attention, and the elapsed time, the witness's
identification is deemed sufficiently reliable so that it is
worthy of presentation to and consideration by the jury.
State v. Araki , 82 Hawai #i 474, 484, 923 P.2d 891, 901 (1996)
(quoting State v. Okumura , 78 Hawai #i 383, 391, 894 P.2d 80, 88
(1995)).  "As long as there is not a substantial likelihood of
(c) The person recklessly disregards a risk that the
building is the dwelling of another, and the
building is such a dwelling.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
misidentification, it is the function of the jury to determine
the ultimate weight to be given the identification."  State v.
DeCenso, 5 Haw. App. 127, 132, 681 P.2d 573, 578 (1984) (internal
quotation marks and citations omitted).
In this case, the State stipulated that the field show-
up was impermissibly suggestive.  Therefore, we consider only
Kaneaiakala's arguments that Laraway's identification was not
sufficiently reliable to be presented to and considered by the
jury.  See In re Doe , 107 Hawai #i 439, 450-52, 114 P.3d 945, 956-
58 (App. 2005) (concluding that although the show-up procedure at
issue was impermissibly suggestive, the totality of the
circumstances indicated that the witness's identification was
sufficiently reliable to be presented to the jury); see also
DeCenso, 5 Haw. App. at 131, 681 P.2d at 577-78.
In determining whether Laraway's identification was
sufficiently reliable, we first consider Laraway's opportunity to
view the suspect at the time of the crime.  Kaneaiakala argues
that Laraway's view of the suspect was merely "fleeting."  We
disagree.  At the Motion to Suppress hearing, Laraway testified
that when she first saw the suspect near the subject apartment
unit, Laraway was not far from the suspect––approximately four
meters away, and it was a clear, sunny day.  Laraway was able to
see about half of the suspect's face from the side, and noticed
that his hair was short, but curly, and he had a scruffy face.
She was also able to note that the suspect was wearing a white or
light blue shirt and a brimmed hat.  Although the suspect was
behind a hedge, Laraway was able to view the suspect prior to
passing the hedge, and could still see over the hedge when
walking alongside the hedge, as the hedge was "mid-rib" height.
With respect to Laraway's degree of attention when she
viewed the suspect, Laraway testified that when she first saw the
suspect, she knew right away that she did not recognize him,
thought his behavior was unusual, and felt scared.  She was
attentive enough to notice that the screen of the window the
suspect was crouched in front of was detached and rolled up, and
that there was a bicycle next to him.  Laraway also kept her
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
focus on the suspect while she was walking, and although she did
not turn to face him, she continued to monitor him with her
peripheral vision.  Laraway was fixated enough on the suspect
that she made a point to look at him again even after getting
into her car.
In considering the time elapsed between the crime and
the identification, we note that "[t]here is no bright line
indicating what length of time would render the identification
suspect."  Doe, 107 Hawai #i at 451, 114 P.3d at 957.  The time
elapsed here was approximately two and a half hours, as Laraway
first viewed the suspect at approximately 12:30 p.m., and the
show-up identification occurred at approximately 3:00 p.m.  We
conclude that two and a half hours is not particularly
significant.  See, e.g. , State v. Araki , 82 Hawai #i 474, 485–86,
923 P.2d 891, 902–03 (1996) (concluding that a seven-week period
of time between the commission of the crime and the time of
identification was "neither so short as to favor reliability nor
too long to raise any serious doubts" (citations omitted)); State
v. Okumura, 78 Hawai #i 383, 393, 894 P.2d 80, 90 (1995) (same
conclusion as Araki for an eight-week period) (abrogated on other
grounds by State v. Cabagbag, 127 Hawai #i 302, 277 P.3d 1027
(2012)); Doe, 107 Hawai #i at 451, 114 P.3d at 957 (concluding
that a period as brief as two hours does not appear to be
particularly significant).
Kaneaiakala further argues that Laraway's
identification was unreliable because her description of the
suspect to the 911 dispatcher was unspecific and inaccurate. 
With regard to specificity, Laraway testified that the 911
dispatcher asked only for a general description of the suspect.
Laraway told the dispatcher that the suspect was a skinny black
male wearing a white or light blue shirt and a brimmed hat.  The
dispatcher did not ask any follow-up questions regarding the
suspect's appearance.  With regard to accuracy, we note that
Laraway initially told the dispatcher that the suspect was black,
but at trial explained that she meant that the suspect had dark
skin which when combined with his curly hair gave her an overall
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
image of a black man.3  In her written statement, Laraway
described the suspect as Caucasian, and she explained at the
Motion to Suppress hearing that "although he's not black . . . he
seemed to be suntanned, Caucasian with light brown . . . skin."
We also consider the level of certainty demonstrated by
Laraway during the field show-up.  As noted by the circuit court,
Laraway testified that she was "pretty sure" that Kaneaiakala was
the same person she had seen entering the subject apartment based
upon "his skin and his hair and also his body."  Although Laraway
had told a detective that she had bad eyesight and had not been
wearing her glasses during her show-up identification, she
testified that her concern about this was "little," and despite
the fact that she was not wearing her glasses, she was sure that
Kaneaiakala was the person she had seen earlier.
Based on our consideration of the totality of the
circumstances, we conclude that Laraway's identification of
Kaneaiakala was sufficiently reliable and worthy of presentation
to and consideration by the jury.
(2)  Next, Kaneaiakala argues that there was
insufficient evidence at trial to convict him where the evidence
failed to establish the identity of the perpetrator beyond a
reasonable doubt.  We disagree.
The jury was given the following instruction regarding
eyewitness identification:
The burden of proof is on the prosecution with
reference to every element of a crime charged, and this
burden includes the burden of proving beyond a reasonable
doubt the identity of the defendant as the person
responsible for the crime charged.
You must decide whether an eyewitness gave accurate
testimony regarding identification.
In evaluating identification testimony, you may
consider the following factors:
3  Laraway was born and raised in Japan and had lived in the United
States for about ten years.  Japanese, and not English, is Laraway's first
language, and she was assisted by a Japanese language interpreter when
testifying at court proceedings in this case.  Laraway communicated with the
dispatcher in English during the 911 call and the form she filled out to
describe the suspect was written in English.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
The opportunity of the witness to observe the
person involved in the alleged criminal act;
The stress, if any, to which the witness was
subject at the time of the observation;
The witness's ability, following the
observation, to provide a description of the person;
The extent to which the defendant fits or does
not fit the description of the person previously given
by the witness;
The cross-racial or ethnic nature of the
identification;
The witness's capacity to make an
identification;
Evidence relating to the witness's ability to
identify other participants in the alleged criminal
act;
Whether the witness was able to identify the
person in a photographic or physical lineup;
The period of time between the alleged criminal
act and the witness's identification;
Whether the witness had prior contacts with the
person;
The extent to which the witness is either
certain or uncertain of the identification and whether
the witness's assertions concerning certainty or
uncertainty are well-founded;
Whether the witness's identification is in fact
the product of his/her own recollection; and
Any other evidence relating to the witness's
ability to make an identification. 
In considering the evidence in the strongest light for
the prosecution, State v. Matavale , 115 Hawai #i 149, 157-58, 166
P.3d 322, 330-31 (2007), we conclude that the State proved beyond
a reasonable doubt the identity of Kaneaiakala as the person who
burglarized the subject apartment unit.
The evidence adduced at trial showed that when Laraway
first saw the suspect, it was the middle of a sunny day.  She was
only a few meters away from the suspect, and was able to observe
the side of his face for three to five seconds.  She was focused
enough to notice the suspect's attire, a bicycle laying in the
grass near the suspect, a cut in the window screen, and jalousies
missing from the window laying on the ground nearby.  Laraway had
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
lived in her apartment unit for the past ten years, did not
recognize the suspect as someone who lived in her building, and
thought his behavior was strange.  After getting into her car,
Laraway had a "perfect angle" to see the suspect, and saw that
the top half of his body was inside the apartment window.
During the 911 phone call, Laraway told the dispatcher
that the suspect was a skinny male of black ethnicity, and was
wearing a hat, light blue or white t-shirt, and shorts.  At
trial, Laraway testified that although she had described the
suspect as "black" during the 911 call, she really "meant dark
skin," and that his skin color together with his curly hair gave
Laraway the overall "image of [a] black man."
Laraway returned to her apartment to participate in a
field show-up approximately two and a half hours later.  As noted
above, the period of time between the alleged crime and Laraway's
identification of Kaneaiakala could be considered not
particularly significant.
During the field show-up, Laraway again was able to see
approximately half of Kaneaiakala's face.  Within five to ten
seconds, Laraway identified Kaneaiakala as the suspect she had
seen that morning based upon his face, skin, hair, and body, and
told the police that she was "almost positive that that guy was
him."  Although Laraway was not wearing her glasses when she
initially saw the suspect male enter the subject apartment unit,
she testified that she is still able to see without her glasses,
even while driving, and that she could still see the suspect even
though she did not have her glasses on when she first saw him.
Laraway further testified that she would have told the police
they detained the wrong person if she thought the person that was
detained was the wrong person.  Honolulu Police Department
Officer Hose testified that he did not get any doubts from
Laraway as to her identification of Kaneaiakala.4  Accordingly,
we conclude that there was sufficient evidence to support
4  The State also presented evidence that when Kaneaiakala was arrested,
he was wearing a watch that had been taken from the burglarized apartment and
that other items taken from the apartment were found nearby. 
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Kaneaiakala's conviction.
(3)  In his final point of error, Kaneaiakala argues
that his conviction should be reversed and the case remanded for
a new trial because the prosecutor committed misconduct when she
expressed her own personal opinion during closing arguments by
stating: "[a]nd you can look at his profile in court.  I sat here
through this trial.  I can see his profile clearly."
We first note that no objection was made to the
challenged statement at trial, therefore, we review the alleged
error for plain error.  See State v. Wakisaka , 102 Hawai #i 504,
513, 78 P.3d 317, 326 (2003) ("If defense counsel does not object
at trial to prosecutorial misconduct, this court may nevertheless
recognize such misconduct if plainly erroneous."); Hawai #i Rules
of Penal Procedure Rule 52(b) ("Plain errors or defects affecting
substantial rights may be noticed although they were not brought
to the attention of the court.").  "[Appellate courts] will not
overturn a defendant's conviction on the basis of plainly
erroneous prosecutorial misconduct, however, unless 'there is a
reasonable possibility that the misconduct complained of might
have contributed to the conviction.'"  Wakisaka , 102 Hawai# i at
513, 78 P.3d at 326 (quoting Rogan, 91 Hawai #i at 412, 984 P.2d
at 1238).
Hawaii Code of Professional Responsibility DR 7-106(C)(4)
provides in part:
In appearing in his professional capacity before a
tribunal, a lawyer shall not . . . [a]ssert his
personal opinion as to the justness of a cause, as to
the credibility of a witness, . . . or as to the guilt
or innocence of an accused; but he may argue, on his
analysis of the evidence, for any position or
conclusion with respect to the matters stated herein.
Prosecutors are similarly bound to refrain from expressing
their personal views as to a defendant's guilt or
credibility of witnesses.  United States v. Young , 470 U.S.
1, 105 S.Ct. 1038, 84 L.Ed.2d 1 (1985); ABA Standards for
Criminal Justice, Standard 3-5.8 (1980).
The rationale for the rule is that "[e]xpressions of
personal opinion by the prosecutor are a form of unsworn,
unchecked testimony and tend to exploit the influence of the
prosecutor's office and undermine the objective detachment
that should separate a lawyer from the cause being argued." 
ABA Standards for Criminal Justice, Commentary, at 3.89. 
The Supreme Court has observed that a prosecuting attorney's
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
"improper suggestions, insinuations, and especially,
assertions of personal knowledge are apt to carry much
weight against the accused when they should properly carry
none."  Berger v. United States , 295 U.S. 78, 88, 55 S.Ct.
629, 633, 79 L.Ed. 1314 (1935).
Marsh, 68 Haw. at 660–61, 728 P.2d at 1302.
In Marsh, the supreme court held that the prosecutor's
presentation of her personal views during closing argument
prejudiced the defendant's right to a fair trial as to amount to
plain error, based in part on the fact that the prosecutor
"repeatedly" stated "on at least nine occasions her belief that
defense witnesses had lied."  Id. at 660, 728 P.2d at 1302.
Kaneaiakala cites to Marsh in arguing that the prosecutor's
statements during his trial constituted reversible error. 
However, the prosecutor in this case, unlike the prosecutor in
Marsh, did not repeatedly express her personal opinion regarding
the credibility of a witness.
We find that State v. Nakoa , 72 Haw. 360, 817 P.2d 1060
(1991) is more pertinent to the facts of this case.  In Nakoa,
the defendant argued that the following statement made by the
prosecutor constituted plain error:
You have heard their testimony and I think that based on
their demeanor in the courtroom, on your common sense, on
your knowledge of human nature, and your experience that the
police officers who testified are trying their best to be as
accurate as they could in their recollection of the incident
that occurred.
Id. at 371, 817 P.2d at 1066.  In rejecting Nakoa's argument, the
supreme court reasoned:
The prosecutor's remarks in this case, when taken in
context, requested that the jurors rely on their own
observations, common sense, knowledge of human behavior, and
experiences when judging the credibility of the two
officers.  The prosecutor's statement was not a direct
averment of her personal belief in the officer's
credibility.  We therefore conclude that the prosecutor's
comments were harmless beyond a reasonable doubt and that
Nakoa's right to a fair trial was not substantially
prejudiced.
Id.
In considering the context of the statement challenged
by Kaneaiakala, we find the remarks surrounding the challenged
statement particularly significant.  Taken together, the
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
prosecutor stated:
And you can look at his profile in court. I sat here through
this trial.  I can see his profile clearly.  You can decide
for yourself whether you think that's distinctive where
someone could look at him from the side of his face and be
able to tell that he's the same person two and a half hours
later.
(Emphasis added.)  Similar to the prosecutor's remarks in Nakoa,
the challenged statement here, taken in context, merely implored
the jurors to decide for themselves the reliability of Laraway's
eyewitness identification by using "their own observations,
common sense, knowledge of human behavior, and experiences."  Id.  
The prosecutor's statement that she could see Kaneaiakala's
profile clearly was not a direct affirmation of her personal
belief in Laraway's credibility as a witness.  Accordingly, we
conclude that the prosecutor's comments were harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt and Kaneaiakala's right to a fair trial was not
substantially prejudiced.
Based on the foregoing, the "Judgment of Conviction and
Sentence" entered on September 20, 2016 in the Circuit Court of
the First Circuit is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 7, 2017.
On the briefs:
Michael J. Park,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Brandon H. Ito,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
10