
 

 

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
NOS. CAAP-15-0000907 and CAAP-15-0000588
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JAMES DEMARCO and CHERYL DEMARCO, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
 
v.
 
 
MAUI BEACH RESORT LIMITED PARTNERSHIP, a Delaware limited
 
partnership; NORTHWEST MAUI CORPORATION, a Delaware corporation;
 
FIDELITY NATIONAL TITLE & ESCROW OF HAWAII, a Hawai 'i
 
 
corporation; TITLE GUARANTY ESCROW SERVICES, INC., a Hawai 'i
 
 
corporation, Defendants-Appellees,
 
and
 
 
DOES 1-10, inclusive, Defendants
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-1315)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., and Fujise, J.
with Reifurth, J. concurring separately)
 
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants James DeMarco (Mr. DeMarco) and
 
 
Cheryl DeMarco (together, the DeMarcos) appeal from the (1)
 
 
"Order Granting Defendants Maui Beach Resort Limited Partnership
 
 
and Northwest Maui Corporation's Motion to Amend to Clarify and
 
 
Correct the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order,
 
 
Filed April 21, 2015" entered on July 27, 2015; (2) "Order
 
 
Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendants Maui Beach Resort
 
 
Limited Partnership and Northwest Maui Corporation's Motion for
 
 
Attorneys' Fees and Costs, Filed August 20, 2015" entered on
 
 
November 3, 2015; and (3) "Amended Final Judgment" entered on
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1
 
 November 3, 2015 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit(circuit court).
 
 
On appeal, the DeMarcos contend the circuit court erred

 
in (1) granting the motion to amend filed by Defendants-Appellees
 Maui Beach Resort Limited Partnership (Maui Beach Resort) and
 
Northwest Maui Corporation (NW Maui Corp.) (together, Appellees)
 
and modifying its Findings of Fact (FOF) and Conclusions of Law
 
(COL) relating to Appellees' actual damages; (2) modifying its
 
FOF/COL by deleting references to testimony from Appellees'
 
witness Shannon Smith (Smith); (3) concluding that the DeMarcos
 
were not consumers within the meaning of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
(HRS) 480-2 (2008 Repl.); (4) finding that "the existence of a
 
sewage treatment plant was disclosed through numerous reports";
 
and (5) determining that the increased construction loan and the
 mechanic's lien application were not "material changes."
2
 
I. BACKGROUND3
 
In 2005, after the sale of Mr. DeMarco's interest in a 
company he founded, the DeMarcos' liquid assets totaled approximately $3.7 million. Between 2005 and 2009, the DeMarcos entered into sales contracts, and, in some instances, closed on 
sales agreements to purchase at least sixteen properties located 
in Utah, California, and Hawai
'i. Together, the properties were 
worth an estimated $10.5 million, and the DeMarcos deposited an estimated $2.5 million for the properties. 
Maui Beach Resort was one of the developers of a 
condominium resort project at Ka
'anapali Beach on the island of 
Maui. NW Maui Corp. was the general partner of Maui Beach Resort. 
1 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 
2 Although the DeMarcos include the circuit court's order awarding
attorneys' fees and costs to Appellees in their notice of appeal, the DeMarcos
do not raise any points of error in their opening brief regarding the circuitcourt's award of attorneys' fees. The DeMarcos have waived their challenge tothe circuit court's award of attorneys' fees. See Hawai' i Rules of Appellate
Procedure Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). 
3 This Background is taken primarily from undisputed FOFs in the circuit
court's "Amended Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order" entered on
July 27, 2015.
 
2
 
 


 

 


 

 


 
	 
 
	 
 
	 
 
	 

 
	 

 
	 
 

 
	 
 
	 
 
	 

 
	 
 

 








 




 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On December 14, 2005, the DeMarcos signed a sales
 
 
contract with Appellees and their sales team, Playground
 
 
Destination Properties, Inc. (Playground) for the purchase of a
 
 
two-bedroom, two-bath condominium to be built as part the
 
 
Hokulani Enclave portion of the Honua Kai development (Hokulani
 
 
Sales Contract). The DeMarcos agreed to a purchase price of
 
 
$985,000 with an initial deposit of $98,500 and a second deposit
 
 
of $98,500 due June 30, 2006. The Hokulani Sales Contract read,
 
 
in pertinent part:
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF RECEIPT, OPPORTUNITY TO REVIEW, AND
ACCEPTANCE OF PROJECT DOCUMENTS
 
THE FOLLOWING DOCUMENTS THAT ARE REFERRED TO IN THIS SALES
 CONTRACT FORM AN ESSENTIAL PART OF THIS SALES CONTRACT. 
PURCHASER ACKNOWLEDGES THAT PURCHASER HAS RECEIVED COPIES OF
 EACH OF THE FOLLOWING DOCUMENTS AND THAT PURCHASER HAS HAD A
 FULL AND COMPLETE OPPORTUNITY TO READ, REVIEW AND EXAMINE
EACH OF THE FOLLOWING DOCUMENTS:
 
1.	 the form of Sales Contract
 
2.	 the State of Hawaii Condominium Public Report(s)
 
3.	 the HUD Property Report
 
4.	 the Declaration of Condominium Property Regime
of Honua Kai
 
5.	 the Bylaws of the Honua Kai Condominium
Association
 
6.	 the form of Honua Kai Condominium Unit Deed with
 Reservations and Covenants
 
7.	 the Escrow Agreement
 
8.	 the Master Association Documents
 
9.	 the Articles of Incorporation of the Honua Kai
Condominium Association
 
10.	 the Condominium Map
 
. . . .
 
D.35 Material Changes in the Project. 
If, prior to Closing, Purchaser, within thirty (30)
days from the delivery by Seller of a copy of the
Disclosure Documents containing a provision for
Purchaser's written approval or acceptance, either
personally or by registered or certified mail with
return receipt requested, shall fail to execute and
return to Seller the Disclosure Document with
 Purchaser's written approval or acceptance of any
Material Change in the Project which Purchaser may do
so without penalty, Seller may at its option either:
(i) terminate this Sales Contract, and upon such
 
3
 
 




 



 









 

 

 







 






 




 


 






 


 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
termination, Seller shall cause Escrow to refund to
Purchaser all Deposits previously made to Purchaser,
without interest, or (ii) if Purchaser does not
execute and return the Disclosure Document within
 thirty (30) days from the date of delivery of such
document, Seller may deem Purchaser to have received
such Disclosure Document and deem Purchaser to have
 waived Purchaser's right to cancel and to have
approved and accepted such Material Change, all as
provided in Section 514A-63, Hawaii Revised Statutes,
provided that such receipt shall be effective only if
at the time of the delivery of such Disclosure
Document Purchaser is notified in writing of the fact
that the Purchaser will be deemed to have approved and
accepted the Material Change upon his or her failure
to act within the thirty (30) day period.
 
. . . .
 
D.52. Independent Investigation. Purchaser
 
acknowledges and agrees that it must independently
investigate the use and character of all property
adjacent to the Project and may not rely on any
statements of any sales agent or any broker or any
brochures or displays in the sales office about the
use or character of any property other than the
Condominium Unit.
 
(Emphasis and ellipses omitted.) Under the terms of the sales
 
 
contract, "material change" was defined as:
 
 
a change in the Project which (1) directly, substantially
and adversely affects the use or value of the Condominium
Unit or the Limited Common Elements appurtenant thereto or
the amenities of the Project available for Purchaser's use,
and (2) is not made pursuant to a right reserved to Seller
under the Declaration.
 
The Condominium Public Report, referred to in the
 
 
Hokulani Sales Contract, reserved to the developer the right to
 
 
build the Honua Kai project in phases. Exhibit C, attached to
 
 
the Condominium Public Report, read in relevant part:
 
 
(G) As set forth in Section 8.07 (Reserved
Right to Construct the Condominium in Phases) of the
Declaration, Developer reserves the right to construct
the Project in two or more phases. For further
 information, please refer to Exhibit D of this
Contingent Final Public Report.
 
The Condominium Public Report also informed purchasers of blanket
 
 
liens, and read:
 
 
[The] land underlying the Project is presently subject
to one mortgage and a financing statement made by the
Developer and . . . the Developer intends to record a
construction loan during the construction of the
apartments being offered for sale under this Public
Report. Such construction loan shall be in an amount
 not to exceed $185 million. Moreover, if the
Developer Defaults or Lien is Foreclosed Prior to
 
4
 

 

 








 

 









 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Conveyance the purchaser will be entitled to a refund
of the deposits held in escrow.
 
(Brackets and ellipsis in original omitted.)
 
Maui Beach Resort provided prospective purchasers with
 
 
a Property Report, dated November 29, 2005, which included a
 
 
section entitled "Nuisances," and informed prospective
 
 
purchasers:
 
 
Hokulani and the Project as a whole, have been, and/or may
continue to be, affected periodically by noise, dust, smoke,
soot, ash, odor, noxious vapors, transmission of surface
water runoff, or other adverse environmental conditions and
nuisances, including but not limited to those attributable
to wind drift and other weather factors attributable to (g)
irrigation of any and all surrounding lands with reclaimed
water, treated effluent, or other non-potable water sources.
 
(Ellipsis omitted.) The Property Report also noted:
 
[The] property on which Hokulani will be located is subject
to a blanket lien in favor of Wachovia Bank and Wells Fargo
Bank. N.A. (the 'Existing Mortgage') encumbers, in part, all
Units in Hokulani and contains specific release provisions
which will be exercised by the Developer in connection with
its construction financing for Hokulani and if Developer
default[s] on the Existing Mortgage prior to obtaining a
release, you may not be able to complete your purchase of
the Unit and you may lose any money you have paid for it.
 
(Ellipses and brackets omitted.)
 
The DeMarcos visited the Honua Kai development project
 
in August 2006. During their visit, the DeMarcos conducted an
 
independent investigation of the properties adjacent to the Honua
 Kai development on the west, north, and south, but not to the
 east, where a sewage treatment plant was located.
 
Around August 31, 2006, the DeMarcos received a "Honua
 
Kai Condominium Final Public Report Disclosure Statement" dated
 July 28, 2006, which, like other documents received by the
 DeMarcos, reiterated the developer's right to develop the Honua
 Kai project in phases.
 
On December 13, 2006, the DeMarcos entered into two
 
additional sales contracts for Honua Kai condominium units in the
 Konea Enclave of the development (Konea Sales Contracts). The
 
DeMarcos contracted to pay $665,000 for one unit, depositing
 
$133,000, and contracted to pay $835,000 for the second unit,
 depositing $167,000. The Hokulani Sales Contract and Konea Sales
 
5
 
 

 










 






 





 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Contracts were virtually identical, but the Konea Sales Contracts
 
 
included a subordination provision: 
 
37. Purchaser's Interest Under this Sales Contract
 
Is to Be Subordinate to the Construction Loan. Purchaser
 acknowledges that Seller intends to enter into an agreement
with one or more construction lenders (the 'Construction
Lender') pursuant to which the Construction Lender may loan
an aggregate of up to Two Hundred Forty Two Million
($242,000,000). To secure this loan, Seller will grant to
the Construction Lender security interests covering Seller's
interest in the Konea Enclave, including the Condominium
Unit covered by this Sales Contract. Purchaser acknowledges
and agrees that all security interests obtained by the
Construction Lender in connection with such loan as well as
 any extensions, renewals and modifications thereof shall be
and remain at all times a lien or charge on the Konea
Enclave, including the Condominium Unit covered by this
Sales Contract, prior to and superior to any and all liens
or charges on the Konea Enclave arising from this Sales
Contract.
 
Around May 11, 2007, the DeMarcos received an amended
 
 
public report for the Konea Enclave of the Honua Kai project,
 
 
which informed purchasers of various liens and encumbrances on
 
 
the property, and further, that the developer
 
 
intends to record a new mortgage in an amount not to exceed
$242,000,000 to finance the construction of the Konea
Enclave which will act as a second mortgage on the Honua Kai
Condominium until the release of the $338,000,000
construction loan is recorded as to the Konea Enclave and
 the Luana Enclave.
 
Around December 24, 2008, Maui Beach Resort sent
 
 
purchasers a letter updating and summarizing information about
 
 
the Honua Kai project since the issuance of the public reports. 
 
Attached to the letter was a copy of an application for a
 
 
mechanic's lien filed against the Honua Kai project by Nordic
 
 
Construction (Nordic), claiming that Nordic was due $8,500,000. 
 
Another attachment was a "Bond for Discharge of Mechanic's and
 
 
Materialmen's Lien" filed by counsel for Maui Beach Resort,
 
 
confirming that if a mechanic's lien were to attach to the
 
 
Hokulani Enclave, Fidelity National Title Insurance Company was
 
 
prepared to issue title insurance policies to owners of certain
 
 
units within the Hokulani Enclave (Fidelity Bond).
 
 
Around the same time, Maui Beach Resort sent a second
 
 
letter updating and summarizing information, amending the public
 
 
reports. Maui Beach Resorts informed purchasers that the
 
 
6

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
developers decided to build the Konea Enclave at once rather than
 
in phases, which increased the construction finance required from
 $242 million to $305 million.
 
After receiving the reports from Maui Beach Resorts,
 
the DeMarcos hired a California attorney because they were
 concerned about Nordic's application for a mechanic's lien and
 the Fidelity Bond. Counsel for the DeMarcos began contacting
 Maui Beach Resort about the DeMarcos' concerns.
 
By letter dated February 9, 2010, NW Maui Corp.
 
informed the DeMarcos that their scheduled closing date for their
 Hokulani property had passed, and that because they had not
 closed on the property by January 22, 2009, they were in default
 of the Hokulani Sales Contract. The DeMarcos responded to Maui
 Beach Resort that the new liens for Nordic Construction and the
 other new encumbrances were "material changes" under the Hokulani
 Sales Contract, and the DeMarcos were entitled to terminate the
 contract under the terms of the Hokulani Sales Contract.
 
By letter dated March 4, 2010, NW Maui Corp. reminded
 
the DeMarcos that their closing date for one of the Konea
 properties was approaching. By letters dated May 10, 2010, NW
 Maui Corp. notified the DeMarcos that they were in default of
 their obligations under the Konea Sales Contracts because they
 failed to close on the properties by the specified date.
 
The DeMarcos filed a complaint in the circuit court on
 
June 15, 2010 for fraud, intentional and negligent
 misrepresentation, negligent supply of information to others,
 gross negligence, unfair and/or deceptive acts and practices, and
 breach of contract. Following a trial held between November 10,
 2014 and November 24, 2014, the circuit court entered "Findings
 of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order" (FOF/COL) on April 21,
 
2015 dismissing all of the DeMarcos' claims.
 
On May 1, 2015, Appellees filed "[Appellees'] Motion to
 
Amend to Clarify and Correct the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of
 
Law, and Order, Filed April 21, 2015" (Motion to Amend) The
 
circuit court granted Appellees' motion and entered "Amended
 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order" (Amended FOF/COL)
 
7
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on July 27, 2015, which did not disturb its decisions to dismiss
 all of the DeMarcos' claims.
 
The circuit court entered its Final Judgment on August
 
10, 2015.
 
On August 19, 2015, the DeMarcos filed their notice of
 
appeal from the circuit court's order granting Appellees' Motion
 to Amend its April 21, 2015 FOF/COL in case no. CAAP-15-0000588.
 
On August 20, 2015, Appellees filed a motion for
 
attorneys' fees and costs, which the circuit court granted in
 part and denied in part.
 
On November 3, 2015, the circuit court entered its
 
 
Amended Final Judgment that included an award of Appellees'
 
 
attorneys' fees and costs in the amount of $249,264.93.
 
 
On November 25, 2015, the DeMarcos filed their notice
 
of appeal from the circuit court's Amended Final Judgment and
 from the order granting Appellees attorneys' fees and costs in
 case no. CAAP-15-0000907.
 
On December 30, 2015, this court consolidated case nos.
 
CAAP-15-0000588 and CAAP-15-0000907 under case no. CAAP-15­
0000907 as they both involve the same underlying case and
 parties.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
A. Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
 
Appellate courts review FOFs under the clearly 
erroneous standard. Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of Emps.' Ret. Sys. of 
State of Hawai
'i, 106 Hawai 'i 416, 430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 (2005) 
(citing State v. Hutch, 75 Haw. 307, 328, 861 P.2d 11, 22 (1993)). "An FOF is clearly erroneous when, despite evidence to support the finding, the appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been committed." Chun, 106 Hawai
'i at 430, 106 P.3d at 353 (citing Hutch, 75 Haw. 
at 328, 861 P.2d at 22. "An FOF is also clearly erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding." Leslie v. Estate of Tavares, 91 Hawai
'i 394, 399, 984 P.2d 1220, 
1225 (1999) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting State v. Kotis, 91 Hawai
'i 319, 329, 984 P.2d 78, 88 (1999)). 
8
 	 
 

 
	 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Substantial evidence" is "credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Leslie, 91 Hawai
'i 
at 399, 984 P.2d at 1225 (quoting Kotis, 91 Hawai 'i at 328, 984 
P.2d at 87). 
COLs are reviewed under the right/wrong standard. 
Chun, 106 Hawai 'i at 430, 106 P.2d at 353 (citing In re Estate of 
Holt, 75 Haw. 224, 232, 857 P.2d 1355, 1359 (1993)). "Under the right/wrong standard, this court examines the facts and answers the question without being required to give any weight to the trial court's answer to it." Leslie, 91 Hawai
'i at 399, 984 P.2d 
at 1225 (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted) (quoting Robert's Hawaii School Bus, Inc. v. Laupahoehoe Transp. Co., Inc., 91 Hawai
'i 224, 239, 982 P.2d 853, 868 (1999)).
B.	 Motion to Amend or Clarify
 
Findings by the court may be amended by motion of a 
party within ten days of the entry of judgment. Hawai 'i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 52(b). "A trial court's decision to 
grant or deny a motion to amend is reviewed under the abuse of 
discretion standard." Kienker v. Bauer, 110 Hawai 'i 97, 113, 129 
P.3d 1125, 1141 (2006) (citing Roxas v. Marcos, 89 Hawai 'i 91, 
115, 969 P.2d 1209, 1233 (1998)).
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 Admission of Testimony from Erika Alm (Alm) on Actual
Damages
 
The DeMarcos challenge the circuit court's COL 33 in
 
its Amended FOF/COL, which states: "33. [Appellees] (Developer)
 
were entitled to retain [the Demarcos'] deposits as liquidated
 damages pursuant to Section D.40 of the Konea/Hokulani sales
 contracts." The DeMarcos contend the circuit court "made no
 [FOFs] that Appellees had suffered damages as a result of the
 [DeMarcos'] cancellation of their contracts and therefore, it was
 a mistake of law for the [circuit court] to allow the Appellees
 to retain [the DeMarcos'] deposits as liquidated damages."
 
The circuit court based COL 33 exclusively on the
 
testimony of Alm, Senior Vice President of Global Sales for
 
9
 



 













 





 

 



 



 


 

 


 


 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Playground and Principal of PowerPlay Destination Properties
 
 
(PowerPlay). Prior to trial, Appellees submitted a declaration
 
 
from Alm, a portion of which read:
 
 
68. [Maui Beach Resort] terminated the DeMarcos'
purchase and sale agreements as follows: Hokulani Unit 220
on March 1, 2010; Konea Unit 148 on June 7, 2010; and Konea
Unit 215 on June 7, 2010.
 
69. Between 2008 (Honua Kai pre-construction prices)
and the Spring of 2010 (when [Maui Beach Resort] terminated
all three DeMarco contracts), the average [per square foot
(PSF)] sale price at Honua Kai had decreased by
approximately 17% (from approx. $1,136 PSF to approx. $950
PSF). 
70. Given the approximate 17% reduction in value
from the DeMarcos' pre-construction prices for all three
units ($2,485,000) to the date of termination (Spring 2010),
the approximate reduction of value on the DeMarcos' three
units was approximately $422,450 ($2,485,000 x 17% =
$422,450), not including closing costs, brokerage fees and
other incidental costs.
 
(Citations to record omitted.) The DeMarcos sought to exclude
 
 
part of Alm's testimony in the November 3, 2014 "[DeMarcos']
 
 
Motion in Limine No. 12 to Strike Excerpts From the Declaration
 
 
of Erika Alm Dated October 28, 2014" (MIL 12). One of the
 
 
arguments made in the DeMarcos' MIL 12 was that Alm's testimony
 
 
constituted "impermissible expert opinion." The circuit court
 
 
granted in part and reserved in part the DeMarcos' MIL 12. The
 
 
circuit court's order states:
 
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that [the
DeMarcos' MIL 12] is GRANTED as to striking Paragraphs 68,
69, and 70 of the Trial Declaration of [Alm] only to the
extent if [Alm] attempts to testify as to any reasonable
relationship, and purports to provide opinion testimony.
 
At trial, the circuit court admitted controverted
 
4
testimony from Alm  relating to the information contained in 
4 Alm testified at trial:
 
A [(Alm)] So as part of my role both at Playground
and Power Play I spend a majority of my time going through
sales data, our sales data, the market sales data. I'm
 always looking at what our pricing is vis-a-vie the market,
what our sales targets are, what the absorption are. This
 is what I live and breathe.
 
So this specific chart [(referring to Exhibit CT)] is
Honua Kai sales only. Just Honua Kai product. And this is
 between 2008 and 2014, and I'm taking the price per square
(continued...)
 
10
 

 





 



 



 

 


 


 

 

 

 

 

 




 


 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4(...continued)
foot of the smaller, less expensive units. So that's
 
 
everything below one million. And we started at four
 
 
hundred thousand. So four hundred thousand to one million
 
 
priced per square foot.
 
 
. . . .
 
Q . . . [I]f you imagine a line at May 2010, when
all three contracts that the DeMarcos had signed were
terminated by [Maui Beach Resort], did you determine what
the value—approximately what the value per square foot of
those units were?
 
A Yes. So the contracts were terminated March,
June, and June. As an average I chose May, and the average
would have been $950 per square foot. These are closed
 units starting at $1,136 per square foot. And again these
are Honua Kai closings only. So we're showing an average
decline from 1,136 to 950.
 
Q Okay. So is it the case that between December
 
2008 and—well, from the last time that the contracts were
first entered into in the end of '05 and end of '06 to the
 time of termination, May 2010, did the value per square foot
decrease by 17 percent?
 
A Yes, it did.
 
Q All right. And were there other costs that
 
arose as a result of the DeMarcos' default?
 
A Yes.
 
Q And what were those[?]
 
. . . . 
 
 
A Roughly there's a cost per sale on every single
unit that's going to be marketing expense, sales expense,
salary expense, operation expense, and we break that down to
about $20,000 per unit.
 
Q Okay. So if we have three units, we're talking
about another sixty thousand?
 
A Correct. 
Q And then is there any other loss? 
A Yeah. So the commission was paid out on the
original sale. 
And the commission worked is the Playground 

team that sold this, the internal team, was paid 1.5 percent 

and they were paid 70 percent of that 1.5 percent. As well 
 
 
on this Hokulani 220 there was a co-broker, an external 

broker from another Playground team, and he was paid 1.5 

percent. 
 
 
Q Okay.

 
(continued...)
 
11
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
paragraphs 68-70 in her trial declaration because the circuit
 court deemed that Alm's trial testimony was based on information
 gained as part of Alm's job, rather than as an expert in, for
 example, real estate valuation. However, the circuit court also
 struck part of Alm's testimony as it pertained to the
 relationship of actual damages to liquidated damages, in line
 with the circuit court's pre-trial ruling.
 
The DeMarcos argue that Alm's testimony was admitted
 
into evidence in contravention of the circuit court's pre-trial
 ruling that Alm could not testify about her opinion or the
 reasonable relationship between actual and liquidated damages.
 
The question before us is whether Alm, as the Vice
 
President of Global Sales for Playground and Principal of
 PowerPlay, could testify about the depreciation in value of the
 Honua Kai properties that constitute Appellees' actual damages.
 
The value of real estate is generally recognized to be
 
opinion testimony. See City & Cty. of Honolulu v. Int'l Air
 
Serv. Co., Ltd., 63 Haw. 322, 332, 628 P.2d 192, 200 (1981). 
While individual owners are typically presumed qualified to give
 their opinion as to the value of their land, the presumption does
 not extend to corporate owners and officers. Id. Corporate
 
4(...continued)
A He received 50 percent of that. 
QAll right. So the 17 percent amounted to 422 
thousand-­
A Correct. 
Q 
--in decreased value for the three units?
 
A Correct.
 
Q And the commissions amounted to 33 thousand?
 
A Correct.
 
Q  And the overhead for a 20 thousand unit you
said is 60 thousand; correct?
 
A Correct.
 
Q And the total is 515 thousand?
 
A That's correct.
 
12
  
 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
officers are not qualified to testify as to the value of the
 corporation's real estate unless the officer is deemed an expert. 
Id. at 332-33, 628 P.2d at 200-01 (affirming a trial court's
 ruling that a corporate officer's opinion was not competent
 evidence of value of a property). It is undisputed that Alm was
 not offered as an expert witness.
 
Under the circuit court's own ruling on the DeMarcos' 
MIL 12, Alm was prohibited from testifying as to her opinion of the depreciation in value of the Honua Kai properties, and therefore, also precluded from testifying as to her opinion of the actual damages suffered by Appellees. The only type of testimony appropriate to establish Appellee's actual damages by way of the depreciation in value of the Honua Kai properties was through expert testimony, which Appellees did not offer. The circuit court improperly relied on Alm's testimony in concluding that Appellees' liquidated damages were reasonably related to their actual damages, and therefore, its conclusion was wrong. See Chun, 106 Hawai
'i at 430, 106 P.2d at 353. 
B. Reliance on the Smith Declaration
 
The DeMarcos next challenge the circuit court's
 
reliance on Smith, Appellees' expert, who was not called at trial
 but referenced in the circuit court's original FOF/COL. The
 circuit court's original FOF 120 summarized Smith's opinion and
 focused on whether there were "material changes" justifying the
 DeMarcos' rescission of the sales agreements. Following
 Appellee's Motion to Amend, the circuit court removed references
 to Smith in its Amended FOF/COL. In its Amended FOF/COL, the
 circuit court clarified, "The deletion of FOF Nos. 120 and 121
 [regarding Smith's opinions] is not dispositive of the court's
 conclusions of law, the court finding that its conclusions of law
 were amply supported by its findings of fact."
 
The DeMarcos fail to cite to any COLs that were
 
affected by the circuit court's deletion of references to Smith
 in its Amended FOF/COL. The DeMarcos argue that the circuit
 court "exceed[ed] its authority under HRCP [Rule] 52(b) by
 deleting the testimony of [Smith] on which it relied," but do not
 
13
 
 


 

 


 

 

 

 

 




 

 




 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
explain why the deletion of testimony that was not presented at
 
trial would be an abuse of the circuit court's discretion. 
Because it does not appear that any of the circuit court's
 amended COLs relied on Smith's testimony, the DeMarcos' argument
 is without merit. 
C. "Consumer" Under HRS § 480-2
 
The DeMarcos contend the circuit court erred in its COL
 
24, which stated, "[The DeMarcos] do not satisfy the definition
 
of a 'consumer' and may not bring a cause of action under HRS
 Chapter 480-2." HRS § 480-2 provides, in pertinent part:
 
§ 480-2 Unfair competition, practices, declared
unlawful. (a) Unfair methods of competition and unfair or
deceptive acts or practices in the conduct of any trade or
commerce are unlawful.
 
. . . .
 
(d) No person other than a consumer, the attorney
general or the director of the office of consumer protection
may bring an action based upon unfair or deceptive acts or
practices declared unlawful by this section.
 
"Consumer" is defined in HRS chapter 480 as "a natural person
 
who, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes,
 purchases, attempts to purchase, or is solicited to purchase
 goods or services or who commits money, property, or services in
 a personal investment." HRS § 480-1 (2008 Repl.).
 
The circuit court relied on Cieri v. Leticia Query 
Realty, Inc., 80 Hawai
'i 54, 905 P.2d 29 (1995), in concluding 
that the DeMarcos were not "consumers" because the DeMarcos did not purchase the three Honua Kai properties for "personal, family or household purposes." In Cieri, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court 
described the legislative history behind HRS chapter 480. See 
id. at 59-62, 905 P.2d at 34-37. In enacting HRS § 480-2(d), the supreme court explained, "the legislature principally sought to preclude HRS § 480-2's applicability to private disputes between business persons." Id. at 62, 905 P.2d at 37 (brackets and 
internal quotation marks omitted). The Cieri court considered whether a couple who bought real estate with the intent to reside on the property were considered "consumers" within the meaning of HRS § 480-2(d) because they had made a "personal investment" in 
14
 
 

 








 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
real estate. Id. at 67-69, 905 P.2d at 42-44. The supreme court
 
held,
 
We believe that, as previously noted, real estate is,
particularly in Hawai' i, both scarce and expensive. As a 
result, the purchase of real estate or a residence likely isthe largest "investment" a person in Hawai' i may make in a
lifetime. 
We further believe that . . . real estate may be
purchased with an intent to reside on the parcel of property
and, concurrently, with an intent to hold the property in
anticipation of an appreciation in the parcel's resale
value. Accordingly, absent legislative intent to the
contrary, we believe the plain and obvious meaning of the
term "personal investment" includes real estate or
residences.
 
Id. at 67, 905 P.2d at 42. The supreme court cited legislative
 
history of the statute to clarify that the addition of the word
 "personal" before "investment" was intended "to protect
 individual consumers, rather than businesses." Id. at 68, 905
 
P.2d at 43.
 
The DeMarcos argue on appeal that "there was
 
substantial evidence in the record that the [DeMarcos] bought the
 units as a personal investment using their personal funds to be
 owned by the [DeMarcos] jointly." The DeMarcos also argue, "the
 evidence at Trial was that the [DeMarcos'] intent was to
 personally use the units. The [DeMarcos'] testimony at Trial was
 that they were not sure whether they were going to rent out the
 Honua Kai units or use them." (Citations to the record omitted.)
 
As plaintiffs, the DeMarcos bear the burden of proving 
that they are "consumers" within the meaning of HRS chapter 480. The DeMarcos' testimony does not prove that they purchased the Honua Kai properties with the intent to reside in them. The fact that the DeMarcos had purchased about a dozen properties across the United States within five years, three of which were on Maui, is evidence weighing against the conclusion that the DeMarcos intended to reside in one of the Honua Kai condos. Because they did not prove that they were "consumers" making a "personal investment" in real estate, the DeMarcos did not have standing to bring a claim based upon unfair or deceptive acts or practices under HRS § 480-2. See Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Newton 
Meadows ex rel. its Bd. of Dirs. v. Venture 15, Inc., 115 Hawai
'i 
15
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 




 

 

 







 

 





 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
232, 252-53, 167 P.3d 225, 245-46 (2007) (holding that an 
unincorporated association was not a natural person and therefore not a consumer within the meaning of HRS § 480-1, and did not have standing to bring an action under HRS § 480-2). The circuit court's conclusion that the DeMarcos were not "consumers" was not wrong. See Chun, 106 Hawai
'i at 430, 106 P.2d at 353 
D. Adequate Disclosure of Sewage Treatment Plant
 
The DeMarcos next contend that the circuit court erred
 
in its FOF 112 and COLs 4, 6, 11, 12, 30, 31, 32, which relate to
 Appellees' disclosure to the DeMarcos that there was a sewage
 treatment plant (STP) adjacent to the Honua Kai properties. The
 
DeMarcos argue that the circuit court's Amended FOF/COL "fails to
 
identify what documents that [the DeMarcos] allegedly received
 that disclosed the [STP] and that there were odors emanating from
 the [STP] on to Honua Kai."
 
The DeMarcos attempt to characterize Appellees' failure
 
to expressly notify the DeMarcos of the existence of the STP as a
 violation of Appellees' duty to disclose, but ignore the circuit
 court's holding that the DeMarcos were under a duty to
 investigate the area surrounding the properties and failed to act
 in accordance with that duty. The circuit court's relevant
 findings were:
 
17. [The DeMarcos], principal broker Playground, and
NW Maui Corp. executed the Hokulani Sales Contract.
Pertinent to the issues hereunder are the following contract
provisions:
 
. . . .
 
D.52. Independent Investigation. Purchaser
 
acknowledges and agrees that it must independently
investigate the use and character of all property
adjacent to the Project and may not rely on any
statements of any sales agent or any broker or any
brochures or displays in the sales office about the
use or character of any property other than the
Condominium Unit.
 
. . . .
 
24. Prior to executing the sales contract for any
Hokulani condominium units, Maui Beach Resort provided to
prospective purchasers a copy of their 11/29/05 Property
Report, which states in bold face, "READ THIS PROPERTY
REPORT BEFORE SIGNING ANYTHING." Contained therein is a
 section entitled, "Utilities," informing prospective
 
16
 




 


 





 




 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
purchasers that the "Units in Hokulani will be served by a
central sewage disposal system. The existing sanitary sewer
main is located adjacent to the Project in Lower
Honoapiilani Road. The owner and operator of the central
sewage disposal system is the County of Maui." There is
 also a section entitled "Nuisances," informing prospective
purchasers that:
 
Hokulani and the Project as a whole, have been, and/or
may continue to be, affected periodically by noise,
dust, smoke, soot, ash, odor
, noxious vapors,
transmission of surface water runoff, or other adverse
environmental conditions and nuisances,
 including but 

not limited
 to those attributable to wind drift and
 
other weather factors attributable to . . . (g)
irrigation of any and all surrounding lands with
reclaimed water, treated effluent, or other non-
potable water sources.
 
. . . .
 28. The entrance to the STP is immediately across
the intersection from Lower Honoapi' ilani Road. The 
entrance to the STP is marked by a readily noticeable sign
that read: "TRASH COLLECTION" and "LAHAINA RECLAMATION FACILITY. ALL VISITORS MUST CHECK IN AT CONTROL BUILDING." 
. . . .
 
33. The STP is a fairly large facility, sited on a
considerable tract of land, readily visible as one drives
along Honoapi' ilani Highway. The STP had been operating at
the same location for over thirty (30) years prior to [theDeMarcos'] visit. 
. . . .
 
35. During their 8/12/06 visit to the Honua Kai
project, [the DeMarcos] conducted an independent
investigation of adjacent properties west of Honua Kai(i.e., the beach), north of Honua Kai (i.e., hotelproperties) and south of Honua Kai (i.e., hotel properties).[The DeMarcos] did not investigate adjacent properties tothe east of Honua Kai. It was Mr. DeMarco's position thatthe only adjacent property to the east of Honua Kai wasHonoapi' ilani Highway, and since the STP was not a property
immediately adjacent to Honua Kai, there was no duty toconduct an independent investigation of the STP. 
36. This court finds Mr. DeMarco's testimony less
than credible regarding the STP not being adjacent to theHonua Kai Project and the STP's visibility or lack thereoffrom his vantage point while traveling along Honoapi' ilani 
Highway. 
The DeMarcos do not challenge these FOFs on appeal.
 
The DeMarcos cite no legal or contractual obligation
 
 
for Appellees to disclose more information to the DeMarcos than
 
 
they did, or any evidence that would undermine their contractual
 
 
obligation to inspect the areas around their properties. We have
 
 
no reason to conclude that the circuit court's FOFs were clearly
 
 
17
 
 

 

 





 





 



 




 







 




 





 

 










 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
erroneous or that the circuit court's COLs were wrongly decided. 
 
See Chun , 106 Hawai 'i at 430, 106 P.3d at 353. 
E. Recision of Sales Contract for "Material Changes"

 
Finally, the DeMarcos contend the circuit court erred
 
 
5

in its Amended COLs 26-32  concluding that the increased
 
 
5 The circuit court's COLs state:
 
Breach of Contract (Count VI)
 
26. As to Count VI of the Complaint, [the DeMarcos]
basically allege that they entered into express and implied
contracts with Maui Beach Resort, including the Maui
Purchase Agreements; and further, that Maui Beach Resort's
conduct constitutes a breach of contract.
 
27. In particular, [the DeMarcos] allege that
[Appellees] breached the Hokulani and Konea sales contracts
by failing to disclose certain "material changes," such as
borrowing approximately $400 million more than was disclosed
in the Maui Purchase Agreements.
 
28. "Material change" is defined as a change in the
project which directly, substantially and adversely affects
the use or value of the condominium unit or the limited
 common elements appurtenant thereto or the amenities of the
project available for purchaser's use and is not made
pursuant to a right reserved to seller under the
Declaration. See FOF No. 18.
 
29. It is undisputed that the developer borrowed
additional monies to finance the project that was
constructed in phases, which right the developer reserved.
It is also undisputed that as it pertains to the Konea
Enclave, the [DeMarcos] as purchasers never received a
request from the developer(s) to subordinate their interest
to an amount greater than $242 million. Neither Maui Beach
 Resort nor any of its lenders ever requested that [the
DeMarcos] increase their subordination beyond the $242
million reflected in paragraph no. 37 of the Konea Sales
Contract.
 
30. [The DeMarcos] additionally argued that failure
to adequately disclose the existence and presence of the STP
and the adverse effect of the Nordic lien application
constitutes a "material change," justifying their rescission
of all three (3) Hokulani/Konea Sales Contracts.
 
31. The credible evidence indicates that the
 
existence of the STP was disclosed through numerous reports
received by the [DeMarcos], that [the DeMarcos] recognized
their independent duty to investigate adjacent properties to
the project, that a lien was never attached to the project,
and that the developer secured through Fidelity a $17
million bond confirming that if a mechanic's lien by Nordic
Construction were to attach to the Hokulani Enclave, that
Fidelity was prepared to issue title insurance policies to
purchasers of units in Buildings SE-A, SE-B and SE-C in the
Hokulani Enclave.
 
(continued...)
 
18
 





 



 



 





 









 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
construction loan and the mechanic's lien application were not
 
 
"material changes" that allowed the DeMarcos to rescind the sales
 
 
agreements.
 
 
Regarding the increased construction loan, the DeMarcos
 
 
explain that the sales agreements specified that Appellees were
 
 
permitted to obtain a construction loan only up to $242,000,000
 
 
in order to build the Konea Enclave portion of the Honua Kai
 
 
development. Appellees instead borrowed $305,000,000 to build
 
 
the Konea Enclave, which the DeMarcos contend constituted a
 
 
"material change." Additionally, the mechanic's lien application
 
 
for $8,500,000 filed by Nordic Construction, Inc. was also a
 
 
"material change" to the DeMarcos. Because of these "material
 
 
changes,"
 
 
[the DeMarcos] were concerned about the debt load of the
Honua Kai project and the Nordic Mechanic's Lien application
since they understood that when a subcontractor files an
application for a Mechanic's Lien, it means either that (a)
the Developer was not able to pay its subcontractors or (b)
the subcontractor had performed substandard work.
 
In its Amended FOF 18, the circuit court recited the
 
 
contractual definition of "material change":
 
 
18. Incorporated and made part of the Hokulani Sales
Contract was a Definitions Section attached as Exhibit A,
defining "Material Change" to mean:
 
a change in the Project which (1) directly,
substantially and adversely affects the use or
value of the Condominium Unit or the Limited
 Common Elements appurtenant thereto or the
amenities of the Project available for
Purchaser's use, and (2) is not made pursuant to
a right reserved to Seller under the
Declaration.
 
The circuit court relied on this definition in concluding that
 
 
the increased construction loan and the mechanic's lien
 
 
applications were not "material changes" because the DeMarcos'
 
 
5(...continued)
32. Since neither the additional project financing,
the extent of disclosure surrounding the STP, nor the Nordic
lien application directly, substantially and adversely
affected the use or value of the condominium unit,
constituting a "material change," [the DeMarcos] failed to
prove by a preponderance of the evidence their breach of
contract claim, such as to justify their rescission of their
Hokulani/Konea Sales Contracts.
 
19
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 


 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
use or value of their condominium units were not "directly,
 
substantially, and adversely affected."
 
On appeal, the DeMarcos fail to make any argument or 
point to any evidence that demonstrates that the increased construction loan or mechanic's lien "directly, substantially, and adversely affected" the use or value of their condominium units. Without such evidence, we cannot conclude that the circuit court's FOFs were clearly erroneous or its COLs were wrongly decided. See Chun, 106 Hawai
'i at 430, 106 P.3d at 353. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Therefore, the (1) "Order Granting Defendants Maui
 
Beach Resort Limited Partnership and Northwest Maui Corporation's
 Motion to Amend to Clarify and Correct the Findings of Fact,
 Conclusions of Law, and Order, Filed April 21, 2015" entered on
 July 27, 2015; (2) "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 Defendants Maui Beach Resort Limited Partnership and Northwest
 Maui Corporation's Motion for Attorneys' Fees and Costs, Filed
 August 20, 2015" entered on November 3, 2015; and (3) "Amended
 Final Judgment" entered on November 3, 2015 in the Circuit Court
 of the First Circuit is vacated as to the issue of actual damages
 and remanded for further proceedings consistent with this
 opinion, and affirmed in all other respects.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 10, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
 
Philip R. Brown
Effie Steiger
(Law Offices of Philip R. Brown)
for Plaintiffs-Appellants. 
Presiding Judge 
William C. McCorriston 
 
Lisa W. Cataldo 
 
Jessica M. Wan 
 
(McCorriston Miller Mukai
MacKinnon)for Defendants-Appellees. 
 
Associate Judge 
20

 