FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
---o0o---
THE TRUSTEES OF THE ESTATE OF BERNICE PAUAHI BISHOP,
ALSO KNOWN AS KAMEHAMEHA SCHOOLS,
Plaintiffs-Counterclaim Defendants/Appellees,
v.
RONALD G.S. AU,
Defendant-Counterclaimant/Appellant
NO. CAAP-15-0000466 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0420-02)
DECEMBER 22, 2017
NAKAMURA, C.J., and FUJISE and REIFURTH, JJ.
ORDER PARTIALLY GRANTING APPELLEES' REQUEST 
FOR ATTORNEYS' FEES AND COSTS BY NAKAMURA, C.J. 
Plaintiffs-Counterclaim Defendants/Appellees Trustees
of the Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop, also known as Kamehameha
Schools (KS), seek attorneys' fees and costs as the prevailing
party in this appeal, which was brought by Defendant-
Counterclaimant/Appellant Ronald G.S. Au (Au).  KS requests
attorneys' fees in the amount of $67,236.04 pursuant to HawaiiFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 607-14 (2016)1 and costs in the amount
of $566.50 pursuant to Hawai# i Rules of Appellate Procedure
(HRAP) Rule 39 (2016).2  Au objects to KS's request, arguing
1HRS § 607-14 provides in relevant part:
In all the courts, in all actions in the nature of
assumpsit and in all actions on a promissory note or
other contract in writing that provides for an
attorney's fee, there shall be taxed as attorneys'
fees, to be paid by the losing party and to be included
in the sum for which execution may issue, a fee that
the court determines to be reasonable; provided that
the attorney representing the prevailing party shall
submit to the court an affidavit stating the amount of
time the attorney spent on the action and the amount of
time the attorney is likely to spend to obtain a final
written judgment, or, if the fee is not based on an
hourly rate, the amount of the agreed upon fee.  The
court shall then tax attorneys' fees, which the court
determines to be reasonable, to be paid by the losing
party; provided that this amount shall not exceed
twenty-five per cent of the judgment.
Where the note or other contract in writing
provides for a fee of twenty-five per cent or more, or
provides for a reasonable attorney's fee, not more than
twenty-five per cent shall be allowed.
Where the note or other contract in writing
provides for a rate less than twenty-five per cent, not
more than the specified rate shall be allowed.
. . . .
The above fees provided for by this section shall
be assessed on the amount of the judgment exclusive of
costs and all attorneys' fees obtained by the
plaintiff, and upon the amount sued for if the
defendant obtains judgment.
(Emphasis added.)
2HRAP Rule 39 provides in relevant part:
(a) Civil Costs; to whom allowed. Except in
criminal cases or as otherwise provided by law, . . .
if a judgment is affirmed or a petition denied, costs
(continued...)
2FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
among other things that the amount of the requested attorneys'
fees is unreasonable and that KS failed to properly apportion its
fees between work done on assumpsit claims recoverable under HRS
§ 607-14 and non-assumpsit tort claims not recoverable under HRS
§ 607-14.
KS's request for attorneys' fees raises a question for
which there is no controlling authority in Hawai# i -- whether
under HRS § 607-14, a prevailing party in an assumpsit case is
entitled to recover attorneys' fees incurred in litigating its
fee request.3  KS's request for attorneys' fees also raises
questions concerning: (1) the reasonableness of the amount of
fees requested by KS; (2) the appropriate apportionment of fees
between work done on claims raised in KS's Complaint and Au's
First Amended Counterclaim (Counterclaim); and (3) the
appropriate apportionment between the work done on the assumpsit
and the non-assumpsit claims raised in Au's Counterclaim.
2(...continued)
shall be taxed against the appellant or petitioner
unless otherwise ordered; . . . .
. . . .
(c) Costs defined. Costs in the appellate courts
are defined as: (1) the cost of the original and one
copy of the reporter's transcripts if necessary for the
determination of the appeal; (2) the premiums paid for
supersedeas bonds or other bonds to preserve rights
pending appeal; (3) the fee for filing the appeal; (4)
the cost of printing or otherwise producing necessary
copies of briefs and appendices, provided that copying
costs shall not exceed 20¢ per page; (5) necessary
postage, cost of facsimiles, intrastate travel, long
distance telephone charges; and (6) any other costs
authorized by statute or rule.
3In this Order, we use the term "assumpsit" as a shorthand
way of referring to cases, claims, and litigation subject to the
provisions of HRS 
§ 607-14, which applies to "all actions in the nature of
assumpsit and . . . all actions on a promissory note or other
contract in writing that provides for an attorney's fee[.]"  
3FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
As explained in greater detail below, we conclude that  
under HRS § 607-14, a prevailing party in an assumpsit case is
entitled to recover attorneys' fees incurred in litigating its
fee request.  We further conclude that after evaluating the
reasonableness of KS's fee request and performing the appropriate
apportionments, KS is entitled to attorneys' fees in the reduced
amount of $22,853.39 and that it is entitled to $566.50 in costs
as requested.
BACKGROUND
I.
KS filed a Complaint against Au, alleging that Au
breached the terms of a settlement agreement and a lease between
the parties and seeking damages resulting from these breaches and
the termination of the lease.  Au filed a Counterclaim, which
asserted eleven claims for relief: (1) "breach of lease,
settlement agreement, and amendment of lease"; (2) "unreasonable
withholding of consent of assignment"; (3) "settlement agreement
of April 24, 2012, should be set aside and determined to be void,
voidable and unenforceable"; (4) "breach of the covenant of good
faith and fair dealing"; (5) "breach of promise"; (6)
"intentional or negligent misrepresentation"; (7) "fraudulent
inducement"; (8) "tortious interference with third-party
contract"; (9) "retaliatory eviction"; (10) "tortious breach of
the lease and amended lease"; and (11) "HRS 480 unfair and
deceptive practices." 
KS filed a motion for summary judgment on its
Complaint.  The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
Court)4 granted KS's motion, terminated the lease, and awarded KS
damages in the principal amount of $130,735.40.  KS subsequently
filed a motion for summary judgment on Au's Counterclaim.  The
Circuit Court granted this motion and entered summary judgment in
favor of KS and against Au on all claims set forth in Au's
4The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
4FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Counterclaim.
KS filed a post-judgment motion for attorneys' fees
pursuant to HRS § 607-14.  KS asserted that it incurred
$114,969.69 in attorneys' fees in pursuing the claims raised in
the Complaint and that it incurred $180,663.70 in attorneys' fees
in defending against the claims in the Counterclaim.  With
respect to the attorneys' fees incurred in pursuing the
Complaint, the Circuit Court, applying the "twenty-five percent
of the judgment" cap on attorneys' fees set forth in HRS § 607-
14, awarded KS twenty-five percent of the judgment amount of
$130,735.40 or $32,683.85 in attorneys' fees.  With respect to
the attorneys' fees incurred in defending against the
Counterclaim, the Circuit Court awarded KS $85,000.00 in
reasonable attorneys' fees out of the $180,663.70 sought by KS.5 
The Circuit Court stated that it reduced the amount sought by KS
"after a careful review" and noted that "some of the legal
services rendered reference only the tort claims, to wit,
retaliatory eviction, Chapter 480, misrepresentation, etc.;
therefore, this Court is apportioning the attorneys' fees between
assumpsit and non-assumpsit claims."
II.
On appeal, Au challenged the Circuit Court's: (1) grant
of summary judgment in favor of KS on KS's Complaint; (2) grant
of summary judgment in favor of KS on Au's Counterclaim; (3)
denial of Au's motion to vacate or for reconsideration of the
Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment on the Complaint and
the Counterclaim; and (4) grant in part of KS's motion for
attorneys' fees.  By an Amended Summary Disposition Order, we
affirmed the Circuit Court's decisions challenged by Au on
5The Circuit Court indicated that Au had sought recovery of
approximately $1.36 million in damages in his Counterclaim. 
Based on this figure, the total amount in attorneys' fees that
could have been awarded to KS for defending against the
Counterclaim under HRS § 607-14 was $340,000 -- twenty-five
percent of "the amount sued for[.]"
5FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
appeal.  Therefore, KS is clearly the prevailing party in this
appeal.
KS has moved for appellate attorneys' fees pursuant to
HRS § 607-14 and costs pursuant to HRAP Rule 39.  With respect to
its request for attorneys' fees, KS asserts that it has incurred
a total of $80,042.90 in attorneys' fees for this appeal.6  This
consists of 256 hours at $250 per hour for Dennis W. Chong Kee
(Chong Kee) and 75.4 hours at $165 per hour for Christopher T.
Goodin (Goodin) plus general excise tax ($64,000.00 + $12,441.00
= $76,441 + $3,601.90 (4.712% general excise tax) = $80,042.90). 
KS apportions its fees on appeal as 16 percent attributable to
the Complaint and 84 percent attributable to the Counterclaim; it
does not make any apportionment between assumpsit and non-
assumpsit claims in the Counterclaim and seeks recovery of all
appellate fees relating to the Counterclaim.  KS acknowledges
that it has already been awarded the maximum permissible fees
under HRS § 607-14 for the Complaint.  KS requests a total of
$67,236.04 in appellate fees, or the 84 percent of its total fees
it asserts were attributable to the Counterclaim ($80,042.90 x
.84 = $67.236.04).  
As part of its attorneys' fees motion, KS argues that
it is entitled to recover attorneys' fees it has incurred and
will incur in litigating its attorneys' fees motion.  Included in
the total $80,042.90 in fees KS claims it incurred on appeal is
$11,261.78 in fees that KS asserts it has incurred and will incur
in litigating the attorneys' fees motion.7  When KS's 84 percent
6KS initially asserted that it has incurred a total of
$81,142.38 in attorneys' fees on appeal, but later reduced that
figure to $80,042.90. 
7In its attorneys' fees motion, KS stated that it expended
38.5 hours (26.5 hours by Chong Kee and 12 hours by Goodin) for a
total of $8,605 in attorneys' fees in preparing the motion, and
that it anticipated expending an additional 12 hours (2 hours by
Chong Kee and 10 hours by Goodin) for a total of $2,150 in
attorneys' fees in preparing a reply to Au's expected opposition
(continued...)
6FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
apportionment is applied to this $11,261.78 amount, KS is seeking
an award of $9,459.90 in fees attributable to KS's litigation of
its fee motion.
DISCUSSION
I.
We first address the question of whether under HRS 
§ 607-14, a prevailing party in an assumpsit case is entitled to
recover attorneys' fees incurred in litigating its fee request. 
As noted, there is no controlling authority in this jurisdiction
on this question under HRS § 607-14.  The Hawai# i Supreme Court
has addressed the question of entitlement to recovery of fees
incurred in litigating fee requests in other contexts with
conflicting results.
A.  
In County of Hawaii v. C & J Coupe Family Limited #
Partnership , 124 Hawai #i 281, 242 P.3d 1136 (2010), the supreme
court addressed whether the defendant in an eminent domain action
that had been dismissed was entitled to recover fees incurred in
litigating its fee request.  The supreme court held that the
defendant was entitled to recover such fees based on HRS § 101-
27,8 which authorized the defendant in an eminent domain action
7(...continued)
to its motion.  When the general excise tax is added to these
amounts, the total fees that KS claims for litigating its fee
request is $11,261.78 ($8,605 + $2,150 = $10,755 + $506.78
(4.712% general excise tax) = $11,261.78). 
8HRS § 101-27 (2012) provides, in relevant part: 
Whenever [condemnation proceedings] are abandoned
or discontinued before reaching a final judgment, or
if, for any cause, the property concerned is not
finally taken for public use, a defendant who would
have been entitled to compensation or damages had the
property been finally taken, shall be entitled, in such
proceedings, to recover from the plaintiff all such
damage as may have been sustained by the defendant by
reason of the bringing of the proceedings and the
(continued...)
7FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
in which the plaintiff failed to complete the taking of the
property to recover "all such damage . . . sustained . . . by
reason of the bringing of the proceedings."  C & J Coupe , 124
Hawai#i at 306, 242 P.3d at 1161 (ellipsis points in original). 
The supreme court reasoned that the County was liable for the
fees incurred by the defendant to litigate its fee request
because those fees would not have been incurred by the defendant
if the County had not brought its unsuccessful condemnation
action.  Id.  The supreme court, however, stated that its holding
was "limited to the specific circumstances of HRS § 101–27
involved in litigating disputes as to fees and costs recoverable
because of a failed condemnation." Id. at 308, 242 P.3d at 1163.
In Hawaii Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, Inc. # , 116 Hawai# i
465, 468, 173 P.3d 1122, 1125 (2007), a receiver was appointed to
manage a hotel pending a foreclosure sale.  The supreme court
addressed whether the receiver was entitled to recover from the
estate the attorneys' fees incurred by the receiver in litigating
the receiver's own request for fees that was challenged by a
creditor of the estate.  The supreme court held that the receiver
was not entitled to recover attorneys' fees incurred in defending
her own request for fees.  Hawaii Ventures # , 116 Hawai# i at 476,
173 P.3d at 1133.  In doing so, the supreme court distinguished
between attorneys' fees the receiver incurred to fulfill her 
duties to the estate and fees incurred to advance her own
personal interests.  Id.  The supreme court explained that
"although a receiver is generally entitled to compensation from
the estate for services rendered in protecting the estate, . . .
receivers are not entitled to recover fees and expenses
8(...continued)
possession by the plaintiff of the property concerned
if the possession has been awarded including the
defendant's costs of court, a reasonable amount to
cover attorney's fees paid by the defendant in
connection therewith, and other reasonable expenses . .
. .
8FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
associated with litigation involving the propriety of the fees to
be awarded to them . . . ."  Id. (block quote format altered;
citation omitted).  This is because "the law imposes on a party
the duty to pay her own fees and expenses in vindicating her
personal interests."  Id.  (internal quotation marks, citation,
brackets, and ellipsis points omitted).
In Wong v. Takeuchi, 88 Hawaii 46, 961 P.2d 611
(1998), the award of attorneys' fees and costs to Ohara, one of
the prevailing parties, was challenged on appeal.  The supreme
court held that attorneys' fees previously awarded to other
prevailing parties had already used up the entire amount of
attorneys' fees allowable under HRS § 607-14.  Wong , 88 Hawai #i
at 50-51, 961 P.2d 615-16.  The supreme court vacated the award
of attorneys' fees to Ohara on this basis and did not otherwise
address the propriety of the attorneys' fees award.  Id.  at 55,
961 P.2d at 620.  The supreme court, however, addressed the trial
court's award of costs to Ohara under Hawai# i Rules of Civil
Procedure Rule 54(d), which provides that "[e]xcept when express
provision therefor is made either in a statute or in these rules,
costs shall be allowed as of course to the prevailing party
unless the court otherwise directs[.]"  The supreme court held
that "Ohara's request for $187.96 in costs for preparing the
motion for costs is not a taxable cost."  Id.  The court
explained: "[W]e are unable to find any authority for the
proposition that costs incurred after the conclusion of the
circuit court proceeding, solely for the purpose of preparing a
motion for reimbursement of costs already incurred, are
themselves taxable costs.  We hold that they are not."  Id.#
B.  
C & J Coupe, Hawai# i Ventures , and Wong do not provide
much useful guidance on the question at hand -- whether HRS 
§ 607-14 authorizes a prevailing party to recover attorneys' fees
incurred in litigating its fee request.  C & J Coupe  was based on
different statutory language.  Hawai# i Ventures  involved
9FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
dissimilar circumstances -- a receiver's attempt to recover from
the estate the attorneys' fees the receiver incurred in defending
against a creditor's challenge to the receiver's own request for
compensation.  Wong did not address whether attorneys' fees
incurred in litigating a fee request were recoverable under HRS 
§ 607-14.
C.
When construing a statute,
our foremost obligation is to ascertain and give effect to
the intention of the legislature, which is to be obtained
primarily from the language contained in the statute itself.
And we must read statutory language in the context of the
entire statute and construe it in a manner consistent with
its purpose.
When there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or
indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an expression used in a
statute, an ambiguity exists. . . .
In construing an ambiguous statute, "[t]he meaning of the
ambiguous words may be sought by examining the context, with
which the ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may be
compared, in order to ascertain their true meaning.
Moreover, the courts may resort to extrinsic aids in
determining legislative intent.  One avenue is the use of
legislative history as an interpretive tool."
This court may also consider "[t]he reason and spirit of the
law, and the cause which induced the legislature to enact it
. . . to discover its true meaning."
Lingle v. Hawai #i Gov't Emps. Ass'n, 107 Hawai #i 178, 183, 111
P.3d 587, 592 (2005) (ellipsis points and brackets in original)
(quoting Guth v. Freeland , 96 Hawai #i 147, 150, 28 P.3d 982, 985
(2001)).
10FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
HRS § 607-14 does not specifically address whether a
prevailing party in an assumpsit case is entitled to recover
attorneys' fees incurred in litigating its fee request.  HRS 
§ 607-14 simply states that "there shall be taxed as attorneys'
fees, to be paid by the losing party and to be included in the
sum for which execution may issue, a fee that the court
determines to be reasonable[,]" subject to the twenty-five
percent statutory cap.  HRS § 607-14's language requiring that
the prevailing party's attorney submit an affidavit to the court
"stating the amount of time the attorney spent on the action and
the amount of time the attorney is likely to spend to obtain a
final written judgment" (emphasis added) indicates that the
prevailing party may seek to claim attorneys' fees incurred after
the court's ruling which establishes the prevailing party in the
action.  To the extent that an award of attorneys' fees will be
included in a final judgment for which execution may issue, the
emphasized language suggests that attorneys' fees incurred in
litigating the fee request should be recoverable.  However, this
suggestion is indirect and is not sufficient to eliminate the
ambiguity in the statutory language regarding whether attorneys'
fees incurred in litigating the fee request are recoverable.
We turn to the purpose of the statute and the reason
for its enactment by the Legislature.  HRS § 607-14 is a fee-
shifting statute.  It countermands the presumption under the
American Rule that parties bear their own attorneys' fees by
requiring the losing party to pay the attorneys' fees incurred by
the prevailing party in assumpsit cases.  The clear purpose of
HRS § 607-14 is to reimburse the prevailing party, and thereby
shift the burden to the losing party, for attorneys' fees the
prevailing party was required to incur in litigating an assumpsit
claim -- attorneys' fees to pursue a meritorious claim as well as
attorneys' fees to defend against an unmeritorious claim.
Given the fee-shifting purpose of HRS § 607-14, it
would be illogical to treat attorneys' fees incurred in
11FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
litigating a fee request different from other attorneys' fees
incurred by the prevailing party in the litigation.  If the
prevailing party is unable to obtain reimbursement for attorneys'
fees it incurred in litigating its fee request, it will have to
pay those fees to its lawyers.  This would be inconsistent with
HRS § 607-14's purpose of shifting attorneys' fees incurred by
the prevailing party in assumpsit litigation to the losing party. 
From the prevailing party's perspective, it makes no difference
whether attorneys' fees were incurred in seeking to recover fees
from the losing party or in other aspects of the litigation --
attorneys' fees that are not reimbursed by the losing party will
have to be paid by the prevailing party.  Consistent with the
fee-shifting purpose of HRS § 607-14, we conclude that the
prevailing party in an assumpsit case is entitled to recover
attorneys' fees incurred in litigating its fee request.  
 D.
Courts from other jurisdictions have agreed with our
analysis.  "In fee-shifting cases, the vast majority of courts
that have considered the issue have held or indicated that
reasonable attorneys' fees may be awarded for litigating the fee
issue."  1 Robert L. Rossi, Attorneys' Fees  § 6:15 (3d ed. 2016);
e.g., In re S. Cal. Sunbelt Developers, Inc. , 608 F.3d 456, 463
(9th Cir. 2010) (stating, in discussing a fee-shifting provision,
that "[i]n statutory fee cases, federal courts, including our
own, have uniformly held that time spent in establishing the
entitlement to and amount of the fee is compensable" (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted)); Fisher Props., Inc. v.
Arden-Mayfair, Inc., 798 P.2d 799, 807 (Wash. 1990) ("The general
rule is that time spent on establishing entitlement to, and
amount of, a court awarded attorney fee is compensable where the
fee shifts to the opponent under fee shifting statutes.").
In allowing recovery under fee-shifting statutes of
attorneys' fees incurred in litigating fee requests, courts have
concluded that it would be inconsistent with the policy of fee-
12FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
shifting statutes "to dilute the fee award by refusing to
compensate time spent establishing the rightful claim to a fee." 
Blixseth v. Yellowstone Moutain Club, LLC , 854 F.3d 626, 629 (9th
Cir. 2017); In re Marriage of Powers , 624 N.E.2d 390, 396 (Ill.
Ct. App. 1993) ("[R]efusing to award fees for prosecuting the fee
petition 'would dilute the effect of the statute by requiring
successful litigants to incur additional costs to enforce their
rights.'" (citation omitted)); Am. Fed'n of Gov't Emps., AFL-CIO,
Local 3882 v. Fed. Labor Relations Auth., 994 F.2d 20, 22 (D.C. 
Cir. 1993) (concluding that precluding the recovery of fees
incurred to litigate fee requests "could render fee-shifting
provisions impotent, thereby reducing the effectiveness of the
underlying statutes").  This rationale supports our
interpretation of HRS § 607-14 as authorizing the prevailing
party to recover attorneys' fees incurred in litigating its fee
request.
E.
Although we conclude that HRS § 607-14 authorizes the
award of attorneys' fees incurred in litigating the fee request,
other standard requirements applicable to the award of attorneys'
fees apply.  Thus, like other attorneys' fees incurred during the
course of a litigation, the attorneys' fees incurred in
litigating the fee request are subject to apportionment between
the assumpsit and non-assumpsit claims in the litigation.  In
addition, only reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in pursuing
the fee request may be recovered.  In this regard, we note that
an attorney's billing records should be prepared and readily
available independent of the fee request, and therefore, the time
needed to determine the number of hours worked and tasks
performed should not ordinarily be extensive.
KS's fee request embodies all the legal work performed
by its attorneys in this appeal.  We therefore apply the same
apportionment to the attorneys' fees sought for its fee request
that we apply to the other attorneys' fees sought by KS in this
13FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
appeal.  With respect to the reasonableness of KS's request for
attorneys' fees it has incurred and will incur in litigating its 
fee request, we conclude that the amounts requested were
excessive.  KS asserts that its attorneys will spend a total of
50.5 hours (28.5 hours by Chong Kee and 22 hours by Goodin) and
that it has incurred and will incur $10,755 in attorneys' fees
plus general excise tax to prepare its pleadings relating to its
appellate fee request.  However, the legal authorities and
arguments raised in its appellate request for fees are in
substantial part duplicative of the legal authorities and
arguments it asserted in its request for fees in the Circuit
Court.  We conclude that attorneys' fees in the reduced amount of
$3,200 plus general excise tax were reasonably incurred by KS in
litigating its request for fees on appeal.
II.
We now turn to evaluating the reasonableness of the
remainder of KS's fee request and apportioning the fees requested
between the Complaint and Counterclaim and between the assumpsit
and non-assumptsit claim in the Counterclaim.  Excluding the fees
attributable to its litigation of its appellate fee request, KS
asserts that it incurred $65,686 in attorneys' fees, consisting
of 227.5 hours by Chong Kee and 53.4 hours by Goodin for a total
of 280.9 attorney hours plus general excise tax, in defending
against Au's appeal.  In addition to his opening brief, Au filed
several significant substantive motions on appeal: a first motion
to stay enforcement of the final judgment; a second motion to
stay enforcement of the final judgment, a supplement to that
motion, and motion for reconsideration; and a motion to vacate an
order of the trial court.  The breakdown of the approximate hours
spent by KS's attorneys on appellate matters is as follows:
Answering brief 115 hours
First stay motion   40 hours
Second stay motion, supplement to
that motion, and reconsideration motion  65 hours
Motion to vacate  20 hours   
Misc other matters  40 hours
14FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
We acknowledge that the number and extent of the
motions filed by Au in this appeal exceeded that found in a
typical appeal.  On the other hand, a significant portion of the
arguments and analysis presented by KS in its answering brief had
previously been set forth in its summary judgment pleadings in
the Circuit Court, and the number of attorney hours requested for
the answering brief and other work performed on appeal exceeds
that which is reasonable.  Excluding the attorneys' fees
attributable to KS's fee request, we conclude, based on our
review of the record, that attorneys' fees in the reduced amount
of $55,000, plus general excise tax, was reasonably incurred by
KS in defending this appeal.  When this $55,000 amount is added
to the $3,200 we concluded was reasonable for KS to litigate its
request for fees, it brings the total reasonable fees incurred by
KS in this appeal to $58,200.
In apportioning the attorneys' fees requested between
the Complaint and Counterclaim and between the assumpsit and non-
assumptsit claims in the Counterclaim, we consider the entire
record, but pay particular attention to the arguments raised by
Au on appeal and the arguments presented by KS in its answering
brief.  We conclude that a 50/50 apportionment is reasonable as
between the Complaint and Counterclaim.  We further conclude that
a 75/25 apportionment is reasonable as between the assumpsit and
non-assumpsit claims in the Counterclaim.  Accordingly, we award
KS $22,853.39 in attorneys' fees ($58,200 x .5 = $29,100 x .75 =
$21,825.00 + $1,028.39 (4.712% general excise tax) = $22,853.39).
III.
As the prevailing party in this appeal, KS is entitled
to recover its appellate costs.  HRAP Rule 39(a), (c); Deutsche
Bank National Trust Co. v. Kozma, 140 Hawai# i 494, 499, 403 P.3d
271, 276 (2017).  KS requests costs in the amount of $566.50.  We
conclude that KS's request for costs is reasonable and award it
$566.50 in costs.
15FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, it is hereby ordered that we
grant, in part, KS's request for attorneys' fees and costs on
appeal.  Attorneys' fees in the amount of $22,853.39 and costs in
the amount of $566.50 are awarded in favor of KS and against Au.
16