NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-11-0000013
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JOSEPH A. BRESCIA, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KA'IULANI EDENS-HUFF; PUANANI ROGERS; DAYNE GONSALVES;
LOUISE LISTMAN also known as LOUISE SAUSEN; JEFF CHANDLER; HALE
MAWAE; and DOE DEFENDANTS 1-200, Defendants-Appellants
 
and
 
JEFF CHANDLER and ANGIE NORA PUANANI ROGERS,
Third-Party Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
ALAN S. DOWNER, in his official capacity as Administrator
of the State Historic Preservation Division of the Department
of Land and Natural Resources; SUZANNE CASE, in her capacity
as the Director of the Department of Land and Natural
1
Resources;  JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; and
DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS OR OTHER ENTITIES 1-20,
Third-Party Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0107)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Leonard, JJ.)

 
This case arises out of attempts by Jeff Chandler
 
(Chandler) and Angie Nora Puanani Rogers (Rogers) to prevent
 
Joseph A. Brescia (Brescia) from building a residence on property
 he owned on which Native Hawaiian burials had been found. 
1
Pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 43(c)(1)
(2010), Alan S. Downer and Suzanne Case have been automatically substituted as
parties for Pua Aiu and Laura Thielen, respectively, who were sued in theirofficial capacities. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Brescia filed a trespass action against Chandler, Rogers, and
 
other Native Hawaiians who allegedly entered and remained on his
 property to block the construction. Chandler and Rogers filed
 counterclaims against Brescia and third-party complaints against
 the Director of the Department of Land and Natural Resources and
 the Administrator of the State Historic Preservation Division in
 their official capacities (collectively, the "State"). 
Chandler's and Rogers's counterclaims and third-party complaints
 sought declaratory relief concerning the State's actions in
 approving the burial treatment plan for Brescia's property and
 injunctive relief to enjoin all construction by Brescia until the
 State complied with its duties under the Historic Preservation
 Law, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 6E.
 
Chandler and Rogers subsequently entered into a
 
settlement agreement with Brescia, in which they agreed to the
 dismissal and release of all claims against each other. Pursuant
 to the settlement, Chandler and Rogers relinquished all claims
 against Brescia that sought (1) to enjoin Brescia's construction
 of his residence or (2) to invalidate the State's approval of the
 burial treatment plan for Brescia's property or any other
 government approvals necessary to construct his residence.
 
Given the settlement between Brescia, Chandler, and
 
Rogers, the controversy underlying this case regarding Brescia's
 construction of his residence and the treatment of the Native
 Hawaiian burials on his property is moot. The critical question
 in this appeal is whether exceptions to the mootness doctrine
 apply that would warrant a judicial determination of Chandler's
 and Rogers's claims for declaratory relief against the State. As
 explained below, we conclude that the exceptions to the mootness
 doctrine asserted by Chandler and Rogers do not apply under the
 circumstances of this case. Accordingly, we affirm the decisions
 of the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (Circuit Court)
2 to:
 
(1) grant the State's motion for summary judgment against
 
2The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Chandler and Rogers to the extent that the Circuit Court ruled 
that Chandler's and Roger's claims against the State were moot,
 resulting in the dismissal of the claims on mootness grounds;
3
 
(2) deny Chandler's and Rogers's motions for summary judgment
 against the State; and (3) deny Chandler's and Rogers's motion to
 amend or supplement their third-party complaints. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
In 2000, Brescia purchased a 15,677 square-foot lot in 
the Wainiha Subdivision II, situated in Ha
'ena, Kaua 'i (Property). 
In order to develop the Property, Brescia applied to the Kaua 'i 
County Planning Commission (Planning Commission) for approval of his proposal to construct a single-family residence on the Property. In December 2007, the Planning Commission conditionally approved Brescia's proposal to construct a 2,355­square-foot single-family residence, resting approximately eight feet above ground on columns built on concrete footings.
4 The 
conditions imposed included: (1) excavation at the foundation locations to look for archaeological findings, (2) reporting the discovery of any archaeological findings to the State Historic Preservation Division (SHPD) of the Department of Land and Natural Resources (DLNR) and the County Planning Department, and (3) that "[n]o building permit shall be issued until requirements
 of the [SHPD] and the Burial Council have been met."
 
Brescia had an archaeological inventory survey (AIS)
 
conducted on the Property by Scientific Consultant Services, Inc.
 (SCS). The AIS was conducted in phases. During the AIS, thirty
 
3The Circuit Court's determination that the case had become moot was not
 
a resolution of Chandler's and Rogers's claims against the State on the
merits, but rather resulted in the dismissal of the claims on the ground that
they were no longer justiciable due to mootness. 
4Brescia redesigned and relocated his proposed residence multiple times
in order to comply with various state and county requirements, includingshoreline setbacks. See Brescia v. N. Shore Ohana, 115 Hawai' i 477, 168 P.3d
929 (2007). As a result of increasingly restrictive shoreline setbacks, thebuildable area of the Property was limited to a triangle-shaped parcel ofapproximately 4,200 square feet. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sets of Native Hawaiian burials were identified. Because these 
burials were discovered during the AIS, they were considered "previously identified" remains and were subject to the authority of the Kaua
'i/Ni'ihau Island Burial Council (KNIBC).5 The results 
of the AIS report were presented to SHPD, and by letter dated January 24, 2008, Nancy McMahon (McMahon), SHPD's Acting Archaeology Branch Chief and Kaua
'i Archaeologist, accepted 
Brescia's AIS. 
II.
 
Brescia prepared a burial treatment plan (BTP) that,
 
with the approval of SHPD, was presented to the KNIBC for review.
 Brescia's initial BTP (BTP-1) proposed the relocation and
 reinternment of six burials on the Property that would be within
 or very near the construction footprint of the residence, and he
 proposed to preserve in place the remaining twenty-four burials. 
The KNIBC considered BTP-1 at a meeting held on February 7, 2008. 
The KNIBC decided to defer their decision on BTP-1. In the
 interim, Brescia revised BTP-1 to request the relocation of an
 additional burial, for a total of seven burial relocations. 
After hearing public testimony in opposition to the relocation of
 the burials and the construction of Brescia's proposed residence,
 the KNIBC voted on April 3, 2008, to preserve in place all thirty
 burials located on the Property.
 
Brescia then prepared a revised BTP (BTP-2). Under
 
BTP-2, the seven burials located within the construction
 footprint of the proposed residence would be encased "by CMU or a
 concrete jacket," below the surface, with the top of each CMU
 
5Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) § 13-300-2 (1996) defines "previously
identified" to mean "burial sites containing human skeletal remains and any
burial goods identified during archaeological inventory survey and data
recovery of possible burial sites, or known through oral or written
testimony." HRS § 6E-43(b) (2009), provides in relevant part that "[t]he
appropriate island burial council shall determine whether preservation in
place or relocation of previously identified native Hawaiian burials is
warranted[.]"
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
capped for permanent preservation.6 The concrete structures
 
would "remain in the ground to protect the burials through time,
 
with sand being used to cover the CMU/concrete jacket to the
 surface, at which juncture common lawn grass will be placed." 
The remaining twenty-three burials located outside the footprint
 of the proposed residence would be preserved in place and, at a
 minimum, would have a fifteen-foot buffer from the nearest
 ground-altering activity. Each of the burials was subject to GPS
 recordation and the placement of a metal tag, so their position
 would be known and recorded on all property maps and construction
 plans for the lot. The locations of the burials would also be
 recorded with the Bureau of Conveyances.
 
Without first consulting with the KNIBC, SHPD approved
 
BTP-2 on April 24, 2008. Following SHPD's approval, Brescia
 obtained the necessary permits to begin construction on his
 Property.
 
III.
 
On June 3, 2008, Brescia planned a blessing to commence
 
construction on the Property. On that date, Chandler, Rogers,
 and other Native Hawaiians allegedly entered and remained on the
 Property in order to prevent construction. On June 12, 2008,
 Brescia filed an amended complaint (Brescia's Complaint) for
 injunctive relief and damages against Chandler, Rogers, and
 others who Brescia claimed participated in the June 3, 2008,
 incident, alleging trespass, private nuisance, tortious
 interference with contract, and other causes of action. On July
 18, 2008, Chandler filed an amended answer to Brescia's
 Complaint, a counterclaim against Brescia, and a third-party
 complaint against the State, specifically the Director of DLNR
 and the Administrator of SHPD in their official capacities. On 
6BTP-2 also refers to the "CMU/concrete jackets" as "small crypts,"
which "will provide both interim and permanent preservation measures as once
set in place, they will not be removed from the soil matrix surrounding the
seven burials."
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
September 26, 2008, Rogers filed a similar answer, counterclaim,
 
and third-party complaint. 
Chandler's and Rogers's Counterclaims/Third-Party
 
Complaints sought declaratory and injunctive relief against
 Brescia and the State. Chandler's Counterclaim/Third-Party
 Complaint asserted claims regarding SHPD's alleged failure to:
 (1) "preserve [the] burial site on [Brescia's Property] as
 determined by KNIBC"; (2) consult with the KNIBC prior to
 approving BPT-2; and (3) provide information to and properly
 advise the KNIBC with respect to the proposed construction on
 Brescia's Property. Rogers's Counterclaim/Third-Party Complaint
 asserted the same basic claims but added a claim regarding SHPD's
 alleged failure to assure submission of an adequate burial
 treatment plan for Brescia's Property.
 
In their prayers for relief, Chandler and Rogers sought
 
declaratory judgment regarding the scope of the burial councils'
 authority to make preservation-in-place determinations; SHPD's
 obligation to provide burial councils with accurate information
 and proper advice; the failure of SHPD to provide the KNIBC with
 accurate information and proper advice in connection with the
 KNIBC's decisions related to Brescia's Property; and the failure
 of SHPD to consult with the KNIBC prior to approving BTP-2,
 thereby rendering SHPD's approval invalid. Chandler and Rogers
 also prayed for an injunction to enjoin "any and all
 construction" on Brescia's Property until and unless the State
 correctly advises the KNIBC of its duties, powers, and roles and
 provides the KNIBC, all appropriate Hawaiian organizations, and
 any lineal descendants the opportunity to participate in
 formulating the specific "mitigation and protective measures to
 implement [KNIBC's] determination to preserve all burials in
 place on [Brescia's] Property."
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV.
 
On July 28, 2008, Chandler filed a motion for

 
7
preliminary injunction pursuant to HRS § 6E-13(b) (2009)  to stop
Brescia from any further construction on the Property until a
 
decision on the merits of the case could be made. After holding
 hearings on the motion, the Circuit Court concluded that BTP-2
 had not been properly authorized because SHPD had failed to
 consult with the KNIBC and appropriate Hawaiian organizations
 
8
before approving BTP-2, as required by HRS § 6E-43(d)  and
Hawai'i Administrative Rules (HAR) § 13-300-38(e).9 The Circuit 
Court ordered SHPD to engage in the necessary consultation, but
 declined to enjoin Brescia from continuing with the construction
 of his residence. The Circuit Court's October 2, 2008, "Order
 Granting in Part and Denying in Part [Chandler's] Motion for
 Preliminary Injunction" (October 2, 2008, Order) provided as
 follows:
 
7HRS § 6E-13(b) provides:
 
(b) Any person may maintain an action in the trial court having
jurisdiction where the alleged violation occurred or is likely to occur
for restraining orders or injunctive relief against the State, its
political subdivisions, or any person upon a showing of irreparable
injury, for the protection of an historic property or a burial site and
the public trust therein from unauthorized or improper demolition,
alteration, or transfer of the property or burial site.
 
Effective July 1, 2015, HRS § 6E-13(b) has been amended to substitute the term
"environmental court" for "trial court." 2014 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 218, §§ 8,
11 at 739-40. 
8HRS § 6E-43(d) (2009) provides: "Within ninety days following the final
determination [of preservation in place or relocation], a preservation or
mitigation plan shall be approved by the department in consultation with any
lineal descendants, the respective council, other appropriate Hawaiian
organizations, and any affected property owner."
 
9HAR § 13-300-38(e) (1996) provides:
 
(e) Where a council determination to preserve in place is
accepted as final, the applicant shall develop the burial site
component of the preservation plan consisting of the requirements
of section 13-300-33(b)(3)(A) and any accepted recommendations
relating to burial site treatment. Within ninety days of the
council determination, the department shall approve the plan
following consultation with the applicant, any known lineal
descendants, the appropriate council, and any appropriate Hawaiian
organizations. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
This Court is GRANTING IN PART Defendant's Motion for
 
Preliminary Injunction, until the Department of Land and
Natural Resources, State Historic Preservation Division,
complies with Chapter 6E, Hawaii Revised Statues, and Hawaii
Administrative Rules 13-300; in particular, HRS 6E-43(d) and
HAR 13-300-38(e) which require consultation with the
Kauai/Niihau Burial Council, any appropriate Hawaiian
organizations, and any recognized lineal descendants, on the
revised Burial Treatment Plan for the authorized protection
and management of the discovered burial sites.
 
This preliminary injunction does not enjoin Plaintiff
BRESCIA, from continuing with construction of his residence,
provided that the construction does not in any way further
demolish, alter, or prevent access, for whatever purposes in
the event it is so required by SHPD, after proper
consultation, to the seven (7) burials that fall within the
footprint of the house plans.
 
V.
 
Following the issuance of the Circuit Court's October
 
2, 2008, Order, Brescia continued construction of his residence. 
SHPD spent over a year consulting with the KNIBC and Native
 Hawaiian organizations on multiple revised BTPs submitted by
 Brescia, including holding meetings, receiving letters, and
 hearing oral testimony on the revised BTPs. Those consulted by
 SHPD (other than Brescia) opposed the building of a residence
 above the burials and testified that such activity does not
 effectuate the KNIBC's "preservation in place" determination.
 
Prior versions of Brescia's BTP referenced concrete
 
jackets or CMUs being placed around the burials that fell within 
the construction footprint of the residence. However, in
 September 2008, Brescia's consulting archeologist, SCS, decided
 that CMUs were unacceptable because they would cause greater
 disturbance to the burials, and instead decided to only put caps
 on the burials, without notifying SHPD of the change. SHPD found
 out that concrete caps had been placed on the burials without its
 approval during a September 2008 site visit. Although SHPD
 determined that it should have been consulted before this change
 to the BTP was made, SHPD "ultimately agreed that capping was
 less invasive and provided the same amount of protection for the
 []iwi[.]" SHPD requested that a cultural monitor be hired "to
 check that any further construction complies with the version of
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the BTP that is ultimately accepted by SHPD" and to ensure "that
 
proper respect is accorded the burials."
 
VI.
 
On February 9, 2009, Chandler and Rogers filed a motion 
for leave to amend their answers and Counterclaims/Third-Party Complaints. They sought to add additional claims to their Counterclaims/Third-Party Complaints for SHPD's alleged: (1) failure to obtain approval of proposed mitigation commitments from the KNIBC in violation of HAR § 13-284-8; (2) violation of its public trust duties; and (3) failure to protect customary and traditional Native Hawaiian rights, in violation of Article XII, Section 7 of the Hawai
'i Constitution. By order filed on May 26, 
2009, the Circuit Court denied the motion. 
On May 28, 2009, Chandler and Rogers filed a motion to
 
enforce the Circuit Court's October 2, 2008, Order by enjoining
 Brescia from engaging in construction activity on his Property
 until SHPD approved a burial treatment plan that implemented the
 preservation in place determination of the KNIBC after proper
 consultation with the KNIBC and appropriate Hawaiian
 organizations. Chandler and Rogers argued that construction
 should be halted because, among other things, the KNIBC had
 rejected the BPT Brescia proposed in October and November 2008;
 SHPD had failed to consult with the KNIBC "in a meaningful way"
 on the latest proposed BTP; and Brescia's continued construction
 "threaten[ed] to 'foreclose implementing potential options for
 burial treatment plans that may result from the consultation
 between the SHPD and the KNIBC[]'" required under the Circuit
 Court's October 2, 2008, Order.
 
In response, the State detailed its efforts to consult
 
with the KNIBC and Native Hawaiian organizations and its requests
 made to Brescia to address concerns raised during the
 consultation process. The State noted that it had rejected
 Brescia's eleventh revision of the BTP and had identified
 additional matters that needed to be addressed. On August 18, 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2009, the Circuit Court entered an order denying the motion to
 
enforce.
 
VII.
 
On March 8, 2010, SHPD approved the sixteenth revision
 
of the BTP (BTP-16), which included a preservation plan for the
 burials discovered on the Property, over the opposition of the
 KNIBC, Chandler, Rogers, and others. SHPD's approval set forth
 specific conditions and concerns, but allowed Brescia to build
 his residence above the burials that fell within the footprint of
 the residence. SHPD addressed the capping of these burials,
 which the KNIBC and members of the public had opposed as not
 being respectful and proper, as follows:
 
The SHPD however recognizes that the prior determination by
the KNIBC that the burials were to be preserved in place,
the existence of sizeable shoreline setbacks on the
 property, and unusual configuration of the lot (with a
significant portion of the lot being within the shoreline
setback area), leave the applicant with few options for
construction of his house. Given the proximity of the
construction to the burials, there does need to be some
physical or visual protective measures put in place to
ensure that the burials near construction are protected and
not disturbed. The concrete caps do serve this purpose. At
 this point in time, the SHPD feels that removing the
concrete caps could cause harm to the burials and do afford
some level of protection for the burials. The concrete caps
will not be removed.
 
VIII.
 
On August 5, 2010, following the approval of BTP-16,
 
Chandler and Rogers entered into a settlement agreement with
 
Brescia, which was filed in the Circuit Court on August 24, 2010. 
As part of the settlement agreement, Brescia, Rogers, and
 Chandler agreed to dismiss and release all claims against each
 other that were asserted or could have been asserted in the
 underlying action, including all claims arising out of disputes
 regarding Brescia's Property or the burial treatment plan prior
 to the effective date of the settlement agreement. In the
 settlement agreement, Brescia also agreed, subject to specified
 conditions, to permit Chandler, accompanied by a kahu and members
 of Chandler's family, to go onto the Property four times a year
 "to pay respect to the k
�puna on the Property[.]"
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In accordance with the settlement agreement, a
 
Stipulated Partial Judgment was filed by the Circuit Court on
 
August 25, 2010, which entered judgment dismissing the claims
 Brescia, Chandler, and Rogers had asserted against each other. 
With respect to Chandler's and Rogers's Counterclaims/Third-Party
 Complaints, judgment was entered in favor of Brescia dismissing
 all claims against him. Chandler's and Rogers's prayer for
 injunctive relief in their Counterclaims/Third-Party Complaints 
-- to enjoin any and all construction on Brescia's Property until
 the State complied with its responsibilities -- was specifically
 dismissed with prejudice as to Brescia and the State. The
 Stipulated Partial Judgment provided that the remaining prayers
 for relief against the State in Chandler's and Rogers's
 Counterclaims/Third-Party Complaints shall not be construed as
 seeking the invalidation of BTP-16 (and specifically BTP-16's
 preservation plan component), the approval of BTP-16 by SHPD, or
 any of the permits or other government approvals issued for the
 Property. The Stipulated Partial Judgment further provided that
 if Chandler or Rogers prevail against the State on any of the
 remaining prayers for relief, such relief shall have no force or
 effect against Brescia or the Property, shall be purely
 prospective in nature, and shall not be used to contest BTP-16,
 any approval thereof, or any of the permits or other government
 approvals issued for the Property.
 
In effect, the settlement agreement and Stipulated
 
Partial Judgment meant that Chandler and Rogers were giving up
 any right and ability to challenge the treatment of the burials
 that had been discovered on Brescia's Property and the effect
 that the construction of Bresica's residence had on the burials.
 
IX.
 
After the Stipulated Partial Judgment was filed, the
 
State, on September 14, 2010, filed a motion for summary judgment
 or in the alternative for partial summary judgment. The State
 sought summary judgment on Chandler's and Rogers's remaining
 claims for declaratory relief on the grounds that: (1) HRS § 6E­
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
13(b) provided an exclusive remedy that barred such remaining
 
claims; (2) Chandler's and Rogers's remaining claims were moot;
 and (3) Chandler and Rogers did not have standing to assert their
 remaining claims. In the alternative, the State sought partial
 summary judgment on Chandler's and Rogers's claim that the human
 remains found on the Property were part of a single burial site,
 arguing that there were no issues of material fact regarding its
 showing that each of the burials discovered was contained in a
 separate and distinct burial site.
 
On September 15, 2010, Chandler and Rogers jointly
 
filed two motions for partial summary judgment, which covered all
 their claims against the State. They sought summary judgment on
 their claims for declaratory relief regarding the State's alleged
 failure to: (1) preserve in place the burial site on Brescia's
 Property as determined by KNIBC (Chandler's and Rogers's Count
 1); (2) provide information to and properly advise the KNIBC with
 respect to the proposed construction on Brescia's Property
 (Chandler's Count 3 and Rogers's Count 4); assure submission of
 an adequate burial treatment plan for Brescia's Property
 (Rogers's Count 2) and (4) meaningfully consult with the KNIBC
 prior to approving BPT-2 (Chandler's 2, Rogers's Count 3). 
Chandler and Rogers also sought summary judgment on their request
 for an injunction prohibiting the State from future breaches of
 its duties in handling and approving burial treatment plans.
 
On September 21, 2010, Chandler and Rogers filed a
 
Motion to Amend and/or Supplement their Third-Party Complaints to
 add factual allegations regarding actions and events that
 occurred after the filing of their Third-Party Complaints,
 primarily those related to the State's approval of BTP-16.
 
On October 4, 2010, the Circuit Court held a hearing on
 
the parties' competing motions for summary judgment and Chandler
 and Rogers's motion to amend/supplement their Third-Party
 Complaints. The Circuit Court agreed with State's arguments in
 support of its motion for summary judgment and orally ruled that:
 (1) HRS § 6E-13(b) provided an exclusive remedy, and therefore,
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Chandler's and Rogers's remaining claims for declaratory relief
 
were barred; (2) their remaining claims were moot; and (3) they
 did not have standing to assert their remaining claims. The
 Circuit Court also granted the State's alternative motion for
 partial summary judgment, ruling that there were no issues of
 material fact on the State's claim that the human remains
 discovered on Bresica's Property were contained in separate and
 distinct burial sites, and were not part of a single burial site. 
The Circuit Court denied Chandler and Rogers's motions
 
for partial summary judgment. The Circuit Court stated that
 while it "was a bit dismayed at the decisions that were made[,]"
 it would be overstepping the administrative process established
 by statute if it "were to dictate what it means to preserve in
 place[.]" The Circuit Court also indicated that if Chandler and
 Rogers wanted to challenge the State's actions in approving the
 burial treatment plan for Brescia's Property, they were required
 to seek injunctive relief pursuant to HRS § 6E-13. Finally, the
 Circuit Court denied Chandler and Rogers's motion to
 amend/supplement their Third-Party Complaints.
 
On October 19, 2010, the Circuit Court filed its order
 
denying Chandler and Rogers's motions to amend/supplement their
 Third-Party Complaints. On October 27, 2010, the Circuit Court
 filed three separate orders (1) granting the State's motion for
 summary judgment; (2) denying Chandler and Rogers's motion for
 summary judgment regarding Counts I and IV; and (3) denying their
 motion for summary judgment regarding Counts II and III.
10 Final
 
Judgment was entered on December 15, 2010, and this appeal
 followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
On appeal, Chandler and Rogers contend that the Circuit
 
Court erred in: (1) granting the State's motion for summary
 
10The Circuit Court's orders denying Chandler and Rogers's motions for
summary judgment referred to the count numbers used in Rogers's
Counterclaim/Third-Party Complaint.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judgment or in the alternative for partial summary judgment; (2)
 
denying Chandler and Rogers's motions for summary judgment
 regarding their claims against the State; and (3) denying
 Chandler and Rogers's motion to amend or supplement their Third-
Party Complaints. In particular, Chandler and Rogers argue that
 the Circuit Court should have granted their requests for
 declaratory judgment that: (1) the phrase "preservation in place"
 as used in HRS § 6E-43 (2009) should be interpreted to preclude
 the State from permitting a landowner to build on top of burials;
 and (2) in approving the burial treatment plan for Brescia's
 Property, the State failed to ensure a meaningful and informed
 decision-making process under HRS Chapter 6E. They also argue
 that there are material issues of fact regarding whether the
 remains found on Brescia's Property were part of a single burial
 site or were multiple individual burial sites.
 
As explained below, we conclude that Chandler's and
 
Rogers's settlement of all their claims with Brescia, which
 includes their agreement not to challenge the construction of his
 residence or seek to invalidate the approval of the burial
 treatment plan for the Property, renders this case moot. We
 further conclude that the exceptions to the mootness doctrine
 asserted by Chandler and Rogers -- the public interest exception
 and the exception for issues capable of repetition yet evading
 review -- do not apply. The issues on which Chandler and Rogers
 seek declaratory judgment turn on the particular facts of this
 case, and we conclude that rendering a decision in this moot case
 is not warranted. We therefore affirm the Circuit Court's
 decision to grant the State's motion for summary judgment to the
 extent that the Circuit Court ruled that Chandler's and Rogers's
 claims against the State were moot, and we do not reach the
 merits of Chandler's and Rogers's requests for declaratory
 relief. Because the case is moot, we also do not reach Chandler
 and Rogers's claim that the Circuit Court erred in denying their
 motion to amend or supplement their Third-Party Complaints.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
A.
 
Before we can consider the substantive merits of
 
Chandler's and Rogers's requests for declaratory judgment, we
 
must determine whether the controversy in this case is moot.
 
A case is moot if it has lost its character as a
 
present, live controversy of the kind that must exist if
courts are to avoid advisory opinions on abstract
propositions of law. The rule is one of the prudential
rules of judicial self-governance founded in concern about
the proper -- and properly limited -- role of the courts in
a democratic society. We have said the suit must remain
 alive throughout the course of litigation to the moment of
final appellate disposition to escape the mootness bar.
 
Queen Emma Foundation v. Tatibouet, 123 Hawai 'i 500, 506-07, 236 
P.3d 1236, 1242-43 (App. 2010) (formatting altered; citation
 
omitted).
 
The mootness doctrine is said to encompass the
circumstances that destroy the justiciability of a suit
previously suitable for determination. Put another way, the
suit must remain alive throughout the course of litigation
to the moment of final appellate disposition. . . .
 
. . . . 

The duty of this court, as of every other judicial
tribunal, is to decide actual controversies by a judgment
which can be carried into effect, and not to give opinions
upon moot questions or abstract propositions, or to declare
principles or rules of law which cannot affect the matter in
issue in the case before it.
 
Wong v. Board of Regents, University of Hawaii, 62 Haw. 391,
 
394–95, 616 P.2d 201, 203–04 (1980).
 
B.
 
This case is moot because the actual, live controversy
 
that formed the basis for this case has been resolved by
 settlement. Chandler and Rogers filed claims for declaratory and
 injunctive relief against Brescia and the State to challenge a
 burial treatment plan that the State had approved for Brescia's
 Property and to enjoin Brescia from constructing his residence
 until a burial treatment plan was properly approved. The
 settlement between Brescia, Chandler, and Rogers, resolved this 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
controversy. As a result of the settlement, Chandler and Rogers
 
gave up any right or claim they had to challenge the treatment
 the burials that had been discovered on Brescia's Property, the
 approval of the burial treatment plan for Brescia's Property, or
 the construction of his residence.
 
III.
 
Chandler and Rogers, however, argue that we should
 
decide the issues relating to their claims for declaratory relief
 against the State based on two exceptions to the mootness
 doctrine: (1) the public interest exception; and (2) the
 exception for issues capable of repetition yet evading review.
 
A.
 
When analyzing the public interest exception to the 
mootness doctrine, we look to "(1) the public or private nature of the question presented, (2) the desirability of an authoritative determination for future guidance of public officers, and (3) the likelihood of future recurrence of the question." Kaleikini v. Thielen, 124 Hawai
'i 1, 13, 237 P.3d 
1067, 1079 (2010). 
Chandler and Rogers contend that the State
 
misinterpreted the phrase "preservation in place" as used in HRS
 § 6E-43 in approving a burial treatment plan for Brescia's
 Property that permitted him to build on top of burials. They
 request a declaratory judgment that "preservation in place"
 should be interpreted to preclude the construction of any
 "building on top of burials." 
The State made its decision to approve a burial
 
treatment plan that permitted Bresica's residence to be built
 over certain burials based on the specific facts and
 circumstances presented in this case. Although the treatment of
 historic Native Hawaiian burials is an issue of public
 importance, the State's determination of an appropriate burial
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
treatment or preservation plan11 is a decision made in
 
consultation with parties with an interest in the particular plan
 
and based on facts peculiar to that case, and thus must be done
 on a case-by-case basis. We conclude that it would not be
 desirable or in furtherance of the public interest to issue a
 declaratory judgment based on facts peculiar to this case that
 would bind and restrict the State's decision-making in all future
 cases.
 
1.
 
HRS § 6E-43, which contains the "preservation in place"
 
language, establishes procedures to be followed where human
 skeletal remains, which appear to be over fifty years old, are
 discovered or are known to be buried at any site other than a
 known, maintained, actively used cemetery. HRS § 6E-43 provides
 in pertinent part:
 
(b) All burial sites are significant and shall be
preserved in place until compliance with this section is
met, except as provided in section 6E-43.6 [(pertaining to
inadvertent discovery of burial sites)]. The appropriate
island burial council shall determine whether preservation
in place or relocation of previously identified native
Hawaiian burial sites is warranted, following criteria which
shall include recognition that burial sites of high
preservation value, such as areas with a concentration of
skeletal remains, or prehistoric or historic burials
associated with important individuals and events, or areas
that are within a context of historic properties, or have
known lineal descendants, shall receive greater
consideration for preservation in place. . . . A council's
 
11HAR § 13-300-2 defines the terms "burial treatment plan"
and "preservation plan" as follows:
 
"Burial treatment plan" means a plan that meets all
necessary requirements as set forth in this chapter and which
proposes treatment of burial sites, including preservation in
place or relocation, submitted to the department or council,
whichever is appropriate, for a determination.
 
. . . .
 
"Preservation plan" means the form of mitigation that sets
forth appropriate treatment of historic properties, burial sites,
or human skeletal remains which are to be preserved in place.
 
The burial treatment plan ultimately approved by the State for Brescia's
Property included a preservation plan for the burials discovered on the
Property.
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
determination shall be rendered within forty-five days of
referral by the department unless otherwise extended by
agreement between the landowner and the department.
 
(c) Council determinations may be administratively
appealed to a panel composed of three council chairpersons
and three members from the board of land and natural
 resources as a contested case pursuant to chapter 91. In
 addition to the six members, the chairperson of the board of
land and natural resources shall preside over the contested
case and vote only in the event of a tie.
 
(d) Within ninety days following the final
determination, a preservation or mitigation plan shall be
approved by the department in consultation with any lineal
descendants, the respective council, other appropriate
Hawaiian organizations, and any affected property owner.
 
Administrative rules promulgated by DLNR to implement
 
HRS § 6E-43 provide that the applicable island burial council
 
"shall render a determination to preserve in place or relocate
 previously identified Native Hawaiian burial sites in accordance
 with [HAR] section 13-300-38 within forty-five days of referral
 by the department, unless otherwise extended by agreement between
 the landowner and the department." HAR § 13-300-33(f) (1996). 
HAR § 13-300-38 (1996), in turn, provides that where no motion
 for reconsideration or administrative appeal of the council's
 determination to preserve in place is filed and the council's
 determination is accepted as final,
 
the applicant shall develop the burial site component of the
preservation plan consisting of the requirements of section
13-300-33(b)(3)(A) [ 12
] and any accepted recommendations
12HAR § 13-300-33(b)(3)(A) (1996) provides: 
(b) The applicant shall submit a request to preserve in
place or relocate a Native Hawaiian burial site to the department
in the form of a burial treatment plan. The department shall
assure that the burial treatment plan includes the following
information prior to any council determination:
 
. . . .
 
(3)	 A description of proposed treatment of all burial
sites including a statement of preservation in place
or relocation:
 
(A)	 In the event preservation in place is proposed,
statements describing:
 
(i)	 
Short term measures to immediately protect

(continued...)
 
18

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
relating to burial site treatment. Within ninety days of
the council determination, the department shall approve the
plan following consultation with the applicant, any known
lineal descendants, the appropriate council, and any
appropriate Hawaiian organizations.
 
HAR § 13-300-38(e).
 
Accordingly, the statute and applicable regulations
 
establish a process by which the burial council is responsible
 
for determining whether a previously identified historic Native
 Hawaiian burial site will be preserved in place or relocated,
 with the council's determination subject to an administrative
 appeal, and DLNR is responsible, where the council's
 determination to preserve in place is accepted as final, for
 approving a preservation plan, following consultation with any
 lineal descendants, the council, other appropriate Hawaiian
 organizations, and any affected property owner. 
2.
 
As the statute and regulations make clear, DLNR's
 
decision on whether to approve a preservation plan, after the
 council's determination to preserve in place is accepted as
 final, should be made on a case-by-case basis. In other words,
 whether DLNR's approval of a plan complies with the council's
 final determination to "preserve in place" depends on the
 circumstances, the particular features of the plan, and the input
 received from those who have an interest in the plan. In
 particular, in approving a preservation plan, DLNR is required to
 consult with lineal descendants, the council, other appropriate
 Hawaiian organizations, and any affected property owner. It is
 impossible to know in advance what the circumstances of a case
 
12(...continued)
 
all burial sites including, but not
limited to, fencing, buffers, and site
restoration; and
 
(ii)	 Long term measures to properly manage and
protect all burial sites including, but
not limited to, buffers, landscaping, and
access by known lineal or cultural
descendants[.]
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
will be, what a particular preservation plan will provide, and
 
what those who are consulted by DLNR will recommend regarding the
 proposed preservation measures. For example, the rules provide
 that "[t]he council shall give preference for proper treatment of
 previously identified Native Hawaiian skeletal remains and any
 burial goods to known lineal descendants." HAR 
§ 13-300-35(f) (1996). Depending on the circumstances and the
 terms of the particular preservation plan, including features
 such as the vertical and horizontal clearances and buffers
 between the building and the burials and the means chosen to
 manage, provide access to, and protect the burials, known lineal
 descendants may decide to support a plan that authorizes
 construction over burials.
 
As the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has stated, a declaratory 
judgment is a discretionary equitable remedy, which a court should be reluctant to grant, especially where governmental action is involved, unless the need for an equitable remedy is clear: 
"
A declaratory judgment, like other forms of equitable relief,
should be granted only as a matter of judicial discretion,
exercised in the public interest. It is always the duty of a
court of equity to strike a proper balance between the needs of
the plaintiff and the consequences of giving the desired relief.
Especially where governmental action is involved, courts should
not intervene unless the need for equitable relief is clear, not
remote or speculative."
 
Application of Air Terminal Services, Inc., 47 Haw. 499, 531, 393
 
P.2d 60, 78 (1964) (formatting altered) (quoting Eccels v.
 Peoples Bank of Lakewood Village, 333 U.S. 426, 431 (1948).
 
3.
 
The State's decision to approve the burial treatment
 
plan, including its preservation plan component, for Bresica's
 Property turned on the particular facts applicable to this case. 
Regardless of the propriety of the State's decision in Brescia's
 case, it would not serve the public interest to resolve in this
 case Chandler and Rogers's request for a declaratory judgment
 interpreting "preservation in place" to preclude the construction
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of any building over burials that would bind all future cases. 
As noted, it is difficult to predict how the issue of a
 preservation plan's compliance with the council's determination 
to preserve in place will arise in future cases. It is also
 difficult if not impossible to predict how particular
 preservation plans will be viewed in future cases by lineal
 descendants, the applicable burial council, and others who have
 an interest in the plan. Nevertheless, Chandler and Rogers are
 seeking a declaratory judgment in this case to interpret the
 statutory language in a manner that would foreclose DLNR, as well
 as the burial councils, from considering certain preservation
 plan options, an interpretation that would bind all parties in
 future cases. We conclude that a better approach would be to
 permit those with an interest in a particular burial treatment or
 preservation plan for a particular property to be able to fully
 participate and provide input to DLNR and the burial councils on
 whether the plan is appropriate and satisfies the preservation in
 place determination.
 
In addition, Chandler and Rogers fail to establish the
 
need for imposing such a blanket limitation on the "preservation
 in place" language through a declaratory judgment. If the
 State's approval of a preservation plan would violate HRS Chapter
 6E requirements, HRS § 6E-13 permits "any person" to maintain an
 action for a restraining order or injunctive relief against the
 State or any person upon a showing of irreparable injury. HRS §
 6E-13(b).
 
For these reasons, we conclude that the public interest
 
exception to the mootness doctrine is inapplicable. We conclude
 that the declaratory judgment sought by Chandler and Rogers is
 not necessary or desirable for the future guidance of public
 officers. Rather, given the case-specific circumstances that
 affect the State's decision to approve a preservation plan, the
 public interest would be better served if the State's decision
 was made, and compliance with the "preservation in place"
 determination was evaluated and reviewed, on a case-by-case
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
basis.
 
B.
 
We also conclude that the public interest exception
 
does not apply to Chandler and Rogers's claim for declaratory
 
judgment that in approving the burial treatment plan for
 Brescia's Property, the State failed to ensure a meaningful and
 informed decision-making process under HRS Chapter 6E. In
 particular, Chandler and Rogers seek declaratory judgment that
 the State: (1) failed to ensure that the burial treatment plan
 contained complete and accurate information about the location of
 the burials in relation to the proposed construction; (2) failed
 to meaningfully consult with the KNIBC in approving the burial
 treatment plan; and (3) failed to take steps to halt the
 construction until a burial treatment plan was approved.
 
In seeking declaratory relief, Chandler and Rogers do
 
not contend that the State's duties, responsibilities, and powers 
under the applicable statutes and rules are ambiguous or that the
 applicable law fails to provide clear guidance. Indeed, they
 argue that the State's duties, responsibilities, and powers under
 the applicable law is clear.
13 Instead of seeking clarification
 
of the law, Chandler and Rogers seek a declaratory judgment that
 the State violated its obligations under the applicable statutes 
13For example, in support of their claim for declaratory relief that the
State failed to ensure that the burial treatment plan contained complete
information, Chandler and Rogers cite HAR § 13-300-33(b)(4) (1996), which
provides that the State (namely, DLNR) "shall assure that the burial treatment
plan includes . . . [m]aps clearly indicating the location of all identified
Native Hawaiian burial sites located at the property," including their spacial
relationship to any proposed construction. With respect to Chandler and
Rogers's claim that the State failed to meaningfully consult with the KNIBC,
they cite HRS § 6E-43(d) and HAR § 13-300-38(e), which provide that the State
shall approve a preservation plan "in consultation with" or "following
consultation with" any lineal descendants, the respective council, other
appropriate Hawaiian organizations, and any affected property owner. The
 State does not dispute that it has an obligation to consult in good faith
under these provisions. With respect to their claim that the State failed to
halt construction, Chandler and Rogers cite statutory provisions that clearly
give the State (1) the power to order a landowner to cease and desist under
certain circumstances or to impose penalties on a landowner for violating HRS
Chapter 6E, see HRS §§ 6E-10.5(b), -11 (2009), and (2) the authority to
acquire historic or cultural properties by purchase, condemnation, or land
exchange. See HRS § 6E-3(2) (2009). 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and rules in approving the burial treatment plan for Brescia's
 
Property.
 
We conclude that the declaratory judgment requested by
 
Chandler and Rogers would not serve to provide necessary or
 desirable future guidance for public officials. The statutory
 and regulatory provisions cited by Chandler and Rogers in support
 of their request for declaratory judgment are clear. There is no
 need for a declaratory judgment to interpret those provisions. 
The question of whether the State violated its obligations under
 the law in approving the burial treatment plan for Brescia's
 Property is moot -- Bresica has completed construction of his
 residence and Chandler and Rogers have agreed not to challenge
 the construction or seek to invalidate the burial treatment plan. 
In addition, the question of whether the State violated its
 obligations under the law turn on the particular facts of this
 case, and because no trial was held in this case, many of the
 underlying facts have not been determined by a trier of fact. 
Thus, to the extent that Chandler and Rogers are requesting that
 we decide their request for declaratory judgment on appeal, we
 conclude that the record is insufficient to determine relief. 
Under these circumstances, we conclude that the public interest
 exception to the mootness doctrine does not apply.
 
C.
 
Chandler and Rogers rely on Kaleikini v. Thielen, 124 
Hawai
'i 1, 237 P.3d 1067, in support of their contention that we 
should apply the public interest exception to the mootness doctrine. However, Kaleikini is clearly distinguishable. 
1. 
In Kaliekini, the O
'ahu Island Burial Council (OIBC) 
had approved a burial treatment plan submitted by the developer, which provided for the disinterment of Native Hawaiian burial remains or "iwi" discovered at the developer's project site. Id. 
at 4, 237 P.3d at 1070. Kaleikini's request for a contested case hearing on the OIBC's decision was denied by DLNR. Id. 
Kaleikini sought judicial review of the denial of her request for 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a contested case hearing (contested case action), but the circuit
 
court, based on its interpretation of existing case law, ruled
 that it lacked jurisdiction over Kaleikini's contested case
 action because no contested case hearing had been held. Id. at
 
4-5, 8, 237 P.3d at 1070-71, 1074. 
In the meantime, Kaleikini filed a separate action in
 
the circuit court seeking declaratory and injunctive relief
 (declaratory/injunctive relief action) to prevent the removal of
 the iwi from the project area. Id. at 7, 237 P.3d at 1073. 
While Kaleikini's appeal of the circuit court's decision in the
 contested case action was pending in the appellate courts, the
 parties reached a partial settlement in the
 declaratory/injunctive relief action regarding the relocation and
 the reinterment of the burials. Id. at 10-12, 237 P.3d at 1076­
78. The parties, however, did not settle Kaleikini's claim in
 
the declaratory/injunctive relief action that DLNR's denial of
 her request for a contested case hearing was improper, and the
 circuit court ruled against her on that claim. Id. at 9-10, 237
 
P.3d at 1075-76. Kaleikini filed appeals in both actions, but
 the appeal in the declaratory/injunctive relief action was stayed
 due to the developer's filing for bankruptcy. Id. at 10 n.15,
 
237 P.3d at 1076 n.15.
 
In the contested case action, the supreme court held
 
that the question presented -- whether judicial review is
 available for an agency's denial of a person's request to
 participate in a contested case hearing relating to the removal
 of Native Hawaiian burial sites -- was a question of great
 public importance that fell within the public interest exception
 to the mootness doctrine. Id. at 13, 237 P.3d at 1079. 
Evaluating the first and third prongs of the public interest
 exception, the supreme court found (1) that the question
 presented was public in nature, citing the public interest in the
 proper disposition and treatment of Native Hawaiian and other
 burials; and (2) that the likelihood of the future recurrence of
 the issue appeared high because iwi would probably continue to be
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unearthed at future construction projects. Id. With respect to
 
the second prong, the supreme court found that it would be
 
desirable for the supreme court to decide the question to provide
 authoritative future guidance for public officials. Id. In
 
support of this finding, the supreme court referred to the
 circuit court's statements that existing case law created
 confusion over whether an agency's denial of a contested case
 hearing could ever be subject to judicial review and that there
 was a need for an authoritative answer to resolve the confusion. 
Id. 
2. 
Unlike in this case, the question in Kaleikini 
directly concerned the availability of judicial review and the
 jurisdiction of the courts -- fundamental questions of judicial
 process. The supreme court in Kaleikini emphasized the need to
 resolve the issue of whether the denial of a contested case
 hearing precluded judicial review given the confusion surrounding
 that issue as expressed by the circuit court. Here, Chandler and
 Rogers's requests for declaratory judgment are not directed at
 securing judicial review or resolving confusion regarding the
 jurisdiction of the courts. Unlike Kaleikini, Chandler and
 Rogers were not denied the opportunity to obtain judicial review
 of their claims. 
Moreover, the question of the availability of judicial
 
review decided by the supreme court in Kaleikini did not turn on
 the underlying facts of the case. Here, Chandler and Rogers's
 requests for declaratory judgment depend upon and are intertwined
 with the particular facts of this case. We therefore conclude
 that Kaleikini is distinguishable and does not control this case. 
IV.
 
We also conclude that the exception to the mootness
 
doctrine for issues capable of repetition yet evading review does
 not apply. As noted, HRS § 6E-13(b) provides that "any person"
 may maintain an action "for restraining orders or injunctive 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
relief against the State, its political subdivisions, or any
 
person upon a showing of irreparable injury, for the protection
 of an historic property or a burial site and the public trust
 therein from unauthorized or improper demolition, alteration, or
 transfer of the property or burial site." Accordingly, HRS § 6E­13(b) provides a means by which individuals may obtain judicial
 review of, and injunctive relief to prevent, alleged violations
 of HRS Chapter 6E. Indeed, Chandler and Rogers utilized HRS §6E­13(b) to obtain judicial review of the State's actions in the
 Circuit Court, and they could have obtained appellate review had
 they not chosen to settle their dispute with Brescia and thereby
 render their case moot. Accordingly, the issues raised by
 Chandler and Rogers do not fall into the category of issues that
 would evade review in future cases.
 
V.
 
Because we affirm the Circuit Court's decision to
 
dismiss Chandler and Rogers' claims for declaratory judgment
 against the State on mootness grounds,
14 we need not address
 
their challenges on appeal to: (1) the other grounds the Circuit
 Court relied on in granting the State's motion for summary
 judgment; (2) the Circuit Court's grant of the State's
 alternative motion for partial summary judgment; and (3) the
 Circuit Court's denial of their motions for summary judgment. We
 also need not address their challenge to the Circuit Court's
 denial of their motion to amend or supplement their Third-Party
 Complaints with events that took place after the filing of the
 original Third-Party Complaints. Because the settlement rendered
 the case moot, supplementing the pleadings would not have served
 any useful purpose.
 
14Although the Circuit Court cited its determination that the case had
become moot as one of its grounds for granting summary judgment, as previously
noted, the determination of mootness is not a decision on the merits, but
rather results in the dismissal of the claims as nonjusticiable. 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CONCLUSION
 Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court's 
Judgment to the extent that it dismissed Chandler's and Rogers's 
claims against the State on mootness grounds. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 22, 2015. 
On the briefs:

 
Alan T. Murakami 
Camille K. Kalama Sharla Manley(Native Hawaiian LegalCorporation)for Third-Party Plaintiffs-Appellants Chief Judge 
Associate Judge 
Pamela K. Matsukawa 
Donna H. Kalama Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Third-Party Defendants-Appellees Associate Judge 
27

 