  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000596
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE INTEREST OF AA
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
HILO DIVISION
 
(FC-S NO. 11-0042)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Mother-Appellant (Mother) appeals from the Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights of Mother, filed on February 26,
 
2014, in the Family Court of the Third Circuit (family court),1
 
which terminated Mother's parental rights to her child, AA. 
On appeal, Mother contends (1) the family court erred 
by failing to appoint counsel for Mother when the family court granted Petitioner-Appellee State of Hawai
'i, Department of Human 
Services (DHS) temporary custody of AA; (2) the family court erred by terminating Mother's parental rights less than two months prior to her release from incarceration; (3) DHS failed to prove that Mother would not be able to provide a safe family home within a reasonable period of time; and (4) the family court erred by terminating Mother's parental rights instead of requiring DHS to make a good faith effort at evaluating guardianship for AA. 
1
 The Honorable Anthony K. Bartholomew presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Mother's points of error as follows:
(1) Mother cites to In re T.M., 131 Hawai
'i 419, 319 
P.3d 338 (2014), and contends that the family court erred by
 failing to appoint counsel for Mother after the family court
 granted DHS' Petition for Temporary Foster Custody. 
In In re T.M., the Supreme Court held that
 
in light of the constitutionally protected liberty interest
at stake in a termination of parental rights proceeding, wehold that indigent parents are guaranteed the right tocourt-appointed counsel in termination proceedings under thedue process clause in article I, section 5 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution. We direct that upon the filing date of thisopinion, trial courts must appoint counsel for indigentparents upon the granting of a petition to DHS for temporaryfoster custody of their children. 
Id. at 436, 319 P.3d at 355 (footnotes omitted). 
In re T.M. was issued by the supreme court on
 
January 6, 2014. However, Mother had court-appointed counsel
 
since October 4, 2011, long before In re T.M. was issued. 
Moreover, Mother's reliance on In re T.M. to assert that she
 should have been appointed counsel as soon as the family court
 ordered temporary foster custody of AA is misplaced, because this
 aspect of the ruling in In re T.M. was expressly prospective. 
Id.
 
Moreover, although Mother was advised by the family
 
court in this case that she was entitled to an attorney, and that
 an attorney would be appointed if she could not afford one,
 Mother chose to delay submitting her application for appointment
 of counsel. The right to appointed counsel applies to indigent
 parents. Id. Mother was informed on June 30, 2011, at the first
 
hearing on the Petition for Temporary Foster Custody, that she
 was entitled to court-appointed counsel if she could not afford
 one, that she needed to complete an application, and that if she
 applied that day and qualified, an attorney would be appointed
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that day. Mother stated that she would continue with the
 
proceeding without counsel.
 
Upon continuation of the Temporary Foster Custody
 
hearing on July 7, 2011, the family court noted that Mother had
 not yet applied for court-appointed counsel, but Mother stated
 that she was still discussing with her grandfather whether he
 would like to help her retain counsel and that she was
 comfortable in the courtroom so it was okay. Thus, Mother again
 opted to continue without court-appointed counsel.
 
Mother did not complete an application for court-
appointed counsel until September 29, 2011, after DHS was granted
 temporary foster custody. Her request was approved and filed
 shortly thereafter on October 3, 2011 and an Order Appointing
 Counsel for Mother was filed on October 4, 2011. Thus, Mother
 was not deemed indigent until October 3, 2011, after she
 submitted her request for court-appointed counsel. Appointed
 counsel was thereafter approved forthwith.
 
Thus, the family court advised Mother of her right to
 
court-appointed counsel and appointed counsel immediately upon
 Mother's submission of her application and the determination that
 she was indigent. Mother's first point of error is without
 merit.
 
(2) and (3) There was clear and convincing evidence
 
that it was not reasonably foreseeable that Mother would become
 willing and able to provide a safe family home for AA, even with
 the assistance of a service plan, within a reasonable period of
 time, which shall not exceed two years from the date AA entered
 foster care. Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 587A-33(a)(2)
 (Supp. 2014).
 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion
in making its decisions and those decision[s] will not be
set aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. 
Thus, we will not disturb the family court's decisions on
appeal unless the family court disregarded rules or
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment
of a party litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the
bounds of reason.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(quoting In re Doe, 95 Hawai 'i 183, 189-90, 20 P.3d 616, 622-23 
(2001)). 
DHS filed a petition for Temporary Foster Custody when
 
AA was seven (7) days old due to Mother testing positive for
 
amphetamines at AA's birth and AA testing positive for exposure
 to methamphetamine. AA entered foster care on July 7, 2011. 
Mother's parental rights were terminated on February 6, 2014,
 approximately two years and seven months after AA entered foster
 care.
 
After this case was initiated and while it was pending,
 
Mother was arrested on September 26, 2011 for attempted
 methamphetamine trafficking in the 1st degree. Mother was
 convicted of attempted promoting a dangerous drug and was
 incarcerated for two years beginning on April 17, 2012. Carlene
 Greenlee (Greenlee), a DHS social worker, testified that after
 Mother's release from incarceration in April 2014, she would
 still need to complete substance abuse treatment, show that she
 could sustain what she learned in substance abuse treatment for a
 period of time, maintain sobriety for at least six months, and
 show a sense of stability in her living situation, including
 employment and involvement in the community. Greenlee estimated
 that with that additional six months, the case would need to be
 open for a total of three and a half to four years. 
At the time that Mother's parental rights were 
terminated, DHS provided clear and convincing evidence that it was not foreseeable that Mother could provide a safe family home within a reasonable period of time, even with the assistance of a service plan, not to exceed two years from the date AA entered foster care. Mother contends that, under In re Doe, 100 Hawai
'i 
335, 345, 60 P.3d 285, 295 (2002), DHS should have waited until Mother was released from prison to allow her to meaningfully participate in services. However, In re Doe also recognizes that incarceration of a parent "[can] be considered along with other factors and circumstances impacting the ability of the parent to 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
remedy conditions of abuse and neglect." Id. (internal quotation
 
marks omitted).
 
Given the circumstances in this case, the family court
 
did not abuse its discretion by terminating Mother's parental
 
rights prior to her release from incarceration.
(4) Mother contends the family court erred by
 
proceeding with a termination of parental rights hearing instead
 of requiring that DHS make a good faith effort to provide a
 guardianship over AA without termination of Mother's parental
 rights. 
Mother does not cite any statute or rule that mandates
 
DHS or the family court to consider guardianship without
 termination of parental rights when seeking to terminate parental
 rights. Rather, a permanent plan shall state whether adoption,
 legal guardianship, or permanent custody is the goal. HRS
 § 587A-32(a)(1) (Supp. 2014). The permanent plan shall document
 "[a] compelling reason why legal guardianship or permanent
 custody is in the child's best interests if adoption is not the
 goal[.]" HRS § 587A-32(a)(3)(A) (Supp. 2014). The family court
 shall determine if the permanent plan is in the best interests of
 the child and in reaching this determination shall "[p]resume
 that it is in the best interests of the child to be promptly and
 permanently placed with responsible and competent substitute
 parents and family in a safe and secure home[.]" HRS § 587A­33(a)(3)(A) (Supp. 2014). DHS stated that adoption was in the
 best interest of AA and the evidence presented supported DHS'
 position. 
Nonetheless, DHS did consider a guardianship for AA. 
On December 9, 2013, the family court entered an "Order Re:
 Chapter 587A, H.R.S., as Amended," which stated that the
 termination of parental rights trial was continued to "allow for
 a possible resolution by way of legal guardianship without
 termination of parental rights with the prospective guardian
 being the current resource parent, paternal Aunt[,]" and "[a]t
 the hearing on January 16, 2014, the parties either proceed with
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the termination of parental rights hearing or go forward with the
 
legal guardianship without termination of parental rights[.]" 
Mother testified that guardianship with and without termination
 of Mother's parental rights was explained to Paternal Aunt at an
 Ohana Conference. However, when the parties appeared for the
 termination of parental rights hearing, DHS reported that
 Paternal Aunt refused an arrangement of guardianship without
 termination of Mother's parental rights. Mother in turn, did not
 agree to a guardianship that would involve termination of her
 parental rights and Mother thus advised the family court that she
 was ready to proceed with the hearing to determine whether her
 parental rights would be terminated. Thus, although not
 required, DHS did consider a guardianship without termination of
 Mother's parental rights, but the arrangement was not acceptable
 to Paternal Aunt with whom AA was placed.
 
The family court did not err by proceeding with a
 
termination of parental rights hearing instead of requiring that
 DHS make a good faith effort to provide a guardianship without
 termination of Mother's parental rights.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights of Mother, filed on February 26,
 2014, in the Family Court of the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 6, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Rebecca A. Copeland
(Law Office of Rebecca A. Copeland)for Mother-Appellant 
Presiding Judge 
Mary Anne MagnierDiana M. Mellon-LaceyDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Petitioner-AppelleeDepartment of Human Services 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6

 