NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000403
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
AUKUSITINO ATONIO, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 15-1-0849)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Hiraoka, JJ.)
I.  Introduction
Defendant-Appellant Aukusitino Atonio ( Atonio) appeals
from the "Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence"
(Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
(Circuit Court)  on April 20, 2016.  Atonio was charged via an
Indictment with two counts of Sexual Assault in the Third Degree,
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 707-732(1)(c)
(2014).   At trial, Atonio called his children, C.A. and T, to21
1  The Honorable Karen S. S. Ahn presided.
2  HRS § 707-732(1)(c) provides:
§707-732  Sexual assault in the third degree.   (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the third
degree if:
. . . 
(c) The person knowingly engages in sexual contact
with a person who is at least fourteen years old
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
testify on his behalf, and then testified in his own defense,
denying that he committed the offenses charged.  Following
closing arguments, a jury convicted Atonio on both counts. 
On appeal, Atonio raises three points of error:
1.  The trial court plainly erred when it allowed the
prosecutor to use Atonio's presence throughout the trial to
attack the credibility of T and C.A's testimonies even when
there was no evidence that Atonio used his presence to shape
their testimony.
. . . .
2.  The prosecutor's statements during closing argument
constituted prosecutorial misconduct that deprived Atonio of
his constitutional rights to due process and a fair trial.
. . . .
3.  The trial court committed plain error by failing to
instruct the jury that Atonio has a constitutional right to
be present throughout his trial and the right to call
witnesses favorable to his case and that the jury must not
draw any unfavorable inference regarding the credibility of
his witnesses solely on the basis that he was present
throughout the trial.
We note that Atonio references selected portions of the
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i's (the State's) closing
argument.  After the State's initial closing argument, defense
counsel requested a mistrial or alternatively asked the Circuit
Court to strike the closing argument because the prosecutor had
argued that the defense witnesses "colluded their stories" and
because the prosecutor had made a reference to Atonio being in
the courtroom during the trial.  Thus, it appears the defense did
object to the closing arguments challenged on appeal.
The Circuit Court denied Atonio's requests for mistrial
or to strike the State's closing argument, noting that the
prosecutor had not tied Atonio's presence in court to anything. 
Further, the circuit court sua sponte re-read jury instruction
no. 15 to the jury, stating in relevant part: "defendant has a
(...continued)
but less than sixteen years old or causes the
minor to have sexual contact with the person;
provided that:
(i)The person is not less than five years
older than the minor; and
(ii)The person is not legally married to the
minor[.]
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
constitutional right to be present throughout this trial and
while other witnesses testify.  You must not draw any unfavorable
inference regarding the credibility of the defendant's testimony
on the basis that he was present during trial."
Based on our review of the record, we conclude there
was no prosecutorial misconduct and affirm the Judgment against
Atonio.
II.  Background
The following facts are not in dispute: the Complaining
Witness ( CW), who was 14 years old at the time of the incident,
played volleyball on a youth team coached by Atonio.  Atonio's
daughter, C.A., who was sixteen at the time of the incident, also
played on the team.  Atonio's son, T, who was 11 years old at the
time of the incident, sometimes came to practice and helped his
father by collecting balls and the like.  Atonio, C.A., and T
lived together at the time of the incident and the trial.  The
Atonios would often give the CW a ride home from practice in
Atonio's truck, with C.A. and Atonio usually sitting in the front
seats, and T and the CW usually sitting in the back seats.  On
May 8, 2015, the team had practice.  C.A. did not come to
practice that day,  but Atonio, T, and the CW did.  On that day,
the CW rode her bike to practice, but the chain broke on the way. 
After practice, Atonio gave the CW a ride home, putting the CW's
bike in the bed of his truck.  Atonio and the CW sat in the front
seats of Atonio's truck, and T sat in the back.  The drive from
the volleyball court where the team practiced to the CW's house
was about five minutes. 
The CW testified to the following: on May 8, 2015,
while Atonio was putting her bike in his truck bed, he said "[d]o
you promise not to tell anyone what we say?" and she agreed.  The
CW and Atonio got in the truck before T.  Atonio told the CW to
sit in the front seat, and she complied.  At this time, Atonio
asked to hold her hand, she said "okay[,]" and he clasped her
hand.  Then, T got into the truck, and Atonio let go of the CW's
hand.  T sat in the back seat behind the CW.  After some
conversation, Atonio touched the CW's hand again, this time
without asking.  Next, Atonio moved his hand to the CW's thigh
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and started to stroke it, eventually touching the CW's pelvic
area.  The CW testified that this made her "[v]ery
uncomfortable."  Atonio then moved his hand along the left side
of the CW's torso and touched the CW's breast.  The CW did not
give Atonio permission to touch her breast.  From the time they
left practice until they got to the CW's house, Atonio's hand
went from the CW's thigh to her breast about five times.  Once
they reached the CW's house, Atonio retrieved the CW's bike from
the truck bed and told the CW, "[s]o you promise you won't tell
anyone what we say?"  The CW agreed.  Atonio then hugged the CW
and cupped her buttocks with his hand.  Upon entering the house,
the CW told her father what happened.  The police were called and
later that night the CW identified Atonio as the person who
touched her. 
Honolulu Police Department (HPD ) Sergeant Jason Dela
Cruz (Sergeant Dela Cruz), a State witness, testified that during
booking procedures, Atonio said, without any prompting, "I'm so
sorry.  I never mean for do that."   3
T testified for the defense as follows: he normally
goes to volleyball practices to assist Atonio.  T testified that
the CW rides home with his family "a lot[,]" with his father and
C.A. in the front and he and the CW in the back seats of the
truck.  T testified that, on the date of the incident, he knew it
was time to leave practice because Atonio called to him.  At this
time, Atonio and the CW were already seated in the front of the
truck.  T sat behind the CW.  T testified that on the ride home,
he was moving around in the back seat because he was
"uncomfortable" and "wanted to talk to [Atonio and the CW]."  T
testified that he could see Atonio from the back seat during
"most of the ride."  T testified that when they reached the CW's
house, both he and Atonio retrieved the CW's bike, as usual.  T
testified that Atonio never talked to him about what happened in
the car that night. 
3  The Circuit Court inquired as to what Sergeant Dela Cruz was doing or
saying just before Atonio made the statement, and Sergeant Dela Cruz testified
he did not ask Atonio anything or say anything while he was taking Atonio's
fingerprints. 
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
C.A. testified for the defense as follows: the CW had
only one friend on the volleyball team, and that the CW did not
seem to like volleyball.  C.A. also testified that, when the
Atonios give the CW a ride home, C.A. and Atonio sit in the front
of the truck, with T and the CW in the back, with T usually
"moving around" and "[t]alking."  C.A. also testified that once
the CW said she did not have food at home, so they stopped for
food.  C.A. testified that she was not at practice on the date of
the incident because she had May Day at school. 
Atonio testified to the following: on the date of the
incident, he insisted that the CW ride home with him, because it
was raining.  He told the CW to sit in the front seat of his
truck because she is older than T and he "wanted to talk to her." 
On the ride home, Atonio talked to the CW about her attitude
during practice and games, told her not to listen to her friend
on the team, and during the ride T was "actively participating in
the conversation" and leaning forward between the front seats to
talk.  Atonio told the CW not to talk to anybody about what he
said, because it "might cause problems with the team."  At the
CW's house, Atonio and T took the CW's bike out of the back of
the truck.  After Atonio put the CW's bike in her garage, the CW
waved and went in the house.  According to Atonio the CW looked
"[n]ormal" at this time.  Atonio testified that he did not ask to
hold the CW's hand, hold the CW's hand, hug the CW, or touch the
CW's breast, thigh, or buttock.  Regarding his statement at the
police station, Atonio admitted to telling a police officer "I'm
sorry.  I never mean for do that."  He testified that this
statement was prompted by "the shame for my -- my wife and my
kids" because "[e]verybody in my neighborhood saw me being
arrested.  And this never happened before, and I don't know what
happened." 
III.  Standard of Review
"[Appellate courts] evaluate[ ] claims of improper
statements by prosecutors by first determining whether the
statements are improper, and then determining whether the
misconduct is harmless."  State v. Tuua, 125 Hawai#i 10, 14, 250
P.3d 273, 277 (2011) (citation omitted); see also State v.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Schnabel, 127 Hawai#i 432, 452-53, 279 P.3d 1237, 1257-58 (2012). 
Appellate courts consider the following factors when determining
whether a prosecutor's statements are harmless: "(1) the nature
of the conduct; (2) the promptness of a curative instruction; and
(3) the strength or weakness of the evidence against the
defendant."  State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai# i 405, 412, 984 P.2d 1231,
1238 (1999) (quoting State v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai#i 325, 329 n.6,
966 P.2d 637, 641 n.6 (1998) (citation omitted)).  If the State's
prosecutorial misconduct was not harmless, appellate courts must
then determine whether the double jeopardy clause of the Hawaii
Constitution bars reprosecution of the defendant.  Id. at 416,
984 P.2d at 1242.
IV.  Discussion 
Atonio quotes the following excerpts from the State's
closing argument as establishing prosecutorial misconduct:
[THE STATE]:  Power and control.  Power and control
over people you love, like your family, daughters and sons.
. . .  The defendant exhibited power and control throughout
this trial.
The defendant, you know, has two jobs.  He works. 
He's also a coach.  He tells you that he's an average coach.
Pretty good.  Wins on the court.  Today he's in a different
court.  Today he's playing a different game.  It's
defensive, his game, similar to volleyball, and he positions
players accordingly.  And he's done that throughout this
trial.
[. . . .]
So what are we talking about?
We're talking about Aukusitino Atonio, the guy
sitting right behind me, the guy who's been sitting in
this courtroom throughout this trial.
. . . .
Credibility.  Page 8 [of the jury instructions],
please.  Right in the middle about half way down you see the
witness – and these are ways that the Court tells you that
you can determine credibility.  Court gives you instructions
on this. . . .  Means and opportunity of acquiring the
information. 
What are we talking about here?
. . . .
Opportunity of acquiring information.
Who do we have?  Who do we have to argue against what
[the CW] says?  
We only have three people, and that's the
defendant himself, that's his son[, T], and his daughter[,
C.A.].  They told you that they live together.  They come
here together.  They've been here together the whole time.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
. . . .
[. . . .]  They know what they're supposed to say.
What does [the CW] say?
. . . .
He positions T. 
Just in the car, but where?
To the right and then to the left.
Why is he doing this?
Because he wants you to believe T.  He needs you to
believe T.  Because if you believe T, then you can believe
that T must have seen something.  He must have.
. . . .
[C.A.,] again, lives with the father, came together,
left together.  And she wasn't even there, but she has a lot
to say about nothing.  About McDonald's.  She has a lot to
say about how [the CW] has no friends.
Why is [C.A.] even here?
He's positioning her.  He wants you to believe that
[the CW's] father doesn't care about her, because she's got
this -- she's from this broken home.  She's hungry all the
time.  She's got nothing in the refrigerator.  No one comes
home.  We know that's not even true.
[. . . .]
Because [the CW] told you. . . .
[. . . .]
[C.A.] says, Oh, she's always home by yourself.  He
told you -- the father [of the CW] -- that he works from
home.  He's always home. [C.A.'s] never been in the home. 
How does [C.A.] know?
Positioning the children to talk for him, to make up
his story.
What's another position we're talking about? 
It's T.  He makes sure that you understand that T
always helps him put the bike in the back.  T always helps
him take out the bike from the back.
And why is that important for him?
One, it puts T in the back when he was giving her
the hug and touching her butt, which is the basis of Count
II. . . .
Atonio's Opening Brief argues that the "power and control"
statements followed by the statement "[w]e're talking about
Aukusitino Atonio, the guy sitting right behind me, the guy who's
been sitting in this courtroom throughout this entire trial"
caused the jury to consider that the defense witnesses had the
"means and opportunity" of acquiring information and that Atonio
had "positioned" C.A. and T due to Atonio being present
throughout the trial.  Atonio summarizes his argument as follows:
[t]he gist of the prosecutor's argument was that Atonio told
T and C.A. what they had to say to counter [the CW's]
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
testimony.  In other words, T and [C.A.] were not credible
because Atonio heard [the CW's] testimony, and then told T
and C.A. what they had to say in order to discredit her and
strengthen his own case.
Atonio's recitation of the closing argument in his
opening brief omits pages of the State's closing argument,
including pages between some of the quoted language and pages
separating the one comment about Atonio "sitting in this
courtroom throughout this entire trial" and the statement about
"[o]pportunity of acquiring information."  The manner in which
Atonio quotes only certain portions of the State's closing
argument misconstrues the theory posed to the jury by the State. 
Based on our review of the State's entire closing argument, we
agree with the Circuit Court's assessment that the State did not
tie Atonio's presence at trial to either C.A. or T's testimonies,
and thus there was no prosecutorial misconduct in this regard. 
Rather, we infer that the State's main argument was that Atonio,
C.A., and T lived together and thus had the opportunity to
collude in order to present congruent testimony and a stronger
defense for Atonio.  This argument by the State aligned with
"Court's General Instruction No. 9" (Jury Instruction #9 ) given
by the agreement of the parties.  Jury Instruction #9 provides,
in relevant part:
3.09  Credibility and Weight of Testimony  
It is your exclusive right to determine whether and to
what extent a witness should be believed and to give weight
to his or her testimony accordingly.  In evaluating the
weight and credibility of a witness's testimony, you may
consider . . . the witness's relation, if any, to a party;
the witness's temper, feeling, or bias, if any has been
shown; [and] the witness's means and opportunity of
acquiring information[.]
We also conclude that the prosecutor's use of the word
"position[ing]" had two functions, neither being improper: (1) to
argue that Atonio organized everyone's physical whereabouts on
the day of the incident ( i.e., taking advantage of C.A.'s
absence, telling the CW to sit in the front seat, and telling T
to sit in the back seat), and (2) to argue that Atonio was
colluding with C.A. and T as exhibited by their conforming
testimony ( i.e., T leaning forward from the back seat in the
truck during the incident and the CW's alleged problems at home). 
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Cf. State v. Walsh, 125 Hawai#i 271, 282, 260 P.3d 350, 361
(2011) ("[A] general generic tailoring argument occurs when a
prosecutor states that the defendant was able to sit through the
trial and hear the testimony of other witnesses, thereby allowing
the defendant the opportunity to shape his or her testimony to
fit that of other witnesses, even when there is no evidence that
defendant has actually done so.") (citation omitted); see also
State v. Mattson, 122 Hawai# i 312, 327, 226 P.3d 482, 497 (2010)
(holding that because the prosecutor "referred to specific
evidence presented at trial in addition to referring to [the
defendant's] presence at trial, it cannot be said that the
prosecutor's remarks during closing argument continued a 'generic
accusation' that [the defendant] tailored his testimony based
solely on his presence at trial.").  
As previously noted, the Circuit Court denied Atonio's
motion for mistrial and request to strike the State's closing
arguments, stating: 
THE COURT:  This is a family that lives together.  I
don't think it's an argument that would surprise anybody. 
It's not rocket science that the other side is going to
argue that with the similarity of parts of the stories that
something is afoot.  I mean, if you guys were reversed, you
would be arguing the very same thing, the same kinds of
circumstances.  So it's not surprising that that argument is
being made.  Now, he's never tied it to what happened
yesterday.  And, you know, the record just kind of speaks
for itself.  I just think it's a logical argument that the
other side is going to make.  Whether it's true or not, it's
up to the jury to decide.
So I'm going to deny the motion for mistrial.  Your
client has gotten a fair trial.  And I think that's all you
asked for at this point.
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  In addition, we would be asking to
strike the argument based on the fact of improper argument,
that the State alluded to the fact that Mr. Atonio was
present for the trial, because it's improper.
THE COURT:  The prosecutor never tied that to anything
except that he's been here.
(Emphasis added).  Then, in an abundance of caution, the Circuit
Court re-read "Courts General Instruction No. 15" to the jury:
THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, I just want to
emphasize a -- well, I'm just going to read you a part of
the instructions that I have read to you.  Please remember
the defendant has a constitutional right to be present
throughout this trial and while other witnesses testify. 
You must not draw any unfavorable inference regarding the
credibility of the defendant's testimony on the basis that
he was present during the trial.
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Based on the foregoing, we conclude the State's closing
argument did not assert that Atonio used his presence at trial to
affect the testimony of C.A. and T, such as to influence the
jury's evaluation of C.A. and T's credibility.  We conclude that
the State's closing arguments did not amount to prosecutorial
misconduct.
In light of the above, we need not address Atonio's
remaining point of error that the Circuit Court should have
provided further instruction to the jury.
V.  Conclusion
We affirm the "Judgment of Conviction and Probation
Sentence" entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit on
April 20, 2016.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 11, 2019.
On the briefs:
William H. Jameson, Jr., 
Deputy Public Defender,
Office of the Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
10Loren J. Thomas,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu, 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 