NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001364
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KAMAILE ELAINE POWELL, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(Kona Division)

(CASE NO. 3DTC-14-043849)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Kamaile Elaine Powell (Powell) with excessive
 
speeding for driving her vehicle in excess of eighty miles per
 hour, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291C-105
 (2007 & Supp. 2016).
1 After a bench trial, the District Court of
 
1HRS § 291C-105 provides in relevant part:
 
(a) No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed
exceeding: 
(1) The applicable state or county speed limit by thirty
miles per hour or more; or 
(2) Eighty miles per hour or more irrespective of theapplicable state or county speed limit. 
(Emphasis added.) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2
the Third Circuit (District Court)  found Powell guilty of the
charge based on a police officer's estimate that Powell was
 
driving her vehicle about 85 miles per hour.3 The District Court
 
entered its Judgment on November 21, 2014.
 
On appeal, Powell argues that: (1) the District Court
 
erred in admitting the officer's testimony about his visual
 estimate of Powell's speed; and (2) without this evidence, there
 was insufficient evidence to support Powell's conviction for
 excessive speeding.
 
We conclude that the officer's estimate of Powell's 
speed was admissible, but was insufficient to support her conviction for excessive speeding. We further conclude that there was sufficient evidence to show that Powell had committed the non-criminal traffic infraction of driving her vehicle over the maximum speed limit, in violation of HRS § 291C-102(a)(1) (2007).
4 We therefore vacate Powell's excessive speeding 
conviction and remand the case for entry of a judgment that Powell committed the traffic infraction of speeding, in violation of HRS § 291C-102(a)(1). See State v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawai
'i 
354, 378, 227 P.3d 520, 544 (2010). 
BACKGROUND
 
Hawai'i County Police Officer Larry Flowers (Officer 
Flowers) was on duty driving northbound on Queen Ka 'ahumanu 
Highway at about 7:30 in the morning. Officer Flowers testified 
2The Honorable Andrew P. Wilson presided.
 
3The State offered evidence that a radar device had determined that
 
Powell was traveling 84 miles per hour. However, the District Court found
that the State had failed to lay a sufficient foundation for the radar speed
reading and thus the District Court based its guilty verdict on the officer's
expertise at estimating speed.
 
Powell was also charged with reckless driving, but the District Court
acquitted her of that charge after the bench trial.
 
4HRS § 291C-102(a)(1) provides, in relevant part:
 
(a) A person violates this section if the person drives: 
(1)	 A motor vehicle at a speed greater than the maximum
speed limit[.]"
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Powell's vehicle, which was traveling southbound towards
 
him, caught his attention because he estimated Powell's vehicle
 was "doing about eighty-five miles per hour." Officer Flowers
 testified that Powell's vehicle was the only vehicle in the
 southbound lane for about a thousand feet, and that his view was
 unobstructed. Officer Flowers activated the radar device in his
 vehicle and obtained a reading of 84 miles per hour. Officer
 Flowers then made a U-turn, stopped Powell's vehicle, and cited
 her for excessive speeding.
 
With respect to his ability to estimate speed, Officer
 
Flowers testified that whenever he sees a vehicle he believes is
 speeding, he estimates the vehicle's speed before he activates
 his radar device "to confirm or deny [his] estimations." Officer
 Flowers testified that during his eighteen years as a police
 officer, he has estimated a vehicle's speed more than 10,000
 times. Officer Flowers was asked how accurate his estimation of
 speed was "most of the time" and he responded "two to three
 miles," as follows:
 
Q. . . . What is sort of the range of how close
your visual estimation is to what the radar or laser gun or
pace, whatever the measuring device is that you use, how
close do you come most of the time?
 
A. Two to three miles.
 
The District Court ruled that the State had failed to
 
lay a sufficient foundation for the admission of the radar speed
 
reading. However, the District Court found that Officer Flowers
 was qualified to estimate the speed of Powell's vehicle based on
 his eighteen years of experience in estimating speed and then
 confirming that estimate with a radar or laser device. The
 District Court relied on Officer Flowers' estimate in finding
 that the State had proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Powell
 was traveling in excess of 80 miles per hour, and it found Powell
 guilty of excessive speeding.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DISCUSSION
 
We resolve Powell's arguments on appeal as follows.

 
I.

 
Powell contends that the District Court abused its
 
discretion in admitting Officer Flowers' estimate of Powell's
 
speed. We disagree.
 
While the State failed to lay a sufficient foundation 
to have Officer Flowers testify as an expert witness, we conclude that his lay opinion was admissible under Hawai
'i Rules of 
Evidence (HRE) Rule 701 (2016).5 In Nielsen v. American Honda 
Motor Co., 92 Hawai 'i 180, 187, 898 P.2d 264, 217 (App. 1999), 
this court concluded: 
A lay person may render opinions as to speed and
distance. Under HRE Rule 701 (1993), a lay witness may
testify as to rate of speed, 1 J. Strong, McCormick on
Evidence § 11, at 46 n.22 (4th ed. 1992); Nationwide Mut.
Ins. Co. v. Chantos, 298 N.C. 246, 258 S.E.2d 334 (1979) ("A
person of ordinary intelligence and experience is competent
to state his or her opinion as to the speed of a vehicle
when he or she has had a reasonable opportunity to observe
the vehicle and judge its speed.")[.]
 
(Emphasis added; brackets omitted.) The State laid a sufficient
 
foundation for the admission of Officer Flowers' estimate of
 Powell's speed as a lay opinion. 
II.
 
Although Officer Flowers' speed estimate was
 
admissible, we conclude that it was insufficient to prove that
 Powell was traveling in excess of 80 miles per hour. In reaching
 this conclusion, we agree with the reasoning of courts that have
 held that an officer's estimate of speed is insufficient to prove 
5HRE Rule 701 provides:
 
If the witness is not testifying as an expert, the witness'
testimony in the form of opinions or inferences is limited to
those opinions or inferences which are (1) rationally based on the
perception of the witness, and (2) helpful to a clear
understanding of the witness' testimony or the determination of a
fact in issue.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that a defendant was speeding beyond a reasonable doubt where the
 
variance between the estimated speed and the speed limit is
 small. See City of Kansas City v. Oxley, 579 S.W.2d 113 (Mo.
 
1979) (en banc); State v. Estes, 223 P.3d 287 (Idaho. Ct. App.
 2009).
6 These courts recognize that a police officer's ability
 
to estimate the speed of a moving vehicle is subject to error; 
therefore, the officer's speed estimate requires a substantial
 margin of error before the officer's estimate is sufficient to
 establish a speeding offense. 
Here, the variance between Officer Flowers' speed 
estimate (85 miles per hour) and the speed necessary to establish the excessive speeding offense (more than 80 miles per hour) was small -- 5 miles per hour for a vehicle traveling at a very high rate of speed. Moreover, the evidence presented regarding the accuracy of Officer Flowers' estimate was imprecise -- the State only presented evidence that his speed estimate came within two to three miles of the measuring device "most of the time," and it did not elicit evidence of the accuracy of his estimates at high rates of speed, such as the 80 miles per hour threshold at issue in this case. Under these circumstances, we conclude that Officer Flowers' speed estimate was insufficient to support Powell's conviction for excessive speeding. See Fitzwater, 122 
Hawai
'i at 378, 227 P.2d at 544 (concluding that there was 
insufficient evidence to support an excessive speeding conviction given the small margin of error (5 miles per hour) between the unverified speedometer reading and the 65 miles per hour speed 
6In People v. Olsen , 239 N.E.2d 354 (N.Y. 1968), the court held that a
police officer's estimate that the defendant was traveling 50 to 55 miles per
hour in a 30 miles per hour zone was sufficient to sustain the defendant's
speeding conviction. The court, however, noted that the officer's estimate
that the defendant was traveling 35 or 40 miles per hour in the same 30 miles
per hour zone "might for obvious reason be insufficient, since, it must be
assumed that only a mechanical device could detect such a slight variance with
accuracy sufficient to satisfy the burden necessary to sustain a conviction."
Olsen
, 239 N.E.2d at 355. 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
necessary for a conviction). We therefore vacate Powell's
 
excessive speeding conviction.7
 
III.
 
Similar to the supreme court in Fitzwater, we conclude 
that while there was insufficient evidence to sustain Powell's conviction for excessive speeding, there was sufficient evidence to prove that Powell committed the non-criminal traffic infraction of driving over the maximum speed limit. Without objection by Powell, the District Court took "judicial notice" of the citation issued to Powell, which showed that the posted speed limit was 55 miles per hour. Powell testified and stated that she was not "intentionally speeding" and that "[t]here were no cars, and so I guess that's why I was speeding." We conclude that Officer Flowers' estimate that Powell's vehicle was traveling about 85 miles per hour combined with Powell's testimony which indicated that she was "speeding" was sufficient to show that Powell exceeded the 55 miles per hour speed limit. We therefore remand the case for entry of a judgment that Powell committed the infraction of exceeding the maximum speed limit, in violation of HRS § 291C-102(a)(1). See Fitzwater, 122 Hawai
'i at 
378, 227 P.3d at 544. 
CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate Powell's Judgment

 
with respect to her conviction and sentence for excessive 
7
The District Court concluded, based on Hawai' i Supreme Court case law,
that the State had failed to lay a sufficient foundation for admission of the
radar speed reading. In particular, the District Court noted that the Statewas required to establish the manufacturer's requirements for training. In response, the State asserted that it could not lay this foundation because themanufacturer of the radar device did not issue training requirements. We note, however, that the State did not offer evidence that would demonstrateOfficer Flowers' proficiency in operating the radar device or that would showhe had undergone training reasonably designed to ensure competency inoperating the radar device. Accordingly, the State failed to show thatOfficer Flowers was qualified to operate the radar device. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
speeding, and we remand the case for further proceedings
 
consistent with this Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 28, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Jon N. Ikenaga
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Jason R. Kwiat Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7

 