 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
  
 
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000413 06-NOV-2024 07:56 AM Dkt. 98 SO 
NO. CAAP-21-0000413  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
LADONNA MICHELLE OWENS, PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE  
OF THE ESTATE OF OLIVER C. OWENS, Plaintiff-Appellant,  
v.  
THE QUEEN'S MEDICAL CENTER, LEON K. LIEM, M.D.;  
LEON K. LIEM, M.D., LLC; DANIEL J. DONOVAN, M.D.;  
DANIEL J. DONOVAN, M.D., LLC, Defendants-Appellees,  
and  
JOHN OR JANE DOES 1-20; DOE PARTNERSHIPS,  
CORPORATIONS OR OTHER ENTITIES 1-20, Defendants  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 1CC161000570)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION  ORDER  
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.)  
In this medical malpractice action, Plaintiff -
Appellant Oliver C. Owens (Owens)1 appeals from the "Order 
Granting 'Defendant [-Appellee] The Queen 's Medical Center 
1 Owens passed away during the pendency of this appeal. This court 
has approved the substitution of LaDonna M ichelle Owens, as Personal 
Representative of the Estate of Oliver C. Owens , pursuant to Hawaiʻi Rules of 
Appellate Procedure Rule 43(a).   
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
   
  
 
  
  
 
   
   
 
   
 
 
   
     
  
   
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[(QMC)]'s Motion for Partial Summary Judgment as to Plaintiff 's 
Claim for Negligence Regarding His Spinal Condition ' Filed on 
8/26/19" (MSJ Order), filed on March 19, 2020 , and the "[Hawaiʻi 
Rules of Civil Procedure] HRCP Rule 54(b) Final Judgment " 
(Judgment ), filed on June 25, 2021, by the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit ( circuit court ). 2 The MSJ Order and Judgment were 
entered in favor of QMC . 3 
Owens raises a single point of error on appeal , 
contending that "the trial court reversibly erred when it 
granted summary judgment in favor of [Q MC] and entered its [MSJ 
Order], in which the court rejected [Owens '] expert opinions 
regarding causation, and found that [Q MC] was entitled to 
judgment as a matter of law. "4 
Upon careful review of the record and relevant legal 
authorities , and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Owens' 
contentions as follows: 
2 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided over the entry of all 
relevant substantive orders, including the MSJ Order, and the Judgment. 
3 Although Owens ' complaint also named Leon K. Liem, M.D. , Leon K. 
Liem, M.D., LLC , Daniel J. Donovan, M.D., and Daniel J. Donovan, M.D., LLC, 
as defendants, they were dismissed as parties prior to entry of the MSJ Order 
and Judgment, and are nominal appellees to this appeal. 
Owens' complaint set forth two counts: Count I, alleging 
negligence ; and Count II, alleging no informed consent. QMC moved for 
summary judgment as to both Counts I and II. Owens filed a statement of no 
opposition with regard to Count II. The circuit court issued orders granting 
summary judgment in favor of Q MC on Count I I in February 2020, and on Count I 
in March 2020 . Owens does not appeal the summary judgment as to Count II. 
2 4   
 
 
  
   
 
 
   
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) Owens contends that the circuit court erred by 
ruling that  Dr. Weinstein's proffered testimony was inadmissible 
pursuant to Hawaii Rules of Evidence ( HRE)  Rules 702 and 703.   
The admission of expert testimony, pursuant to HRE Rules 702 and 
703, "is premised on an assumption that the expert's opinion 
will have a reliable basis in the knowledge and experience of 
his [or her] discipline." State v. Vliet, 95 Hawai ʻi 94, 106, 
19  P.3d 42, 54 (2001) (citation omitted). "[A] trial court may 
disallow expert testimony if it concludes that the proffer of 
specialized knowledge is based on a mode of analysis that lacks 
trustworthiness." State v. Maelega, 80 Hawaiʻ i 172, 182, 907 
P.2d 758,  768 (1995) (cleaned up).   5
5 HRE Rule 702 provides, 
Rule 702 Testimony by experts.   If scientific, 
technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the 
trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a 
fact in issue, a witness qualified as an expert by 
knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise. In 
determining the issue of assistance  to the trier of fact, 
the court may consider the trustworthiness and validity of the scientific technique or mode of analysis employed by 
the proffered expert.  
HRE Rule 703 provides, 
Rule 703 Bases of opinion testimony by experts.   The 
facts or data in the particular case upon which an expert bases an opinion or inference may be those perceived by or 
made known to the expert at or before the hearing. If of a 
type reasonably relied upon by experts in the particular 
field in forming  opinions or inferences upon the subject, 
the facts or data need not be admissible in evidence. The 
court may, however, disallow testimony in the form of an 
opinion or inference if the underlying facts or data 
indicate lack of trustworthiness.  
3   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The "touchstones of admissibility" under HRE Rule 702 
are relevance and reliability. Vliet, 95 Hawaiʻi at 106, 19 P.3d 
at 54 (citation omitted). As this court has previously 
explained, 
Whether a witness qualifies as an expert is a matter 
addressed to the sound discretion of the trial court, and 
such determination will not be overturned unless there is a 
clear abuse of discretion. In applying HRE Rule 702, the 
trial court must determine whether the expert's testimony 
is (1) relevant, and (2) reliable. The trial court's 
relevancy decision under HRE [Rule] 702 is reviewed de 
novo. The trial court's determination as to reliability is 
reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard.  
Barbee v. Queen 's Med. Ctr. , 119 Hawaiʻi 136, 152, 194 P.3d 1098, 
1114 (App. 2008) (cleaned up). "[I]n a medical malpractice 
case, a plaintiff must establish proximate or contributory 
causation through the introduction of expert medical testimony" 
and such testimony "must be based on a 'reasonable medical 
probability. '" Id. at 159, 194 P.3d at 1121. 
We conclude that the circuit court abused its 
discretion in determining that Dr. Weinstein's proffered 
testimony on causation was not reliable, and in excluding the 
testimony on that basis. 
The circuit court found that Owens proffered Dr. 
Weinstein's testimony to establish "legal causation" by opining: 
(1) "that [QMC] failed to meet its duty to insure  [sic]  that its 
nursing staff provide proper discharge instructions to a surgical patient"; (2) "[a]s a result," "[Owens] lacked an 
understanding regarding when he should return to the hospital or 
4   
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
otherwise contact Dr. Liem if problems arose after surgery"; and 
(3) "[a]n earlier call to Dr. Liem by [Owens] would likely have 
prevented the eventual occurrence and persistence of paralysis 
due to cervical spinal cord compression." With regard to 
causation, Dr. Weinstein's testimony was therefore introduced to 
establish that the provision of improper discharge instructions 
caused Owens'  paralysis.  
We conclude that the circuit court erred in finding 
"that Dr. Weinstein's opinion on the discharge instructions 
causing harm to [Owens] is not admissible because it is [a] 
self-serving attempt to modify his prior deposition testimony, 
lacks foundation, and constitutes pure conjecture or 
speculation. " 
The record reflects that Owens provided an adequate 
foundation for Dr. Weinstein's testimony on causation , by 
establishing that Dr. Weinstein's education, training, and 
experience as a licensed and board -certified neurologist who se 
experience in performing the same type of surgical procedure 
performed on Owens by Dr. Liem , as well as his familiarity with 
the type of discharge instructions that should be provided to 
patients after that specific procedure , qualified him as an 
expert regarding the causal nexus between i nadequate discharge 
instructions and Owens' paralysis . Dr. Weinstein represented in 
his deposition testimony that, inter alia , had proper discharge 
5   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
instructions been provided to Owens, Owens would have likely 
obtained a "better neurological result," 
Q. What's the basis for your conclusion that had Dr. 
Donovan been notified earlier, he would have done anything 
differently than what he did or when he did it? 
A. The basis is the course of events after he was 
notified, which is that he first tried adjusting pain 
medication, he then admitted Dr. Donovan (sic) for a course 
of intravenous steroid therapy, and he then took him back 
for another operation as an emergency.  
 I think that if he had been –- if he had understood 
more about Mr. Donovan (sic), his patient –- Mr. Donovan 
(sic) as his patient, his surgical risk factors, the extent 
of the surgery that had been performed, each of those 
events would have been moved up by a day.  
 . . . . 
Q. So how can you say that he would have done it 
earlier than that day? 
A. My opinion is based on my supposition that if he 
had seen the patient two days earlier, he would have 
started the steroids and, after 24 hours with the amount of 
deterioration that had occurred up to the 22 nd, I guess, he 
would have taken him to surgery earlier with a better 
neurological result. 
  Owens later clarified, through the submission of Dr. 
Weinstein's own deposition testimony, that Dr. Weinstein's  use 
of "speculative" language  –  through words such as "supposition" 
and "guess" –  reflected  his opinion of causation within  
reasonable medical probability,  
Well, I understand "speculative" to be an  [sic]  
hypothesis. In other words, almost every medical principle 
that we use is best approximation. So there's always some uncertainty. And that's my interpretation of the term 
"speculative".  
 . . . . 
. . .  I was interpreting that lack of speculation as 
a hundred percent. Anything less than that, say it was an 
80- or 90-percent chance, as having an element of being 
speculative.  
6   
 
 
  
   
 
  
  
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Owens' clarification of Dr. Weinstein's inability to opine with 
one hundred percent certainty that inadequate discharge 
instructions caused Owens' paralysis cannot fairly be construed 
as a "self -serving attempt to modify [Dr. Weinstein's] prior 
deposition testimony." This clarification, moreover, 
establishes why Dr. Weinstein's testimony as to causation does 
not constitute "pure conjecture or speculation," but, rather, 
explains why his opinion is consistent with the medical standard 
of "best approximation. " 
The record does not support the circuit court's 
characterization of Dr. Weinstein as "an interloper who stands 
behind academic credentials with no real expertise on the 
subject matter." Nor does it support that "Dr. Weinstein's 
opinion as to causation is untrustworthy and does not appear to 
be based upon any scientific technique or analysis," and that 
Dr. Weinstein is therefore "merely a mouthpiece in support of 
the plaintiff by offering an 'expert' opinion as a matter of 
convenience and opportunity." The circuit court abused its 
discretion in making these unsupported findings , and in 
excluding Dr. Weinstein's expert testimony on the issue of 
causation. 
7   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) Owens contends that the circuit court erred in 
granting summary judgment on Count I because a genuine question 
of material fact exists as to causation. We agree. 
"On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is 
reviewed de novo." Ralston v. Yim , 129 Hawaiʻi 46, 55, 292 P.3d 
1276, 1285 (2013) (citations omitted). The court applies the 
following standard, 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A 
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the 
effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential 
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the 
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the non -moving party. In other words, we must 
view all of the evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in 
the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion
.  
Id. at 55-56, 292 P.3d at 1285 -86. 
Owens' proof of the causation element of his 
negligence claim was contingent on medical expert testimony. 
Bernard v. Char, 79 Hawaiʻi 371, 377, 903 P.2d 676, 682 (App. 
1995), aff'd, 79 Hawaiʻi 362, 903 P.2d 667 (1995) ("unlike the 
ordinary negligence case, it is the general rule that a medical 
malpractice case based on negligent treatment cannot be 
established without expert medical testimony to support it"). 
As explained supra, the circuit court erred in excluding Dr. 
Weinstein's proffered testimony on causation . Dr. Weinstein's 
8   
 
 
   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
expert testimony raises a genuine question of material fact as 
to causation. 
For the foregoing reasons, we  vacate the MSJ Order, 
and Judgment, and remand for further proceedings consistent with 
this summary disposition order.  
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, November  6,  2024. 
On the briefs:  /s/ Katherine G. Leonard  
 Acting Chief Judge  
Richard Naiwieha Wurdeman,   
for Plaintiff-Appellant.  /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen  
 Associate Judge  
Saori Takahashi,   
for Defendant-Appellee. /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Associate Judge  
9 