NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000311 22-JAN-2025 10:34 AM Dkt. 65 SO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000311 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
O
F THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CHRISTOPHER MUNDON, Defendant-Appellant. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 3CPC-22-0000316) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Hiraoka, and Guidry, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Christopher Mundon (Mundon) appeals 
from the March 20, 2024 Judgment of Conviction and Probation 
Sentence (Judgment), entered by the Circuit Court of the Third 
Circuit (Circuit Court),  convicting him of Promoting a Dangerous 
Drug in the First Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes 
(HRS) § 712-1241(1)(a) (Supp. 2022). 1
Mundon raises three points of error on appeal, 
contending that: 
(1) the Circuit Court erred in denying his 
motion to suppress evidence; (2) the Circuit Court erred in allowing him to proceed to trial on stipulated facts; and (3) he 
1 The Honorable Wendy M. DeWeese presided.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
received ineffective assistance of trial counsel. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Mundon's points of error as follows: 
(1) Mundon argues that the Circuit Court erred when it 
denied the motion to suppress because the search warrant for the white Toyota Tundra (Toyota) was based on an informant's stale 
information and the subjective opinions and beliefs of Hawai# i 
County Police Department Officer Chandler B. Nacino (O
fficer 
Nacino). 
The Circuit Court's ruling on the motion to suppress is 
reviewed de novo to determine whether the ruling was right or 
wrong. State v. Eleneki, 106 Hawai# i 177, 180, 102 P.3d 1075, 
1078 (2004). 
"Probable cause exists when the facts and circumstances 
within one's knowledge and of which one has reasonably trustworthy information are sufficient in themselves to warrant a person of reasonable caution to believe that an offense has been committed." State v. Detroy
, 102 Hawai#i 13, 18, 72 P.3d 485, 
490 (2003) (citation and quotation marks omitted).
 If the criminal activity is ongoing in nature, the 
passage of time between an informant's last observations of that activity and the issuance of the warrant is less significant than when no such showing is made in the affidavit. State v. Austria
, 
55 Haw. 565, 570, 524 P.2d 290, 294 (1974) (citations omitted). 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Direct evidence that contraband or evidence is at a 
particular location is not essential to establish probable cause 
to search the location. A magistrate is entitled to draw reasonable inferences about where evidence is likely to be kept, based on the nature of the evidence and the type of offense." United States v. Angulo-Lopez, 791 F.2d 1394, 1399 (9th Cir. 1986) (citations omitted). 
In his affidavit for the search warrant, which sought 
authorization for the search of Mundon's person, his residence, and a truck Mundon was known to drive, Officer Nacino stated, inter alia, that he has been a police officer for approximately eight years. He averred that "within the last month," a confidential informant (CI) informed him that Mundon was 
distributing cocaine in the Kailua-Kona area. The CI stated that 
he/she was a "former user of cocaine," had known Mundon for over one year, and observed Mundon conduct cocaine sales from his residence. 
Officer Nacino arranged for the CI to make a controlled 
purchase of cocaine from Mundon at his residence "within the past seven (7) days." After the controlled purchase, the CI turned over the cocaine purchased from Mundon and identified Mundon as the seller. The CI stated that he/she observed Mundon to keep his "stash" within a backpack that is either kept on his person or in his vehicle. 
Officer Nacino and vice officers conducted surveillance 
on Mundon to learn his day-to-day habits, and observed Mundon to 
3  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
operate the Toyota, which was registered to another person. 
Officer Nacino attested that based on his training and 
experience, it is a common practice for drug dealers/users to 
remove controlled substances from their residence, and keep them on their person to prevent theft of their drugs, and based on his experience in conducting searches of protected areas, "it is common practice for heroin, cocaine, methamphetamine, and marijuana to be stored in outbuildings, storage sheds, vehicles and containers." 
On this record, we conclude that the Circuit Court did 
not err in denying Mundon's motion to suppress. The controlled purchase by the CI within seven days corroborated the reliability of the CI's information, and that the information was not stale. Based on the CI's statement that Mundon kept his "stash" within a backpack that is either kept on his person or in his vehicle, and Officer Nacino's averments, it was reasonable to infer that cocaine might be found in the Toyota that Mundon drove. 
(2) Mundon argues the Circuit Court erred in accepting 
his agreement to a stipulated-facts trial because the Circuit Court's on-the-record colloquy with him did not include an explanation of the essential elements of the charged offenses. Mundon appears to assert that he did not knowingly and voluntarily waive his fundamental right to challenge the State's evidence because of the lack of statement of the elements of the charged offenses during the colloquy. 
A trial court is required to engage in colloquy with a 
defendant whenever a defendant waives a fundamental right. 
4  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Murray, 116 Hawai# i 3, 12, 169 P.3d 955, 964 (2007) 
(citing State v. Ibuos, 75 Haw. 118, 121, 857 P.2d 576, 578 
(1993) (involving waiver of right to jury trial); and Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai# i 226, 235-36, 900 P.2d 1293, 1302-03 (1995) 
(involving waiver of right to testify)). The colloquy is meant to ensure that the waiver is being made directly by the defendant, and is a knowing and voluntary waiver. Id.
In the Agreement to Proceed to Trial Upon Stipulated 
Facts (
Agreement to Proceed), Mundon stipulated to the Circuit 
Court's consideration of 110 exhibits from the State for the purpose(s) of a determination of his guilt or innocence.
2 
Mundon did not stipulate to any element of the charged 
offenses.3 Nonetheless, the exhibits stipulated into evidence 
2 The Agreement to Proceed references "118" exhibits, which appears
to be a clerical error as it is undisputed that there were only 110. 
3 Mundon was charged with Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the First
Degree in violation of HRS § 712-1241(1)(a) and Attempted Promotion of a
Dangerous Drug in the First Degree in violation of HRS §§ 705-500 (2014) and712-1241(1)(b)(ii). HRS § 712-1241(1)(a) and (b) states in part: 
§ 712-1241 Promoting a dangerous drug in the first
degree. (1) A person commits the offense of promoting a
dangerous drug in the first degree if the person knowingly: 
(a) Possesses one or more preparations, compounds,mixtures, or substances of an aggregate weightof: 
(i) One ounce or more, containing
methamphetamine, heroin, morphine, orcocaine or any of their respective salts,isomers, and salts of isomers; or 
(ii) One and one-half ounce or more, containingone or more of any of the other dangerousdrugs; 
(b) Distributes: 
. . . . (ii) One or more preparations, compounds,
(continued...) 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
were sufficient to support a conviction. Therefore, the Circuit 
Court was required to engage in a colloquy with Mundon to ensure that he understood the constitutional rights which he was waiving by agreeing to the stipulated-evidence trial. Murray, 116 Hawai#i 3 at 12, 169 P.3d at 964. 
The Circuit Court's thorough colloquy with Mundon 
demonstrates that Mundon knowingly and voluntarily waived his 
3(...continued) 
mixtures, or substances of an aggregate
weight of: 
(A) One-eighth ounce or more,
containing methamphetamine,heroin, morphine, or cocaineor any of their respectivesalts, isomers, and sales ofisomers; or 
(B) Three-eights ounce or more,containing any other dangerousdrug[.] 
HRS § 705-500 states: 
§ 705-500 Criminal attempt.  (1) A person is
guilty of an attempt to commit a crime if the person: 
(a) Intentionally engages in conduct which wouldconstitute the crime if the attendant circumstances were as the person believes themto be; or 
(b) Intentionally engages in conduct which, underthe circumstances as the person believes them tobe, constitutes a substantial step in a courseof conduct intended to culminate in the person'scommission of the crime. 
(2) When causing a particular result is an
element of the crime, a person is guilty of an attemptto commit the crime if, acting with the state of mindrequired to establish liability with respect to theattendant circumstances specified in the definition ofthe crime, the person intentionally engages in conductwhich is a substantial step in a course of conductintended or known to cause such a result. 
(3) Conduct shall not be considered a substantial 
step under this section unless it is strongly corroborativeof the defendant's criminal intent. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
right to challenge the State's evidence, confront witnesses, and 
present witnesses in his own defense. 
Prior to accepting the Agreement to Proceed, the 
Circuit Court properly colloquyed Mundon with respect his waiver of his rights to be present in person, to a jury trial, and to testify in his own defense. During these colloquies, Mundon confirmed, inter alia, that his mind was clear, he was not under the influence of alcohol, illegal drugs or prescription medication, he attended two years of college and was able to speak, read, write and understand English, and he had consulted with his attorney and was satisfied with the advice and services provided by his attorney. 
In the colloquy regarding the Agreement to Proceed, the 
Circuit Court explained to Mundon that by stipulating the exhibits into evidence, Mundon would be waiving the right to confront and cross-examine the State's witnesses, the right to object to the evidence, and the right to call witnesses on his own behalf. Mundon confirmed that he understood he would be waiving these rights, he had no questions, no one had promised him anything or was pressuring, threatening, or forcing him to agree to a stipulated-facts trial, and he consented to proceeding with a stipulated-facts trial. Mundon also confirmed that he read and understood the Agreement to Proceed and discussed it with his lawyer prior to signing it. We conclude that the colloquy was not deficient, and the Circuit Court did not err in accepting the Agreement to Proceed. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) Mundon argues that he received ineffective 
assistance of counsel, because his attorney allowed him to waive 
most of his fundamental constitutional trial rights, and presented no defense for him, even though Mundon maintained his not guilty plea. 
A defendant claiming ineffective assistance of counsel 
must show that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence, and the errors or omissions resulted in the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. State v. Yuen
, 154 Hawai#i 
434, 444, 555 P.3d 121, 131 (2024). 
After the Circuit Court ruled that it was denying 
Mundon's motion to suppress evidence, trial counsel stated, "I think that we all know that the basis for this whole case pretty much is made in these motions," and "a trial in this case really does nothing to help us in terms of – ultimately, if we're going to prevail, that we're going to prevail on appeal on these issues." 
Trial counsel said he would speak to Mundon about 
agreeing to a stipulated-facts trial to avoid wasting time and 
his "client's money relative to what we ultimately have to get to." 
Mundon points to no specific errors or omissions that 
resulted in the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. Additionally, some benefit to Mundon was derived from the stipulated-facts trial, and the on-the-record colloquy established that Mundon knowingly and voluntarily waived his right to confront the State's witnesses, 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
challenge the State's evidence, and present witnesses in his own 
defense. We conclude that Mundon fails to establish that he received ineffective assistance of counsel. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's March 20, 2024 
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 22, 2025. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Acting Chief Judge
Benjamin E. Lowenthal,Deputy Public Defender,Office of the Public Defender, /s/ Keith K. Hiraokafor Defendant-Appellant. Associate Judge 
Nathan A Wersal,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, /s/ Kimberly T. GuidryOffice of the Prosecuting Associate Judge
Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
9 