 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-25-0000006 28-JAN-2026 08:36 AM Dkt. 102 SO 
NO. CAAP-25-0000006 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
STATE OF HAWAIʻ I, Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant, 
v. 
ALVIN TRAN, Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CPC-20-0000890) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Alvin Tran (Tran) 
appeals from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's (circuit 
court 
) December 10, 2024 "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" 
(Judgment).  Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant State of Hawaiʻ i 
(State) cross-appeals from the circuit court's ruling on a 
question of law adverse to the State, pursuant to Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 641-13(5) (2016).  1
1 The Honorable Catherine H. Remi gio presided.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  On July 24, 2020, the State charged Tran by 
Indictment, alleging that Tran committed "Continuous Sexual 
Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen Years" in violation 
of HRS § 707-733.6 (2014). A jury found Tran guilty as charged. 
The circuit court sentenced Tran to a twenty-year term of 
imprisonment. Tran appealed, and the State cross-appealed. 
Tran raises multiple points of error on appeal, 
contending that: (1) "[t]he circuit court reversibly erred by not engaging in a colloquy with Tran to ensure that he 
intelligently, knowingly, and voluntarily waived his right to 
cross-examine [the complaining witness (CW)]"; (2) "[t]rial 
counsel provided Tran with ineffective assistance of counsel by 
not cross-examining [CW]"; (3) "[t]he circuit court reversibly 
erred in instructing the jury . . . that the charged offense's 
attendant circumstances element of the minor's age was a strict 
liability element that did not require any mens rea"; (4) "[t]he 
circuit court plainly erred in allowing the jury to consider Dr. [Kayal] Natarajan's [(Dr. Natarajan)] testimony (in its 
entirety), and Dr. [Alex] Biven[s' (Dr. Bivens)] testimony (also 
in its entirety), because their testimony established its own 
irrelevancy"; (5) "[t]he circuit court . . . plainly erred by 
not qualifying the defense expert, [Tristan Wristen (Nurse 
Wristen)], as an expert in front of the jury"; and (6) the 
 2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
 
   
   prosecutor committed prosecutorial misconduct in her opening, 
closing, and rebuttal statements. (Citations omitted.) 
The State's cross-appeal raises one point of error, 
contending that "[t]he circuit court erred by concluding 
[Tran's] statements to the [CW] . . . required a separate 
determination of voluntariness under HRS § 621-26." 
Upon careful review of the record, briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, 
we resolve Tran and the State's points of error as follows: 
I. Tran's Points of Error
2 
(1) Tran contends the circuit court erred by not 
conducting a colloquy to determine whether Tran waived his right to cross-examine the CW. We review constitutional questions 
under the right/wrong standard. State v. Fields, 115 Hawaiʻ i 
503, 511, 168 P.3d 955, 963 (2007). 
"In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy 
the right . . . to be confronted with the witnesses against the 
accused[.]" Haw. Const. art. I, § 14. "[T]he main and essential purpose of confrontation is to secure for the 
[defendant] the opportunity of cross-examination[.]" Birano v.
2 We address both Tran's first and second points of error in 
section (1) below. 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
    
     
  
  
  
 
   
  
 
  
    
    
 
 (continued . . .) State, 143 Hawaiʻ i 163, 183, 426 P.3d 387, 407 (2018) (citation 
omitted). 
Tran does not cite to any case in which the Hawaiʻ i 
appellate courts have held that, notwithstanding defense 
counsel's discretion to exercise appropriate trial strategy, a 
judge must conduct a colloquy to obtain a criminal defendant's 
express waiver of defendant's right to cross-examine a witness for the prosecution. Indeed, in addressing this issue, the 
Hawaiʻi
 Supreme Court explained that, 
The right of confrontation is a fundamental constitutional 
right of the accused. But, this right is not absolute and defense counsel can waive certain aspects of the right 
where such waiver is considered a matter of trial tactics 
and procedure; in which event the trial court is not 
required to determine whether defendant had knowingly and voluntarily waived his right. 
State v. Oyama, 64 Haw. 187, 189, 637 P.2d 778, 779-80 (1981) 
(emphasis added) (citations omitted). 
Here, the record reflects that Tran's defense counsel 
made a tactical decision not to cross-examine CW.  We therefore 3
3 It appears that defense counsel's decision not to cross- examine 
CW before the jury was part of the defense strategy. The record reflects 
that defense counsel actively engaged in Tran's defense, raising several 
objections during the prosecution's direct examination of CW. Trial 
proceedings were briefly recessed after CW, who had been removed to a witness room during a bench conference, began crying and "was not able to come back" 
to the courtroom. During that recess, as the parties waited for CW to resume her testimony, defense counsel expressed concerns regarding the presence of a 
comfort dog within the courtroom itself, and of the relocation of the victim 
witness counselor nearer to the witness stand. After the prosecutor 
concluded her direct examination, defense counsel informed the circuit court 
that he had "several objections that [he thought] would be better handled from counsel table." Defense counsel subsequently moved for a mistrial, and 
the circuit court ordered a recess to allow for a hearing on the 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
   
    
 conclude that the circuit court was not required to conduct a 
colloquy to determine whether Tran knowingly and intelligently 
waived his right to confrontation. 
With regard to Tran's contention that defense counsel 
was ineffective for failing to cross-examine CW, we consider 
whether defense counsel's assistance, when "viewed as a whole, 
. . . was within the range of competence demanded of attorneys 
in criminal cases." State v. DeLeon, 131 Hawaiʻ i 463, 479, 319 
P.3d 382, 398 (2014) (citation omitted). 
Where a defendant 
alleges "[s]pecific actions or omissions" that "ha[ve] an 
obvious tactical basis for benefitting the defendant's case" as 
error, such allegations "will not be subject to further scrutiny." Id. (citation omitted); 
see also State v. Richie, 88 
Hawaiʻi 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998) ("[M]atters presumably 
within the judgment of counsel, like trial strategy, will rarely 
be second-guessed by judicial hindsight.") (cleaned up). 
Here, 
the record reflects "an obvious tactical basis" underlying defense counsel's decision to not cross-examine CW. 
(2) Tran contends that the circuit court erred by 
failing to instruct the jury of the State's "burden to prove 
3(. . .continued)  
voluntariness of statements made by Tran to CW. 
During that hearing, defense 
counsel questioned CW regarding her statement that Tran " seemed stressed" 
during their interactions. It was only after this hearing, and upon the 
resumption of trial, that defense counsel informed the circuit court that 
"defense has no questions for [CW]." 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [Tran's] mens rea as to [CW's] age." We review the propriety of 
jury instructions de novo, and determine "whether, when read and 
considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially 
insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." State v.
Kato, 147 Hawaiʻ i 478, 490, 465 P.3d 925, 937 (2020) (cleaned 
up). 
Tran was charged pursuant to HRS § 707-733.6. By its 
express terms, HRS § 707-733.6 prohibits the "continuous sexual 
assault of a minor" who is "under the age of fourteen years."4 
HRS § 707-733.6 does not require proof that a person charged with the offense have knowledge of the attendant circumstance of 
the victim's age. 
In State v. Buch, the Hawaiʻ i Supreme Court clarified 
that "a defendant is strictly liable with respect to the attendant circumstance of the victim's age in a sexual assault." 
4 HRS § 707- 733.6 provides, in relevant part, 
(1) A person commits the offense of continuous sexual 
assault of a minor under the age of fourteen years if the 
person: 
(a) Either resides in the same home with a minor 
under the age of fourteen years or has recurring access to the minor; and 
(b) Engages in three or more acts of sexual penetration or sexual contact with the minor over 
a period of time, while the minor is under the 
age of fourteen years. 
(Emphasis added.) 
6   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 83 Hawaiʻ i 308, 315-16, 926 P.2d 599, 606-07 (1996).  The court 
explained that, 
To further its policy of protecting children from sexual 
exploitation by adults, the legislature expressly deleted 
knowledge of the child's age as an element of sexual 
assault offenses in which the child's age is an attendant 
circumstance. By doing so, it  fairly placed on the adult 
the risk of mistake with respect to the child's age.  
Id. at 320, 926 P.2d at 611 (examining the legislative history 
of sexual offense statutes in which the child's age is an 
attendant circumstance). 
In sum, while HRS § 707-733.6 requires the State to 
prove that CW was under the age of fourteen at the time of the continuous sexual assault, it does not require the State to 
prove that Tran knew CW was under the age of fourteen. We 
therefore conclude that the circuit court's jury instructions 
were not prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or 
misleading. 
(3) Tran contends that the testimonies of Dr. 
Natarajan and Dr. Bivens were not relevant, and that the circuit 
court therefore erred by admitting their testimonies. In 
reviewing the circuit court's determinations as to the relevancy of expert witness testimony,
5 we are mindful that, 
5 The admission of expert witness testimony is governed by Hawaii 
Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 702, which states, 
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge 
will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or 
to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an 
7  (continued . . .)   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 5(. . .continued) 
 
 One of the touchstones of admissibility o[f] expert 
testimony under HRE 702 is relevance. In determining the 
relevancy issue, the trial courts' function is akin to the 
relevancy analysis adopted in applying HRE Rules 401 (1993) 
and 402 (1993). Expert testimony must assist the trier of 
fact by providing a resource for ascertaining truth in relevant areas outside the ken of ordinary laity, and 
should include knowledge not possessed by the average trier 
of fact who lacks the expert's skill, experience, training, 
or education. A trial court's relevancy determination is 
reviewed under the right/wrong standard. 
State v. McDonnell, 141 Hawaiʻ i 280, 291, 409 P.3d 684, 695 
(2017) (cleaned up). 
Tran contends Dr. Natarajan's testimony was not 
relevant "because it did not make Tran's abuse more or less 
probable, nor did it provide a reason to believe or not believe 
[CW]." Tran's contention lacks merit. Dr. Natarajan testified 
that, during her examination of CW, she detected a "transection on the hymen" that was "consistent with a penetrating trauma to 
[the hymen]." Dr. Natarajan's testimony was relevant with 
regard to the jury's understanding of the medical evidence and 
its determination of whether Tran sexually assaulted CW. See
State v. Irebaria, 55 Haw. 353, 356, 519 P.2d 1246, 1249 (1974) ("The legitimate tendency to establish a controverted fact is 
expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or 
education may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or 
otherwise. 
In determining the issue of assistance to the 
trier of fact, the court may consider the trustworthiness 
and validity of the scientific technique or mode of 
analysis employed by the proffered expert. 
8   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 all that is required in order that proffered evidence be 
relevant.") (cleaned up). 
Tran contends that Dr. Bivens' testimony regarding 
delayed reporting6 was not relevant because the testimony did not 
"make[] the fact of abuse more or less likely." Tran's contention lacks merit. Expert testimony regarding delayed 
reporting is relevant because it can assist the jury in 
understanding the behavior of child sex abuse victims, and it is therefore admissible so long as the expert does not make 
"conclusory opinions that abuse did occur and that the child 
victim's report of abuse is truthful and believable." See
McDonnell, 141 Hawaiʻ i at 291-92, 409 P.3d at 695-96 (citation 
omitted). The record reflects that Dr. Bivens did not make such 
conclusory opinions. 
Tran further contends Dr. Bivens' testimony regarding 
"incest" was inflammatory and not relevant, and that Dr. Bivens' 
definition of incest
7 was not consistent with HRS § 707-741(1) 
(2014). The State called Dr. Bivens to testify about "the interpersonal dynamics for inter-household child sexual abuse." 
6 CW alleged that Tran started to sexually abuse her when she was 
eight years old, but did not tell her mother until she was thirteen. 
7 At trial, Dr. Bivens defined incest as follows: 
Incest just refers to sex between an adult and a child when 
the adult is a household member, could be a blood family 
relative or a distant relative or a nonrelative, but 
someone who lives in the family setting with the child. 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
   
  
  
 
  
 
    
    Dr. Bivens was qualified to testify as an expert in the field of 
clinical psychology, and he defined the term "incest" within 
that context. Dr. Bivens explained that: "The majority of child 
sexual abuse occurs in the child's home. The second most 
commonplace [sic] is in the molester's home. And obviously in 
the case of incest, those two places are the same place."8 We 
conclude that Dr. Bivens' testimony was relevant in aiding the jury's understanding of the dynamics of child sexual abuse. 
(4) Tran contends the circuit court plainly erred when 
it did not qualify Tran's witness as an expert in front of the jury.
9 The HRE does not preclude the circuit court "from 
declining to qualify a witness as an expert in front of the jury, so long as the requisite foundation for the witness's 
testimony is established." State v. Metcalfe, 129 Hawaiʻ i 206, 
226, 297 P.3d 1062, 1082 (2013) (cleaned up). Moreover, 
"[d]etermination by the court that a witness qualifies as an 
expert is binding upon the trier of fact only as this relates to 
admissibility of the expert's testimony." HRE Rule 702 cmt. 
(2014). 
8 Dr. Bivens' testimony is relevant within the context of CW's 
close relationship with Tran. CW testified that her father had lived with 
Tran and his family for periods of time, and that she would sleep over at 
Tran's home "for about a week or five days" each month. 
9 Tran did not object when the circuit court decided to qualify 
Nurse Wristen outside the presence of the jury. "A complete failure to 
object will waive the point." See State v. Vliet, 91 Hawaiʻ i 288, 299, 983 
P.2d 
189, 200 (1999) (citations omitted). 
10   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 On this record, we conclude that the circuit court did 
not plainly err when it did not qualify Nurse Wristen as an 
expert witness in the jury's presence. 
(5) Tran contends the prosecutor's comments during the 
State's opening, closing, and rebuttal statements constituted 
prosecutorial misconduct. We review allegations of 
prosecutorial misconduct under the harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt standard, 
which requires an examination of the record and a 
determination of whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of might have contributed to the 
conviction. Factors considered are: (1) the nature of the 
conduct; (2) the promptness of a curative instruction; and 
(3) the strength or weakness of the evidence against the 
defendant.  
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawaiʻ i 504, 513, 78 P.3d 317, 326 (2003) 
(cleaned up). 
We first address Tran's contention that the 
prosecutor's opening statement presented an improper "factual 
recitation of personal opinion."  In doing so, we observe that 10
10 Tran challenges the following statements made during the 
prosecutor's opening statement: 
[CW] was 8 years old. . . . When [the CW] was 8, a 
man whom she loved and trusted was touching her and groping
her, and she didn't know what to do. He was touching her 
private parts, her genitalia, with his hand. 
The first 
time it was outside of her clothes. She hoped that her 
daddy would walk through the front door. She was confused.
But her daddy did not walk through the front door for a 
long time, and so [CW] just laid there and she took it.  
The man who did that to [CW] is her dad's best 
friend.   He's seated next to defense counsel. He is 
[Tran].  . . .   
 
 (continued . . .) 
11   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  Tran has not demonstrated the prosecutor's remarks were 
"speculative," nor that they "refer[red] to things the evidence 
 10(. . .continued) 
 
 . . . . 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 From the time that [CW] was 8 to 12 years of age, 
approximately from January of 2015 to January 31st  of two 
thousand -- of 2020, [Tran] repeatedly sexually molested 
her.   It occurred in the Pacific Heights homes that [Tran] 
either shared with her father or in the home that he lived 
in right next door to her father whenever [CW] would visit.  
[Tran] would place his hand on [CW's] chest or on her 
breast when  she started developing breasts.  [Tran] would 
rub his hand on her breast over the clothes and skin to skin. He would place his mouth on her breast, licking her 
breast. . . .  
[Tran] asked her if she wanted to have sex, and when 
[CW]  was 8 years old, she said yes.   She didn't even know 
what sex was.  [Tran] placed his mouth on what she calls 
her private part, in other words her genitalia. [Tran] 
licked her genitalia, which made her feel very  
uncomfortable. She was scared. [Tran] also inserted his 
finger into her vagina, into what she calls her private 
part, her genitals, and it hurt her, it caused her pain. . 
. .  
. . . . 
[CW] wanted to tell.   
 She was afraid to tell. She 
tried to tell her mom on more than one occasion, and she 
finally got the guts to tell her mother  in May of 2020, on 
Mother's Day. . . .  
The doctor who performed the examination is highly 
qualified. . . . The doctor examined [CW] and she found that [CW] had genital trauma, in other words[,]  an injury 
consistent with sexual penetration with either a finger or 
with a penis. . . . It's called a transection to the 
hymen, in other words[,] a deep, healed tear to the hymen that's consistent with sexual penetration.  
 
At the conclusion of this case, the State will ask 
that you find [Tran] guilty of the crime of Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of 14. [Tran] was 
not related to [CW] in any way. The State will ask that 
you find him guilty as charged because he violated [CW].  
(Emphasis added.) 
12   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 [would] not (and did not) show." See State v. Sanchez, 82 
Hawaiʻi 517, 528, 923 P.2d 934, 945 (App. 1996) ("The State 
should only refer in the opening statement to evidence that it 
has a genuine good-faith belief will be produced at trial.") 
(cleaned up). 
After careful review of the record, we also determine 
that the prosecutor's opening remarks do not appear to express 
her personal views as to Tran's guilt. See State v. Barrios, 
139 Hawaiʻ i 321, 329, 389 P.3d 916, 924 (2016) ("[I]t is 
generally recognized under 
Hawaiʻi case law that prosecutors are 
bound to refrain from expressing their personal views as to a defendant's guilt or the credibility of witnesses.") (cleaned 
up). 
We next address Tran's contention that the 
prosecutor's use of "we" and "us," during the State's closing 
and rebuttal arguments, constituted prosecutorial misconduct. 
"A prosecutor is allowed wide latitude in discussing the 
evidence during closing argument . . . [and] may state, discuss, and comment on the evidence as well as draw all reasonable 
inferences from the evidence." State v. Pasene, 144 Hawaiʻ i 339, 
367, 439 P.3d 864, 892 (2019) (cleaned up). 
A prosecutor may 
not, however, use inclusive pronouns in an attempt to "impl[y] 
that the jury and the State ha[ve] similar interests and [are] 
13   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
   
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
   
    
 
   
 
 
 
  working together" to convict the defendant. State v. Conroy, 
148 Hawaiʻ i 194, 202, 468 P.3d 208, 216 (2020). 
The record reflects that the prosecutor used the words 
"we" and "us" during her closing and rebuttal arguments in 
general reference to evidence admitted (e.g., "we have . . . "), 
or arguments made by the State (e.g., "we spoke about . . . ") 
at trial.11 Unlike in Conroy, it does not appear that "we" and 
11 The prosecutor used "we" and "us" in the following context: 
And we have little [CW] trying to protect herself in 
a way that a child - -only a child could. We have the 
unicorn onesie. And she told us that that was her way of 
trying to keep from being molested by [Tran]. . . . 
. . . . 
At the beginning of this case, we spoke about child 
witnesses. If the only witness was a child and believed --
and you believed that child, that you could convict, you 
could find the defendant guilty. 
. . . And we know that child molestation usually happens 
behind closed doors[.] 
. . . . 
Members of the jury, although we spoke so much about 
a single witness, this is a case that has even more than 
the testimony of a single witness. . . . 
. . . We have the testimony of [Dr. Natarajan], who is 
very qualified. . . . 
. . . . What does [ Dr. Bivens] tell us? He tells us that 
it's not the stranger who comes out of the bushes. . . . 
. . . . 
. . . [CW's] mom would tell us that ages 10 and 11, that 
[CW] started acting kind of strangely[.] 
 (continued . . .) 
14   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 "us" were used in the instant case to create an "implication of 
unity" or "the suggestion of an alliance between the State and 
the jury" against Tran. See id. at 202-03, 468 P.3d at 216-17. 
We therefore conclude that the prosecutor's usage of "we" and "us" was not improper when considered within the context of the 
11(. . .continued) 
. . . [CW's dad] would tell us [CW] had the run of the 
house. [CW' s dad] told us that [the] room was empty 
sometimes because [Tran' s] mother had a house somewhere 
else. . . . 
 . . . . 
. . . That [Tran] during the same time period, January 1, 
2015, to January 31, 2020 -- that he intentionally or 
knowingly resided or had recurring access -- that he 
resided in the same house as [CW] or had recurring access 
to her. We can check that off. . . . 
 . . . . 
. . . And we're going to talk about different ways that 
[CW] testified to each of these elements. 
 . . . . 
. . . We have [Tran's] sister, who read the police reports 
in this case, who read [CW' s] transcript. 
 . . . . 
. . . And lo and behold, we have the sister testifying 
that she kicked [CW] out on Mother' s Day. . . . 
 . . . . 
. . . We have the brother saying that [Tran] worked 24/7 
or worked 7 days a week during the middle of the night. . . 
. 
. . . Well, the defense' s own witness . . . tells us the 
first line out of his mouth was, well, if my mother came --was there. So that tells us that sometimes his mom slept 
over somewhere else.  . . . . 
(Emphasis added.) 
15   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  prosecutor's statements, the evidence presented, and the 
reasonable inferences that a jury could draw from the evidence. 
See State v. Brown, 157 Hawaiʻ i 354, 380-81, 577 P.3d 1045, 1071-
72 (2025) (determining that the prosecutor's use of "we know," 
during closing and rebuttal arguments, "were permissible turns 
of phrase uttered in sentences drawing reasonable inferences 
from the trial evidence and did not constitute prosecutorial 
misconduct" when considering the facts and circumstances of the 
case). 
We finally consider Tran's contention that the 
prosecutor, during rebuttal argument, improperly stated that 
"The State asks that you return a just verdict in this case and that you find [Tran] guilty as charged[.]" (Emphasis added.) 
Tran did not object to the prosecutor's statement. 
Nevertheless, the circuit court sua sponte struck the word 
"just" from the record. 
The prosecutor's reference to a "just" verdict was 
improper because it "diverted the jury from its duty to decide 
the case on the evidence." See Conroy
, 148 Hawaiʻi at 202, 468 
P.3d at 216 (cleaned up). We conclude, however, that the 
circuit court's prompt curative action rendered the alleged 
prosecutorial misconduct harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
See Wakisaka
, 102 Hawaiʻi at 513, 78 P.3d at 326. 
16   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 II. State's Point of Error 
Pursuant to our conclusions in part I above, the 
State's cross-appeal is moot. See State v. Okuda, 71 Haw. 434, 
456, 795 P.2d 1, 13 (1990); State v. Cullen, 86 
Hawaiʻi 1, 13, 
946 P.2d 955, 967 (1997). 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻ i, January 28, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
 Thomas M. Otake, for Defendant-Appellant/ 
Cross-Appellee.  
 
Daniel A.J. Hugo, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu for Plaintiff-Appellee/ Cross-Appellant.  /s/ Katherine G. Leonard Presiding Judge  /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
Associate Judge 
 /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
Associate Judge  
 
17 