NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000086
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KIMO KAHALA ST. LAURENT, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-0031)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Kimo Kahala St. Laurent (St.
 
Laurent) appeals from the January 11, 2012 Judgment of Conviction
 
and Probation Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the Fifth
 Circuit (Circuit Court).
1
 
On appeal, St. Laurent maintains that the Circuit Court
 
erred in denying his Motion to Suppress Evidence. St. Laurent
 argues that this denial was in error based on the Circuit Court's
 erroneous finding that the search warrant issued described the
 subject residence with sufficient particularity and that there
 was sufficient probable cause to issue the search warrant. 
After a careful review of the record, the issues raised
 
and arguments made by the parties, and the applicable authority,
 we resolve St. Laurent's points on appeal as follows and affirm.
 
1. The search warrant was supported by probable
 
cause. 
Under the safeguards of the fourth amendment to the United
States Constitution and article I, section 7 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution, all arrests and searches must be based uponprobable cause. 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Probable cause exists when the facts and circumstances
 
within one's knowledge and of which one has reasonably
trustworthy information are sufficient in themselves to
warrant a person of reasonable caution to believe that an
offense has been committed. Direct evidence, however, is not
necessary for a probable cause determination by the [judge].
The issuance of a search warrant is prohibited except upon a
finding of probable cause supported by oath or affirmation.
 
State v. Navas, 81 Hawai 'i 113, 115-16, 913 P.2d 39, 41-42 (1996) 
(citations and footnotes omitted). The appellate court will 
review whether the search warrant presented probable cause de novo. Id., at 123, 913 P.2d at 49. Here, there was probable cause to issue the warrant. St. Laurent does not dispute the Circuit Court's findings that on two occasions the police, through the use of a cooperating source (CS), conducted two controlled purchases of methamphetamine from Kaikane Sherman (Sherman) from within the residence located at 2863 Aukoi Street. St. Laurent does not dispute that this information was provided to the issuing judge. 
St. Laurent's argument that probable cause was lacking 
because it "failed to establish any basis from which [officer/affiant] could conclude that . . . Sherman was dealing drugs from his residence" is without merit. The affidavit in support of the application contains the averment that the officer received a tip from her CS that Sherman was distributing methamphetamine from "his residence on Aukoi Street in L
ihu'e." 
In any event, St. Laurent provides no authority for the proposition that, where there is reliable information that the target of the search is conducting hand-to-hand sales of illicit drugs from within a given location, there must also be evidence that the location is his residence to establish probable cause, and we find none. 
2. St. Laurent's second point that the affidavit in
 
support of the search warrant contained false information, and
 without the false information it failed to establish probable
 cause, is equally without merit. For this point, St. Laurent
 again relies on his position that Sherman did not "reside" at
 2863 Aukoi Street. St. Laurent points to no evidence that the
 officer/affiant had information, at the time of the submission of
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the warrant application, that Sherman did not reside at the
 
target residence. Again, to the contrary, the officer averred
 that information given to her by her CS was that the target
 property was Sherman's residence.
2 Nevertheless, as it was not
 
necessary to the determination of probable cause for a warrant to
 search Sherman or the target property from which Sherman
 distributed drugs that he live at the residence, the averments
 regarding his residency could be excised without undermining the
 sufficiency of the remaining information underlying the finding
 of probable cause. See State v. Sepa, 72 Haw. 141, 144, 88 P.2d
 
848, 850 (1991) ("[O]nce a defendant establishes that an
 affidavit supporting a search warrant contains material
 misstatements of fact, the reviewing court must determine whether
 the affidavit's content, with the false material omitted, is
 sufficient to establish probable cause.")
 
Based on the foregoing, the January 11, 2012 Judgment
 
of Conviction and Probation Sentence entered by the Circuit Court
 of the Fifth Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 17, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Taryn R. Tomasa,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant.
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Charles A. Foster,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Kaua 'i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
2
 Indeed, even after the hearing on St. Laurent's motion to
suppress, this point is unclear. Officer Pia testified that she believed
 
Sherman lived at the residence, and that Marlene Schimmelfenning either lived
permanently or "off and on" at the property and that Sherman was residing at
the residence with St. Laurent. St. Laurent testified that Sherman would
 occasionally come over to the Aukoi residence and spend the night. As St.
 Laurent did not argue before the Circuit Court that information regarding
Sherman's residency at the target property was essential to establishing
probable cause for the warrant, the court was not asked to resolve this issue.
 
3
 