NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000158
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
SENITA TUIVAILALA, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(SPP NO. 10-1-0005(3); CR NO.07-1-0367(3))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Senita Tuivailala (Tuivailala) 
appeals from the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order 
Denying (1) Motion to Grant Rule 40 Petition, and (2) Petition for Post-Conviction Relief" (Order Denying Rule 40 Petition) that was filed in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court) on March 8, 2011.
1 On appeal, Tuivailala contends that 
the Circuit Court erred in denying his "Petition for Post-Conviction Relief" (Petition), which he filed pursuant to Hawai' i 
Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 (2006), without an evidentiary hearing. Tuivailala argues that he does not understand English and therefore his trial counsel provided ineffective assistance by failing to comply with Tuivailala's request for a Tongan interpreter. Tuivailala asserts that 
1 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
because he lacked an interpreter, his no contest plea was not
 
entered knowingly or voluntarily. We affirm.
 
I.
 
In the underlying criminal case, Tuivailala was charged
 
with first-degree assault (Count 1) and second-degree assault
 (Count 2). The alleged victim in both counts was Tuivailala's
 wife. In the midst of a jury trial, Tuivailala decided to plead
 no contest to the first-degree assault charged in Count 1.
2
 
During the plea colloquy, which was conducted without an
 
interpreter, Tuivailala acknowledged that: (1) he understood
 English, which he was taught by his wife; (2) he could speak and
 read in English; (3) he could write in English "[a] little bit";
 (4) he understood the Circuit Court's explanation of the various
 rights he was waiving by pleading no contest and the consequences
 of his plea; (5) he had no questions regarding what the Circuit
 Court had discussed with him; and (6) he was certain that he
 wanted to plead no contest to Count 1. During his allocution at
 sentencing, Tuivailala spoke at length in English, expressing
 remorse for his conduct and asking the Circuit Court for
 leniency, in a manner that was easy to comprehend.
 
The Circuit Court sentenced Tuivailala to the maximum
 
term of ten years of imprisonment and ordered that this sentence
 be served consecutively to a sentence imposed in another case. 
There is no indication in the trial record that Tuivailala raised
 his alleged inability to understand English with the Circuit
 Court at any time before the Circuit Court imposed its sentence. 
Tuivailala did not file a direct appeal from his underlying
 conviction or sentence.
 
Tuivailala filed his Petition pursuant to HRPP Rule 40
 
and was subequently appointed counsel. The Circuit Court held a 
2
 Although Tuivailala stated his willingness to plead no contest to both
counts, the prosecutor expressed the view that Counts 1 and 2 would merge, and
Tuivailala's no contest plea only involved Count 1. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
non-evidentiary hearing on Tuivailala's Petition. At the
 
hearing, the Circuit Court stated:
 
At the time of sentencing when Mr. Tuivailala was
given the opportunity to address the Court, he presented to
the Court a long statement concerning his circumstances in
life, . . . [indicating] a very good understanding of the
English language as well as the ability to address the Court
in English, and in an effective manner. 
The Circuit Court further concluded that based on 
the record of this proceeding concerning what occurred at
the time of the change of plea, Mr. Tuivailala's ability to
proceed without an interpreter and without any complaint
about that both at the time of trial, the change of plea,
and at sentencing, and his ability to articulate his
thoughts, there is no trace of support in the record that
would warrant the grant of this petition.
 
The Circuit Court subsequently issued its written Order Denying
 
Rule 40 Petition.
 
II.
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
 
denying Tuivailala's Petition without an evidentiary hearing. 
Tuivailala's ineffective assistance of counsel claim was premised
 on his assertion that he does not understand English and thus
 needed a Tongan interpreter in order to enter a valid no contest
 plea. 
In general, a petitioner is entitled to an evidentiary 
hearing on his or her claim if the petition alleges facts that if proven would entitle the petitioner to relief. HRPP Rule 40(f) However, the court may deny a petition without a hearing "if the petitioner's claim is patently frivolous and is without trace of support either in the record or from other evidence submitted by the petitioner." Id.; see Dan v. State, 76 Hawai' i 423, 427, 879 
P.2d 528, 532 (1994). "Where examination of the record of the trial court proceedings indicates that the petitioner's allegations show no colorable claim, it is not error to deny the petition without a hearing." Dan, 76 Hawai' i at 427, 879 P.2d at 
532.
 
Here, the record conclusively refutes Tuivailala's
 
claim that his inability to understand English prevented him from
 
3
  
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
entering a knowing and voluntary plea of no contest. Tuivailala
 
not only specifically represented to the Circuit Court that he
 understood English, but he demonstrated his command of the
 English language during his lengthy sentencing allocution. 
The record plainly establishes that Tuivailala had a 
sufficient command and understanding of the English language to enter a valid no contest plea.
3 We conclude that the Circuit 
Court did not err in ruling that Tuivailala's claim for relief was "patently frivolous and without a trace of support in the record" and in denying Tuivailala's Petition without an evidentiary hearing. See Dan, 76 Hawai' i at 427, 879 P.2d at 
532; Cun-Lara v. State, --- Hawai' i ---, ---, 273 P.3d 1227, 
1239-40 (2012).
4 
III.
 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Order Denying Rule 40
 
Petition.  
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 31, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Gerald T. Johnson
 
for Petitioner-Appellant
 
Chief Judge
Richard K. Minatoya
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Maui
for Respondent-Appellee 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
3
 We also note that Tuivailala did not allege in the Circuit Court
proceedings that but for his trial counsel's alleged ineffective assistance,
Tuivailala would not have pleaded no contest to Count 1. Thus, Tuivailala'sallegations were insufficient to satisfy the "prejudice" prong of an HRPP Rule40 ineffective assistance of counsel claim. See Dan, 76 Hawai' i at 427-33,
879 P.2d at 532-38. 
4
 The Circuit Court denied Tuivailala's Petition on the alternative
 
ground that he waived his claim for relief by failing to file a direct appeal.
Given our holding that the Circuit Court properly denied Tuivailala's Petition
on the merits, we need not address Tuivailala's contention that the Circuit
Court erred in concluding that he had waived his claim for relief.
 
4
 