      
             
     
      
        
     
      
       
        NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000728 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
RALPH RIVEIRA, JR., aka Ralph Riveira,
Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1PC131000403 (CR. NO. 13-1-0403)) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Ralph Riveira, Jr., also known as 
Ralph Riveira (Riveira), appeals from the September 26, 2017 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) entered by the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).   After a 
jury trial, Riveira was convicted of one count of Attempted Assault Against a Law Enforcement Officer in the First Degree in
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 705-500 (2014)  and 
21
 
1 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided. 
2 §705-500 Criminal attempt. (1) A person is guilty of an attempt to 
commit a crime if the person: 
(a) Intentionally engages in conduct which would constitute
the crime if the attendant circumstances were as the person believes them to be; or 
(b) Intentionally engages in conduct which, under thecircumstances as the person believes them to be,constitutes a substantial step in a course of conduct         
          
               
           
          
              
     
       
          
 
      
          
        
      
        
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
707-712.5(1)(a) (2014)3.  Riveira was sentenced to a ten-year 
extended term as a multiple and persistent offender. 
On appeal, Riveira asserts that his trial counsel 
provided ineffective assistance of counsel and that the circuit 
court deprived him of a fair trial when it failed to fully 
investigate alleged juror misconduct.  Riveira also asserts that 
the circuit court erred by: admitting prior bad act evidence; 
refusing to remove exhibit labels displaying the initial 
"attempted murder" classification of the case; and sentencing him 
to an extended sentence. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Riveira's 
points of error as follows. 
A. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel On February 21, 2017, Plaintiff-Appellee State of 
Hawai# i (State) filed its Motion in Limine No. 4, which sought, 
inter alia 
, to preclude Riveira from introducing medical records, 
lay or expert testimony, and photographs or demonstrations of the 
intended to culminate in the person's commission of the
crime. 
(2) When causing a particular result is an element of the
crime, a person is guilty of an attempt to commit the crime if, acting with thestate of mind required to establish liability with respect to the attendantcircumstances specified in the definition of the crime, the person intentionallyengages in conduct which is a substantial step in a course of conduct intended orknown to cause such a result. 
(3) Conduct shall not be considered a substantial step
under this section unless it is strongly corroborative of the defendant'scriminal intent. 
3 HRS § 707-712.5 provides in pertinent part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of assault against a law
enforcement officer in the first degree if the person: 
(a) Intentionally or knowingly causes bodily injury to
a law enforcement officer who is engaged in theperformance of duty[.] 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
injuries sustained by Riveira as a result of a March 8, 2013 
incident at 1618 Machado Street.  During that incident, Riveira 
was alleged to have attempted to stab Officer Joselito Obena 
(Officer Obena) of the Honolulu Police Department with a metal 
tent stake, which resulted in Officer Obena shooting Riveira. 
At the hearing on the State's Motion in Limine No. 4, 
Riveira's trial counsel confirmed that he would not be 
introducing any medical evidence or records nor would he be 
introducing the testimony of experts or other witnesses that 
treated Riveira for his gunshot wounds.  Rather, Riveira's 
counsel stated that he would instead seek to introduce lay 
testimony from Riveira himself as to the injuries he sustained. 
Riveira's counsel elaborated that "the reason for that is all the 
doctors who treated [Riveira] during his stay at Queen's have now 
relocated to the mainland."  The circuit court entered its Order 
Granting in Part and Denying in Part State's Motion in Limine No. 
4, precluding Riveira from introducing medical records or expert 
testimony pertaining to the nature or scope of the injuries 
sustained by Riveira as a result of the March 8, 2013 incident. 
However, the circuit court held that Riveira would be permitted 
to provide lay testimony regarding the location of the injuries 
sustained as a result of the March 8, 2013 incident and to show 
such to the jury. 
On appeal, Riveira argues that his trial counsel's 
failure to investigate and introduce testimony of medical and/or 
ballistics experts amounted to ineffective assistance of counsel. 
Riveira posits that the testimonial evidence could have refuted 
the testimony and evidence adduced from the State's witnesses, 
and shown that Riveira had not attempted to assault Officer 
Obena. 
Ineffective assistance of counsel claims based on the 
failure to investigate and obtain witness testimony "must be 
supported by affidavits or sworn statements describing the 
testimony of the proffered witnesses."  State v. Richie, 88 
3    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai# i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998).  Despite Riveira's 
speculations as to what the medical and/or ballistics experts' 
testimonies could have established, Riveira fails to point to 
affidavits or sworn statements in the record indicating what the 
expert witnesses would have actually testified to and we find 
none.  See id. Absent any reliable evidence of what these 
witnesses would have testified to, we are unable to determine whether the absence of their testimonies deprived Riveira of a 
potentially meritorious defense.  Accordingly, Riveira's claim 
for ineffective assistance of counsel fails. 
B. Juror Misconduct On the first day of the jury trial on March 2, 2017, 
during the State's presentation of its case, Juror No. 7 reported to the circuit court via a voicemail message that she was 
concerned about unspecified comments another juror had made to 
her and one other juror, both of whom she did not identify in her 
message.  Upon receiving the message from Juror No. 7, the 
circuit court met with counsel for both parties,
4 outside of the 
presence of the jury, and stated that 
because the Court has an affirmative duty to investigate,
and I'm not sure what the nature of the statement that [Juror No. 7 is] referring to, or the extent of the concern. . . . what I propose is bringing [Juror No. 7] in, allowthe Court to speak with her, to gather some information,maybe necessary to speak to more than just that juror, andfollow it through to its conclusion, and then we can addressthe impact of that, if any. 
The circuit court then called Juror No. 7 in for questioning. 
Juror No. 7 stated that the comments she reported were made by 
Juror No. 1 and regarded Juror No. 1's statements about her 
inability to remember things, and when Juror No. 7 told Juror No. 
1 that it was important to remember the facts, Juror No. 1 said 
"[w]ho cares."  Further, when Juror No. 7 suggested to Juror No. 
1 that maybe she should excuse herself if she did not think she 
could remember the facts, Juror No. 1 expressed an opinion about 
4 Riveira was also present. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the case by making a statement to the effect of, "it's really 
easy 'cause it looks really bad for [Riveira]."  Juror No. 7 also 
identified Juror No. 3 as being present when Juror No. 1 made 
those comments, and the circuit court therefore also questioned 
Juror No. 3.  After questioning Jurors No. 3 and No. 7 about the 
alleged comments by Juror No. 1 and whether the comments were 
heard by other jurors, the circuit court discussed the issue with 
trial counsel for both parties and upon their agreement, decided 
to excuse Juror No. 1.  The circuit court called in Juror No. 1 
and dismissed her without further inquiry.  An alternate juror 
replaced Juror No. 1. 
On appeal, Riveira asserts that he was deprived of a 
fair trial due to the circuit court's decision not to question 
the other jurors, including Juror No. 1, as to whether other 
jurors were exposed to the comments and could remain fair and 
impartial.  Inasmuch as Riveira failed to object to the circuit 
court's handling of the juror's misconduct or move for a new 
trial, we must determine whether the alleged error amounted to 
plain error which affected the substantial rights of the 
defendant.  See State v. Fagaragan, 115 Hawai# i 364, 367-68, 167 
P.3d 739, 742-43 (2007) ("Normally, an issue not preserved at trial is deemed to be waived.  But where plain errors were 
committed and substantial rights were affected thereby, the 
errors may be noticed although they were not brought to the 
attention of the trial court." (internal quotation marks, 
citations, and brackets omitted)). 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has stated that the following 
procedure should be followed in the trial court when a defendant 
claims that the jury was exposed to an improper influence: 
When a defendant in a criminal case claims a deprivation of
the right to a fair trial by an impartial jury, the initialstep for the trial court to take is to determine whether thenature of the alleged deprivation rises to the level ofbeing substantially prejudicial.  If it does not rise to such a level, the trial court is under no duty tointerrogate the jury.  And whether it does rise to the level of substantial prejudice is ordinarily a question committedto the trial court's discretion. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Where the trial court does determine that 
such alleged deprivation is of a naturewhich could substantially prejudice thedefendant's right to a fair trial, arebuttable presumption of prejudice israised.  The trial judge is then dutybound to further investigate the totalityof circumstances surrounding the allegeddeprivation to determine its impact onjury impartiality.  The standard to be applied in overcoming such a presumptionis that the alleged deprivation must beproved harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
The defendant bears the initial burden of 
making a prima facie showing of adeprivation that could substantiallyprejudice his or her right to a fair trialby an impartial jury.  But once a rebuttable presumption of prejudice israised, the burden of proving harmlessnessfalls squarely on the prosecution. 
State v. Chin, 135 Hawai# i 437, 445, 353 P.3d 979, 987 (2015) 
(emphases in original) (brackets omitted) (quoting State v. 
Bailey, 126 Hawai# i 383, 399-400, 271 P.3d 1142, 1158-59 (2012)). 
Although it is apparent that the circuit court found 
Juror No. 1's misconduct5 to have impacted her own ability to 
serve as a juror, the circuit court did not determine on the record whether the comments purportedly made by Juror No. 1, when 
conveyed to other jurors, were of a nature that could 
substantially prejudice Riveira's right to a fair trial.  In 
other words, whether the misconduct could have infected the rest 
of the jury. 
"It is a generally accepted principle of trial 
administration that jurors must not engage in discussions of a 
case before they have heard both the evidence and the court's 
legal instructions and have begun formally deliberating as a 
collective body."  United States v. Resko, 3 F.3d 684, 688–89 (3d 
5 "'Juror  misconduct'  does  not  necessarily  mean  a  juror's  bad  faith  or
malicious  motive,  but  means  a  violation  of,  or  departure  from,  an  established
rule  or  procedure  for  production  of  a  valid  verdict."   Oahu  Publ'ns  Inc.  v.  Ahn, 
133  Hawai #i   482,  490  n.8,  331  P.3d  460,  468  n.8  (2014). 
6        
             
      
      
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Cir. 1993).  Although other courts have observed that extra-jury 
communication poses a far more serious threat to a defendant's 
right to be tried by an impartial jury than intra-jury 
communications, they have not foreclosed the possibility that intra-jury communication could be substantially prejudicial.  See 
Resko, 3 F.3d at 690-691 (stating that "[i]t is well-established 
that [extra-jury communications] pose a far more serious threat 
to the defendant's right to be tried by an impartial jury," but 
also holding that "when jury misconduct (including improper 
intra-jury influences) has been alleged, the district court 
should: ascertain whether the misconduct actually occurred; if it 
did, determine whether it was prejudicial[.]").  Intra-jury 
communication through premature deliberation 76
present[s] a number of dangers, all in some manner affecting
or touching upon the criminal defendant's Sixth Amendmentright to a fair and impartial jury trial.  In Resko, [the court] identified a number of these: 
(1) Since premature deliberations are morelikely to occur before the defendant hashad an opportunity to present his or hercase, the prosecution has an unfairinfluence on the juror's initialimpressions; 
(2) Once a juror has expressed views on a
particular issue, that juror has a "stake"in the expressed view and may give undueweight to additional evidence thatsupports, rather than undercuts, his orher view; 
(3) Individual conversations between
selected jurors thwart the goal of acollective, deliberative process betweenthe jurors as a group; 
(4) Often, the premature deliberations
occur before the jurors are instructed onthe reasonable doubt standard, and hencethe jurors may reach a result using anincorrect, and unconstitutional, standardof proof. 
6 "[Extra-jury or] extraneous influence includes, among other things,
. . . third-party communications with sitting jurors." Meyer v. State , 119 Nev. 
554, 562, 80 P.3d 447, 454 (2003). 
7 "[I]ntra-jury or intrinsic influences involve improper discussions
among jurors[.]" Id. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
United States v. Bertoli, 40 F.3d 1384, 1393 (3d Cir. 1994) 
(citing Resko, 3 F.3d at 689–70). 
Leading up to the dismissal of Juror No. 1, the circuit 
court instructed the jurors on several occasions throughout the 
trial to keep an open mind and not to discuss any matter relating 
to the case.  Further, after jury selection, the circuit court 
relayed to the jurors that 
once the closing arguments are completed, then for the first
time you will -- the twelve jurors that will be deciding thecase will retire to the jury deliberation room . . . .  And once you're in there . . . , then for the first time you canbegin to consider the evidence and arrive at decisions thatyou have to make in reaching your verdicts. 
The purported pre-deliberation comment made by Juror No. 1 
relating to her impression of the case was violative of the 
circuit court's instructions and of a nature that could influence 
the other jurors' opinions and therefore could substantially 
prejudice Riveira's right to a fair trial.  See Chin, 135 Hawai# i 
at 447-48, 353 P.3d at 989-90 ("While we do not consider whether a violation of any court instruction may warrant investigation, 
here, the court's instruction to the jury specifically directed 
'Do not talk to the defendant, lawyers, witnesses or anybody else 
connected with this case.'  As the instruction here is consistent 
with our historical policy of preventing outside influence on a 
jury, the violation of that instruction provides additional 
evidence that the influence is of a nature that could 
substantially prejudice a defendant's right to a fair trial."); 
see also Bertoli, 40 F.3d at 1393.  Therefore, the circuit court 
was duty bound to further investigate the totality of 
circumstances surrounding the alleged misconduct. 
While questioning Jurors No. 3 and No. 7, it appears 
that the circuit court also began investigating the issue to 
determine the totality of the circumstances surrounding the 
alleged misconduct and to determine its impact on jury 
impartiality.  During the voir dire of Jurors No. 3 and No. 7, 
the two jurors confirmed that they did not believe Juror No. 1 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conveyed the comments to anyone else or that anyone else 
overheard Juror No. 1 conveying the comments to them, and that 
the comments had not affected their own impartiality.  However, 
the circuit court never questioned Juror No. 1, whose purported 
comments were central to Riveira's assertion of juror misconduct, 
about what her comments actually were and if they were expressed 
to anyone else.  The circuit court also did not question any 
other juror.  Thus, we conclude that the circuit court did not 
have the totality of circumstances surrounding the alleged 
misconduct before it and could not determine whether the 
purported comments were harmless or not.  See Chin 135 Hawai# i at 
448, 353 P.3d at 990 ("[W]here a prima facie case of improper influence has been shown, raising a presumption of prejudice, the 
totality of the circumstances includes, at a minimum, the court's 
examination of the juror or jurors involved in the misconduct."); 
State v. Williamson, 72 Haw. 97, 104, 807 P.2d 593, 597 (1991) 
("[B]y not inquiring into the identity of the juror who brought 
the dictionary and obtaining a personal explanation from him or 
her as to its use, the trial court did not have before it the 
totality of circumstances surrounding the misconduct to decide 
whether it was harmless."); cf. State v. Amorin, 58 Haw. 623, 
631, 574 P.2d 895, 900 (1978) (holding that the trial court had 
effectively investigated the totality of the circumstances by 
examining the relevant juror, as well as the foreperson of the 
jury who had knowledge of the relevant juror's misconduct).  The 
circuit court's failure to voir dire Juror No. 1 and fully 
investigate the alleged misconduct was an error that affected 
Riveira's substantial rights and therefore constituted plain 
error.  Based on our disposition of this issue, we need not 
address Riveira's remaining points of error. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the September 26, 2017 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered by the Circuit Court 
of the First Circuit is vacated and the matter is remanded for a 
new trial. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, August 25, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza,
Chief Judge 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard,
Associate Judge 
/s/ Derrick H. M. Chan,
Associate Judge Brian R. Vincent,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Salina Kanai Althof,for Defendant-Appellant. 
10 