 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000524
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MARCO A. TAPIA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR NO. 10-1-1449)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Marco A. Tapia (Tapia) appeals from
 
the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) filed on 
June 8, 2011, in the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family
 Court).
1 Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) charged 
Tapia with abuse of a family or household member, in violation of
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 709-906 (Supp. 2011).
2 The
 
complaining witness (CW) was Tapia's girlfriend, and they resided
 together. 
1
 The Honorable Fa' auuga To' oto'o presided. 
2
 HRS § 709-906 provides in relevant part:
 
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, singly or in
concert, to physically abuse a family or household member . . . . 
For the purposes of this section, "family or household
member" means spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, former spouses
or reciprocal beneficiaries, persons who have a child in common,
parents, children, persons related by consanguinity, and persons
jointly residing or formerly residing in the same dwelling unit.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A jury found Tapia guilty as charged. The Family Court
 
sentenced Tapia to a two-year term of probation, subject to the
 
condition that he serve fourteen days in jail. Tapia's sentence
 was stayed pending appeal.
 
On appeal, Tapia argues that the Family Court committed
 
plain error in instructing the jury on self-defense. As
 explained below, we conclude that the Family Court erred in
 failing to adequately instruct the jury that Tapia was entitled
 to estimate the necessity for the use of protective force without
 retreating and that this error was not harmless beyond a
 reasonable doubt. Accordingly, we vacate the Family Court's
 Judgment and remand the case for a new trial. 
I.
 
Tapia and the CW argued in the car while Tapia drove to
 
a condominium owned by the CW's parents. According to the CW's
 trial testimony, after Tapia parked the car, Tapia threw the car
 key on her as he "tried to get out of the car." The CW then
 slapped Tapia in the head. In response, Tapia got back into the
 car and hit or punched the CW at least five or six times, causing
 her to suffer pain, while she covered her face with her arms. 
Tapia testified in his own defense at trial. Tapia
 
testified that after he parked the car, he threw the keys on the
 dashboard. According to Tapia, the CW became upset and slapped
 Tapia in the head by his ear. The CW hit Tapia several times. 
Tapia defended himself by turning his head away from the CW and
 extending his hand toward the CW and "swatting" at her to keep
 her away. Tapia stopped when he saw the CW protecting herself. 
Tapia testified that he struck the CW in self-defense and that he
 had not stepped out of the car before striking the CW. 
II.
 
Tapia argues that the Family Court committed plain
 
error in failing to give the jury an instruction that adequately
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
explained the law of self defense.3 Among other things, Tapia
 
argues that the Family Court's instruction was deficient because
 
it failed to inform the jury that Tapia "did not need to
 retreat[.]" 
HRS § 703–304 (1993 & Supp. 2011), which sets forth the
 
justification defense of use of force in self-protection
 (self-defense), provides in pertinent part:
 
(1) . . . the use of force upon or toward another
person is justifiable when the actor believes that such
force is immediately necessary for the purpose of protecting
himself against the use of unlawful force by the other
person on the present occasion.
 
. . . .
 
(3) . . . a person employing protective force may
estimate the necessity thereof under the circumstances as he
believes them to be when the force is used without
 retreating . . . . 
(Emphasis added.) 
The self-defense instruction given by the Family Court
 
did not include any reference to the statutory language that a
 
person may estimate the necessity of employing protective force
 "without retreating[.]" The Family Court's self-defense
 instruction provided in relevant part:
 
The reasonableness of the defendant's belief that the
 
use of such protective force was immediately necessary shall
be determined from the viewpoint of a reasonable person in
the defendant's position under the circumstances of which
the defendant was aware or as the defendant reasonably
believed them to be.
 
In closing argument, the prosecutor, in addressing
 
Tapia's self-defense claim, argued that Tapia's actions in
 
striking the CW were not immediately necessary because "[h]e was
 actually exiting the car. And even if he wasn't exiting, he
 certainly could have gotten out of that car." The prosecutor
 
3 The instruction challenged by Tapia on appeal was given with his
agreement by the Family Court. This, however, does not prevent Tapia from
basing his appeal on a challenge to the instruction. See State v. Nichols, 
111 Hawai' i 327, 339 n.7, 141 P.3d 974, 986 n.7 (2006). 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
further asked the jury, "[W]ould a reasonable person think it's
 
necessary to protect yourself from other persons in a car when
 you can just exit?" 
Under the circumstances of this case, we conclude that
 
the Family Court's instruction on self-defense failed to
 adequately advise the jury that Tapia was entitled to estimate
 the necessity for the use of protective force without
 retreating.
4 Because we cannot say that this error was harmless
 
beyond a reasonable doubt in this case, we vacate Tapia's
 conviction, and remand the case for a new trial. 
III.
 
We vacate the Judgment of the Family Court and remand
 
the case for further proceedings consistent with this Summary
 Disposition Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 9, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Cherylann Miyamoto
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Brandon H. Ito Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulu Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 In instructing the jury on self-defense, the Family Court used
language from Hawai' i Standard Jury Instructions Criminal (HAWJIC) Instruction
7.01 (2008), which was repealed and replaced on April 4, 2011, with HAWJIC
Instructions 7.01A and 7.01B (2011). The new HAWJIC Instructions 7.01A and
 7.01B incorporate the language of HRS § 703–304(3) and provide that in cases
where deadly force was not used or is not in issue:
 
The defendant may estimate the necessity for the use of
force under the circumstances as he/she reasonably believes them
to be when the force is used, without [retreating] [surrendering
possession] [doing any other act that he/she has no legal duty to
do] [abstaining from lawful action].
 
(Brackets in original).
 
4
 