   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000390
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE INTEREST OF AI and AK
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 10-00040)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Appellant Mother ("Mother") appeals from the Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights, filed on March 30, 2012, in the
 
Family Court of the First Circuit ("Family Court").1
 
In the points of error section of her opening brief, 
Mother fails to identify any findings of fact ("FOF") or conclusions of law ("COL") that she challenges, and fails to indicate where in the record on appeal any objection was made or where the Family Court committed error. From her argument, however, we discern that Mother contends that the Family Court erred: (1) in finding that she was not willing and able to provide a safe family home for her two children, AI and AK ("Children"); (2) in finding that it was not reasonably foreseeable that Mother would become willing and able to provide the Children with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan, within a reasonable period of time; (3) in failing to require that the State of Hawai' i, Department of Human 
Services ("DHS") provide her every reasonable opportunity to reunify with the Children; and (4) in finding that the DHS service plans were fair, appropriate, and comprehensive. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
1
 The Honorable Sherri-Ann L. Iha presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Mother's points of error as follows: 
(1) The Family Court did not err in finding that Mother
 
was not willing and able to provide a safe family home for the
 Children, even with the assistance of a service plan. Mother
 admitted that she could not currently provide the Children with a
 safe family home, that she did not complete substance abuse
 treatment in the last two years, and that she had a substance
 abuse problem that needed to be addressed before she could
 provide a safe family home. Furthermore, Mother does not
 challenge the Family Court's FOF 60 that "[b]ased on Mother's own
 testimony, Mother is not currently able to provide a safe family
 home for the Children because of her ongoing therapy and drug
 use, and foster custody is best for the Children because Mother
 is unable to care for them right now."
 
(2) The Family Court did not err in finding in FOF 66
 
that it was not reasonably foreseeable that Mother would become
 willing and able to provide a safe family home, even with the
 assistance of a service plan, within a reasonable period of time. 
A "reasonable period of time" in parental rights cases "shall not
 exceed two years from the child's date of entry into foster
 care." H
AW. REV. STAT. ยง 587A-33(a)(2) (Supp. 2012). The
 
Children entered foster care on April 13, 2010. At the time of
 trial, the Children had been in foster custody "for two weeks
 short of two years."
 
The Family Court may look to the past and present 
conditions of the home and natural parents to help determine whether a safe family home would become available within a reasonable period of time. In re Doe, 95 Hawai' i 183, 191, 20 
P.3d 616, 624 (2001). Here, Mother has an extensive history of substance abuse which began when she was eight years old and includes the use of alcohol, cannabis, cocaine, and methamphetamine. On July 16, 2010, Mother was diagnosed with methamphetamine dependence. She participated in the Salvation Army Substance Abuse Treatment Program from June 23, 2009 to January 19, 2010, and in the Hina Mauka residential drug treatment program from January 2011 to June 2011, but left both 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
programs prior to being clinically discharged. Mother admitted
 
to relapsing on methamphetamine on March 18, 2012, but only after
 a positive urinalysis test result.
2 Therefore, FOF 66 is not
 
clearly erroneous.
 
Furthermore, Mother contests the lack of weight the 
Family Court gave to her testimony in FOF 93 that she wants to change and accept help for her substance abuse problem. As an appellate court, however, we "will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." Doe, 95 Hawai' i at 
190, 20 P.3d at 623 (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai' i 87, 101, 997 P.2d 13, 27 (2000)). 
Therefore, FOF 93 is not clearly erroneous. 
(3) The Family Court did not err in finding in FOF 64
 
and 81 that DHS had made reasonable efforts to reunify Mother
 with the Children by giving Mother every reasonable opportunity
 to succeed in remedying the problems that put the Children at
 substantial risk of harm. It is uncontested that Mother did not
 appear for a hearing to adjudicate whether the Children could be
 placed with a relative who resided in California. Consequently,
 Mother was defaulted and the Family Court ordered that the
 Children could be relocated to California, if deemed appropriate.
 The Children's in-place caretaker, their maternal grandmother,
 stated that she was not willing to provide them with long term
 care. Thus, the Children were relocated to California with a
 family member that was willing to care for them and also be
 considered as a permanent adoptive parent. 
The record shows that the Children made several
 
attempts to contact Mother, but that the telephone numbers that
 Mother provided frequently changed and that when the Children had
 her telephone number, Mother did not pick up and they were unable
 to leave a message. At review hearings held on December 21, 2011
 and February 15, 2012, Mother was present and made no objection
 to the Family Court's findings that (i) DHS had made reasonable
 efforts to finalize a permanency plan, (ii) the Children's
 
2
 Mother admitted that she had no excuse for her relapse into using
drugs. Therefore, the Family Court did not err in finding that Mother's
relapse was not excusable. 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
current placement was safe and appropriate, and (iii) the
 
Children's current out-of-state placement was safe, appropriate
 and in their best interests. Therefore, FOF 64 and 81 are not
 clearly erroneous.
 
(4) The Family Court did not err in finding in FOF 80 
and 89 that each of the service plans offered by DHS and ordered by the court was fair, appropriate, and comprehensive. Mother argues on appeal that the service plans were insufficient because a DHS social worker testified at trial that a dual diagnosis program was appropriate for Mother. Mother, however, never objected to the service plans. At the April 13, 2010 hearing, Mother stipulated to the two service plans (one for AI and one for AK) dated March 30, 2010. At the hearings on March 31, 2011, December 21, 2011, and February 15, 2012, Mother did not object to the subsequent service plan dated March 28, 2011. A claim for additional services cannot be made during a trial or on appeal unless it was timely raised at an earlier proceeding. In re Doe, 
100 Hawai' i 335, 344, 60 P.3d 285, 294 (2002). 
In addition, Mother fails to establish that the service
 
plans were substantively inadequate. Notwithstanding the DHS
 social worker's testimony that a dual diagnosis program was
 appropriate, there is no evidence that such a program was
 necessary. Therefore, FOF 80 and 89 are not clearly erroneous.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order Terminating
 
Parental Rights, filed on March 30, 2012 in the Family Court of
 the First Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 11, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Herbert Y. Hamada 
for Mother-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Mary Anne Magnier andErin K.S. Torres,Deputy Attorneys General,for Petitioner-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 