 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS  AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-18-0000169 28-MAR-2024 08:23 AM Dkt. 52 SO 
NO. CAAP-18-0000169 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI 
RENEE CORDERO, Claimant-Appellee-Appellee, v. 
COUNTY OF MAUI, PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, Employer-Appellant-Appellant, 
and SEDGWICK CMS-HAWAII, 
Insurance Carrier-Appellant-Appellant. 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD 
(CASE NO. AB 2015-307(M); DCD NO. 7-14-02096) 
  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Wadsworth, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.) 
Employer-Appellant-Appellant County of Maui, Public 
Prosecutor (
Employer) appeals from the February 16, 2018 
Decision and Order of the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals 
Board (Board), determining Claimant-Appellee-Appellee Renee Cordero (Cordero) suffered a compensable personal psychological stress injury on September 16, 2014, arising out of and in the course of her employment.   
 
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Employer raises three points of error 
challenging the Board's application of Hawai‘ i Revised Statutes 
(HRS) § 386-3(c) (2015). 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve the points of error as discussed below, and affirm. 
(1) Employer first contends the Board "wrongfully 
found other causes of stress were relevant to [Cordero's] claim and concluded that [her] claim was not solely related to disciplinary actions of the Employer." (Formatting altered.) 
Hawai‘i
 law provides for compensation when an employee 
suffers an injury "arising out of and in the course of employment," though a "claim for mental stress resulting solely from disciplinary action taken in good faith" is exempt: 
(a) If an employee suffers personal injury either by 
accident arising out of and in the course of the employment
or by disease proximately caused by or resulting from the
nature of the employment, the employee's employer or the 
special compensation fund shall pay compensation to theemployee or the employee's dependents as provided in this chapter. 
 . . . . 
(c) A claim for mental stress resulting solely from 
disciplinary action taken in good faith by the employershall not be allowed 
. . . . 
HRS § 386-3 (formatting altered).  
Because nothing in HRS § 386-3(c) requires the Board 
to limit its review to disciplinary actions, the Board did not 
2   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
err in considering all sources of stress "arising out of and in 
the course of" Cordero's employment as required by HRS § 386-
3(a). See Cadiz v. QSI, Inc.
, 148 Hawai‘i 96, 107, 468 P.3d 110, 
121 (2020) ("The Hawai‘ i workers' compensation statute is social 
legislation that is to be interpreted broadly" so that an 
employee is "indemnified for all infirmities resulting from their employment.") (cleaned up). 
Thus, the Board was not wrong to consider causes of 
stress "arising out of and in the course of" Cordero's employment. 
(2) Employer next contends the Board "wrongfully 
focused on the September 16, 2014 email in reviewing application of HRS § 386-3(c) to this case." 
(Formatting altered.) To 
support this contention, Employer relies on medical records to show there was no treatment sought until the October 28, 2014 email. 
Although Employer is correct that Cordero only stopped 
working after her supervisor sent the October 28, 2014 email, 
the Board made the following findings: 
8. The Board also finds that while Claimant's claim for 
workers' compensation benefits identifies a September 16,
2014 injury date, the record on appeal documents that Claimant's claim relates not only to the exchanges aboutovertime, but also other matters. Such other matters included meeting deadlines placed on her assignments and
discussion of personnel matters in a public area. 
9. The Board finds that Claimant's claim is not one for 
mental stress resulting solely from disciplinary action. 
3   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
10. The Board finds that Employer has not presented
substantial evidence to overcome the presumption of
compensability. 
(Formatting altered.) These findings are supported by 
substantial evidence in the record. See Leslie v. Est. of
Tavares
, 91 Hawai‘i 394, 399, 984 P.2d 1220, 1225 (1999). 
Moreover, Cordero testified that after she received a 
September 16, 2014 email from her supervisor, which warned her that she needed prior approval to work overtime, Cordero asked to meet with her supervisor in private to discuss the overtime 
issue. 
But, her supervisor refused to meet in private, raised 
her voice at Cordero within earshot of other employees, which 
caused Cordero to be "embarrassed and upset," and "start shaking" and "hav[e] difficulty breathing." The Board credited Cordero's testimony. 
Thus, the Board did not wrongfully apply HRS § 386-3 
to the circumstances of this case. 
(3) Finally, Employer contends the Board "wrongfully 
concluded that [Cordero's] claim was not solely related to disciplinary action." (Formatting altered.) Employer argues that the Board's conclusion was wrong because the Board relied on clearly erroneous findings. 
Based on our review of the record, there was 
substantial evidence to support the Board's findings and, thus, 
4   
 
 
 
   
   
 
      
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Board's conclusion that Cordero's claim "did not result solely from disciplinary action taken in good faith" was not 
wrong. See generally, Bhakta v. Cnty. of Maui
, 109 Hawai‘i 198, 
208, 124 P.3d 943, 953 (2005) (noting a conclusion of law 
supported by findings of fact and reflecting "an application of the correct rule of law will not be overturned") (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
For the reasons discussed above, we affirm the 
Decision and Order of the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board entered on February 16, 2018. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘i, March 28, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
 Presiding Judge 
Patrick K. Wong  
Corporation Counsel, /s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
Caleb P. Rowe, Associate Judge 
Thomas W. Kolbe,  
Deputies Corporation Counsel, /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
for Employer-Appellant- Associate Judge 
Appellant.  
 
Stanford H. Masui, for Claimant-Appellee-
Appellee. 
5 