  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0000818
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ROBERT PERALES, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
GARY BLUM, M.D.; ROBERT ATKINSON, M.D.;
ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES OF HAWAII, LLP,
Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0613-03)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION

 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Robert Perales (Perales) appeals
 
from the Judgment, filed on April 11, 2014, in the Circuit Court
 
of the First Circuit (circuit court).1
 
Perales contends that the circuit court erred when it
 
granted Defendants-Appellees Gary Blum, M.D. (Dr. Blum), Robert
 
Atkinson, M.D. (Dr. Atkinson), and Orthopedic Associates of
 
Hawaii, LLP's (collectively Defendants) motion for judgment as a
 
matter of law (JMOL) on Perales's claim for lack of informed
 
consent at the conclusion of Perales's case during jury trial.2
 
1
 The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided.
 
2
 In the argument section of Perales's opening brief, he appears to
argue that claims for battery and breach of warranty also apply in this case.
Perales does not include these claims in his points of error. Further, it
does not appear from the record, and Perales provides no citation to the
(continued...)
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
For the reasons stated below, we affirm in part, vacate
 
in part, and remand.
 
I. Background
 
Perales injured his right thumb in a work accident. As
 
a result of his injury, Perales underwent two surgeries on his
 
thumb, the first performed by Dr. Blum and the second performed
 by Dr. Atkinson. 
After the two surgeries, Perales filed a Complaint
 
against the Defendants alleging (a) negligent breach of the
 standard of care, and (b) negligent failure to obtain informed
 consent. With respect to his claim for lack of informed consent,
 Perales asserted, inter alia, that: both Dr. Blum and Dr.
 Atkinson failed to properly inform him of the risks and benefits
 of the surgery, including the anticipated results of the
 surgeries and that there was a risk he would not be able to
 return to work as a welder; and Dr. Atkinson failed to inform him
 of the risks of the fusion surgery, and in particular that his
 thumb would be shortened due to the fusion surgery. In his
 complaint, Perales seeks: "[s]pecial damages including but not
 limited to Plaintiff's medical expenses (past and future), lost
 wages (past and future), and loss of earning and/or working
 capacity," as well as "[g]eneral damages in an amount according
 to proof at trial[.]"
 
On January 28, 2014, the circuit court granted summary
 
judgment in favor of the Defendants with regard to Perales' claim
 for negligent breach of the standard of care. This claim is not
 in issue on appeal.
 
The case proceeded to a jury trial on the issue of
 
whether Perales gave informed consent for each of the two
 surgeries to his thumb. In his case in chief, Perales testified
 and also called Dr. Blum and Dr. Atkinson as witnesses. Perales
 
2(...continued)
record showing, that he argued a claim for battery or breach of warranty in
the circuit court. Therefore, these arguments are waived. See Hawai' i Rules 
of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4), (7). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testified that in his visits with each doctor prior to the
 
surgeries, they both guaranteed their surgery would enable
 Perales to return to work as a welder and both doctors did not
 inform Perales that there was a risk that the surgeries would not
 be successful. Perales testified that he signed a consent form
 but when he expressed concerns about the form to Dr. Blum, Dr.
 Blum "laughed about it and said, I know it sounds horrible. But
 it's a standard form . . . . But I can assure you, Mr. Perales,
 that you will be –- you'll do just fine." Likewise, Perales
 testified that when he questioned Dr. Atkinson, he was told
 "[d]on't worry about it, Mr. Perales." Perales also testified
 that Dr. Atkinson did not properly inform him that the second
 surgery would result in a shortened thumb.
 
Both Dr. Blum and Dr. Atkinson testified that they did
 
not guaranty a successful surgery or that Perales would be able
 to return to work. Further, Dr. Blum and Dr. Atkinson testified
 that they discussed the risks and possible complications of the
 respective surgeries as provided on the related consent form and
 answered Perales's many questions regarding the form and their
 surgery.
 
The Defendants moved for JMOL at the close of Perales's
 
case at trial, arguing that Perales did not present evidence to
 support the causation element for his lack of informed consent
 claim. In their written motion, Defendants argued in relevant
 part that "the evidence presented is that Plaintiff would not
 have consented to the surgical treatments had he been informed
 that there was no 100% guaranty. Consequently, the radial
 collateral ligament of his right thumb would have remained
 ruptured and the injury he claims he now suffers (inability to
 work as a welder) would still exist." The circuit court orally
 granted JMOL in favor of the Defendants stating:
 
Viewing all of the evidence in the light most
favorable to the plaintiff, and giving the plaintiff's
evidence all the value to which it is legally entitled, and
indulging every legitimate inference which may be drawn from
the evidence in favor of the plaintiff, the Court grants the
Motion for Judgment as a Matter of Law and finds that
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
there's no evidence to support plaintiff's claim for lack of
informed consent, as there is not evidence as to the legal
causation as required under element three of the claim for
failure to obtain informed consent.
 
There's no evidence that there was any treatment or
surgical procedure that had a 100 percent guarantee for
return to work as a welder, and so the plaintiff has failed
to present evidence as to a prima facie case as to all
elements of the claim.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
On March 18, 2014, the circuit court filed an "Order
 
Granting [Defendants'] Motion for Judgment as a Matter of Law." 
On April 11, 2014, the circuit court filed the Judgment.
 
On May 12, 2014, Perales timely filed a Notice of
 
Appeal from the Judgment.
II. Standard of Review
 
We review de novo the circuit court's ruling on the
 
motion for JMOL. Ray v. Kapiolani Med. Specialists, 125 Hawai 'i 
253, 261, 259 P.3d 569, 577 (2011). 
A [motion for judgment as a matter of law] may be granted
only when after disregarding conflicting evidence, giving to
the non-moving party's evidence all the value to which it is
legally entitled, and indulging every legitimate inference
which may be drawn from the evidence in the non-moving
party's favor, it can be said that there is no evidence to
support a jury verdict in his or her favor.
 
Id. (citation omitted). Further,
 
[a] motion for [judgment as a matter of law] asks the trial
court to rule that the movant's opponent has introduced so
little evidence to support a verdict in his favor that the
case does not raise a jury question. . . . If there is any
 
substantial evidence which might support a verdict for each
 
side, the case should be submitted to the jury.
 
Miyamoto v. Lum, 104 Hawai 'i 1, 14, 84 P.3d 509, 522 (2004).
III. Discussion
 
Perales contends that the circuit court erred when, at
 
the close of his evidence in the jury trial, it granted the
 
Defendants' motion for JMOL. The sole issue at trial was
 Perales's claim for negligent failure to obtain informed consent
 for the two surgeries on his thumb. 
As stated above, the circuit court ruled that Perales
 
did not present evidence as to legal causation. The following 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
elements must be proven for a negligent failure to obtain
 
informed consent claim:
 
(1)	 the physician owed a duty of disclosure under HRS § 671­
3(b);
(2)	 the physician breached that duty;
(3)	 the patient suffered injury;
(4)	 the physician's breach of duty was a cause of the
 patient's injury in that (a) the physician's treatment
was a substantial factor in bringing about the
patient's injury and (b) a reasonable person in the
plaintiff patient's position would not have consented
to the treatment that led to the injuries had the
plaintiff patient been properly informed; and
 
(5)	 no other cause is a superseding cause of the patient's
injury.
 
Garcia v. Robinson, 137 Hawai 'i 388, 394, 375 P.3d 167, 173 
(2016) (emphasis added) (citation omitted). Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 671-3(b) (2016) provides the standard for a
 
physician's duty to disclose information to the patient, stating:
 
(b) The following information shall be supplied to the
patient or the patient's guardian or legal surrogate prior
to obtaining consent to a proposed medical or surgical
treatment or a diagnostic or therapeutic procedure:
(1)	 The condition to be treated;
(2)	 A description of the proposed treatment or
procedure;
(3)	 The intended and anticipated results of the
proposed treatment or procedure;
 
(4)	 The recognized alternative treatments or
procedures, including the option of not
providing these treatments or procedures;
(5)	 The recognized material risks of serious
complications or mortality associated with:
(A)	 The proposed treatment or procedure;
(B)	 The recognized alternative treatments or
procedures; and
(C)	 Not undergoing any treatment or procedure;
and
 
(6)	 The recognized benefits of the recognized
alternative treatments or procedures.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
On appeal, Perales contends there was lack of informed
 
consent arising under HRS § 671-3(b)(3) because Dr. Blum and Dr.
 
Atkinson did not properly inform him of the risk of failure for
 the surgeries or the possibility he would be unable to return to
 work as a welder and, thus, Perales claims that he suffered the
 following injuries: (1) he was unable to return to work as a 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
welder; (2) his right thumb was shortened; and (3) he experienced
 
the pain, inconvenience, and expense of the two surgeries.
 
By contrast, the Defendants contend, inter alia, that
 
JMOL was appropriate because Perales did not present expert
 testimony as to, among other things, causation.
3
 
In Carr v. Strode, 79 Hawai 'i 475, 904 P.2d 489 (1995), 
although the plaintiff underwent a vasectomy operation, his wife later became pregnant. Id. at 478, 904 P.2d at 492. Carr and 
his wife filed a complaint against their doctor alleging, inter alia, lack of informed consent. Id. With regard to the need for 
expert testimony in a lack of informed consent case, the Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court affirmatively quoted the following: 
Experts are ordinarily indispensable to identify and
elucidate for the factfinder the risks of therapy and the
consequences of leaving existing maladies untreated. They
are normally needed on issues as to the cause of any injury
or disability suffered by the patient and, where privileges
are asserted, as to the existence of any emergency claimed
and the nature and seriousness of any impact upon the
patient from risk-disclosure. Save for relative[ly]
infrequent instances where questions of this type are
resolvable wholly within the realm of ordinary human
knowledge and experience, the need for the expert is clear.
 
Id. at 486, 904 P.2d at 500 (quoting Canterbury v. Spence, 464 
F.2d 772, 791-92 (D.C. Cir. 1972)) (emphasis added). See also 
Barbee v. Queen's Med. Ctr., 119 Hawai 'i 136, 158-59, 194 P.3d 
1098, 1120-21 (App. 2008) (stating "in a medical malpractice case, a plaintiff must establish proximate or contributory causation through the introduction of expert medical testimony" but recognizing a "common knowledge exception"). 
One of Perales's claimed injuries is that the surgeries
 
rendered him unable to return to work as a welder. However,
 Perales testified that he was unable to work as a welder after
 the workplace accident and before he underwent either of the two
 surgeries. Further, although Dr. Blum and Dr. Atkinson testified
 
3
 At oral argument, Defendants asserted several points unrelated to the
issue of causation. Because Defendants' JMOL motion and the circuit court's
 
JMOL ruling were based on causation, we confine our review to whether Perales
presented sufficient evidence at trial as to causation for his lack of
informed consent claim.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Perales expressed concerns about being able to return to
 
work as a welder, they did not testify that the surgeries were
 the cause of his inability to return to work. In short, Perales
 did not present expert medical evidence that the surgeries caused
 his inability to return to work. Therefore, with regard to
 Perales's claimed injuries of being unable to return to work and
 any lost wages associated with his inability to return to work,
 Perales did not present evidence that the surgeries were a
 "substantial factor" in bringing about these injuries. Thus, the
 circuit court correctly granted JMOL as to these claimed
 injuries.
 
Perales also claims injury in that his right thumb is
 
shorter as a result of the surgery performed by Dr. Atkinson.
 Perales testified that Dr. Atkinson assured him that his right
 thumb would look exactly like his left thumb. Perales further
 testified that after his surgery with Dr. Atkinson and while he
 was in physical therapy, the therapist informed Perales that his
 injured thumb was a half inch shorter than his uninjured thumb. 
Dr. Atkinson testified that a shortened thumb was a
 
risk of the fusion surgery that he performed. Dr. Atkinson
 testified that he explained to Perales that part of the surgical
 procedure was to remove the cartilage in part of his thumb and
 fuse the bones together and that Perales understood the procedure
 and "he understood that when we shave a little bit of the joint
 surface . . . it's going to be shorter than it would have been if
 he hadn't had that portion of the joint removed." Dr. Atkinson
 testified that a "couple millimeters" of Perales's thumb bone was
 removed, but in all nine of Perales's post-operative visits with
 Dr. Atkinson, Perales never mentioned his thumb was shorter. 
Based on Dr. Atkinson's testimony, and in indulging
 
every legitimate inference which may be drawn from the evidence
 in Perales's favor given the JMOL standard, Perales presented
 evidence as to causation on this claimed injury, i.e., that Dr.
 Atkinson's surgery was a "substantial factor" in bringing about
 Perales's claimed injury of a shortened thumb. Further, in
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
regard to the second part of the causation element -- whether a
 
"reasonable person in the plaintiff patient's position would not
 have consented to the treatment that led to the injuries had the
 plaintiff patient been properly informed" –- this is a question
 for the jury given the evidence in this case.
 
The final injury that Perales claims is that, because
 
he was not properly informed about the two surgeries, he decided
 to undergo the procedures and thus experienced the pain,
 inconvenience, and expense of the two surgeries. Perales
 
4
testified that although he signed a consent form  prior to his
surgery with Dr. Blum, which stated "[n]o promise or guarantee
 has been made to me as to result or cure[,]" he did not discuss
 that particular statement with Dr. Blum because he was satisfied
 based on their conversations that he "would be able to return to
 work full duty" and his "right thumb would look exactly like
 [his] left thumb." Perales testified that Dr. Blum reassured
 Perales that Dr. Blum had done "many of these surgeries" and "it
 was a fairly simple procedure." Perales also testified that Dr.
 Blum told Perales that many athletes have similar injuries and
 are "typically back to doing whatever they were doing . . .
 within six to eight weeks." Perales further testified that he
 was very clear with Dr. Blum that he wanted full use of his thumb
 and would not undergo surgery if there was even a 99.9 percent
 chance that it would succeed, because with his luck he would "be
 that point 1 percent." According to Perales, Dr. Blum said that
 he could not put it in writing "[b]ut I can guarantee you that
 you're going to have a hundred percent use of your thumb."
 
With regard to Dr. Atkinson, Perales also signed a
 
consent form stating that "[n]o promise or guarantee has been
 made to me as to result or cure." However, Perales testified
 
4
 Given the evidence in this case, we conclude that although Perales
signed a consent form prior to both of his surgeries, the consent form is not
conclusive as to whether he gave informed consent. See Keomaka v. Zakaib, 8
Haw. App. 518, 532-33, 811 P.2d 478, 486-87 (1991)(stating that "a physician
may not fulfill his affirmative duty of timely and adequate disclosure by
merely having the patient sign a printed informed consent form").
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that he expressed concerns to Dr. Atkinson about having full use
 
of his thumb and getting back to work as a welder. Perales
 testified that Dr. Atkinson stated: 
Don't worry, Mr. Perales, you'll be fine. You'll be able to
 
get right back to work. I've done a lot of these surgeries.
I've done carpenters and tradesmen, which rely heavily upon
their hands to work for a living, and they're swinging
hammers all day and climbing the roofs and stuff like
that[.]
 
On cross-examination, Perales testified that if Dr. Atkinson had
 
told him there was only a 99.9 percent chance of a good outcome,
 he would not have agreed to the surgery.
 
Dr. Blum testified that he did not give Perales a
 
guarantee as to the outcome of the surgery and he told Perales
 that the surgery may not work. Dr. Atkinson testified that he
 talked with Perales about the relative risk of the surgery and
 there was a good likelihood that the joint would fuse together,
 but informed Perales that it was not a guarantee that the surgery
 would be a success.
 
Based on Perales's testimony, there is evidence in the 
record that he would not have undergone the surgeries if he had known there was a possibility he would not have full use of his thumb. Our review of the record further shows that Perales argued in the circuit court that if he was properly informed of the risks, he would not have had the surgeries and that an option was to have no treatment. In this regard, there is evidence as to causation related to Perales's claimed injury that he experienced pain and inconvenience from undergoing the two surgeries. With regard to these claimed injuries, it does not appear that expert testimony is required. That is, assuming arguendo that Perales convinces a jury that the other elements for his lack of informed consent claim are established, the question of whether the two surgeries were a "substantial factor" in causing him pain and inconvenience is within the realm of ordinary human knowledge and experience. See Carr, 79 Hawai
'i at 
486, 904 P.2d at 500. Moreover, the second part of the causation element -- whether a "reasonable person in the plaintiff 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
patient's position would not have consented to the treatment that
 
led to the injuries had the plaintiff patient been properly
 informed" –- is a question for the jury given the evidence in
 this case. 
We must emphasize, however, that our ruling is limited
 
only to Perales's pain and inconvenience from the two subject
 surgeries. Any claimed injury that Perales needed further
 medical or other treatment as a result of the two surgeries and
 that he sustained damages due to the further medical or other
 treatment, would require expert testimony, which he did not
 present. Therefore, to the extent specified above, JMOL should
 not have been granted with respect to Perales's claimed injuries
 of pain and inconvenience from the two surgeries.
 
With regard to Perales's claimed injury that he
 
incurred expenses for the two surgeries, there was no evidence in
 his case at trial regarding expenses for the surgeries. Thus, in
 this regard, there is no evidence that the surgeries were a
 "substantial factor" in causing Perales to incur expenses. JMOL
 was properly granted on Perales's claimed injury as to expenses
 for the surgeries.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the Judgment filed on April 11,
 
2014, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, is:
 
(1) Affirmed to the extent that JMOL was proper in
 
regard to: (a) Perales's claimed injury that the two surgeries
 caused his inability to return to work and caused any wage loss;
 and (b) Perales's claimed injury that he sustained expenses due
 to the surgeries.
 
(2) Vacated to the extent that JMOL should not have
 
been granted in regard to: (a) Perales's claimed injury that the
 second surgery caused his right thumb to be shortened; and (b)
 Perales's claimed injury that he experienced pain and
 inconvenience for undergoing the two subject surgeries.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
This case is remanded to the circuit court for further
 
proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, August 31, 2017. 
On the briefs:
Charles H. Brower,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
Arthur F. Roeca,
April Luria,
Jodie D. Roeca,
for Defendants-Appellees. 

 
Presiding Judge

Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
11
 