NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000027
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
DJ, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
CJ, Defendant-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(FC-D. NO. 12-1-6689)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Nakamura, Chief Judge and Chan, J. with
Reifurth, J., dissenting separately)
Plaintiff-Appellant DJ (Father) appeals from the "Order
Granting Defendant's Motion for Post-Decree Relief Filed
February 1, 2016," filed on November 23, 2016 (Custody Order),
and the "Order Denying Motion for Reconsideration or Amendment of
Judgments and Order Filed 12/2/16," filed on January 4, 2017, in
the Family Court of the First Circuit (family court).1 The
Custody Order awarded Defendant-Appellee CJ (Mother) sole legal
and physical custody of the couple's son and daughter, subject to
Father's rights of reasonable visitation.
On appeal, Father contends that the family court abused
its discretion in (1) denying Father's request for a continuance
to obtain legal counsel, and (2) relying upon a Custody
Investigation Unit (CIU) report that was done without Father's
1The Honorable William J. Nagle presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
consent.2
In 2007, Father and Mother met in the Philippines where
the oldest child was born.  Father and Mother came to Hawai #i and
they were married in 2009.  Their second child was born in early
2012.  Later that year, Father filed for divorce.
Father and Mother were both represented by counsel
throughout the divorce proceedings, during which time, Father and
Mother also attempted to work through legal and physical custody
of the children.  All issues in the divorce proceedings were
resolved without a trial.  Father and Mother were awarded joint
legal and physical custody of the children.
On February 1, 2016, Mother, through her counsel, filed
a Motion and Declaration for Post-Decree Relief (Post-Decree
Motion).  The Post-Decree Motion stated that Mother was planning
to relocate to the mainland, and requested that Mother be granted
sole physical custody of the two children and Father be granted
reasonable visitation.  Mother and Father both appeared pro se
for Mother's Post-Decree Motion.
The hearing on Mother's Post-Decree Motion was held on
September 30, 2016.
The record indicates that Father was unfamiliar with
the trial process, did not understand that trial would impose
different requirements than prior hearings that he attended, and
did not know how to conduct cross-examination.  It further
indicates that Father had not officially been served with the CIU
report, which the family court introduced at the trial and on
which the family court relied, and it is unclear when Father
actually received the report.  Father was also burdened with
language difficulties as English was not his first language, and
he had to rely upon an interpreter during the proceedings.
During Father's attempts to cross-examine Mother's witnesses, the
family court had to remind Father to question, and not argue
with, the witnesses.
Later during the hearing, the family court told Father
that he would have time to call his witnesses and make his
2We only address Father's first point of error, as our conclusion
regarding point (1) renders any decision on point (2) unnecessary.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
statement to the court after a ten minute recess.  In response,
Father stated:
Your Honor, I have a question.  I –- 'cause I didn't know
it's going be –- this is going be the setup, 'cause normally
when I go to court, normally we just –- there's no witnesses
like that, so I didn't know about cross-examination –-
examination, whatsoever.  I just –- I'm lost about all the
–- evidence (indiscernible) exhibit that I need that –- you
can only accept.
After the recess, Father once again requested a
continuance to retain counsel:
[FATHER]: Can I say something, Your Honor?  I
would like to practice my right to –- to see a –- a lawyer.
THE COURT: See a lawyer now?
[FATHER]: I would like to extend this hearing.
THE INTERPRETER: Asking for a continuance
because he wants to consult a lawyer.
THE COURT: [Mother], do you agree with that?
[MOTHER]: Your Honor, I would like to object,
'cause we've been waiting –- the last hearing, I ask Judge
Kupau for advance motion 'cause my intention is to enroll my
son in North Carolina.  But I did respect the Court's
decision.  I thought the next hearing was in August 8th. 
And then Judge Kupau change his mind and set aside his order
last July.  And then he decided to pursue to Custody
Investigation Unit, which I participated, Your Honor.  I –-
I –- I –-
THE COURT: So you object to Mr. –-
[MOTHER]: I –- I object, Your Honor, 'cause we
have enough time.
THE COURT: [Father], why haven't you retained an
attorney after all this time?
[FATHER]: Your Honor, I didn't know is going –-
this going to be the setup, 'cause normally when we go to –-
to the court, it's normally asking the judge.  I didn't know
about -- about cross-examination, something like that.  I
have no idea.  So I would like to practice my right to hire
a lawyer, to see a lawyer (indiscernible), and extend this
hearing, 'cause I cannot –- I cannot –- I don't –- I have no
idea about this –- I know –- procedure.
THE COURT: Okay. [Father], the problem I'm
having is that this motion was filed back on –- back in
February.  You folks have had numerous hearings before –-
before Judge Kupau.  Since that time, you've been to court,
you know, a fair amount.  I guess I –- I don't understand
why you've had in excess of six months to hire an attorney,
and now we're halfway through the trial, and you want to
continue the matter to hire an attorney. 
[FATHER]: Like, again, like I said, Your Honor,
I didn't know this –- that this the first time I been here
in this kind of setup of –- in the court.  I normally go to
a –- they get judge and two of us. 
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
THE COURT: Uh-huh.
[FATHER]: That's –- that's how it is.  But
cross-examination, I have no idea.  That's why I cannot do
it.  So I would like to say –- I would like to practice my
right to hire –- to see a lawyer so I can also
(indiscernible) for me to deliver my –- my . . .
THE COURT: Okay. [Father], the Court's going to
deny your motion for a continuance.  I think it's too late. 
We're already in the trial.  That's something that if you
were –- you were going to, you should have hired an attorney
early on.  So I'm going to deny your motion.  It's too late.
 
The family court then called and examined Liana Lui,
the judiciary social worker who performed the CIU report.  Father
then attempted to cross-examine Ms. Lui.  After struggling with
his questioning, Father again requested a continuance in order to
retain counsel.
[FATHER]: Your Honor, again, I would like to practice
my right to hire a lawyer, to . . .
THE COURT: [Father], again, we're in the middle of the
trial.  If you wanted to hire a lawyer, this was something you
should have done way before this.
Do you have any other questions for Mrs. Lui?  Because if
you don't, I'm going to release her. 
[FATHER]: That's all I want to ask (indiscernible).
THE COURT: Thank you very much.
Okay, ma'am.
THE WITNESS: Thank you, sir.
After Father presented his evidence, the family court
took the matter under advisement.
On November 23, 2016, the family court issued its
findings based on evidence at trial and the CIU report, and
granted Mother's Post-Decree Motion to relocate with the children
to Durham, North Carolina.
A parent's right to the "care, custody and control" of
his or her child is a fundamental liberty interest protected by
the United States Constitution.  Troxel v. Granville, 530 U.S.
57, 65 (2000) ("[T]he interest of parents in the care, custody,
and control of their children -- is perhaps the oldest of the
fundamental liberty interests recognized by this Court.").  The
Hawai#i Supreme Court has also recognized that "independent of
the federal constitution, . . . parents have a substantive
liberty interest in the care, custody, and control of their
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
children protected by the due process clause of article 1,
section 5 of the Hawai# i Constitution.  Parental rights
guaranteed under the Hawai #i Constitution would mean little if
parents were deprived of the custody of their children without a
fair hearing."  In re Doe , 99 Hawai #i 522, 533, 57 P.3d 447, 458
(2002).
In this case, a continuance was requested by Father to
seek legal counsel.  The record suggests that Father, even with
the aid of an interpreter, was incapable of presenting his case
and cross-examining witnesses.  It does not appear that under the
circumstances, Father sought a continuance for general delay.
Moreover, the record does not indicate that granting the
continuance would have been prejudicial to Mother.  In light of
the foregoing, the nature of the proceeding, and Father's
substantive parental rights, we conclude that the family court
abused its discretion in denying Father's request for a
continuance to seek the assistance of counsel.  See Sapp v. Wong ,
62 Haw. 34, 41, 609 P.2d 137, 142 (1980).
Accordingly, we vacate the "Order Granting Defendant's
Motion for Post-Decree Relief Filed February 1, 2016," filed on
November 23, 2016, and the "Order Denying Plaintiff's Motion for
Reconsideration or Amendment of Judgments and Order Filed
12/2/16," filed on January 4, 2017, and remand the case to the
family court for further proceedings consistent with this summary
disposition order.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 26, 2017.
On the briefs:
Emmanuel G. Guerrero,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Mother,
Defendant-Appellee.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
5