FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
---o0o---
DIANE CERVELLI and TAEKO BUFFORD,
Plaintiffs-Appellees,
vs.
ALOHA BED & BREAKFAST, a Hawai #i sole proprietorship,
Defendant-Appellant,
and
WILLIAM D. HOSHIJO, as Executive Director of the
Hawai#i Civil Rights Commission,
Plaintiff-Intervenor-Appellee.
NO. CAAP-13-0000806
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-3103)
FEBRUARY 23, 2018
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, and FUJISE and REIFURTH, JJ.
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
Defendant-Appellant Aloha Bed & Breakfast (Aloha B&B)
is owned and operated by Phyllis Young (Young) as a sole
proprietorship.  Aloha B&B provides lodging to transient guests,
averaging between one hundred and two hundred customers per year. 
Plaintiffs-Appellees Diane Cervelli (Cervelli) and Taeko Bufford
(Bufford) (collectively, Plaintiffs), lesbian women in aFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
committed relationship, planned a trip to Hawai# i and sought
lodging with Aloha B&B.  Aloha B&B and Young refused to
accommodate Plaintiffs' request for lodging based solely on their
sexual orientation.
Plaintiffs filed a Complaint in the Circuit Court of
the First Circuit (Circuit Court)1 against Aloha B&B, alleging
discriminatory denial of public accommodations in violation of
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 489.2  The Hawai #i Civil
Rights Commission (HCRC) intervened in the case as a plaintiff,
after it had determined that there was reasonable cause to
believe that unlawful discriminatory practices had occurred. 
Plaintiffs and the HCRC filed a partial motion for
summary judgment on the issues of liability and injunctive
relief, and Aloha B&B filed a competing cross-motion for summary
judgment.   The Circuit Court granted Plaintiffs and the HCRC's
motion and denied Aloha B&B's motion.  The Circuit Court ruled
that Aloha B&B violated HRS § 489-3 by discriminating against the
Plaintiffs on the basis of their sexual orientation.  The Circuit
Court also enjoined Aloha B&B from "engaging in any practices
that operate to discriminate against same-sex couples as
customers." 
On appeal, Aloha B&B argues that the Circuit Court
erred in ruling that it is liable for discriminatory practices
under HRS Chapter 489.  Aloha B&B maintains that because Aloha
1The Honorable Edwin C. Nacino presided. 
2HRS Chapter 489 is entitled "Discrimination in Public
Accommodations."  HRS § 489-3 (2008) provides: 
Discriminatory practices prohibition .  Unfair
discriminatory practices that deny, or attempt to deny,
a person the full and equal enjoyment of the goods,
services, facilities, privileges, advantages, and
accommodations of a place of public accommodation on
the basis of race, sex, including gender identity or
expression, sexual orientation, color, religion,
ancestry, or disability are prohibited.
2FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B&B operates its business out of Young's residence, the Circuit
Court should have applied an exemption from prohibited
discriminatory practices in real property transactions set forth
in HRS Chapter 515 for the rental of rooms by a resident. 
Alternatively, Aloha B&B argues that the application of HRS
Chapter 489 to prohibit discriminatory practices under the
circumstances of this case would violate Young's constitutional
rights.  Based on these arguments, Aloha B&B contends that the
Circuit Court erred in granting Plaintiffs and the HCRC's motion
for partial summary judgment and in denying Aloha B&B's motion
for summary judgment.  We affirm.
BACKGROUND
I.
Aloha B&B operates out of a four bedroom home in the
Mariner's Ridge section of Hawai# i Kai, where Young and her
husband reside.  Young operates Aloha B&B as a sole
proprietorship and offers three rooms in her residence to guests
for overnight lodging.  Rooms at Aloha B&B are offered at a
nightly rate of $80 to $100, and there is a three-night minimum
booking requirement.  In addition to the nightly rate, Aloha B&B
charges and collects general excise taxes from its customers as
well as transient accommodation taxes, which only providers of
transient accommodations are required to pay.   Aloha B&B remits
these taxes to the State of Hawai# i.  
Aloha B&B does not offer rooms to customers for use as
a permanent residence, and Young never describes herself as a
landlord to her guests.  Aloha B&B averages one hundred to two
hundred customers per year.  The median length of stay for Aloha
B&B customers is four to five days.  The majority of customers
stay for less than a week, about 95 percent or more stay for less
than two weeks, and more than 99 percent stay for less than a
month.  In addition to overnight lodging, customers at Aloha B&B
are provided breakfast, pool access, wireless internet access,
and other amenities.  Almost all of Aloha B&B customers, 
3FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
an estimated 99 percent, are travelers who do not live in
Hawai#i.
Aloha B&B advertises its services to the general public
through its own website as well as through multiple third-party
websites.  Aloha B&B's website, freely accessible through the
internet, provides a phone number and email address for potential
customers to contact Aloha B&B, and it contains graphics stating
"Best Choice Hawaii Hotel" and "Best Choice Oahu Hotels."  Aloha
B&B also advertises through various bed-and-breakfast-related
websites to generate more business for itself, including paying
an annual fee of between $400 to $500 to BedandBreakfast.com.
II.
Plaintiffs Cervelli and Bufford, two lesbian women in a
committed relationship, began planning a trip to Hawai #i to visit
a friend.  Plaintiffs, who resided in California, wanted to stay
near their friend, who lived in Hawai# i Kai.  Cervelli emailed
Aloha B&B to inquire if a room was available for their planned
trip.  Young responded by email the same day, stating that a room
was available for six days and providing instructions on how to
complete the reservation. 
Two weeks later, Cervelli called Aloha B&B to book the
reservation and spoke with Young, who indicated that the room was
still available.  While Young was writing up the reservation,
Cervelli mentioned that she would be accompanied by another woman
named "Taeko."  Young stopped and asked whether Cervelli and her
companion were lesbians.  When Cervelli said "yes," Young
responded, "[W]e're strong Christians.  I'm very uncomfortable in
accepting the reservation from you."  Young refused to accept the 
reservation from Cervelli and terminated the phone call by
hanging up. 
Cervelli called Bufford in tears and explained what had
happened.  Bufford then called Young and attempted to reserve a
room, but Young again refused to accept the reservation.  Bufford
asked Young if her refusal was because Bufford and Cervelli were
lesbians, to which Young responded "yes."  Bufford had two phone
4FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
conversations with Young that day.  Young referred to her
religious beliefs in discussing her refusal to provide a room to
Plaintiffs.  Apart from Plaintiffs' sexual orientation, there was
no other reason for Young's refusal to accept Plaintiffs' request
for a room.
III.
Cervelli and Bufford each filed a complaint against
Aloha B&B with the HCRC alleging discrimination in public
accommodations on the basis of sexual orientation.  Young was
interviewed during the HCRC's investigation and was asked to
describe the religious beliefs that she claimed precluded her
from accepting Cervelli and Bufford's reservation.  Young stated
that she is Catholic; that she believes that homosexuality is
wrong; that she believes that sexual relations between same-sex
couples (regardless of whether they are legally married) are
immoral; and that she therefore refused to provide Cervelli and
Bufford with a room.  The HCRC found that there was reasonable
cause to believe that Aloha B&B had committed an unlawful
discriminatory practice against Cervelli and Bufford in violation
of HRS § 489-3.  The HCRC subsequently closed its cases based on
Cervelli's and Bufford's election to pursue a court action, and
it issued "right to sue" notices to Cervelli and Bufford. 
IV.
Plaintiffs subsequently filed in the Circuit Court a
Complaint for injunctive relief, declaratory relief, and damages
against Aloha B&B, alleging discrimination on the basis of sexual
orientation in violation of HRS Chapter 489.  The HCRC filed a
motion to intervene in the case as a plaintiff because it found
the case was one of "general importance" given the HCRC's mission
to eliminate discrimination.  The Circuit Court granted the
HCRC's motion to intervene as a plaintiff. 
Plaintiffs and the HCRC filed a motion for partial
summary judgment with respect to liability and injunctive
5FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
relief.3  Aloha B&B filed a cross-motion for summary judgment. 
The Circuit Court held a hearing on the parties'
competing motions for summary judgment.  At the hearing, counsel
for Aloha B&B acknowledged that "discrimination is a horrible
evil" and that "in places of public accommodation discrimination
is a horrible evil."  Aloha B&B's counsel also acknowledged that
Aloha B&B admits that it "does provide lodging to transient
guests."4  However, Aloha B&B's counsel argued that the law
prohibiting discrimination in public accommodations, HRS Chapter
489, does not apply to Aloha B&B because it uses Young's
residence to provide lodging to transient guests.  Aloha B&B's
counsel argued that Aloha B&B's use of a residence means that it
is not a "place of public accommodation" subject to the
requirements of Chapter 489, but instead is governed by HRS
Chapter 515.  
The Circuit Court granted Plaintiffs and the HCRC's
motion for partial summary judgment with respect to liability and
declaratory and injunctive relief, and it denied Aloha B&B's
cross-motion for summary judgment as moot.  In its Summary
Judgment Order,5 the Circuit Court found that:
[Aloha B&B] is governed by Chapter 489, HRS, not Chapter
515, HRS, and [Aloha B&B] constitutes a place of public
accommodation under HRS § 489-2, because its goods,
services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or
accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise
made available to the general public as customers, clients,
or visitors.  [Aloha B&B] also constitutes "[a]n inn, hotel,
motel, or other establishment that provides lodging to
transient guests" and "[a] facility providing services
3The only claim for which Plaintiffs and the HCRC did not
seek summary judgment was the claim for damages in the Complaint.
4As discussed infra, HRS § 489-2 defines "place of public
accommodation" to include "[a]n inn, hotel, motel, or other
establishment that provides lodging to transient guests[.]" 
5The Circuit Court's Order was entitled "Order Granting
Plaintiffs' and [the HCRC's] Motion for Partial Summary Judgment
for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief and Denying [Aloha B&B's]
Motion for Summary Judgment," which we will refer to as the
"Summary Judgment Order."
6FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
relating to travel or transportation."  HRS § 489-2.  [Aloha
B&B] violated HRS § 489-3 by discriminating against
Plaintiffs Diane Cervelli and Taeko Bufford on the basis of
their sexual orientation as lesbians.
(Certain brackets in original.)   The Circuit Court enjoined and
prohibited "Defendant Aloha Bed & Breakfast, a Hawai #i sole
proprietorship of Phyllis Young," and its officers, agents, and
employees "from engaging in any practices that operate to
discriminate against same-sex couples as customers of Aloha Bed &
Breakfast[.]"
The Circuit Court entered its Summary Judgment Order on
April 15, 2013.  The parties subsequently submitted a stipulated
application to file an interlocutory appeal from the Summary
Judgment Order, which the Circuit Court granted.  
DISCUSSION
I.
Aloha B&B argues that the Circuit Court erred in ruling
that it is liable for discriminatory practices under HRS Chapter
489.  Aloha B&B argues that it is not subject to HRS Chapter 489,
but that its activities are governed by HRS Chapter 515.  In
particular, Aloha B&B asserts that an exemption from prohibited
discriminatory practices in real property transactions set forth
in HRS § 515-4(a)(2) protects it from liability in this case.  
Plaintiffs and the HCRC, on the other hand, argue that
Aloha B&B is clearly a place of public accommodation that is
subject to HRS Chapter 489.  Plaintiffs and the HCRC argue that
Aloha B&B cannot "borrow" an exemption applicable to a different
law (HRS Chapter 515) to avoid liability for violating the public
accommodations law (HRS Chapter 489) on which Plaintiffs seek
relief.  They also argue that the HRS Chapter 515 exemption
relied upon by Aloha B&B only applies to long-term living
arrangements in which tenants are seeking permanent housing, and
not to the short-term transient lodging provided by Aloha B&B to
its customers. 
As explained below, we conclude that the Circuit Court
properly granted partial summary judgment in favor of Plaintiffs
7FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and the HCRC.
A.
The statutory provisions relevant to this appeal are as
follows.
Plaintiffs' Complaint against Aloha B&B alleged
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in public
accommodations, in violation of HRS Chapter 489.  HRS § 489-3
provides:
Unfair discriminatory practices that deny, or attempt
to deny, a person the full and equal enjoyment of the goods,
services, facilities, privileges, advantages, and
accommodations of a place of public accommodation on the
basis of race, sex, including gender identity or expression,
sexual orientation, color, religion, ancestry, or disability
are prohibited.
HRS § 489-2 (2008) defines the terms "place of public
accommodation" and "sexual orientation" for purposes of HRS
Chapter 489, in relevant part, as follows:
"Place of public accommodation" means a business,
accommodation, refreshment, entertainment, recreation, or
transportation facility of any kind whose goods, services,
facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations are
extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the
general public as customers, clients, or visitors.  By way
of example, but not of limitation, place of public
accommodation includes facilities of the following types:
(1) A facility providing services relating to travel
or transportation; [or] 
(2) An inn, hotel, motel, or other establishment
that provides lodging to transient guests;
. . . .
"Sexual orientation" means having a preference for
heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality, having a
history of any one or more of these preferences, or being
identified with any one or more of these preferences.
Aloha B&B argues that its activities are governed by
HRS Chapter 515 and that it falls within the exemption from
prohibited discriminatory practices set forth in HRS § 515-
4(a)(2).  HRS § 515-3 (2006), provides in relevant part:
It is a discriminatory practice for an owner or any
other person engaging in a real estate transaction, or for a
real estate broker or salesperson, because of race, sex,
8FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
including gender identity or expression, sexual orientation,
color, religion, marital status, familial status, ancestry,
disability, age, or human immunodeficiency virus infection:
(1) To refuse to engage in a real estate transaction with
a person; 
. . . .[6]
HRS § 515-4(a)(2) (Supp. 2011) provides:
(a) Section 515-3 does not apply:
. . . 
(2) To the rental of a room or up to four rooms in a
housing accommodation by an owner or lessor if the
owner or lessor resides in the housing
accommodation.[7]
HRS § 515-2 (2006) defines the terms "housing
accommodation," "real estate transaction" and "real property" for
purposes of HRS Chapter 515, in relevant part, as follows:
"Housing accommodation" includes any improved or
unimproved real property, or part thereof, which is used or
occupied, or is intended, arranged, or designed to be used
or occupied, as the home or residence of one or more
individuals.
. . . .
"Real estate transaction" includes the sale, exchange,
6HRS § 515-3 identifies numerous other actions related to
real estate transactions that constitute "discriminatory
practice[s]."    
7At the time that Plaintiffs attempted to secure lodging
with Aloha B&B, HRS § Section 515-4(a)(2) (2006) provided:
(a) Section 515–3 does not apply:
. . .
(2) To the rental of a room or up to four rooms
in a housing accommodation by an individual
if the individual resides therein. 
Although HRS § 515-4(a)(2) (2006) was subsequently amended,
the differences between the pre-amended and post-amended statute
are not material to our analysis in this case because Young was
an owner/resident.  For simplicity, we refer to the current
version of the statute in our analysis.
9FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
rental, or lease of real property.
"Real property" includes buildings, structures, real
estate, lands, tenements, leaseholds, interests in real
estate cooperatives, condominiums, and hereditaments,
corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest therein.
The definition of "sexual orientation" in HRS § 515-2 is
identical to the definition in HRS § 489-2. 
B.
In rendering its decision, the Circuit Court construed
provisions of HRS Chapter 489 and HRS Chapter 515.  Statutory
construction is a question of law, which we review de novo under
the right/wrong standard.  Lingle v. Hawai #i Gov't Empls. Ass'n,
AFSCME, Local 152, AFL-CIO
, 107 Hawai# i 178, 183, 111 P.3d 587,
592 (2005).  In interpreting a statute, we are guided by the
following well-established principles:
When construing a statute, our foremost obligation is to
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself.  And we must read
statutory language in the context of the entire statute and
construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose.
When there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or
indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an expression used in a
statute, an ambiguity exists.
In construing an ambiguous statute, the meaning of the
ambiguous words may be sought by examining the context with
which the ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may be
compared, in order to ascertain their true meaning.
Moreover, the courts may resort to extrinsic aids in
determining legislative intent.  One avenue is the use of
legislative history as an interpretive tool.
This court may also consider the reason and spirit of the
law, and the cause which induced the legislature to enact it
to discover its true meaning.  Laws in pari materia, or upon
the same subject matter, shall be construed with reference
to each other.  What is clear in one statute may be called
upon in aid to explain what is doubtful in another.
Haole v. State, 111 Hawai #i 144, 149–50, 140 P.3d 377, 382–83
(2006) (block quote format altered; citation and brackets
omitted).
C.
Having identified the statutory provisions at issue and
the established principles for statutory interpretation, we
10FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
proceed to consider the parties' statutory interpretation claims. 
We conclude that the Circuit Court properly ruled that there are
no material facts in dispute and that Aloha B&B violated HRS 
§ 489-3 by discriminating against Plaintiffs on the basis of
their sexual orientation.
HRS § 489-3 prohibits "[u]nfair discriminatory
practices that deny, or attempt to deny, a person the full and
equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges,
advantages, and accommodations of a place of public accommodation
on the basis of . . . sexual orientation . . . ."  Aloha B&B
admitted that the sole reason it refused to provide lodging to
Plaintiffs was because of their sexual orientation.  Young
testified in her deposition that there was no other reason for
Aloha B&B's refusal.  
It is also clear based on the plain statutory language
that Aloha B&B is a "place of public accommodation."  That term
is defined by HRS § 489-2 to mean "a business, accommodation, 
. . . recreation, or transportation facility of any kind whose
goods, services, facilities, . . . or accommodations are
extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the
general public as customers, clients, or visitors."  Aloha B&B
admitted in its responsive pretrial statement that "it offers bed
and breakfast services to the general public."  The evidence
presented by Plaintiffs and the HCRC supports this admission. 
The evidence showed that Aloha B&B advertises and offers its
services to the general public through its own website as well as
through multiple third-party websites that are freely accessible
over the internet; it makes its services available to a large
number of customers, an average of between one hundred and two
hundred per year; and aside from same-sex couples and smokers, it
generally accepts anyone as a customer as long as the person is 
willing to pay and a room is available.
More importantly, the statutory definition of "place of
public accommodation" specifically includes, "[b]y way of
11FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
example, but not of limitation," "[a]n inn, hotel, motel, or
other establishment that provides lodging to transient guests [.]" 
HRS § 489-2 (emphasis added).  Aloha B&B admitted that it "does
provide lodging to transient guests."  The undisputed evidence
showed that Aloha B&B customers only stay for short periods of
time -- the majority for less than a week and about 95 percent
for less than two weeks.  Aloha B&B does not offer rooms to
customers for permanent housing or for use as a residence, and
Young does not view herself as the landlord of the guests.  In
addition, Aloha B&B collects from its customers, and pays to the
State, a transient accommodation tax, which only providers of
transient accommodations are required to pay.
Based on Aloha B&B's own admissions as well as the
undisputed evidence, we conclude that Aloha B&B falls squarely
within the statutory definition of "place of public
accommodation" as an "establishment that provides lodging to
transient guests[.]"  Our conclusion is bolstered by the stated
purpose of HRS Chapter 489 and the Legislature's directive on how
it should be construed.  HRS § 489-1(a) (2006) states that the
purpose of HRS Chapter 489 "is to protect the interests, rights,
and privileges of all persons within the State with regard to
access and use of public accommodations by prohibiting unfair
discrimination."  HRS § 489-1(b) (2006) then directs that HRS
Chapter 489 "shall be liberally construed to further" these
purposes.    
When the plain language of the statutory definition of
"place of public accommodation" is liberally construed to further
the anti-discrimination purposes of HRS Chapter 489, it
reinforces our firm conclusion that Aloha B&B is a place of
public accommodation.  We conclude that the Circuit Court
correctly ruled that Aloha B&B constitutes a place of public
accommodation that is subject to HRS Chapter 489.  It is
undisputed that Aloha B&B refused to provide Plaintiffs with
lodging on the basis of their sexual orientation.  Therefore, we
12FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
affirm the Circuit Court's determination that Aloha B&B violated
HRS § 489-3 by discriminating against Plaintiffs on the basis of
their sexual orientation.8
D.
In arguing that its actions were not prohibited by HRS
489-3, Aloha B&B relies on an exemption applicable to a different
law, HRS Chapter 515, a law which generally prohibits
discrimination in real property transactions.  In particular,
Aloha B&B relies on the exemption set forth in HRS § 515-4(a)(2),
a so-called "Mrs. Murphy" exemption.9  HRS § 515-4(a)(2) provides
that the prohibitions in HRS § 515-3 against discrimination in
real estate transactions do not apply "[t]o the rental of . . .
up to four rooms in a housing accommodation by an owner or lessor
if the owner or lessor resides in the housing accommodation." 
Aloha B&B argues that the HRS § 515-4(a)(2) exemption supersedes
the prohibition against discrimination set forth in HRS § 489-3
and therefore authorized its discriminatory conduct in this case. 
We disagree.
1.
In analyzing Aloha B&B's argument, we begin by focusing
on our "foremost obligation . . . to ascertain and give effect"
to the Legislature's intent in enacting the statutory provisions. 
As noted, through HRS § 489-1, the Legislature mandated that HRS
Chapter 489 shall be liberally construed to further its purposes
8Because we conclude that Aloha B&B falls within the
statutory definition of "place of public accommodation" as "an
establishment that provides lodging to transient guests," we need
not address whether the Circuit Court was correct in determining
that Aloha B&B also constitutes a place of public accommodation
as "[a] facility providing services relating to travel or
transportation."  See HRS § 489-2.
9"Mrs. Murphy" was a hypothetical widow running a boarding
house, whose circumstances were first cited in the 1960s to argue
that a person renting a small number of rooms in the person's
residence should be exempted from laws prohibiting
discrimination. 
13FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of protecting people's rights to access and to use public
accommodations by prohibiting unfair discrimination.  HRS Chapter
515 is also directed at prohibiting discrimination and "shall be
construed according to the fair import of its terms and shall be
liberally construed."  HRS § 515-1 (2006).
By providing remedies for discrimination and the
injuries caused by discrimination, HRS Chapter 489 and HRS
Chapter 515 are remedial statutes.10  "Remedial statutes are
liberally construed to suppress the perceived evil and advance
the enacted remedy."  Flores v. United Air Lines, Inc., 70 Haw.
1, 12, 757 P.2d 641, 647 (1988) (internal quotation marks,
citation, and brackets omitted).  In addition, "exceptions to a
remedial statute should be narrowly construed[.]"  EEOC v.
Borden's, Inc., 551 F.Supp. 1095, 1110 (D. Ariz. 1982); see State
v. Russell, 62 Haw. 474, 479-80, 617 P.2d 84, 88 (1980) ("The
importation of exceptions into statutes properly affected with a
public interest is not lightly to be made. . . . It is a well
settled rule of statutory construction that exceptions to
legislative enactments must be strictly construed."); United
States v. Columbus Country Club, 915 F.2d 877, 883 (1990)
(construing exemptions to federal Fair Housing Act narrowly). 
Accordingly, we liberally construe the scope of the protection
against discrimination provided by HRS Chapter 489, and we
narrowly or strictly construe the scope of the exemption from
prohibited discrimination provided by HRS § 515-4(a)(2).
The Hawai #i Legislature's actions in omitting a "Mrs.
Murphy" exemption when it enacted HRS Chapter 489 indicates its
intent that no such exemption would apply to discrimination in
public accommodations and the type of conduct engaged in by Aloha
B&B in this case.  The "Mrs. Murphy" exemption in HRS Chapter 515
10See Flores v. United Air Lines, Inc., 70 Haw. 1, 12 n.8,
757 P.2d 641, 647 n.8 (1988) ("Generally, remedial statutes are
those which provide a remedy, or improve or facilitate remedies
already existing for the enforcement of rights and the redress of
injuries." (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)).
14FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
was enacted in 1967.  See 1967 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 193, § 4 at
196.  Almost twenty years later, the Hawai# i Legislature enacted
HRS Chapter 489, which was patterned after the public
accommodation provisions of the federal 1964 Civil Rights Act. 
See State v. Hoshijo ex rel. White , 102 Hawai #i 307, 317-18, 76
P.3d 550, 560 (2003).  The federal public accommodation
provisions contain the "Mrs. Murphy" exemption in the provision
defining a "place of public accommodation" to include an
"establishment which provides lodging to transient guests[.]" 
See 42 U.S.C. § 2000a(b)(1).  Although the corresponding Hawai# i
provision adopts portions of the federal provision word for word,
the "Mrs. Murphy" exemption is conspicuously omitted from the
Hawai#i provision.  
A side by side comparison of the two provisions is as
follows:
Hawaii Public Accommodations
Law# Federal Public Accommodation
Law
HRS § 489-2 defines a "place
of public accommodation" to
include:
"An inn, hotel, motel, or
other establishment that
provides lodging to transient
guests[.]"42 U.S.C § 2000a(b)(1) defines
a "place of public
accommodation" to include:
"[A]ny inn, hotel, motel, or
other establishment which
provides lodging to transient
guests, other than an
establishment located within a
building which contains not
more than five rooms for rent
or hire and which is actually
occupied by the proprietor of
such establishment as his
residence[.]"
We conclude that the Hawai #i Legislature's omission of
the "Mrs. Murphy" exemption in enacting HRS Chapter 489 provides
persuasive evidence that it did not intend such an exemption to
apply to establishments, like Aloha B&B, that provide lodging to
transient guests.  We also conclude that Congress' inclusion of
the "Mrs. Murphy" exemption is instructive, for it demonstrates
that Congress believed that a person's residence may constitute a
15FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
"place of public accommodation" as an "establishment which
provides lodging to transient guests."  If a person's residence
could not constitute a place of public accommodation, then the
"Mrs. Murphy" exemption would not be necessary in the federal
public accommodation provision.  Congress' inclusion of the "Mrs.
Murphy" exemption in the federal public accommodation law
supports our conclusion that a place of public accommodation
includes a bed and breakfast business, like Aloha B&B, that uses
the proprietor's residence to provide lodging to transient
guests.
2.
Contrary to Aloha B&B, we do not view HRS Chapter 489
and HRS § 515-4(a)(2) to be in irreconcilable conflict.  In this
regard, we note that the term "rental" as used in HRS § 515-
4(a)(2) is not specifically defined.  Also, because HRS § 515-
4(a)(2) is an exception to a remedial statute, we construe it
narrowly.  We conclude that it is possible to reconcile HRS
Chapter 489 and HRS § 515-4(a)(2) by construing the phrase
"rental of a room" for purposes of HRS § 515-4(a)(2) to exclude
short-term lodging provided to transient guests covered by HRS
Chapter 489 and as applying only to longer-term living
arrangements where more permanent housing is sought.  Such a
construction would be consistent with the manner in which the
Legislature has characterized the "Mrs. Murphy" exemption set
forth in HRS § 515-4(a)(2).
In enacting the HRS § 515-4(a)(2) exemption in 1967,
the Legislature referred to it as the "tight living" exemption. 
See H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 874, in 1967 House Journal, at 819.  
Furthermore, in amending HRS Chapter 515 in 2005 to add sexual
orientation to the types of discrimination precluded by HRS 
§ 515-3, the Legislature described the "Mrs. Murphy" exemption
set forth in HRS 515-4(a)(2) as follows: "Housing laws  presently
permit landlords to follow their individual value systems in
selecting tenants to live in the landlords' own homes[.]"  2005
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 214, § 1 at 688 (emphasis added).  This
16FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
characterization of the "Mrs. Murphy" exemption indicates that
the Legislature understood the exemption to apply to longer-term
living or housing arrangements -- where a landlord-tenant
relationship would be established.  See State v. Sullivan , 97
Hawai#i 259, 266, 36 P.3d 803, 810 (2001) ("'[S]ubsequent
legislative history or amendments' may be examined in order to
confirm our interpretation of statutory provisions." (citation
omitted)). 
Here, Aloha B&B admitted that it provides lodging to
transient guests and that no landlord-tenant relationship is
established during the guests' short-term stays.  Construing the
phrase "rental of a room" for purposes of HRS § 515-4(a)(2) to
exclude short-term lodging provided to transient guests and as
applying only to longer-term living arrangements would serve the
Legislature's purposes for enacting both HRS Chapter 489 and HRS
§ 515-4(a)(2).  It would advance the Legislature's goal of
prohibiting discrimination in public accommodations, while
permitting landlords "to follow their individual value systems"
in selecting a tenant who will reside with them on a longer-term
basis in their own homes.  This construction would also avoid any
irreconcilable conflict between HRS Chapter 489 and HRS § 515-
4(a)(2).  See State v. Vallesteros , 84 Hawai #i 295, 303, 933 P.2d
632, 640 (1997) ("[W]here the statutes simply overlap in their
application, effect will be given to both if possible, as repeal
by implication is disfavored." (block quote format and citation
omitted)).
3.
But even if there were an irreconcilable conflict
between HRS Chapter 489 and HRS § 515-4(a)(2), we conclude that
Chapter 489 would control as it is the more specific statute with
respect to Aloha B&B and Aloha B&B's actions that are at issue in
this case.  See id. ("[W]here there is a 'plainly irreconcilable'
conflict between a general and a specific statute concerning the
same subject matter, the specific will be favored." (block quote
format and citation omitted)).  The plain language of HRS Chapter
17FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
489 specifically applies to and governs an "establishment that
provides lodging to transient guests."  See HRS § 489-2.  This
language perfectly describes Aloha B&B.  HRS Chapter 489 also
directly addresses the precise conduct at issue in this case --
the discriminatory refusal by a public accommodation
establishment to provide lodging to transient guests based on
their sexual orientation.  See  HRS § 489-3.  HRS § 515-4(a)(2),
on the other hand, applies more generally to the "rental of
rooms," without specifying the time period involved or whether
the provision of lodging to transient guests is covered.  We
conclude that HRS Chapter 489 is the more specific statute
regarding the subject matter of this case.11
II.
We now turn to address Aloha B&B's constitutional
claims.  Aloha B&B contends that the application of HRS Chapter
489 to its conduct in this case would violate Young's
constitutional rights to privacy, intimate association, and free
11Contrary to Aloha B&B's contention, the doctrine of
ejusdem generis  does not support its claim that it falls outside
the definition of a "place of public accommodation."  See
Richardson v. City and County of Honolulu
, 76 Hawai #i 46, 74, 868
P.2d 1193, 1221 (1994) (Klein, J., dissenting) (describing the
doctrine of ejusdem generis  to mean: "[W]here words of general
description follow the enumeration of certain things, those words
are restricted in their meaning to objects of like kind and
character with those specified.").  The doctrine is inapplicable
where the statute's plain meaning is apparent or where applying
the ejusdem generis  rule would conflict with other, clearer
indications of the Legislature's intent.  United States v. West ,
671 F.3d 1195, 1199 (10th Cir. 2012); Leslie Salt Co. v. United
States, 896 F.2d 354, 359 (9th Cir. 1990).  As we have concluded,
the plain language of HRS Chapter 489 and the Legislature's
directive that it be liberally construed to further its anti-
discrimination purposes clearly establishes that Aloha B&B falls
within the definition of a "place of public accommodation."  In
any event, Aloha B&B's claim that the ejusdem generis  doctrine
supports its claim because a bed and breakfast operates out of a
residence while an inn, hotel, and motel do not is without merit. 
The trait that unifies the items in the list is set forth in the
statutory definition itself -- establishments "that provide[]
lodging to transient guest."  It is undisputed that Aloha B&B
possesses this unifying trait.
18FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
exercise of religion.  We disagree.
We review "questions of constitutional law ,
under the right/wrong standard," and we "answer questions of
constitutional law by exercising [our] own independent judgment
based on the facts of the case.  Malahoff v. Saito, 111 Hawai #i
168, 181, 140 P.3d 401, 414 (2006) (citation and brackets
omitted).  "[E]very enactment of the [Hawai# i] [L]egislature is
presumptively constitutional, and a party challenging the statute
has the burden of showing [the alleged] unconstitutionality
beyond a reasonable doubt."  State v. Mueller , 66 Haw. 616, 627,
671 P.2d 1351, 1358 (1983).  The alleged constitutional violation
"should be plain, clear, manifest, and unmistakable." 
Kaho#ohanohano v. State, 114 Hawai #i 302, 339, 162 P.3d 696, 733
(2007). de novo
A.
Aloha B&B argues that applying HRS Chapter 489 to
prohibit it from discriminating against Plaintiffs and others
based on their sexual orientation violates Young's right to
privacy.  We disagree.  
The "evil of unequal treatment, which is the injury to
an individual's sense of self-worth and personal integrity" is
"the chief harm resulting from the practice of discrimination by
establishments serving the general public."  King v. Greyhound
Lines, Inc., 656 P.2d 349, 352 (Or. Ct. App. 1982), cited in
Hoshijo ex rel. White, 102 Hawai# i at 317 n.22, 76 P.3d at 560
n.22.  Unfair discriminatory practices in general, and such
practices in places of public accommodation in particular, 
"deprive[] persons of their individual dignity and den[y] society
the benefits of wide participation in political, economic, and
cultural life."  Roberts v. United States Jaycees , 468 U.S. 609,
625 (1984). 
Hawai#i has a compelling state interest in prohibiting
discrimination in public accommodations.  "[A]cts of invidious
discrimination in the distribution of publicly available goods,
services, and other advantages cause unique evils that government
19FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
has a compelling interest to prevent[.]"  Id. at 628.  A State's
interest in assuring equal access is not "limited to the
provision of purely tangible goods and services," and a State has
broad authority to create rights of public access.  Id.  at 625.
Aloha B&B argues that the right to privacy is "the
right to be left alone."  However, to the extent that Young has
chosen to operate her bed and breakfast business from her home,
she has voluntarily given up the right to be left alone.  In
choosing to operate Aloha B&B from her home, Young, for
commercial purposes, has opened up her home to over one hundred
customers per year, charging them money for access to her home. 
Indeed, the success of Aloha B&B's business and its profits
depend on members of the general public entering Young's home as
customers.  In other words, the success of Aloha B&B's business
requires that Young not be left alone.  
Aloha B&B also argues that the right to privacy has
special force in a person's own home.  However, given Young's
choice to use her home for business purposes as a place of public
accommodation, it is no longer a purely private home.  "The more
an owner, for [her] advantage, opens [her] property for use by
the public in general, the more do [her] rights become
circumscribed by the statutory and constitutional rights of those
who use it."  State v. Viglielmo, 105 Hawai# i 197, 206, 95 P.3d
952, 961 (2004) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
In addition, the State retains the right to regulate activities
occurring in a home where others are harmed or likely to be
harmed.  See State v. Kam , 69 Haw. 483, 492, 748 P.2d 372, 378
(1988); Mueller , 66 Haw. at 618-19, 628, 671 P.2d at 1353-54,
1359 (finding no privacy right to engage in prostitution in one's
home).  Aloha B&B's discriminatory conduct caused direct harm to
Plaintiffs and threatens to harm other members of the general
public.    
The privacy right implicated by this case is not the
right to exclude others from a purely private home, but rather
the right of a business owner using her home as a place of public
20FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
accommodation to use invidious discrimination to choose which
customers the business will serve.  "The Constitution does not
guarantee a right to choose employees, customers, suppliers, or
those with whom one engages in simple commercial transactions,
without restraint from the State."  Roberts, 468 U.S. at 634
(O'Connor, J., concurring).  We conclude that Young's asserted
right to privacy did not entitle her to refuse to provide
Plaintiffs with lodging based on their sexual orientation and
that the application of HRS Chapter 489 to prohibit such
discriminatory conduct does not violate her right to privacy. 
See Mueller , 66 Haw. at 618-19, 628, 671 P.2d at 1353-54, 1359. 
B.
Aloha B&B claims that applying HRS Chapter 489 to
prohibit it from denying accommodations to Plaintiffs and others
based on their sexual orientation violates Young's
constitutionally protected right to intimate association.  We
disagree.
In recognizing the constitutional right of intimate
association, the Supreme Court "has concluded that choices to
enter into and maintain certain intimate human relationships must
be secured against undue intrusion by the State because of the
role of such relationships in safeguarding the individual freedom
that is central to our constitutional scheme."  Roberts , 468 U.S.
at 617-18.  "[C]ertain kinds of personal bonds have played a
critical role in the culture and traditions of the Nation by
cultivating and transmitting shared ideals and beliefs[.]"  Id.
at 618-19.  The right of intimate association protects family
relationships and similar highly personal relationships, which
"by their nature, involve deep attachments and commitments to the
necessarily few other individuals with whom one shares not only a
special community of thoughts, experiences, and beliefs but also
distinctively personal aspects of one's life."  Id.  at 619-20. 
The protected relationships "are distinguished by such attributes
as relative smallness, a high degree of selectivity in decisions
to begin and maintain the affiliation, and seclusion from others
21FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
in critical aspects of the relationship."  Id. at 620.  
Conversely, an association lacking these qualities, "such as a
large business enterprise," are not protected.  Id.
The Supreme Court specifically referred to family
relationships to exemplify and to suggest limitations on the
kinds of relationships entitled to constitutional protection. 
Id. at 619.  The factors relevant for a court to consider in
determining whether a particular relationship is entitled to
protection are "the group's size, its congeniality, its duration,
the purposes for which it was formed, and the selectivity in
choosing participants."  IDK, Inc. v. Clark County , 836 F.2d
1185, 1193 (9th Cir. 1988).
Considering these factors, we conclude that applying
HRS Chapter 489 to Aloha B&B does not violate Young's right to
intimate association.  The relationship between Aloha B&B and the
customers to whom it provides transient lodging is not the type
of intimate relationship that is entitled to constitutional
protection against a law designed to prohibit discrimination in
public accommodations. 
With respect to the group's size, Aloha B&B provides
transient lodging to between one hundred and two hundred
customers per year.  Aloha B&B has accommodated customers in up
to three rooms at a time for twenty years.  The hundreds of 
customer relationships Aloha B&B forms through its business is
far from the "necessarily few" family-type relationships that are
subject to constitutional protection.  See Roberts , 468 U.S. at
620-21 (holding that relationships formed through membership in
business groups with 400 and 430 members were not protected);
IDK, 836 F.2d at 1193 (concluding that while an escort and a
client "are the smallest possible association[,]" this
relationship was not protected because, among other reasons, an
escort may have many other clients, and the relationship "lasts
for a short period and only as long as the client is willing to
pay the fee").
With respect to the purpose for which the relationship
22FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
is formed, Aloha B&B forms relationships with its customers for
commercial, business purposes, and it is only the commercial
aspects of the relationship that HRS Chapter 489 regulates. 
Young testified that the primary purpose of Aloha B&B is to "make
money."  She also admitted that if she could not make money by
running Aloha B&B, she "wouldn't operate it."  Young does not
operate Aloha B&B for the purpose of developing "deep attachments
and commitments" to its customers.  See id. at 620.
With respect to selectivity, duration, and
congeniality, Aloha B&B generally is not selective about whom it
will accept as customers, provides short-term, transient lodging,
and does not form lasting relationships with customers.  With
narrow exceptions such as same-sex couples and smokers, Aloha B&B
basically provides lodging to "any member of the public who is
willing to pay."  Aloha B&B does not inquire into the background
of its prospective customers, such as their political or
religious beliefs, before allowing them to book a reservation.12
Aloha B&B's customers only stay for short periods of time.  The
majority stay for less than a week, about 95 percent less than
two weeks, and over 99 percent less than a month.  While Young
stated that "people come as guests and leave as friends," she
acknowledged that she had difficulty putting customers' "faces to
the name" a month after they left.
Aloha B&B and Young's relationship with customers
arising from the commercial operation of Aloha B&B does not
constitute an intimate, family-type relationship that involves
"deep attachments and commitments to the necessarily few other
12While Young stated that she will not accept reservations
from smokers, same-sex couples, unmarried couples, and disabled
people who cannot climb the stairs, Young stated that the
standard questions she asks people in processing a reservation
consists of the dates they want, whether they are smokers, what
room they are asking about, requesting their names, addresses,
and contact information, asking if they have any dietary needs,
and asking about the deposit.  Therefore, based on her standard
questions, Young would not be able to determine the customers'
marital status or whether they are able to climb stairs.
23FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
individuals with whom one shares not only a special community of
thoughts, experiences, and beliefs but also distinctively
personal aspects of one's life."  Roberts, 468 U.S. at 620.  
Applying HRS Chapter 489 to prohibit the discriminatory conduct
engaged in by Aloha B&B in this case does not violate Young's
right to intimate association. 
C.
Aloha B&B contends that application of HRS Chapter 489
to its conduct in this case violates Young's constitutional right
to free exercise of religion.  We disagree.  
The Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment, which
is applicable to the States through the Fourteenth Amendment,
provides that "Congress shall make no law respecting an
establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise
thereof . . . ."  U.S. Const., amend. I. (emphasis added).  The
protections of the Free Exercise Clause apply to laws that target
religious beliefs or religiously motivated conduct.  Church of
the Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc. v. City of Hialeah, 508 U.S. 520,
532-34 (1993).  However, the Supreme Court has held that "the
right of free exercise does not relieve an individual of the
obligation to comply with a 'valid and neutral law of general
applicability on the ground that the law proscribes (or
prescribes) conduct that his religion prescribes (or
proscribes).'"  Employment Div., Dept. of Human Resources of Ore.
v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872, 879 (1990) (citation omitted).  In Smith,
the Supreme Court further held that neutral laws of general
applicability need not be justified by a compelling governmental
interest even when they have the incidental effect of burdening a
particular religious practice.  Id. at 882-85.13 
13The Supreme Court explained:
The government's ability to enforce generally
applicable prohibitions of socially harmful conduct,
like its ability to carry out other aspects of public
policy, "cannot depend on measuring the effects of a
(continued...)
24FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Under Smith, to withstand a challenge based on the Free
Exercise Clause of the First Amendment, a neutral state law of
general applicability that has the incidental effect of burdening
a particular religious practice need not be justified by a
compelling state interest, but need only satisfy the rational
basis test.14  Aloha B&B does not dispute that HRS Chapter 489 is
a neutral law of general applicability.  However, it argues that
we should depart from Smith, impose a compelling state interest
requirement, and apply strict scrutiny in deciding its free
exercise claim under the Hawai #i Constitution.15
We need not decide whether a higher level of scrutiny
should be applied to a free exercise claim under the Hawai# i
Constitution than the United States Constitution.  This is
13(...continued)
governmental action on a religious objector's spiritual
development."  To make an individual's obligation to
obey such a law contingent upon the law's coincidence
with his religious beliefs, except where the State's
interest is "compelling" -- permitting him, by virtue
of his beliefs, "to become a law unto himself," --
contradicts both constitutional tradition and common
sense.
Smith, 494 U.S. at 885 (citations and footnote omitted).
14In response to the Supreme Court's decision in Smith,
Congress passed the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993
(RFRA), which prohibits government from substantially burdening
the exercise of religion, even through a neutral law of general
applicability, unless the government can show that the law was in
furtherance of a compelling government interest and was the least
restrictive means of furthering that interest.  See City of
Boerne v. Flores, 521 U.S. 507, 515-16 (1997).  In City of
Boerne, however, the Supreme Court invalidated the RFRA as it
applied to the States.  Id.  at 511, 536.  Thus, with respect to
state laws, the Smith standard generally applies to claims under
the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment.  See Korean
Buddhist Dae Won Sa Temple of Hawaii v. Sullivan, 87 Hawai# i 217,
246 & n.31, 953 P.2d 1315, 1344 & n.31 (1998). 
15Similar to the United States Constitution, the Hawai #i
Constitution provides: "No law shall be enacted respecting the
establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise
thereof . . . ."  Haw. Const. art I, § 4 (emphasis added). 
25FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
because we conclude that HRS Chapter 489 satisfies even strict
scrutiny as applied to Aloha B&B's free exercise claim.  To
satisfy strict scrutiny, a statute must further a compelling
state interest and be narrowly tailored to achieve that interest.
Nagle v. Board of Education, 63 Haw. 389, 392, 629 P.2d 109, 111
(1981) ("Under the strict scrutiny standard . . . [a] court will
carefully examine a statute to determine whether it furthers
compelling state interests and is narrowly drawn to avoid
unnecessary abridgment of constitutional rights."); Kolbe v.
Hogan, 849 F.3d 114, 133 (4th Cir. 2017) (en banc) ("To satisfy
strict scrutiny, . . . the challenged law [must be] 'narrowly
tailored to achieve a compelling governmental interest.'"
(citation omitted)).     
In evaluating Aloha B&B's free exercise claim under the
Hawai#i Constitution, we balance the burden HRS Chapter 489
imposes on Young's free exercise of religion against the State's
interest in prohibiting discrimination in public accommodations.
See Korean Buddhist Dae Won Sa Temple of Hawaii v. Sullivan , 87
Hawai#i 217, 246, 953 P.2d 1315, 1344 (1998).  To establish a
prima facie case for its free exercise claim, Aloha B&B must show
that HRS Chapter 489 interferes with a religious belief that is 
sincerely held by Young and imposes a substantial burden on
Young's religious interests.  See id. at 247, 953 P.2d at 1345. 
Aloha B&B asserts that based on Young's religion, she
believes that sexual relations between individuals of the same
sex are immoral; that providing a room to a same-sex couple would
serve to facilitate conduct she believes is immoral; and thus
requiring her to provide lodging to Plaintiffs and other same-sex
couples would impose substantial burdens on her free exercise of
religion.  Plaintiffs have not challenged the sincerity of
Young's religious beliefs, but argue that Aloha B&B cannot show a
substantial burden on Young's religion.  Plaintiffs argue that
Young's religious beliefs do not compel her to operate a bed and
breakfast business.  They also assert that Young can still use
her home to generate income without any alleged conflict between
26FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
her religious beliefs and the law by relying on the "Mrs. Murphy"
exemption in HRS Chapter 515 and renting out rooms to tenants
seeking long-term housing.  
Assuming, without deciding, that Aloha B&B established
a prima facie case of substantial burden to Young's exercise of
religion, we conclude that the application of HRS Chapter 489 to
Aloha B&B's conduct in this case satisfies the strict scrutiny
standard.  As previously discussed, Hawai #i has a compelling
state interest in prohibiting discrimination in public
accommodations.  The Hawai #i Legislature has specifically found
and declared that "the practice of discrimination because of 
. . . sexual orientation . . . in . . . public accommodations 
. . . is against public policy."  HRS § 368-1 (2015).
Discrimination in public accommodations results in a
"stigmatizing injury" that "deprives persons of their individual
dignity" and injures their "sense of self-worth and personal
integrity."  Roberts, 468 U.S. at 625; King, 656 P.2d at 352,
cited in Hoshijo ex rel. White , 102 Hawai #i at 317 n.22, 76 P.3d
at 560 n.22.  Aloha B&B itself has acknowledged that "in places
of public accommodation discrimination is a horrible evil." 
HRS Chapter 489 is narrowly tailored to achieve
Hawai#i's compelling interest in prohibiting discrimination in
public accommodations.  See Roberts , 468 U.S. at 626 (holding
that Minnesota, in applying its public accommodations statute to
prohibit the Jaycees from discriminating against women, advanced
its interest "through the least restrictive means of achieving
its ends").  HRS Chapter 489 "responds precisely to the
substantive problem [of discrimination in public accommodations]
which legitimately concerns the State."  Id. at 629 (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted).  Because the application
of HRS Chapter 489 to Aloha B&B's discriminatory conduct in this
case satisfies even strict scrutiny, Aloha B&B is not entitled to
27FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
relief on its free exercise claim.16 
CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court's
Summary Judgment Order.
On the briefs:
Shawn A. Luiz
James Hochberg
for Defendant-Appellant
Joseph P. Infranco
Joseph E. La Rue
(Alliance Defending Freedom)
for Defendant Appellant
Jay S. Handlin
Linsay N. McAneeley
(Carlsmith Ball LLP)
Peter C. Renn
(Lambda Legal Defense and 
   Education Fund, Inc.)
For Plaintiffs-Appellees
Robin Wurtzel
Shirley Naomi Garcia
April L. Wilson-South
(Hawai#i Civil Rights Commission)
for Plaintiff-Intervenor-Appellee
16We reject Aloha B&B's claim that Plaintiffs' Complaint
should have been dismissed for failing to name Young, who it
maintains is an indispensable party, as a defendant.  Aloha B&B
is operated as a sole proprietorship with Young as its sole
proprietor.  "[I]n the case of a sole proprietorship, the firm
name and the sole proprietor's name are but two names for one
person."  Credit Assocs. of Maui, Ltd. v. Carlbom , 98 Hawai #i
462, 466, 50 P.3d 431, 435 (App. 2002) (block quote format and
citation omitted).  
28