NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000375
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
HOWARD M. NOBUNAGA, Claimant-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, JUDICIARY DEPARTMENT, Employer-Appellee
 
LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. AB 2005-618 (2-04-02893))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Claimant-Appellant Howard Michio Nobunaga (Nobunaga)
 
appeals from an April 5, 2011 Decision and Order1
 (Decision and 
Order) entered by the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals 
Board, State of Hawai 'i (Board). After a hearing before the 
Board on August 24, 2009, the Board concluded that: (1) Nobunaga 
did not sustain a personal injury on March 15, 2004, arising out of and in the course of employment; and (2) Employer-Appellee State of Hawai
'i, the Judiciary (Employer) had rebutted or 
overcome the presumption of compensability by substantial evidence. 
On appeal, Nobunaga asks this Court to reverse the
 
Board's Decision and Order, challenging the Board's Findings of
 Fact (FOFs) 11, 13, 18, 19, 26, 27, 30-36 and its Conclusion of
 
Law (COL), and raising the following points of error:
 
1
 Roland Q.F. Thom, Chairman (recused), Melanie S. Matsui, Member,
and David A. Pendleton, Member, presided .
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1. The Board clearly erred in crediting the opinions
 
of Dr. Grills and Dr. Rogers instead of Dr. Tsushima and Dr.
 
Bernstein;
 
2. The Board clearly erred in finding that Nobunaga
 
misperceived the meeting on March 15, 2004 between himself and
 supervisor, Russell Tellio (Tellio), as the record shows the
 
meeting was belittling and demeaning, caused Nobunaga stress that
 
was not self-generated, and the Board clearly erred in not
 crediting Nobunaga's description of what transpired;
 
3. The Board clearly erred in not crediting Nobunaga's
 
testimony and not finding him to be believable, as the record as
 a whole does not reveal Nobunaga's statements as being
 inconsistent, and many of the inconsistencies cited by the Board
 were not in fact inconsistencies;
 
4. The Board clearly erred in crediting the testimony
 
of Tellio over Nobunaga, as the record as a whole does not
 justify this and because Tellio's testimony was actually more
 inconsistent than Nobunaga's testimony;
 
5. The Board clearly erred when it found that
 
Nobunaga's pre-existing Bipolar I Disorder was not aggravated or
 worsened by the March 15, 2004 meeting and that he did not suffer
 Adjustment Disorder as a result of the meeting based on the
 medical and factual evidence presented as interpreted in light of
 the presumption in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 386-85(1) and
 
other applicable law; and
 
6. The Board erred as a matter of law in finding that
 
the Employer adduced substantial evidence to overcome the
 
presumption of compensability in HRS § 386-85(1), and the Board
 should have found Nobunaga's Bipolar I Disorder and Adjustment
 Disorder to be compensable injuries. The finding of
 compensability would also necessarily dictate that the Board
 should decide the unresolved issues of average weekly wage,
 temporary partial disability, temporary total disability, and
 entitlement to vocational rehabilitation upon remand.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced, applicable authorities, and the issues
 raised by the parties, we resolve Nobunaga's points of error as
 follows:
 A.	 The Board Did Not Clearly Err in Entering Its Credibility
Determinations In Favor of Tellio and Against Nobunaga
 
It is well established that, in workers' compensation
 
cases, "the credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given
 their testimony are within the province of the trier of fact and,
 generally, will not be disturbed on appeal." 
Tamashiro v.
  
Control Specialist, Inc., 97 Hawai 'i 86, 92, 34 P.3d 16, 22 
(2001).
 
The Board stated its rationale for not crediting the
 
testimony of Nobunaga in its FOF 30 as:
 
The Board does not credit the testimony and statements
by Claimant. In particular, but not limited to, the Board
finds the Claimant's testimony and statements about the
March 15, 2004 incident have been inconsistent and not
believable. Further, the medical records indicate that
Claimant has a tendency to make overly broad statements, but
when questioned directly regarding those statements, he
would retract and indicate that those statements were not
 entirely accurate.
On September 9, 2006, Claimant told Dr. Grills that
[Tellio] was singling him out. When asked to describe what
 he meant, Claimant stated that [Tellio's] negative remarks
and behavior. When asked for an example of this, Claimant
mentioned that he was made to sign a statement to have his
work reviewed by [Tellio]. When asked if this was unusual,
Claimant stated that it was not unusual.
 
With regard to the March 15, 2004 incident, Claimant
stated that he found it "demeaning" and that it set him off,
but he was not angry. Claimant also stated that the
 incident was a 30-minute "put down, chewing out session"
wherein he was "cussed at" by [Tellio]. However, he later
acknowledged that [Tellio] did not actually use curse words,
did not yell, and did not threaten him with physical harm,
but that [Tellio] spoke in a negative manner.
Claimant described the statements in the letter of
 
understanding as belittling and demeaning because he was
already complying. When asked how it was belittling and
demeaning if he was already complying, he stated that it was
unnecessary.
Claimant stated that he would be sent to an
 
examination to determine if he was "faking," but
acknowledged that was just his interpretation, and that his
supervisor had not stated that directly.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
He denied conflicts with prior supervisors. Claimant
 
also only reported a history of panic attacks after the
March 15, 2004 meeting, which is contradicted in the medical
reports and later in Dr. Grills' report. However, the
evidence indicates Claimant had a problem with at least one
prior supervisor.
Dr. Grills also noted several inconsistencies. He noted
 
that Claimant informed Dr. Rogers that he did not know the names
of any of his medications, but was able to provide the names of
the medications to Dr. Grills. Claimant told Dr. Rogers that he
was laid off from a law firm because the firm lost several
 contracts, but informed Dr. Grills that he was let go because one
of the partners was grooming a relative rather than Claimant for a
partnership position. He informed Dr. Rogers that [Tellio] was a
personal friend, but denied that he was a friend to Dr. Grills.
Claimant also informed Dr. Grills that former co-workers
 
would sabotage or back stab him to make work more difficult. As
 an example, he stated that he wanted to computerize the office,
but a co-worker wanted to maintain a manual system. He stated
 that he had multiple meetings with management and wasted his time
meeting with the union who would not help him. He created a
 policy that outside visitors would not be allowed in the office
without proper visitor identification or a volunteer pass. The
 co-worker supposedly took it personally, but obtained a volunteer
pass for her daughter who was helping with the computers.
The foregoing leads the Board to find that there is a high
likelihood that Claimant misperceived the March 15, 2004 meeting
with [Tellio].
 
Further, in FOF 33: "The Board credits the testimony
of [Tellio] over [Nobunaga]." 
 
Nobunaga argues that FOFs 30 and 33 are clearly
 
erroneous because Tellio admitted to having poor memory,
 
displayed inconsistencies of his own, and displayed profound poor
 judgment by admitting to bringing a prohibited, unloaded rifle to
 work. For these reasons, Nobunaga argues that Tellio's "overall
 testimony should be viewed with skepticism and found
 untrustworthy."
 
In response, Employer first argues that this Court
 
"should refuse to review the [Board's] findings of fact
 pertaining to the credibility of the testimony presented before
 the [Board]." For this, Employer cites to 
Igawa v. Koa House
  
Rest. for the proposition that:
 
It is well established that courts decline to consider
 
the weight of the evidence to ascertain whether it weighs in
favor of the administrative findings, or to review the
agency's findings of fact by passing upon the credibility of
witnesses or conflicts in testimony, especially the findings
of an expert agency dealing with a specialized field.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Igawa v. Koa House Rest., 97 Hawai 'i at 409-10, 38 P.3d at 577-78 
(format altered; citations omitted). 
We reject Employer's argument that the Board's
 
credibility determination is beyond judicial review. "The issue
 
of credibility is one within the primary responsibility of the
 Board as the fact finder whose determination will not be
 disturbed lightly. But where the record reveals no conflict in
 the evidence or impeachment of any witness, the court will not
 sustain a finding as to credibility which it is firmly convinced
 is mistaken." De Victoria v. H & K Contractors, 56 Haw. 552,
 
559, 545 P.2d 692, 698 (1976) (citations omitted) (holding the
 Board's FOF that, within the year following the accident, the
 claimant's back condition had returned to a state which prevailed
 prior to his work accident as clearly erroneous when such a
 finding was based solely upon a skeletal, internally
 contradictory WC-2 Physician's Final Report form). Therefore,
 although this Court gives a great deal of deference to the
 Board's credibility determinations, it is not beyond judicial
 review altogether.
 
We nevertheless agree with Employer that the Board's
 
noted inconsistencies are supported in the record. Therefore,
 its credibility determination is not clearly erroneous, despite
 possible inconsistencies in Tellio's testimony. In reviewing the
 inconsistencies cited to by the Board, Nobunaga did tell Dr.
 Grills that Tellio was singling him out by asking him to state in
 the letter of understanding that he would have his work reviewed
 by Tellio. However, when asked if it was unusual, Nobunaga
 responded that it was not unusual. 
Additionally, Nobunaga stated that he found the March
 
15, 2004 incident "demeaning" and that it set him off, but that
 he was not angry. Although he described the letter of
 understanding as "belittling and demeaning," when Nobunaga was
 asked how it was belittling and demeaning when he was already
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
complying with the rules set out in the letter of understanding,
 
he stated that it was because it was "unnecessary." 
Also, Nobunaga stated to Dr. Grills that the incident
 
was a 30-minute "put down, chewing out session" wherein he was
 "cussed at" by Tellio. However, Nobunaga later acknowledged that
 Tellio did not actually use curse words, did not yell, and did
 not threaten him with physical harm, but that Tellio spoke in a
 negative manner.
 
Moreover, Nobunaga initially asserted that Tellio
 
wanted to send him for an independent medical examination to
 determine "whether or not [Nobunaga] was faking" what he had. 
However, when asked explicitly if Tellio actually said that,
 Nobunaga acknowledged that "this would be my interpretation" and
 that Tellio did not say it "directly, but he intimated that." 
When Dr. Grills asked Nobunaga if he had other 
conflicts with prior supervisors, Nobunaga replied, "No." However, the record shows and Nobunaga later acknowledges having a conflict with at least one prior supervisor, Clifford Higa, when Nobunaga was working as a deputy attorney general for the State of Hawai
'i. 
Additionally, Nobunaga did in fact list two different
 
reasons for being laid off from a previous law firm for which he
 had worked. Specifically, Nobunaga told Dr. Rogers that he was
 laid off when this law firm lost several contracts. However,
 when speaking with Dr. Grills, Nobunaga said he was let go
 because "after five years [the firm] had to decide whether or not
 to make him partner, and one of the current partners was grooming
 a relative for that position."
 
Nobunaga argues on appeal that "[Employer] never
 
presented evidence or let alone suggested [Nobunaga] lied about
 any of his previous work experience or that both or one of the
 reasons stated above were untrue." Inconsistent is defined as: 
"Lacking agreement among parts; not compatible with another fact
 or claim." B
LACK'S LAW DICTIONARY 834 (9th ed. 2009). Therefore,
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
when Nobunaga was asked the same question and provided differing
 
answers, i.e., not in agreement, the Board did not clearly err in
 finding the answers to be inconsistent.
 
Nobunaga told Dr. Rogers that he considered Tellio "my
 
personal friend." Additionally, during his hearing before the
 Board, Nobunaga stated that he had an "out of the zone kind of
 feeling," which "shatter[ed his] trust of 28 years." Tellio's
 testimony confirms that they had been friends for approximately
 20 years. However, when Dr. Grills asked Nobunaga if he used to
 be friends with Tellio, he stated, "no."
 
In addition to these noted inconsistencies,
 
importantly, to Dr. Grills, Nobunaga "attributed his first panic
 attack to his meeting with [Tellio] 3/15/04." However, this
 statement is contradicted by the record. Nobunaga was being
 treated for Panic Disorder when Dr. Bernstein took over the
 treatment of Nobunaga from Dr. Jarlais in 2001. Also, as close
 to the March 15, 2004 incident as February 21, 2004, Nobunaga
 reported experiencing two panic attacks to Dr. Bernstein. 
Due to these inconsistencies in Nobunaga's
 
representations between Dr. Grills and Dr. Rogers, the Board's
 FOF 30 that "Claimant has a tendency to make overly broad
 statements, but when questioned directly regarding those
 statements, he would retract and indicate that those statements
 were not entirely accurate" is not clearly erroneous. See De
 
Victoria, 56 Haw. at 559-60, 545 P.2d at 698-99 (holding the
 Board's finding as clearly erroneous when the only basis for the
 Board's finding is an internally contradictory fill-in-the-blank
 physician's report form, which was unsupported by other evidence
 in the record). Therefore, the Board's entry of a negative
 credibility finding against Nobunaga cannot be said to be clearly
 erroneous.
 
After finding in FOF 30 that the testimony and
 
statements by Nobunaga were not credible, the Board went on to
 credit the testimony of Tellio over Nobunaga in FOF 33. On
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appeal, Nobunaga argues that Tellio had inconsistencies in his
 
testimony as well, which makes the Board's finding of credibility
 clearly erroneous. Specifically, Nobunaga points to Tellio's
 answer when asked if he had an "independent recollection" of what
 happened at the March 15, 2004 meeting:
 
You know, you got to excuse me because my job was so
intense at The Judiciary. And one of the reasons I retired
 
was I felt they were -- Well, I was overwhelmed with what
was happening over there.
My memory may be vague at times. But, you know, now
that you give me this memo,
[ 2
] I recall I met with Howard. 
Again, the intent was to be able to communicate with
[Nobunaga] better.
 
Additionally, as support that the Board clearly erred
 
by finding Tellio credible, Nobunaga points to Tellio's "lack of
 
awareness of the rudiments of the [Americans with Disabilities
 Act], and reckless judgment" when he acknowledged bringing an
 unloaded rifle to his former workplace, as well as venting.
 
However, in reviewing the weight of evidence assigned
 
by the Board, this Court is not left with a firm conviction that
 a mistake has been made. Therefore, the Board's credibility
 determination with respect to Tellio and Nobunaga are not clearly
 erroneous.
 B.	 The Board Did Not Clearly Err in Finding That There Is a
High Likelihood That Nobunaga Misperceived the March 15,
2004 Incident
 
In his second point of error, Nobunaga challenges
 
another portion of FOF 30 in which the Board found: "The
 
foregoing leads the Board to find that there is a high likelihood
 that Claimant misperceived the March 15, 2004 meeting with
 [Tellio]." In support of his argument, Nobunaga also challenges
 FOFs 13 and 27.
 
2
 This is a March 21, 2005 memorandum prepared by Tellio, which was
addressed to Leighton Oshiro, Division Chief of Employer's Workers'
Compensation Division. During trial before the Board, the memorandum was used
by Employer's counsel to refresh Tellio's memory of the March 15, 2004
incident.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
FOF 13 states:
 
Dr. Rogers prepared a Supplemental Report dated March
9, 2005. Dr. Rogers opined that the March 15, 2004 incident
did not cause, aggravate, or worsen Claimant's preexisting
Bipolar I Condition. Rather, he suffered a recurrence of
symptoms of that condition when he misperceived [Tellio's]
behavior and interpreted the meeting as harassing,
demeaning, and belittling.
Dr. Rogers opined that if the March 15, 2004 meeting
was "stressful," it was only stressful because of Claimant's
preexisting psychiatric condition which posed a threat to
his job security. Dr. Rogers opined that the behavior of
[Tellio] was appropriate.
Dr. Rogers summarized that Claimant's symptoms
following the March 15, 2004 incident represented a
recurrence or "relapse" of his preexisting condition,
 
which were not symptomatically different
to be a new condition . . . ." Even if
 the Adjustment Disorder diagnosis were to
be accepted, "the root cause of the stress
reaction is [Nobunaga's] pre-existing
psychiatric condition, and not the 3/15/04
meeting with his supervisor.
 
FOF 27 states:
 
At trial, Dr. Rogers testified that at the time of his
first evaluation of Claimant, Claimant presented with
symptoms consistent with a Bipolar I Disorder[.] Dr. Rogers
also diagnosed Undifferentiated Somatoform Disorder, because
Claimant also presented with "a lot of symptoms that were
physical symptoms that were kind of unusual that were beyond
the typical realm of bipolar."
Dr. Rogers testified that "an adjustment disorder is
really a last ditch effort to pin a diagnosis on a
condition. An adjustment disorder really should not be used
if symptoms are better explained by a specific Axis I
disorder, such as his bipolar disorder." Further,
Claimant's symptoms after the March 15, 2004 meeting with
[Tellio] were identical to his symptoms before the meeting.
Dr. Rogers opined that if [Nobunaga] perceived stress
during the March 15, 2004 meeting with [Tellio], it was self
generated by Claimant's belief that he would be fired from
his job. Dr. Roger's [sic] explained:
The nature of a bipolar condition is such
that the neurochemical abnormalities in
 the brain cause everything to be
amplified. And I think his thoughts were
amplified. His perceptions, therefore,
were expansive. ... By all objective
standards they were not reflective of
accurate reality of what was going on in
that meeting.
Further, Dr. Rogers explained that Bipolar I Disorder
is a recurrent disorder, and that its symptoms ebb and flow.
Dr. Rogers opined that Claimant's bipolar disorder was not
aggravated; Claimant simply experienced a recurrence of the
symptoms that he had been experiencing for years.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Dr. Rogers explained that bipolar symptoms are not
triggered by external events, but can make the symptoms more
evident. He stated, "the true cause of bipolar disorder is
biochemical abnormalities in the central nervous system
which is genetically linked. And the way you treat that is
to treat those chemicals in the central nervous system to
restore those abnormalities as much as possible."
 
FOFs 13 and 27 are not clearly erroneous, as they
 
accurately reflect what Dr. Rogers stated in his reports, as well
 
as in his testimony during trial. These findings were also
 supported by Dr. Slomoff's report, which opined that
 "misperception is a frequent component of psychiatric disorders." 
Based upon FOFs 13 and 27, as well as the Board's finding that
 Nobunaga "has a tendency to make overly broad statements [that] .
 . . were not entirely accurate," the Board's finding in FOF 30
 that there is a high likelihood that Nobunaga misperceived the
 March 15, 2004 incident with Tellio is not clearly erroneous.
 C.	 The Board Did Not Clearly Err in Finding That the Opinions
of Drs. Bernstein and Tsushima Are Not Credible
 
Nobunaga argues that the Board clearly erred in
 
crediting the opinions of Dr. Grills and Dr. Rogers instead of
 
Dr. Tsushima and Dr. Bernstein. Specifically, Nobunaga
 challenges the Board's FOFs 31, 32, and 35. 
FOF 31 states: "Given the foregoing, the Board also
 
does not credit the opinions of Dr. Tsushima and Dr. Bernstein to
 the extent that they relied primarily and uncritically upon the
 representation of Claimant to formulate their opinions." 
FOF 32 states: "The Board credits the opinions of Dr.
 
Rogers and Dr. Grills."
 
FOF 35 states: "The Board credits the opinions of Dr.
 
Rogers and Dr. Grills over that of Dr. Tsushima and Dr.
 Bernstein." 
Again, "the credibility of witnesses and the weight to 
be given their testimony are within the province of the trier of fact and, generally, will not be disturbed on appeal." Tamashiro, 97 Hawai
'i at 92, 34 P.3d at 22. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Board does not explain why it considers the
 
opinions of Drs. Tsushima and Bernstein to rely "primarily and
 
uncritically" upon the representations of Nobunaga, while finding
 this not to be the case for Drs. Rogers and Grills. In our
 review of the record, all four doctors examined Nobunaga for the
 purpose of evaluating Nobunaga and rendering a medical diagnosis. 
Like Drs. Rogers and Grills, Drs. Bernstein and Tsushima also
 reviewed other sources of information in making their evaluation,
 including Nobunaga's medical history, reports of other doctors,
 as well as consulted medical treatises to guide their diagnoses. 
As such, Nobunaga argues that all doctors had "virtually
 identical access to the same database of medical records,
 interviews, and each other's reports." 
Employer reiterated Dr. Bernstein's evaluation that
 
Nobunaga's symptoms were not substantially different from the
 symptoms he had experienced prior to the March 15, 2004 incident.
 Based upon this portion of Dr. Bernstein's evaluation, Employer
 seems to reason that Dr. Bernstein "cannot be deemed as credible"
 because "Dr. Bernstein changed his opinion." We assume Employer
 is hereby referencing the fact that, although Dr. Bernstein
 stated that Nobunaga's condition was not "substantially
 different" after the incident, Dr. Bernstein began using the
 diagnostic code for Adjustment Disorder (309.0) in his clinical
 notes on February 24, 2005. 
Dr. Bernstein's change in diagnosis came after he
 
reviewed Dr. Tsushima's initial medical report, which was dated
 January 13, 2005. In this report, Dr. Tsushima was the first to
 diagnose Nobunaga with Adjustment Disorder, in conjunction with
 Nobunaga's long-standing diagnosis of Bipolar I Disorder. To
 support the Adjustment Disorder diagnosis, Dr. Tsushima explained
 that although "[in] early 2004, [Nobunaga] appeared to be
 improving, and thus he planned to return to work in March[,] . .
 . he encountered an emotionally distressing incident with his
 supervisor who criticized the patient for his absence . . . ." 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As a result, although "[b]y August 2004, the patient was able to
 
improve emotionally and was judged to be about 85% of his usual
 condition. At this time, there appears to be mild residual from
 the 03/15/2004 incident, with the patient experiencing anxiety
 and threat with respect to going back to work." 
Dr. Bernstein explained this seemingly late change by
 
stating during his deposition:
 
Simply the -- as I recall, it was the difficulty in
terms of looking at the whole picture when he was claiming a
specific work claim. The bipolar disorder had been
preexisting, and there was no question about that. The
 question was more what -- what the injury was since the
previous year. And I had always been treating him for
bipolar disorder and would feel very strange if I were to
submit a claim to HMSA for an adjustment disorder using
medications that were meant for bipolar disorder. So in my
head, that is why I continued to use the bipolar disorder
code.
 
Dr. Bernstein subsequently stated that patients who are treated
 
for Adjustment Disorder "would not be using the medications that
 Mr. Nobunaga is on."
  
Additionally, Dr. Rogers pointed out, an important
 
portion of Dr. Tsushima's opinion also appears to be internally
 inconsistent. Specifically, in his March 22, 2005 letter, Dr.
 Tsushima wrote: 
After his upsetting encounter with Mr. Tellio on his first
day back at work, Mr. Nobunaga had an immediate resumption
of his rapid heart palpitations, tremulousness, and
difficulty concentrating that he had exhibited earlier in
his illness. In short, Mr. Nobunaga's psychiatric condition
was clearly aggravated and worsened by the 3/15/04 incident
at work.
 
Dr. Rogers criticized this portion of Dr. Tsushima's
 
opinion because a resumption of symptoms exhibited earlier in
 
Nobunaga's illness is contradictory to an aggravation or
 
worsening of the illness. 
Therefore, although the record does not shed further
 
light on the Board's reasoning for discrediting the opinions of
 
Drs. Bernstein and Tsushima (that they relied "primarily and
 
uncritically" upon the representations of Nobunaga), the Board's
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
finding that their opinions are not as reliable as those of Drs. 
Rogers and Grills is not clearly erroneous. Cf. De Victoria, 56 
Haw. at 559-60, 545 P.2d at 698-99 (holding the Board's finding as clearly erroneous when the only basis for the Board's finding 
was an internally contradictory fill-in-the-blank physician's 
report form, which was unsupported by other evidence in the 
record). In reviewing the "reliable, probative, and substantial 
evidence on the whole record," Igawa, 97 Hawai
'i at 406, 38 P.3d 
at 574, we are not "left with a firm and definite conviction that a mistake has been made." Chung, 63 Haw. at 652, 636 P.2d at 727 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). D.	 The Board Did Not Clearly Err in Finding That Employer
Overcame the Presumption of Work-Relatedness and Did Not Err
As to Compensability
 
Nobunaga argues that: (1) the Board clearly erred when
 
it found that Nobunaga's pre-existing Bipolar I Disorder was not
 
aggravated or worsened by the March 15, 2004 incident and that he
 did not suffer Adjustment Disorder; and (2) the Board erred as a
 matter of law in finding that the Employer adduced substantial
 evidence to overcome the presumption of compensability in HRS §
 386-85(1) and should have found Nobunaga's Bipolar I Disorder and
 Adjustment Disorder to be compensable injuries. In conjunction
 with these arguments, Nobunaga challenges the Board's FOFs 34,
 11, 18, 26, 19, 27, 36 and the Board's COL. 
FOF 34 states: "The Board finds that Claimant's
 
preexisting Bipolar I Condition was not aggravated or worsened by
 the March 15, 2004 incident and that Claimant did not suffer an
 Adjustment Disorder or other psychiatric diagnosis as a result of
 that meeting."
 
As the March 15, 2004 meeting is a singular incident
 
which Nobunaga claims to have caused his injury, when
 "determining the compensability of injuries 'by accident,'" we
 must use the unitary or nexus test. Van Ness v. State of Haw.,
 
Dep't of Educ., SCWC-11-0000775, slip op. at 39 (Haw. Jan. 23,
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2014). Under this test, the Court "considers whether there is a
 
sufficient work connection to bring the accident within the scope
 of the statute", and "requires the finding of a causal connection
 between the injury and any incidents or conditions of
 employment." 
Id. (citing Tate v. GTE Hawaiian Tel. Co., 77
 
Hawai'i 100, 103, 881 P.2d 1246, 1249 (1994)). 
Under HRS § 386-85 (1993):
 
In any proceeding for the enforcement of a claim for
compensation under this chapter it shall be presumed, in the
absence of substantial evidence to the contrary:
(1) That the claim is for a covered work injury;
 
. . . 
The supreme court has explained the operation of this
 
presumption as follows:
 
In order to overcome the presumption of
work-relatedness, the employer bears the initial burden of
going forward with the evidence and the burden of
persuasion. In other words, the employer must initially
introduce substantial evidence that, if true, could rebut
the presumption that the injury is work-related. In the
 workers' compensation context, the term substantial evidence
signifies a high quantum of evidence which, at the minimum,
must be relevant and credible evidence of a quality and
quantity sufficient to justify a conclusion by a reasonable
person that an injury or death is not work connected. Once
 the trier of fact determines that the employer has adduced
substantial evidence that could overcome the presumption, it
must then weigh that evidence against the evidence presented
by the claimant. In so doing, the employer bears the burden
of persuasion in which the claimant is given the benefit of
the doubt.
 
Nakamura v. State, 98 Hawai 'i 263, 267-68, 47 P.3d 730, 734-35 
(2002) (internal citations, quotation marks, and brackets
 
omitted).
 
As a mixed question of law and fact, this Court reviews
 
the Board's conclusion that an employer has produced substantial
 evidence to rebut the presumption of work-relatedness under the
 clearly erroneous standard. 
Id. at 271, 47 P.3d at 738 (holding
 
that, because the employer adduced substantial evidence to rebut
 the presumption of work-relatedness attributable to Claimant's
 claim and giving due deference to the Board's role in evaluating
 the weight and credibility of the evidence, the Board's decision
 was not clearly erroneous).
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In furtherance of his argument that the Board clearly
 
erred when it found that Nobunaga's pre-existing Bipolar I
 
Disorder was not aggravated or worsened by the March 15, 2004
 incident and that he did not suffer Adjustment Disorder, Nobunaga
 points to 
Akamine for the proposition that the Board confused the
 
difference between medical and legal cause.  See Akamine v.
 
Hawaiian Packing & Crating Co., 53 Haw. 406, 410-12, 495 P.2d
 
1164, 1167-68 (1972). Specifically, Nobunaga cites the
 following:
 
That the testimony of one of the medical witnesses is
entitled to very little probative weight issues from the
problem involving the distinction which must be made between
etiology of heart disease and legal causation. Elucidation
on etiology of heart disease is sought from medical experts.
The meaning and boundaries of legal causation are
established by the legislature and courts; and finding legal
causation in a given case is the function of the Board and
not that of medical witnesses. To allow a medical expert to
give his opinion as to whether legal causation existed in a
particular case could lead to an unjust result. For a
medical man may give a generalized opinion that there was no
connection between an incident at work and a heart attack,
and, in his own mind, may mean thereby that a pre-existing
pathological condition was the overwhelming factor in
bringing about the attack and that the part played by the
work was insignificant. But, while it may be sound medically
to say that the work did not 'cause' the attack, it may be
bad law, because, an [sic] general, existing law treats the
slightest factor of aggravation as an adequate 'cause'.
 
Id. at 410, 495 P.2d at 1167 (citations and some internal
 
quotation marks omitted).
 
In Akamine, the claimant died of an apparent heart
 
attack while working at his job, which involved unloading,
 stacking, and "handtrucking" fifteen to twenty pounds of cargo
 from container trucks. Id. at 415, 495 P.2d at 1165. In support
 
of the employer's denial of the claim, one of the employer's
 medical experts testified that there was no connection between
 the claimant's death and the exertion required by his employment,
 relying heavily on the fact that heart disease originates early
 in life and that, therefore, the claimant's pre-existing
 condition was the sole cause of his heart attack and death. Id.
 
at 410-11, 495 P.2d at 1167-68. 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The supreme court held that, rather than to focus on 
the medical cause of the heart attack, the "primary focus of the 
medical testimony should have been a discussion on whether the employment effort, whether great or little, in any way aggravated Mr. Akamine's heart condition which resulted in his death." Id. 
at 412, 495 P.2d at 1168. Subsequently, the supreme court clarified its Akamine holding by stating that "a reasonable degree of specificity is required in order for medical opinion evidence to rebut the presumption of compensability." Nakamura, 
98 Hawai
'i at 269, 47 P.3d at 736. 
Unlike Akamine, the doctors in this case did not merely
 
opine generally that the injury was not caused by the meeting
 with Tellio, in a medical sense. Instead, with the exception of
 Dr. Grills, the doctors were each asked to render their opinion
 specifically as to whether the meeting with Tellio had
 "aggravated" Nobunaga's pre-existing Bipolar I Condition, which
 meets the "reasonable degree of specificity" requirement under
 Akamine and Nakamura. Although not previously defined in our
 workers' compensation jurisprudence, "aggravation" means "[t]he
 fact of being increased in gravity or seriousness." B
LACK'S LAW
 
DICTIONARY 76 (9th ed. 2009). 
Although he was not credited by the Board, Dr. Tsushima
 
stated that he believed that Nobunaga's condition was aggravated
 by the March 15, 2004 incident and that Nobunaga's Adjustment
 Disorder was caused or aggravated by the same. However, Dr.
 Tsushima also opined that Nobunaga experienced a resumption of
 symptoms exhibited earlier in Nobunaga's illness. Additionally,
 Dr. Bernstein's opinion was that the meeting caused a "temporary
 aggravation in his depression" which "lasted approximately a
 month and stabilized fairly soon." 
On the other hand, as the Board found in FOFs 18 and
 
26, Dr. Slomoff opined that Nobunaga's condition was not
 aggravated by the meeting with Tellio. Rather, Dr. Slomoff
 explained that, as he gleaned from the clinical notes of Dr.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bernstein, Nobunaga had "anticipatory anxiety" about how he would
 
be received upon his return to work. This was confirmed by Dr.
 Bernstein's February 21, 2004 clinical notes, which provided: 
"Doing well. Discussed meds. Discussed [return to work]
 03/15/04 - 4/04 part time 3 days x 4 hrs. Non-psychotic. 
3
Euthymic.[ ]  2 panic attacks. Plan: Work on anxiety re return
 to work." From this, Dr. Slomoff opined that Nobunaga's reaction
 to the meeting with Tellio was an indication to Nobunaga that he
 was not ready to return to work, rather than an aggravation
 caused by Tellio. 
As the Board found in FOF 11, Dr. Rogers opined that
 
the March 15, 2004 incident did not "aggravate or worsen"
 Nobunaga's pre-existing condition because "the events that
 occurred on 3/15/04 cannot be defined as stressful, by any
 reasonable criteria." Specifically, Dr. Rogers quoted a
 psychiatry textbook for the proposition that "it is now generally
 accepted that environmental conditions contribute more to the
 timing of an episode than to the underlying vulnerability, which
 is largely genetic." Citing Rundell & Wise, T
EXTBOOK OF
 
CONSULTATION -LIAISON PSYCHIATRY 349 (1996). Dr. Rogers further
 
supported his opinion by noting that the "type, scope, and
 severity" of Nobunaga's symptoms were not substantially different
 from his previous Bipolar I Disorder symptoms, which is
 consistent with Dr. Bernstein's initial evaluation that Nobunaga
 had "relapsed again."
 
The supreme court has liberally construed HRS § 386-85
 
and "requires that all reasonable doubts be resolved in favor of
 the claimant." Van Ness, slip op. at 33-34 (citations and
 
emphasis omitted). Thus, "if there is reasonable doubt as to
 whether an injury is work-connected, the . . . statute demands
 
3
 Dr. Bernstein testified during his deposition that "euthymic"
means that the patient is "neither depressed nor manic."
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that doubt be resolved in favor of the claimant." Akamine, 53
 
Haw. at 409, 495 P.2d at 1166.
 
Nobunaga argues that Dr. Slomoff's uncertainty as to
 
whether panic attacks may be exacerbated by external conditions
 
is a "doubt" which should be reasonably found in Nobunaga's
 favor, resulting in a favorable ruling in work-relatedness of the
 injury. However, the issue, as defined in Akamine, is whether
 the pre-existing injury was "aggravated or accelerated" by the
 work activity. Akamine, 53 Haw. at 413, 495 P.2d at 1169. Here,
 
the reliable medical experts testified that Nobunaga had a
 "relapse" of a long-standing condition, at best the timing of
 which may be affected by external conditions. Nobunaga was not
 on medication for a new condition, he had similar panic attacks
 prior to the incident, and the type, scope, and severity of his
 symptoms were not substantially different from his previous
 Bipolar I Disorder symptoms.
 
Given the above substantial and thorough opinions of
 
three credible doctors, the Board did not clearly err in finding
 no aggravation because Nobunaga's condition did not increase in
 gravity or seriousness.
 
Additionally, the Board's finding that Nobunaga was not
 
suffering from Adjustment Disorder is not clearly erroneous, as
 it is supported by substantial evidence. As stated above, Dr.
 Bernstein did not initially diagnose Nobunaga with Adjustment
 Disorder, which diagnosis was only added after Dr. Tsushima so
 opined. Although Dr. Tsushima diagnosed Nobunaga with Adjustment
 Disorder, as stated above, his opinion was not clearly
 erroneously discredited by the Board. 
The remaining doctors, Drs. Rogers, Slomoff and Grills,
 
found that Nobunaga was not suffering from Adjustment Disorder. 
Dr. Rogers explained that adjustment disorder is a "last ditch
 effort to pin a diagnosis on a condition. An adjustment disorder
 really should not be used if symptoms are better explained by a
 specific Axis I disorder, such as his bipolar disorder." Dr.
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Slomoff concurred when he opined that "I believe that most people
 
would find it unnecessary to suggest an adjustment disorder in
 addition to bipolar disorder given the circumstances." 
Similarly, Dr. Grills also found the diagnosis of adjustment
 disorder "unnecessary."
 
The doctors that the Board credited agreed that 
Nobunaga either had a "relapse" or a resumption of the same symptoms he exhibited prior to the March 15, 2004 incident. None of them explained that his pre-existing condition, Bipolar I Disorder, was made worse or was "aggravated" after the meeting with Tellio. Therefore, in light of the "reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on the whole record," Igawa, 97 Hawai
'i 
at 406, 38 P.3d at 574, the Board's FOF 34 is not clearly erroneous. 
In light of the Board's findings relevant to its 
conclusion of no compensability in this case, the Board did not clearly err. Once the "trier of fact determines that the employer has adduced substantial evidence to overcome the presumption, it must weigh the evidence elicited by the employer against the evidence elicited by the claimant." Igawa, 97 
Hawai
'i at 409, 38 P.3d at 577. 
Although there are testimony and medical records that 
conflict, they were not accorded the same weight by the Board. Thus, this Court's review of the conflicting testimony must be conducted in light of the proper weight assigned by the Board, which we found not to be clearly erroneous, supra. The Board is not "mandated to reconcile conflicting expert testimony in favor of the claimant," because doing so would "eviscerate the well-established rule that the Board's determination of credibility and weight are entitled to deference." Nakamura, 98 Hawai
'i at 
270, 47 P.3d at 737. The credible medical experts agree that Nobunaga's pre-existing illness was not aggravated or worsened by the meeting with Tellio; thus, the injury cannot be deemed work-related, and the Board did not err in its conclusion that 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nobunaga did not sustain a personal injury arising out of and in
 
the course of employment, under HRS § 386-3.
 
For these reasons, we affirm the Board's April 5, 2011
 
Decision and Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, March 28, 2014. 
On the briefs:
  
Lowell K.Y. Chun-Hoon 
Tatjana Johnson
(King, Nakamura & Chun-Hoon)for Claimant-Appellant
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
Scott G. Leong
Shawn L.M. Benton
 (Leong Kunihiro Lezy & Benton)
for Employer-Appellee 
20
 