FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF ROYAL ALOHA, a Hawai 'i
 
non-profit corporation, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
CERTIFIED MANAGEMENT, INC., a Hawai 'i corporation;
CHANEY BROOKS & COMPANY, LLC, a Hawai 'i corporation;
MICHAEL DAVID BRUSER, an individual; TOKYO JOE'S, INC.,
a Hawai 'i corporation; MICHAEL T. MCCORMACK, individually
and as Trustee under that certain unrecorded Michael T.
 
McCormack Revocable Living Trust Agreement dated
November 12, 1991; and MICHAEL T. MCCORMACK and SIGNA S.
MCCORMACK, as Co-Trustees of The McCormack Ranch Trust
dated January 6, 2005, Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants 
NO. CAAP-15-0000445
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-1019-04)
 
JUNE 30, 2016
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING J., FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.

 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Association of Apartment Owners of
 
Royal Aloha (AOAO) appeals from the following entered in the
 
1
Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court):
 
1
 The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) "Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting Defendant
 
Certified Management, Inc's Motion for Summary Judgment, Filed
 
8/5/14, and Order Granting Joinder by: Defendant Chaney Brooks &
 Company, LLC to Defendant Certified Management Inc.'s Motion for
 Summary Judgment, Filed 8/12/14" entered on October 9, 2014;
 
(2) "Amended Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting
 
Defendant Certified Management, Inc's Motion for Summary
 Judgment, Filed 8/5/14, and Order Granting Joinder by: Defendant
 Chaney Brooks & Company, LLC to Defendant Certified Management
 Inc.'s Motion for Summary Judgment, Filed 8/12/14" entered on
 October 10, 2014;
 
(3) "Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting Defendants
 
Michael David Bruser, and Tokyo Joe's Inc.'s Motion for Partial
 Summary Judgment, Filed 6/19/14" entered on October 9, 2014;
 
(4) "Order Granting Defendant Certified Management,
 
Inc.'s Motion for Award of Attorneys' Fees and Costs Against
 Plaintiff AOAO Royal Aloha, Filed 10/24/14" entered on March 31,
 2015;
 
(5) "Order Granting Defendant Chaney Brooks & Company,
 
LLC's Non Hearing Motion for Award of Attorneys' Fees and Costs,
 Filed 10/24/14" entered on March 31, 2015;
 
(6) "Order Granting Defendants Michael T. McCormack,
 
Individually and as Trustee and Co-Trustee, and Signa S.
 McCormack, as Co-Trustee's Motion for Award of Attorneys' Fees
 and Costs, Filed 10/24/14" entered on March 31, 2015;
 
(7) "Order Granting Defendants Michael David Bruser and
 
Tokyo Joe's, Inc.'s Motion for Award of Attorneys' Fees and
 Costs, Filed 10/23/14" entered on March 31, 2015; and
 
(8) "Final Judgment in Favor of All Defendants Against
 
Plaintiff Association of Apartment of [sic] Owners of Royal
 Aloha" entered on May 5, 2015.
 
On appeal, the AOAO contends (1) the circuit court
 
erred in applying the doctrine of laches to grant summary
 judgment in favor of the defendants; (2) the circuit court
 erroneously concluded that Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 514A­
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2
15.5 (2015 Supp.)  required the AOAO to send a bill to the
commercial apartment owners as a condition precedent to the
 
application of the commercial owners' contractual indemnification

 
obligation; and (3) the circuit court abused its discretion in
 awarding attorneys' fees.
3
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
The circuit court's factual background is undisputed on
 
appeal:
 
The Royal Aloha Condominium is a mixed-use condominium
project of residential and commercial units. The [AOAO]
employed [Chaney Brooks & Company, LLC (Chaney)] from 1995
to 2002 and [Certified Management, Inc. (Certified
 
2 HRS § 514A-15.5 provides:
 
§ 514A-15.5 Metering of utilities.  (a)
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 514A-15,
commercial apartments in mixed-use projects containing
apartments for both residential and commercial use shall
have a separate meter, or calculations shall be made, or
both, to determine the use by the commercial apartments of
utilities, including electricity, water, gas, fuel, oil,
sewerage, and drainage and the cost of the utilities shall
be paid by the owners of the commercial units; provided that
the apportionment of the charges among owners of commercial
apartments shall be done in a fair and equitable manner as
set forth in the declaration or bylaws.
 
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in this
chapter or in a project's declaration or bylaws of an
association of apartment owners, the board of directors may
authorize the installation of separate meters to determine
the use by each of the residential and commercial apartments
of utilities, including electricity, water, gas, fuel, oil,
sewerage, and drainage; provided that the cost of installing
the meters shall be paid by the association.
 
(b) Notwithstanding any approval requirements and
spending limits contained in the declaration or bylaws of an
association of apartment owners, the board of directors of
any association of apartment owners may authorize the
installation of meters to determine the use by each
residential or commercial apartment of utilities, including
electricity, water, gas, fuel, oil, sewerage, and drainage;
provided that the cost of installing the meters shall be
paid by the association. The cost of metered utilities
 shall be paid by the owners of each apartment based on
actual consumption and may be collected in the same manner
as common expense assessments. Owners' maintenance fees
 shall be adjusted as necessary to avoid any duplication of
charges to these owners for the cost of metered utilities. 
3
 In its argument section, the AOAO also contends, "the circuit court
denied the AOAO its right to a fair hearing when it sua sponte dismissed all
legal and equitable claims against the commercial owners." We disregard this
argument because it is not presented in accordance with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(D) ("Points not
presented in accordance with this section will be disregarded, except that the
appellate court, at its option, may notice a plain error not presented.").
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Management)] from 2003 to 2010 as its Managing Agent.
 
Defendants[-Appellees] Michael David Bruser [(Bruser)]
and Tokyo Joe's Inc. [(Tokyo Joe's)] were the owners of
commercial unit "C-1" in the Royal Aloha Condominium, during
the relevant period.
 
Defendants[-Appellees] Michael T. McCormack
[(McCormack)], individually and as Trustee under that
certain unrecorded Michael T. McCormack Revocable Living
Trust Agreement dated November 12, 1991 [(McCormack Trust)],
Michael T. McCormack and Signa S. McCormack, as Co-trustees
of The McCormack Ranch Trust dated January 6, 2005
[(McCormack Ranch Trust) (collectively, McCormacks)] were
the owners of commercial unit "C-2" in the Royal Aloha
Condominium, during the relevant period.
 
The [AOAO] controlled the electricity submeters for
each unit. The electrical submetering system was installed
16 years ago, in 1998. The [AOAO] used Energy Data
Corporation (1998 to 2002) and Bartley Engineering, Inc.
(from June 2002) to read each unit's electricity submeter.
The electrical engineers, from Energy Data or Bartley
Engineering, read each unit's submeter to prepare a "Utility
Billing Register" (UBR). The UBRs were sent to the Managing
Agent [Chaney], then to [Certified Management] when it took
over.
 
One of the Managing Agent's duties was to determine
each unit owner's electricity and other pro-rated utility
costs, based on the UBR, and bill each unit owner.
 
During the time period relevant to this lawsuit, from
January 1998 to April 2010, the [AOAO, Chaney, and Certified
Management] never charged or billed the owners of C-1, and
erroneously billed the owners of C-2, for the submetered
electricity costs shown in the UBRs. The [AOAO] claims that
this was error, and that its managing agents [Chaney and
Certified Management] were responsible for this alleged
error.
 
As a result of this error, the [AOAO] brought this
lawsuit, alleging that [Bruser, Tokyo Joe's, and the
McCormacks], the owners of C-1 and C-2 during the pertinent
time frame, owe hundreds of thousands of dollars in
electricity costs that were unbilled and misbilled. The
 [AOAO] also brought claims against its former managing
agent, [Chaney and Certified Management], which include
breach of contract, breach of fiduciary duty, and
negligence, for the alleged incorrect billing.
 
The period of alleged incorrect electricity billing
spans 12 years, from January 1998 to April 2010. The
 [AOAO's] President "discovered" the alleged incorrect
billing in April 2011, and this lawsuit was filed in April
2012.
 
The AOAO filed its complaint against Certified
 
Management, Chaney, Bruser, Tokyo Joe's, and the McCormacks
 
(collectively, Appellees) on April 13, 2012, and an amended
 
complaint on April 16, 2012 (First Amended Complaint).
 
Bruser and Tokyo Joe's filed a motion for partial

 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
summary judgment on May 15, 2013 (May 2013 Motion for Partial
Summary Judgment). Bruser and Tokyo Joe's argued that they had
 
no contractual obligation to indemnify the AOAO under Section
 
6.02 of the AOAO's Bylaws. Bruser and Tokyo Joe's argued in the
 alternative that the AOAO's claims and damages should be limited
 to the applicable statute of limitations period. Additionally,
 Bruser and Tokyo Joe's argued that the AOAO's claims for
 equitable relief were barred by the doctrines of waiver, laches,
 and unclean hands. Chaney filed a motion to join the May 2013
 Motion for Partial Summary Judgment on May 24, 2013. Certified
 Management filed a motion to join the May 2013 Motion for Partial
 Summary Judgment on June 25, 2013.
 
On July 9, 2013, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
Bruser and Tokyo Joe's May 2013 Motion for Partial Summary
 Judgment, Chaney's motion to join the May 2013 Motion for Partial
 Summay Judgment, and Certified Management's motion to join the
 May 2013 Motion for Partial Summary Judgment. At the hearing,
 the circuit court requested the parties submit supplemental
 briefs on the application of the statute of limitations.
 
On July 18, 2013, Chaney submitted a supplemental brief
 
on the issue of statute of limitations, arguing that the AOAO's
 claims were barred under HRS § 657-1 (1993).
4 On August 1, 2013,
 
4 HRS § 657-1 provides:
 
§ 657-1 Six years. The following actions shall be
commenced within six years next after the cause of action
accrued, and not after:
 
(1)	 Actions for the recovery of any debt founded
upon any contract, obligation, or liability,
excepting such as are brought upon the judgment
or decree of a court; excepting further that
actions for the recovery of any debt founded
upon any contract, obligation, or liability made
pursuant to chapter 577A shall be governed by
577A;
 
(2)	 Actions upon judgments or decrees rendered in
any court not of record in the State, or,
subject to section 657-9, in any court of record
in any foreign jurisdiction;
 
(3)	 Actions for taking or detaining any goods or
chattels, including actions in the nature of
replevin;
 
(continued...)
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bruser and Tokyo Joe's submitted a supplemental memorandum in
 
support of their May 2013 Motion for Partial Summary Judgment
 arguing that the statute of limitations barred or limited the
 AOAO's damages.
 
On September 9, 2013, the circuit court entered an
 
order denying Bruser and Tokyo Joe's Motion for Partial Summary
 Judgment and Certified Management and Chaney's motions to join.
 
On June 19, 2014, the McCormacks filed a motion for
 
partial summary judgment or in the alternative to stay litigation
 (McCormack Motion for Partial Summary Judgment). On the same
 
day, Bruser and Tokyo Joe's filed a motion for partial summary
 
judgment (June 2014 Motion for Partial Summary Judgment). On
 
June 24, 2014, Chaney filed a motion to join the McCormack Motion
 
for Partial Summary Judgment and Bruser and Tokyo Joe's June 2014
 Motion for Partial Summary Judgment.
 
On August 5, 2014, Certified Management filed a motion
 
for summary judgment (Certified Management MSJ). Certified
 
Management argued that the AOAO's claims were statutorily time-
barred and barred by laches.
 
On August 7, 2014, Certified Management filed a motion
 
to join Bruser and Tokyo Joe's June 2014 Motion for Partial
 Summary Judgment.
 
On August 12, 2014, Chaney filed a motion to join the
 
Certified Management MSJ.
 
On August 20, 2014, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
the McCormack Motion for Partial Summary Judgment and denied the
 motion.
 
On September 5, 2014, Chaney filed a motion for summary
 
judgment on the issue of successor liability.
 
On September 9, 2014, the circuit court held a hearing
 
on Bruser and Tokyo Joe's June 2014 Motion for Partial Summary
 Judgment and took the issues under advisement in anticipation of
 the hearing on the Certified Management MSJ.
 
On September 15, 2014, the AOAO filed for partial
 
4(...continued)
(4)	 Personal actions of any nature whatsoever not
specifically covered by the laws of the State.
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
summary judgment against Bruser, Tokyo Joe's, and the McCormacks. 
On September 26, 2014, the circuit court held a hearing
 
on the Certified Management MSJ and Chaney's joinder motion, in
 
which it took the matter under advisement.
 
On September 29, 2014, Certified Management filed a
 
"Motion for Summary Judgment and Dismissal on All Claims Based on
 Ratification, Estoppel, and Waiver, and for Dismissal of Punitive
 Damage Claim" (MSJ on All Claims). [JROA doc 56 at 388] On
 
October 7, 2014, Chaney filed a motion to join Certified
 
Management's MSJ on All Claims.
 
On October 9, 2014, the circuit court entered
 
conclusions of law and an order granting the Certified Management
 MSJ and granting Chaney's motion to join the Certified Management
 MSJ. The basis for the circuit court's order granting the
 Certified Management MSJ was the defense of laches. On the same
 day, the circuit court entered conclusions of law and an order
 granting Bruser and Tokyo Joe's June 2014 Motion for Partial
 Summary Judgment on the grounds that under Section 6.02 of the
 AOAO's Bylaws and HRS § 514A-15.5, Bruser and Tokyo Joe's had no
 obligation to indemnify the AOAO for electricity costs.
 
On October 10, 2014, the circuit court held a hearing
 
in which it announced that it would bar all of the AOAO's claims
 based on the defense of laches. The circuit court entered an
 order on the same day, amending its conclusions of law granting
 the Certified Management MSJ to include all claims against all
 defendants as barred under the doctrine of laches (Amended
 
Conclusions of Law).
 
On March 31, 2015, the circuit court entered orders
 
granting attorneys' fees and costs to the McCormacks, Chaney,
 
Certified Management, Bruser, and Tokyo Joe's.
 
On May 5, 2015, the circuit court entered its "Final
 
Judgment in Favor of All Defendants Against [AOAO]."
 
The AOAO filed its notice of appeal on June 4, 2015.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
A. Summary Judgment
 
Summary judgment decisions are reviewed de novo. 
Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85,
104, 839 P.2d 10, 22 [(1992)]. "Unlike other appellate
matters, in reviewing summary judgment decisions an
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
appellate court steps into the shoes of the trial court and
applies the same legal standard as the trial court applied."Beamer v. Nishiki, 66 Haw. 572, 577, 670 P.2d 1264, 1270(1983) (citation omitted). Summary judgment will be upheld"if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories,and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, ifany, show there is no genuine issue of material fact and themoving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law."Heatherly v. Hilton Hawaiian Vill. Joint Venture, 78 Hawai' i 
351, 353, 893 P.2d 779, 781 (1995) (citations omitted). 
Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Maalaea Kai, Inc. v. Stillson, 108 
Hawai'i 2, 7, 116 P.3d 644, 649 (2005).
B. Equitable Relief
 
"A court's decision to invoke equitable relief, such as 
the 'unclean hands' doctrine, is a matter within its discretion." 7's Enters., Inc. v. Del Rosario, 111 Hawai
'i 484, 489, 143 P.3d 
23, 28 (2006). "A trial court abuses its discretion when it clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Id. (quoting Sugarman v. Kapu, 104 Hawai
'i 119, 
124, 85 P.3d 644, 649 (2004)).
C. Statutory Interpretation
 
"The interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
reviewable de novo." Ass'n of Condo. Homeowners of Tropics at 
Waikele ex rel. Bd. of Dirs. v. Sakuma, 131 Hawai 'i 254, 255, 318 
P.3d 94, 95 (2013) (brackets and ellipses omitted) (quoting State 
v. Bohannon, 102 Hawai 'i 228, 232, 74 P.3d 980, 984 (2003)).
D. Interpretation of a Contract
 
"When reviewing the court's interpretation of a 
contract, the construction and legal effect to be given a contract is a question of law freely reviewable by an appellate court." Laeroc Waikiki Parkside, LLC v. K.S.K. (Oahu) Ltd. 
P'ship, 115 Hawai
'i 201, 213, 166 P.3d 961, 973 (2007) (quoting 
Mikelson v. United Servs. Auto. Ass'n, 107 Hawai 'i 192, 197, 111 
P.3d 601, 606 (2005)). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. Defense of Laches
 1. Availability of Laches as a Defense to Legal Claims
 
The AOAO contends the circuit court erred in dismissing
 
the AOAO's legal claims, in addition to its equitable claims,
 
under Appellees' laches defense. In response, Appellees argue
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
that in some jurisdictions, laches is available as a defense
 
regardless of whether the remedy sought is in law or equity.
 
"The doctrine of laches reflects the equitable maxim
 
that 'equity aids the vigilant, not those who slumber on their
 rights.'"
 Adair v. Hustace,  64 Haw. 314, 320, 640 P.2d 294, 300
 
(1982) (quoting 2 S. Symonds, Pomeroy's Equity Jurisprudence
 § 418 (5th ed. 1941)). "Where applicable, it acts to bar a court
 from considering an equitable action such as for cancellation
 because of a perception that it is more equitable to defendants
 and important to society to promote claimant diligence,
 discourage delay and prevent the enforcement of stale claims." 
Adair, 64 Haw. at 320-21, 640 P.2d at 300 (citing 2 S. Symonds,
 Pomeroy's Equity Jurisprudence § 418).
 
The doctrine of laches under Hawai
'i law is similar to 
yet distinct from the statute of limitations.5 The Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court has explained, 
Just as the statute of limitations establishes the requisite
degree [of diligence in bringing suit] for actions at law,
so is laches the rule for equitable actions. But a major
difference between the statute of limitations and laches is
 the flexibility of the latter. "The statute of limitations
 consorts with the rigid principles of the common law, but is
ill adapted to the flexible remedies of a court of equity."
[Patterson v. Hewitt, 195 U.S. 309, 317 (1904).] As a
 result, while "inactions at law, the question of diligence
is determined by the words of the statute . . . in suits in
equity the question is determined by the circumstances of
each particular case." [Id.]
 
Adair, 64 Haw. at 321, 640 P.2d at 300 (parentheses and footnote
 
omitted).
 
Laches is a defense that is available where a plaintiff

 
5 2 S. Symonds, Pomeroy's Equity Jurisprudence § 419a (5th ed. 1941)
provides in relevant part:
 
Under ordinary circumstances a suit in equity will not be
stayed for laches before the time fixed by the analogous
statute of limitations, and the court will run very nearly,
if not quite up to, the measure of the statute, but, if
unusual conditions or extraordinary circumstances make it
inequitable to allow the prosecution of a suit after a
briefer, or to forbid its maintenance after a longer, period
than that fixed by the statute, the court will determine the
extraordinary case in accordance with the equities which
condition it.
 
(Footnotes omitted.)
 
9
 7
Id.FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
seeks equitable relief,6
 and its availability is not dependent on
the type of relief pleaded but instead on the nature of the
 
underlying action. See Wells Fargo Bank v. Bank of America, 38
 
Cal. Rptr. 2d 521, 530 (Cal. Ct. App. 1995) ("Although
 declaratory relief is an equitable proceeding, whether laches is
 available in a declaratory relief proceeding depends on the
 nature of the underlying claim."). California courts, for
 example, bar the application of laches where "an action
 formulated as a declaratory relief action . . . really amount[s]
 to an action for damages."  (citing Mandracio v. Bartenders
Union, Local 41, 256 P.2d 927 (1953)). Where the nature of a
 
6 See 27A J. Bordeau and R. Kane, Am. Jur. 2d Equity § 110 (2d Ed.
 
2016) ("A suit in equity, though otherwise meritorious, may be dismissed if
the elements of laches are shown."). "[T]he defense of laches generally
applies to equitable actions and remedies. Laches may apply to bar:
Reformation of a contract[;] Rescission[;] An equitable proceeding to set
aside a probate decree[;] Quiet title actions [; and] Injunctive relief." Id.
 
at § 116 (format altered) (footnotes omitted). 
We note that both state and federal courts "are divided on whether laches
 
applies only to equitable actions or applies also to actions at law." Id. at
 
§ 117. For example, 
[s]ome federal courts hold that, after the Federal Rules of
Civil Procedure merged legal and equitable claims into a
single civil action, the Rules specifically recognized the
right to interpose the equitable defense of laches in a
civil action and laches became part of the general body of
rules governing relief in the federal court system,
extending to suits at law as well as suits brought in
equity. It is reasoned that, with the merger of law and
equity, there is no longer a good reason to distinguish
between the legal and equitable character of defenses, save
as the distinction may bear on matters unaffected by the
merger, such as the right to trial by jury in cases at law,
a right preserved in federal courts by the Seventh Amendment
to the United States Constitution. Thus, it has been stated
that laches can be argued regardless of whether the suit is
at law or equity, because, as with many equitable defenses,
the defense of laches is equally available in suits at law.
On the other hand, some federal courts, while recognizing
laches as an affirmative defense generally allowable under
the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, nevertheless consider
laches properly to be relevant only where the claims
presented may be characterized as equitable rather than
legal. Thus, according to some federal courts, laches is an
equitable defense, unavailable in actions at law that are
governed by a statute of limitations.
 
Id. (footnotes omitted). 
7
 See also 27A J. Bourdeau and R. Kane, Am. Jur. 2d at § 116 ("Laches
 
has sometimes been deemed to be instructive by analogy even though the action
was not an equitable one, where the court felt that equitable considerations
were at the heart of the claim.").
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
plaintiff's cause of action is legal rather than equitable, the
 
defense of laches is not available as a defense. See 27A J.
 
Bordeau and R. Kane, Am. Jur. 2d Equity at § 117 ("Some courts
 state that laches is usually available only in suits strictly in
 equity or in actions at law that involve claims of an essentially
 equitable character.").
 
The AOAO's First Amended Complaint includes a breach of
 
contract claim against Chaney and Certified Management; a breach
 of fiduciary duty claim against Chaney and Certified Management;
 a negligence claim against Chaney and Certified Management; a
 negligent misrepresentation claim against Certified Management; a
 breach of the covenant of good faith and fair dealing claim
 against Certified Management; an indemnification claim against
 Bruser, Tokyo Joe's, McCormack Trust, and McCormack Ranch Trust;
 an unjust enrichment claim against Bruser, Tokyo Joe's, McCormack
 Trust, and McCormack Ranch Trust; a surety and guaranty claim
 against Bruser, McCormack, and McCormack Trust; and a declaratory
 relief claim against Bruser, McCormack, and McCormack Trust.
 
Except for the AOAO's declaratory relief claim, every
 
cause of action against Appellees in the AOAO's First Amended
 Complaint is based in contract and the AOAO sought monetary
 damages as relief. In addition to a "money judgment," the AOAO
 prayed for "[a] judicial declaration that MCCORMACK and MCCORMACK
 TRUST are, joint and severally, responsible and liable for the
 failures and breaches of performance by MCCORMACK RANCH TRUST and
 are responsible and liable to the [AOAO] for the unpaid
 electricity charges and other assessments and charges owed to the
 [AOAO]." The AOAO is essentially seeking a judicial
 pronouncement stating that McCormack and the McCormack Ranch
 Trust have breached their contractual obligations. The inclusion
 of declaratory relief does not change the nature of the AOAO's
 claims based in contract against Appellees. Because the AOAO
 sought legal rather than equitable remedies, Appellees were
 precluded from using the defense of laches to bar the AOAO's
 claim against them. See Wells Fargo Bank, 38 Cal. Rptr. 2d at
 
530 ("[T]he laches defense is unavailable in an action at law for
 damages 'even though combined with the cumulative remedy of
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
declaratory relief.'" (quoting Abbott v. City of Los Angeles, 326
 
P.2d 484, 498 (1958))). We agree with the AOAO's contention that
 the defense of laches, as a matter of law, applies only to
 equitable claims.
8
 
2. Summary Judgment on Defense of Laches
 
Because we hold that as a matter of law, the defense of 
laches applies only where a plaintiff has alleged an equitable 
claim and seeks equitable relief, Appellees were not entitled to summary judgment. See Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 
Rule 56(c) ("The judgment sought shall be rendered forthwith if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law."). The circuit court erred in granting summary judgment as to all claims and all defendants based on the defense of laches. 
B. The AOAO's Bylaws and HRS § 514A-15.5
 
The AOAO contends the circuit court erred in granting
 
partial summary judgment to Bruser and Tokyo Joe's on the
 
indemnification issue. The AOAO challenges the circuit court's
 interpretation of HRS § 514A-15.5 requiring the AOAO to have
 billed owners for submetered electricity before the AOAO could
 assert its contractual right under Section 6.02 of the AOAO's
 
9
Bylaws to recover the charges from the owners. The AOAO argues,
8 Because we hold that Appellees may not assert laches as a defense to
the AOAO's legal claims, we need not address the AOAO's argument that the
doctrine of unclean hands bars Appellees' assertion of the defense of laches.
 
9 Section 6.02 of the AOAO's Bylaws states in its entirety:
 
ARTICLE VI
 
Obligations of Apartment Owners
 
. . . .
 
Section 6.02. Repairs; Utilities.
 
(a) Every apartment owner at all times and at his own
expense shall restore, repair, maintain, and keep his
apartment and all necessary reparations and amendments
thereto in good and safe order and condition, and shall be
responsible for all loss and damage caused by his failure to
do so. If an apartment owner fails to perform such work
(continued...)
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
10
"Nothing in the plain reading of HRS § 514A-15 [(2006 Repl.) ]
9(...continued)
after reasonable notice by the [AOAO], he shall reimburse

the [AOAO] promptly on demand for all expenditures incurred
by it in performing such work as may be authorized by the
Board of Directors or the Managing Agent.
 
(b) Every apartment owner at all times and at his own
expense shall pay all rates and other charges for public
utility and other services which are separately metered or
otherwise charged to his apartment and shall indemnify the
[AOAO] against all of such rates and other charges.
 
(c) All repairs of internal installations within each
apartment such as water, light, gas, power, sewage,
telephones, air conditioning, sanitation, doors, windows,
lamps, and all other fixtures and accessories belonging to
such apartment, including interior walls and partitions and
the inner decorated or finished surfaces of the perimeter
walls, floors, and ceilings of such apartment shall be at
the apartment owner's expense.
 
(d) Every apartment owner shall promptly reimburse the
[AOAO] on demand for all expenditures incurred by it in
repairing or replacing any common elements or any furniture,
furnishings, or equipment thereof damaged or lost through
the fault of such apartment owner or any person using the
Project under him, and shall give prompt notice to the
resident manager, if any, or to the Managing Agent of any
such damage, loss, or other defect when discovered.
 
10 HRS § 514A-15 provides:
 
§514A-15 Common profits and expenses. (a) The common
profits of the property shall be distributed among, and the
common expenses shall be charged to, the apartment owners,
including the developer, in proportion to the common
interest appurtenant to their respective apartments;
provided that in a mixed-use project containing apartments
for both residential and commercial use, such charges and
distributions may be apportioned in a fair and equitable
manner as set forth in the declaration; provided further
that all limited common elements costs and expenses,
including but not limited to, maintenance, repair,
replacement, additions and improvements shall be charged to
the owner of the apartment to which the limited common
element is appurtenant in an equitable manner as set forth
in the declaration.
 
(b) An apartment owner, including the developer, shall
become obligated for the payment of the share of the common
expenses allocated to his apartment at the time the
certificate of occupancy relating to his apartment is issued
by the appropriate county agency; provided that a developer
may assume all the actual common expenses in a residential
project containing no mixed commercial and residential use,
by stating in the abstract as required by section 514A-61
that the apartment owner shall not be obligated for the
payment of his respective share of the common expenses until
such time the developer files an amended abstract with the
commission which shall provide, that after a date certain,
the respective apartment owner shall thereafter be obligated
to pay for his respective share of common expenses that is
(continued...)
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and HRS § 514A-15.5 excuses or releases an owner from
responsibility for electricity charges that they owe, regardless
 of whether the charges were billed or not."
 
 
The circuit court stated in its conclusions of law
 
granting partial summary judgment for Bruser and Tokyo Joe's:
 
5. The [AOAO] was required to follow HRS Chapter
514A. Thus, the [AOAO] was required to bill [Bruser and
Tokyo Joe's] for submetered electricity charges under HRS
§ 514A-15.5.
 
6. The [AOAO] also agrees with this construction,
stating "the plain language of HRS § 514A-15.5(a) recognizes
that a unit owner is to be billed for both the electricity
that is a part of the common expenses and also separately
for electricity incurred specifically by the unit. As for
 the manner of billing, HRS § 514A-15.5(b) states that
payment from the owners may be collected in the same
manner."
 
7. HRS § 514A-15.5(b) states that "the cost of
metered utilities shall be paid by the owners of each
apartment based on actual consumption and may be collected
in the same manner as common expense assessments."
 
8. Subsection (b) makes clear that separately
metered utilities charges are not "common expenses," but
provides that they can be collected like or "in the same
manner as" common expense assessments.
 
9. Subsection (b) says the [AOAO] "may" collect
separately metered utilities like common expenses. The use
 of the term "may," in HRS § 514A-15.5(b) is because an
association could have the utility provider bill the owner
directly for the separately metered utilities, or, an
association could bill and collect the costs of separately
metered utilities, similar to assessments for common
 expenses.
 
10. In this case, the C-1 submetered electricity
costs were never billed to the owners, [Bruser and Tokyo
Joe's]. The [AOAO] was required to bill these separately
submetered costs under subsection (a), and to do so "in the
same manner as common expense assessments" under subsection
(b).
 
11. Bylaws Section 6.02(b) requires every unit
owner, including defendants, to indemnify the [AOAO] for
public utilities "which are separately metered or otherwise
charged to his apartment." This section, construed in
conformity with the Condominium Property Act of HRS Chapter
514A, means that if a unit owner is not directly billed for
its separately metered utilities from the utility company,
then the separately metered utilities must be "otherwise
 
10(...continued)
allocated to his apartment. The amended abstract shall be
 filed at least thirty days in advance with the commission
with a copy of the abstract being delivered either by mail
or personal delivery after the filing to each of the
apartment owners whose maintenance expenses were assumed by
the developer. 
14
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
charged" by the [AOAO], in the same manner as common
expenses. See § 514A-15.5(a) and (b).
 
12. The [AOAO] failed to "charge" [Bruser and Tokyo
Joe's] for their separately metered electricity costs, as
required by HRS § 514A-15.5(a) and (b).
 
13. The duty to indemnify under Bylaws § 6.02 can
only be triggered if the unit owner is "charged." As
 [Bruser and Tokyo Joe's] were never "charged," Bylaws § 6.02
and the duty to indemnify, do not apply.
 
. . . .
 
15. The only reasonable conclusion this court can
draw, in light of the billing requirements of HRS § 514A­
15.5, is that the [AOAO's] failure to bill or charge the
separately metered electricity costs, bars any recovery
under the indemnification provision.
 
16. To adopt the [AOAO's] interpretation of Bylaws
§ 6.02(b), where a unit owner would have an unending
obligation in perpetuity, to pay for all submetered costs
incurred, even though the owner was never billed or charged
for such costs, would be unreasonable, and contrary to HRS
§ 514A-15.5. Thus, summary judgment is granted in Count VI,
Indemnification.
 
(Footnotes and brackets in original omitted.)
 
We agree with the circuit court's reasoning that to the
 
extent that Bruser and Tokyo Joe's were never billed for their
 
"separately metered" electricity usage or "otherwise charged,"
 the indemnification provision in Section 6.02 of the AOAO's
 Bylaws is not enforceable. To the extent that Bruser and Tokyo
 Joe's were never billed, the circuit court properly granted
 summary judgment on the AOAO's Count VI regarding indemnification
 as to Bruser and Tokyo Joe's.
 
The circuit court dismissed all of the remaining claims
 
against Bruser and Tokyo Joe's, apparently on the grounds of
 "estoppel and laches." Therefore, the circuit court did not
 reach the issue of whether some of the separately metered
 electricity usage costs were billed or charged, and suit filed,
 within the applicable statute of limitations periods. See, e.g.,
 
Assoc. of Apt. Owners of Palms at Wailea-Phase 2 v. Dep't of
 Commerce & Consumer Affairs, No. 29033, 2010 WL at *3 (Haw. App.
 Nov. 10, 2010) (SDO) (where a contract or covenant imposes a
 continuing or ongoing obligation, statute of limitations begins
 with each successive breach). We affirm in part as to the AOAO's
 indemnification claims against Bruser and Tokyo Joe's, and vacate
 
15
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the remaining conclusions in the circuit court's "Conclusions of
 
Law, and Order Granting Defendants Michael David Bruser, and
 
Tokyo Joe's Inc.'s Motion for Partial Summary Judgment, Filed
 6/19/14."
C. Attorneys' Fees
 
The AOAO challenges the circuit court's award of
 
attorneys' fees and costs to Appellees. Because we hold that the
 
defense of laches does not apply to the AOAO's claims against
 Appellees, and the circuit court did not reach the issue of the
 applicable statute of limitations, we vacate the circuit court's
 awards of attorneys' fees and costs.
IV. CONCLUSION
 
We affirm in part and vacate in part the "Conclusions
 
of Law, and Order Granting Defendants Michael David Bruser, and
 Tokyo Joe's Inc.'s Motion for Partial Summary Judgment, Filed
 6/19/14" entered on October 9, 2014 in the Circuit Court of the
 First Circuit.
 
We vacate the following Circuit Court of the First
 
Circuit decisions: 
(1) "Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting Defendant
 
Certified Management, Inc.'s Motion for Summary Judgment, Filed
 8/5/14, and Order Granting Joinder by: Defendant Chaney Brooks &
 Company, LLC to Defendant Certified Management Inc.'s Motion for
 Summary Judgment, Filed 8/12/14" entered on October 9, 2014;
 
(2) "Amended Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting
 
Defendant Certified Management Inc.'s Motion for Summary
 Judgment, Filed 8/5/14 and Order Granting Joinder by: Defendant
 Chaney Brooks & Company, LLC to Defendant Certified Management
 Inc.'s Motion for Summary Judgment, Filed 8/12/14" entered on
 October 10, 2014;
 
(3) "Order Granting Defendant Certified Management,
 
Inc.'s Motion for Award of Attorneys' Fees and Costs Against
 Plaintiff AOAO Royal Aloha, Filed 10/24/14" entered on March 31,
 2015;
 
(4) "Order Granting Defendant Chaney Brooks & Company,
 
LLC's Non Hearing Motion for Award of Attorneys' Fees and Costs,
 Filed 10/24/14" entered on March 31, 2015;
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(5) "Order Granting Defendants Michael T. McCormack,
 
Individually and as Trustee and Co-Trustee, and Signa S.
 
McCormack, as Co-Trustee's Motion for Award of Attorneys' Fees
 and Costs, Filed 10/24/14" entered on March 31, 2015;
 
(6) "Order Granting Defendants Michael David Bruser and
 
Tokyo Joe's, Inc.'s Motion for Award of Attorneys' Fees and
 Costs, Filed 10/23/14" entered on March 31, 2015; and
 
(7) "Final Judgment in Favor of All Defendants Against
 
Plaintiff Association of Apartment of [sic] Owners of Royal
 Aloha" entered on May 5, 2015.
 
We remand this case to the Circuit Court of the First
 
Circuit for proceedings consistent with this Opinion.
 
On the briefs:

 
Matt A. Tsukazaki
 
(Li & Tsukazaki)
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
John D. Zalewski
 
Michael G. Kozak
 (Case Lombardi & Pettit of
counsel)
for Defendant-Appellee
Certified Management, Inc.
 
James H.Q. Lee
Thomas J. Wong
(Devens, Nakano, Saito, Lee,
Wong & Ching)
for Defendant-Appellee
Chaney Brooks & Company, LLC.
 
Yuriko J. Sugimura
Jason W. Hirata
 (Bendet Fidell Sugimura)
for Defendants-Appellees
Michael David Bruser; Tokyo
Joe's Inc.; Michael T.
McCormack, individually
and as Trustee under that
 certain unrecorded Michael T.
 McCormack Revocable Living
Trust Agreement dated
November 12, 1991; and Michael
T. McCormack and Signa S.
McCormack, as Co-Trustees of
The McCormack Ranch Trust
 dated January 6, 2005.
 
17
 