FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
---o0o--­
IN THE MATTER OF THE ISHIDA-WAIAKAMILO
 
LEGACY TRUST DATED JUNE 27, 2006
 
AND
 
IN THE MATTER OF THE ISHIDA-WINANT
 
LEGACY TRUST DATED JUNE 27, 2006
 
NOS. CAAP-13-0000449 and CAAP-13-0000450
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(T.
 NOS. 12-1-0080 AND 12-1-0081)
 
MARCH 31, 2016
 
FUJISE, PRESIDING JUDGE, LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
 
In this consolidated appeal, Settlors-Appellants
 
Richard H. Ishida, Jr., (Richard) and Rachel N. Ishida (Rachel)
 
(collectively, the Ishidas) appeal from the Probate Court of the
 First Circuit's (Probate Court's): (1) May 3, 2013 Judgment on
 (1) Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Petition for
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rescission of Warranty Deed Dated March 28, 2007, Imposition of
 
Constructive Trust, and an Order for Disgorgement Filed May 4,
 2012, Filed on July 30, 2012, and (2) Order Denying Petition for
 Reconsideration of Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 Petition for Rescission of Warranty Deed Dated March 28, 2007,
 Imposition of Constructive Trust, and an Order for Disgorgement
 Filed August 10, 2012, Filed on March 27, 2013 (Waiakamilo
 
Judgment), in T. No. 12-1-0080 (the Waiakamilo Case); and (2) May
 3, 2013 Judgment on (1) Order Denying Petition for Reformation of
 
Trust and/or Order Setting Aside the Ishida-Winant Legacy Trust
 Filed May 4, 2012, Filed on July 30, 2012, and (2) Order Denying
 Petition for Reconsideration of Order Denying Petition for
 Reformation of Trust and/or Order Setting Aside the Ishida-Winant
 Legacy Trust Filed on August 10, 2012, Filed on March 27, 2013
 (Winant Judgment), in T. No. 12-1-0081 (the Winant Case).
1
 
I. BACKGROUND FACTS
 A. Creation of the Trusts
 On June 27, 2006, the Ishidas, with the help of 
Michelle Hobus, Esq. (Hobus) of the Sterling & Tucker law firm, 
created the Ishida-Winant Legacy Trust (Winant Trust). The trust was irrevocable. The trustee was their daughter, Juney M. Ishida 
(Juney). The trust's principal asset was an interest in the real 
property located at 945 Winant Street, Honolulu, Hawai
'i (the 
Winant Property). Under the terms of the Winant Trust, upon the death of whichever of the Ishidas died last, the Winant Property 
1
 The Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan presided.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was to be distributed to Juney or, if she was deceased, to the
 
Ishidas' granddaughter Kauialohaokalani R. Wilson (Kaui). Also
 
on June 27, 2006, the Ishidas executed a limited warranty deed
 
transferring the Winant Property to Juney, as Trustee of the
 Winant Trust, reserving a life estate for themselves.
 
On the same day, the Ishidas also formed the Ishida­
2
Waiakamilo Legacy trust (Waiakamilo Trust),  naming another
daughter, Jeri S. Wilson (
Jeri), as trustee. This trust was also 
irrevocable. The trust's principal asset was an interest in the real property located at 948 Waiakamilo Road, Honolulu, Hawai
'i 
(the Waiakamilo Property). The trust property was to be 
distributed to Jeri or, if she was deceased, to Kaui, who is 
Jeri's daughter, as well as the Ishidas' granddaughter. Also on June 27, 2006, the Ishidas executed a limited warranty deed tranferring the Waiakamilo Property to Jeri, as Trustee of the Waiakamilo Trust. 
The Ishidas have a third daughter, Richardeen R. Kimura

 
(Richardeen), who they specifically excluded from the Trusts. It
 
appears undisputed that, in 2010, the Ishidas and Richardeen
 
reconciled.
 
B. Subsequent Transfers
 In early 2007, as she was preparing to complete the
 
Ishidas' 2006 tax returns, the Ishidas' accountant, Siu Lan Lundy
 (Lundy), asked to review the Trusts. After reviewing the Trusts,
 
Lundy raised concerns with Rachel about the terms of the
 
2
 The Winant Trust and the Waiakamilo Trust will collectively be
referred to as the Trusts.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Waiakamilo Trust, specifically, that it did not specify that the
 
Ishidas would continue to receive the income from the Waiakamilo
 Property, but the Ishidas remained responsible for the property-
related expenses, thus purportedly leaving the Ishidas with
 insufficient income to meet their needs. Rachel asked Lundy to
 call Hobus.
 
On March 28, 2007, in what appears to have been an
 
3
attempt to address the concerns raised by Lundy,  the Waiakamilo
Property underwent a series of transfers: first, from Jeri, as
 Trustee, to Jeri, individually; second, from Jeri, individually,
 to the Ishidas; and third, reserving a life estate for
 themselves, from the Ishidas to Jeri, individually.
4
 
On November 3, 2010, subject to the Ishidas' life
 
estate, Jeri transferred her interest in the Waiakamilo Property
 to a living trust created for Jeri and her husband.
 
C. The Petitions
 On May 4, 2012, the Ishidas filed: (1) a Petition for
 
Rescission of Warranty Deed Dated March 28, 2007, Imposition of
 Constructive Trust, and an Order for Disgorgement, in the
 Waiakamilo Case (the Waiakamilo Petition); and (2) a Petition for
 
Reformation of Trust and/or Order Setting Aside the Ishida-Winant
 
Legacy Trust, in the Winant Case (the Winant Petition)
 
(collectively, the Petitions). 
3
 The Ishidas' signatures on these deeds were notarized by Hobus.
 
4
 We express no opinion on the scope and/or merits of the concerns
raised by Lundy in 2007 or the effectiveness of the transfers in addressing
those concerns. We note that Lundy later, in a 2012 affidavit, also raised
potential gift tax issues.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Waiakamilo Petition raised various allegations
 
related to the Waiakamilo Trust, and the subsequent transfers of
 
the Waiakamilo Property, and alleged that the March 28, 2007
 transfer of the Waiakamilo Property from Jeri, as Trustee, to
 Jeri, individually, was void because the transfer violated the
 terms of the Waiakamilo Trust and Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 554A-5(b) (2006). In essence, the Ishidas alleged that they
 
had not intended to create an irrevocable trust and that doing so
 left them unable to provide for themselves in their elder years. 
The Ishidas asked the Probate Court to rescind the March 28, 2007
 deed transferring the Waiakamilo Property from Jeri, as Trustee,
 to Jeri, individually, to impose a constructive trust on the
 Waiakamilo Property, and to order that the Waiakamilo Property be
 returned to the Ishidas. The Waiakamilo Petition was supported
 by copies of both Trusts, the various aforementioned deeds
 transferring the Winant and Waiakamilo Properties in 2006, 2007,
 and 2010, a copy of a letter from the Custodian of Records for
 
5
the Notary Public Program to the Ishidas' law firm,  and the
Ishidas' signatures on the petition following a statement that:

 
THE UNDERSIGNED UNDERSTANDS THAT THIS DOCUMENT IS
 
DEEMED TO INCLUDE AN OATH, AFFIRMATION, OR STATEMENT TO THE
THE EFFECT THAT REPRESENTATIONS ARE TRUE AS FAR AS THE
 UNDERSIGNED KNOWS OR IS INFORMED, AND PENALTIES FOR PERJURY
MAY FOLLOW DELIBERATE FALSIFICATION.
 
5
 The letter stated, inter alia, that there were no entries found in
Hobus's notarial record book for the signatures of the Ishidas dated March 28,
2007. It does not appear that the Ishidas were implying that they did not, in
fact, sign the deeds. The Waiakamilo Petition specifically asserts that the
Ishidas were "asked to sign documents that supposedly would solve the
accountant's issues and allow [them] to continue to receive rental income from
Waiakamilo." It appears from the Petition, rather, that the Ishidas were
asserting that the deeds were not executed by the Ishidas on the specific
date, March 28, 2007, that appears on the deeds themselves, which were
notarized by Hobus, purportedly on that date.
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
No other affidavit or declaration was submitted in support of the
 
Waiakamilo Petition.
 
Similarly, the Winant Petition raises various
 
allegations related to the Winant Trust, most notably that they
 did not intend to create an irrevocable trust. The Ishidas
 argued that, as the Winant Trust does not reflect their intent to
 create a revocable trust, they are entitled to an equitable
 remedy of reformation or that the trust should be set aside on
 the grounds that they were mistaken as to the terms and effect of
 the Trust. The Winant Petition was supported by the same
 documents as the Waiakamilo Petition and the same statement, as
 quoted above, over the Ishidas' signatures. No other affidavit
 or declaration was submitted in support of the Winant Petition.
 
Jeri filed an objection to the Waiakamilo Petition. 
Juney filed an objection to the Winant Petition. Each argued that numerous important allegations in the Petitions were incorrect and/or required further investigation and discovery, including but not limited to the deposition of Hobus, and that the Petitions should either be assigned to the civil trials calendar pursuant to Rule 20(a) of the Hawai
'i Probate Rules 
(HPR) or denied in their entirety. Reply memoranda were filed by 
the Ishidas, objecting to any transfer to the civil calendar due 
to the Ishidas' advanced age, and requesting that the Petitions be granted. 
A joint hearing was held on the Petitions, on June 14,
 
2012, and, after argument of counsel, the matters were taken
 under advisement. Minute orders were issued on July 2, 2012. 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Regarding the Winant Petition, the Probate Court stated that "the
 
court finds no basis to reform or set aside the Ishida-Winant
 Legacy Trust." The Probate Court granted in part and denied in
 part the Waikamilo Petition, stating that "the court finds that
 Jeri Wilson violated the terms of the trust by transferring the
 Waiakamilo Property out of the Trust. The Court orders Jeri
 Wilson to transfer the Waiakamilo Property back to the Ishida-
Waiakamilo Legacy Trust. Petitioners' request to impose a
 constructive trust and order the property to be returned to
 Petitioners is denied." Jeri's request to assign the matter to
 the civil trials calendar was also denied. Written orders were
 entered on July 30, 2012.
 
On August 10, 2012, petitions for reconsideration were
 
filed in both matters. Without explanation as to why it could
 not have been presented earlier, both petitions included
 affidavits by Lundy, which described her actions in early 2007,
 as described hereinabove, and included Lundy's after-the-fact
 view that Rachel never would have signed the trust documents if
 Rachel had understood them, as well as Lundy's opinion as to what
 the outcome of the cases should be. Objections and replies were
 filed. A hearing was held on the petitions for reconsideration. 
Orders denying reconsideration were entered in both cases on
 March 27, 2013. In both cases, the Probate Court found "that it
 is unable to conclude that there has been a mistake, newly
 discovered evidence which by due diligence could not have been
 discovered in time before the [orders denying the initial
 petitions were] issued, or any other reason justifying relief."
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Waiakamilo and Winant Judgments were entered,
 
pursuant to HPR Rule 34(c), on May 3, 2013. Notices of appeal
 
were timely filed by the Ishidas. The appeals were consolidated
 by an order entered by the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) on
 
September 11, 2013.
 
On September 30, 2015, Rachel filed a suggestion of
 
death upon the record, noting the death of Richard during the
 
pendency of this action. On January 28, 2016, a motion was filed
 seeking to substitute Raydeen L. Graffam (Raydeen) for Richard
 
after the Probate Court issues letters testamentary duly
 
appointing Raydeen, a granddaughter of Richard and Rachel, as
 Richard's personal representative. As the Probate Court had not
 yet acted on Raydeen's petition, the requested relief was
 premature, and on February 3, 2016, the ICA denied the motion for
 substitution without prejudice.
 II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
The Ishidas raise two, related, points of error,
 
contending that the Probate Court erred when: (1) it refused to
 exercise its power to impose an equitable remedy by denying the
 Ishidas' request to have the Waiakamilo Property returned to them
 and by refusing to reform or set aside the Winant Trust; and (2)
 it denied the Ishidas' request to impose a constructive trust or
 an order of disgorgement for the Waiakamilo Property and for the
 Winant Trust to be reformed or set aside based on the Ishidas'
 position that the Trusts were a mistake and not what they
 intended.
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Ishidas specifically aver that they do not appeal
 
from the Probate Court's denial of the petitions for
 
reconsideration.
 III. APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
Although contending that the Circuit Court erred in 
refusing to exercise its equitable powers, the Ishidas submit that the applicable standard of review is de novo, because the construction of a trust is a question of law which the appellate court reviews de novo. Applicable cases do, indeed, hold that the construction of a trust is reviewed de novo. See, e.g., In re Lock Revocable Living Trust, 109 Hawai
'i 146, 151, 123 P.3d 1241, 
1246 (2005). However, the disputed issues on appeal in this case do not involve the interpretation of the subject Trusts. As plainly stated on the first page of each Trust, the Trusts are irrevocable. The Ishidas have never argued otherwise. Rather, they have argued, seeking various equitable remedies, that they should be relieved from the clear terms of the Trusts. 
The rescission or reformation of an instrument 
constitutes an equitable remedy. AIG Haw. Ins. Co., Inc. v. 
Bateman, 82 Hawai
'i 453, 456, 923 P.2d 395, 398 (1996) 
("[r]escission and cancellation are equitable remedies") (citation omitted); Civic Realty, Inc. v. Dev., Inc., 3 Haw. App. 101, 102, 641 P.2d 1361, 1362 (1982) (acknowledging reformation as an equitable remedy). The imposition of a constructive trust is also an equitable remedy. Beneficial Haw., Inc. v. Kida, 96 
Hawai
'i 289, 315, 30 P.3d 895, 921 (2001). 
The relief granted by a court in equity is
discretionary and will not be overturned on review unless
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the circuit court abused its discretion. An abuse of
 
discretion occurs when the trial court has clearly exceeded
the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant.
 
Ueoka v. Szymanski, 107 Hawai 'i 386, 393, 114 P.3d 892, 899 
(2005) (citations, internal quotation marks, brackets, and 
ellipsis omitted). 
Thus, we review the Probate Court's challenged orders
 
and judgments for an abuse of discretion.
 IV. DISCUSSION
 A. The Petitioners' Burden of Proof
 It is a fundamental principle that the intent of the 
settlor, as expressed in the trust instrument, shall prevail, "unless inconsistent with some positive rule of law." In re Lock 
Revocable Trust, 109 Hawai
'i at 151-52, 123 P.3d at 1246-47 
(citation omitted). Here, both Trusts unequivocally state that they are irrevocable. The threshold question is whether and based on what degree of proof, despite the clear language of the Trusts, the irrevocable Trusts should have been reformed or set aside, and/or the Ishidas should otherwise have been provided equitable relief on the grounds that they made a mistake and did not intend to create irrevocable trusts. 
In the Waiakamilo Petition, the Ishidas sought, in 
addition to the relief granted, to impose a constructive trust on the Waiakamilo Property and an order that it be returned to the Ishidas. In the Winant Petition, the Ishidas sought a reformation or setting aside of the Winant Trust. It has been established that, under Hawai
'i law, "[a] constructive trust will 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
be imposed where the evidence is clear and convincing that one
 
party will be unjustly enriched if allowed to retain the entire
 property." 
Maria v. Freitas , 73 Haw. 266, 274, 832 P.2d 259, 264
 
(1992) (emphasis added; citation omitted). With respect to the
 degree of proof required before a court will reform or rescind a
 trust based on mistake, the Restatement (Third) of Trusts
 provides:
 
Where no consideration is involved in the creation of
 
a trust, it can be rescinded or reformed upon the same
grounds, such as fraud, duress, undue influence, or mistake,
as those upon which a gratuitous transfer of property not in
trust can be rescinded or reformed. . . . The law governing
the rescission or reformation of a transfer inter vivos
 applies to declarations of trust as well as to inter vivos
transfers in trust. . . .
 
. . . .

 
Even if the will or other instrument creating a
donative testamentary or inter vivos trust is unambiguous,
the terms of the trust may be reformed by the court to
conform the text to the intention of the settlor if the
 following are established by clear and convincing evidence:
 (1) that a mistake of fact or law, whether in expression or
inducement, affected the specific terms of the document; and
(2) what the settlor's intention was.
 
Restatement (Third) of Trusts § 62 cmt. a & b (2003) (emphasis
 
added); see also Mary F. Radford, George Gleason Bogert, & George
 Taylor Bogert, The Law of Trusts and Trustees § 991 (3d ed.
 2006). The rationale for the clear and convincing evidence
 standard in proving mistakes in donative documents is further
 explained in the Restatement (Third) of Property § 12.1 cmt. b
 (2003):
 When a donative document is unambiguous, evidence
 
suggesting that the terms of the document vary from
intention is inherently suspect but possibly correct. The
 law deals with situations of inherently suspicious but
possibly correct evidence in either of two ways. One is to
 exclude the evidence altogether, in effect denying a remedy
in cases in which the evidence is genuine and persuasive.
The other is to consider the evidence, but guard against
giving effect to fraudulent or mistaken evidence by imposing
an above-normal standard of proof. In choosing between
exclusion and high-safeguard allowance of extrinsic
 
11

  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence, this Restatement adopts the latter. Only
high-safeguard allowance of extrinsic evidence achieves the
primary objective of giving effect to the donor's intention.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
This heightened level of proof is consistent with
 
Hawai'i precedent. In Love v. Love , 17 Haw. 206 (1905), the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court described the case, which has obvious 
similarities to the one before us, as follows:
 
This was a bill in equity to establish the plaintiff's
claim that he had a right to revoke a conveyance in trust
made by him without reserving a power of revocation.
He bases his claim upon the facts that the conveyance
was made voluntarily, without consideration from either of
the beneficiaries and without his intention that the trust
 should be irrevocable but with the understanding and belief
that it was revocable and could be rescinded at any time by
him, and that he was not advised by his attorney who
prepared the instrument that he ought to make provision for
revoking the trust.
 
Id. at 207.
 
Recognizing the trial court's discretion in the matter,
 
the supreme court opined: "[W]e do not think that we ought to
 
remand the case with direction to the judge to allow the
 amendment [of the trust], the refusal of which by him was an
 action 'taken in the exercise of a discretion with which we are
 not justified in interfering.'" Id. at 211 (citations omitted).
 
After examination of various arguments and authorities, the court
 recognized in Love that "an act may be so improvident and
 unreasonable as to justify the inference that it was done under
 some delusion or by one whose mind was so enfeebled as to render
 him incompetent to transact business, when proof would be
 required to show that the act was done intelligently, with
 knowledge of its consequences." Id. at 215. The court further
 
observed that the fact that the plaintiff intended for the
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conveyance to be revocable and that he was not properly advised
 
by his attorney did not satisfy the foregoing condition, and held
 that:
 
A grantor's ignorance of the contents of his voluntary deed
of gift or of its legal effect or his belief that it
contains an important provision which it does not contain or
the failure of his attorney to advise him of its contents
and their legal effect are facts which, under certain
circumstances, justify an inference of his mental
incapacity, but there is no rule that such facts alone are
sufficient to enable the grantor to avoid his deed.
Id. 
Although not stated as such, the supreme court clearly
 
recognized a heightened level of proof applicable to the
 
disavowment of a duly-executed legal instrument. In noting the
 application of the clear and convincing evidence standard to
 various other situations, the supreme court has stated:
 
Clear and convincing proof is a standard frequently
imposed in civil cases where the wisdom of experience has
demonstrated the need for greater certainty, and where this
high standard is required to sustain claims which have
serious social consequences or harsh or far reaching effects
on individuals to prove willful, wrongful and unlawful acts
to justify an exceptional judicial remedy.
 
Iddings v. Mee-Lee, 82 Hawai 'i 1, 14, 919 P.2d 263, 276 (1996). 
As the Restatement explains, mistakes in unambiguous donative 
documents should be proved by clear and convincing evidence because "evidence suggesting that the terms of the document vary from intention is inherently suspect but possibly correct." Restatement (Third) of Property § 12.1 cmt. b (2003). 
Thus, we conclude that the clear and convincing
 
evidence standard applies when a trustor seeks reformation,
 rescission, or other equitable relief from the clear and
 unambiguous terms of a trust instrument on the grounds of mistake
 of fact or law.
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B. The Probate Court's Denial of Equitable Relief
 
1. The Waiakamilo Petition
 
On appeal, the Ishidas first argue that the Waiakamilo 
Trust should have been reformed or set aside on the grounds of mistake because they did not intend, inter alia, to put the Waiakamilo Property in a trust that could not be revoked. This argument must fail, however, because the Waiakamilo Petition did not seek to reform or set aside the Waiakamilo Trust. As discussed above, the Waiakamilo Petition asked the Probate Court to rescind the March 28, 2007 deed transferring the Waiakamilo Property from Jeri, as Trustee, to Trustee, individually – the Probate Court granted this relief and ordered that the Waiakamilo Property be transferred back to the Waiakamilo Trust. The Waiakamilo Petition also asked the Probate Court to impose a constructive trust on the Waiakamilo Property and to order that it be returned to the Ishidas – the Probate Court denied this relief. As the Ishidas did not seek to reform or set aside the Waiakamilo Trust in their Probate Court petition, their argument on appeal, that the Waiakamilo Trust should be reformed or set aside, is without merit. See, e.g., Price v. AIG Haw. Ins. Co., 
107 Hawai
'i 106, 111, 111 P.3d 1, 6 (2005). 
Without reference to the applicable standard of review
 
on appeal, or the clear and convincing evidence necessary for the
 imposition of a constructive trust, the Ishidas argue that a
 constructive trust should be placed on the Waiakamilo Property
 because Jeri, who paid nothing for the Waiakamilo Property, is
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
being unjustly enriched by wrongfully retaining title of the
 
property, as trustee of the Waiakamilo Trust.
 
Hawai'i law concerning the imposition of a constructive 
trust is well-established and has been clearly explicated as
 follows:
 
A constructive trust arises where a person holding
title to property is subject to an equitable duty to convey
it to another on the ground that he would be unjustly
enriched if he were permitted to retain it. Restatement,
Restitution § 160 (1937). A constructive trust will be
 imposed if a transfer of land was obtained in an abuse of a
confidential relationship. 
Fairfield v. Medeiros,  58 Haw.
73, 431 P.2d 296 (1967); Restatement, Restitution § 182
(1937), 3 Bogert, Trusts, § 482 (1960). Where at the time
 of the transfer the transferee was in a confidential
 relation to the transferor, and the transferor relied upon
his oral promise to reconvey the land, he is chargeable as
constructive trustee of the land for the transferor. 1
 Scott, Trusts § 44.2 (3d ed. 1967). It is necessary that
both a confidential relationship and reliance upon a promise
to reconvey induced by that relationship be shown. As
 Justice Cardozo has written:
 
It (is) the case of a confidence induced, not by the

bare promise of another, but by the promise and the
confidential relation conjoined. (Citation omitted)
 
It is not the promise only, nor the breach only, but
unjust enrichment under cover of the relation of
confidence, which puts the court in motion. Sinclair
 
v. Purdy, 235 N.Y. 245, 253, 139 N.E. 255, 258 (1923).
 
The basic prerequisites for the application for an abuse of
confidence constructive trust are: (1) a confidential
relationship; (2) conveyance to the grantee based upon, and
arising out of a confidential relationship; (3) a promise to
hold for, or reconvey to, the grantor or a third person; and
(4) a subsequent refusal to reconvey resulting in the
grantee's unjust enrichment. The Confidential Relationship
Theory of Constructive Trusts-An Exception to the Statute of
Frauds, 29 Fordham L.R. 561, 563 (1961); Sinclair v. Purdy,
supra; Restatement, Restitution § 160.
 
It is well established in this jurisdiction that a
constructive trust will be imposed only when the evidence is
clear and convincing. 
Fairfield v. Medeiros, supra; De
Mello v. De Mello, 34 Haw. 922 (1939); Kuwahara v. Kuwahara,
23 Haw. 273 (1916). 
Kam Oi Lee v. Fong Wong, 57 Haw. 137, 139-40, 552 P.2d 635, 638
 
(1976) (internal quotation marks and ellipses omitted). 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Other Hawai 'i cases have explained that "a constructive 
trust may be defined as a device utilized by equity to compel one 
who unfairly holds a property interest to convey that interest to another to whom it justly belongs," and "[t]he policy basis of a constructive trust is to prevent the holder of the property from being unjustly enriched due to fraud, duress or other unconscionable conduct." DeMello v. Home Escrow, Inc., 4 Haw. 
App. 41, 48, 659 P.2d 759, 763–64 (1983) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). Thus, "[t]he beneficial owner, in equity, has the right to have the title to the property transferred to himself if it is in the hands of the wrongdoer." Peine v. Murphy, 46 Haw. 233, 241, 377 P.2d 708, 713 (1962) (citations omitted). 
In this case, the Waiakamilo Petition contains only the
 
faintest insinuation of any wrongdoing by Jeri related to the
 creation of the Waiakamilo Trust, i.e., "the Ishidas were
 encouraged by Jeri to update their estate plan" and "[the
 Ishidas] did not know that Sterling and Tucker was also
 [contemporaneously] working for and communicating with Jeri."
 Both assertions were expressly denied by Jeri in response to the
 Waiakamilo Petition. The record in this case is devoid of
 evidence sufficient to demonstrate that Jeri is being unjustly
 enriched due to an abuse of confidence, fraud, duress, or other
 unconscionable conduct.
 
The Ishidas' remaining argument for the imposition of a
 
constructive trust on the Waiakamilo Property is that they were
 mistaken as to the fact that the Waiakamilo Trust was irrevocable
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and as to the legal effect of the Trust. First, the Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court has rejected arguments similar to the one at bar. 
In Evans v. Bishop Trust Co., 21 Haw. 74, 76-77 (1912), the complainant sought to terminate a trust which she had created for the benefit of her and her children but which did not reserve for her a specific power to revoke though "when she executed the [deed in trust] in question, [she] believed that she might at any time revoke the trust[.]" Acknowledging that the trust in question could not be revoked by the complainant in the absence of mistake or fraud, the supreme court stated that: 
[t]he omission of a clause of revocation is sometimes
regarded as a circumstance, which, taken together with other
circumstances, tends to show mistake or undue influence.
But the absence of such a clause from the deed [of trust]
without circumstances other than the mere mistaken belief on
 the part of the settlor that she possessed the power of
revocation does not give rise to any inference which could
be taken as a ground for the revocation of the trust.
 
Id. at 83. 
In Cummins v. Carter, 17 Haw. 71, 72 (1905), the
 
petitioner requested the cancellation of a trust deed on the
 
grounds of duress, undue influence, and mistake. With regards to
 mistake, the petitioner alleged, inter alia, that he did not
 understand the provisions of the trust deed at the time he
 executed it, that he did not realize that it was irrevocable,
 that it was read to him in English, but that he did not have a
 clear understanding of its provisions and only understood simple
 English. Id. at 74-75. As summarized in the court's syllabus:
 
A trust deed made for the benefit of the maker and his
 
family cannot be set aside on the ground that the maker did
not fully realize its scope or effect on account of his
imperfect knowledge of English or legal phraseology. He was
not mentally weak, no fraud was practiced on him, the deed
was read to him, and he trusted his agent's advice that it 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was all right. It was his duty to have had it translated or
explained to him or take the consequences.
 
Id. at 71-72; see also id. at 80. 
In Love, 17 Haw. at 207, the plaintiff claimed he had a
 
right to revoke a trust where it was made voluntarily, without
 
consideration, without the intention that it would be
 irrevocable, but with the understanding and belief that it was
 revocable. However, as stated in Section IV.A. above, the court
 held that:
 
A grantor's ignorance of the contents of his voluntary deed
of gift or of its legal effect or his belief that it
contains an important provision which it does not contain or
the failure of his attorney to advise him of its contents
and their legal effect are facts which, under certain
circumstances, justify an inference of his mental
incapacity, but there is no rule that such facts alone are
sufficient to enable the grantor to avoid his deed. 
Id. at 215; see also Joaquin v. Joaquin, 5 Haw. App. 435, 442,
 
698 P.2d 298, 303 (1985) ("A mistake as to the nature and effect
 of a document caused by a failure to read it is not an excusable
 mistake.") (citation omitted).
 
Moreover, the Probate Court did not err in concluding
 
that the evidence in support of the Ishidas' argument of mistake
 falls short of the evidence necessary to establish that the
 Ishidas were mistaken as to the unambiguous terms of the Trust. 
The only evidence offered in support of the assertion that the
 Ishidas were mistaken as to the nature and/or legal effect of the
 Waiakamilo Trust is the Petition itself, which was signed by the
 Ishidas. 
On appeal, the Ishidas refer to "compelling evidence"
 
and "the clear testimony of the Settlors regarding their own
 intent and the mistake that was made," in apparent reference to
 
18
  
We consider the Ishidas' verification in the context of
 
the clear and convincing evidence standard applicable to their
 
request for equitable relief from the unambiguous terms of the
 Waiakamilo Trust. The Ishidas jointly attested that
 "representations [contained in the Petition] are true as far as
 the undersigned knows or is informed" and acknowledged that a
 penalty of perjury might result from "deliberate falsification." 
As set forth in HPR Rule 5(a), this attestation is accepted in
 lieu of a sworn affidavit to the same effect, i.e., that the
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I R
 EPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Ishidas' signatures on the Waiakamilo Petition following a
 statement that:
 
THE UNDERSIGNED UNDERSTANDS THAT THIS DOCUMENT IS
 
DEEMED TO INCLUDE AN OATH, AFFIRMATION, OR STATEMENT TO THE
THE EFFECT THAT REPRESENTATIONS ARE TRUE AS FAR AS THE
 UNDERSIGNED KNOWS OR IS INFORMED, AND PENALTIES FOR PERJURY
MAY FOLLOW DELIBERATED FALSIFICATION.
 
This statement appears to stem from HPR Rule 5(a)
 
 (2007) which, at that time, provided:6
Rule 5. SIGNING OF PLEADINGS.
 
(a) Verification of Pleadings; Affidavits. All
 
pleadings (other than those signed by a party's attorney)
shall include a statement at the end and before the
 signature of the person presenting the pleading to the
effect that the person understands that the document is
deemed to include an oath, affirmation, or statement to the
effect that its representations are true as far as the
person executing or filing it knows or is informed, and that
penalties for perjury may follow deliberate falsification.
Such a statement shall be accepted in lieu of an affidavit
as to the facts stated in the pleading. The signature of an
applicant in informal proceedings shall be notarized.
If a pleading requires consideration of facts not
appearing of record or verified as provided above, it shall
be supported by affidavit, signed by the person having
knowledge of the facts and competent to testify. An attorney
may submit a declaration in lieu of an affidavit to support
facts outside of the record.
 
6
 HPR Rule 5(a) was amended in 2013 to, inter alia, require an oath
or affirmation that a probate court petition and application include an oath,
affirmation or statement to the effect that the document "is not being
presented for an improper purpose, such as to harass or to cause unnecessary
delay or needless increase in the cost of litigation." 
19
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
information contained therein is true as far as the affiant knows 
or is informed, and thus satisfied the requirements of the rule. It is not, however, identical in every way to testimony that has been subject to cross-examination, or a sworn affidavit, or a declaration made under penalty of law, that specified factual statements are true and correct. It is within the province of the trial court to determine the credibility of a witness and the weight to be given to a witness's testimony. See, e.g., 
Tamashiro v. Control Specialist, Inc., 97 Hawai
'i 86, 92, 34 P.3d 
16, 22 (2001). Written testimony that could be based upon limited memory or knowledge, or information and belief, rather than personal knowledge, particularly testimony that purports to reflect the joint recollection and intent of two people, without distinction, might reasonably be viewed as less reliable or less convincing than other forms of evidence. 
We have carefully examined the affirmative statements
 
made in the Waiakamilo Petition concerning the Ishidas' purported
 mistake, which includes the following:
 
On May 17, 2006, the Ishidas met with [Hobus] to
discuss changing their estate plan. . . .
 
. . . The Ishidas told [Hobus] that they wanted to
control the properties during their lives, but when they
died they wanted to give the Winant Property to Juney, and
the Waiakamilo Property to Jeri, with both properties
eventually passing to Kaui. . . .
 
Based on the discussion with [Hobus], the Ishidas
understood that Sterling and Tucker would create simple
wills and revocable trusts that would provide for the
distribution of the properties upon the death of both Rachel
and Richard to Juney and Jeri, with the properties
ultimately passing to Kaui upon Juney and Jeri's death.
 
On June 27, 2006, Michelle Hobus provided the Ishida
with [] 17 documents for execution, including two complex
trusts over 50 pages each. . .
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
During the time between the initial meeting with Hobus
and the date of execution, Sterling and Tucker did not seek
any clarification from the Ishidas, did not ask any
questions, did not send the Ishidas any drafts, and did not
provide the Ishidas with any information. Michelle Hobus
 simply showed up on June 27, 2006 and presented the Ishidas
with these complex and unfamiliar documents in final form,
which the Ishidas signed the same day. The Ishidas had
 never seen drafts of the documents and believed that Hobus
 had made the changes they had discussed.
 
  
The Ishidas did not understand the contents or
 
ramifications of executing such documents. At the time,
Richard was in a weakened mental and physical state and was
relying upon Rachel. Richard had always handled the
couple's legal and financial affairs and Rachel was
unsophisticated and ill-equipped to understand any of the
legal instruments. Rachel was embarrassed to explain that
she did not understand the documents. Instead, she relied
on Sterling and Tucker to guide her. Michelle delivered and
 notarized the documents. The Ishidas executed what they
understood to be simple wills and revocable trusts. 
Notably, the Waiakamilo Petition does not specify
 
whether one or both of the Ishidas read the first page of the
 
Waiakamilo Trust, Section 3 of which plainly states (emphasis in
 the original):
 
Irrevocable Trust
 
Our trust is irrevocable. Except as expressly herein
provided to the contrary, no Trustor or any other person
shall have any right or power to alter, amend, or in any
manner whatsoever modify any of the provisions hereof.
 
The Ishidas' representations that they understood that
 
Hobus would create revocable trusts, and that they understood
 
that they executed revocable trusts, tend to undermine the
 representation that they did not understand the above. Nor do
 they go so far as to say that Richard was incompetent or lacked
 the capacity to understand the documents at the time they were
 executed. The Ishidas make no attempt whatsoever to explain 
Richard's purportedly "weakened mental and physical state" at the
 time the documents were executed or Rachel's purported 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unsophistication. In her objection to the Waiakamilo Petition,
 
Jeri averred that:
 
[C]ontrary to the Petition, Rachel handled the Ishidas'
finances and legal matters and by no means is/was
"unsophisticated and ill-equipped to understand" the Trusts
and related documents. Evidencing Rachel's sophistication
is the fact that she managed and operated two businesses out
of the Waiakamilo storefronts: 1) a floral shop and 2) a
snackshop/restaurant. Furthermore, Richard was in good
health at the time the Trusts were executed and in no way
mentally weak[.]
 
In their reply memoranda and at the hearing on the
Petitions, the Ishidas actively opposed allowing any discovery or
further development of the facts, instead arguing that "[t]he
 Court has all the information it needs."
7
 
 
 
In sum, we have a trust document that plainly and
 
prominently states that it is irrevocable, which we assume that
 the Ishidas read, as they have not posited otherwise. There is
 no evidence of an abuse of confidence, fraud, duress, or other
 wrongdoing. There is scant evidence of incapacity or an
 inability to understand the Trust documents, and that evidence is
 disputed. The Ishidas now, years later, jointly aver that the
 Trust documents do not reflect what they intended. Although
 unsupported by any other evidence, such as testimony, notes,
 correspondence and/or other records from Hobus, we recognize that
 
7 We note that the parties' submissions to Probate Court also
contain numerous emotionally-charged statements about the respective parties'
motivations, including the impact of the Ishidas' reconciliation with
Richardeen, the Ishidas' finances and the financial consequences of the
Trusts, and other disputed assertions concerning money (for example, the
Ishidas say that Jeri stopped paying on a line of credit taken out by the
Ishidas and Jeri says that Rachel told her to stop and refused future
payments). However, the Ishidas consistently argue that their mistake was
that they did not understand the Trust documents at the time they were
executed, rather than that they regret and now seek relief from the effect of
the documents. Although all of the parties' factual assertions have been
reviewed and considered by this court, only those tending to support or negate
the Ishidas' claim of mistake are specifically recounted here.
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Ishidas' statement that they were mistaken as to the nature
 
or effect of the Waiakamilo Trust is possibly correct. However,
 it is inherently suspicious, as it could as easily reflect regret
 over a course of action that they later viewed as improvident or
 regret over their determination of beneficiaries. Nor can we
 conclude, based on the parties' submissions concerning their
 family history and their description of their financial
 circumstances, that the creation of irrevocable trusts was so
 inherently improvident and unreasonable that the Probate Court
 was required to infer that "it was done under some delusion or by
 one whose mind was so enfeebled as to render him incompetent to
 transact business." Love, 17 Haw. at 215.
 
Thus, we conclude that the Probate Court did not abuse
 
its discretion when it declined to impose a constructive trust on
 the Waiakamilo Property or otherwise return it to the Ishidas.
 
2. The Winant Petition
 
On appeal, the Ishidas first argue that the Winant
 
Trust should have been reformed or set aside on the grounds of
 mistake because they did not intend, inter alia, to put the
 Winant Property in a trust that could not be revoked. 
Under Hawai
'i law, it has been held that: 
In equity a conveyance made or a contract entered into by a
person of legal and mental capacity may be declared void ifinduced by fraud, duress, undue influence,misrepresentation, or, in contracts, of mutual mistake offact or of mistakes of fact and law.
 
Love, 17 Haw. at 215. Although Love did not expressly state that
 
mistakes of fact or law could provide grounds for reformation or
 rescission of a trust, that was in fact the issue at bar in Love.
 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
See id. Thus, we hold that, upon sufficient evidence and in the 
trial court's discretion, a trust may be reformed or rescinded 
based on such mistakes. See also In re Lock Revocable Trust, 109 
Hawai'i at 157, 123 P.3d at 1252 (Nakamura, J., concurring) 
(reformation of trust provisions could be allowed so that they conform with the settlor's intent on the ground that the settlor made a unilateral mistake) (citing 90 C.J.S. Trusts § 95; cmt. e, Restatement (Second) of Trusts § 333 (1959)). 
Nevertheless, as the same evidence concerning the
 
Ishidas' purported mistake was presented in conjunction with both
 
8
the Waiakamilo Petition and the Winant Petition,  and the first
page of the Winant Trust contains the same plain and unambiguous
 language as the Waiakamilo Trust, stating that it is an
 irrevocable trust, our analysis of the Probate Court's rejection
 of the Ishidas' request for equitable relief based on mistake is
 the same. Thus, we conclude that the Probate Court did not abuse
 its discretion when it declined to reform or rescind the Winant
 Trust.
 
On appeal, the Ishidas further argue that a
 
constructive trust should be placed on the Winant Property. 
However, the Winant Petition did not seek to impose a
 constructive trust on the Winant Property. Thus, we conclude
 that this argument is without merit.
 
8
 With respect to the Winant Petition, Juney verified the statements
in her objection to the Winant Petition, which were essentially the same as
the statements made by Jeri in her objection to the Waiakamilo Petition.
 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, we affirm the Waiakamilo Judgment

 
and the Winant Judgment, both of which were entered by the
 
Probate Court on May 3, 2013.
 
On the briefs:
 
Margery S. Bronster,
Mia D. Obciana,
(Bronster Hoshibata)
for Appellants.
 
Michael A. Lilly,
(Ning, Lilly & Jones)
for Appellees.
 
25
 