FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
KILAKILA 'O HALEAKAL A, Plaintiff/Appellant-Appellant,
v.
 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI 'I, and THOMAS M. APPLE,1
 
in his official capacity as Chancellor of the
University of Hawai 'i at Manoa; BOARD OF LAND AND
NATURAL RESOURCES, WILLIAM AILA, in his capacity as
the Interim Chairperson of the Board of Land
and Natural Resources; and DEPARTMENT OF
LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES, Defendants/Appellees-Appellees
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000182
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-2510)
 
JUNE 9, 2014
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING J., REIFURTH, J. AND

CIRCUIT JUDGE NAKASONE,
IN PLACE OF NAKAMURA, C.J., FUJISE, LEONARD,
AND GINOZA, JJ., ALL RECUSED
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
Plaintiff/Appellant-Appellant Kilakila 'O Haleakal a 
(Kilakila) appeals from:
 
1
 During the pendency of this case, Thomas M. Apple succeeded
Virginia Hinshaw as the Chancellor of the University of Hawai' i and was 
substituted as a defendant. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
1) the February 20, 2013 "Final Judgment";
 
2) 
the March 14, 2011 "Order Granting Defendants 
University of Hawai 'i and [Thomas M. Apple's] Motion for 
Protective Order [Filed January 18, 2011]" (Protective Order); 
3) 
the May 9, 2011 "Order Granting Defendants 
University of Hawai 'i and [Thomas M. Apple's] Motion to Dismiss 
or in the Alternative for Summary Judgment as to Counts 2, 3, and 
4 of Plaintiff's First Amended Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief [Filed December 13, 2010]"; 
4) 
the May 9, 2011 "Order Denying Plaintiff's Motion
 
for Partial Summary Judgment as to Counts 3 and 4"; 
5) 
the May 29, 2012 "Order Denying Plaintiff's Motion 
to Reconsider the May 9, 2011 Order Granting Defendants University of Hawai
'i and [Thomas M. Apple's] Motion to Dismiss 
or in the Alternative for Summary Judgment as to Counts 2, 3, and 4 of Plaintiff's First Amended Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief"; 
6) 
the July 17, 2012 "Order Granting University of 
Hawai'i and [Thomas M. Apple's] Motion to Dismiss the Second 
Amended Complaint or in the Alternative for Summary Judgment as to Counts 5 and 6 of the Second Amended Complaint [Filed May 25, 2012]"; and 
7) 
the January 17, 2013 "Order (1) Granting [the
 
University's] Motion for Summary Judgment as to Count 1 of
 [Kilakila's] First Amended Complaint for Declaratory and
 Injunctive Relief; (2) Granting Defendants Board of Land and
 Natural Resources, Department of Land and Natural Resources, and
 William Aila's [(collectively, DLNR)] Motion for Summary Judgment
 
as to Count 1 of [Kilakila's] First Amended Complaint for
 
Declaratory and Injunctive Relief [Filed December 13, 2010]; (3)
 Granting [the University's] Joinder in [DLNR's] Motion for
 Summary Judgment as to Count 1 of [Kilakila's] First Amended
 Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief [Filed December
 13, 2010]; and (4) Denying [Kilakila's] Motion for Summary
 Judgment as to Count 1" ((1)-(7) collectively, Judgment and
 
2

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Orders). The Judgment and Orders were entered in the Circuit
 
2
Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).
 
On appeal, Kilakila contends the circuit court erred

 
when it:
 
3
(1) concluded an environmental impact statement  (EIS)
 
was not required for the Haleakal a High Altitude Observatories
 
Management Plan (Management Plan);
 
(2) concluded it lacked jurisdiction and dismissed

 
counts 2,3 and 4, the counts challenging Defendant/Appellee-
Appellee Board of Land and Natural Resources (Board) approval of
 
a conservation district use permit (CDU Permit) for the Advanced
 
Technology Solar Telescope (Telescope Project);
 
(3) denied Kilakila's motion for partial summary
 
judgment on counts 3 and 4, and denied its motion to reconsider
 
the court's dismissal of counts 2, 3 and 4; and
 
(4) granted Defendant/Appellee-Appellee University of 
Hawai'i and Thomas M. Apple's (together, University) motion for 
Protective Order. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. The Management Plan
 
In 1961, the State of Hawai 'i (State) transferred 
approximately eighteen acres of land on the summit of Haleakal a, 
on the island of Maui, to the University on the condition that the land be set aside for the Haleakal
a High Altitude Observatory 
Site (Observatory Site). The Observatory Site, located within a 
conservation district, is in a subzone which specifically permits 
astronomy facilities. See Hawai 'i Administrative Rules (HAR) 
§§ 13-5-24(c) (effective 1994) and 13-5-25(a) (effective 1994). The University published the Management Plan for the Observatory Site in June, 2010. The Management Plan is "implemented to regulate land use in the Conservation District for the purpose of 
2
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura.
 
3
 The EIS is an "informational document" that discloses the
 
environmental, economic, social, and cultural effects of a proposed action on
the community and State, the "measures proposed to minimize adverse effects,
and alternatives to the action and their environmental effects." Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 343-2 (2010 Repl.).
 
3
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
conserving, protecting, and preserving the important natural
 
resources of the State" and provides over-arching monitoring
 strategies, as well as design and construction guidelines, for
 the Observatory Site. The Management Plan is a prerequisite for
 building astronomy facilities at the Observatory Site. See HAR
 
§ 13-5-24(c)(4)(R-3) and (astronomy facilities may be constructed
 in a conservation district general subzone only if the project
 receives approval of a board permit and management plan).
 
On October 25, 2010, the University issued a Final
 
4
Environmental Assessment (Final EA) for the Management Plan. 
The Final EA lists the University as the proposing and approving
 agency, and provides that the Final EA review triggers are the
 use of State lands or funds and the use of conservation district
 lands. The Final EA defined the proposed action as "the
 implementation of a [Management Plan], which would regulate land
 use in the Conservation District . . . ." The Final EA also
 provides that the implementation of the Management Plan "is
 
5
intended to comply with Exhibit 3 of HAR § 13-5  and is not
intended to assess impacts from construction or operation of any
 new project at [the Observatory Site] . . . ."
 
Based on the Final EA, the University determined the 
implementation of the Management Plan would not have a significant effect on the environment (
Negative Declaration) and 
did not require the preparation of an EIS as a result. See HAR 
§ 11-200-9(A)(4) (effective 1996); see also Kepo 'o v. Kane, 106 
Hawai'i 270, 289, 103 P.3d 939, 958 (2005) (the proper inquiry 
for determining the necessity of an EIS is whether the proposed action will likely have a significant effect on the environment). The Board approved the Management Plan on December 1, 2010.
B. Kilakila's Challenge of the Management Plan
 
On November 22, 2010, Kilakila filed a "Complaint for
 
Declaratory Judgment and Injunctive Relief" against the
 University. Count 1 of the complaint challenged the University's
 
4
 An EA is a "written evaluation to determine whether an action may
have a significant effect." HRS § 343-2.
 
5
 Exhibit 3 of HAR § 13-5 provides management plan requirements.
See HAR § 13-5-39(a). 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Negative Declaration. On December 13, 2010, Kilakila amended its
 
complaint to allege three additional counts. Counts 2, 3 and 4
 raised various challenges against the Telescope Project, a
 proposed astronomy facility submitted with the Management Plan. 
Kilakila's prayer for relief requested the circuit court: 
A. Declare that [the University] violated HRS Chapter
 
343.
 
B. Declare that [the University] must prepare an EIS
for the [Management Plan].
 
C. Declare that the [University] improperly accepted
the [Final EA] for [the Management Plan].
 
D. Declare that [the Management Plan] may have a
significant impact.
 
E. Declare that any approvals granted pursuant to the [Final
EA] for the [Management Plan] are null and void.
 
F. Declare that [the Management Plan] is null and
 
void.
 
G. Declare that all permits granted pursuant to the
[Management Plan], including the [CDU permit] for the
[Telescope Project], are null and void.
 
. . . .
 
L. Order [the University] to prepare an EIS for the
[Management Plan] if they wish for the plan to be approved.
 
On January 18, 2011, the University moved for a 
protective order barring all discovery requests by Kilakila under 
Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 26(c). The 
University argued discovery was not required to resolve the matter because the question of whether the University had complied with HRS Chapter 343 was a question of law, not fact, and the circuit court's review was limited to the administrative record. The circuit court granted the Protective Order on March 14, 2011. 
On May 9, 2011, the circuit court granted summary 
judgment against Kilakila and dismissed counts 2, 3 and 4,
 concluding the court lacked jurisdiction.
6 On April 18, 2012,
 
Kilakila filed a motion to reconsider this decision and the
 circuit court denied the motion on May 29, 2012. On October 5,
 
6
 On May 25, 2012, Kilakila filed a second amended complaint raising
two additional counts which the circuit court dismissed July 12, 2012.
Kilakila does not challenge this dismissal on appeal.
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2011, the University filed a motion for summary judgment on count
 
1, contending primarily that an EA was not required but was
 conducted to allow informed decision-making and such action
 complied with the "rule of reason." On January 17, 2013, the
 circuit court entered an order granting the University's motions
 and joinder for summary judgment on count 1. The circuit court
 concluded:
 
The [circuit court] finds that under the notice
pleading standard, Count 1 of the Second Amended Complaint
alleges that the [Telescope Project] is a component of the
[Management Plan], and that an [EIS] should have been
prepared for the Management Plan pursuant to [HRS] Chapter
343. In making its determination, the [circuit court] looksto the [HRS], the [HAR], the Management Plan and case lawincluding Mauna Kea Anaina Hou v. University of Hawai' i. 
The [circuit court] finds that an [EA] was prepared
for the Management Plan and that an EIS was not required.
The Management Plan is a guideline, a planning tool, that
sets certain policies with respect to if there are future
actions or projects one must consider certain monitoring
strategies and take into consideration [the] cultural,
religious and other resources. The Management Plan does not
authorize specific projects, such as the [Telescope
Project]. A future project requires its own environmental
review. The [Telescope Project] did a separate EIS. 
The [circuit court] finds that an EIS was not required
for the Management Plan. 
Nevertheless an [EA] for the
Management Plan was prepared and complied with [HRS] Chapter
343 under the rule of reason standard set forth in case law
 including Unite Here! Local 5 v. City and County of
Honolulu
, 124 [Hawai' i] 171, 238 P.3d 698 (2010). 
With respect to the [DLNR's] motion, the [circuit
court] further finds that notwithstanding notice pleading, a

multi-step process is propounded regarding why the [DLNR is]
a party. This process does not concern the Management Plan
or whether [HRS] Chapter 343 was violated, and the [circuit
court] grants the [DLNR's] Motion on that ground as well as
on the merits. The [University's] joinder is granted for the
same reason.
 
Judgment was entered on February 20, 2013 and Kilakila filed a 
notice of appeal on March 14, 2013.
C. The Telescope Project
 
The Telescope Project is a proposed land use described
 
by the Management Plan as a reasonably foreseeable project. A
 final EIS for the Telescope Project was prepared in July of 2009,
 before the University published the Management Plan. On December
 1, 2010, the Board approved the University's application to
 construct the Telescope Project within the Observatory Site,
 issuing CDU Permit MA-3542 (Board's 2010 Approval). On December
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
13, 2010, Kilakila filed an administrative agency appeal to the 
circuit court challenging the Board's 2010 Approval. See 'O 
Haleakal a v. Bd. of Land & Natural Res., 131 Hawai 'i 193, 197, 
317 P.3d 27, 31 (2013).7 On February 11, 2011, while the agency 
appeal was pending, the Board approved Kilakila's request -- a request that was made before the Board's 2010 Approval -- for a contested case hearing on CDU permit MA-3542. See 
'O Haleakal a, 
131 Hawai 'i at 198, 317 P.3d at 32. As a result, the circuit 
court dismissed the agency appeal as moot. See id. 
'O Haleakal a held that the circuit court had 
jurisdiction to review Kilkila's challenge under HRS § 91-14 (2012 Repl.) because the Board effectively denied Kilakila's request for a contested case hearing when it approved CDU Permit MA-3542 without rendering a decision on Kilakila's request. See 
id., 131 Hawai
'i at 203, 317 P.3d at 37. On December 13, 2013, 
the Hawai 'i Supreme Court remanded the case to the circuit court 
to decide Kilakila's request for a stay or reversal of the Board's 2010 Approval. See 
'O Haleakal a, 131 Hawai 'i at 206, 317 
P.3d at 40. 
Meanwhile, on November 9, 2012, following the contested
 
case hearing for CDU Permit MA-3542, the Board again approved the
 University's permit application, issuing CDU Permit MA-11-04
 (Board's 2012 Approval). Kilakila's challenge of the Board's 
2012 Approval is before this court in pending case No. 
CAAP-13-0003065.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Summary Judgment
 
We review summary judgments de novo. See Kamaka v. 
Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai
'i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 
91, 103 (2008). Under HRCP Rule 56(c), the circuit court must grant a motion for summary judgment when the moving party: (1) has shown that there is no genuine issue regarding any material fact, and (2) is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Id. 
"A fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect 
7
 We take judicial notice of this fact as an easily verifiable
matter of public record. See Williams v. Aona, 121 Hawai' i 1, 11 n.6, 210
P.3d 501, 511 n.6 (2009). 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a
 
cause of action or defense asserted by the parties." Id.
 
If the moving party meets its burden of production, the 
non-moving party must present admissible evidence showing specific facts about essential elements of each claim to avoid summary judgment. See Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 
322-23 (1986). We view the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party; factual inferences are made in favor of the non-moving party. See Kamaka, at 117 Hawai
'i at 104, 176 
P.3d at 103. 
In cases of public importance, summary judgments should
 
be granted sparingly, and never on limited and indefinite factual
 foundations. Molokai Homesteaders Coop Ass'n v. Cobb, 63 Haw.
 
453, 458, 629 P.2d 1134, 1139 (1981). But where there is no
 genuine issue as to any material fact and defendants clearly
 demonstrate they should prevail as a matter of law, the
 disposition of a case by summary judgment is proper. Id.
 
B. Discovery Order
 
We disturb a trial court's discovery order only if 
there is a clear abuse of discretion that results in substantial prejudice to a party. See Hac v. University of Hawai
'i, 102 
Hawai'i 92, 101, 73 P.3d 46, 55 (2003). An abuse of discretion 
occurs when the trial court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant. See id. 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. HRS Chapter 343
 
Each person in the State has "the right to a clean and
 
healthful environment, as defined by laws relating to
 environmental quality, including control of pollution and
 conservation, protection and enhancement of natural resources." 
Haw. Const. art. XI, § 9. Accordingly, the State's environmental
 policy is to:
 
(1)	 Conserve the natural resources, so that land, water,
mineral, visual, air and other natural resources are
protected by controlling pollution, by preserving or
augmenting natural resources, and by safeguarding the
State's unique natural environmental characteristics
in a manner which will foster and promote the general
welfare, create and maintain conditions under which
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
humanity and nature can exist in productive harmony,
and fulfill the social, economic, and otherrequirements of the people of [Hawai' i]. 
(2)	 Enhance the quality of life by:
 
(A)	 Setting population limits so that the
interaction between the natural and artificial
 environments and the population is mutually
beneficial;
 
(B)	 Creating opportunities for the residents of[Hawai'i] to improve their quality of life
through diverse economic activities which arestable and in balance with the physical andsocial environments; 
(C)	 Establishing communities which provide a sense
of identity, wise use of land, efficient
transportation, and aesthetic and social
satisfaction in harmony with the natural
environment which is uniquely Hawaiian; and
 
(D)	 Establishing a commitment on the part of eachperson to protect and enhance [Hawai' i's]
environment and reduce the drain on nonrenewable resources. 
HRS § 344-3 (2010 Repl.). 
To implement these broad objectives, HRS Chapter 343
 
creates a process of review, aiming to "alert decision makers to
 
significant environmental effects which may result from the
 implementation of certain actions" and "ensure that environmental
 concerns are given appropriate consideration in decision making
 along with economic and technical considerations." HRS § 343-1 
(2010 Repl.). The heart of this review process is the EIS. See
 
generally Molokai Homesteaders, 63 Haw. at 464, 629 P.2d at 1142
 (arguing the EIS is the heart of HRS Chapter 343's federal
 counterpart, the National Environmental Policy Act). The EIS is
 "meaningless without the conscientious application of the EIS
 process as a whole, and shall not be merely a self-serving
 recitation of benefits and a rationalization of the proposed
 action." HAR § 11-200-14 (effective 1996).
 
The review process begins by defining the proposed 
action. An "action" is "any program or project to be initiated by any agency or applicant." HRS § 343–2. The subject of an EA may be variously described as an action, a project, or a program. Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp., 115 Hawai
'i 299, 306, n.6, 167 
P.3d 292, 299, n.6, (2007). An EA is required for actions that propose (1) the use of state or county lands or funds" or (2) any 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
use within land classified as a conservation district. See HRS
 
§§ 343-5(a)(1) and (2) (2010 Repl.). The Management Plan's EA
 
cites these as its statutory triggers.8 For agency actions, as
 
here, the agency proposing the action must (1) review the EA, (2)
 consider the "significance criteria" provided by HAR §11-200-12,
 and (3) determine whether the proposed action will likely have a
 significant effect on the environment. See HRS § 343-5, HAR
 
§§ 11-200-9(a), -11.2 (effective 1996), and -12 (effective 1996).
 
If the proposing agency determines the proposed action 
is likely to have a significant effect on the environment, then

 
an EIS is required. See Kepo 'o, 106 Hawai 'i at 289, 103 P.3d at 
958. A "significant effect" or "significant impact" is
 
the sum of effects on the quality of the environment,
including actions that irrevocably commit a natural
resource, curtail the range of beneficial uses of the
environment, are contrary to the state's environmental
policies or long-term environmental goals and guidelines as
established by law, or adversely affect the economic or
social welfare, or are otherwise set forth in section
11-200-12 of this chapter.
 
HAR § 11-200-2 (effective 1996). The proposing agency must
 
consider "every phase of a proposed action, the expected
 consequences, both primary and secondary, and the cumulative as
 well as the short-term and long-term effects of the action." HAR
 § 11–200–12. "In most instances," an action has a significant
 effect on the environment if it:
 
(1)	 Involves an irrevocable commitment to loss or
 
destruction of any natural or cultural resource;
 
(2)	 Curtails the range of beneficial uses of the
environment;
 
(3)	 Conflicts with the [S]tate's long-term environmental
policies or goals and guidelines as expressed in [HRS
 
8
 The parties dispute whether the Management Plan was exempted from
the EA requirement as a planning document under HRS § 343-5(b). The [DLNR]
contends the Management Plan is a planning document because it is not a land
use. The University contends the circuit court made a factual finding that
the Management Plan was a planning document and Kilakila's failure to contest
the finding on appeal makes it binding on this court. Kilakila characterizes
 this contention as a meritless post-hoc argument because the University cited
three § 343-5(a) triggers requiring an EA in the Management Plan's EA.
Kilakila also contends the circuit court wrongly resolved a disputed fact on
summary judgment. Regardless of whether an EA was required for the Management
Plan, the University completed an EA, and HRS Chapter 343 requires an EIS if
an EA concludes a significant environmental impact is likely. See HAR
 
§ 11-200-9(A)(4). 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Chapter 344], and any revisions thereof and amendments
thereto, court decisions, or executive orders;
 
(4)	 Substantially affects the economic welfare, social
welfare, and cultural practices of the community or
State;
 
(5)	 Substantially affects public health;
 
(6)	 Involves substantial secondary impacts, such as
population changes or effects on public facilities;
 
(7)	 Involves a substantial degradation of environmental
quality;
 
(8)	 Is individually limited but cumulatively has
considerable effect upon the environment or involves a
commitment for larger actions;
 
(9)	 Substantially affects a rare, threatened, or
endangered species, or its habitat;
 
(10)	 Detrimentally affects air or water quality or ambient
noise levels;
 
(11)	 Affects or is likely to suffer damage by being located
in an environmentally sensitive area such as a flood
plain, tsunami zone, beach, erosion-prone area,
geologically hazardous land, estuary, fresh water, or
coastal waters;
 
(12)	 Substantially affects scenic vistas and viewplanes
identified in county or state plans or studies; or,
 
(13)	 Requires substantial energy consumption.
 
HAR § 11–200–12(b).
 
The University determined the Management Plan would not
 
have a significant impact on the environment and published the
 
Negative Declaration. Kilakila contends the Final EA for the
 Management Plan was deficient, and an EIS was required, because
 the Final EA failed to consider secondary and cumulative visual,
 noise, and cultural impacts.
 
HRS Chapter 343 provides for judicial review at various 
stages of the process: (1) when no EA is prepared, (2) when an agency determines that an EIS will or will not be required, as here, and (3) when an EIS is accepted. See HRS § 343–7 (2010 
Repl.). The reviewing court must determine whether the agency complied with HRS Chapter 343 and HAR 11-200 as a matter of law. See Sierra Club, 115 Hawai
'i at 317-18, 167 P.3d 292, 310-11. 
HRS § 343-5(c) affords agencies discretion to determine if a significant impact is likely, and HAR § 11-200-12 requires the agency to consider certain effects and criteria when making that 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
determination. See § 343-5(c) and HAR § 11-200-12. 
Consequently, we review the Negative Declaration to determine
 
whether the University followed the proper procedures and
 
9
considered HAR § 11-200-12  when it made the Negative
Declaration.
 
B. The merits of Kilakila's challenge
 
Kilakila contends the circuit court erred in concluding
 
that on summary judgment the University's Negative Declaration
 complied with HRS Chapter 343. Kilakila's argument is composed
 of two subparts: (1) the University failed to consider HAR 11­200-12, specifically regarding secondary and cumulative effects
 of the Management Plan, and (2) the circuit court erred by
 limiting discovery.
1. The circuit court did not err by concluding the
Management Plan's EA complied with HRS Chapter 343 and that an
EIS was not required as a matter of law.
 
Kilakila contends the University's Negative Declaration
 
did not consider the appropriate environmental factors because:
 
(1) the Telescope Project, the development of which is
 facilitated by the Management Plan, is a secondary impact of the
 Management Plan, (2) the Telescope Project's EIS concluded that
 visual and noise impacts of the Telescope Project would likely
 
10
affect cultural resources adversely,  and as a result, (3) theUniversity's determination that the Management Plan would not have a significant impact on the environment indicates the University failed to consider HAR § 11-200-12. 
Analogous 
challenges have been addressed by the Hawai 'i Supreme Court in 
Molokai Homesteaders, Kepo 'o, and Sierra Club. 
In Molokai Homesteaders, a private developer sought to
 
lease space in a county water distribution system. See Molokai
 
Homesteaders, 63 Haw. at 456-57, 629 P.2d at 1138. The Board in
 
9
 The University contends Kilakila "did not dispute below that the
proper significance criteria was applied." However, Kilakila's first amended
complaint alleges the University failed to consider impacts mandated by HAR
11-200-12 ("signifigance criteria").
 
10
 Kilakila's argument on this point conflates the Telescope
Project's EIS findings of "major" with "significant," and mischaracterizes the
Management Plan's EA discussion of public comments as environmental impact
conclusions that contradict the Negative Declaration.
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Molokai Homesteaders  determined the proposed action would not
 
have a significant effect on the environment, issued a negative
 
declaration, and approved the action. Id. This approval
 
predated the enactment of HRS Chapter 343. The Board issued the
 Negative Declaration under the Executive Order of August 23, 1971
 § 1(b), which mandated environmental impact statements for all
 "major State actions or projects utilizing State funds and/or
 State lands, that significantly affect the quality of the human
 and natural environment . . . ." Molokai Homesteaders, 63 Haw.
 
at 457, n.6, 629 P.2d at 1138, n.6. In dicta, the Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court explained that under HRS Chapter 343, had it
 applied, the proposed action was one where a significant effect
 was indeed likely because it facilitated the development of a
 large resort complex and likely involved the irrevocable
 commitment of natural resources:
 
We entertain no doubt that the pertinent statutory
provisions would mandate the preparation of an EIS if [the
developer's] application for "rental of space" in the
System's facilities were presented to the Board now. A
 proposal whose approval would facilitate the development of
a large resort complex in a previously unpopulated area
through the use of the Molokai Irrigation System's pipeline,
allow water to be transported from its source to another
area, and cause a rise in the salinity of the system's
irrigation water would be within the purview of activities
covered by [HRS] Chapter 343. The use of a government
pipeline, the implicit commitment of prime natural resources
to a particular purpose, perhaps irrevocably, and the
substantial social and economic consequences of the
governmental approval of the proposal would dictate the
preparation of an EIS.
 
Id., 63 Haw. at 466-67, 629 P.2d at 1144 (footnote omitted.)
 
Kepo'o also addressed the question of whether a 
proposed action was likely to have a significant impact and
 
require an EIS. Kepo'o, 106 Hawai 'i at 289-90, 103 P.3d at 
958-59. Kepo'o concluded that because the proposed action 
involved an irrevocable commitment of natural resources, an EIS
 was required:
 
The EA in the present case indicates that the proposed power
plant would essentially commit 86,000 gallons of fuel to
plant operations per day, withdraw 10.4 million gallons of
groundwater per day, and discharge hundreds of tons of air
pollutants into the atmosphere each year, exceeding
significance levels under the Prevention of Significant
Deterioration program. Although [the Plaintiffs] maintain
that numerous "undisputed facts" show that the power plant
"may have a significant effect on the environment," the
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
aforementioned facts meet the definition of "significant
effect." As defined in HRS § 343-2, "significant effect"
includes irrevocable commitment of natural resources. The
 burning of thousands of gallons of fuel and the withdrawal
of millions of gallons of groundwater on a daily basis will
"likely" cause such irrevocable commitment. Therefore, the
preparation of an EIS was required pursuant to both the
common meaning of "may" and the statutory definition of
"significant effect."•
 
The power plant also involves effects that are similar to
the effects of the proposed project in Molokai Homesteaders. 
In addition to the substantial fuel consumption and
withdrawal of groundwater, the proposed plant would increase
the salinity of the groundwater (because of the re-injection
of water with higher salinity levels into the injections
wells), bring oil by sea to Kawaihae Harbor, and pump the
oil through pipes running under the State highway to the
plant. These aspects of the power plant mirror the effects
posed by the use of the transmission facilities of the
Molokai Irrigation System, a project that would have
necessitated an EIS.
 
Finally, as the court observed, an EIS was mandated by the
pre-1996 rule for "significance criteria."• Even though the
"substantial energy consumption"•category did not exist when
Chairperson Drake issued the negative declaration in 1993,
the proposed project triggered at least one other category
that was in existence in 1993, namely that it "[i]nvolves an
irrevocable commitment to loss or destruction of any natural
or cultural resource."• HAR § 11-200-12(b). As previously
discussed, the withdrawal of 10.4 million gallons of
groundwater and the burning of 86,000 gallons of fuel on a
daily basis "[i]nvolves an irrevocable commitment to loss or
destruction of" natural resources. Thus, an EIS was
required pursuant to HRS § 343-5(c) and under both the pre­and post-1996 versions of the significance criteria
enumerated in HAR § 11-200-12(b).
 
Id. (citation omitted).
 
Molokai Homesteaders and Kepo 'o essentially reasoned 
that the agency determining that a significant impact was not
 
likely could not have considered the appropriate factors since
 the proposed actions involved irrevocable commitments of natural
 resources. The proposed action in both cases, the withdrawal and
 consumption of large amounts of water, itself involved a
 commitment of natural resources. Whether the Management Plan in
 this case involves a similar commitment is less clear.
11 At its
 
11
 The Telescope Project, on the other hand, clearly involves a
commitment of natural resources, to wit, the portion of unimpeded view-plane
lost by constructing a multi-story building. The Management Plan concluded:
"While a separate analysis of land use resources for the proposed [Telescope
Project] describes specific impacts, it can be stated that this proposed
project would be an incremental addition of approximately 4 percent to the use
of Conservation District lands within HO and only a fraction of a percent of
the total resource subzone." An EIS was completed for the Telescope Project.
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
heart, the Management Plan exists to conserve resources rather
 
than commit them to a specific purpose. However, the Management
 Plan's EA appears to suggest the routine management of the
 Observatory Site involves some commitment of cultural resources: 
There is no way to fully quantify the cumulative effects of
past and ongoing action on traditional cultural practicesand spiritual values. In consideration of these past andpresent actions, foreseeable future actions would result inreadily detectable, localized effects, with additionalconsequences to traditional cultural practitioners withingreater Hawai' i. The practices and procedures in the
[Management Plan] for cultural preservation are intended tobe helpful and to reduce adverse impacts from routinemanagement of the site. However, the cumulative impact ofthe [Management Plan], along with past and ongoing actionswould still be adverse, but less than significant. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Molokai Homesteaders and Kepo 'o found the agency failed 
to take a hard look at the appropriate environmental 
considerations where the proposed action created a new, or additional, commitment of natural resources. Rather than making additional commitments of natural resources, the Management Plan would mitigate existing commitments. 
Much of Kilakila's challenge of the Management Plan's 
Final EA is founded not on the contention the Management Plan will likely have a significant impact on the environment, but is instead founded on the contention the Telescope Project, as a secondary effect of the Management Plan, has a significant impact on the environment. To this end, Kilakila relies heavily on Sierra Club. Sierra Club differs from Molokai Homesteaders and 
Kepo
'o because the petitioner in Sierra Club challenged an 
agency's determination that a proposed action was exempt from the EA requirement, and not a determination that an EIS was not required. See Sierra Club. However, an agency making an 
exemption determination "must look beyond an action's facial compliance with an exemption class, and also determine that the activity will probably not have a significant effect." Id., 115 
Hawai
'i at 340, 167 P.3d at 333 (emphasis added). 
In Sierra Club, the Department of Transportation (DOT)
 
proposed harbor improvements and the petitioner contended the
 agency failed to consider secondary impacts resulting from
 activity facilitated by the harbor improvements: 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The exemption letter does not consider whether Superferry
operation independent of the harbor will have any
significant effect on the environment. Rather, DOT appears
to studiously restrict its consideration of environmental
impact to the physical harbor improvements themselves.
Although DOT does say that "[t]he installation and result of
the minor improvements noted will not produce or create any
adverse air quality, noise or water quality impact," which
could imply a reference to the Superferry itself, as the
"result" of the harbor improvements, this statement is
oblique and does not indicate that secondary impacts were
considered.
 
Id., 115 Hawai 'i at 341-342, 167 P.3d at 334-335 (citation and 
emphasis omitted). Consequently, Sierra Club held:
 
Stated simply, the record in this case shows that DOT didnot consider whether its facilitation of the [Hawai' i]
Superferry Project will probably have minimal or nosignificant impacts, both primary and secondary, on theenvironment. Therefore, based on this record, we can onlyconclude that DOT's determination that the improvements toKahului Harbor are exempt from the requirements of [Hawai' i 
Environmental Policy Act] was erroneous as a matter of law.The exemption being invalid, the EA requirement of HRS§ 343–5 is applicable. 
Id., 115 Hawai 'i at 342, 167 P.3d at 335. 
Unlike Sierra Club, the action facilitated by the
 
Management Plan, the Telescope Project, had both a final EIS and
 
supplemental cultural impact statement. Additionally, any future
 developments facilitated by the Management Plan would trigger an
 EA under § 343-5 (a)(2) (use of land in conservation district). 
And, the Management Plan's EA repeatedly considered the Telescope
 Project:
 
The two reasonably known future projects at [the Observatory
Site] are the construction of the minor SLR 2000 facility
located behind the southwest side of the Mees facility and
the proposed [Telescope Project]. SLR 2000 would be located
 on a small site less than 900 square feet and would not
alter land use or existing activities. The construction of
 the proposed [Telescope Project] would increase the level of
existing telescope activities. While a separate analysis of
land use resources for the proposed [Telescope Project]
describes specific impacts, it can be stated that this
proposed project would be an incremental addition of
approximately 4 percent to the use of Conservation District
lands within [the Observatory Site] and only a fraction of a
percent of the total resource subzone. In consideration of
these factors, if construction is approved, the proposed
[Telescope Project] is anticipated to result in less than
significant cumulative impacts on land use.
 
. . . .
 There is no way to fully quantify the cumulative effects of
past and ongoing action on traditional cultural practices
and spiritual values. In consideration of these past and
present actions, foreseeable future actions would result in
 
16
         FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
readily detectable, localized effects, with additional
consequences to traditional cultural practitioners withingreater Hawai' i. The practices and procedures in the
[Management Plan] for cultural preservation are intended tobe helpful and to reduce adverse impacts from routinemanagement of the site. However, the cumulative impact ofthe [Management Plan], along with past and ongoing actionswould still be adverse, but less than significant. 
Individual projects that may have the potential for
significant impacts on cultural resources would need to be
analyzed to quantify those impacts, and to avoid, minimize,
and mitigate those impacts where possible. For projects
proposed or funded by Federal agencies, such as the proposed
[Telescope Project], the Section 106 process discussed in
Section 3.2.2-Factors Considered for Impacts Analysis is
required.
 
. . . .
 New impacts from projects Listed in Table 4-1 (in
particular, any future excavation) could affect
archeological resources at [the Observatory Site]. Possible
future effects and measures to mitigate them would be
considered in the environmental review documents completed
for specific projects, such as SLR 2000 and the proposed
[Telescope Project]. Combined impacts may affect known (but
not located) traditional cultural properties or areas of
tradition al importance. However, implementation of the
[Management Plan] for [the Observatory Site] would not
result in significant cumulative impacts on those resources.
 
Impacts on cultural resources resulting from implementation
of the [Management Plan] are expected to be less than
significant. Therefore it would not substantially contribute
to the adverse impacts from past, present, and reasonably
foreseeable future activities on cultural resources.
 
. . . .
 The implementation of the [Management Plan] would result in
a beneficial impact on visual resources. However, past and
ongoing actions at [the Observatory Site] have had less than
significant adverse impacts on visual resources and the
existing visual character, or quality of the site and its
surroundings and light or glare. The implementation of
requirements in Section 3.5.4-Facility Design Criteria of
the MP are intended to minimize such visual impacts, so that
the impacts would continue to be less than significant on
visual resources. The cumulative impact from past, present,
and known foreseeable future actions in addition to
 implementation of the [Management Plan] would still be less
than significant.
 
Future projects could involve impacts similar to or greater
than current impacts of [the Observatory Site] on visual
resources. The proposed [Telescope Project] is a project
that would have adverse impacts on visual resources beyond
those addressed in the [Management Plan], and those have
been analyzed elsewhere ([Telescope Project Final EIS]
2009).
 
* * *
 
The current ambient noise level within [the Observatory
Site] is low, but some users of Haleakala  may be
particularly noise sensitive. In particular, cultural
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
practitioners within the immediate vicinity of a noise
source could be disturbed. Most disturbances are low level
 discrete events rather than a substantial increase in the
 overall ambient noise level. In general, current noise
levels are compatible with existing activities.
 
Reasonably foreseeable future actions within [the
Observatory Site] would require analysis of noise impacts
from construction and operations. Section
3.5.3.2-Construction Practices of the [Management Plan]
provide requirements for avoiding, minimizing and mitigating
noise from potential future construction activities. Future
 potential projects could result in construction noise that
has an adverse impact on cultural resources and on visitors
to the summit area, whose expectations of a natural
soundscape may not be met. These projects would require
noise analysis to evaluate the cumulative contribution to
noise from past and present [Observatory Site] activities.
 
The implementation of the [Management Plan] would have some
beneficial impacts to baseline noise levels from
implementation of noise reduction requirements for any
construction activity. Therefore, overall, the cumulative
impacts of past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future
actions at [the Observatory Site], combined with the
requirements of the [Management Plan] for noise management,
would be less than significant.
 
This record does not show that the University failed to follow
 
the proper procedures or failed to consider § 11-200-12 when it
 made the Negative Declaration for the Management Plan. As such,
 the circuit court did not err by granting summary judgment in
 favor of the University on Count 1.
2. The circuit court did not err by granting the

University's Protective Order.
 
HRCP Rule 26(c) provides that the court may, for good
 
cause shown, "make any order which justice requires to protect a
 party or person from annoyance, embarrassment, oppression, or
 undue burden or expense, including . . . that the . . . discovery
 not be had[.]" The University moved for a protective order
 barring discovery requests served by Kilakila under HRCP Rule
 26(c), contending the University's compliance with HRS Chapter
 343 was a question of law, not fact, and the circuit court's
 review was limited to the agency's administrative record. The
 circuit court, "having reviewed [the University's] Motion for
 Protective Order, [DLNR's] substantive joinder therein, the
 memoranda, declarations and reply in support thereof and
 opposition thereto, and the files and records herein, and for
 good cause shown," granted the motion.
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Kilakila contends the circuit court's review is not 
limited to the administrative record since Kepo 'o involved a 
challenge of a negative declaration. The Hawai 'i Supreme Court's 
statement that "summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law," indicated the circuit court's review was not limited to the administrative record. Kepo
'o, 106 
Hawai'i at 287, 103 P.3d at 956 (internal quotation marks, 
citations omitted and emphasis added). Kepo'o merely cited the 
standard of review for summary judgment, quoting Heatherly v. Hilton Hawaiian Village Joint Venture, 78 Hawai
'i 351, 353, 893 
P.2d 779, 781 (1995), amended on reconsideration in part by 78 Hawai
'i 474, 896 P.2d 930 (1995), a case where a protective order 
barring discovery was not at issue. 
Kilakila also maintains that challenges to compliance 
with HRS Chapter 343 are not restricted to an administrative record since the circuit court and Hawai
'i Supreme Court in Unite 
Here! Local 5 v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 123 Hawai 'i 150, 231 
P.3d 423 (2010) considered evidence outside the administrative record. Unite Here! is inapposite because it involved a dispute 
over whether a supplemental EIS was required. See Unite Here!, 
123 Hawai
'i at 154, 231 P.3d at 427. The question presented in 
Unite Here! involved examination of whether environmental impacts had changed in the time since the original EIS was prepared and was not limited to a question of law. See id. 
Here, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion by
 
granting the Protective Order. Whether the Management Plan's EA
 and its Negative Declaration complied with HRS Chapter 343 is a
 question of law that does not require factual determinations
 beyond the administrative record. See generally Wakabayashi v.
 
Hertz Corp., 66 Haw. 265, 275, 660 P.2d 1309, 1315 (1983) (the
 trial court possesses considerable discretion in permitting
 discovery).
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3. Counts 2, 3 and 4 are moot.
 
In Count 2, Kilakila contended the Board violated HAR 
§ 13-1-28, et seq. and HRS § 91-9, et seq. by failing to conduct 
a contested case hearing before the Board's 2010 Approval. Count 3 contended the Board's 2010 Approval was invalid because construction of the Telescope Project was contrary to the purpose of the conservation district. Count 4 contended the Board's 2010 Approval violated HAR Chapter 13-5 because the UH Appellees failed to meet the criteria of HAR § 13-5-30(c) (1994). Counts 2, 3 and 4 are moot because relief had already been granted by 
'O 
Haleakal a, which remanded the controversy surrounding the Board's 
2010 Approval of the Telescope Project to the circuit court on December 13, 2013. See supra, I.C.; see also Wong v. Bd. of 
Regents, University of Hawai
'i, 62 Haw. 391, 394-95, 616 P.2d 
201, 203-04 (1980) (issue is moot if the two conditions for justiciability relevant on appeal -- adverse interest and effective remedy -- have been compromised). Consequently, the appeal from the circuit court's denial of Kilakila's motion to reconsider the dismissal of counts 2, 3 and 4 is also moot. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Accordingly, the following Judgment and Orders entered
 
in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit are affirmed:
 
1)
 
the February 20, 2013 "Final Judgment," to the
 
extent consistent with this opinion;
 
2) 
the March 14, 2011 "Order Granting Defendants 
University of Hawai 'i and [Thomas M. Apple's] Motion for 
Protective Order [Filed January 18, 2011]"; and 
3) 
the January 17, 2013 "Order (1) Granting Defendants 
University of Hawai 'i and [Thomas M. Apple's] Motion for Summary 
Judgment as to Count 1 of Plaintiff's First Amended Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief; (2) Granting Defendants Board of Land and Natural Resources, Department of Land and Natural Resources, and William Aila's Motion for Summary Judgment as to Count 1 of Plaintiff's First Amended Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief [Filed December 13, 2010]; (3) Granting Defendants University of Hawai
'i and [Thomas M. Apple's] Joinder 
in Defendants Board of Land and Natural Resources, Department of 
20

  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Land and Natural Resources, and William Aila's Motion for Summary
 
Judgment as to Count 1 of Plaintiff's First Amended Complaint for 
Declaratory and Injunctive Relief [Filed December 13, 2010]; and
 (4) Denying Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment as to Count
 1."
 
David Kimo Frankel 
Sharla Ann Manley(Camille K. Kalama with them on thebriefs)(Native Hawaiian Legal Corporation)for Plaintiff/Appellant-AppellantKilakila 
'O Haleakal a. 
Lisa Woods Munger
Lisa A. Bail
 Adam K. Robinson
 Christine A. Terada
 (Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel)
and 
Darolyn H. Lendio,University General Counsel, andBruce Y. Matsui (Office of the General Counsel)with them on the brief for Defendant/Appellee-AppelleeUniversity of Hawai
'i, and Thomas M.
Apple, in his official capacity asChancellor of the University ofHawai
'i at Manoa. 
Julie H. China,
Deputy Attorney General,
(Donna H. Kalama, Deputy Attorney
General, with her on the brief) for
 Defendant/Appellee-Appellee
Board of Land and Natural Resources,
William Aila, in his capacity as the
Interim Chairperson of the Board of
Land and Natural Resources; and
Department of Land and Natural
Resources.
 
21
 