NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000422
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ZAK K. SHIMOSE, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
HAWAI'I HEALTH SYSTEMS CORPORATION
 
DBA HILO MEDICAL CENTER, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-383)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Pro se Plaintiff-Appellant Zak K. Shimose (Shimose)
 
appeals from the April 25, 2012 Final Judgment entered in the
 
1
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit  (circuit court) in favor of
Defendant-Appellee Hawai 'i Health Systems Corporation (HHSC) dba 
Hilo Medical Center (HMC) (collectively HHSC/HMC). The Final Judgment was entered pursuant to the March 28, 2012 "Order 
Denying Plaintiffs Motion For Summary Judgment Filed On December 
21, 2011; And Granting Defendants Motion For Summary Judgment 
Filed On December 22, 2011" (Summary Judgment Order). 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude
 
Shimose's appeal is without merit.
 
We review the circuit court's Summary Judgment Order 
granting HHSC/HMC's motion for summary judgment, to which Shimose 
was the non-moving party before reviewing its denial of Shimose's 
own motion for summary judgment. "Summary judgment is 
appropriate if the pleadings, depositions, answers to 
interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the 
affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any 
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment 
as a matter of law." Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 
117 Hawai 'i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008). 
The circuit court did not err in denying Shimose's 
constitutional claim to a "property interest" in the right "to be considered for employment[,]" because Shimose had not established 
a legitimate claim of entitlement to the position. A "legitimate 
claim of entitlement" must be based on more than the Hawai
'i 
Constitution, which does not itself create the requisite "property interest" to support a prospective employee's 
constitutional due process claim. See Abramson v. Bd. of 
Regents, Univ. of Hawai
'i, 56 Haw. 680, 693-94, 548 P.2d 253, 262 
(1976) ("it is clear that the [Hawai 'i] Constitution does not 
create the requisite property interest or expectancy of employment . . . and that the interests which procedural due 
process protects stem from independent sources."). 
The circuit court did not err when it concluded HHSC's
 
inquiry into Shimose's criminal conviction record did not violate
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 378-2 (Supp. 2012) because his
 
criminal record "bears a rational relationship to the duties and
 
responsibilities of the [HMC's radiologic technician position]"
 
so as to fall within provisions for conviction record inquiries
 
under HRS § 378-2.5 (Supp. 2012).
 
Shimose contends HRS § 378-2.5(c) restricted HHSC/HMC
 
from inquiring into his most recent ten year criminal history. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
However, HHSC/HMC is exempt from this limitation under HRS § 378­
2.5(d), which provides exemptions for state agencies acting
 
pursuant to HRS §§ 78-2.7 (2003) and 831-3.1 (Supp. 2012). 
Under HRS §§ 378-2.5 and 78-2.7 respectively, state 
agencies may deny employment that has a "rational relationship" 
to an applicant's conviction history or if the applicant's 
criminal conviction "poses a risk to the health, safety, or well­
being of children or dependent adults[.]" Both HHSC and HMC are 
"state agencies" within the meaning of HRS § 378-2.5. See HRS 
§ 323F-2(a) (2010 Repl.). HMC is a regional division of HHSC and a facility within HHSC's east Hawai
'i regional health care 
system. HRS § 323F-2(b)(4). 
In its October 16, 2008 response to Shimose's Charge of 
Discrimination filed with Hawai 'i Civil Rights Commission, 
HHSC/HMC responded: "[m]ore likely than not, [Shimose] would be 
working in close proximity of patients and residents that could 
have an adverse impact on the safety and well-being of these 
individuals. Therefore, [Shimose] was disqualified from 
employment consideration at HMC . . . ." See HRS § 78-2.7(c)(1). 
During his March 7, 2011 deposition, Shimose acknowledged that HMC radiologic technician work with infants, "kids," adults, 
geriatrics, and disable patients. HMC's Facility Imaging 
Director, Reynold Cabarloc, also declared that HMC radiologic 
technologists work with vulnerable population groups such as 
children, geriatrics, and disabled patients. Accordingly, 
because the radiologic technician position would bring him in 
contact with children and dependent adults and would pose a risk 
to these populations, HHSC was permitted to deny Shimose's 
application for employment upon finding he had been convicted for 
possession with intent to distribute. See HRS § 78-2.7(c)(1). 
Shimose contends the circuit court erred by "find[ing]
 
that [Shimose's] criminal history bears a rational relationship
 
to potential employment as a radtech at HMC" and, thereby finding 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 378-2.5 permitted HHSC to inquire into his criminal
 
convictions and decline his application for employment. 
HMC's radiologic technicians have access to: (1) a
 
"crash cart" containing 11 different drugs, syringes and needles
 
(2) patient charts, which disclose drugs patients are taking (3)
 
a drug reaction box containing 16 different drugs, syringes, and
 
needles; and (4) "virtually all areas of the hospital, many areas
 
of which contain storage supplies of various drugs." HHSC argued
 
Shimose's prior history of possession with intent to distribute
 
crystal methamphetamine is rationally related to access to drugs
 
and related materials and proposed a scenario in which a
 
radiologic technician would have opportunities to take medication
 
from vulnerable patients. Under its ordinary meaning, a
 
"rational relationship" exists between a demonstrated capacity to
 
possess, and intend to distribute, controlled substances and
 
risks posed by allowing access to controlled substances.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the April 25, 2012 Final
 
Judgment entered in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
 pursuant to the March 28, 2012 "Order Denying Plaintiffs Motion
 
For Summary Judgment Filed On December 21, 2011; And Granting
 
Defendants Motion For Summary Judgment Filed On December 22,
 
2011" is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 20, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Zak K. Shimose 
Plaintiff-Appellant pro se. Presiding Judge 
Sarah O. WangDarin R. Leong(Marr Jones & Wang)for Defendant-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
4
 