NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000959 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
RANDY JOHN, ALSO KNOWN AS WELLISON SIGHRA, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CRIMINAL NO. 1CPC-17-0000959) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Randy John, aka Wellison Sighra 
(John), appeals from the November 28, 2018 Judgment of Conviction 
and Probation Sentence; Notice of Entry (Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1   
John was charged via Felony Information and Non-Felony 
Complaint with Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, in 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1243 (2014) 
(Count 1),2 and Theft in the Fourth Degree, in violation of HRS 
1 The Honorable Fa#auuga L. To #oto #o presided. 
2 HRS § 712-1243 provides: 
§ 712-1243 Promoting a dangerous drug in the third
degree. (1) A person commits the offense of promoting a
dangerous drug in the third degree if the person knowingly
possesses any dangerous drug in any amount. 
(continued...) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 708-833(1) (Supp. 2019) (Count 2). John filed a motion to 
dismiss Count 1 as de minimis. After a hearing held on July 26, 
2018, the Circuit Court denied John's motion, and on March 6, 2019, the Circuit Court entered Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law [(COLs)], and Order Denying Defendant's Motion to Dismiss 
Felony Information (Order Denying Dismissal).  Thereafter, John pleaded no contest to the charged offenses (reserving his right 
to appeal the Order Denying Dismissal), was sentenced, and timely filed a notice of appeal. 
John raises two, related, points of error on appeal, 
contending that the Circuit Court erred by not applying the correct legal standard when it entered the Order Denying Dismissal, and abused its discretion by not applying the appropriate facts adduced at the hearing that indicated that the offense charged in Count 1 was de minimis. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve John's points of error as follows: 
John primarily contends, citing HRS § 702-236(1)(b) 
(2014),
3 that the Circuit Court used the wrong legal standard 
2(...continued)
(2) Promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree is
a class C felony. 
3 HRS § 702-236 provides, in part: 
§ 702-236 De minimis infractions.  (1) The court may
dismiss a prosecution if, having regard to the nature of the
conduct alleged and the nature of the attendantcircumstances, it finds that the defendant's conduct:
(a) Was within a customary license or tolerance,
which was not expressly refused by the person
(continued...) 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
because it failed to examine whether the possession of 0.003 
grams of a substance containing cocaine "did not actually cause or threaten the harm or evil sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense or did so only to an extent too trivial to warrant the condemnation of conviction." 
In State v. Melendez, 146 Hawai#i 391, 395-97, 463 P.3d 
1048, 1052-54 (2020), the Hawai# i Supreme Court recently 
reiterated that a defendant need not prove that possessed drugs are incapable of producing any pharmacological or physical effect, stating, inter alia: 
This court has thus consistently held over the past
forty years that when the amount of drugs possessed is
unusable, the violation of HRS § 712-1243 does not cause orthreaten the harm or evil sought to be prevented by the lawdefining the offense, and a de minimis dismissal would bewarranted in such circumstances. Although we have declinedto read a usable quantity standard into HRS § 712-1243, itis clear that if the amount possessed is so minuscule thatit cannot be used in such a way as to have any discernibleeffect on the human body, it follows that the drug cannotlead to abuse, social harm, or property and violent crimes,i.e., the harm sought to be prevented by HRS § 712-1243.Under such circumstances, dismissal under HRS § 702-236 iswarranted. 
Hence, . . . a defendant's burden on a de minimis
motion for an HRS § 712-1243 violation is not tospecifically prove that the drugs possessed could not have apharmacological or physiological effect, but to place all ofthe relevant attendant circumstances before the trial court to establish why dismissal is warranted in light of thosecircumstances. When the defendant proves the amount ofdrugs possessed is incapable of producing a pharmacologicaleffect, it is clear the amount is not usable or saleable.In such cases, in the absence of other circumstancesindicating the violation actually threatened the harm sought 
3(...continued) 
whose interest was infringed and which is notinconsistent with the purpose of the lawdefining the offense; or
(b) Did not actually cause or threaten the harm or
evil sought to be prevented by the law definingthe offense or did so only to an extent tootrivial to warrant the condemnation of conviction; or
(c) Presents such other extenuations that it cannot 
reasonably be regarded as envisaged by thelegislature in forbidding the offense. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to be prevented by HRS § 712-1243, de minimis dismissal will
be warranted. But proving that the possessed drugs couldnot have a pharmacological effect is not a conditionprecedent for de minimis dismissal of a possessory drugviolation. Our decisions firmly establish that if the
amount of drugs possessed is not usable or saleable, theviolation does not engender the harms sought to be preventedby HRS § 712-1243 absent demonstrable evidence to thecontrary. In sum, if the possessed drugs are neither usablenor saleable, and the attendant circumstances do nototherwise demonstrate the defendant's violation caused the harm HRS § 712-1243 seeks to prevent, de minimis dismissalis warranted. 
Id. at 396-97, 463 P.3d at 1053-54 (emphasis added; citations, 
internal quotation marks, and original ellipsis omitted). 
Here, in its COLs, the Circuit Court acknowledged that 
John was asserting the 0.003 grams of a substance, containing cocaine, was a de minimis amount that was neither usable nor saleable. Nevertheless, the Circuit Court did not conclude, one way or the other, whether the amount of drugs possessed was usable or saleable, as discussed in Melendez. Instead, the Circuit Court concluded, inter alia, that:  (1) John "has not 
provided any evidence of the individualized variables about him that would enable the court to determine whether the amount of cocaine in this case was sufficient to produce a pharmacological action or physiological effect;" and (2) John "was in possession of 0.003 grams of a substance containing cocaine which was both visible and capable of analysis." While the Circuit Circuit's COLs were in part reflective of the legal standards set out in Melendez and the cases it followed, "visible and capable of analysis" is not a standard comparable to "usable and saleable," and the supreme court expressly stated that "proving that the possessed drugs could not have a pharmacological effect is not a 
4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
condition precedent for de minimis dismissal of a possessory drug 
violation." Melendez
, 146 Hawaii # at 397, 463 P.3d at 1054. 
Unlike in 
Melendez, where in the same courthouse, for a 
hearing held two months earlier than the hearing in this case, the State stipulated that 0.005 grams of a substance containing cocaine was not usable and saleable,
4 here there is no 
stipulation that 0.003 grams of a substance containing cocaine – which the expert witness described as barely visible, "like a spec of -- more than a spec of dust, a couple of particles maybe" – is not usable and saleable. We nevertheless conclude that the Circuit Court erred in not reaching the conclusion that the 0.003 grams of substance possessed by John was not usable and saleable, based on the record in this case and the case law in this jurisdiction. 
As firmly held in Melendez, "if the amount of drugs 
possessed is not usable or saleable, the violation does not engender the harms sought to be prevented by HRS § 712-1243 absent demonstrable evidence to the contrary." Id. (citations omitted). Here, the attendant circumstances of this incident included John having shoplifted two cans of Libby's Vienna Sausage and a multipack of Spam, with a total value of $11.37.
5 
While theft at any level constitutes criminal conduct and a property crime, theft of roughly eleven dollars worth of canned meat appears equally indicative of poverty, hunger and/or 
4 Melendez , 146 Hawai #i at 397, 463 P.3d at 1054. 
5 John also had no form of identification and identified himself to 
the arresting officer as Wellison Sighra. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
homelessness. We recognize that criminality and substance abuse 
may in some instances be associated with these conditions as well, but we nevertheless conclude that none of the attendant circumstances in this case undermine a conclusion that John's possession of an unusable and unsaleable amount of cocaine did not threaten or cause the harm sought to be prevented by HRS § 712-1243. See generally Melendez, 146 
Hawai#i at 398, 463 P.3d 
at 1055. Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in failing to determine that John's possession of 0.003 grams of a substance containing cocaine constituted a de minimis infraction pursuant to HRS § 702-236. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's November 28, 
2018 Judgment is vacated in part, as to Count 1, and affirmed in part, as to Count 2. This case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further proceedings. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai#i, December 28, 2020. 
On the briefs: Dana S. Ishibashi, 
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Stephen K. Tsushima, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu, for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
6 