 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000572
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JOEL LONZAGA, Defendant-Appellant

 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 14-1-0833)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Joel Lonzaga (Lonzaga) appeals from
 
the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) filed July 15,
 
2015, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1
  
Following a jury trial, Lonzaga was convicted of Assault in the
 
First Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
2
§ 707-710 (2014)  (Count 1), Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided. 
2
 HRS § 707-710 provides:
 
§ 707-710 Assault in the first degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of assault in the first degree if the
person intentionally or knowingly causes serious bodily
injury to another person.
(2)
 Assault in the first degree is a class B felony.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3
Third Degree, in violation of HRS § 712-1243 (2014)  (Count 2),
 
and Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia, in violation of HRS

 
4
§ 329-43.5(a) (2010)  (Count 3). Lonzaga was sentenced to
 
concurrent five-year terms of imprisonment as to Counts 2 and 3,
 
and a ten-year term of imprisonment as to Count 1, to be served
 consecutively to the terms imposed for Counts 2 and 3.
 I. BACKGROUND

 
On May 19, 2014, Plaintiff-Appellee the State of
 
Hawai'i (State) filed a Complaint against Lonzaga for: Attempted 
Murder in the Second Degree in violation of HRS §§ 705-500
 (2014), 707-701.5 (2014), and 706-656 (2014); Promoting a
 Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree; and Unlawful Use of Drug
 Paraphernalia (Complaint). 
The case proceeded to trial on April 27, 2015. The
 
State elicited testimony from Tracy Carroll (  Carroll), Elizabeth
 
Lonzaga (Elizabeth), Rocky Kahanu (Kahanu), Erica Garcia, M.D.
 
3 HRS § 712-1243 provides: 
§ 712-1243 Promoting a dangerous drug in the third
degree.  (1) A person commits the offense of promoting a
dangerous drug in the third degree if the person knowingly
possesses any dangerous drug in any amount.
(2) Promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree is
a class C felony.
 
4 HRS § 329-43.5(a) provides: 
§ 329-43.5 Prohibited acts related to drug
paraphernalia. (a) It is unlawful for any person to use, or
to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of this chapter. Any person who
violates this section is guilty of a class C felony and upon
conviction may be imprisoned pursuant to section 706-660
and, if appropriate as provided in section 706-641, fined
pursuant to section 706-640.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(Dr. Garcia), Edi Schadwill (Schadwill), Honolulu Police
 
Department (HPD) Officer Tuk Wright (Officer Wright), HPD
 Detective Dru Akagi (Detective Akagi), and Michael Pharaon, M.D.
 (Dr. Pharaon).
 
Carroll, the complainant, testified that he first met
 
Lonzaga at a tavern in Kaneohe in April 2014. Carroll and
 
Lonzaga would socialize, drink beer, and barbeque at Lonzaga's
 mother's house. On the day of the incident, May 7, 2014, Carroll
 testified that Lonzaga called and asked him to "come over and
 drink some beer . . . and talk." After Carroll arrived at the
 house, he drank two beers and observed Lonzaga drink one beer. 
Carroll related that he also smoked methamphetamine with Lonzaga. 
Carroll testified that as he was sitting in a chair on the side
 porch, he "saw a liquid coming over [his] baseball cap." 
Carroll was surprised that Lonzaga had poured gasoline on him. 
Carroll stated, "[w]hy are you fucking pouring gas on me,
 [Lonzaga]?" Carroll related that Lonzaga's mother came outside,
 and told him to leave because Lonzaga had a lighter in his hand. 
Carroll testified that he said "All right, [Lonzaga], I don't
 know what I did to you, but I'm leaving. I don't know what's
 going on." Lonzaga then reached around his mother, and set
 Carroll on fire. Carroll testified that Lonzaga's mother's face
 was the last thing he remembered before waking up at Straub Burn
 Center. 
Elizabeth, Lonzaga's mother, also testified at trial. 
Elizabeth related that Carroll would come to her house to
 barbeque and drink beer. Elizabeth testified that she worked the
 
3
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
graveyard shift from 9:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. at Aloha Gas in
 
Kaneohe. At about 6:00 p.m., as Elizabeth was attempting to
 sleep, she heard Carroll say, "[w]hy did you do that? Why did you
 throw gasoline all over me?" Prior to Carroll's statement,
 Elizabeth related that there was no argument between Lonzaga and
 Carroll. When Elizabeth heard the word "gasoline," she jumped
 out of bed, and ran towards the kitchen door. Once outside,
 Elizabeth saw Carroll "doused with gasoline." As Elizabeth was
 trying to direct Carroll towards the water hose, Lonzaga pushed
 her to the side and "flicked the lighter." Elizabeth testified
 that the lighter was "practically" on Carroll. Elizabeth related
 that after Lonzaga set Carroll on fire, "[Lonzaga] was just
 standing there." Elizabeth then screamed for her nephew, Ernie,
 to help her extinguish the fire. Elizabeth testified that 
Ernie came running down the stairs, pushed my
son on the side. My son fell on the ground. And then
 
I told Ernie to get the water hose ready and I told
[Carroll] to drop and roll, drop and roll. While I
 was rolling his feet up and down, back and forth,
Ernie was with the water hose from the top of his head
to his feet back and forth, back and forth, until the
fire went out. 
After the fire was extinguished, Elizabeth observed 
Lonzaga "running down the street." Elizabeth related that her
 
neighbors, the Kahanus, tried to "chase [Lonzaga] down[.]" 
Kahanu testified that he lived across the street from
 
Lonzaga. On May 7, 2014, at approximately 6:30 p.m., Kahanu
 heard screams coming from Lonzaga's house. Kahanu rushed over to
 Lonzaga's house, and observed "[Lonzaga] and his friend outside.
 And I seen a flame go on him and he's on fire." Kahanu testified
 
that he observed Lonzaga run under the house, and towards an
 
4
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
agricultural farm. Kahanu and his brother (Grayson) chased
 
Lonzaga into the farm area. Kahanu testified that Lonzaga "went
 as far as he could to the back, and then there's a stone wall
 there where you can't really go anywhere else." When Kahanu
 
approached Lonzaga, Lonzaga pulled a knife. Kahanu testified
 
that Lonzaga saw Grayson coming towards them, threw the knife on
 the ground, and started running. While chasing Lonzaga, Kahanu
 observed Lonzaga throw knives and a pipe on the ground. Kahanu
 related that Lonzaga continued to run in the direction of his
 house, and eventually jumped into a stream. Kahanu responded
 affirmatively when the Deputy Prosecuting Attorney (DPA) asked,
 
"Did you tell the detective that [Lonzaga] told you that he was
 
going to die anyway and the guy was trying to kill him?"
 Schadwill testified at trial that Lonzaga was his
 
neighbor. On May 7, 2014, at approximately 6:15 p.m., Schadwill
 was cleaning windows on a van in his driveway. Schadwill said he
 heard people arguing near Lonzaga's house. Schadwill walked
 towards Lonzaga's house, and observed "pushing between" Elizabeth
 and Carroll. Upon his arrival at Lonzaga's house, Schadwill saw
 a man on fire. Schadwill helped extinguish the fire by "patting
 the flames out." Schadwill testified that Lonzaga's mother
 asked "Why, why, why? Why did you do this[,]" and Lonzaga
 responded "He deserved it, and, I don't care." 
Officer Wright testified that, on May 7, 2014, at
 
approximately 6:40 p.m., he was dispatched to Anoi Street in
 Kaneohe to investigate an attempted murder case. Upon his
 
arrival, Officer Wright observed a "bunch of people outside
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pointing towards the canal near the residence." Officer Wright
 
walked around the canal area, and observed a male, later
 identified as Lonzaga. Officer Wright testified that Lonzaga was
 yelling, "I had to do it. He was going to kill -- he was going to
 kill me and my family."
 
Detective Akagi testified that he interviewed Lonzaga
 
on May 8, 2014 at 6:52 p.m. Detective Akagi related that the
 interview was recorded with a digital audio recorder. The State
 introduced a CD containing the audio recording of Detective
 Akagi's interview with Lonzaga. Detective Akagi testified that
 he listened to the audio recording, and related that it was "a
 fair and accurate representation of the actual interview [he] had
 with [Lonzaga.]" 
The audio recording of Detective Akagi's interview was
 
played to the jury. During the interview, Lonzaga stated that he
 was awake for four days prior to the day of the incident. On the
 day of the incident, Lonzaga related that he smoked a half gram
 of methamphetamine, and also drank beer and vodka. Lonzaga
 related that he discovered different names on Carroll's
 identification cards, and bank card. Lonzaga believed that
 Carroll was an undercover police officer, and that "Kailua people
 [were] coming after [him.]" Lonzaga admitted that he poured
 gasoline on Carroll. Lonzaga stated "[Carroll] was kind like
 shocked like what you doing? And I know what I doing. You know
 what you doing?" Lonzaga related that his mother told Carroll to
 leave the house. The following exchange took place:
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Detective Akagi:]  So when you went grab 'em . . . with the
shirt, what were you thinking 'cause you had the lighter in

which hand? 
[Lonzaga:]  No, I never just light automatically light 'em

. . . I was thinking everything, you know. 
. . . . 
[Detective Akagi:]  What you was thinking? 

[Lonzaga:]  You know, should I--should I do it or just, you

know what I mean? . . . He said well, I used to live in
Kailua before, you know what I mean? I said oh, I thought
you said you--you was from Montana? You came down three
months ago? You know what I mean, so all this never match
up. So I'm thinking they sending somebody illegal down here,
too, you know what I mean. So can, you know what I mean, go,
maybe, go back to your real name whatever it is. So I really
wanted for--I had a knife in my pocket. I really wanted for
kill him. I was going kill him. I was going kill him that
way.
 
Detective Akagi asked Lonzaga, "What did you want to
 
happen when you went light 'em . . . on fire?" Lonzaga answered,
 
"it's not about what I wanted to happen . . . It's just more like
 let me teach you one lesson. You don't . . . lie to me, you know
 what I mean?" When Detective Akagi asked Lonzaga if he was aware
 that Carroll could have died from the fire, Lonzaga responded
 affirmatively. Later in the interview, Detective Akagi stated
 "you know that when you light one large amount of gas, that . . .
 [Carroll is] going to get hurt. Good chance that he going die." 
Lonzaga answered, "I don't think was that much that where he was
 going die. I don't think was going to die." Detective Akagi
 also asked if Lonzaga accidently set Carroll on fire, Lonzaga
 replied that it "[w]asn't one accident." Lonzaga related that he
 knew what he was doing when he set Carroll on fire. Lonzaga
 stated that he ran from his house because he was "going [to] be
 in jail forever[.]" 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
After the State rested its case, defense counsel read a
 
stipulation to the jury regarding "items of personal property of
 
Tracy Carroll that were contained within Tracy Carroll's clothing
 at the time he was being treated for injuries." The defense
 rested its case after reading the stipulation to the jury. 
Lonzaga did not testify. 
On May 4, 2015, the jury returned a verdict finding
 
Lonzaga guilty of the included offense of Assault in the First
 Degree as to Count 1, and guilty as charged in Counts 2 and 3. 
On July 15, 2015, Lonzaga was sentenced to concurrent five-year
 terms of imprisonment as to Counts 2 and 3, and a ten-year term
 of imprisonment as to Count 1, to be served consecutively to the
 term imposed for Counts 2 and 3. 
On August 11, 2015, Lonzaga filed a notice of appeal.
 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
On appeal, Lonzaga argues that (1) the State presented
 
insufficient evidence to convict him of Assault in the First
 Degree, and (2) the Circuit Court abused its discretion when it
 imposed consecutive sentencing. 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has long held that: 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered
in the strongest light for the prosecution when the
appellate court passes on the legal sufficiency of such
evidence to support a conviction; the same standard
applies whether the case was before a judge or a jury.
The test on appeal is not whether guilt is established
beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was
substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the
trier of fact. Indeed, even if it could be said in a
bench trial that the conviction is against the weight of
the evidence, as long as there is substantial evidence to
support the requisite findings for conviction, the trial
court will be affirmed.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
9"Substantial evidence" as to every material element
of the offense charged is credible evidence which is of
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person
of reasonable caution to support a conclusion. And as
trier of fact, the trial judge is free to make all
reasonable and rational inferences under the facts in
evidence, including circumstantial evidence.
State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai# i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31
(2007) (quoting State v. Batson , 73 Haw. 236, 248-49, 831 P.2d
924, 931 (1992)) (brackets omitted).  
A sentencing judge generally has broad discretion
in imposing a sentence.  The applicable standard of
review for sentencing or resentencing matters is whether
the court committed plain and manifest abuse of
discretion in its decision.  Factors which indicate a
plain and manifest abuse of discretion are arbitrary or
capricious action by the judge and a rigid refusal to
consider the defendant's contentions.  And, generally, to
constitute an abuse it must appear that the court clearly
exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or
principles of law or practice to the substantial
detriment of a party litigant.
State v. Pecpec, 127 Hawai #i 20, 32, 276 P.3d 589, 601 (2012)
(quoting State v. Rauch, 94 Hawai# i 315, 322, 13 P.3d 324, 331
(2000)).  
IV.DISCUSSION 
A.Substantial Evidence
Lonzaga argues that the State presented insufficient
evidence to convict him of Assault in the First Degree "where he
only acted recklessly as to the degree of injury to Carroll."   
The State contends that there was substantial evidence to support
a conviction for Assault in the First Degree because Lonzaga's
conduct and statements to bystanders and the police tended to
show that he acted intentionally or knowingly. 
With regard to a defendant's state of mind, the supreme
court has recognized that:
[I]t is not necessary for the prosecution to introduce
direct evidence of a defendant's state of mind in orderNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to prove that the defendant acted intentionally,
knowingly, or recklessly. Given the difficulty of
proving the requisite state of mind by direct evidence in
criminal cases, proof by circumstantial evidence and
reasonable inferences arising from circumstances
surrounding the defendant's conduct is sufficient. The
mind of an alleged offender may be read from his acts,
conduct and inferences fairly drawn from all the
circumstances. 
State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai 'i 131, 140-41, 913 P.2d 57, 66-67 
(1996) (citations omitted). 
In order to convict Lonzaga of Assault in the First
 
Degree, the State was required to present substantial evidence
 
5	that he intentionally or knowingly  caused serious bodily injury
6
5	 HRS § 702-206 provides in relevant part: 
§ 702-206 Definitions of states of mind. (1)
"Intentionally."
(a) 	A person acts intentionally with respect to his
conduct when it is his conscious object to
engage in such conduct.
(b)	 A person acts intentionally with respect to
attendant circumstances when he is aware of the
 existence of such circumstances or believes or
 hopes that they exist.
(c)	 A person acts intentionally with respect to a
result of his conduct when it is his conscious
 object to cause such a result.
(2)	 "Knowingly."
(a)	 A person acts knowingly with respect to his
conduct when he is aware that his conduct is of
 that nature
 
(b)	 A person acts knowingly with respect to
attendant circumstances when he is aware that
 such circumstances exist.
 
(c)	 A person acts knowingly with respect to a result
of his conduct when he is aware that it is
 practically certain that his conduct will cause
such a result.
 
(3) 	"Recklessly."
(a)	 A person acts recklessly with respect to his
conduct when he consciously disregards a
substantial and unjustifiable risk that the
person's conduct is of the specified nature.
(b)	 A person acts recklessly with respect to
attendant circumstances when he consciously
disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk
that such circumstances exist.
 
(c)	 A person acts recklessly with respect to a
result of his conduct when he consciously
disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk
that his conduct will cause such a result.
 
(d)	 A risk is substantial and unjustifiable within
the meaning of this section if, considering the
(continued...)
 
10
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to Carroll. HRS §§ 707-710, 702-206 (2014), 707-700 (2014). 
Lonzaga contends that his "statement and the rationale behind his
 actions" indicate that "he acted 'recklessly' at best with regard
 to causing 'serious bodily injury.'" 
The State elicited the above-referenced testimony from
 
Carroll, Elizabeth, Kahanu, Schadwill, HPD Officer Wright, and
 
HPD Detective Akagi, as well as played the recording of Detective
 
Akagi's interview with Lonzaga wherein Lonzaga admitted that he
 poured gasoline on Carroll. Lonzaga admitted that he did not
 
automatically light Carroll on fire. When Detective Akagi asked
 
if Lonzaga accidently set Carroll on fire, Lonzaga replied that
 it "[w]asn't one accident." Lonzaga related that he knew what he
 
was doing when he set Carroll on fire. Lonzaga stated that he
 
ran from his house because he was "going [to] be in jail
 forever[.]" 
Based on the evidence presented, the jury could
 
reasonably infer that Lonzaga was at least "aware that it is
 practically certain that his conduct" would cause serious bodily
 injury to Carroll. HRS §§ 702-206(2), 707-700. Viewing the
 evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, with the
 fact finder determining credibility, the State presented
 
5(...continued)
 
nature and purpose of the person's conduct and
the circumstances known to him, the disregard of
the risk involves a gross deviation from the
standard of conduct that a law-abiding person
would observe in the same situation.
 
6
 "Serious bodily injury" is defined as "bodily injury which creates
a substantial risk of death or which causes serious, permanent disfigurement,
or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or
organ." HRS § 707-700. 
11
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
substantial evidence that Lonzaga committed the offense of 
Assault in the First Degree. See State v. Agard, 113 Hawai 'i 
321, 324, 151 P.3d 802, 805 (2007); Matavale, 115 Hawai 'i at 158, 
166 P.3d at 331. 
B. Consecutive Sentencing
 Lonzaga contends that the Circuit Court erred when it
 
imposed consecutive sentencing because the Circuit Court failed
 "to consider mitigating factors that weighed against a
 consecutive sentence." The State argues that the Circuit Court
 
did not abuse its discretion because it considered the
 
statutorily mandated factors, and was not required to "go through
 each factor on the record." 
"A sentencing judge generally has broad discretion in 
imposing a sentence." Pecpec, 127 Hawai
'i at 32, 276 P.3d at 601 
(citation omitted). It is within the sentencing court's discretion to order multiple terms of imprisonment to run concurrently or consecutively. See HRS § 706-668.5(1) (Supp. 
2015). Additionally, the court "in determining whether the terms imposed are to be ordered to run concurrently or consecutively, shall consider the factors set forth in section 706-606" (2014).
7 
7	 HRS § 706-606 provides: 
§ 706-606 Factors to be considered in imposing a
sentence.  The court, in determining the particular sentence
to be imposed, shall consider:
(1)	 The nature and circumstances of the offense and
 
the history and characteristics of the
defendant;
(2)	 The need for the sentence imposed:
(a)	 To reflect the seriousness of the offense,
to promote respect for law, and to provide
just punishment for the offense;
(b)	 To afford adequate deterrence to criminal
conduct;

 
(continued...)
 
12

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 706-668.5(2). "The weight to be given the factors set 
forth in HRS § 706-606 in imposing sentence is a matter generally left to the discretion of the sentencing court, taking into consideration the circumstances of each case." State v. Kong, 
131 Hawai
'i 94, 101, 315 P.3d 720, 727 (2013) (quoting State v. 
Akana, 10 Haw. App. 381, 386, 876 P.2d 1331, 1334 (1994)). 
"Absent clear evidence to the contrary, it is presumed 
that a sentencing court will have considered all factors before imposing concurrent or consecutive terms of imprisonment under HRS § 706-606." Id., at 102, 315 P.3d at 728 (brackets omitted) 
(quoting State v. Hussein, 122 Hawai
'i 495, 503, 229 P.3d 313, 
321 (2010)). The supreme court has further held that "circuit courts must state on the record at the time of sentencing the reasons for imposing a consecutive sentence." Hussein, 122 
Hawai
'i at 510, 229 P.3d at 328; accord State v. Barrios, SCWC­
13-0000118, 2016 WL 7422349 (Haw. Dec. 22, 2016). 
At sentencing, the Circuit Court stated: 
All right. Mr. Lonzaga, I'm sure that you're
sincere in the remorse you're talking about now,
etcetera, mainly because I don't think you're insane or
evil, and only an insane or evil person would have no
remorse for what you did because what you did was
horrific. There's no other way to put it. You set a man
 on fire. 
7(...continued)
 
(c)	 To protect the public from further crimes
of the defendant; and
(d)	 To provide the defendant with needed
educational or vocational training,
medical care, or other correctional
treatment in the most effective manner;
(3)	 The kinds of sentences available; and
(4)	 The need to avoid unwarranted sentence
 disparities among defendants with similar
records who have been found guilty of similar
conduct.
 
13
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Now the reason that I'm seriously considering
consecutive terms is what [the DPA] just enunciated
and, ironically enough, it's also what your attorney
kind of enunciated but in an exculpatory way. He's
 trying to, you know, say that it's so intertwined with
the assault that I should make it all concurrent. It
 is inextricably intertwined with the assault. But I
 think, frankly, that's a reason for consecutive terms
in this case. You yourself admit you were up for four
straight days 'cause you were strung out on ice before
this happened. Might not have happened if not for
that. And that's illegal conduct that you were also
found guilty of. Okay? 
706-606 are the factors that I have to consider in
 
terms of a sentence period and also in terms of whether
I'm going to impose consecutive sentences or not. 
I have to consider the nature and circumstances of
 
the offense. And, again, the main offense in this case
is absolutely horrific. The man is lucky to be alive,
although I'm not sure he would look at it that way, given
the fact that he's going to suffer for the rest of his
life from these burns. And the restitution is almost -­is $700,000, and that's because he was in the hospital
for so long, needed the kind of treatment he had because
burns are such serious things. So I think the nature and
 circumstances of the offense, you know, warrant a
consecutive term. 
Also I have to look at the seriousness of the
 
offense, the need for the sentence to promote respect for
law and, to me, this is the singlemost important aspect,
to provide just punishment for the offense. You know,
[the DPA] said he's not doing it out of vindictiveness
and I'm sure he's absolutely right about that. He's
 doing his job, and I feel like I've got to do my job too
and I just do not feel that a 10-year prison sentence is
enough in this case given all the facts that are in front
of me.
 
Now I'm not going to give you 20. I'm going to give
you 15 because the two drug offenses, I think, are just
two sides of the same, the same coin. One is possession,
one is drug paraphernalia. Those are going to run
concurrent with the other, but they're going to run
consecutive to the 10-year open term I'm giving you for
the Assault One. 
The Circuit Court's statements clearly indicate that in
 
imposing consecutive sentences it considered: (1) the nature and
 
circumstances of the offenses and history and characteristics of
 the defendant; and (2) the need for the sentence imposed to
 reflect the seriousness of the offenses, to promote respect for
 law, and to provide just punishment for the offense. HRS § 706­606. The sentencing court is required to state on the record at
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the time of sentencing the reasons for imposing a consecutive 
sentence in order to "(1) identify[] the facts or circumstances within the range of statutory factors that the court considered, and (2) confirm[] for the defendant, the victim, the public, and the appellate court that the decision was deliberate, rational, and fair." Kong, 131 Hawai
'i at 102-03, 315 P.3d at 728-29 
(citation omitted). We conclude that the Circuit Court's statements fulfilled this mandate. 
On appeal, Lonzaga argues that the Circuit Court failed 
"to consider mitigating factors that weighed against a consecutive sentence." In support of his argument, Lonzaga asserts that: (1) he had no prior felony convictions; (2) his last misdemeanor criminal offenses occurred in 2010; (3) he graduated from high school; (4) he was employed as a painter, (5) he had strong family support; and (6) his "primary issue was his substance abuse of alcohol and methamphetamine." Lonzaga provides no clear evidence to rebut the presumption that the Circuit Court considered all factors under HRS § 706-606. See 
Kong, 131 Hawai
'i at 102, 315 P.3d at 728. Moreover, this court 
has recognized that a sentencing court is not required to "specifically address certain facts in the record that may have weighed in [the defendant's] favor with respect to other HRS § 706-606 factors[.]" State v. Fetuao, No. CAAP-12-0001069, 2014 
WL 812969, at *4 (Haw. App. Feb. 28, 2014) (SDO) (citing Kong, 131 Hawai
'i at 102, 315 P.3d at 728); see also State v. Sinagoga, 
81 Hawai 'i 421, 428-29, 918 P.2d 228, 235 (App. 1996), overruled 
on other grounds by State v. Veikoso, 102 Hawai 'i 219, 74 P.3d 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
575 (2003) ("The fact that a court does not orally address every
 
factor stated in HRS § 706-606 at the time of sentencing does not
 mean the court failed to consider those factors. The statute
 contains no requirement that the court expressly recite its
 findings on the record for each of the factors set forth in HRS
 § 706-606."). In light of the broad discretion afforded to the
 sentencing court, we cannot conclude that the Circuit Court
 abused its discretion in imposing consecutive sentencing.
 V.	 CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's July 15, 2015
 
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 20, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Jon N. Ikenaga,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Loren J. Thomas,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
16
 