 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000446 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I  
LO, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
NO, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-D NO. 16-1-1111) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant NO (Wife or Mother) appeals from 
the "Decree Granting Absolute Divorce and Awarding Child Custody" 
(Divorce Decree) entered by the Family Court of the First 
Circuit1 on May 20, 2019. Wife contends2 that the family court 
erred in (1) awarding sole physical custody of a minor child to 
Plaintiff-Appellee LO (Husband or Father), (2) enforcing a 
premarital agreement, (3) failing to include a provision about 
Husband's unpaid child support obligations in the Divorce Decree, and (4) failing to admit Wife's trial exhibit M into evidence. For the reasons explained below, we affirm the Divorce Decree. 
I. 
Wife and Husband were married on August 13, 2014, after 
signing a premarital agreement. Their child (Child) was born in 
2015; Husband has three children from a prior marriage. Husband 
1 The Honorable Kevin T. Morikone presided. 
2 Wife's opening brief lists ten points of error; we consolidate and
summarize them to facilitate our analysis of Wife's appeal. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
filed a complaint for divorce on August 25, 2016. The parties 
stipulated to have Reneau Kennedy, Ed.D. appointed as a child custody evaluator. Dr. Kennedy filed a report on July 27, 2018. The family court conducted a trial on January 14, 15, and 29, 2019, and on February 4, 2019. Wife, Husband, Dr. Kennedy, and six other witnesses testified at the trial. The Divorce Decree was entered on May 20, 2019. The family court entered a decision and order on April 15, 2019, and findings of fact and conclusions of law on August 19, 2019. 
II. 
[T]he family court possesses wide discretion in making its
decisions and those decision[s] will not be set aside unlessthere is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus, we will notdisturb the family court's decisions on appeal unless thefamily court disregarded rules or principles of law orpractice to the substantial detriment of a party litigantand its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of reason. 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai# i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(citation omitted). 
The family court's findings of fact are reviewed under 
the "clearly erroneous" standard. Fisher, 111 Hawai# i at 46, 137 
P.3d at 360. A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when the 
record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding or, despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, we are nonetheless left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. Id. "Substantial evidence" is credible 
evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion. Id. "It is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass 
upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." Id.
 (citation omitted). 
The family court's conclusions of law are ordinarily 
reviewed de novo
, under the right/wrong standard, "and are freely 
reviewable for their correctness." Fisher, 111 Hawai# i at 46, 
137 P.3d at 360. 
However, when a conclusion of law presents 
mixed questions of fact and law, we review it under the "clearly erroneous" standard because the court's conclusions are dependent 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on the facts and circumstances of each individual case. Estate 
of Klink ex rel. Klink v. State, 113 Hawai# i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 
504, 523 (2007). A conclusion of law that is supported by the 
trial court's findings of fact and reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be overturned. Id. 
I
II. 
Wife challenges 24 of the family court's findings of 
fact. We have thoroughly reviewed the record, including all trial transcripts and exhibits. 
Conflicting evidence was 
presented at trial. The family court's decision and order was based upon the court's consideration of "the testimony and demeanor of the witnesses," among other things. The family court's findings of fact were specifically based upon its evaluation of "the credibility of the testimony and evidence[.]" Evaluating the credibility of witnesses and weighing conflicting evidence "is the province of the trier of fact." Fisher, 111 
Hawai# i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360. None of the challenged findings 
of fact are clearly erroneous; each is supported by substantial evidence in the record, and we are not left with a definite or firm conviction that the family court made a mistake. 
A. The family court did not abuse its discretion by
awarding Husband sole physical custody of Child. 
The family court concluded: 
33. Based on the credible and reliable evidence 
presented, as well as the relevant factors enumerated in HRS571-46(b), the Court finds that it is in the best interestof the child that Father be awarded primary physical custodyof the child, subject to Mother's visitation rights outlinedbelow. 
The paramount concern in child custody cases is the best 
interests of the child. W.N. v. S.M., 143 Hawai# i 128, 135, 424 
P.3d 483, 490 (2018). 
The criteria and procedures for 
determining the best interests of the child in custody cases are set forth in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571-46 (2018), 
titled "Criteria and procedure in awarding custody and 
visitation; best interest of the child." The portions of that statute relevant to this case are: 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(a) In actions for divorce . . . where there is at 
issue a dispute as to the custody of a minor child, the
court . . . may make an order for the custody of the minorchild as may seem necessary or proper. In awarding thecustody, the court shall be guided by the followingstandards, considerations, and procedures: 
(1) Custody should be awarded to either parent or toboth parents according to the best interests ofthe child, and the court also may considerfrequent, continuing, and meaningful contact ofeach parent with the child unless the courtfinds that a parent is unable to act in the bestinterest of the child; 
. . . . 
(4) Whenever good cause appears therefor, the courtmay require an investigation and reportconcerning the care, welfare, and custody of anyminor child of the parties. 
When so directed by
the court, investigators or professionalpersonnel attached to or assisting the court,hereinafter referred to as child custodyevaluators, shall make investigations andreports that shall be made available to allinterested parties and counsel before hearing,and the reports may be received in evidence[.] 
. . . . 
(b) In determining what constitutes the best
interest of the child under this section, the court shallconsider, but not be limited to, the following: 
. . . . 
(2) Any history of neglect or emotional abuse of achild by a parent; 
(3) The overall quality of the parent-childrelationship; 
(4) The history of caregiving or parenting by eachparent prior and subsequent to a marital orother type of separation; 
. . . . 
(6) The physical health needs of the child; 
(7) The emotional needs of the child; 
(8) The safety needs of the child; 
(9) The educational needs of the child; 
(10) The child's need for relationships withsiblings;[
3] 
3 Although Child has no full siblings, Husband has three children
from a prior marriage. Dr. Kennedy reported: 
It is apparent that [Child] perceives his half-brothers ashis brothers and he calls [one half-brother]'s girlfriend [a
(continued...) 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . 
(12) Each parent's actions demonstrating that they
separate the child's needs from the parent'sneeds; [and] 
. . . . 
(15) The areas and levels of conflict present withinthe family[.] 
(Footnote added.) The family court made the following findings
of fact:  
39. On or about October 16, 2017, the Honorable
Dyan M. Medeiros ordered that Reneau Kennedy, Ed.D. serve
a[s] custody evaluator in this case. 
40. Dr. Kennedy engaged in a comprehensive investi-
gation and provided a 112-page report which was filed onJuly 27, 2018[,] and received into evidence as Plaintiff'sExhibit "6". 
41. Dr. Kennedy also provided testimony and was
subject to cross-examination during the trial. 
42. Dr. Kennedy provided her findings and
recommendations in her report and also testified to thesame. 
43. The Court found Dr. Kennedy's report and testi-
mony credible and persuasive. Notwithstanding however,approximately six (6) months elapsed between the filing ofthe report and the completion of trial. 
44. Dr. Kennedy identified that the child had
developmental delays in several areas and that theDepartment of Health Services provided support and servicesto the child which helped to compensate for said delays. 
45. Father took a pro-active approach with respect
to the child's education and Mother did not. 
46. After some time however, it appears that Mother
became more supportive of the child's educational needs. 
47. Although initially, Mother frequently took the
child to school late or failed to take the child to school,it appeared to the Court that Mother addressed this issue. 
48. Although domestic violence between the parties
were alleged by both sides, Dr. Kennedy through herextensive investigation, believed that Father's accountswere [sic] more credible and the Court agreed with the same. 
49. There was no credible evidence that either party
was a danger to the child or neglected the child. 
3 (...continued)nickname.] He addresses [Husband's ex-wife] as "Auntie[first name]." . . . [Child] was clearly comfortable withall family members. He would spontaneously engage with allparties. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
50. It appeared to the Court that both parties had a
strong and healthy relationship with the child. 
51. Based on the credible and reliable evidence 
adduced at trial, the Court found that it is in the child's
best interests that Mother and Father share joint legalcustody except for educational decisions. 
52. Based on the credible and reliable evidence 
adduced at trial, the Court found that it is in the bestinterests of the child that Father be awarded sole physicalcustody of the child subject to the liberal visitation setforth in the Decision and Order. 
The family court's conclusion of law no. 33 is supported by the
family court's findings of fact and reflects an application of the correct rule of law. Estate of Klink, 113 Hawai# i at 351, 
152 P.3d at 523. The family court did not abuse its discretionby awarding Husband sole physical custody of Child.  
 
B. The family court did not err by enforcing the
premarital agreement. 
The parties' premarital agreement included a provision
releasing both parties from any alimony or support obligations. 
Hawai
#i has adopted the Uniform Premarital Agreement Act, 
HRS Chapter 572D. HRS § 572D-6 (2018), titled "Enforcement," provides:  
(a) A premarital agreement is enforceable and shall
be binding in any action unless the party against whom
enforcement is sought proves that: 
(1) That party did not execute the agreementvoluntarily; or 
(2) The agreement was unconscionable when it wasexecuted and, before execution of the agreement,that party: 
(A) Was not provided a fair and reasonable
disclosure of the property or financialobligations of the other party; 
(B) Did not voluntarily and expressly waive,in writing, any right to disclosure of theproperty or financial obligations of theother party beyond the disclosureprovided; and 
(C) Did not have, or reasonably could not havehad, an adequate knowledge of the propertyor financial obligations of the otherparty. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(b) If a provision of a premarital agreement
modifies or eliminates spousal support and that modification
or elimination causes one party to the agreement to beeligible for support under a program of public assistance atthe time of separation or marital dissolution, a court,notwithstanding the terms of the agreement, may require theother party to provide support to the extent necessary toavoid eligibility for public assistance. 
(c) An issue of unconscionability of a premarital
agreement shall be decided by the court as a matter of law. 
A Hawai# i Supreme Court decision concerning a postmarital 
agreement informs our decision about the premarital agreement at
issue in this case:  
The family court must enforce all valid and enforceable
postmarital and separation agreements. A postmarital orseparation agreement is enforceable if the agreement is notunconscionable and has been voluntarily entered into by theparties with the knowledge of the financial situation of theother spouse. . . . 
Unconscionability encompasses two principles: one-
sidedness and unfair surprise. One-sidedness (i.e.,substantive unconscionability) means that the agreementleaves a post-divorce economic situation that is unjustlydisproportionate. 
Unfair surprise (i.e., procedural
unconscionability) means that one party did not have fulland adequate knowledge of the other party's financialcondition when the marital agreement was executed. A contract that is merely "inequitable" is notunenforceable. . . . 
Generally, a determination of unconscionability . . .
requires a showing that the contract was both procedurallyand substantively unconscionable when made, but there may beexceptional cases where a provision of the contract is sooutrageous as to warrant holding it unenforceable on theground of substantive unconscionability alone. . . . Undercertain circumstances, an impermissibly one-sided agreementmay be unconscionable even if there is no unfair surprise. 
. . . . 
Involuntariness is shown by evidence of duress,
coercion, undue influence, or any other circumstanceindicating lack of free will or voluntariness. . . . 
Duress is defined as a threat of harm made to compel a
person to do something against [their] will or judgment;especially, a wrongful threat made by one person to compel amanifestation of seeming assent by another person to atransaction without real volition. . . . An agreement isvoidable due to duress when a party's manifestation ofassent is induced by an improper threat by the other partythat leaves the victim no reasonable alternative. . . . 
. . . . 
. . . Coercion is defined as "compulsion of a free agent byphysical, moral, or economic force or threat of physicalforce." 
Black's Law Dictionary 315 (10th ed. 2014).
Coercion sufficient to avoid a 
contract need not . . . 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
consist of physical force or threats of it. Social or 
economic pressure illegally or immorally applied may besufficient. . . . 
. . . . 
. . . Undue influence is "the improper use of power or trustin a way that deprives a person of free will andsubstitute's another's objective." Black's Law Dictionary
1760 (10th ed. 2014)[.] . . . 
Balogh v. Balogh, 134 Hawai# i 29, 40-45, 332 P.3d 631, 642-47
(2014) (cleaned up).  
The family court made the following findings of fact: 
13. Prior to their marriage, the parties were
introduced to each other by [Wife]'s aunt, who was a friendof [Husband]. 
14. At the time the parties were introduced,
[Husband] was a United States citizen and domiciled in theState of Hawaii and [Wife] was a citizen of Vietnam anddomiciled in Vietnam. 
15. After being introduced, [Husband] and [Wife]
communicated with each other by e-mail and text message.Said communications were in the English language. 
16. [Wife] learned English as a second language in
elementary school and through high school. Although asecond language, [Wife] understood English. 
. . . . 
18. Prior to their marriage, [Husband] traveled to
Vietnam to visit [Wife]. 
[Husband] also traveled to
Thailand with [Wife]. 
19. While the parties were in Thailand, the parties
discussed the possibility of marriage and [Husband] raisedthe issue of a Premarital Agreement ("PMA") and that [Wife]would be required to execute a PMA before the parties wouldmarry. 
20. While [Wife] was still living in Vietnam, the
parties became engaged. 
21. [Wife] moved to Hawaii from Vietnam and she
entered the United States pursuant to a fiancé visa. 
22. After [Wife] moved, the parties intended to
marry within the 90-day deadline [under the fiancé visa].The parties knew and were aware of the fact that if they didnot marry within said time frame, [Wife] would be requiredto leave the United States. 
. . . . 
27. The parties executed the PMA and got married on
August 13, 2014. 
28. A few weeks prior to the execution of the PMA,
[Husband] provided a copy of the PMA to [Wife] and [Wife] 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reviewed the same. The parties discussed the content of the
PMA and the portions that [Wife] did not like. 
29. [Husband] made changes to the initial draft of
the PMA to address [Wife]'s concerns. 
30. There was no credible or reliable evidence that 
[Wife] did not voluntarily execute the PMA. 
31. Based upon the credible and reliable evidence,
[Husband] did not coerce [Wife] to sign the PMA. 
32. There was no credible or reliable evidence to 
support the assertion that [Wife] did not understand theterms of the PMA. 
33. There was no credible or reliable evidence that 
the terms of the PMA was [sic] unconscionable at the time ofthe execution of the PMA. 
34. There was no credible or reliable evidence that 
the terms of the PMA was [sic] unconscionable at the time oftrial. 
35. There was no credible or reliable evidence that 
[Wife] received financial assistance from the State ofHawaii. 
36. The PMA was notarized. 
37. The PMA (pages 1-9) was [sic] received into
evidence as [Husband]'s Exhibit "l". 
. . . . 
60. Based upon the credible and reliable evidence,
orders requiring alimony to be paid to either party wereprecluded by the PMA. 
61. There was no evidence that either party received
public assistance from the State of Hawaii or any othergovernmental agency. 
62. Based upon the credible and reliable evidence,
Wife did not have a need for alimony. 
63. Wife was capable of maintaining regular, full-
time employment, but chose not to do so. 
64. Wife failed to convince the Court that she 
complied with her duty to exert reasonable efforts to attainself-sufficiency at the standard of living establishedduring the marriage. 
The family court entered the following conclusions of law, which
were actually mixed findings of fact and conclusions of law:  
4. Chapter 572D of the Hawaii Revised Statutes
("HRS") governs the Premarital Agreement ("PMA") at issue in
this case. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5. The PMA satisfied the formalities in that it was in writing
and signed by both parties. HRS § 572D-2.[4] 
6. The terms of the PMA did not violate HRS 
§ 572D-3.[5] 
7. The PMA became effective as of August 13,
2014[,] the date of marriage. HRS § 572D-4.[6] 
4 HRS § 572D-2 (2018) provides: 
A premarital agreement must be in writing and signed
by both parties. It is enforceable without consideration. 
5 HRS § 572D-3 (2018) provides: 
(a) Parties to a premarital agreement may contract
with respect to: 
(1) The rights and obligations of each of the
parties in any of the property of either or bothof them whenever and wherever acquired orlocated; 
(2) The right to buy, sell, use, transfer, exchange,abandon, lease, consume, expend, assign, createa security interest in, mortgage, encumber,dispose of, or otherwise manage and controlproperty; 
(3) The disposition of property upon separation,marital dissolution, death, or the occurrence ornonoccurrence of any other event; 
(4) The modification or elimination of spousalsupport; 
(5) The making of a will, trust, or otherarrangement to carry out the provisions of theagreement; 
(6) The ownership rights in and disposition of thedeath benefit from a life insurance policy; 
(7) The choice of law governing the construction ofthe agreement; and 
(8) Any other matter, including their personalrights and obligations, not in violation ofpublic policy or a statute imposing a criminalpenalty. 
(b) The right of a child to support may not be
adversely affected by a premarital agreement. 
6 HRS § 572D-4 (2018) provides: 
A premarital agreement becomes effective upon marriage
of the parties to each other. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
8. The PMA was never amended or revoked. HRS 
§ 572D-5.[7] 
. . . . 
10. Based upon the credible and reliable evidence,
the Court did not find that [Wife] was forced to execute the
PMA. 
On the contrary, based upon the credible and reliable
evidence, the Court found that [Wife] voluntarily executedthe PMA. 
11. "Unconscionability encompasses two principles:
onesidedness and unfair surprise." Balogh v. Balogh, 134
Hawaii 29, 41, 332 P.3d 631, 643 (2014). 
12. "As applied to premarital agreements, one-
sidedness would mean that the agreement leaves a post-divorce economic situation that is unjustly disproportion-ate. Unfair surprise would mean that one party did not havefull and adequate knowledge of the other party's financialcondition when the premarital agreement was executed."Lewis v. Lewis, 69 Haw. 497, 502, 748 P.2d 1362, 1366(1988). 
13. Based upon the reliable and credible evidence,
the Court found that Husband provided a copy of the PMA toWife a few weeks prior to the execution of the PMA. 
14. In addition, Husband made full disclosure of his
premarital assets that he sought to protect via the PMA. 
15. There was no credible evidence to controvert the 
fact that Husband made full disclosure of his premaritalassets that he sought to protect via the PMA. 
16. Based upon the reliable and credible evidence,
the Court found that Wife had adequate knowledge ofHusband's premarital assets. 
. . . . 
18. "[T]he issue of unconscionability of a provision
governing division of property in a premarital agreement
should be evaluated at the time the agreement was executed."Prell v. Silverstein, 114 Hawaii 286, 297, 162 P.3d 2, 13(2007)[.] 
19. Due to public policy concerns, the determination
of whether a spousal support provision is unconscionable ismade at the time of divorce. Id. 
20. Based upon the credible and reliable evidence,
the Court found that neither the terms governing propertydivision, nor the terms eliminating spousal support[,] wereunconscionable.[
8] 
7 HRS § 572D-5 (2018) provides: 
After marriage, a premarital agreement may be amended
or revoked only by a written agreement signed by theparties. The amended agreement or the revocation isenforceable without consideration. 
8 The issue of whether a premarital agreement is unconscionable is
decided by the court as a matter of law. HRS § 572D-6(c). 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . 
49. The enforcement of the PMA precludes an award of
alimony to either party. 
50. The PMA did not cause Wife to be eligible for
support under a program of public assistance. 
51. There was no credible or reliable evidence that 
Wife received any assistance under a program for public
assistance. 
(Footnotes added.) The family court's conclusions of law are 
supported by the family court's findings of fact and reflect an application of the correct rule of law. Estate of Klink, 113 
Hawai# i at 351, 152 P.3d at 523. The family court did not err by 
enforcing the premarital agreement. 
C. It was not necessary for the Divorce Decree to
contain a provision regarding Father's past-duechild support payments. 
On October 16, 2017, in response to Mother's motion for 
pre-decree relief, the family court
9 ordered Father to pay $540 
per month to Mother as child support. On March 20, 2018, Mother 
filed another motion for pre-decree relief claiming that Father's child support payments were in arrears.
10 Eight days later, 
Father filed his own motion for pre-decree relief, contending that he should have been given a child care expense credit. On May 3, 2018, the family court issued a written order directing Father to pay the child support arrearage.
11 A stipulated order 
that corrected the amount of Father's arrearage to $3,780 (through March 31, 2018) was entered on May 17, 2018. 
Mother contends that "[i]t was just plain, reversible 
error for the Family Court to not reduce Father's child support arrears to Judgment and mention them in this couple's Decree[,]" because "the State of Hawaii [Child Support Enforcement Agency] has somehow adopted some kind of policy that JUST ELIMINATES an 
9 The Honorable Dyan M. Medeiros signed the order. 
10 Mother claimed that Father failed to "provide his full social
security number so that his wages . . . can be garnished and sent to the
[Child Support Enforcement Agency]." 
11 The Honorable Jessi L.K. Hall signed the order. 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
obligor's child support obligation arrears if they are not 
mentioned in a Divorce Decree." Mother cites no authority for this proposition, and we find none. In fact, "past-due court-ordered child support payments are enforceable decrees." Lindseyv. Lindsey, 6 Haw. App. 201, 206, 716 P.2d 496, 500 (1986). It was not necessary for the Divorce Decree to contain a provision regarding Father's past-due child support payments.  
D. Wife's contentions regarding Exhibit M lack merit. 
Wife contends that the family court erred by declining 
to admit her "Exhibit M" — an email from Husband to Wife about his alcohol consumption (among other things) — into evidence. Wife attempted to use the document in the second day of trial, during her cross-examination of Husband. Husband objected because the document had not been identified in Wife's trial exhibit list.
12 The family court allowed Wife to use the 
document for impeachment purposes only, but did not admit the document into evidence. Wife then attempted to use the document to impeach Husband. 
On appeal, Wife does not argue that the family court's 
decision was contrary to any of the Hawaii Rules of Evidence, nor does Wife argue that there were reasonable grounds for her failure to include Exhibit M in her trial exhibit list. Wife's brief uses the Exhibit M issue to re-argue Husband's credibility. Determination of witness credibility is the exclusive domain of the family court, and will not be second-guessed on appeal. See 
Fisher, 111 Hawai# i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360 ("It is well-settled 
that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon 
12 Hawai #i Family Court Rules ( HFCR ) Rule 94.3 provides, in relevant
part: 
(2) Each party shall submit to the other party by
the exchange date listed in the pre-trial order an Exhibit
List and all exhibits which are in [their] possession orunder [their] control which [they] intend[] to offer inevidence at the trial. 
(3) Unless so disclosed and exchanged, no exhibits
required to be disclosed and exchanged by paragraph (2)shall be received in evidence at the trial over objectionunless the court finds that there was reasonable ground forfailing to disclose and exchange such exhibits prior totrial. 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the credibility of witnesses and the weight of evidence; this is 
the province of the trier of fact.") (citation omitted). Wife's contentions regarding Exhibit M lack merit. 
IV. 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Decree 
Granting Absolute Divorce and Awarding Child Custody entered by the Family Court of the First Circuit on May 20, 2019. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 6, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
Scot Stuart Brower,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge Michael A. Glenn,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Associate Judge 
14 