FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
EVELYN K. SCHOLES AND EVELYN WONG AS CO-TRUSTEES OF THE
 
SCHOLES FAMILY TRUST DATED SEPTEMBER 18, 2003,
Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
 
KIYOSHI KAWAGUCHI AND SUNG SOOK KAWAGUCHI,
Defendants-Appellants,
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000577 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CIVIL NO. 1RC15-1-2486)
 
SEPTEMBER 26, 2017
 
FUJISE, PRESIDING JUDGE, LEONARD and GINOZA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY GINOZA, J.
 
Plaintiffs-Appellees Evelyn K. Scholes (Evelyn Scholes)
and Evelyn Wong (Wong) as Co-Trustees of the Scholes Family Trust
(collectively Scholes/Wong) brought this action in the District
 
Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (District Court),1
 
seeking to eject Defendants-Appellants Kiyoshi Kawaguchi
 
(Kiyoshi) and Sung Sook Kawaguchi (collectively the Kawaguchis)
 

 

 
1
 The Honorable Michael K. Tanigawa presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
from property located on Wanaka Street in Honolulu.2 On July 15,
 
2015, the District Court entered a Judgment for Possession and a
 
Writ of Possession in favor of Scholes/Wong and against the
 Kawaguchis.
 
The Kawaguchis appeal and contend that the District
 
Court erred by: (1) concluding it had jurisdiction and thus
 denying the Kawaguchis' motion to dismiss or, alternatively, for
 a stay of the proceedings (hereafter motion to dismiss); (2)
 
concluding that a certificate of title for the property
 
conclusively established that title was held by the Scholes
 Family Trust, regardless of claims asserted by Kiyoshi in a
 separate action filed in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (Circuit Court); and (3) denying the Kawaguchis' motion for
 
reconsideration and two motions to continue the trial.
 
For the reasons set forth below, we conclude the
 
Kawaguchis sufficiently demonstrated there was an issue of title
 
regarding the property such that the District Court lacked
 jurisdiction. We thus vacate the Judgment for Possession and
 Writ of Possession, and remand to the District Court for
 dismissal.
 
I. Background
 
On April 6, 2015, Scholes/Wong filed a Complaint for
 
Ejectment in the District Court against the Kawaguchis alleging,
 inter alia, that: the Scholes Family Trust is the record title
 owner of the property; the property is registered property in
 Land Court with Transfer Certificate of Title No. 779,343; a
 Warranty Deed recorded on November 10, 2005, evidences the
 conveyance of the property to the Scholes Family Trust; Kiyoshi,
 son of Evelyn Scholes, has occupied the property since 1980 and
 the Kawaguchis currently occupy the property but do not pay rent;
 the Kawaguchis were advised that their occupancy was terminated
 by letter dated December 3, 2014; and the Kawaguchis have
 neglected, failed, and refused to vacate the property. Exhibits
 
2
 The record reflects that Evelyn Scholes is the mother of Wong and
Kiyoshi, who are apparently half-siblings. Evelyn Scholes was married to
Edward Scholes, who is Wong's father and who is now deceased.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attached to the Complaint for Ejectment include: a Short Form
 
Trust, dated September 23, 2014, for the Scholes Family Trust
 (dated September 18, 2003) naming Evelyn Scholes as Settlor/Co-
Trustee and Wong as Co-Trustee; a certificate of title issued onNovember 10, 2005, which identifies the registered owner of the
property as Edward Scholes, Trustee and Evelyn Scholes, Trustee,Trustees of the Scholes Family Trust; and a Warranty Deed
 recorded on November 10, 2005, which conveyed Edward Scholes andEvelyn Scholes's interest in the property to the Scholes Family
Trust.
 
  
 

 
 
On April 21, 2015, the Kawaguchis filed the motion to
 
dismiss, pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 604-5(d)
 
(2016).3 The Kawaguchis asserted that the District Court did not
 
have jurisdiction in this case because title to the property was
 
in question. Attached to the motion was Kiyoshi's affidavit, in
 which he attested in relevant part:
 
I claim title to the [property] that is subject to this
ejectment action. I was promised the property by my mother,
Plaintiff Evelyn K. Scholes, and her husband Edward A.
Scholes, and in reliance upon the agreement made
improvements to the property, nearly tripling the size of
the house on the property and generating a source of rental
income. Exhibit "A" is a true and correct copy of a
Verified Complaint, which is being filed in Circuit Court,
setting forth the basis for my claim to title to the
property.
 
The verified Circuit Court complaint (Circuit Court complaint)4
 
attached to Kiyoshi's affidavit asserted claims by him against
 
3 HRS § 604-5(d) provides:
 
§604-5 Civil jurisdiction.
 
. . .
 
(d) The district courts shall not have cognizance of real
actions, nor actions in which the title to real estate comes in
question, nor actions for libel, slander, defamation of character,
malicious prosecution, false imprisonment, breach of promise of
marriage, or seduction; nor shall they have power to appoint
referees in any cause.
 
4 The copy of the Circuit Court complaint attached to Kiyoshi's
affidavit was unfiled. The Circuit Court complaint was later filed on April
21, 2015, the same day the Kawaguchis' motion to dismiss was filed in District
Court. A filed copy of the Circuit Court complaint was thereafter attached to
Scholes/Wong's opposition to the Kawaguchis' motion to dismiss. Thus, the
District Court had a filed copy of the Circuit Court complaint while
considering Kiyoshi's motion to dismiss.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Evelyn Scholes, Individually and as Co-Trustee of the restated
 
Scholes Family Trust, and Wong, as Co-Trustee of the restated
 Scholes Family Trust.
5 Kiyoshi's Circuit Court complaint
 
alleged, inter alia, that: sometime after 1980, Kiyoshi made
 improvements to the property at the request of Evelyn Scholes and
 Edward Scholes and in reliance on their promise that the property
 would be given to Kiyoshi in consideration for the improvements;
 the improvements made by Kiyoshi expanded the size of the home
 from approximately 900 square feet to nearly 3,000 square feet;
 Evelyn and Edward Scholes moved to Las Vegas and obtained a loan
 secured by the property to purchase their Las Vegas home;
 although Kiyoshi did not pay rent while residing at the property,
 he screened tenants, rented portions of the home, and remitted
 rental proceeds to Evelyn Scholes; Kiyoshi also paid for repairs
 and upkeep of the property, and would not have paid for and made
 improvements but for the promises that he would be given the
 property; in 1992, Evelyn Scholes and Edward Scholes transferred
 the property to Kiyoshi, Evelyn Scholes, and Edward Scholes to
 hold as joint tenants; in 2003, Evelyn Scholes and Edward Scholes
 wanted to refinance the debt secured by the property and obtain a
 mortgage loan solely in their name, and thus the property was
 transferred back to Evelyn Scholes and Edward Scholes by way of a
 Warranty Deed recorded on August 29, 2003 (2003 Warranty Deed);
 
Kiyoshi did not intend to divest himself of his interest in the
 
property and only intended to accommodate his mother and her
 husband so that they could refinance the home at a better
 interest rate; when the property was transferred back to Evelyn
 Scholes and Edward Scholes in 2003, Kiyoshi did not receive any
 consideration for his interest in the property; and subsequently,
 in 2005, Evelyn Scholes and Edward Scholes transferred the
 property to the Scholes Family Trust by way of a deed recorded on
 November 10, 2005.
 
5
 The Circuit Court complaint asserts that Edward A. Scholes died on
February 16, 2014, and that "[u]pon information and belief, [Wong] became a
successor Co-Trustee [of the Scholes Family Trust] upon the death of her
father Edward A. Scholes."
 
4
   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kiyoshi's Circuit Court complaint asserts claims for:
 
breach of contract, equitable lien, unjust enrichment, and breach
 
of fiduciary duty/constructive trust. The Circuit Court
 complaint seeks, inter alia, specific performance requiring
 conveyance of the property to Kiyoshi, as well as damages.
 
On June 9, 2015, the District Court filed an "Order
 
Denying Defendants' Motion to Dismiss Complaint For Ejectment"
 (Order Denying Motion to Dismiss) concluding: 
a) that title to the subject property is registered in the
Land Court in Plaintiffs' name, which is dispositive ; b)
that Defendants have failed to raise an issue of title
 sufficient to oust this court of jurisdiction over the
ejectment claim; and c) that Defendants' filing of a Notice
of Pendency of Action has no effect to either stay or
dismiss the proceedings.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
On June 19, 2015, the Kawaguchis filed a motion for
 
reconsideration of the Order Denying Motion to Dismiss. The
 
motion for reconsideration was denied without a hearing.
 
The Kawaguchis subsequently filed two motions to 
continue trial in the District Court. In the first motion, submitted on June 23, 2015, the Kawaguchis pointed to Aames Funding Corp. v. Mores, 107 Hawai
'i 95, 110 P.3d 1042 (2005) and 
argued that the Hawai 'i Supreme Court had recognized that a 
certificate of title could be challenged in cases of fraud to which the party holding title is a party. The Kawaguchis noted that in Aames, the Supreme Court discussed three types of fraud: (1) fraud in the factum; (2) fraud in the inducement; and (3)
 constructive fraud. Id. at 103, 110 P.3d at 1050. The
 
Kawaguchis further noted that Aames described "constructive
 fraud" as "characterized by the breach of a fiduciary or
 confidential relationship." Id. at 104, 110 P.3d at 1051. The
 
Kawaguchis reasserted that Kiyoshi's Circuit Court complaint
 included a claim for breach of a confidential relationship
 between Kiyoshi, his mother, and her husband, and that Kiyoshi
 seeks specific performance requiring conveyance of title to him. 
This motion to continue trial was denied on June 24, 2015.
 
In their second motion to continue trial, submitted on
 
June 29, 2015, the Kawaguchis relied upon declarations by their
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
counsel, Ann C. Kemp (Kemp). Kemp attested that through
 
discovery in the Circuit Court action, Kiyoshi had learned that
 
the notary book for the notary who purportedly notarized
 Kiyoshi's signature on the 2003 Warranty Deed, which transferred
 the property out of his name, did not actually contain an entry
 regarding the Warranty Deed. Kemp's declaration again cites to
 Aames for the proposition that fraud is a valid basis to
 challenge a certificate of title. Kemp further attested that,
 based on the recent discovery regarding the notary book, Kiyoshi
 would be seeking to amend the Circuit Court complaint to allege
 forgery and that this would be a further basis for the fraud-
based claims he was pursuing in the Circuit Court. This second
 motion to continue trial was denied on June 30, 2015.
 
The case proceeded to bench trial and on July 15, 2015,
 
the District Court entered the Judgment for Possession and Writ
 of Possession. The Kawaguchis timely appealed.
II. Mootness
 
As an initial matter, this court granted Scholes/Wong's
 
motion to file supplemental briefs as to whether this appeal is
 moot. In their supplemental brief filed on March 8, 2017,
 Scholes/Wong argue this appeal is moot based on orders entered by
 the Circuit Court after this appeal was initiated, which dismiss
 most of Kiyoshi's claims against them in the Circuit Court
 action.
6 Scholes/Wong contend that, given the Circuit Court
 
orders, there are no remaining claims that place title to the
 property in question because the only claims remaining are for
 
6 Scholes/Wong submit with their supplemental brief a First Amended
Complaint filed by Kiyoshi in the Circuit Court on October 20, 2015. In
 
addition to the claims asserted in the original Circuit Court complaint
(breach of contract, equitable lien, unjust enrichment, breach of fiduciary
duty/constructive trust), the First Amended Complaint added allegations that
Kiyoshi did not sign the 2003 Warranty Deed and that "[u]pon information and
belief, although the purported signature of [Kiyoshi] on the 2003 Warranty
Deed was notarized, the book maintained by the notary who purportedly
notarized his signature contains no record of [Kiyoshi's] signature being
notarized." The First Amended Complaint asserts additional claims for:
rescission of the 2003 Warranty Deed; declaratory relief; and injunctive
relief. Like the original Circuit Court complaint, the First Amended
Complaint requests specific performance and damages. Scholes/Wong also attach
Circuit Court orders which dismiss the claims for breach of fiduciary
duty/constructive trust, breach of contract, rescission, declaratory relief,
and injunctive relief.
 
6
     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
monetary damages.
 
Under the mootness doctrine:
 
the suit must remain alive throughout the course of
litigation to the moment of final appellate disposition. Its
chief purpose is to assure that the adversary system, once
set in operation, remains properly fueled. The doctrine
 seems appropriate where events subsequent to the judgment of
the trial court have so affected the relations between the
 parties that the two conditions for justiciability relevant
on appeal--adverse interest and effective remedy--have been
compromised.
 
Hamilton ex rel. Lethem v. Lethem, 119 Hawai 'i 1, 5, 193 P.3d 
839, 843 (2008) (citation omitted). 
The Circuit Court orders that Scholes/Wong rely upon 
for their mootness argument are interlocutory orders and 
Scholes/Wong do not assert that a final judgment has been entered in the Circuit Court. Moreover, in opposing the mootness argument, the Kawaguchis assert that Kiyoshi intends to appeal once a final judgment is issued in the Circuit Court action. It is unclear at this time whether Kiyoshi will seek and obtain a stay of any judgment entered in the Circuit Court action pending an appeal. See Rule 62 of the Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure. 
Given these circumstances, Kiyoshi's claims in the
 
Circuit Court related to a constructive trust, rescission of the
 2003 Warranty Deed, and specific performance do not appear to be
 finally adjudicated such that there is an enforceable judgement
 as to title to the property. Therefore, this appeal is not moot.
III. Subject Matter Jurisdiction
 
The Kawaguchis contend that the District Court erred by
 
entering the Order Denying Motion to Dismiss, because the
 District Court did not have subject matter jurisdiction pursuant
 to HRS § 604-5(d) after the Kawaguchis raised a question of title
 to the property.
 
In its Order Denying Motion to Dismiss, the District
 
Court concluded, inter alia, that "title to the subject property
 is registered in the Land Court in Plaintiffs' name, which is
 dispositive" and "[d]efendants have failed to raise an issue of
 title sufficient to oust this court of jurisdiction over the
 ejectment claim[.]"
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 604-5(d) provides in pertinent part that "[t]he
 
district courts shall not have cognizance of real actions, nor
 
actions in which the title to real estate comes in question[.]"
 Further, District Court Rules of Civil Procedure (DCRCP) Rule
 
12.1 provides:
 
Pleadings. Whenever, in the district court, in defense of an
action in the nature of an action of trespass or for the
summary possession of land, or any other action, the
defendant shall seek to interpose a defense to the
jurisdiction to the effect that the action is a real action,
or one in which the title to real estate is involved, such
defense shall be asserted by a written answer or written
motion, which shall not be received by the court unless
accompanied by an affidavit of the defendant, setting forth
the source, nature and extent of the title claimed by
defendant to the land in question, and such further
particulars as shall fully apprise the court of the nature
of defendant's claim.
 
Thus, "[u]nder the plain language of Rule 12.1, an affidavit that 
raises a defense to the court's jurisdiction must set forth the source, nature, and extent of the title claimed by defendant and further particulars sufficient to fully apprise the court of the nature of defendant's claim." Deutsche Bank Nat'l Tr. Co. v. 
Peelua, 126 Hawai
'i 32, 36, 265 P.3d 1128, 1132 (2011)(internal 
quotation marks omitted).
A. Constructive Fraud
 
Here, Scholes/Wong attached a certificate of title to 
their Complaint for Ejectment, which identifies the Scholes Family Trust as the registered owner. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court 
has consistently expressed that "conclusive effect is to be given the certificate of title on the question of title to land." Bank 
of New York Mellon v. R. Onaga, Inc., __ Hawai
'i __, __ P.3d __ , 
2017 WL 3308219, at *10 (Aug. 3, 2017) (quoting Aames, 107 Hawai
'i at 101, 110 P.3d at 1048). It is also often stated that 
"a certificate of title is unimpeachable and conclusive except as otherwise provided by law[.]" In re Bishop Tr. Co., 35 Haw. 816, 
825 (Haw. Terr. 1941); see also Waikiki Malia Hotel, Inc. v. Kinkai Props. Ltd. P'ship, 75 Haw. 370, 391, 862 P.2d 1048, 1060 (1993); Honolulu Mem'l Park, Inc. v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 50 Haw. 189, 192, 436 P.2d 207, 210 (1967). 
Notably, however, certain claims of fraud have been
 
recognized as exceptions to the conclusive effect of a
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
certificate of title.
 
If the intent and purpose of the law pertaining to the
registration of land titles is to be preserved, the
integrity of certificates of title must be scrupulously
observed and every subsequent purchaser of registered land
who takes a certificate of title for value, except in cases
of fraud to which he is a party, is entitled under the
provisions of section 5041 to hold the same free from all
encumbrances except those noted on the certificate and the
7
statutory encumbrances enumerated. []
In re Bishop Tr. Co., 35 Haw. at 825 (emphasis added); see also
 
Aames, 107 Hawai 'i at 103-04, 110 P.3d at 1050-51 (analyzing the 
defendants' argument that under In re Bishop Tr. Co., the
 conclusive and unimpeachable nature of a certificate of title was
 qualified where "otherwise provided by law" or "in cases of
 fraud").
 
Furthermore, with respect to entry of a new certificate
 
of title, HRS § 501-106(b) (2006) expressly provides:
 
§501-106 Entry of new certificate.
 
. . . .
 
(b) The new certificate or memorandum shall be binding
upon the registered owner and upon all persons claiming
under the registered owner, in favor of every purchaser for
value and in good faith; provided that in all cases of
registration procured by fraud the owner may pursue all the
owner's remedies against the parties to the fraud, without
prejudice however to the rights of any innocent holder for
value of a certificate of title; and provided further that
after the transcription of the decree of registration on the
original application any subsequent registration under this
chapter procured by the presentation of a forged deed or
other instrument, shall be void.
 
(Emphasis added.) Thus, although certificates of title are
 
generally "conclusive and unimpeachable," certain types of fraudare a valid basis to challenge a certificate of title.
 
 
In 
Aames, like this case, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
addressed whether the District Court had jurisdiction over an
 ejectment action involving property registered in Land Court. 
107 Hawai
'i at 98-99, 110 P.3d at 1045-46. The defendants 
claimed there was a dispute regarding title to the property that
 divested the District Court of jurisdiction. Id.
 at 98, 110 P.3d
 
7
 The reference to "section 5041" in the quote is a reference to
Revised Laws of Hawai' i (RLH) § 5041 (1935), which is a predecessor statute to
HRS § 501-82 (2006 and 2016 Supp.).
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
at 1045. The defendants asserted there had been deficiencies in 
consummating a mortgage, pursuant to which a non-judicial foreclosure on the property had been conducted. Id. at 96, 99, 
110 P.3d at 1043, 1046. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court held, in 
relevant part, that the plaintiff's title was conclusive because the defenses to the foreclosure were not raised prior to entry of a certificate of title that followed the foreclosure. Id. at 
102-03, 110 P.3d at 1049-50; HRS § 501-118 (2006). 
Important to this case, Aames also addressed the fraud 
exception noted in In re Bishop Tr. Co. On this issue, the Supreme Court stated that "[t]hree types of fraud have been recognized in this jurisdiction in the mortgage context: (1) fraud in the factum, (2) fraud in the inducement, and (3) constructive fraud." 107 Hawai
'i at 103, 110 P.3d at 1050 
(emphasis added)(citation omitted).8 After discussing the 
different types of fraud, the court determined that "the [defendants] do not provide a discernible factual or legal argument in support of their position that the case at bar involves any one of the three types of fraud mentioned." 107 Hawai
'i at 104, 110 P.3d at 1051 (citation omitted). Thus, 
although the Supreme Court held that the fraud exception did not apply in Aames, the court's analysis supports the Kawaguchis' argument that certain fraud claims can challenge the conclusive nature of a certificate of title. See also Takushi v. BAC Home 
Loans Servicing, LP, 814 F.Supp.2d 1073, 1084 (D. Hawai
'i 
2011)(recognizing that a defense of fraud could be asserted against a certificate of title, but ruling that the plaintiffs had not alleged or made a showing of fraud). 
Here, the Kawaguchis assert that they properly raised
 
an issue regarding title to the property because Kiyoshi's
 declaration and the Circuit Court complaint assert a constructive
 
8
 Although Aames discusses the types of fraud recognized in the
 
mortgage context, and this case does not involve a mortgage foreclosure, the
discussion about fraud in Aames is nevertheless pertinent here. First, no
logical basis is apparent that would preclude application of the Aames
analysis about fraud to this case. Second, fraud exceptions qualifying the
conclusive effect of a new certificate of title are set forth in HRS § 501­106(b).
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fraud claim against his mother, Evelyn Scholes, who allegedly 
made the promise in question and is the Settlor and a Co-Trustee of the Scholes Family Trust (the registered owner of the property), and against Wong, also a Co-Trustee of the Scholes Family Trust in place of her deceased father. "Constructive fraud is characterized by the breach of [a] fiduciary or confidential relationship." Aames, 107 Hawai
'i at 104, 110 P.3d 
at 1051 (citing Honolulu Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass'n v. Murphy, 7 Haw. App. 196, 201 n.6, 753 P.2d 807, 811 n.6 (1988) and Silva v. Bisbee, 2 Haw. App. 188, 190, 628 P.2d 214, 216 (1981)); see also 37 Am. Jur. 2d Fraud and Deceit § 9 (2001) ("Constructive fraud arises on a breach of duty by one in a confidential or fiduciary relationship to another that induces justifiable reliance by the other to his or her prejudice."). The facts attested to in Kiyoshi's affidavit and the allegations in the Circuit Court complaint regarding his claim for "breach of fiduciary duty/constructive trust" are similar to circumstances in other cases where constructive fraud or a constructive trust was recognized. 
In Kam Oi Lee v. Fong Wong, 57 Haw. 137, 552 P.2d 635
 
(1976), Annie Lin Wong died intestate leaving, inter alia, her
 five children an undivided one-half interest in certain property,
 and with her surviving husband Ah Poy Wong retaining the other
 one-half interest in the property. Id. at 138, 552 P.2d at 637. 
Three of the surviving children brought an action to impose a
 constructive trust regarding their interests in the property. 
Id. at 137-138, 552 P.2d at 637. These children alleged that
 they, along with their other two siblings, had conveyed their
 interests in the property to their father, Ah Poy Wong, after he
 asked them to do so and told them he would sell some of the
 property and give them the proceeds of the sale. Id. at 138, 552
 
P.2d at 637. Soon after the children conveyed their interests in
 the property to Ah Poy Wong, he in turn conveyed the property to
 himself and his new wife. Id. A year later, Ah Poy Wong died
 
and his new wife was left with full title to the property. Id.
 
at 139, 552 P.2d at 637. The trial court held that a
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
constructive trust existed based on its findings that: there had
 
been a close family tie between Ah Poy Wong and his children and
 thus a confidential relationship existed between them; due to the
 confidential relationship, the plaintiffs relied on their
 father's representations that he would distribute proceeds to
 them from selling some or all of the property; and Ah Poy Wong
 failed to carry out his promise. Id. 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court affirmed the trial court and 
recognized that: 
A constructive trust arises where a person holding title to
property is subject to an equitable duty to convey it to
another on the ground that he would be unjustly enriched if
he were permitted to retain it. A constructive trust will
 be imposed if a transfer of land was obtained in an abuse of
a confidential relationship.
 
Id. (citations omitted); see also Teixeira v. Teixeira, 37 Haw.
 
64, 70-71 (Haw. Terr. 1945) ("The betrayal of trust and
 confidence is constructively fraudulent and gives rise to a
 constructive trust."). The court in Kam Oi Lee also ruled that:
 
The basic prerequisites for the application for an abuse of
confidence constructive trust are: (1) a confidential
relationship; (2) conveyance to the grantee based upon, and
arising out of a confidential relationship; (3) a promise to
hold for, or reconvey to, the grantor or a third person; and
(4) a subsequent refusal to reconvey resulting in the
grantee's unjust enrichment.
 
Id. at 140, 552 P.2d at 638 (citations and internal quotation
 
marks omitted).
 
In Keanu v. Kamanoulu, 20 Haw. 96 (Haw. Terr. 1910),
 
the plaintiffs brought an action against their daughter seeking
 to cancel a deed they claimed was obtained from them by fraud,
 and seeking reconveyance to them of the subject property located
 in Wailuku, Maui. Id. at 96. The evidence showed that
 
plaintiffs had resided on the property for forty-five years, were
 elderly, and spoke only the Hawaiian language. Id. at 96-97. 
For many years, plaintiffs held a life interest in the property
 and their daughter held the fee interest. Id. at 97. Shortly
 
before the deed in question was executed, daughter had
 represented to plaintiffs that she needed funds to pay off a
 mortgage on her home in Honolulu, which was about to be
 foreclosed. Id. Daughter asked plaintiffs to deed the Wailuku
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
property to her by releasing their life estate interest so that
 
she could obtain a mortgage on that property and raise the funds
 needed to pay off the mortgage on her Honolulu home. Id. 
Daughter represented she would not make any other use or
 disposition of the Wailuku property, and she led plaintiffs to
 believe they would not be deprived of the use or possession of
 the property. Id. Plaintiffs, placing confidence in their
 
daughter's representations, executed the deed in question without
 value or consideration. Id. at 97-98. Soon thereafter, daughter
 
entered a contract with another person to sell the Wailuku
 property. Id. at 98. The circuit court made numerous findings
 
adverse to the defendant daughter, but concluded that it could
 give no relief to plaintiffs and thus dismissed their suit. Id.
 
at 98. The circuit court stayed the sale of the property pending
 an appeal. Id.
 
On appeal, the Supreme Court of the Territory of 
Hawai
'i held that: 
The questions presented for our consideration are those
which concern parties to a transaction between whom thereexists that relationship which the law terms confidential.The record before us shows that the relationship between theplaintiffs and the defendant was confidential in fact aswell as in law, and that both actual and constructive fraudhas been committed in this case. 
Id. at 99-100 (emphasis added). The court further expressed:
 
By the weight of authority, if a person, by means of a parol
promise to reconvey, obtains an absolute conveyance without
consideration, or a devise, from one to whom he stands in a
fiduciary or confidential relation, a violation of the
promise is a constructive fraud, and ground for holding him
as a constructive trustee, although there may have been no
intention not to perform at the time of the promise.
 
Id. at 102 (citations omitted). The Supreme Court thus reversed
 
the circuit court's dismissal of the action and remanded the case
 with directions that the circuit court order a reconveyance of
 the Wailuku property to plaintiffs. Id.
 
Here, the Kawaguchis' motion to dismiss the District
 
Court ejectment action, and the attachments thereto, assert a
 fiduciary relationship existed between Kiyoshi, his mother Evelyn
 Scholes, and Edward Scholes. Kiyoshi's affidavit and Circuit
 Court complaint also set forth the request and promise he asserts
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was made to him by his mother and Edward Scholes, that if Kiyoshi
 
assisted in making improvements to the home, the property would
 be given to him in consideration of his contributions toward the
 property. Kiyoshi claims that he relied on this promise in
 making significant improvements to the property, including
 increasing the size of the house from about 900 square feet to
 nearly 3,000 square feet. He claims his mother and her husband
 moved to Las Vegas and obtained a loan, secured by the property,
 to purchase their Las Vegas home. Kiyoshi also claims he
 screened tenants and rented portions of the subject property, and
 that he remitted the rental proceeds to his mother. Kiyoshi's
 verified Circuit Court complaint asserts a claim for "breach of
 fiduciary duty/constructive trust" and alleges:
 
30. By virtue of their relationship, and the
agreement which they had with respect to the Wanaka Street
Property, Defendants were in a fiduciary relationship with
Plaintiff.
 
31. By not putting Plaintiff back on title after the
2003 re-finance transaction, and threatening to evict
Plaintiff and sell the Wanaka Street Property, Defendants
violated Plaintiff's trust and breached their fiduciary
duties to Plaintiffs.
 The registered owner of the property is the Scholes 
Family Trust. In turn, Evelyn Scholes, who is a purported party 
to the alleged constructive fraud, is the Settlor and Co-Trustee of the Scholes Family Trust. Based on In re Bishop Trust Co., Aames and HRS § 501-106(b), as well as the cases discussed above regarding constructive fraud and constructive trust, we conclude the Kawaguchis raised a challenge to the property's title sufficient to divest the District Court of jurisdiction. The facts attested to in Kiyoshi's affidavit, the allegations in his Circuit Court complaint, and his claim therein for breach of fiduciary duty/constructive trust, set forth the "source, nature, and extent of the title claimed by defendant[,]" as well as "further particulars sufficient to fully apprise the court of the nature of defendant's claim." Peelua, 126 Hawai
'i at 36, 265 
P.3d at 1132 (internal quotation marks omitted); DCRCP Rule 12.1. Therefore, the District Court erred when it denied the Kawaguchis' motion to dismiss. 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B. Forgery
 
In their second motion to continue trial, submitted on 
on June 29, 2015, the Kawaguchis presented an additional basis
 
for alleging fraud, i.e. forgery.9 In support of this motion,
 
the declarations of the Kawaguchis' attorney, Kemp, were
 submitted to the District Court. Kemp attested in relevant part
 that, in the Circuit Court action, she had subpoenaed the notary
 book for the notary who purportedly had notarized Kiyoshi's
 signature on the 2003 Warranty Deed, which removed Kiyoshi from
 title to the property. Kemp attested that upon production of the
 relevant documents, there was no entry in the notary book related
 to the 2003 Warranty Deed. Additionally, Kemp attested there was
 no entry for a mortgage and finance statement purportedly signed
 by Wong in 2003 as attorney in fact for Evelyn Scholes and Edward
 Scholes. Kemp attested that Kiyoshi was seeking to amend his
 Circuit Court complaint to add claims based on forgery.
 
Kiyoshi's Circuit Court complaint asserted that he was 
on title to the property prior to the 2003 Warranty Deed. He further asserted that the 2003 Warranty Deed, which removed him from title, conveyed the property to Evelyn Scholes and Edward Scholes and he received no consideration for his interest in the property. Kiyoshi further asserts that in 2005, Evelyn Scholes and Edward Scholes conveyed the property to the Scholes Family Trust. HRS § 501-106(b) provides in part that a new certificate of title "procured by the presentation of a forged deed or other instrument, shall be void." Kemp's declaration regarding potential forgery of Kiyoshi's signature on the 2003 Warranty Deed, along with the existing record in the case, raised another fraud-based claim that could challenge whether the certificate of title held by the Scholes Family Trust is valid. In short, Kiyoshi sufficiently set forth the source, nature and extent of title that he claimed and the particulars to fully apprise the District Court of the nature of his claim. Peelua, 126 Hawai
'i 
9
 "Forgery" is defined as "[a] false or altered document made to look
genuine by someone with the intent to deceive[.]" Forgery, Black's Law
 
Dictionary, 10th ed. 2014.
 
15
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 36, 265 P.3d at 1132; DCRCP Rule 12.1.
 
We thus conclude that Kiyoshi's assertion of forgery
 
related to the 2003 Warranty Deed, supported by Kemp's
 
declarations and the existing record, provided an additional
 ground to establish that the District Court lacked jurisdiction
 in this case.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
For the reasons set forth above, the Judgment for
 
Possession and the Writ of Possession, both entered on July 15,
 2015, in the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu
 Division, are vacated. This case is remanded to the District
 Court with instructions to dismiss for lack of subject matter
 jurisdiction.
 
On the briefs:
 
Gary G. Grimmer,
Ann C. Kemp,
for Defendants-Appellants. 
John D. Zalewski,
and
 
Rodney H. Uchida,
for Plaintiffs-Appellees.
 
16
 