FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
---o0o---
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
KEVIN T. WILSON, Defendant-Appellant
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001221
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 14-1-0187)
DECEMBER 26, 2017
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND FUJISE AND CHAN, JJ.
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i (State) charged
Defendant-Appellant Kevin T. Wilson (Wilson) with first-degree
terroristic threatening for committing terroristic threatening
with the use of a dangerous weapon.  The charge arose from an
incident in which Wilson allegedly threatened to kill the
complaining witness (CW), his then girlfriend, and lunged toward
her while holding a knife.  After a jury-waived bench trial, theFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)1 found Wilson
guilty as charged.  The Circuit Court sentenced Wilson to five
years of incarceration.
On appeal, Wilson contends that: (1) the Circuit Court
erred in admitting evidence which he claims was obtained as the
result of an illegal search of his residence and his illegal
arrest; and (2) without admission of the excludable evidence,
there was insufficient evidence to support a guilty verdict, and
therefore, his retrial should be barred by double jeopardy.  We
affirm Wilson's conviction and sentence.
BACKGROUND
I.
The State presented the following evidence at trial.
A.
In response to a 911 call, Honolulu Police Department
Officers Douglas Dunkirk, Kendrick Noda, and Jason Akiona were
dispatched during the evening to a residence in Kahalu #u.  The
officers were aware that a third party had reported an argument
between a male and female at that location, and that the female
had called the third party saying that she was scared.  After the
initial 911 call, the officers received several updates from
dispatch.  The officers were informed that a male and female were
arguing, the female was afraid, a knife was involved in the
argument, and that the male had the knife.
Upon arriving at the residence, Officers Dunkirk and
Noda approached the front of the house while Officer Akiona went
to the back door.  All the officers were wearing their police
uniforms.  The front door to the residence was open and the
screen door was closed.  As they approached the front door,
Officers Dunkirk and Noda could see Wilson in the house.  The
officers announced their presence and asked Wilson to step
outside.  Wilson refused and told the officer to "get the fuck
1The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
2FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
away from my house."  Officer Noda opened the screen door and
directed Wilson to come out.  Wilson complied, but continued to
argue with the officers.  Officer Dunkirk conducted a pat down of
Wilson for weapons.  No weapons were found, but Wilson remained
agitated and continued to curse at the officers. 
Meanwhile, as Officer Akiona was making his way to the
back of the house, he could hear a female crying.  When he
reached the back door, Officer Akiona could still hear the female
crying.  He called out to the female to try to get her to come to
him, but received no response.  After determining that Wilson was
out of the house, Officer Akiona entered the house through the
back door.  Upon entering, he continued calling out to the
female, saying "police . . . where are you?"  Officer Akiona
heard crying and sobbing, but did not receive a response to his
calls.  Officer Akiona followed the sounds he heard to a locked
door in a hallway.  He knocked on the door, announced "police,"
and said, "it's okay, you can open the door." 
At that point, the CW, holding a baby, opened the door
and came out of the bathroom; "[s]he was crying, she was afraid,
she was shaken."  The CW appeared to be "very scared" and was
unable to speak in full sentences. 
Officer Akiona testified that when he entered the
house, he did not have a search warrant or prior permission to
enter.  Officer Akiona explained that he entered the house
without a warrant based on the following circumstances:  The
police had received a call that a female was possibly being
harmed by a male, that a knife was involved, and "[n]ormally when
someone says they're going to harm someone and they have a knife,
we tend to think that there might be some type of injury that
could occur."  From his training and experience, Officer Akiona
was aware that a search warrant takes over six hours to obtain. 
When the officers arrived at the residence, they observed the
male, but not the female.  Officer Akiona could hear crying from
a female, but she did not respond to his call.  Officer Akiona
3FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
testified that he believed these circumstances constituted
"exigent circumstances" which required him "to make entry to
insure the safety of the female and the child."  Officer Akiona
related that "[i]n a situation where there's possible domestic
violence and someone says they're about to be stabbed," immediate
action is necessary to "insure the safety and well-being of [the
potential victim]." 
After the officers spoke with the CW, Officer Noda
located the weapons that the CW said were used during the
argument, a knife and tire iron,2 in the garage on top of a
freezer.  Officer Noda initially observed these items while
standing outside the garage, and Officer Akiona recovered the
weapons and submitted them into evidence.
B.
The CW testified that at the time of the charged
incident, she had been Wilson's girlfriend for three years.  They
had lived together on the mainland and in Hawai# i and were the
parents of an 18-month-old boy.  The CW testified that their
relationship ended on the day of the charged incident and they
were no longer together.
According to the CW, on the evening in question, she
returned home with her son after visiting her mother in the
hospital.  Wilson was "sprawled out" on their bed and smelled of
alcohol.  The CW put her son, who had fallen asleep, on the bed
next to Wilson and went back outside.  There were two cars parked
outside, both owned by the CW: a white SUV, which the CW drove,
and a Lexus sedan, which Wilson drove.  The CW opened the door of
the Lexus sedan and saw an empty condom wrapper on the floor. 
The CW thought "not again" as the condom wrapper was not the
brand that they used. 
The CW confronted Wilson with the condom wrapper, and
she told Wilson that he would need to find another place to stay
2The tire iron was an x-shaped, crossbar type of tire iron.  
4FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and that she would be selling the Lexus sedan.  Wilson replied,
"[O]kay, whatevers, I'm going back to bed."  The CW proceeded to
post the Lexus sedan for sale on craigslist.  She received
immediate responses and made arrangements to show the car to a
prospective buyer that evening.  The CW left the house driving
the Lexus sedan and also took Wilson's cell phone. 
On the way to meeting with the prospective buyer, the
CW stopped at the 7-Eleven in Kahalu #u to clean out the car.  
As she was cleaning the car, the CW received a call from Wilson,
who was angry.  Wilson said, "[B]itch, where's my motherfucking
car . . . . [Y]ou better get home . . . I'll kill you and I'll
tear up this house and destroy the house and destroy your car."
The CW was "very afraid" because of the threatening tone of
Wilson's voice and because her son was at home with Wilson. 
The CW told Wilson that she was coming home right away
and began driving home.  As she drove home, the CW called her
father (Father), who was employed as a deputy sheriff, to let him
know what was happening and the threats Wilson had made.  The CW
told Father to stay on the cell phone in case anything happened
to her because she would not have the chance to call the police. 
She also told Father that she was going to hide the phone in her
shirt and keep it on speaker phone so he could hear what was
happening to her.
When the CW arrived home, Wilson was already outside.
The CW parked the Lexus sedan, turned the engine off, and began
to exit the vehicle.   Wilson came quickly toward her with a knife
in his right hand and a tire iron in his left hand.  The CW
testified that "he had the knife and the [tire iron] and he came
basically striding, lunging towards me."  The CW stated, "I
thought I was going to die.  I thought he's really going to kill
me this time because he was coming at me so quickly and he had
the knife up."  As Wilson lunged toward the CW with the knife and
tire iron in his hands, he said, "[B]itch, I'll motherfucking
kill you."  The CW got back into the Lexus sedan and shut the
5FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
door.  She screamed, "[H]e has a knife, he has a knife," so
Father could hear her.
The CW tried to lock the doors to the Lexus sedan, but
could not locate the proper button.  Wilson opened the door and
pulled the key out of the ignition.  Wilson was swearing at the
CW and repeatedly said, "where the fuck were you, get out of my
motherfucking car . . . [, and] [B]itch, I'll kill you and I'm
going to destroy your car."  The CW got out of the car, and she
tried to defuse the situation and to have Wilson focus on
something other than trying to kill her.  The CW told Wilson to
relax, to calm down, and that everything was fine. 
Wilson kept swearing at the CW and pacing back and
forth with the knife and tire iron in his hand.  However, Wilson
calmed down a little after the CW told him that she had just gone
to 7-Eleven to get something to eat, but came right back when he
called.  While Wilson remained outside, the CW went into the
house to check on her son.  She locked the front door and she
locked the bedroom door where her son was sleeping because she
was afraid Wilson would try to come in the house and kill her and
her son.  The knife that Wilson had threatened the CW with was a
kitchen knife that was part of a knife set they kept in the
kitchen.  When the CW went into the house, she saw the other
knives still in their proper "brick" slots, grabbed as many as
she could, and hid them around the house so she could protect
herself if necessary. 
When Wilson tried to enter the house through the front
door, the CW told him she would not let him come in with the
knife.  Wilson eventually opened the door with a set of keys he
had, but apparently left the knife outside.  While in the house,
Wilson and the CW continued to argue, which woke up their son,
who started screaming and crying because he was locked in the
bedroom and could not open the door.  Wilson and the CW then
turned their attention to getting their son out of the bedroom,
which required removing the doorknob.  While Wilson was working
6FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
on removing the doorknob, the CW saw police vehicles approaching
the residence.  As soon as the bedroom door was open, the CW
grabbed her son, ran to the bathroom, and locked the door.  She
removed everything from under the bathroom sink and told her son
to get under the sink.  The CW then sat on the ground with her
back against the door to prevent Wilson from coming in.  The CW
did not leave the bathroom until a police officer knocked on the
bathroom door.
Father's testimony corroborated the CW's account of the
incident.  Father testified that while he was visiting his wife
at the hospital, he received a call from the CW.  The CW was
excited and upset, and she told Father that "[Wilson], he's going
crazy. . . . [H]e's going to smash my car, he's going to smash
the house.  [My son] is at home."  The CW said she was on her way
home, and she told Father that she was going to hide her cell
phone in her bra.  The CW told Father to call 911 if anything
happened.  With his phone, Father stayed on the call with the CW. 
He used his wife's phone to call 911, and he explained the
situation to the 911 dispatcher and gave the dispatcher the CW's
address. 
Father subsequently heard Wilson yelling that "he's
going to smash the car, . . . he's going to smash the house, he's
going to break up everything, he's going to kill [the CW]." 
Father described Wilson's tone of voice as "[a]ngry, crazy, just
going nuts."  Father called 911 again.  While on the phone with
the 911 dispatcher, Father heard his daughter through the other
phone yelling, "[W]hat are you doing with the knife, oh, no,
Daddy, he's coming at me with the knife, he's got a knife,
[Wilson], put the knife away, put the knife away. . . . What am I
going to do, Dad, he's going to kill me, Dad, what am I going to
do?"  Father asked the 911 dispatcher whether she heard what the
CW had said, and the dispatcher said she heard it.  Father told
the CW to leave and run to Father's house, which was down the
road. 
7FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
II.
Wilson testified in his own defense.  According to
Wilson, on the day of the incident, he returned home in the early
evening.  While he was laying down in the bedroom, the CW angrily
confronted him with an empty condom package.  Wilson told the CW,
"don't start this.  You don't even know what you're talking
about.  There's nothing going on," and then he went back to
sleep.  The next thing Wilson heard was the CW speeding off in
his Lexus sedan.  When he could not locate his phone, he "knew
[the CW] had taken it."  He found another phone and called the CW
who said she was at the 7-Eleven checking his car "for evidence
of you fucking with bitches[.]"  The CW told Wilson that she was
going to call every number in his cell phone until she found out
with whom he was having sex and that he needed to leave her
house.
Wilson decided that it might be a good idea if they
took "a little time-out" in their relationship.  So he called the
CW back and told her, "if you want me to leave, go ahead and
bring my car back.  I'll pack up my stuff, and I'll go ahead and
leave and take a little bit of a break, if that's what we need to
do."  Wilson denied threatening the CW or threatening to destroy
the house, things in the house, or the CW's SUV.
When the CW returned home, she kept the engine running
with the lights on and her foot on the brake.  Wilson asked the
CW if she wanted to run him over, tear up the house, or tear up 
his car, and he reminded her that their son was sleeping
upstairs, right above the garage.  According to Wilson, the CW
said that she just wanted to tear up the car.  In response,
Wilson went to look for something the CW could use to "tear up
the Lexus [sedan] without tearing up the garage."  He found a
knife on top of his "rag box where [he] cut up the rags" and a
tire iron.3  He placed the knife and tire iron on the driver's
3Wilson acknowledged that the knife, which he said he
(continued...)
8FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
seat of the other car (the SUV) and invited the CW to use them to
"[h]ave fun" and damage the Lexus sedan.  Wilson denied
threatening to kill the CW.  Wilson reached into the Lexus sedan,
turned the engine off, put the car in park, and removed the keys.  
The CW went into the house.  After Wilson checked his
car for damage and put the knife and tire iron back where he had
found them, he used his key to enter the house.  He checked on
his son, who apparently was still sleeping, turned on the
television, put food in the microwave, and accessed the internet
through his computer.  Wilson later heard a door slam and
discovered that his son was locked in the bedroom.  Wilson worked
with the CW to unscrew the doorknob, and when the door was
opened, the CW indicated she would take the child to the bathroom
to wash up.
Wilson went to the garage to get some laundry.  As he
was reentering the house, he saw Officer Akiona running toward
him and screaming for him to get on the ground.  Because Officer
Akiona was not in uniform and did not identify himself as a
police officer, Wilson thought there was a "home invasion" being
perpetrated.  Wilson yelled at Officer Akiona to get off his
property, and Wilson pulled the front screen door shut and locked
it.  Officer Noda then opened the back door and forced Wilson out
the front door.  Wilson said he overheard the CW telling the
officers that she wanted to keep Wilson out of the house and the
officers responding that their hands were tied unless Wilson did
something to put the CW in fear of her life.  The CW then told
the officers that Wilson had a knife and the officers arrested
Wilson.
III.
The Circuit Court found Wilson guilty as charged. 
Among other things, the Circuit Court found that the CW's version
3(...continued)
grabbed from the garage, was a "kitchen knife" that was from
their kitchen.
9FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of events was more credible than Wilson's, especially the CW's
version regarding what transpired during their phone conversation 
while the CW was at the 7-Eleven and their interaction when the
CW returned to the residence.  The Circuit Court found and
concluded that collectively, the testimonies of the police
officers, the CW, and Father "establish a logical and
credible sequence of events," and the Circuit Court resolved "all
issues of fact based on said testimonies."
At sentencing, the CW addressed the Circuit Court and
stated that it has "been about eight months since the night Mr.
Wilson threatened and attempted to kill me."  The CW told the
Circuit Court that the incident "still "haunt[s]" her, leaving
her in constant fear for the safety of herself and her son.  The
CW stated that Wilson had threatened to kill her on several
occasions and always emphasized that he would kill her if she
ever called the police or reported him.  The CW was fearful that
if Wilson was released, he would harm her, her son, or her
family.  The CW reported that she had obtained a fifty-year
restraining order against Wilson and that the family court had
awarded her sole custody of their son with no visitation based on
Wilson's violent criminal history4 and "accounts of physical
abuse and domestic abuse" against her.  Based upon Wilson's
violent criminal history and the violent nature of his
terroristic threatening offense, the CW asked the Circuit Court
to sentence Wilson to "the maximum sentence allowable by law." 
The Circuit Court sentenced Wilson to five years of
imprisonment.  The Circuit Court entered its Judgment on
September 29, 2014.
DISCUSSION
I.
Wilson contends that the Circuit Court erred in
admitting evidence which he claims was obtained as the result of
4Wilson's criminal history included convictions for rape,
battery against a correctional officer, and aggravated burglary.
10FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
an illegal search of his residence and his illegal arrest.  As
explained below, Wilson is not entitled to relief on this claim.
A.
At the outset, we note that Wilson waived his right to
challenge the admission of evidence on the ground that it was
obtained as the result of an illegal search of his residence or
his illegal arrest.  Wilson did not file a motion before trial to
suppress evidence on this ground.5  See Hawai#i Rules of Penal
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 12(b)(3) (2007) (identifying motions to
suppress evidence as motions that must be raised prior to trial);
HRPP Rule 12(f) (2007) (stating that failure to timely raise
requests which must be made prior to trial "shall constitute 
waiver thereof, but the court for cause shown may grant relief
from the waiver"). 
In addition, Wilson did not object at trial to the
introduction of any evidence, including the kitchen knife or tire
iron recovered by the police, on the ground that the evidence was
obtained as the result of an illegal search of his residence or
5The record indicates that while Wilson was represented by
his first appointed counsel, he sent correspondence to the
Circuit Court that included a "Motion to Suppress," which Wilson
apparently drafted, seeking to suppress evidence he claimed was
obtained as the result of an illegal entry of his home and his
illegal arrest.  The Circuit Court advised Wilson that his
correspondence constituted an impermissible ex parte
communication with the Circuit Court and that it was sending his
correspondence to his attorney.  Subsequently, Wilson was
appointed new counsel, who filed a Motion to Extend Pretrial
Motions Deadline (Motion to Extend).  In support of this motion,
counsel filed a declaration representing that Wilson "recently
has insisted" that counsel file a document that Wilson had
prepared, which counsel attached as Exhibit A, but that counsel
instead "would file a Motion to Dismiss in lieu of the document
that Defendant prepared."  The document attached as Exhibit A was
entitled "Petition for Writ of Habeas Corpus" and sought to
suppress evidence which was "the product of an illegal entry and
illegal arrest[.]"  However, at the hearing on the Motion to
Extend, at which Wilson was present, the Motion to Extend was
withdrawn, and the case proceeded to trial.  The record does not
show that Wilson ever actually filed a motion seeking to suppress
evidence or requested that the Circuit Court rule on such a
motion prior to trial.
11FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
his illegal arrest.  Indeed, the first time the issue of the
police's purported illegal search or arrest was raised at trial
was during Wilson's closing argument.  In Wilson's closing
argument, his counsel stated: "Your Honor, first I'd like to
argue that there's no probable cause for the arrest or the search
that there should have been an arrest warrant obtained or a
search warrant obtained.  And I'll incorporate that in my
arguments."  However, counsel did not further address, elaborate
on, or provide support for these claims in the remainder of his
closing argument.  Under these circumstances, we conclude that
Wilson waived the claim that evidence obtained as the result of
an illegal search or arrest was improperly admitted at trial. 
See State v. Hoglund , 71 Haw. 147, 150, 785 P.2d 1311, 1313
(1990) ("Generally, the failure to properly raise an issue at the
trial level precludes a party from raising that issue on
appeal."); State v. Ildefonso, 72 Haw. 573, 584, 827 P.2d 648,
655 (1992) ("Our review of the record reveals that [the
defendant] did not raise this argument at trial, and thus it is
deemed to have been waived."); State v. Moses , 102 Hawai #i 449,
456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003) ("As a general rule, if a party does
not raise an argument at trial, that argument will be deemed to
have been waived on appeal[.]").
B.
In any event, even if Wilson did not waive his illegal
search or arrest claim, we conclude that Wilson is not entitled
to relief on this claim.  On appeal, Wilson claims that the
search of his residence and his arrest were illegal because the
police did not have a search or arrest warrant and there were no
exigent circumstances justifying the search of his residence.  In
his opening brief, Wilson states that "[e]xigent circumstances
exist when an immediate police response is reasonably required to
prevent imminent danger to life or serious damage to property, or
to forestall the likely escape of a suspect or the threatened
removal or destruction of evidence."  See State v. Lloyd , 61 Haw.
505, 512, 606 P.2d 912, 918 (1980).  He contends, however, that
12FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
there was no exigency to justify an exception to the warrant
requirement,6 and therefore, the police's entry into his
residence was illegal.
1.
The State counters that the police's warrantless entry
into the residence was justified based on their "objectively
reasonable basis for believing that medical assistance was
needed, or persons were in danger."  In support of its argument,
the State cites federal cases that have recognized an emergency
aid exception to the warrant requirement.  See Brigham City v.
Stuart, 547 U.S. 398, 403 (2006) ("[L]aw enforcement officers may
enter a home without a warrant to render emergency assistance to
an injured occupant or to protect an occupant from imminent
injury."); Michigan v. Fisher, 558 U.S. 45, 49 (2009) (concluding
that a police officer may make a warrantless entry into a
residence where the officer has "an objectively reasonable basis
for believing that medical assistance was needed, or persons were
in danger." (internal quotation marks and citation omitted));
Johnson v. City of Memphis , 617 F.3d 864, 867-71 (6th Cir. 2010). 
The State notes that the officers were responding to a domestic
abuse 911 call, which heightened the potential that someone was
injured or in danger due to the "combustible nature" of those
situations.  See Tierney v. Davidson , 133 F.3d 189, 197 (2d Cir.
1998) ("Courts have recognized the combustible nature of domestic
disputes, and have accorded great latitude to an officer's belief
that warrantless entry was justified by exigent circumstances
when the officer had substantial reason to believe that one of
the parties to the dispute was in danger."); United States v.
Martinez, 406 F.3d 1160, 1164-65 (9th Cir. 2005).  Here, the
6A general exception to the warrant requirement exists "when
the government has probable cause to search, and exigent
circumstances exist which advise against delay in proceeding to
do so."  State v. Clark , 65 Haw. 488,  494, 654 P.2d 355, 360
(1982).  In his argument on appeal, Wilson does not address
whether the police had probable cause to search his residence.   
13FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
police had information that a domestic abuse 911 call had been
received; that the female was afraid and that a knife was
involved; Officer Akiona heard sounds of a female crying; and
there was no response to Officer Akiona's calls into the house. 
If the CW had been stabbed, injured, or restrained by Wilson, the
failure of the police to enter the residence without a warrant to
assure the CW's well-being could have resulted in dire
consequences to her.
2.
We note that in State v. Ramos-Saunders, 135 Hawai #i
299, 306, 349 P.3d 406, 413 (App. 2015), this court observed that
Hawai#i had not yet adopted the federal "emergency aid exception"
to the warrant requirement.  Applying existing Hawai# i caselaw,
we affirmed the trial court's finding that there was no exigency
justifying the warrantless search and held that "the totality of
the circumstances indicate the officers were not faced with an
'immediate danger to life or serious injury or an immediate
threatened removal or destruction of evidence.'"  Id. at 307, 349
P.3d at 414 (citation omitted).  However, given the trial court's
factual findings and our analysis on appeal, the circumstances
presented in Ramos-Saunders would not have satisfied the federal
emergency aid exception.  We therefore do not read Ramos-Saunders
as rejecting or precluding this court from adopting an emergency
aid exception to the warrant requirement.
3.
For the reasons articulated by the United States
Supreme Court in Brigham City  for recognizing an emergency aid
exception to the warrant requirement under the Fourth Amendment,
we recognize an emergency aid exception to the warrant
requirement under Article I, Section 7 of the Hawai #i
Constitution.  In doing so, we join numerous other jurisdictions
which have recognized this exception.  See Brigham City , 547 U.S.
at 403; S tate v. Baker , 260 P.3d 476 (Or. 2011) (en banc);
Commonwealth v. Gordon, 29 N.E.3d 856 (Mass. App. Ct. 2015);
State v. Bennett, 351 P.3d 363 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2015); Mincey v.
14FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Arizona, 437 U.S. 385, 392 (1978) ("Numerous state and federal
cases have recognized that the Fourth Amendment does not bar
police officers from making warrantless entries and searches when
they reasonably believe that a person within is in need of
immediate aid." (footnotes omitted)).
In Brigham City, the Supreme Court explained that
"[o]ne exigency obviating the requirement of a warrant is the
need to assist persons who are seriously injured or threatened
with such injury.  The need to protect or preserve life or avoid
serious injury is justification for what would be otherwise
illegal absent an exigency or emergency."  Brigham City , 547 U.S.
at 403 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).  The
Court therefore held that "law enforcement officers may enter a
home without a warrant to render emergency assistance to an
injured occupant or to protect an occupant from imminent injury." 
Id.  "This 'emergency aid exception' does not depend on the
officers' subjective intent or the seriousness of any crime they
are investigating when the emergency arises."  Fisher, 558 U.S.
at 47.  Rather, the test is an objective one that focuses on
whether law enforcement officers had "'an objectively reasonable
basis for believing' that medical assistance was needed, or
persons were in danger."  Id. at 49 (citation omitted).
Here, we agree with the State that given the
information available to the police, Officer Akiona had an
objectively reasonable basis for believing that medical
assistance was needed, or that persons were in danger.  As noted,
the police knew that there had been a 911 domestic abuse call
involving a male and female, in which the female was afraid and
the male had a knife; upon arrival at the scene, the police
located the male, but not the female; and Officer Akiona heard a
female crying, but the female did not respond to his calls. 
Especially given the domestic violence context of the 911 call,7
7Tierney, 133 F.3d at 197 (recognizing the combustible
nature of domestic disputes and the need to give officers
(continued...)
15FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the police could reasonably have believed that the female did not
respond to Officer Akiona's calls because she had been stabbed,
injured, restrained, or was otherwise in critical need of
assistance.  We conclude that "[i]t does not meet the needs of
law enforcement or the demands of public safety to require
officers to walk away from a situation like the one they
encountered here."  Id.  Under the circumstances of this case, we
conclude that Officer Akiona's warrantless entry into the
residence was justified by the emergency aid exception to the
warrant requirement.
C.
Finally, even assuming that the police's entry into the
residence and Wilson's arrest were illegal, it would not affect
the outcome of this case.  On appeal, Wilson does not specify
what evidence he contends was the excludable fruit of the alleged
illegal search of his residence and his alleged illegal arrest. 
Presumably, Wilson challenges the admission of the kitchen knife
and tire iron that were recovered by the police after they
entered the residence.
However, the police's recovery of the kitchen knife and
tire iron and the State's introduction of these items as physical
evidence at trial was not important to the State's case.  There
was no dispute that Wilson possessed a kitchen knife and tire
iron during the incident.  Indeed, Wilson himself testified that
he grabbed the knife and tire iron during the incident with the
CW after she returned home from the 7-Eleven.  The dispute at
7(...continued)
latitude in assessing whether one of the parties to the dispute
was in danger); Martinez, 406 F.3d at 1164 (concluding that the
"volatility of situations involving domestic violence make them
particularly well-suited for an application of the emergency
doctrine"); United States v. Lawrence , 236 F.Supp.2d 953, 961-62
(D. Neb. 2002) (noting that "[d]omestic abusers intimidate and
control their victims" and citing statistics from a 1992 United
States Supreme Court case that "'in an average 12–month period in
this country, approximately two million women are the victims of
severe assaults by their male partners.'" (citation and brackets
omitted)). 
16FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
trial was over how these items were used.  The CW testified that
Wilson used these items to threaten her.  Wilson denied
threatening the CW with the knife or tire iron and instead
testified that he offered these items to the CW so she could use
them to damage his car.  The introduction of the kitchen knife
and tire iron at trial, items that are typically found at most
homes, added little, if anything, to the strength of the State's
case.  Accordingly, there was no reasonable possibility that any
erroneous admission of the kitchen knife or tire iron as physical
evidence at trial affected the outcome of the case.
To the extent that Wilson challenges the admission of
the CW's testimony as the excludable fruit of the alleged illegal
search or arrest, that challenge is without merit.  With respect
to the suppression of derivative evidence, "the fruit of the
poisonous tree doctrine prohibits the use of evidence at trial
which comes to light as a result of the exploitation of a
previous illegal act of the police."  State v. Fukusaku , 85
Hawai#i 462, 475, 946 P.2d 32, 45 (1997) (internal quotation
marks and citation omitted).  "[N]ot all derivative evidence is
inadmissible[.]"  Id.   Rather,
[a]dmissibility is determined by ascertaining whether the
evidence objected to as being the "fruit" was discovered or
became known by the exploitation of the prior illegality or
by other means sufficiently distinguished as to purge the
later evidence of the initial taint.  Where the government
proves that the evidence was discovered through information
from an independent source or where the connection between
the illegal acts and the discovery of the evidence is so
attenuated that the taint has been dissipated, the evidence
is not a "fruit" and, therefore, is admissible.
Id. (block quote format altered; citation omitted).  Thus, the
pivotal question under the fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine
is: "Disregarding the prior illegality, would the police
nevertheless have discovered the evidence?"  State v. Trinque ,
140 Hawai# i 269, 281, 400 P.3d 470, 482 (2017) (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted).
In this case, the answer to that pivotal question is
clearly "yes."  Here, the police knew about the CW and certain
details regarding the alleged terroristic threatening before they
17FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
entered the residence and arrested Wilson.  At the CW's request,
Father had called 911.  Father's 911 calls disclosed that Wilson
was arguing with the CW, that the CW was afraid, that a knife was
involved in the argument, and that Wilson had the knife.  More
importantly, the CW, the victim of the charged terroristic
threatening offense, was a cooperative and willing witness for
the prosecution.  The CW spoke willingly with the officers after
Officer Akiona found her in the locked bathroom, later gave a
recorded statement to the police, testified willingly at trial,
obtained a fifty-year restraining order against Wilson, and at
Wilson's sentencing, asked the Circuit Court to impose the
maximum sentence allowable by law.  The record plainly shows that
disregarding the alleged illegal search and arrest, the police
would nevertheless have independently discovered the CW's
testimony, the CW would have testified for the prosecution at
trial, and any connection between the alleged prior illegality
and the CW's testimony was attenuated.  Under these
circumstances, the CW's testimony clearly would not have been
subject to suppression under the fruit of the poisonous tree
doctrine.  See United States v. Ceccolini , 435 U.S. 268, 274-79
(1978) (holding that the trial testimony of a witness was an act
of her own free will and not subject to suppression under the
fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine and observing that "[r]ules
which disqualify knowledgeable witnesses from testifying at trial
are . . . 'serious obstructions to the ascertainment of truth'"
(citation omitted)); United States v. Brookins , 614 F.2d 1037,
1041-49 (5th Cir. 1980) (holding that a witness's trial testimony
was not subject to suppression as the fruit of the poisonous tree
because his testimony was attenuated from the illegal police
conduct and the witness would have been discovered through
ordinary police investigation); United States v. Leonardi , 623
F.2d 746, 751-54 (2d Cir. 1980).  
II.
Wilson argues that without the evidence excludable
under the fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine, there was
18FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
insufficient evidence to support a guilty verdict, and therefore,
his retrial should be barred by double jeopardy.  As established
by our foregoing analysis, this claim is without merit. 
CONCLUSION
  We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment.
On the briefs:
Andrew T. Park
for Defendant-Appellant
Stephen K. Tsushima
Deputy Prosecutingy Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
19