NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000015
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE MATTER OF PC
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-M NO. 14-1-6971)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Reifurth, Presiding Judge, Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)

 
Respondent-Appellant PC appeals from the "Findings and
 
Order of Involuntary Hospitalization" (Findings & Order) filed on
 
December 9, 2014 in the Family Court of the First Circuit (family
 
1
court) in which the family court ordered that PC be
involuntarily committed at the Tripler Army Medical Center (TAMC)
 for a period not to exceed seven days from the date of the
 hearing, unless sooner discharged. 
On appeal, PC contends that the family court erred in
 
concluding that there was clear and convincing evidence that PC
 was "imminently dangerous to others" warranting involuntary
 hospitalization
2. 
1
 The Honorable Jennifer L. Ching presided.
 
2
 PC also contends that although the commitment period has expired,
this appeal is not moot because it falls within the collateral consequence
exception to the mootness doctrine. We find the application of the collateralconsequence exception appropriate under the circumstances of this particularcase and therefore, the issue on appeal is not moot. See Hamilton ex rel. 
Lethem v. Lethem, 119 Hawai' i 1, 9-10, 193 P.3d 839, 847-848 (2008). (adopting
the collateral consequence exception to the mootness doctrine in a caseinvolving domestic violence temporary restraining orders (TRO) where there wasa reasonable possibility that prejudicial collateral consequences would occuras a result of the entry of the TRO.) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve PC's
 point of error as follows, and affirm the family court's Findings
 & Order.
 
On November 24, 2014, PC was admitted to TAMC for
 
emergency hospitalization for having delusional thoughts that led
 to homicidal ideations towards his father (Father). Prior to
 
PC's admission, PC was visiting his family for the holidays and
 
temporarily living with his mother (Mother) and Father. PC was
 
experiencing delusions of being assaulted earlier in life, which
 
he believes Father was responsible for, causing increased
 tensions within the family. During this time, PC sent
 threatening text messages to his parents which included pictures
 of guns, bullets, and knives. On November 23, 2014, Mother and
 Father decided to vacate their home and stay at a friend's house
 out of fear for their safety. That night, PC plunged a large
 kitchen knife into his parent's mattress on the side where Father
 usually slept. Mother discovered the knife impaled in the
 mattress the next day and called the police. The police took PC
 into custody and transported him to TAMC where he was admitted as
 a patient.
 
On November 25, 2014, the Department of Health filed a
 
"Petition for Involuntary Hospitalization" (Petition). At the
 December 4, 2014 hearing on the Petition, the family court found
 that pursuant to HRS §§ 334-60.2 and 334-60.5(j), PC was (1)
 mentally ill, (2) imminently dangerous to others, and (3) in need
 of care and/or treatment and there was no suitable alternative
 available through existing facilities and programs, which would
 be less restrictive than hospitalization. The Petition was
 granted, and the court issued an order authorizing TAMC to retain
 PC for treatment for a period not to exceed seven days from the
 date of the hearing. 
The statutory criteria for involuntary civil commitment 
are set forth in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 334-60.2, which
 provides:
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
"Clear and convincing evidence" is defined as:3
an intermediate standard of proof greater than a preponderance of
the evidence, but less than proof beyond a reasonable doubt
required in criminal cases.  It is that degree of proof which will
produce in the mind of the trier of fact a firm belief or
conviction as to the allegations sought to be established, and
requires the existence of a fact be highly probable.
Masaki v. General Motors Corp., 71 Haw. 1, 15, 780 P.2d 566, 574,
reconsideration denied , 71 Haw. 664, 833 P2d 899 (1989) (citations
omitted).
3Involuntary hospitalization criteria. A person may be committed to
a psychiatric facility for involuntary hospitalization, if the
court finds:
(1) That the person is mentally ill or suffering from
substance abuse;
(2) That the person is imminently dangerous to self or
others; and
(3) That the person is in need of care or treatment, or
both, and there is no suitable alternative available through
existing facilities and programs which would be less
restrictive than hospitalization. 
HRS § 334-60.2 (2016 Supp.).  The first criterion must be
established by the "beyond a reasonable doubt" standard, while
the second and third criteria must be established by the "clear
and convincing evidence" standard.  HRS  § 334-60.5(j) (2016
Supp.).
HRS § 334-1 defines "Dangerous to others" as "likely to
do substantial physical or emotional injury on another, as
evidenced by a recent act, attempt or threat."  HRS § 334-1
(2010).  "'Imminently dangerous to self or others' means that,
without intervention, the person will likely become dangerous to
self or dangerous to others within the next forty-five days." HRS
§ 334-1 (2016 Supp.). 
The issue presented on appeal is whether there was
clear and convincing evidence3 in the record to support the
family court's findings that PC was "imminently dangerous to
others."  The family court specifically found that PC was:
imminently dangerous to others, by clear and convincing evidence,
in that the Subject is likely to do substantial physical and
emotional injury on Mother and Father as evidenced by the recent
act of plunging a large kitchen knife in the Father's side of the
mattress, by the recent threats to kill Father, and the recent
threatening text messages sent by Subject to Mother and Father.
 
The family court based its determination regarding whether PC wasNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
"imminently dangerous to others" on the testimony of three 
witnesses, Dr. Helena H. Nakama (Dr. Nakama), PC's treating psychiatrist during his admission to TAMC, Mother and Father. 
Dr. Nakama testified that PC would be imminently
 
dangerous to others if he was immediately released from the
 hospital based on the following factors: (1) the day before the
 hearing, PC told her that he wanted to leave the hospital and
 "bear arms"; (2) PC admitted to having homicidal ideations toward
 Father, and continued to "perseverate and ruminate on his father
 as well as other unspecified people that he believes were
 involved" in his delusion of being assaulted; (3) seeing Father
 at the hearing on the Petition after not seeing him for several
 days could exacerbate the situation; (4) the incident on November
 23, 2014 when PC plunged a large kitchen knife into his parents'
 mattress; and (5) the threatening text messages PC sent to Mother
 and Father, which included pictures of guns, bullets, and knives. 
Dr. Nakama further stated that a period of seven days in which PC
 would be involuntarily committed is being requested in order to
 further evaluate PC, attempt to administer medication, keep him
 in a secure environment, and for discharge planning.
 
Father testified in regards to his concerns of his own
 
safety in light of the threats made by PC. Specifically, Father
 discussed how his presence around PC caused PC to become
 increasingly agitated inducing erratic behavior. Father would
 leave his home during these behavioral episodes to avoid
 aggravating the situation further. Father stated that he
 perceived the various text messages with the accompanying
 pictures sent by PC as threats to his own safety. 
Mother testified that she felt that PC's behavior and
 
the emails and text messages received from PC were of a 
threatening nature causing concern for the safety of Father and
 herself. She explained that she had been the one to discover the
 large kitchen knife plunged into Father's side of the mattress
 and that she felt that had Father been home, that there would
 have been serious injury to one or both of them. 
PC's contention that the evidence in support of
 
imminent danger to others was not clear and convincing because
 Dr. Nakama's request that PC be committed for seven days or less
 
4
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
suggested that although PC was still delusional, he no longer 
harbored the homicidal ideations towards his father that he had when he was first admitted to TAMC, are without merit.  The 
family court's decision to civilly commit PC for a period of 
seven days does not imply that PC was no longer imminently dangerous to others. The family court's decision was within the court's discretion to make and was fully supported by evidence in the record and reasonable reliance on the credible expert testimony of Dr. Nakama's assessment of PC's care and treatment. 
Testimony from Dr. Nakama, Father and Mother
 
constituted clear and convincing evidence in the record to
 support the family court in concluding that PC was imminently
 dangerous to others (i.e. PC was likely to do substantial
 physical and emotional injury on Mother and Father as evidenced
 by the recent act of plunging a large kitchen knife in Father's
 side of the mattress, by the recent threats to kill Father, and
 the recent threatening text messages sent by PC to Father and
 Mother). Accordingly, the underlying Finding of Facts, which
 support the family court's conclusion that PC was imminently
 dangerous to others by clear and convincing evidence are not
 clearly erroneous. 
Therefore, the family court's December 9, 2014
 
"Findings and Order of Involuntary Hospitalization" is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 15, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
William H. Jameson, Jr.,
Deputy Public Defender
for Respondent-Subject/
Appellant.
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Julio C. Herrera,
Mary Anne Magnier, and
Jay K. Goss,
Deputy Attorneys General
for Appellee Department of
Health.
 Associate Judge
5
 