NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000060 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
BONNIE LIMATOC-DEPONTE, Petitioner-Appellee,
v. 
EDMOND CANI, Respondent-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
NORTH AND SOUTH HILO DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 3SS17-1-0385) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Respondent-Appellant Edmond Cani (Cani)
 appeals from 
the Order Granting Petition for Injunction Against Harassment 
(Order
) in favor of Petitioner-Appellee Bonnie Limatoc-Deponte 
(Limatoc-Deponte) entered by the District Court of the Third 
Circuit, North and South Hilo Division (District Court) on 
January 10, 2018.  Cani contends that: 
1. the District Court lacked jurisdiction over an 
incident that took place within the Hawai# i Volcanoes National 
Park; and 
2. the evidence was insufficient to support the 
Order. 
For the reasons explained below, we affirm the Order. 
On November 14, 2017, Limatoc-Deponte filed a petition 
for a temporary restraining order (TRO) and injunction against 
Cani.  A fifteen-day temporary restraining order was issued  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
against Cani nunc pro tunc November 13, 2017,  and a return was 
set for November 29, 2017.  Cani appeared at the return and 
denied the allegations.  The District Court set a trial for January 10, 2018, and extended the TRO until that date.
2 1
Trial took place on January 10, 2018.3 Limatoc-Deponte 
testified that on October 13, 2017, she was driving a mini-bus on a tour at Rainbow Falls.  One of her passengers said, "Bonnie, that guy is getting out of his bus."  Limatoc-Deponte then saw Cani outside her mini-bus, yelling and swearing at her and punching the passenger door and exit window.  Limatoc-Deponte drove away.  Cani tried to follow in his mini-bus but another car was in the way.  Limatoc-Deponte testified that then, on October 31, 2017, she had driven a tour group to the Jaggar Museum at the Hawai# i Volcanoes National Park.  As she was 
waiting for the passengers to return to the bus, Cani walked up, swore, and threatened her.  She made a police report.  The District Court received the report in evidence. 
Cani testified on his own behalf.  He said he was 
driving a tour bus at Rainbow Falls on October 13, 2017.  His bus was parked.  A bus driven by Limatoc-Deponte almost hit his bus. Their buses left Rainbow Falls at the same time.  Cani said Limatoc-Deponte's bus was going "extremely slow.  Like block me." He pulled up next to her "to tell her that you almost hit me there, so be careful."  Cani said, "she gave me the bird.  And then she left."  On "the next cruise ship day," Cani saw Limatoc-Deponte at the Jaggar Museum.  He asked her, "So are you always like that or that was a special day that you had some kind of problem?" 
After hearing closing arguments, the District Court 
issued the Order.  This appeal followed. 
Cani incorrectly contends that the District Court 
lacked jurisdiction because the second incident happened at 
1 The Honorable Diana L. Van De Car signed the TRO. 
2 The Honorable Darien W.L. Ching Nagata presided over the return. 
3 The Honorable M. Kanani Laubach presided over the trial. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai# i Volcanoes National Park, where the federal government has 
"sole and exclusive jurisdiction[.]"  Section 16(b)(ii) of Public 
Law No. 86-3, 73 Stat. 4 (1959), also known as the Hawaii Admission Act, gives the State of Hawai# i concurrent jurisdiction 
over Hawai# i
 Volcanoes National Park.  Cf. State v. Thomas, 
8 Haw. App. 497, 810 P.2d 668 (1991) (state had concurrent jurisdiction under Hawaii Statehood Act § 16(b)(ii) to prosecute defendant for abuse of family or household member in violation of HRS § 709-906(1) for an incident committed on federal property at Pu#uloa Naval Reservation).  The District Court had jurisdiction 
to issue the Order under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 604-10.5(b) and (c).
4 
We disagree with Cani's contention that the evidence 
was insufficient to support the District Court's Order.  First, 
Cani argues that the District Court should not have considered evidence about what happened at Jaggar Museum because the court 
4 HRS § 604-10.5 (2016) provides, in relevant part: 
Power to enjoin and temporarily restrain harassment . 
(a) For the purposes of this section: 
"Course of conduct" means a pattern of conduct
composed of a series of acts over any period of time
evidencing a continuity of purpose. 
"Harassment" means: 
(1) Physical harm, bodily injury, assault, or the
threat of imminent physical harm, bodily injury,or assault; or 
(2) An intentional or knowing course of conductdirected at an individual that seriously alarmsor disturbs consistently or continually bothersthe individual and serves no legitimate purpose;provided that such course of conduct would causea reasonable person to suffer emotionaldistress. 
(b) The district courts shall have the power to
enjoin, prohibit, or temporarily restrain harassment. 
(c) Any person who has been subjected to harassment
may petition the district court of the district in which thepetitioner resides for a temporary restraining order and aninjunction from further harassment. 
The statutory definition of harassment does not include a geographic orjurisdictional component. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
had no jurisdiction over Hawai# i Volcanoes National Park.  Citing 
Duarte v. Young, 134 
Hawai# i 459, 464, 342 P.3d 878, 883 (App. 
2014), he then argues that his conduct at Rainbow Falls was a 
single act that, "even if it disturbs, alarms, bothers, or intimidates an individual[,]" does not meet the statutory definition of "course of conduct." 
As discussed above, the State of Hawai# i has concurrent 
jurisdiction with the federal government over 
Hawai# i Volcanoes 
National Park.  Cani's alleged conduct towards Limatoc-Deponte on October 13, 2017, and October 31, 2017, if believed by the District Court to be true, would constitute a "course of conduct" within the meaning of HRS § 604-10.5. 
Cani next argues that the District Court did not make 
specific findings regarding the incident at Jaggar Museum, and therefore the Order was based on the single incident at Rainbow Falls which could not constitute a "course of conduct" under Duarte.  During the trial Limatoc-Deponte and Cani each testified to their respective versions of the incident at Jaggar Museum. The District Court stated to Cani, after hearing all of the evidence: 
So I believe what Miss Limatoc-Deponte -- what she
said happened, I believe what she said. 
. . . . 
. . . I'm going to find that Miss Limatoc-Deponte's
testimony was more credible, sir, than yours. 
The District Court then had the following dialog with Cani: 
THE COURT:  So why even go to her the second time at 
the Jaggar Museum?  Why even go to talk to her at that 
point?  Why do that? 
MR. CANI:  That was kind of the first time, ma'am. 
Because the first time at the Rainbow Falls we didn't even talk.  She was on her van, I was in -- on her bus.  I was in my bus.  We didn't even have any conversation or anythingwhat happened.  I didn't even get a chance to tell her thatyou almost hit me.  It was me honking the horn. 
"[I]t is for the trial judge as fact-finder to assess the 
credibility of witnesses and to resolve all questions of fact; 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the judge may accept or reject any witness's testimony in whole 
or in part."  Duarte, 134 Hawai# i at 464, 342 P.3d at 883 
(citation omitted).  The District Court believed Limatoc-Deponte's version of what happened at Jaggar Museum.  Those facts were sufficient to support the District Court's issuance of the Order. 
Finally, Cani argues that his conduct at Rainbow Falls 
did not constitute a "threat of imminent physical harm, bodily injury, or assault" within the meaning of HRS § 604-10.5.  The phrase "threat of imminent physical harm, bodily injury, or assault" means "that an alleged harasser's conduct expressly or impliedly communicates an intent to physically harm, cause bodily injury, or assault another person imminently."  Duarte, 134 Hawai# i at 464–65, 342 P.3d at 883–84.  This is an objective 
test.  Id. The District Court accepted Limatoc-Deponte's testimony that Cani yelled and swore at her and punched the door and exit window of her mini-bus.  The District Court did not err in finding that Cani's conduct was sufficient to objectively communicate "an intent to physically harm, cause bodily injury, or assault another person imminently."  Id. 
For the foregoing reasons, the Order Granting Petition 
for Injunction Against Harassment entered by the District Court on January 10, 2018, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 18, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
Francis R. Alcain,
for Respondent-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Bonnie Limatoc-Deponte,Petitioner-Appellee/Self-Represented. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5 