FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
vs.
 
QUINCY L.F. CHOY FOO, III, Defendant-Appellee, 
NO. CAAP-13-0000636
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 12-1-0829)
 
DECEMBER 29, 2016
 
NAKAMURA, C.J., and LEONARD and GINOZA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
The question presented in this appeal is whether a 
delay caused by the referral of Defendant-Appellee Quincy L.F. 
Choy Foo III (Choy Foo) to the Public Defender's Office, to enable him to seek a court-appointed lawyer, constituted an excludable delay for speedy trial purposes under Hawai
'i Rules of 
Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 48 (2000). At Choy Foo's initial arraignment, for which he appeared without counsel, the court referred Choy Foo to the Public Defender's Office and set a new hearing in twenty-one days for Choy Foo to demand or waive his right to a jury trial. We conclude that this twenty-one day FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
period was an excludable delay under HRPP Rule 48. In
 
particular, we hold that this period was excludable under HRPP
 Rule 48(c)(1), which excludes "periods that delay the
 commencement of trial and are caused by collateral or other
 proceedings concerning the defendant[,]" or alternatively, under
 HRPP Rule 48(c)(8), which excludes "other periods of delay for
 good cause." We therefore vacate the dismissal of the charge
 against Choy Foo by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (Circuit Court),
1
 and we remand the case for further proceedings. 
BACKGROUND
 
On February 22, 2012, Plaintiff-Appellant State of 
Hawai'i (State) filed a complaint in the District Court of the 
First Circuit (District Court) that charged Choy Foo with fourth-degree sexual assault, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-733(1)(a) (2014).
2 Fourth-degree sexual assault is a 
misdemeanor that is punishable by imprisonment for up to one year, and Choy Foo was entitled to a jury trial unless he waived that right. 
On March 15, 2012, Choy Foo appeared in the District
 
Court for arraignment and plea. He was not represented by
 counsel. After advising Choy Foo of the maximum penalty for the
 charged offense, the District Court referred Choy Foo to the
 Public Defender's Office and directed him to call the office
 "right away for an appointment." The District Court scheduled a
 new hearing in three weeks for Choy Foo to demand or waive his
 right to a jury trial. 
1The Honorable Patrick W. Border presided.
 
2At the time relevant to this case, HRS § 707-733(1)(a)
provided, in relevant part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of sexual assault
in the fourth degree if:
 
(a) The person knowingly subjects another person
to sexual contact by compulsion . . . [.]
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On April 5, 2012, Choy Foo appeared before the District
 
Court without counsel. Choy Foo informed the District Court that
 
he had called the Public Defender's Office and they asked him to
 request a continuance. He also advised the District Court that
 he had an appointment to see the Public Defender's Office on May
 8th. The District Court continued the hearing until a week after
 May 8th. 
On May 15, 2012, Choy Foo appeared before the District
 
Court without counsel. Choy Foo informed the District Court that
 he had contacted the Public Defender's Office and they wanted him
 to ask for another continuance because "they stay in training
 right now[.]" Choy Foo stated that he had an appointment with
 the Public Defender's Office scheduled for May 22nd. The
 District Court continued the hearing until May 30, 2012. 
On May 30, 2012, Choy Foo appeared before the District
 
Court, and he was represented by a Deputy Public Defender (DPD). 
Choy Foo, through the DPD, demanded a jury trial. As a result,
 the District Court committed the matter to the Circuit Court and
 scheduled the case for arraignment in Circuit Court on June 12,
 2012. 
On June 12, 2012, Choy Foo, represented by a DPD,
 
appeared in Circuit Court for arraignment and plea. Choy Foo
 waived oral reading of the charge and entered a not guilty plea. 
The Circuit Court set the case for trial during the week of July
 23, 2012.  The Circuit Court subsequently continued the trial
 date several times, including two continuances at Choy Foo's
 request and over the State's objection. 
On March 11, 2013, Choy Foo filed a "Motion to Dismiss
 
Charges for Violation of HRPP Rule 48" (Motion to Dismiss). Choy
 
Foo argued that based on his calculation, 189 countable days had
 
elapsed from the date he was arrested on the charge to the filing
 of his motion, thereby exceeding the six-month time period
 prescribed by HRPP Rule 48 for commencement of the trial. The
 State filed an opposition to the Motion to Dismiss, arguing that
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
only 168 countable days had elapsed and therefore the speedy
 
trial time limits imposed by HRPP Rule 48 had not been exceeded. 
The only time period disputed by the parties in their respective
 HRPP Rule 48 computations was the twenty-one day period between
 March 15, 2012, and April 5, 2012, which Choy Foo included and
 the State excluded in calculating the number of countable days
 that had elapsed.
 
The Circuit Court held a hearing on Choy Foo's Motion
 
to Dismiss. At the hearing, the parties focused their arguments
 on whether the twenty-one day period between Choy Foo's initial
 arraignment in District Court on March 15, 2012, and his next
 appearance on April 5, 2012 -- a delay to enable Choy Foo to meet
 with the Public Defender's Office to determine if he qualified
 for court-appointed counsel -- was excludable under HRPP Rule 48. 
Choy Foo asserted that in cases of full misdemeanors, where the
 defendant has a right to a jury trial, the District Court, as a
 matter of course, will continue the case for three weeks after
 the defendant's initial appearance for a waiver or demand of jury
 trial. Choy Foo also asserted that the practice in District
 Court was to charge this time period to the State. The State
 agreed that this was the District Court's practice, but argued
 that this practice was incorrect under the law.
 
The Circuit Court granted Choy Foo's Motion to Dismiss
 
and dismissed the charge against Choy Foo with prejudice, ruling
 as follows:
 
I'm going to follow the district court practice and find
that the period of time before this jury waiver is not
excludable and that it counts so that the period between
March 15th and April 5th does count against the state, and
that 189 days have run, and, therefore, that the -- the Rule
48 has been violated by nine days, and therefore, that the
matter is dismissed with prejudice. I do so despite the
fact that the nature of the charge is one of the more
troubling ones, to say the least, in our culture.
 
Prior to the Circuit Court's ruling, the parties had
 
not directed their arguments at the hearing to whether any
 
dismissal should be with or without prejudice. After the Circuit
 Court announced its ruling, the Circuit Court did not permit
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argument on this issue,3
 despite the State's apparent attempt to
present argument:
 
[Deputy Prosecuting Attorney (DPA)]: Your Honor, may
I briefly just ask -­
THE COURT: No. Remember, I get the last word.
That's why I gave you guys all the time in the world to
argue.
 
[DPA]: The only thing I'm challenging is -­
THE COURT: No, no. Don't challenge anything.
 [DPA]: -- asking you to reconsider is the -­THE COURT: No, no. A reconsideration has to be in
 
writing. You can't do a reconsideration. See, right now
you're just arguing with me. You disagree and you're
arguing. If you have to do a reconsideration, you do it in
writing.
 
[DPA]: Your Honor, may you at least hear arguments on
whether -­
THE COURT: No. Hearing arguments -- hearing
arguments is reopening the matter. I get the last word.
I've ruled. If I'm wrong, appeal it.
 
[DPA]: Your Honor, it's -­
THE COURT: Please.
 [DPA]: May I -­THE COURT: We're done.
 [Deputy Public Defender]: Your Honor, just -­(Proceedings concluded.)
 
On April 5, 2013, the Circuit Court issued its written
 
"Order Granting Defendant's Motion to Dismiss Charges for
 
Violation of HRPP Rule 48" (Dismissal Order). The Dismissal
 Order granted Choy Foo's Motion to Dismiss and dismissed the
 complaint against Choy Foo with prejudice. The Dismissal Order
 
3Prior to announcing its ruling, the Circuit Court had
stated:  "Tell me at that moment when you have reached the end of
your arguments, because when you've reached the end, I'm going to
rule and then we're done. I don't want to have any
reconsiderations  or  anything."   Prior to ruling, the Circuit
Court also asked, "Is everybody finished?", and both parties said
yes. 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
did not state the Circuit Court's rationale for dismissing the
 
complaint with prejudice.
 
DISCUSSION
 
The State appeals from the Dismissal Order. On appeal,
 
the State argues that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) concluding
 that the twenty-one day delay caused by Choy Foo's referral to
 the Public Defender's Office was not excludable delay for speedy
 trial purposes under HRPP Rule 48; and (2) failing "to articulate
 and weigh" the factors it is required to consider under State v.
 Estencion, 63 Haw. 264, 625 P.2d 1040 (1981), in rendering its
 decision to dismiss the case with prejudice.
 
Choy Foo concedes that the Circuit Court erred in
 
failing to articulate and weigh the Estencion  factors4
 in
dismissing the case with prejudice. He further concedes that this error requires that the Dismissal Order be vacated and the case remanded to allow the Circuit Court to articulate its consideration of the Estencion factors. We agree with Choy Foo's concession of error. See State v. Hern, 133 Hawai
'i 59, 64, 323 
P.3d 1241, 1246 (App. 2013) (holding that "in determining whether to dismiss a charge with or without prejudice under HRPP Rule 48(b), the trial court must not only consider the Estencion factors, but must also clearly articulate the effect of the Estencion factors and any other factor it considered in rendering its decision"). We conclude that, at minimum, the Dismissal Order must be vacated and the case remanded for consideration of the Estension factors and articulation of the necessary findings. 
4In Estencion, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that a trial
court is required to consider each of the following factors in
determining whether to dismiss a case with or without prejudicewhen the time limits set forth in HRPP Rule 48 have been violated: "[(1)] the seriousness of the offense; [(2)] the factsand the circumstances of the case which led to the dismissal; and[(3)] the impact of a reprosecution on the administration of[HRPP Rule 48] and on the administration of justice." Estencion,
63 Haw. at 269, 625 P.2d at 1044 (quoting 18 U.S.C. § 3162(a)(2)of the federal Speedy Trial Act). 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. at 64-65, 323 P.3d at 1246-47.
 
We now turn to address the issue disputed by the
 
parties, namely, whether the Circuit Court erred in determining
 
that the speedy trial time limits set forth in HRPP Rule 48 had
 been violated. This issue turns on whether the twenty-one day
 delay between March 15, 2012, and April 5, 2012, during which
 Choy Foo was referred to the Public Defender's Office to seek
 appointed counsel, constituted excludable delay under HRPP Rule
 48.
5 As explained below, we hold that this time period was
 
excludable and that the Circuit Court erred in ruling that HRPP
 Rule 48 had been violated and in dismissing the charge against
 Choy Foo.
 
I.
 
In his first court appearance in this case, Choy Foo
 
appeared before the District Court for arraignment without a
 lawyer. The District Court delayed the proceedings for twenty-
one days so that Choy Foo could be referred to the Public
 Defender's Officer to enable him to seek appointed counsel. 
In our criminal justice system, an accused has a
 
fundamental right to be represented by counsel. As the United
 States Supreme Court has explained:
 
5As noted, this twenty-one day period was the only time
period between the date of Choy Foo's arrest and the filing of
his Motion to Dismiss that the parties did not agree upon in
their respective HRPP Rule 48 computations. Choy Foo asserted in
his Motion to Dismiss that this twenty-one day period did not
constitute excludable delay under HRPP Rule 48, and the State
asserted that it did constitute excludable delay in opposing the
motion. In his Motion to Dismiss, Choy Foo acknowledged that the
time period from April 5, 2012, to June 12, 2012, constituted
excludable delay. On April 5, 2012, and May 15, 2012, Choy Foo
appeared before the District Court without counsel, informed the
District Court that he was attempting to meet with the Public
Defender's Office, and reported that they asked him to request a
continuance. The District Court continued the hearing on both
occasions. On May 30, 2012, Choy Foo, represented by a DPD,
appeared before the District Court and demanded a jury trial,
which resulted in the District Court committing the matter to the
Circuit Court for arraignment on June 12, 2012.
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
An accused's right to be represented by counsel is a
fundamental component of our criminal justice system.
Lawyers in criminal cases are necessities, not luxuries.
Their presence is essential because they are the means
through which the other rights of the person on trial are
secured. Without counsel, the right to a trial itself would
be of little avail, as this Court has recognized repeatedly.
Of all the rights that an accused person has, the right to
be represented by counsel is by far the most pervasive for
it affects his ability to assert any other rights he may
have.
 
United States v. Cronic, 466 U.S. 648, 653-54 (1984) (internal
 
quotation marks and footnotes omitted). 
The crucial importance of a defendant's right to
 
counsel is exemplified by the fact that the erroneous denial of
 the right to counsel is one of the few errors that is considered
 structural error. See United States v. Gonzales-Lopez, 548 U.S.
 
140, 148-49 (2006). Structural errors "defy analysis by
 harmless-error standards" and generally require the automatic
 invalidation of a conviction because they "affect the framework
 within which the trial proceeds, and are not simply an error in
 the trial process itself." Id. (internal quotation marks, 
citation, and brackets omitted). Indeed, "[t]he right to
 assistance of counsel is so fundamental and essential to a fair
 trial that it has been absorbed into the due process clause of
 the Fourteenth Amendment." Wong v. Among, 52 Haw. 420, 423-24,
 
477 P.2d 630, 633 (1970) (citing Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S.
 335 (1963)). 
II.
 
A.
 
We consider the fundamental importance of the right to
 
counsel in analyzing whether the delay to permit Choy Foo to seek
 representation by counsel through the Public Defender's Office
 constituted excludable delay under HRPP Rule 48. 
HRPP Rule 48 generally imposes a six-month time limit
 
for a criminal case to be brought to trial. HRPP Rule 48(b)
 provides, in relevant part:
 
Except in the case of traffic offenses that are not
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
punishable by imprisonment, the court shall, on motion of
the defendant, dismiss the charge, with or without prejudice
in its discretion, if trial is not commenced within six
months:
 
(1) from the date of arrest if bail is set or from the
filing of the charge, whichever is sooner, on any offense
based on the same conduct or arising from the same criminal
episode for which the arrest or charge was made[.]
 
HRPP Rule 48 further provides that various periods of delay,
 
which are described in HRPP Rule 48(c), shall be excluded in
 computing the six-month time limit for commencing trial, and it
 also identifies in HRPP Rule 48(d) certain periods of time that
 are per se excluable or per se includable in computing the time
 for trial commencement.
6
   
6HRPP Rule 48(c) and (d) provide, in relevant part: 
(c) Excluded periods. The following periods shall
be excluded in computing the time for trial
commencement:
 
(1) periods that delay the commencement of trial
and are caused by collateral or other proceedings
concerning the defendant, including but not limited to
penal irresponsibility examinations and periods during
which the defendant is incompetent to stand trial,
pretrial motions, interlocutory appeals and trials of
other charges;
 
. . .
 
(3) periods that delay the commencement of trial
and are caused by a continuance granted at the request
or with the consent of the defendant or defendant's
 counsel;
 
. . .
 
(5) periods that delay the commencement of trial
and are caused by the absence or unavailability of the
defendant;
 
. . . ; and
 
(8) other periods of delay for good cause.
 
(d) Per se excludable and includable periods of
time for purposes of subsection (c)(1) of this rule.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
We conclude that the twenty-one day time period at
 
issue in this case was excludable under HRPP Rule 48(c)(1), or
 
alternatively, under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8). HRPP Rule 48(c)(1)
 excludes from speedy trial computation "periods that delay the
 commencement of trial and are caused by collateral or other
 proceedings concerning the defendant, including but not limited
 to penal irresponsibility examinations and periods during which
 the defendant is incompetent to stand trial, pretrial motions,
 interlocutory appeals and trials of other charges[.]" HRPP Rule
 
(1) For purposes of subsection (c)(1) of this
rule, the period of time, from the filing through the
prompt disposition of the following motions filed by a
defendant, shall be deemed to be periods of delay
resulting from collateral or other proceedings
concerning the defendant: motions to dismiss, to
suppress, for voluntariness hearing heard before trial,
to sever counts or defendants, for disqualification of
the prosecutor, for withdrawal of counsel including the
time period for appointment of new counsel if so
ordered, for mental examination, to continue trial, for
transfer to the circuit court, for remand from the
circuit court, for change of venue, to secure the
attendance of a witness by a material witness order,
and to secure the attendance of a witness from without
 the state.
 
(2) For purposes of subsection (c)(1) of this
rule, the period of time, from the filing through the
prompt disposition of the following motions or court
papers, shall be deemed not to be excluded in computing
the time for trial commencement: notice of alibi,
requests/motions for discovery, and motions in limine,
for voluntariness hearing heard at trial, for bail
reduction, for release pending trial, for bill of
particulars, to strike surplusage from the charge, for
return of property, for discovery sanctions, for
litigation expenses and for depositions.
 
(3) The criteria provided in section (c) shall be
applied to motions that are not listed in subsections
(d)(1) and (d)(2) in determining whether the associated
periods of time may be excluded in computing the time
for trial commencement.
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
48(d)(1) provides that the time period from the filing through
 
the prompt disposition of a motion "for withdrawal of counsel
 including the time period for appointment of new counsel if so
 ordered" shall be per se excludable as "periods of delay
 resulting from collateral or other proceedings concerning the
 defendant" under HRPP Rule (c)(1).
 
Here, the twenty-one day delay was not caused by a
 
motion for withdrawal of counsel and appointment of new counsel,
 because Choy Foo had not yet obtained counsel. However, the
 purpose of the delay was the same as the delay for withdrawal of
 counsel and appointment of new counsel which is per se excludable
 under HRPP Rule 48(d)(1) -- to ensure that a defendant (Choy Foo)
 is represented by and has the assistance of counsel. Because the
 purpose served by the twenty-one day delay in this case is the
 same as the delay recognized as per se excludable under HRPP Rule
 48(d)(1), we conclude that the twenty-one day delay to permit
 Choy Foo to seek counsel through the Public Defender's Office was
 excludable under HRPP Rule 48(c)(1). 
Choy Foo's need for counsel at the outset of this case
 
when the twenty-one day delay occurred would arguably be even
 greater than that of a defendant who seeks the withdrawal of
 counsel and appointment of new counsel. A defendant who seeks
 the withdrawal of counsel and appointment of new counsel would at
 least have had the assistance of counsel for some period of time,
 whereas Choy Foo had not yet been represented by counsel in the
 case when he was referred to the Public Defender's Office. Choy
 Foo's case could not proceed to trial until he either obtained
 counsel or waived the right to counsel. We conclude that the
 twenty-one day delay in this case was excludable under HRPP Rule
 48(c)(1) as a period that delayed "the commencement of trial and
 [was] caused by collateral or other proceedings concerning the
 defendant[.]"
 
C.
 
Our conclusion that the twenty-one day period is
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
excludable from speedy trial computation is supported by State v. 
 
Senteno, 69 Haw. 363, 742 P.2d 369 (1987). In Senteno, the
 
Hawai'i Supreme Court held that a one-month delay attributable to 
local defense counsel's motion to withdraw as counsel was
 excludable under HRPP Rule 48(c)(1). Id. at 368, 742 P.2d at
 
373. The supreme court further held that the nearly five months
 that the defendant was without local counsel following the grant
 of the motion to withdraw was also excludable. Id. The supreme
 
court reasoned:
 
Because trial could not proceed in the absence of trial
counsel or a waiver of the right to counsel, this period was
excluded under the "good cause" provision of subsection
(c)(8). As a general rule, "good cause" means a substantial
reason which affords a legal excuse.
 
Id. at 368-69, 742 P.2d at 373. 
In State v. Canencia, this court, in an unpublished
 
memorandum opinion, held under facts that closely match Choy
 
Foo's situation that the delay caused by the District Court's
 referral of Canencia to the Public Defender's Office at his
 initial appearance to seek appointed counsel constituted
 
excludable delay. State v. Canencia , No. 29345, 2009 WL 3151221
 
(Hawai 'i App. Sept. 30, 2009) (mem.). We reasoned: 
It is well established that a period of time in which the
defendant is not represented by counsel is an excludableperiod. See State v. Samonte, 83 Hawai' i 507, 515-16, 928
P.2d 1, 9-10 (1996); State v. Senteno, 69 Haw. 363, 368, 742P.2d 369, 373 (1987); HRPP Rule 48(d)(1). Canencia was without counsel at his first appearance on September 28,2007. The district court could not proceed to takingCanencia's plea and if Canencia pleaded not guilty, tosetting a trial date, while Canencia was not represented bycounsel and had not waived his right to counsel.Consequently, the district court had no choice but to deferthe case for the appointment of counsel, which began withthe referral of Canencia to the Public Defender. Canencia did not object to the delay of proceedings and referral tothe Public Defender. Periods of delay excludable from thesix-month time limit include "periods that delay thecommencement of trial and are caused by a continuancegranted at the request or with the consent of the defendantor defendant's counsel." HRPP Rule 48(c)(3). People v.
Jaswinder, 165 Misc.2d 371, 632 N.Y.S.2d 923, 925 (N. Y.Crim. Ct. 1995) (excluding time of adjournment from firstappearance to appearance with private counsel) andCommonwealth v. Manley, 503 Pa. 482, 469 A.2d 1042, 1044(Pa. 1983) (where accused appears for court proceeding 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
without counsel and without waiving his right to counsel,
the period of delay is excludable because the accused is
unavailable for trial).
 
Id. at 2009 WL 3151221, at *2.
 
Underlying the supreme court's decision in Senteno and
 
our decision in Canencia is the recognition of a defendant's
 
fundamental right to be represented by counsel and the inability
 of a court to proceed to trial or conduct proceedings affecting a
 defendant's rights while the defendant is not represented by and
 has not waived the right to counsel. The reasoning of these
 cases bolsters our conclusion that the twenty-one day period
 during which Choy Foo was referred to the Public Defender's
 Officer was excludable under HRPP Rule 48(c)(1).
 
III.
 
Alternatively, we conclude that the twenty-one day 
period was excludable under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) as a "period[] of delay for good cause." "HRPP Rule 48(c) does not give any guidance on what good cause means, but [the Hawai
'i Supreme 
Court] has held that the good cause provision 'is provided to take care of unanticipated circumstances' and that good cause means 'a substantial reason that affords legal excuse[.]'" State 
v. Abregano, 136 Hawai
'i 489, 497, 363 P.3d 838, 846 (2015) 
(citations omitted). 
In Senteno, the supreme court held that a nearly five-
month period that the defendant was without local counsel after
 his prior local counsel was permitted to withdraw was excludable
 under the "good cause" provision of HRPP Rule 48(c)(8). Senteno,
 
69 Haw. at 368, 742 P.2d at 373.
7 The supreme court reasoned
 
that "[b]ecause trial could not proceed in the absence of trial
 counsel or a waiver of the right to counsel, this period was
 excluded under the 'good cause' provision of subsection (c)(8)." 
7In Senteno, co-defendants George Steven Senteno and Frank
Peter Gallegos (Gallegos) appealed their convictions. Only
Gallegos raised a claim under HRPP Rule 48. Senteno, 69 Haw. at
 
364, 368, 742 P.2d at 370, 373. 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. 
Choy Foo argues that Senteno is distinguishable because
 
the defendant in Senteno was unrepresented by counsel as a result
 
of the trial court's permitting his counsel to withdraw whereas
 Choy Foo had not previously been represented by counsel. We fail
 to see how this distinction defeats the existence of good cause
 in this case. Both the defendant in Senteno and Choy Foo were
 not represented by counsel during the time period at issue. As a
 result, trial in both cases "could not proceed in the absence of
 trial counsel or a waiver of counsel," which was the supreme
 court's basis for finding good cause for the delay in Senteno.
 
Choy Foo also attempts to distinguish Senteno by
 
arguing that the twenty-one day delay in this case was not an
 "unanticipated" circumstance because the twenty-one day
 continuance was a common occurrence in District Court. We
 disagree. The District Court does not know whether a defendant
 will appear without counsel or will be in need of court-appointed
 counsel until the defendant makes his or her first appearance in
 court. Thus, the District Court is unable to take steps to
 address the defendant's need for representation by counsel until
 the defendant appears in court. Even if it is a common
 occurrence for defendants in general to make their first
 appearance in District Court without a lawyer, that does not mean
 that the District Court can anticipate in advance that a
 particular defendant will appear without counsel and avoid that
 occurrence in a particular case. Accordingly, we conclude that
 Choy Foo's appearance without counsel was an unanticipated
 circumstance and that the twenty-one day delay to afford him the
 opportunity to seek counsel through the Public Defender's Office
 was a period of delay for "good cause" under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8).
 
CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the speedy
 
trial time limits of HRPP Rule 48 were not violated in this case. 
We vacate the Circuit Court's Dismissal Order and remand the case
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
for further proceedings consistent with this Opinion. 
On the briefs:
 
Brian R. Vincent
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellant
 
Tyler I. Gomes
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellee
 
16
 