NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0001137
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
DEUTSCHE BANK NATIONAL TRUST COMPANY, AS TRUSTEE OF THE
RESIDENTIAL ASSET SECURITIZATION TRUST 2006-A8, MORTGAGE PASS
THROUGH CERTIFICATES, SERIES 2006-H UNDER THE POOLING AND
SERVICING AGREEMENT DATED JUNE 1, 2006, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
MICHAEL C. GREENSPON, Defendant-Appellant,
and
JOHN DOES 1-50; AND JANE DOES 1-50, Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
LAHAINA DIVISION
(DC-CIVIL NO. 10-1-2608)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Michael C. Greenspon (Greenspon ),
pro se, appeals from the following, entered in the District Court
of the Second Circuit, Lahaina Division ( District Court )1 in
favor of Plaintiff-Appellee Deutsche Bank National Trust Company,
as Trustee of Residential Asset Securitization Trust 2006-A8,
Mortgage Pass-Through Certificates, Series 2006-H Under the
Pooling and Servicing Agreement Dated June 1, 2006 (DBNTC):
1  The Honorable Blaine J. Kobayashi presided, except as otherwise
noted.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(A) "Order Denying [Greenspon's] Motion for Costs and 
Attorneys' Fees and [District Court Rules of Civil Procedure
(DCRCP)] Rule 11 Sanctions" (Order Denying Fees/Costs) entered on
July 23, 2014;
(B) an order denying Greenspon's motion for
reconsideration of the Order Denying Fees/Costs (Order Denying
Reconsideration ), entered on August 27, 2014; and
(C) a document titled as an order, but stamped "DENIED"
as to Greenspon's request for taxation of costs ( Taxation of
Costs document ), filed on September 22, 2014.
On appeal, Greenspon contends that the District Court
abused its discretion by: (1) "avoiding determination of the
[DCRCP] Rule 11 violation based on an erroneous rationale" and
also denying reconsideration; (2) failing to find sanctionable
Rule 11 conduct by DBNTC; and (3) denying his request for
taxation of costs without an explanation.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant legal authorities, we resolve Greenspon's
points of error as follows, and we affirm.
(1) Denial of Rule 11 Sanctions.  DBNTC initiated this
case in the District Court on July 21, 2010, by filing a Verified
Complaint for Ejectment ( Complaint ), asserting that it was the
fee simple owner of the subject property by virtue of a non-
judicial foreclosure sale and the recording of a Quitclaim Deed
in the Bureau of Conveyances, State of Hawaii on May 7, 2010.
DBNTC sought a judgment and writ of possession against Greenspon.
On December 1, 2010, DBNTC filed a motion for summary
judgment.  In response, on January 20, 2011, Greenspon filed an
opposition to the summary judgment motion and a Motion to Dismiss
for Lack of Subject Matter Jurisdiction (Motion to Dismiss ). 
Soon thereafter, on January 26, 2011, Greenspon filed a separate
action in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit ( Circuit Court)
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
against various parties related to the non-judicial foreclosure,
including DBNTC, asserting claims for: wrongful foreclosure and
quiet title; injunctive relief; and unfair and deceptive acts and
practices ( UDAP) and fraud  (Circuit Court Action).2
Initially, the District Court orally granted DBNTC's
summary judgment motion in the ejectment action, but subsequently
vacated that ruling.  Instead, the District Court granted
Greenspon's motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction because
Greenspon had demonstrated that title to the property was in
dispute.  The order dismissing the District Court ejectment
action was issued on March 3, 2011.3  The parties then proceeded
to litigate the Circuit Court Action.
On June 6, 2014, Greenspon filed in the District Court
a "Motion for Costs and Attorneys' Fees as DCRCP Rule 11
Sanctions" ( Motion for Fees/Costs).4  Greenspon asserted in his
motion that, after the ejectment action was dismissed, he had
obtained discovery in the Circuit Court Action of various facts
2  On February 7, 2011, Greenspon requested that the District Court take
judicial notice of the Circuit Court Action.
3  The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo granted summary judgment to DBNTC at a
hearing on January 27, 2011.  Subsequently, Judge Kobayashi vacated the
summary judgment ruling and granted Greenspon's motion to dismiss for lack of
jurisdiction.
4  In the Motion for Fees/Costs, Greenspon cited to both DCRCP Rule 11
and Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) ยง 607-14.5 as grounds for awarding fees and
costs.  However, on appeal, Greenspon only argues pursuant to DCRCP Rule 11,
which provides in pertinent part:
The signature of an attorney or party constitutes a
certificate by the signatory that the signatory has read the
pleading, motion, or other paper; that to the best of the
signatory's knowledge, information, and belief formed after
reasonable inquiry it is well grounded in fact and is not
interposed for any improper purpose, such as to harass or to
cause unnecessary delay or needless increase in the cost of
litigation. . . . If a pleading, motion, or other paper is
signed in violation of this rule, the court, upon motion or
upon its own initiative, shall impose upon the person who
signed it, a represented party, or both, an appropriate
sanction, which may include an order to pay to the other
party or parties the amount of the reasonable expenses
incurred because of the filing of the pleading, motion, or
other paper, including a reasonable attorney's fee.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
establishing, inter alia , that "[n]one of [DBNTC's] deeds convey
to it any rights of possession in [the property] that would serve
as a valid basis to bring an ejectment claim[.]".  Greenspon thus
asserted that DBNTC had improperly filed the ejectment action in
violation of DCRCP Rule 11.
The District Court denied Greenspon's motion without
prejudice in the Order Denying Fees/Costs, explaining that:
As represented by counsel for Plaintiff in the Opposition,
Greenspon v. Deutsche Bank National Trust Company , CAAP-13-
0001432, is currently on appeal.  As the Court understands,
that case involves among other things, issues relating
directly to the issue of title to the subject property.  The
outcome of said appeal may have a direct bearing upon the
instant case.  Accordingly, unless and until a decision has
been made on said appeal, the Motion may be premature and is
therefore being denied without prejudice.
On August 4, 2014, Greenspon filed a motion for reconsideration
of the Order Denying Fees/Costs, which the District Court denied
on August 27, 2014.
Greenspon contends that DBNTC's "reckless and/or
intentional misrepresentation of falsified documents" in its
Complaint in the District Court resulted in Greenspon "incurring
more than $22,000 of attorneys' fees and costs . . . to
successfully defend what is ultimately an unfair, deceptive and
fraudulent collections action."  Greenspon argues that this
warrants DCRCP Rule 11 sanctions against DBNTC.
We review the District Court's Order Denying Fees/Costs
for abuse of discretion.  Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of Emps.' Ret. Sys.
of State of Hawaii #, 106 Hawai# i 416, 431, 106 P.3d 339, 354
(2005) (citations omitted); Enos v. Pac. Transfer & Warehouse,
Inc., 79 Hawai# i 452, 459, 903 P.2d 1273, 1280 (1995).  Likewise,
we review the District Court's denial of reconsideration for
abuse of discretion.  Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v.
Wailea Resort Co., Ltd., 100 Hawai #i 97, 110, 58 P.3d 608, 621
(2002).
Greenspon's motion for Rule 11 sanctions is grounded in
his claims that the non-judicial foreclosure, which lead to the
property being transferred to DBNTC, was improper and that DBNTC
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
failed to make reasonable inquiry to support its Complaint
seeking ejectment.  Greenspon's assertions of wrongful conduct by
DBNTC have been the subject of ongoing litigation.  As noted by
the District Court in its Order Denying Fees/Costs, the Circuit
Court Action was pending on appeal at the time Greenspon was
seeking the Rule 11 sanctions in the District Court.  Moreover,
the District Court correctly noted that the Circuit Court Action
involved issues of title to the property and those issues appear
to bear directly on Greenspon's Rule 11 claims.  Thus, the
District Court did not abuse its discretion by denying
Greenspon's motion for fees and costs without prejudice.5
As to Greenspon's motion for reconsideration, the
District Court properly denied the motion given that Greenspon
did not present additional evidence or arguments that could not
have been presented in his original motion, and instead attempted
to relitigate his initial motion.  Sousaris v. Miller, 92 Hawai# i
505, 513, 993 P.2d 539, 547 (2000).
(2)  Taxation of Costs.  We lack appellate jurisdiction
to review the Taxation of Costs document.  Greenspon sought
taxation of costs pursuant to DCRCP Rule 54(d), which provides in
pertinent part: "Costs may be taxed by the clerk on 48 hours'
notice.  On motion served within 5 days thereafter, the action of
the clerk may be reviewed by the court."  The Taxation of Costs
document is not signed by a clerk or a judge of the District
Court.  Rather, it merely contains the word "DENIED" stamped on
the front and back of the document.
HRS ยง 604-20 (2016) states in relevant part that "[t]he
clerks of the district court shall have, within the scope of the
5  We note that this court subsequently issued a Memorandum Opinion on
June 14, 2016, in which we affirmed the Circuit Court's grant of summary
judgment in favor of DBNTC on Greenspon's claims for wrongful foreclosure,
UDAP and fraud.  See Greenspon v. Deutsche Bank Nat'l Tr. Co., No. CAAP-13-
0001432, 2016 WL 3280366 (Hawai #i App. Jun. 14, 2016) (Mem. Op.).  As to the
Circuit Court's summary judgment in favor of DBNTC on its counterclaim for
ejectment against Greenspon and Greenspon's claim for quiet title and
injunctive relief, we vacated and remanded based on the Hawai #i Supreme
Court's decision in Kondaur Capital Corp. v. Matsuyoshi , 136 Hawai #i 227, 361
P.3d 454 (2015).  Id. at *5-7, 14.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
jurisdiction of the district courts, all the powers of clerks of
other courts of record, including the power to . . . sign and
issue garnishee summons, writs of attachment, execution and
possession, and other process [.]" (Emphasis added.)  The Taxation
of Costs document does not contain any type of signature by a
clerk or judge, and therefore does not constitute an order that
is eligible for appellate review.  See Rule 4(a) of the Hawai# i
Rules of Appellate Procedure (when permitted by law, a notice of
appeal may be filed in a civil appeal within 30 days from "entry
of the judgment or appealable order.").
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the Order Denying
Fees/Costs filed on July 23, 2014, and the Order Denying
Reconsideration filed on August 27, 2014, by the District Court
of the Second Circuit, Lahaina Division, are affirmed.
We lack appellate jurisdiction to review the Taxation
of Costs document filed on September 22, 2014.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 30, 2017.
On the briefs:
Michael C. Greenspon,
Defendant-Appellant, pro se. Presiding Judge
Charles R. Prather, 
Sofia Hirosane McGuire,
Steven Idemoto,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
6