NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000394 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
DARIUS FULLER, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(WAIANAE DIVISION)
(CASE NO. 1DTC-17-000094) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Darius Fuller (Fuller) appeals from 
the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, 
entered on May 4, 2018 (
Judgment), by the District Court of the 
First Circuit, Waianae Division (District Court).  Fuller was 
convicted of violating Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 431:10C-1
1 The Honorable James McWhinnie presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
104 (2005),2 Conditions of Operation and Registration of Motor 
Vehicles. 
Fuller raises five points of error, arguing: (1) there 
was insufficient evidence to support his conviction under HRS 
§ 431:10C-104(b); (2) the District Court failed to provide Fuller with his "prior to trial" advisement of his right to either testify or not testify; (3) the District Court failed to engage in a true Tachibana colloquy; (4) the District Court erred in denying his motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction; and (5) the District Court erred in denying his motion to dismiss for improper venue. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Fuller's claims of error as follows: 
(1) Fuller argues that the District Court erred in 
convicting him of violating HRS § 431:10C-104(b), because there was insufficient evidence to establish the necessary element that 
2 HRS § 431:10C-104 states, in relevant part: 
§431:10C-104 Conditions of operation and registration
of motor vehicles. (a) Except as provided in section
431:10C-105, no person shall operate or use a motor vehicle
upon any public street, road, or highway of this State atany time unless such motor vehicle is insured at all timesunder a motor vehicle insurance policy. 
(b) Every owner of a motor vehicle used or operated at
any time upon any public street, road, or highway of thisState shall obtain a motor vehicle insurance policy uponsuch vehicle which provides the coverage required by thisarticle and shall maintain the motor vehicle insurance policy at all times for the entire motor vehicleregistration period. 
2   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
he was the owner of the motor vehicle that did not have an 
appropriate motor vehicle insurance policy. 
HRS § 431:10C-104 contains two subsections under which 
a person may be charged: 
(a) Except as provided in section 431:10C-105, no
person shall operate or use a motor vehicle upon any public
street, road, or highway of this State at any time unlesssuch motor vehicle is insured at all times under a motor vehicle insurance policy. 
(b) Every owner of a motor vehicle used or operated
at any time upon any public street, road, or highway of thisState shall obtain a motor vehicle insurance policy uponsuch vehicle which provides the coverage required by thisarticle and shall maintain the motor vehicle insurance policy at all times for the entire motor vehicleregistration period. 
HRS § 431:10C-104. 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i (State) admits that 
at the time Honolulu Police Department Sergeant Kelly Pahio 
issued Fuller a citation under HRS § 431:10C-104, she did not indicate under which subsection Fuller was being cited. Fuller was orally charged at the start of trial as follows: 
On or about May 7, 2017, in the City and County of Honolulu,
State of Hawaii, Darius Fuller, as the owner of a motorvehicle, intentionally, knowingly or recklessly used oroperated at any time upon a public street, road, or highway,in the State of Hawaii, did fail to obtain a motor vehicleinsurance policy upon such vehicle which provided thecoverage required by the Hawaii motor vehicle insurance lawand/or did fail to maintain motor vehicle insurance policy
at all times for the entire motor vehicle registration
period, thereby committing the offense of Driving WithoutMotor Vehicle Insurance, in violation of section 403:10C-104of the Hawaii Revised Statutes. 
(Emphasis added). 
The State concedes that the language above is used to 
charge a violation of HRS § 431:10C-104(b), which requires, inter 
alia, that the State prove that the person charged is the owner of the motor vehicle. The State does not argue that it intended to charge Fuller with a violation of HRS § 431:10C-104(a) or that 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the oral charge could have been sufficient to support a 
conviction under subsection (a). 
In order to conclude that there is sufficient evidence 
to support a conviction, there must be substantial evidence as to "every material element of the offense charged." See State v. Kalaola, 124 
Hawai# i 43, 49, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010). The 
State acknowledges that it failed to adduce any evidence that Fuller was, in fact, the owner of the motor vehicle in which he was cited and for which he was convicted of failing to obtain a motor vehicle insurance policy. This court's review of the record confirms that no such evidence was adduced. To the contrary, evidence admitted at trial pertaining to the owner of the vehicle identified a person other than Fuller as the registered owner of the vehicle. Therefore, we conclude that there is not substantial evidence in the record to support Fuller's conviction for violating HRS § 431:10C-104(b). 
Therefore, the District Court's May 4, 2018 Judgment is 
reversed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 28, 2019. 
On the briefs: Walter J. Rodby,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Loren J. Thomas,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4 