NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000596 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
FRED E. WILLIAMS, also known as Frederick Ernest
Williams, Jr., Defendant-Appellant.
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CRIMINAL NO. 13-1-0025)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i (State) charged
Defendant-Appellant Fred E. Williams (Williams) with promoting a
dangerous drug in the third degree for possessing methamphetamine
(Count 1) and possession with intent to use drug paraphernalia
(Count 2).  Williams was arrested on an outstanding warrant. 
During the course of his arrest, a glass pipe with whitish
residue was recovered from Williams' jacket pocket and two
lighters -- a butane lighter and a disposable lighter -- were
recovered from Williams' pants pocket.  While the lighters were
being removed from Williams' pocket, a small one inch by one inch
plastic packet containing a substance resembling crystal
methamphetamine fell out and was also recovered.  A Honolulu
Police Department criminalist analyzed the residue in the glass
pipe and the contents of the plastic packet and determined that
the substances analyzed contained methamphetamine. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1/ The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
2A jury found Williams guilty as charged.  The Circuit
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)1/ sentenced Williams
and entered its Judgment on July 28, 2015.
On appeal, Williams contends that: (1) the Circuit
Court abused its discretion in admitting the glass pipe and the
plastic packet containing the substance resembling crystal
methamphetamine recovered from Williams because the State failed
to sufficiently establish the chain of custody; (2) the Circuit
Court abused its discretion in admitting the criminalist's
expert's testimony that the substance in the plastic packet and
the residue in the glass pipe contained methamphetamine; and (3)
because the evidence recovered from Williams and the
criminalist's testimony regarding her drug analysis should not
have been admitted, there was insufficient evidence to support
his convictions.  We affirm.
I.
We resolve the issues raised by Williams on appeal as
follows:
1. The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
determining that a sufficient chain of custody had been
established to admit the glass pipe and plastic packet containing
the substance resembling crystal methamphetamine into evidence. 
A trial court's decision to admit evidence over a chain-of-
custody objection is reviewed for abuse of discretion.  State v.
DeSilva, 64 Haw. 40, 42, 636 P.2d 728, 730 (1981).  "In showing
chain of custody, all possibilities of tampering with an exhibit
need not be negated.  Chain of custody is sufficiently
established where it is reasonably certain that no tampering took
place, with any doubt going to the weight of the evidence."  Id.
at 41, 636 P.2d 730.  In other words, "[t]he trial court may
admit the evidence when satisfied it is . . . reasonably probable
that tampering, substitution or alteration of evidence did notNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2/ At trial, Officer Bernadine Canite, the officer who placed the
evidence into the manila envelopes, testified that the items she placed in the
envelopes were "just" the items that were seized from Williams.  The State,
however, notes that Officer Canite was not specifically asked about the larger
Ziplock bags in the manila envelopes, and the State contends that a reasonable
inference is that Officer Canite placed the evidence recovered from Williams
into the larger Ziplock bags before sealing the manila envelopes.  After
Williams made chain-of-custody objections based on the presence of the larger
Ziplock bags, the State requested leave to recall Officer Canite to question
her specifically about the larger Ziplock bags.  However, Williams objected to
the State's request to recall Officer Canite for this purpose, and the Circuit
Court denied the State's request to recall Officer Canite.
3occur.  Absolute certainty is not required."  Id. at 42, 636 P.2d
at 730.
Here, the glass pipe and the packet containing
suspected crystal methamphetamine recovered from Williams were
placed in manila envelopes.  Every person in the chain of custody
for this evidence up through its receipt by the criminalist
testified at trial that he or she did not alter the contents of
the manila envelopes, substitute anything, or tamper with the
evidence.  The criminalist who performed the drug analysis on the
glass pipe and the substance in the plastic packet testified that
when she received the manila envelopes, the seals to the manila
envelopes were intact, the paperwork documenting the chain of
custody was in order, and there was no indication that the
evidence had been tampered with.  When the criminalist had
completed her analysis of an item, she placed the item into the
laboratory's evidence bag and heat-sealed it on both ends.
The criminalist testified that when she opened the
manila envelopes, the glass pipe and the plastic packet were each
in a larger Ziplock bag with a red line across the top.  The
criminalist testified that it is common for her to receive
evidence for analysis in this type of Ziplock bag.  Williams'
chain-of-custody objection was based on the State's failure to
explain the presence of the larger Ziplock bag with the red line
in each of the manila envelopes.2/  The Circuit Court considered
this objection, but it ruled that a sufficient chain of custody
had been established and that any question raised by the presence
of a larger Ziplock bag containing the evidence in each manilaNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4envelope went to the weight and not the admissibility of the
evidence.  Based on our review of the record, we conclude that
the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in ruling that the
chain-of-custody was sufficient.  The State's failure to
specifically account for the presence of the larger Ziplock bag
in each manila envelope went to the weight, and did not preclude
the admissibility, of the evidence. 
2. Williams argues that the Circuit Court abused its
discretion in permitting the criminalist to testify about her
drug analysis because the State failed to lay a sufficient
foundation for the results of the Fourier Transform Infrared
Spectrometer (FTIR) test on which she relied.  We disagree.  The
foundation laid by the State for the results of the FTIR test was
comparable to the foundation found sufficient by the supreme
court in State v. Manewa , 115 Hawai #i 343, 167 P.3d 336 (2007). 
As in Manewa, the criminalist in this case was qualified as an
expert in drug analysis, and her testimony established that the
FTIR was in proper working order based on established
manufacturer's procedures.  See id. at 354, 167 P.3d 347.
Unlike in State v. Subia , 139 Hawai #i 62, 67, 383 P.3d
1200, 1205 (2016), the criminalist in this case personally
conducted the daily performance check used to verify that the
FTIR was in proper working order.  In Subia, the supreme court
raised the question of whether in addition to the daily
performance check, evidence that the FTIR had received periodic
calibration was necessary to show that the FTIR was working
properly.  Id. at 68-69, 383 P.3d 1206-07.  Here, the criminalist
testified, without objection, that the FTIR is maintained to
ensure it is working properly and described the actions taken as
"[w]e align the bench weekly, and we have the manufacturer's
service engineer come in once a year to do preventive
maintenance."  We conclude that a sufficient foundation was laid
to show that the FTIR used to perform the drug analysis in this
case was in proper working order.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
53. Because we conclude that the evidence recovered
from Williams and the criminalist's testimony regarding her drug
analysis were properly admitted, we reject Williams' claim that
there was insufficient evidence to support his conviction. 
II.
We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaii, June 30, 2017. #
On the briefs:
James S. Tabe
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant.Chief Judge
Stephen K. Tsushima
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge