NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000025
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
BONG AGUSTIN ONZA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 11-1-139)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Bong Agustin Onza (Onza) appeals
 
from the October 8, 2012 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law
 
and Order Denying [Onza's] Motion to Withdraw Guilty Plea"1
 
(Denial Order) and the December 18, 2012 "Judgment of Conviction
 
2
and Probation Sentence"  (Judgment) both entered in the Circuit
 
Court of the Third Circuit (circuit court). 
On appeal, Onza contends (1) the circuit court erred by
 
refusing to set aside his plea, and (2) that he was denied
 
effective assistance of counsel.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On April 7, 2011, Onza was indicted for Terroristic
 
Threatening in the First Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised
 
1
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided unless otherwise noted.
 
2
 The Honorable Glen S. Hara presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3
Statutes (HRS) §§ 707-715(1) (Supp. 2013)  and 707-716(1)(e)
(Supp. 2011).4 On November 14, 2011, the State of Hawai 'i 
(State) filed a "Complaint Superceding Indictment" adding a 
second count, Criminal Contempt of Court, HRS § 710-1077(1)(g) 
(1993).5 Onza pled guilty to both counts the next day. 
At the change of plea hearing on November 15, 2011, the 
circuit court extensively questioned Onza according to the 
mandates of Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 11. 
Onza testified he could speak, read, write, and understand 
English. Onza testified his lawyer explained the State's 
evidence against him. Onza confirmed his attorney explained the 
charges and defenses, and that he understood he was entitled to a 
jury trial. Onza also confirmed the factual basis of the 
charges. The circuit court subsequently found Onza knowingly, 
intelligently, and voluntarily entered his plea with the 
understanding of the consequences. Also on November 15, 2011, 
3
 HRS § 707-715(1) provides in part:
 
§ 707-715(1) Terroristic threatening, defined. A person
commits the offense of terroristic threatening if the person
threatens, by word or conduct, to cause bodily injury to another
person or serious damage or harm to property of, including the
pets or livestock, of another or to commit a felony: 
(1) 	With the intent to terrorize, or in reckless
disregard of the risk of terrorizing, another
person[.]
 
4
 HRS § 707-716(1)(e) provides in part:
 
§ 707-716(1)(e) Terroristic threatening in the first degree.
  
(1) A person commits the offense of terroristic threatening in
the first degree if the person commits terroristic threatening:
 
. . . .
 
  (e) 	With the use of a dangerous instrument[.]
 
5
 HRS § 710-1077 (1)(g) provides in part:
 
§ 710-1077(1)(g) Criminal contempt of court. (1) A person
commits the offense of criminal contempt of court if:
 
. . . .
 
  (g) 	The person knowingly disobeys or resists the
process, injunction, or other mandate of a court[.]
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Onza signed a "Waiver of Indictment" which waived, in part, his
 
right to obtain written transcripts of the grand jury proceeding
 
under HRPP Rule 7(c). Onza confirmed he understood the waiver. 
By March 16, 2012, Onza had informed his counsel that
 
his guilty plea was not knowing, intelligent and voluntary
 
because he was denied an interpreter, and Onza's counsel filed a
 
"Motion to Withdraw as Counsel." On April 11, 2012, the circuit
 
court filed the "Order Granting Motion to Withdraw as Counsel and
 
for Appointment of Substitute Counsel" appointing Steve Strauss
 
(Strauss) as substitute counsel. Before sentencing, on May 22,
 
2012, Onza filed a motion to withdraw his plea. The circuit
 
court entered its Denial Order on October 8, 2012. The circuit
 
court found:
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
1.	 On April 19, 2011, [Onza] appeared before the
Honorable Greg K. Nakamura, with former Deputy Public
Defender Mirtha Oliveros for an arraignment and plea.
 
2.	 On April 19, 2011, Ms. Oliveros requested an
interpreter for future court appearances.
 
3.	 On April 19, 2011, Judge Nakamura also ordered [Onza]
to appear for a June 21, 2011 at 4:00 p.m., pre-trial
conference and a jury trial on August 2, 2011 at 9:00
 a.m.
 
4.	 On June 21, 2011, [Onza] appeared before Judge
Nakamura, without an interpreter, but with former
Public Defender Neilani Graham and was ordered to meet
 with his attorney and appear at a pre-trial conference
on July 13, 2011.
 
5.	 On June 21, 2011, no interpreter was requested by
[Onza] or his Counsel.
 
6.	 On July 13, 2011, [Onza] appeared for his pre-trial
conference and there was no interpreter present or
requested.
 
7.	 On August 2, 2011, [Onza] failed to appear for his
scheduled jury trial.
 
8.	 A Motion of Revocation of Release on Bail was filed on
 
September 14, 2011.
 
9.	 [Onza] appeared before Judge Nakamura on October 25,
2011 and requested a hearing on the Motion and the
Court scheduled a jury trial and hearing on November
22, 2011 at 9:00 a.m.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
10.	 On October 25, 2011, [Onza] appeared with Melody
Parker, Deputy Public Defender and did not have an
interpreter, nor was one requested.
 
11.	 On November 15, 2011, [Onza] appeared before Judge
Nakamura with Jennifer Wharton, Deputy Public Defender
for a change of plea.
 
12.	 On November 15, 2011, no court interpreter was present
or requested by [Onza].
 
13.	 On November 15, 2011, Judge Nakamura entered into a
colloquy with the [Onza] and found that [Onza]
knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently waived his
rights regarding (1) his constitutional right to
require the State to establish probable cause before a
felony prosecution can begin in circuit court (2) that
the State must offer sufficient evidence to "lead a
 person of ordinary caution or prudence to believe and
conscientiously entertain a strong suspicion" that the
[Onza] has committed the felony charged in order to
establish probable cause (3) that if there is a grand
jury indictment, then [Onza] has the right to obtain
written transcripts of the grand jury proceedings (4)
by waiving indictment, [Onza] gives up his right to a
probable cause determination and his right to obtain
written transcripts of grand jury proceedings.
 
14.	 On November 15, 2011, [Onza] entered a plea of guilty
as to Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree and
Criminal Contempt of Court.
 
15.	 At the change of plea hearing, Judge Nakamura went
over the change of plea form with [Onza].
 
16.	 [Onza] understands both English and Ilocano.
 
17.	 The Court finds that [Onza] has a sufficient
understanding and command of English to understand
what is happening in his case and at court
proceedings.
 
18.	 The evidence did not indicate that Judge Nakamura had
any reason to doubt [Onza] had a sufficient
understanding of English.
 
19.	 This Court also found that Deputy Public Defender,
Jennifer Wharton, an experienced attorney has appeared
before this Court on numerous occasions could
 effectively communicate in English with [Onza]. 
20.	 Jennifer Wharton met with [Onza] on numerous occasions
without the use of an interpreter.
 
21.	 Jennifer Wharton as an experienced attorney did not
feel an interpreter was necessary to communicate with
[Onza].
 
22.	 [Onza's] pleas were knowingly, voluntarily and
intelligently entered into[.] There were on changed
circumstances or new information to justify withdrawal
of [Onza's] pleas.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The circuit court concluded:
 CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
1.	 When a request to withdraw a guilty plea is made
before the sentence is imposed, the court observes a
"liberal approach," and "the court should grant themotion if the [Onza] has presented a fair and justreason for his request and the State has not reliedupon the plea to its substantial prejudice." State v.Gomes, 79 Hawai' i 32, 36, 897 P.2d 959, 963 (1995). 
2.	 The two fundamental bases for showing a fair and just
reason for withdrawing a plea are: (1) the [Onza] did
not knowingly, intelligently or voluntarily waive his
rights or (2) there are changed circumstances or new
information to justify a withdrawal of that plea. Id.
at 27, 897 P.2d at 964.
 
3.	 There is no fair and just reason for granting
withdrawal of [Onza's] plea.
 
4.	 There was an express waiver regarding a right to an
interpreter as [Onza] had a sufficient command and
understanding of the English language.
 
5.	 [Onza] waived his right to a grand jury transcript
during the waiver of the indictment.
 
On December 18, 2012, the circuit court entered the
 
Judgment and on January 9, 2013, Onza filed a notice of appeal
 
from the Judgment.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
A. Withdrawal of Plea
 
"Generally, we review the trial court's denial of a
 
motion to withdraw guilty plea for abuse of discretion." 
State v.
 
Topasna, 94 Hawai 'i 444, 452, 16 P.3d 849, 857 (App. 2000). If 
our review of the court's discretion hinges on the constitutional
 
inquiry whether the defendant knowingly, intelligently, and
 
voluntarily entered his or her plea of guilty, we review de novo.
 
Id.
 
A trial judge is constitutionally required to ensure
that a guilty plea is voluntarily and knowingly entered.
Although no specific dialogue is required, the court should
make "an affirmative showing by an on-the-record colloquy
between the court and the defendant wherein the defendant is
 shown to have a full understanding of what the plea of
guilty connotes and its consequences."
State v. Williams, 68 Haw. 498, 499, 720 P.2d 1010, 1012 (1986)[.]
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
State v. Solomon, 107 Hawai 'i 117, 126, 111 P.3d 12, 21 (2005) 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
B. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
 
When reviewing a claim of ineffective assistance of
counsel, [the appellate court] looks at whether defense
counsel's assistance was within the range of competence
demanded of attorneys in criminal cases. The defendant has
 the burden of establishing ineffective assistance of counsel
and must meet the following two-part test: 1) that there
were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack
of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or
omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial
 impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. To satisfy
this second prong, the defendant needs to show a possible
impairment, rather than a probable impairment, of a
potentially meritorious defense. A defendant need not prove
actual prejudice. 
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai 'i 504, 513-14, 78 P.3d 317, 326-27 
(2003) (internal quotation marks, citations, and footnote 
omitted). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. The circuit court's denial of Onza's motion to
 
withdraw plea was proper because Onza's change of plea was
knowing, intelligent, and voluntary.
 
"A defendant does not enjoy an absolute right to 
withdraw his or her guilty plea." Topasna, 94 Hawai 'i at 451, 16 
P.3d at 856. Where the motion is made before sentencing, "the 
motion should be granted if the defendant has presented a fair 
and just reason for his request and the prosecution has not 
relied upon the guilty plea to it's substantial prejudice." Id. 
at 451, 16 P.3d at 856 (brackets omitted). There are two recognized bases for a fair and just reason to withdraw a guilty 
plea: (1) "that the defendant did not knowingly, intelligently[,] 
and voluntarily waive the rights relinquished upon pleading 
guilty[;]" or (2) "that changed circumstances or new information 
justify withdrawal of the plea." Id. at 452, 16P.3d at 857. 
To determine whether a waiver was voluntarily and 
intelligently undertaken, we look to the totality of facts and 
circumstances of each particular case. See State v. Friedman, 93 
Hawai
'i, 63, 68–69, 996 P.2d 268, 273–74 (2000). The defendant 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
has the burden of establishing plausible and legitimate grounds 
for the withdrawal. Topasna, 94 Hawai 'i at 451, 16 P.3d at 856. 
Onza contends the circuit court erred by denying his 
motion to withdraw plea because he did not have the benefit of an 
interpreter and thus could not knowingly, intelligently, and 
voluntarily waive his right to trial. This contention is without 
merit because "where a defendant has some knowledge of English 
and he is reasonably able to converse in English, it is within 
the discretionary power of the trial court whether to appoint or 
not to appoint an interpreter." Cun-Lara v. State, 126 Hawai 'i 
541, 554, 273 P.3d 1227, 1240 (App. 2012), as amended (Mar. 30, 2012) (citing State v. Faafiti, 54 Haw. 637, 639, 513 P.2d 697, 
699 (1973)). 
In Cun-Lara, the defendant, through an HRPP Rule 40 
Petition for Post-Conviction Relief, contended his no contest 
plea was not knowing, intelligent or voluntary because he had 
difficulty understanding English and was not provided an 
interpreter at his change of plea hearing. See Cun-Lara, 126 
Hawai
'i at 543, 273 P.3d at 1229. The defendant claimed 
ineffective assistance of counsel on the same basis. Id. The 
circuit court denied the petition without a hearing, concluding the defendant failed to raise any colorable claims. In Cun-Lara, 
we held: 
The totality of the record plainly demonstrates that
Cun-Lara sufficiently understood English and specifically,
with a single unexplained exception which could have had to
do with any number of possible reasons other than an
inability to comprehend the language, understood the Circuit
Court's questions. At the Change-of-Plea hearing, Cun-Lara
told the Circuit Court that he was not having difficulty
understanding its questions and that he could read and write
in English. Cun-Lara answered the Court's questions during
the plea colloquy with yes or no answers, depending on the
question, and frequently responded with coherent, full
sentences. Cun-Lara was capable of asking, and did ask, the
Circuit Court a question regarding a future court
 appearance.
 
Cun-Lara informed the Circuit Court that he fully
understood the proceeding. The COP Transcript establishes
that Cun-Lara understood the questions that the Circuit
Court asked him. See Faafiti, 54 Haw. at 639, 513 P.2d at
699-700 (looking at the transcript of defendant's testimony
to determine whether the defendant "had sufficient command
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of the English language"); accord People v. Osuna, 174
Mich.App. 530, 436 N.W.2d 405, 407 (1988) (rejecting claim
that the case should be remanded for hearing on whether
defendant was sufficiently fluent in English to knowingly
waive his rights upon pleading guilty because "the
transcript of the plea proceedings indicates that defendant
had no problem communicating in English with the lower
court").
 
Id. at 554, 273 P.3d at 1240. Here, the record similarly reveals
 
Onza had sufficient command of the English language.
 
At Onza's change of plea hearing, the following
 
exchange occurred regarding the factual basis of the charges: 
[circuit court]: Is it true that on March 8 th
, 2011,
in the County and State of Hawai' i, you swung a pipe at [the
complaining witness (CW)]? 
[Onza]: Yes, Your Honor.
 
[circuit court]: Okay. And would that be under
 
circumstances that he probably would have been afraid at
that time?
 
[Onza]: I beg your pardon?
 
[circuit court]: Would that be under circumstances in
which [the CW] probably would have been afraid at that time?
 
[Onza]: Uh, I don't think so.
 [circuit court]: He wouldn't have been afraid?
 [Onza]: He wouldn't be afraid because like he went
come to my driveway but. So I went pick the pipe up cause
he was coming to me. He was in my driveway.
 
[circuit court]: Okay. But you swing the pipe at him? 
[Onza]: Yeah. 
[circuit court]: Okay. Is it true that, uh, on August
2 
nd , 2011, South Hilo, County and State of Hawai' i, you
missed a court date and you had previously been ordered to
appear in court on that date?
 
. . . .
 
[Onza]: Yes, guilty to not show up in court.
 
At the hearing on the motion to withdraw guilty plea,
 
Jennifer Wharton, one of Onza's former Deputy Public Defenders,
 
(Wharton) testified:
 
[Deputy Prosecuting Attorney (DPA)]: At any time
during the change of plea hearing, while the judge was going
over the change of plea, did he ever stop you and tell you
he did not understand?
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[Wharton]: No.
 
[DPA]: Did he ever stop you and tell you that he
needed an interpreter?
 
[Wharton]: No.
 [DPA]: If he had done this while the judge was
explaining to him, what would you have done?
 
[Wharton]: I would have told the court.
 . . . .
 [DPA]: At any time, during your interviews with
[Onza], did you feel a need to request an interpreter?
 
[Wharton]: No.
 [DPA]: And why not?
 [Wharton]: Because he spoke English fine.
 
Consequently, we conclude the totality of the record plainly
 
demonstrates Onza sufficiently understood English.
 
We conclude this holding is consistent with 
State v.
 
Gomez-Lobato, 130 Hawai 'i 465, 312 P.3d 897 (2013). In 
Gomez-Lobato, the defendant pled not guilty and waived his right
 to a jury trial. Id. at ___, 312 P.3d at 899. An interpreter
 
assisted the defendant in entering his plea and reviewing the
 waiver of jury form. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court concluded the 
family court's colloquy was insufficient:
 
Although the family court conducted a colloquy with
[the defendant] regarding the waiver form, the family
court's questions were not sufficient to establish that [the
defendant] knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently waived
his right to a jury trial. Specifically, the family court
asked [the defendant] whether the form contained his
initials and signature, whether he understood "what he was
doing and signing," whether the form was explained to him in
Spanish, and whether he discussed "this with [his]
attorney[.]" Respectfully, in light of [the defendant's]
language barrier, his affirmative answers to each of these
questions did not establish that he understood he was
waiving his right to a jury trial.
 
Id. at ___, 312 P.3d at 903-04 (footnote omitted). The supreme
 
court held "where a language barrier indicates that a defendant's
 
written waiver executed outside the presence of the judge 'might
 
be less than knowing and intelligent,' the court should take
 
additional steps to ensure the defendant understands the right
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that he or she is waiving." Id. at ___, 312 P.3d at 904
 
(citation omitted).
 
The case at bar is distinguishable because Onza
 
demonstrated a sufficient understanding of English. Onza engaged
 
in dialogue with the circuit court and his counsel, indicating
 
language was not a barrier between Onza and the circuit court. 
Moreover, Onza himself denied the need for an interpreter on
 
several occasions. Unlike Gomez-Lobato, there was no language
 
barrier constituting a salient fact which would have put the
 
circuit court on notice to take further steps to ensure Onza
 
understood the rights he was waiving. 
B. Onza fails to establish an ineffective assistance
 
of counsel claim.
 
To establish an ineffective assistance of counsel claim
 
Onza must show: "(1) that there were specific errors or omissions
 
reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; and
 
(2) that such errors or omissions resulted in either the
 
withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious
 
defense." Wakisaka, 102 Hawai 'i at 514, 78 P.3d at 327 (internal 
quotation mark and citation omitted).
 
To satisfy the first prong, Onza contends Wharton was
 
ineffective because she failed to (1) obtain a translator for
 Onza's client meetings and change of plea hearing, (2) request a
 
grand jury transcript, and (3) explain the potential defenses. 
This contention is unsupported by the record. First, Wharton,
 
deemed credible by the circuit court, testified:
 
Okay, so you asked why there was no interpreter. Um,
on several occasions, [Onza] said he did not need an
interpreter. On the day of the change of plea, when I was
going through the file to figure out the credit for time
served, because he was in custody and the deal was for sixty
days, I noticed that, at the initial A and P, an interpreter
was requested. I noticed that I had set up an interpreter
for his initial interview, which he didn't appear for. And
 so I asked him, while he was in cell block in the back, I
told him there was no interpreter at the court, I asked him
if he wanted to continue the court to have an interpreter
present, and he said, "No, I understand fine, no need."
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Second, Onza expressly waived his right to obtain written
 
transcripts of the grand jury proceeding and confirmed his
 
understanding of such waiver. Finally, both Wharton and Onza's
 
testimony confirmed that Wharton explained Onza's defenses. Onza
 
testified:
 
[circuit court]: Did your lawyer explain to you what
the State's evidence is against you, what your possible
defenses might be, and what facts the state must prove in
order to obtain convictions against you?
 
[Onza]: Yes, your Honor.
 
Wharton testified on cross examination: 
[Strauss]: Okay. Did you explained (sic) to [Onza] in
English what his rights of self-defense were?
 
[Wharton]: I did.
 
[Strauss]: What did you explain to him?
 [Wharton]: He initially told me that they were in his
yard and there was more than one man and that they were
mobbing him or attacking him. I explained to him he could
have the defense of self-defense. We initially were going to
go to trial. I told him that I would talk to his mother,
because he said his mother was a witness. I had my
investigator call his mother. His mother said the guys never
went in his yard, that they were out on the street. And I
came back for another interview and spoke with Mr. Onza
regarding his mother's testimony.
 
[Strauss]: Did you explain to him what the standard of
proof is for self-defense?
 
[Wharton]: Yes, I did.
 
[Strauss]: What did you explain to him?
 [Wharton]: I explained to him that whether he felt
there was an immediate threat of danger to himself he can -
he can defend himself.
 ­
[Strauss]: Did you explain to him the standard of
proof required and who carried the burden?
 
[Wharton]: Yes. I explained to him it's beyond a
reasonable doubt and that it's the state that has to prove
it.
 
As such, we conclude Onza failed to prove there were
 
specific errors or omissions reflecting Wharton's lack of skill,
 
judgment, or diligence necessary to establish that Wharton's
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
assistance fell below the range of competence demanded of
 
attorneys in criminal cases.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Accordingly, the October 8, 2012 "Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law and Order Denying Defendant's Motion to
 
Withdraw Guilty Plea" and the December 18, 2012 "Judgment of
 
Conviction and Probation Sentence" both entered in the Circuit
 
Court of the Third Circuit are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 20, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Steven D. Strauss 
Christopher P. Schlueter(Law Offices of Steven D.Strauss)for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Shannon M. KagawaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
12
 