  Defendant-Appellant Leigh Matsuyoshi (Matsuyoshi)
 
appeals from the September 18, 2012 "Judgment on Order Granting
 
Plaintiff Kondaur Capital Corporation's Motion for Summary
 
Judgment Against All Defendants on Complaint Filed June 5, 2012"
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000867
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
KONDAUR CAPITAL CORPORATION, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
LEIGH MATSUYOSHI, Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10,
DOE CORPORATIONS, 1-10, DOE ENTITIES 1-10,
ALL PERSONS RESIDING WITH AND ANY PERSONS
 
CLAIMING BY AND THROUGH OR UNDER THEM, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0185)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
1
 entered in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (circuit
 
court) in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee Kondaur Capital Corporation
 
(Kondaur Capital).
 
Matsuyoshi contends the circuit court erred by:
 
(1) granting Kondaur Capital's motion for summary
 
judgment, and
 
1
 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(2) denying Matsuyoshi's Hawai 'i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 60(b) motion to set aside judgment on the
 
order granting Kondaur Capital's motion for summary judgment.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
By a warranty deed dated February 13, 2007, Jun 
Matsuyoshi and others conveyed a property located at 2888 Hoolako 
Street, Lihue, Hawai 'i 96766 (Hoolako Property) to Matsuyoshi. 
The Hoolako Property is located in Kaua 'i County. 
On March 29, 2007, Resmae Mortgage Corporation (Resmae 
Corporation) recorded a mortgage on the property with the Bureau 
of Conveyances as Document No. 2007-057187 (Mortgage). The 
Mortgage listed Matsuyoshi as the borrower of $500,000, which she 
would repay with interest, subject to an adjustable rate rider, 
no later than May 1, 2037. The Mortgage included an acceleration 
clause, which provided that Matsuyoshi would be given at least 30 
days to cure a default of payment. The notary section of the 
Mortgage represents that Matsuyoshi personally appeared to Notary 
Public of the State of Hawai 'i, Kai Yamamoto (Yamamoto), on March 
26, 2007 in the City and County of Honolulu. Yamamoto signed the 
Mortgage. 
At the time Matsuyoshi entered into the Mortgage
 
agreement, Resmae Corporation was in Chapter 11 bankruptcy. On
 
June 5, 2007, the United States Bankruptcy Court for the District
 
of Delaware under Case No. 07-10177, filed its "Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law, and Order Under 11 U.S.C. § 1129(a) and (b)
 
and Fed. R. Bankr. P. 3020 Confirming the Second Amended Plan of
 
Reorganization of the Debtor Proposed by the Debtor and Sponsored
 
2
by RMC Mortgage Holdings LLC" (Bankruptcy Order).  The
 
Bankruptcy Order, among other things, created the Resmae
 Liquidating Trust and provided, "[t]itle to and possession of the 
2
 "RMC Mortgage Holdings LLC" is "Resmae Mortgage Corporation Mortgage
Holdings LLC" and is the same company as Resmae Corporation, prior to
reorganization under the Bankruptcy Order. 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Trust Property . . . shall be deemed transferred and delivered to
 
the Trust without further act or action under any applicable
 
agreement, law, regulation, order, or rule of law." The
 
Bankruptcy Order sets forth a permanent injunction that bars any
 
claim against the property based on factual allegations arising
 
prior to June 15, 2007, the effective date of the Bankruptcy
 
Order.3
 
By letter dated May 20, 2008, Resmae Corporation gave
 
Matsuyoshi notice of their intent to foreclose on the property
 
because her Mortgage loan was in default. Resmae Corporation
 
stated Matsuyoshi owed $9,704.34 and required that she pay this
 
amount, including other charges that may become due in the
 
meantime, by June 20, 2008. "Failure to do so will result in
 
acceleration of the due date of all sums secured by this mortgage
 
or deed of trust and the mortgage property being referred for
 
foreclosure action, which may result in sale of the property."
 
On August 28, 2008, Resmae Corporation recorded an
 
assignment of its interest to Resmae Liquidation Properties, LLC
 
(Resmae Liquidation Properties).
 
On October 3, 2008, Matsuyoshi was personally served
 
with a notice of Resmae Liquidation Properties' non-judicial
 
foreclosure action against the property. On October 17, 2008,
 
Jun Matsuyoshi was also personally served with notice of Resmae
 
Liquidation Properties' non-judicial foreclosure action in the
 
state of New Jersey.
 
On November 17, 2008, Lester K.M. Leu (Leu), attorney
 
for Resmae Liquidation Properties recorded a "Mortgagee's
 
Affidavit of Foreclosure Under Power of Sale" (Mortgagee's
 
3
   The Bankruptcy Order states:
 
[t]he Effective Date shall occur and the [Reorganization]
Plan shall become effective on the first Business Day after
the satisfaction or waiver of the conditions contained in
 the Asset Purchase Agreement and the consummation of the
'Second Closing' under the Asset Purchase Agreement.
 Parties do not dispute that the effective date is June 15, 2007.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Affidavit of Foreclosure) on behalf of Resmae Corporation, as 
Mortgagee. Leu affirmed that Resmae Corporation had sent a 
notice of default to Matsuyoshi on May 20, 2008; that notice of 
the public auction sale of the property, to be held November 13, 
2008 at noon at 777 Punchbowl Street, Honolulu, Hawai 'i 96813, 
was published in the Honolulu Star-Bulletin for three weeks commencing October 6, 2008; and that Resmae Liquidation 
Properties bought the property for $416,900.20 at the nonjudicial 
foreclosure public auction sale. 
On January 22, 2009, Leu recorded a quitclaim deed by
 
and between Resmae Liquidation Properties as foreclosing
 
mortgagee on the Hoolako Property for consideration in the sum of
 
ten dollars.
 
On July 14, 2010, Resmae Liquidation Properties granted 
the Hoolako Property to Kondaur Capital via quitclaim deed for 
one dollar. 
The quitclaim deed was recorded on February 24, 2011 
in the State of Hawai 'i Bureau of Conveyances under Document 
Number 2011-032290 (Quitclaim Deed). 
By letter dated May 22, 2012, Kondaur Capital informed
 
Matsuyoshi that she and all other occupants were required to
 vacate the Hoolako Property immediately.
 
On June 5, 2012, Kondaur Capital filed a complaint 
against Matsuyoshi in the instant case, requesting the circuit 
court eject Matsuyoshi and all other persons from the Hoolako 
Property and award Kondaur Capital rent for the period Matsuyoshi 
had unlawfully possessed the Hoolako Property. Kondaur Capital's 
complaint contained the following pertinent factual allegation: 
"[Kondaur Capital] acquired title and current ownership of the 
[Hoolako] Property through a Quitclaim Deed recorded on February 
24, 2011 in the Bureau of Conveyances, State of Hawai[
']i under 
Document Number 2011-032290 ('Quitclaim Deed')." 
On June 29, 2012, Kondaur Capital filed a motion for
 
summary judgment. Attached to the motion were affidavits from
 
Kondaur Capital's asset manager, Ann Pham (Pham), and Kondaur
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Capital's attorney, Thomas J. Berger (Berger). Pham affirmed
 
that Kondaur Capital's records included the Quitclaim Deed and
 
that Matsuyoshi continued to reside at the Hoolako Property.
 
On July 6, 2012, Kondaur Capital filed a "Request for
 
Entry of Default of [Matsuyoshi] As To [Kondaur Capital's]
 
Complaint Filed June 5, 2012" pursuant to HRCP Rule 55(a). 
Default was signed and entered July 6, 2012 by the clerk of the
 
circuit court.
 
On July 26, 2012, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
Kondaur Capital's motion for summary judgment. Matsuyoshi,
 
appearing pro se, requested a continuance to seek legal counsel.
 
Berger, representing Kondaur Capital, stated that Matsuyoshi's
 
counsel in a related case, Gary Dubin (Dubin), told him that he
 
was considering continued representation of Matsuyoshi in the
 
instant case as late as May or June 2012. Matsuyoshi
 
acknowledged that Dubin informed her "last week" that he would
 
not take the case and stated she "ha[d] not heard from him at all
 
prior to that . . . ."
 
At this same hearing, Berger stated: 
And to be frank with the [circuit c]ourt, I believe
because [Matsuyoshi] is defaulted and there's been no motion
placed on the record to set aside the default -- because
that's what happens. Sometimes they will show up at a
hearing, and there here [sic] may a motion for summary
judgment pending, but also there may be another motion
already set down the road. Because that's not the case here,
if we continue this, [Matsuyoshi] can't even present a case
because they have been defaulted.
 
So, really, if we keep kicking the ball down the road,
how far is it going to go? That's the question. So I guess
my point is [Matsuyoshi's] procedurally barred.
Berger then requested the circuit court rule on Kondaur
 
Capital's motion for entry of default. The circuit court
 
determined that it would "take [Berger's] presentation as an
 
objection [to Matsuyoshi's request for a continuance]" and stated
 
that it would continue the hearing on August 23, 2012. Berger
 
again stated that because Matsuyoshi was in default, she would
 
have to file a motion. 
So I'm not sure how the [circuit c]ourt is going to take
that up. But in any event, if there was some kind of -­
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sort of pleading to set aside default. I would probably move
ex parte to advance it to that other date, just for the
[circuit c]ourt's information.
 
On August 21, 2012, Matsuyoshi, acting through her
 
counsel, Damon M. Senaha and Colin B. Sakumoto (Sakumoto), filed
 
her opposition to Kondaur Capital's motion for summary judgment,
 
alleging various defects with Resmae Corporation's foreclosure
 
process and Kondaur Capital's documentation of their alleged
 
ownership of the Hoolako Property.
 
On August 22, 2012, Kondaur Capital filed a Reply
 
Memorandum in support of their motion for summary judgment.
 
Kondaur Capital contended that its Quitclaim Deed and Affidavit
 
of Pham established their superior title to the Hoolako Property
 
and its entitlement to summary judgment for possession.
 
On August 23, 2012, the circuit court continued its
 
hearing on Kondaur Capital's motion for summary judgment. In
 
response to the circuit court's request to hear Matsuyoshi's
 
arguments against granting Kondaur Capital's motion for summary
 
judgment, Matsuyoshi's counsel, Sakumoto, contended: (1) Kondaur
 
Capital lacks standing because Resmae Corporation continued to
 
assert rights to the Hoolako Property six months after the
 
alleged assignment in January 2011; and (2) Resmae Corporation's
 
nonjudicial foreclosure sale was not carried out in compliance
 
with Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 667.
 
On September 18, 2012, the circuit court granted and
 
filed judgment on Kondaur Capital's motion for summary judgment.
 
On September 28, 2012, the circuit court issued a writ
 
of possession in favor of Kondaur Capital against Matsuyoshi. 
Notice of entry of its judgment was entered the same day.
 
On October 17, 2012, attorney Joe P. Moss entered his
 
appearance for Matsuyoshi and filed "[Matsuyoshi's] (1) Motion to
 
Set Aside Entry of Default; (2) Motion to Set Aside Judgment on
 
Order Granting [Kondaur Capital's] Motion for Summary Judgment
 
Against all Defendants on Complaint Filed June 5, 2012; (3)
 
Motion to Stay Judgment on Order Granting [Kondaur Capital's]
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Motion for Summary Judgment Against all Defendants on Complaint
 
Filed June 5, 2012" (October Motions) In the declaration
 
submitted with her motions (Declaration), Matsuyoshi declared:
 
3. I am absolutely positive that the
[M]ortgage . . . was not signed by me before a notary
public. The notarization on this document is false. I was not in the City and County of Honolulu on March 26, 2007.All documents signed or initialed by me in regard to thisloan were done at the Starbucks at Kukui Grove in Lihue,Hawai'i. There was not a notary present. I did not sign a
notary book or provide identification to any person. 
4. I am not even sure that the signature on the
[M]ortgage is my own. The transaction was supposed to close
at First Hawaii Title Corporation in Princeville but the
mortgage broker, Damon Yee, arrived late on Kauai and said
he did not have time to go to Princeville and told me to
meet him at Starbucks at Kukui Grove to sign the documents.
No other persons were present with us when I signed and
initialed documents. None of these documents were explained
to me and I was not given copies of anything I signed
despite my request for copies. I was not given time to read
any of the documents. I was shown where to initial and sign
as Damon Yee went through the documents.
 
5. I did not sign the [M]ortgage application . . .
and the amounts listed as my income on page two are false
and were not provided to me.
 
On October 18, 2012, Matsuyoshi filed a notice of
 
appeal from the circuit court's September 18, 2012 judgment.4
 
On October 31, 2012, Matsuyoshi filed an "Ex-Parte
 
Motion to Stay Enforcement of Writ of Possession." In the
 
declaration attached to this motion, Matsuyoshi stated she was
 
served a writ of possession on October 29, 2012 instructing her
 
to leave the Hoolako Property by October 30, 2012.
 
On November 1, 2012, Kondaur Capital filed an
 
opposition to Matsuyoshi's motion to stay enforcement of the writ
 
of possession. Kondaur Capital attached a copy of real property
 
tax records for the Hoolako Property computed through October 30,
 
4
 Although the circuit court continued to receive parties' motions and
oppositions, this case is appealable under an exception to the finality
requirement because the judgment appealed from "require[s] immediate executionof a command that property be delivered to the appellant's adversary, and thelosing party would be subjected to irreparable injury if appellate review hadto wait the final outcome of the litigation." Ciesla v. Reddish, 78 Hawai' i 
18, 20, 889 P.2d 702, 704 (1995) (citing Forgay v. Conrad, 47 U.S. 201, 205(1848)). 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2012. On November 5, 2012, Matsuyoshi filed her reply
 
memorandum.
 
On November 8, 2012, the circuit court held a hearing
 
on Matsuyoshi's October Motions, which were denied in part on
 
November 14, 2012.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
Motion for Summary Judgment
 
On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is
reviewed de novo. Summary judgment is appropriate if the
pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any,
show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact
and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law. A fact is material if proof of that fact
would have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the
essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted
 by the parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party. In other words, we
must view all of the evidence and inferences drawn therefrom
 in the light most favorable to the party opposing the
motion.
 
Nuuanu Valley Ass'n v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 119 Hawai 'i 90, 
96, 194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008) (citations and brackets omitted; 
format altered). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
Matsuyoshi contends the circuit court reversibly erred
 
by denying her motion to set aside judgment on the order granting
 
summary judgment for Kondaur Capital. Kondaur Capital contends
 
Matsuyoshi's October Motions to set aside the circuit court's
 
judgment on the order granting Kondaur Capital's motion for
 
summary judgment is untimely because it was filed more than ten
 
days after entry of the judgment. Citing HRCP Rule 59(b) and (e)
 
(providing that a motion for a new trial or to alter or amend
 
judgment shall be filed no later than 10 days after entry of
 
judgment). One of Matsuyoshi's post-judgment motions was
 
submitted pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b), which provides that such
 
motions be made "within a reasonable time," and not HRCP Rule 59.
 
Under Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 
4(a)(3), only "post-judgment motions that are timely filed" are 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
deemed appealed by an appellant's notice of appeal. (Emphasis 
added.) A post-judgment motion to set aside judgment pursuant to 
HRCP Rule 60(b), however, must be filed within ten days after the 
judgment is entered in order to toll the period for appealing 
from the judgment. See Lambert v. Lua, 92 Hawai 'i 228, 234, 990 
P.2d 126, 132 (App. 1999) (under HRAP Rule 4(a)(3), "[a]n HRCP Rule 60(b) motion for relief from judgment may toll the period 
for appealing a judgment or order, but only if the motion is 
served and filed within ten (10) days after the judgment is 
entered."); and Simbajon v. Gentry, 81 Hawai
'i 193, 196, 914 P.2d 
1386, 1389 (App. 1996) (noting that a motion under HRCP Rule 60(b) usually does not extend the time for filing a notice of 
appeal under HRAP Rule 4(a)). Matsuyoshi, however, did not 
appeal the circuit court's November 14, 2012 order denying her 
post-judgment HRCP Rule 60(b) motion to set aside judgment on the 
summary judgment order within thirty days and was therefore not 
"timely filed" as required under HRAP Rule 4(a)(3).
 Accordingly, this court lacks jurisdiction to review
 
the circuit court's November 14, 2012 Order denying Matsuyoshi's
 
HRCP Rule 60(b) motion to set aside judgment on order granting
 
summary judgment for Kondaur Capital.
 
Kondaur Capital sought entry of default against
 
Matsuyoshi pursuant to HRCP Rule 55(a) because Matsuyoshi failed
 
to file an answer to Kondaur Capital's complaint. The circuit
 
court denied her motion to set aside entry of default. 
Matsuyoshi does not appeal from the circuit court's July 6, 2012
 
entry of her default on Kondaur Capital's complaint nor its
 
November 14, 2012 order denying her motion to set aside entry of
 
default.
 To prove that they were entitled to the remedy of
 
ejectment, Kondaur Capital was required to prove ownership and
 
title to the Hoolako Property. See State by Price v. Magoon, 75
 
Haw. 164, 175, 858 P.2d 712, 718-719 (1993) ("in order for the
 State to maintain its ejectment action in the circuit court
 
against the landowners, the State must necessarily prove that it
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
owns the parcels in issue"); State by Kobayashi v. Midkiff, 49 
Haw. 456, 460, 421 P.2d 550, 554 (1966) ("in ejectment a 
plaintiff must recover upon the strength of his own title and not 
upon any weakness in the defendant's title") (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted). Kondaur Capital's complaint alleged 
the following fact: "[Kondaur Capital] acquired title and current 
ownership of the [Hoolako] Property through a Quitclaim Deed 
recorded on February 24, 2011 in the Bureau of Conveyances, State 
of Hawai[ ']i under Document Number 2011-032290 ('Quitclaim 
Deed')." 
Entry of default against Matsuyoshi meant she admitted
 
factual allegations in Kondaur Capital's complaint. See Geddes
 
v. United Fin. Grp., 559 F.2d 557, 560 (9th Cir. 1977) ("The
 
general rule of law is that upon default the factual allegations
 
of the complaint, except those relating to the amount of damages,
 
will be taken as true."); see also HRCP Rule 8(d) ("Effect of
 
failure to deny. Averments in a pleading to which a responsive
 
pleading is required, other than those as to the amount of
 
damage, are admitted when not denied in the responsive
 
pleading."); and Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (FRCP) Rule
 
55(b) (expressly authorizing a court to conduct a hearing on the
 
issue of damages before entering a judgment by default). 
Under comparable sections of the FRCP, after entry of
 
default by the lower court, "[o]n appeal, the defendant . . . is
 
entitled to contest the sufficiency of the complaint and its
 
allegations to support the judgment." Danning v. Lavine, 572
 
F.2d 1386, 1388 (9th Cir. 1978) ("Upon entry of a default
 judgment, . . . facts which are not established by the pleadings
 
of the prevailing party, or claims which are not well-[pled], are
 
not binding and cannot support the judgment."); see also Geddes,
 
559 F.2d at 560. 
The circuit court did not enter default judgment
 
against Matsuyoshi, but an entry of default as to the allegations
 
in Kondaur Capital's complaint. The Ninth Circuit has marked 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
this distinction in the context of entry of default in a
 
bankruptcy proceeding; "[e]ntry of a default by the bankruptcy
 
court clerk does not automatically entitle a plaintiff to entry
 
of a default judgment, regardless of the fact that generally the
 
effect of entry of a default is to deem allegations admitted." 
In re Beltran, 182 B.R. 820, 823 (B.A.P. 9th Cir. 1995). A trial
 
court may require a party moving for default judgment to "prove
 
up even a purported prima facie case by . . . establish[ing] the
 
facts necessary to determine whether a valid claim exists that
 
would support relief against the defaulting party." In re McGee
,
 
359 B.R. 764, 773 (B.A.P. 9th Cir. 2006). "[L]iability is not
 deemed established simply because of the default and the court,
 
in its discretion, may require some proof of the facts that must
 
be established in order to determine liability." Court's Entry
 
of a Default Judgment - Hearings, 10A Charles Alan Wright, Arthur
 
R. Miller & Mary Kay Kane, Federal Practice and Procedure Civil §
 
2688 (3d ed. 1998) (footnote omitted). These holdings allow the
 
conclusion that entry of default against Matsuyoshi did not
 
establish that the circuit court found that Kondaur Capital had
 
proven, as opposed to merely pled, their prima facie case for
 
ejectment. See In re McGee
, 359 B.R. at 773. We next consider
 
whether factual allegations in Kondaur Capital's complaint were
 "well-pled." 
Consequent to entry of default against Matsuyoshi, all
 
well-pled factual allegations were deemed admitted. Geddes, 559
 
F.2d at 560. This court has rejected the contention that an
 allegation was not well-pled where the complaint contained "a
 
short and plain statement of the claim showing that the pleader
 
is entitled to relief[.]" Jou v. Siu, No. CAAP-12-0000119, 2013
 
WL 1187559, at *5 (App. Mar. 22, 2013) (mem.); reconsideration
 denied, No. CAAP-12-0000119, 2013 WL 1319361 (App. Apr. 2, 2013)
 
(quoting HRCP Rule 8(a)(1)).
 
Facts that are not well pled include allegations that are
made indefinite or erroneous by other allegations in the
same complaint, . . . allegations which are contrary to
facts of which the court will take judicial notice, or which
are not susceptible of proof by legitimate evidence, or
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
which are contrary to uncontroverted material in the file of
the case. 
In re McGee, 359 B.R. at 772 (internal quotation marks and
 
citations omitted, second emphasis added). 
As discussed infra, the instant case presents a
 
situation in which the "file of the case" contains
 
"uncontroverted material" that was submitted in opposition to
 
Kondaur Capital's motion for summary judgment, which the parties
 
continued to litigate after the circuit court's July 6, 2012
 
entry of default. Among other "uncontroverted evidence[,]" the
 
file of the case contains Matsuyoshi's declaration contesting
 
Resmae Liquidation Properties' acquisition of their mortgage
 
interest in the Hoolako Property and a mortgage document
 
representing that it was notarized in Honolulu. As further
 
discussed infra, this evidence contradicts Kondaur Capital's
 
allegation that Resmae Liquidation Properties' conveyed the
 
Hoolako Property to Kondaur Capital via the July 14, 2010
 
quitclaim deed. Because Kondaur Capital's allegation that it
 
owns the Hoolako Property is contradicted by such uncontroverted
 
evidence, its complaint is not "well pled" so as to sustain the
 
conclusion of law that Kondaur Capital is entitled to a writ of
 
ejectment against Matsuyoshi. See In re McGee, 359 B.R. at 772
 
and 10A Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. Miller & Mary Kay Kane,
 Federal Practice and Procedure Civil § 2688 (3d ed. 1998) ("Even
 
after default, however, it remains for the court to consider
 
whether the unchallenged facts constitute a legitimate cause of
 
action, since a party in default does not admit mere conclusions
 
of law.") (footnote omitted).
 
The circuit court continued to receive evidence and
 
hear arguments from parties after its entry of default. 
Notwithstanding the circuit court's entry of default against
 
Matsuyoshi as to the factual allegations in the complaint,
 
evidence in the file of the case contradicts a key factual
 
allegation concerning Kondaur Capital's ownership of the Hoolako
 
Property.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Matsuyoshi contends that even if she was prevented from
 
contesting the factual allegations in Kondaur Capital's complaint
 
by the circuit court's entry of default, the circuit court
 
reversibly erred by granting summary judgment to Kondaur Capital
 
because "the material facts did not show that Kondaur [Capital]
 
was entitled to judgment as a matter of law." A motion for
 
summary judgment:
 
shall be rendered forthwith if the pleadings, depositions,
answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together
with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine
issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is
entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. 
HRCP Rule 56(c) (emphasis added).
 
Matsuyoshi contends, in part, that the Mortgage was not
 
notarized as represented and was not executed in the City and
 
County of Honolulu as was represented in the notary's
 
attestation. Matsuyoshi submitted a declaration to this effect
 
with her post-judgment October Motions and this declaration is
 
part of file constituting the record under our review. See HRCP
 
Rule 56(c). 
Matsuyoshi's allegations that the Mortgage was not
 
properly executed and contains notary misrepresentations are
 material to the issue of whether Kondaur Capital acquired good
 
title to the Hoolako Property through the Quitclaim Deed from
 
Resmae Liquidation Properties.
 
Matsuyoshi's Declaration stated that she: (1) did not 
sign the Mortgage before a notary public; (2) initialed or signed 
all documents at a Starbucks at the Kukui Grove Shopping Center 
in Lihue, Hawai
'i and not in Honolulu; and (3) did not sign the 
mortgage application that allegedly gave rise to the Mortgage document. 
If a notary public does not witness the signatures of
the mortgagors, is not in the place where the mortgagors
sign the mortgage, and does not see or speak to the
mortgagors when they sign the mortgage, and the mortgagors
do not acknowledge to the notary that they executed the
mortgage, the mortgage is invalid . . . . 
Am. Jur. 2d Acknowledgments § 98 (2014).
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Whether a notary public witnessed Matsuyoshi and a
 
Resmae Corporation representative sign the Mortgage; was
 
physically present with Matsuyoshi and the Resmae Corporation
 
representative in Honolulu; and witnessed their acknowledgment
 
that they executed the Mortgage are factually material to whether
 
the Mortgage was valid. 
If the Mortgage was invalid, then Resmae Corporation
 
did not hold a valid mortgage interest on the Hoolako Property
 
when it assigned the foreclosed Mortgage to Resmae Liquidation
 
Properties on August 26, 2008. If it held no valid interest in
 
the foreclosed Mortgage, then Resmae Liquidation Properties' July
 
14, 2010 Quitclaim Deed to Kondaur Capital conveyed no such
 
interest in the Hoolako Property to Kondaur Capital. See Hustace
 
v. Kapuni, 6 Haw. App. 241, 245, 718 P.2d 1109, 1112 (1986)
 (holding that a quitclaim deed conveys whatever interest the
 
grantor may have had in the property). Kondaur Capital asserts
 
its ownership of the Hoolako Property via the Quitclaim Deed,
 
which, if the facts in Matsuyoshi's Declaration are taken as
 
true, may not have conveyed an interest in the foreclosed
 
Mortgage to Kondaur Capital. We conclude that Matsuyoshi's
 
Declaration alleges material facts that raise genuine issues as
 
to the validity of the Mortgage and therefore rendered summary
 
judgment for Kondaur Capital inappropriate. Because we conclude
 
the circuit court reversibly erred by granting summary judgment
 
for Kondaur Capital, Matsuyoshi's other contentions on appeal are
 
moot.
 
Kondaur Capital contends the Bankruptcy Order barred
 
Matsuyoshi from contesting the validity of Resmae Corporation's
 
non-judicial foreclosure process in any but the Bankruptcy Court. 
The Bankruptcy Order imposed an injunction under which: 
all persons who have held, hold, or may hold Claims or
interests and any successors, assigns, or representatives of
the foregoing shall be precluded and permanently enjoined on
and after the Effective Date [June 15, 2007] from (a)
commencing or continuing in any manner any Claim, action, or
other proceeding of any kind with respect to any Claim,
interest, or any other right or Claim against Reorganized
[RMC Mortgage Holdings LLC], which they possessed or may
 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
possess prior to the Effective Date, (b) the enforcement,
attachment, collection, or recovery by any manner or means
of any judgment, award, decree, or order with respect to any
Claim, interest, or any other right or Claim against
Reorganized [RMC Mortgage Holdings LLC], which they
possessed or may possess prior to the Effective Date, (c)
creating, perfecting, or enforcing any encumbrance of any
kind with respect to any Claim, interest, or any other right
or Claim against Reorganized [RMC Mortgage Holdings LLC],
which they possessed or may possess prior to the Effective
Date, and (d) asserting any Claims that are released hereby.
 
Matsuyoshi's allegation that the Mortgage was not
 
properly executed on March 26, 2007 was presented a defense, not
 
a claim, against Kondaur Capital's motion to summary judgment. 
Matsuyoshi is not making affirmative claims against Resmae
 
Corporation or Resmae Liquidating Properties arising from acts
 
prior to June 15, 2007.5 She is contesting the allegedly
 
defective sale of the Mortgage via quitclaim deed to Kondaur
 Capital, which occurred on July 14, 2010, and the November 13,
 
2008 non-judicial foreclosure process.
 
We conclude the Bankruptcy Order did not bar Matsuyoshi
 
from alleging facts concerning Resmae Corporation's and Resmae
 
Liquidation Properties' acts and representations regarding the
 
March 26, 2007 execution of the Mortgage in her October 17, 2012
 
declaration, the November 13, 2008 non-judicial foreclosure, or
 
the Quitclaim Deed, which were offered in support of her defense
 
against Kondaur Capital's July 3, 2012 motion for summary
 
judgment.
 
In light of the foregoing, we decline to reach further
 
issues raised by the parties.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The September 18, 2012 "Judgment on Order Granting
 
Plaintiff Kondaur Capital Corporation's Motion for Summary 
5
 We note that other acts underlying Matsuyoshi's challenges to Resmae
Corporation's non-judicial foreclosure process occurred in 2008, and resulted
in Resmae Liquidation Properties' purchase of the Hoolako Property as the sole
bidder at a public auction sale held in Honolulu. Even if Matsuyoshi raised
these in claims against Resmae Liquidation Properties or Resmae Corporation's,
the underlying acts occurred after June 15, 2007 and the Bankruptcy Order
would not bar Matsuyoshi from raising them as factual allegations.
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Judgment Against All Defendants on Complaint Filed June 5, 2012"
 
entered in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit is vacated and
 
this case is remanded for proceedings consistent with this
 
memorandum opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, March 7, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Joe P. Moss 
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Jonathan W.Y. Lai Thomas J. Bergerfor Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
16
 