NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
 NO. CAAP-10-0000040
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I 
BERNICE LYNN WINTERMANTEL-BAPTISTA, a.k.a.
BERNICE LYN WINTERMANTEL-BAPTISTA, individually
and as Guardian ad litem for Minor children,
NAIA A. born on February 6, 1994 and
ANELA A. born on March 23, 1995,
Plaintiff-Appellant, v. JEAN HANOHANO,
ROBERT HANOHANO, [BARBARA LARSON], ADAM LIPKA,
THOMAS ADRIANCE and THE CITY AND COUNTY OF
 
HONOLULU, a municipal corporation, Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0244-01)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Bernice Lynn Wintermantel-Baptista
 
(Plaintiff or Wintermantel-Baptista) appeals from an August 30,
 
2010 Final Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the First
 
1
Circuit (Circuit Court),  in favor of Defendants-Appellees Adam
Lipka (Lipka), Thomas Adriance (Adriance), and City and County of
 Honolulu (City, collectively City Defendants), as well as
 
Defendants Jean Hanohano and Robert Hanohano.
2
 Wintermantel-Baptista raises three points of error on
 
appeal, arguing that the Circuit Court erred when it: (1) 
refused to consider the opposition memoranda and supporting
 documents filed by Plaintiff in response to the City Defendants'
 
1
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided.
 
2
 On June 17, 2010, the Circuit Court approved a stipulation to
dismiss Plaintiff's claims against Jean and Robert Hanohano.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
motion for summary judgment; (2) granted summary judgment in
 
favor of the City Defendants; and (3) denied Plaintiff's motion
 for reconsideration of the order granting summary judgment.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Wintermantel-Baptista's points of error as follows:
 
(1) It is undisputed that Plaintiff's memorandum in
 
opposition to the City Defendants' September 18, 2009 motion for
 summary judgment was untimely filed, without the filing of a
 motion for an extension of time. See Haw. R. Civ. P. 56(c); Haw.
 
R. Cir. Ct. 7(b). Although, at the October 9, 2009 hearing on the City Defendants' motion, the Circuit Court indicated that it would not consider the Plaintiff's late-filed memorandum, the Circuit Court clearly and specifically examined whether the moving party had met its burden of demonstrating that there was no genuine issue of material fact in dispute and that the City Defendants were entitled to judgment as a matter of law on each of Plaintiff's claims. See Arakaki v. SCD-Olanani Corp., 110 
Hawai'i 1, 6, 129 P.3d 504, 509 (2006) (quoting Amaker v. Foley, 
274 F.3d 677, 680–81 (2d Cir. 2001)). Under the circumstances of this case, we cannot conclude that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in declining to consider Plaintiff's late-filed memorandum. 
(2) Even assuming, arguendo, that the Circuit Court
 
erred when it declined to consider Plaintiff's memorandum in
 opposition to the City Defendants' September 18, 2009 motion for
 summary judgment, we conclude that summary judgment was properly
 granted in favor of the City Defendants and against Plaintiff. 
As acknowledged by Plaintiff, many of the factual allegations in
 this case were previously litigated in a related federal court
 matter. In other words, many of Plaintiff's state court claims
 have the same factual issues present as the previously
 adjudicated federal claims; thus, Plaintiff's state court claims
 are potentially subject to collateral estoppel. "Collateral
 estoppel is an aspect of res judicata which precludes the
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
relitigation of a fact or issue which was previously determined 
in a prior suit on a different claim between the same parties or their privies." Omerod v. Heirs of Kaheananui, 116 Hawai' i 239, 
263, 172 P.3d 983, 1007 (2007). The doctrine of collateral estoppel prevents relitigation if the following four factors are met: 
(1) the issue decided in the prior adjudication is identical to
the one presented in the action in question; (2) there is a final
judgment on the merits; (3) the issue decided in the prior
adjudication was essential to the final judgment; and (4) the
party against whom collateral estoppel is asserted was a party or
in privity with a party to the prior adjudication[.]
 
Id. at 264, 172 P.3d at 1008. The Hawai' i Supreme Court has held 
that state courts, where appropriate under the doctrine of 
collateral estoppel, are "required to give preclusive effect" to Federal District Court findings. See Sussel v. Civil Serv. 
Comm'n of City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 74 Haw. 599, 612, 851 P.2d 311, 318 (1993). Therefore, collateral estoppel may apply to U.S. District Court for the District of Hawai' i Judge Michael 
Seabright's (U.S. District Court's) findings and the previously 
adjudicated issues that underlie Plaintiff's claims herein. 
Plaintiff contends that the City Defendants violated
 
3
Article I, Section 7  of the Hawai' i Constitution when they 
allegedly impounded her car and placed her children in foster 
care. 
The U.S. District Court, however, made key findings on 
these allegations, including that: (1) Plaintiff's car was seized by Aloha Auction Collateral Recovery acting on behalf of the Bank of Hawai' i (because her car payments were in arrears) 
and not the City Defendants; and (2) neither Adriance nor Lipka engaged in activity resulting in the placement of Plaintiff's 
3
 Article I, Section 7 of the Hawai' i State Constitution states as 
follows: 
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses,
papers and effects against unreasonable searches, seizures and
invasions of privacy shall not be violated; and no warrants shall
issue but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation,
and particularly describing the place to be searched and the
persons or things to be seized or the communications sought to be
intercepted.
 
Haw. Const. art. I, § 7.
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
children in foster care, Lipka did not "threaten" to have CPS
 
take Plaintiff's children, and there is no evidence to suggest
 that the officers conspired to take her children away. 
An examination of the four collateral estoppel factors 
reveal that collateral estoppel applies here, and these issues are precluded from relitigation. The U.S. District Court's findings regarding the car repossession and Plaintiff's children are determinative of the merit of Plaintiff's claims under Article I, Section 7 of the Hawai' i State Constitution. Section 
7 prohibits unreasonable searches and seizures, and Plaintiff is claiming that the City Defendants unconstitutionally impounded her car and seized her children. The federal court determined that the City Defendants had nothing to do with the seizure of either Plaintiff's vehicle or the removal of her children from her custody. Therefore, "the issue decided in the prior adjudication is identical to the one presented in the action in question". Omerod, 116 Hawai' i at 264, 172 P.3d at 1008 (2007). 
In addition, there was a final judgment on the merits
 
entered in the U.S. District Court and these factual findings
 were essential to the Federal District Court's final judgment
 because they provided the basis for dismissal of Plaintiff's
 Fourth Amendment claims. Finally, the party against whom
 collateral estoppel is asserted (here Plaintiff) was a party in
 the federal action. Therefore, summary judgment was properly
 granted on this claim; no genuine issue of material fact exists,
 and the City Defendants are entitled to judgment as a matter of
 law.
 
Plaintiff also contends that the City Defendants
 
4
violated Article I, Section 5  of the Hawai' i State Constitution 
4
 Article I, Section 5 of the Hawai' i State Constitution states as 
follows: 
No person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property without
due process of law, nor be denied the equal protection of the
laws, nor be denied the enjoyment of the person's civil rights or
be discriminated against in the exercise thereof because of race,
religion, sex or ancestry.
 
Haw. Const. art. I, § 5
.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
when they held her in a police car while they investigated
 
whether she was in violation of a temporary restraining order (an
 alleged due process violation) and engaged in "class of one"
 
5
harassment  (an alleged equal protection violation).  Pertinent
 
U.S.
 District Court findings and conclusions included that: (1) 
placement of Wintermantel-Baptista in a "hot" squad car for five to ten minutes (while they investigated her alleged temporary restraining order violation) did not constitute excessive force; and (2) there is no evidence that Adriance or Lipka possessed racial animus towards Plaintiff or that City Defendants treated Plaintiff differently than other members of the public. The latter of these findings disposes of Plaintiff's equal protection claim under state law, as well as federal law. And while the scope of protections under the Hawai' i Constitution may be 
broader than under the U.S. Constitution (see, e.g., State v. Santiago, 53 Haw. 254, 265, 492 P.2d 657, 664 (1971)), it is unclear what circumstances Plaintiff submits are entitled to greater scrutiny under Hawai' i constitutional law, Plaintiff 
cites no Hawai' i authority in support of her claim that her due 
process rights were violated, and we find none. 
Plaintiff also asserts that summary judgment was
 
improperly entered in favor of Lipka and Adriance on the claims
 of intentional infliction of emotional distress, when the
 officers allegedly engaged in a "protracted campaign" to "single
 out," "harass," and "terrorize" Plaintiff. As the City
 Defendants argue, "non-judicial governmental officials, when
 acting in the performance of their public duty, enjoy the
 protection of" qualified immunity. Towse v. State, 64 Haw. 624,
 
631, 647 P.2d 696, 702 (1982) (footnote omitted). Overcoming
 qualified immunity requires "clear and convincing proof as to the
 
5
 In its Village of Willowbrook v. Olech case, the U.S. Supreme
 
Court articulated what a "class of one" equal protection claim entails,
explaining that it is a cause of action arising under the Equal Protection
Clause "where the plaintiff alleges that she has been intentionally treated
differently from others similarly situated and that there is no rational basis
for the difference in treatment." Vill. of Willowbrook v. Olech, 528 U.S.
562, 564, 120 S. Ct. 1073, 1074, 145 L. Ed. 2d 1060 (2000) (noting that "class
of one" claims are not based on "membership in a class or group"). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
existence of malice and improper purpose". See id. at 633, 647
 
P.2d at 703. "[B]are allegations in the complaint which assert
 
that the defendants were motivated by malice are not sufficient"
 to overcome a motion for summary judgment. See Runnels v.
 
Okamoto, 56 Haw. 1, 6, 525 P.2d 1125, 1129 (1974). 
In the present case, it is undisputed that Lipka and
 
Adriance are "non-judicial government officials" and were "acting
 in the performance of their public duty" because they are police
 officers who were carrying out their duties as such when all of
 these alleged incidents occurred.
6 Thus, they are entitled to
 
qualified immunity. In light of the U.S. District Court's
 findings, as well as the unsubstantiated and conclusory
 allegations by Plaintiff, it is clear that Plaintiff has failed
 to meet her threshold showing that the officers acted
 maliciously. Therefore, summary judgment was properly entered on
 these claims.
 
Plaintiff alleges conversion against Lipka and Adriance
 
associated with the repossession of her car while she was being
 arrested. However, the U.S. District Court specifically found
 that Plaintiff's car was seized by a third party and not the City
 Defendants. For the reasons set forth above, collateral estoppel
 applies and she may not relitigate these facts in support of her
 conversion claim.
 
Plaintiff's remaining claims, including her claims of
 
negligent supervision by the City over its police officers,
 conspiracy by Lipka and Adriance to deprive her of her property,
 liberty, and custody of her children, as well as to subject
 Plaintiff and her children to severe emotional distress, and
 respondeat superior liability of the City for the actions of its
 police officers, are also without merit.
 
(3) "The purpose of a motion for reconsideration is to
 
allow the parties to present new evidence and/or arguments that
 
6
 This court has found that a "police official, as a nonjudicial
officer, enjoys qualified immunity from state law claims." Woodard v. 
Tabanara, 125 Hawai' i 247, 257 P.3d 1224 (Ct. App. 2011) (unpublished
disposition). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
could not have been presented during the earlier adjudicated 
motion." Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co.,  74 Haw. 
85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 27 (1992). "Reconsideration is not a device to relitigate old matters or to raise arguments or evidence that could and should have been brought during the earlier proceeding." Cho v. State, 115 Hawai
'i 373, 384, 168 
P.3d 17, 28 (2007) (citation omitted). In the present case, Plaintiff offered no new evidence or arguments that could not have been presented during the earlier adjudicated motion, including the reasons for the dilatory filing of her opposition papers. We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion when it denied Plaintiff's motion for reconsideration. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's August 30, 2010
 
Final Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 11, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Walter R. Schoettle 
for Plaintiff-Appellant Chief Judge 
Curtis E. Sherwood Deputy Corporation CounselCity and County of Honolulufor Defendants-AppelleesCITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU,ADAM LIPKA, and THOMAS ADRIANCE Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7
 