  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000560 05-MAY-2026 08:36 AM Dkt. 55 MO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000560 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAI#I 
ALLISON CAETANO, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
HAWAIIAN AIRLINES, INC., Defendant-Appellee,
and DOE PERSONS 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10;
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; ROE "NON-PROFIT" CORPORATIONS 1-10;
DOE UNINCORPORATED ORGANIZATIONS 1-10; andR
OE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CCV-22-0001370) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Nakasone, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Guidry, JJ.) 
Allison Caetano's cat was killed while in the custody 
of Hawaiian Airlines, Inc. (
HA) in Los Angeles. She sued HA in 
Hawai#i. The Circuit Court of the First Circuit granted HA's 
motion to dismiss based on forum non conveniens.1 Caetano 
appeals from the Final Judgment for HA. She challenges the 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order granting HA's 
motion to dismiss, and the Order Granting Defendant Hawaiian Airlines, Inc.'s Motion for Attorneys' Fees. 
We hold that the circuit court acted within its 
discretion by dismissing Caetano's lawsuit based on forum non conveniens, but acted outside its discretion by dismissing the action with prejudice, and by not conditioning the dismissal on HA's agreement to waive any statute of limitations defense 
1 The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai presided.  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
provided Caetano filed suit in California within a reasonable 
time. We vacate the Final Judgment and the orders granting HA's motion to dismiss and awarding attorney fees, and remand to the circuit court with instructions. 
I. BACKGROUND 
Caetano booked an HA flight from Los Angeles 
International Airport (LAX) to Honolulu. On April 8, 2022, she 
checked in her cat, Nubis, to travel in the baggage compartment. 
After Nubis was checked in, he escaped from his kennel and was 
fatally hit by a bus on the LAX tarmac. 
Caetano sued HA on November 2, 2022. Her complaint 
alleged negligence, gross negligence, negligent infliction of emotional distress, breach of contract, negligent supervision, and intentional infliction of emotional distress. 
On October 13, 2023, HA moved to dismiss based on forum 
non conveniens.  The motion was heard on November 14, 2023. The record does not contain a transcript of the hearing because Caetano failed to deposit the required fee.
2 HA's motion was 
granted; Caetano's complaint was dismissed with prejudice. The Final Judgment was entered on August 13, 2024. HA timely moved for an award of $55,315.65 in attorney fees. The circuit court granted the motion in part, awarding $26,323.55 including Hawai# i 
general excise tax.
3 Caetano appeals. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Caetano's opening brief states two points of error. 
She contends the circuit court erred by (1) granting HA's motion 
to dismiss, and (2) granting HA's motion for attorney fees. 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
We review an order granting a motion to dismiss based 
on forum non conveniens for abuse of discretion. UFJ Bank Ltd. v. Ieda, 109 
Hawai#i 137, 142, 123 P.3d 1232, 1237 (2005). 
2 See Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 10(b)(1)(C). 
3 The Honorable Lisa W. Cataldo presided. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Caetano does not challenge the circuit court's findings 
of fact, including those labeled as conclusions of law,4 or mixed 
findings and conclusions. See Hawai# i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4)(C). Unchallenged findings of fact 
are binding on appeal. Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water 
Supply
, 97 Hawai# i 450, 459, 40 P.3d 73, 82 (2002). 
IV. DISCUSSION 
Forum non conveniens gives a court discretion to 
decline to exercise jurisdiction over a case that may be more 
appropriately tried in another forum. UFJ Bank
, 109 Hawai#i at 
145, 123 P.3d at 1240. An alternative forum must exist and the defendant must be amenable to process in the alternative forum for the doctrine to apply. 
Id.
A. HA did not waive 
forum non conveniens. 
Caetano argues that HA waived its forum non conveniens 
argument because it "waited almost a year to file their instant motion even though they knew right away all the facts that they raised in their motion." She relies on Estate of I.E.H. v. CKE Restaurants, Holdings, Inc., 995 F.3d 659 (8th Cir. 2021). 
There, the motion to dismiss was filed 18 months after 
the complaint was filed, after the discovery cutoff. Id. at 662. 
CKE knew all facts relevant to its forum non conveniens argument when the complaint was filed. Id. at 664. Under those 
circumstances, the federal court of appeals held that "the motion should have been filed earlier than 18 months after [the plaintiffs] filed their complaint and earlier than the end of the discovery period prior to trial." Id. at 665. 
Here, Caetano's complaint was filed on November 2, 
2022. HA answered on December 2, 2022, and asserted forum non conveniens as an affirmative defense. The scheduling conference 
4 The label of a finding of fact or a conclusion of law does not
determine the standard of review because the accuracy of the label affixed by
the trial court is freely reviewable by an appellate court. Cf. Kilauea 
Neighborhood Ass'n v. Land Use Comm'n, 7 Haw. App. 227, 229, 751 P.2d 1031,1034 (1988) (concerning administrative agency's findings and conclusions). 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was set for January 30, 2023, but was continued by stipulation to 
March 1, 2023. A settlement conference was set for April 26, 2023. A 4-day jury trial was set for February 26, 2024. 
HA's motion to dismiss was filed on October 13, 2023. 
The circuit court found, and Caetano does not dispute, that: 
28. On April 26, 2023, [Caetano] and Hawaiian
Airlines participated in an early settlement conference. 
29. [Caetano] participated remotely in the
settlement conference from California. 
30. Hawaiian Airlines made a good faith attempt to
resolve the instant case through participation in the
settlement conference. 
31. The parties have propounded no other written
discovery [besides Caetano's initial disclosures] in thismatter, depositions have not been taken and no other motionspractice (other than the instant Motion [to dismiss]) hasoccurred. 
. . . . 
40. As set forth above, in this case, neither party
has propounded written discovery, nor have any depositions
been taken, nor has any motions practice occurred other thanthe instant Motion. Accordingly, substantial progress hasnot been made in this litigation. 
41. Furthermore, the Court holds that Hawaiian
Airlines did not unduly delay in filing its Motion, nor wasthere any dilatory intent on the part of Hawaiian Airlineswith respect to the timing of the Motion, because HawaiianAirlines made a good faith attempt to resolve the case via asettlement before filing its Motion, including participatingin a settlement conference with the Court. 
42. Consequently, the Court holds that the Motion
was timely filed. 
(Citations omitted.) 
On this record, the circuit court acted within its 
discretion by holding that HA's motion to dismiss had been timely 
filed — that is, there was no unreasonable delay that prejudiced Caetano. 
B. An alternative forum was conditionally
available. 
Caetano argues that an "alternative forum is not 
practically available." 
"An alternative forum ordinarily exists 
when all defendants are amenable to service of process in the 
foreign forum." UFJ Bank, 109 Hawai# i at 145, 123 P.3d at 1240. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HA is registered to do business in California and is amenable to 
service of process there. California appears to be an alternative forum. 
However, Nubis died on April 8, 2022. The California 
statute of limitations on Caetano's tort claims could be three years. See Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 338(c)(1) (2022) (three years 
for "action for taking, detaining, or injuring goods or chattels"). An alternative forum is not available "if the plaintiff's cause of action would elsewhere by barred by the statute of limitations, unless the court is willing to accept the defendant's stipulation that he will not raise this defense in the second state." Johnson v. G.D. Searle & Co., 314 Md. 521, 
530, 552 A.2d 29, 33 (1989) (quoting Restatement (Second) of Conflict of Laws § 84, Comment c (1971)). 
In Lesser v. Boughey
, 88 Hawai#i 260, 965 P.2d 802 
(1998), the supreme court noted that "the trial court guaranteed an alternative forum by expressly conditioning [its] order upon Boughey's agreement to accept service of process and waive any statute of limitations defense in California." 
Id.
 at 263, 965 
P.2d at 805 (emphasis added). 
The statute of limitations issue was not raised with 
the circuit court, apparently because a lawsuit by Caetano in California would not then have been time-barred. We ordered supplemental briefing on it, under HRAP Rule 28(b)(4). 
HA's supplemental brief argued that the minutes of the 
November 14, 2023 hearing on its motion to dismiss show the court orally granted the motion. According to HA, no applicable California statute of limitations had then expired; Caetano should have immediately filed suit in California; she instead filed this appeal and "offers no explanation for her delay in filing suit in California." 
The record reflects a reason for Caetano's apparent 
reticence to file a second suit against HA without pursuing this appeal. The circuit court's order granting HA's motion to dismiss stated "the case is dismissed in Hawai# i WITH PREJUDICE 
on the ground of forum non conveniens." HA argues the words "in Hawai#i" would "avoid[] any possible confusion on the part of the 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
California court that the action could not be litigated on the 
merits in California." But that is just speculation about how a California court might interpret the ambiguous Hawai# i order. 
And the Final Judgment unqualifiedly states the order "dismissed all claims in the case with prejudice as to all Defendants." The language of the Final Judgment shows it was a judgment on the merits of Caetano's claims. 
A new case filed in California may also have been 
subject to abatement because this appeal is pending. See 
Hawaiian Airlines, Inc. v. Dep't of Tax'n, 158 Hawai# i 1, 6, 581 
P.3d 1232, 1237 (App. 2025) (discussing abatement), cert. rejected, SCWC-24-0000496, 2026 WL 883991 (Haw. March 31, 2026). 
The possible three-year California statute of 
limitation expired while this appeal was pending. Thus, HA's proffered alternative forum may only be available if HA waived a statute of limitations defense. 
C. The circuit court appropriately balanced the
private interests of the litigants and thepublic interest factors. 
Caetano argues "she is a full-time resident of Hawai# i 
with limited means and resources and has been since April of 
2022." She maintains she "cannot afford to travel to California nor to litigate the case there." That argument goes to the "balance of conveniences" analysis. "[A]lthough the plaintiff's choice of forum is an important factor, if the balance of conveniences suggests that trial in the chosen forum would be unnecessarily burdensome for the defendant or the court, dismissal is proper." Lesser
, 88 Hawai#i at 263, 965 P.2d at 805 
(quotation marks omitted). 
A court deciding a 
forum non conveniens motion must 
balance "the private interest of the litigants and public interest factors." Lesser
, 88 Hawai#i at 263, 965 P.2d at 805. 
Private interest factors include: 
the relative ease of access to sources of proof;
availability of compulsory process for attendance ofunwilling, and the cost of obtaining attendance of willing,witnesses; possibility of view of premises, if view would beappropriate to the action; and all other practical problems 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that make trial of a case easy, expeditious and inexpensive.
There may also be questions as to the enforcibility [sic] ofa judgment if one is obtained. The court will weighrelative advantages and obstacles to fair trial. It is often said that the plaintiff may not, by choice of aninconvenient forum, 'vex,' 'harass,' or 'oppress' thedefendant by inflicting upon him expense or trouble notnecessary to his own right to pursue his remedy. But unless the balance is strongly in favor of the defendant, theplaintiff's choice of forum should rarely be disturbed. 
Gulf Oil Corp. v. Gilbert, 330 U.S. 501, 508 (1947) (footnote 
omitted). 
Public interest factors include: 
Administrative difficulties follow for courts when 
litigation is piled up in congested centers instead of beinghandled at its origin. Jury duty is a burden that ought notto be imposed upon the people of a community which has norelation to the litigation. In cases which touch the affairs of many persons, there is reason for holding thetrial in their view and reach rather than in remote parts ofthe country where they can learn of it by report only.There is a local interest in having localized controversiesdecided at home. There is an appropriateness, too, inhaving the trial of a diversity case in a forum that is athome with the state law that must govern the case, ratherthan having a court in some other forum untangle problems inconflict of laws, and in law foreign to itself. 
Id. at 508–09. 
Here, the circuit court conducted a lengthy analysis of 
the parties' relative ease of access to sources of proof; 
availability of compulsory process for attendance of unwilling witnesses, and the cost of obtaining attendance of willing witnesses; the possibility of a jury view; administrative difficulties; jury duty burden and local interest; and court congestion. 
The circuit court found and concluded that Caetano 
claimed to be a Hawai#i resident, but her declaration "is devoid 
of any actual facts that would establish residency, such as a residential address or employment information." 
Caetano's initial disclosures showed the only evidence 
she had that HA did not have, or that was not in California, were the crates in which her cats were stored at LAX. 
Other than Caetano herself, every potential witness 
identified was in California. HA would incur substantial lodging and incidental costs for its California-based witnesses if the 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
case were tried in Hawai# i,5 while it would be relatively 
inexpensive for Caetano to try the case in California because 
she'd be the only witness required to travel to California and she's shown an ability to do so (when she participated in the settlement conference by Zoom from California). 
The circuit court rejected Caetano's argument that 
witness costs could be resolved by allowing testimony by Zoom, stating, "It is well-recognized that in-person testimony is preferable to videoconferencing or other remote means of testifying. . . . [HA]'s concerns regarding its key witnesses testifying remotely in this case are amplified given that [Caetano] has demanded a jury trial." 
Given the case facts — Nubis escaping from his kennel 
and making his way to the LAX tarmac, HA "and several airport agencies" conducting "an intensive search for the cat" which, while airport police were trying to collect him, "darted in front of a bus and was hit and did not survive" — the circuit court noted a jury site visit could be appropriate. 
On the public interest factors, the circuit court 
stated "the origin of this dispute is in California at LAX. As such, litigation concerning a California dispute would, under the instant circumstances, be better handled in California and Hawai#i courts should not be burdened with such a California-
centric dispute." The court also stated, "Dismissing this case so that it may be tried in California will serve the interests of avoiding unnecessary court congestion in Hawai# i, and of not 
imposing jury duty on the people of Hawai
#i, who have no relation 
to, or interest in, this litigation. Additionally, California has an interest in resolving this localized controversy arising out of an incident that occurred at LAX." 
The circuit court's mixed findings and conclusions were 
supported by substantial evidence in the record, and were not 
5 HA's Los Angeles Station General Manager Daniel Castro submitted a
declaration stating, "Myself, Hawaiian Airlines' LAX Manager Chasity Wills,
and LAX Operations Manager Maritza Leanos, and Darren Horio, the HawaiianAirlines' [sic] agent who checked in Plaintiffs [sic] cats at the HawaiianAirlines LAX special services counter, are all based at LAX and reside inCalifornia." 
8  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
clearly erroneous. See Cowan v. Exclusive Resorts PBL1, LLC, 156 
Hawai#i 268, 272, 574 P.3d 288, 292 (2025) (stating that a 
conclusion presenting mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed 
under the clearly erroneous
 standard because it implicates the 
facts and circumstances of that case). 
On this record, we conclude the circuit court acted 
within its discretion by dismissing Caetano's lawsuit based on forum non conveniens, but acted outside its discretion by dismissing the action with prejudice, and by not conditioning the dismissal on HA's agreement to waive any statute of limitations defense provided Caetano filed suit in California within a reasonable time. Lesser, 88 Hawai# i at 263, 965 P.2d at 805. 
D. The order awarding HA attorney fees is
vacated. 
Because we are vacating the Final Judgment, we also 
vacate the September 27, 2024 Order Granting Defendant Hawaiian 
Airlines, Inc.'s Motion for Attorneys' Fees.  See Ass'n of Owners 
of Kalele Kai v. Yoshikawa, 149 Hawai# i 417, 420, 493 P.3d 939, 
942 (2021) (stating that "an award of attorneys' fees is inappropriate where the underlying judgment is vacated"). 
We 
express no opinion about whether HA was or is a prevailing party. 
V. CONCLUSION 
The February 6, 2024 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of 
Law and Order granting HA's motion to dismiss Caetano's complaint, the August 13, 2024 Final Judgment, and the September 27, 2024 Order Granting Defendant Hawaiian Airlines, Inc.'s Motion for Attorneys' Fees are vacated, and this case is 
remanded to the circuit court. 
On remand, if HA agrees to waive any potential statute 
of limitations defense for an amount of time reasonable to allow Caetano to file suit in California, the circuit court should enter an amended order dismissing Caetano's complaint without prejudice based on forum non conveniens. Because the order would not be a decision on the merits of Caetano's claims, the Hawai# i 
Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 58 judgment should state only that 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
all claims in Caetano's complaint are dismissed without prejudice 
based on forum non conveniens; it should not be entered for or against any party. 
If HA does not agree to waive any potential statute of 
limitations defense for a reasonable period of time, the circuit court should enter an order denying HA's motion to dismiss. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 5, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
Bosko Petricevic, 
for Plaintiff-AppellantAllison Caetano. 
Joachim P. Cox,
Robert K. Fricke, Abigail M. Holden, for Defendant-AppelleeHawaiian Airlines, Inc. /s/ Karen T. NakasoneChief Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry
Associate Judge
10 