NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000455
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ANTHONY SANTIAGO, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 13-1-1519)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Acting C.J., Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Anthony Santiago (Santiago) appeals
from the May 14, 2015 Judgment of Conviction and Probation
Sentence entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
(Circuit Court).1  Santiago was convicted of two counts of
Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree (TT1), in violation
of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 707-716(1)(e) (2014).  He was
sentenced to two concurrent four-year probationary terms with,
inter alia , one year of incarceration with credit for time served
as a special term.
On appeal, Santiago challenges the Circuit Court's
decision to exclude evidence that one of the complaining
witnesses was held for over a year because he could not afford
$150,000 bail set in an unrelated case, and instructions on self-
defense and the definition of a dangerous instrument.
1The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
After a careful review and consideration of the points
raised2 and arguments made by the parties, the record, and the
applicable legal authority, we resolve Santiago's points as
follows and affirm.
1. The Circuit Court did not err in excluding
testimony that the complaining witness named in Count I (CWI) was
being held in prison because he was unable to make bail in the
amount of $150,000, when the property that was central to the
dispute underlying this case was removed from CWI's home. 
Santiago argues that the Circuit Court's ruling prevented him
from presenting to the jury the reasons Santiago knew CWI would
not be home soon and why he needed to safeguard CWI's property.
Relevant evidence is "evidence having any tendency to
make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the
determination of the action more probable or less probable than
it would be without the evidence."  Hawaii Rules of Evidence
(HRE) Rule 401.  "Evidence which is not relevant is not
admissible."  HRE 402.  "A trial court's determination that
evidence is 'relevant' within the meaning of HRE Rule 401 (1993)
is reviewed under the right/wrong standard of review."  State v.
St. Clair, 101 Hawai #i 280, 286, 67 P.3d 779, 785 (2003) quoting
State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai# i 390, 403-04, 56 P.3d 692, 705-06
(2002).
Santiago's defense involved justifying his actions with
regard to CWI's property, a dispute over which was the basis for
the meeting giving rise to the incident underlying the charged
offenses.  Santiago maintained that CWI had asked him to "watch
his house" and it was because CWI was away for over a year that
Santiago believed it was necessary to take steps to safeguard
2We note that Santiago's points on appeal do not comply with
Hawai#i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4) insofar as they do
not provide citations to the record identifying where the alleged error
occurred, where it was objected-to, and where the grounds for the objection
may be found, nor do they contain a description of the substance of the
evidence and a quotation of the instructions at issue.  Counsel is warned that
future noncompliance may result in disregard of the noncompliant points and/or
sanctions.  HRAP Rules 28(b)(4) and 51.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
CWI's property.  Santiago argued that he should be able to
present to the jury the reason CWI was away for an extended
period of time to support his actions.  The Circuit Court ruled
that Santiago could present evidence that CWI was away from his
home for this period, but ruled that the reason CWI was away was
not relevant.  We agree.  The reason CWI was away from his home
when his property was removed did not make it more or less likely
that Santiago was justified in his handling of CWI's property, or
make any fact pertinent to the TTI charges more or less probable. 
2. The instructions regarding self-defense and
defining dangerous weapons were not erroneous.  Both instructions
were given by the Circuit Court by agreement.  "[T]he appellant
must first demonstrate instructional error by rebutting the
'presumption that unobjected-to jury instructions are correct.'"  
State v. DeLeon , 131 Hawai #i 463, 479, 319 P.3d 382, 398 (2014)
(quoting State v. Nichols , 111 Hawai #i 327, 337 n.6, 141 P.3d
974, 984 n.6 (2006)).
a. Santiago agrees that a self-defense instruction
should have been given and does not argue that the Circuit
Court's instruction was an incorrect statement of the law but
maintains that, because the "use of deadly force was not at all
an issue in this case[,]" the Circuit Court should have "redacted
the sections which commanded the jury to first consider whether
[Santiago] used deadly force."  However, a defendant is entitled
to have the trier of fact consider any defense no matter how
weak, unsatisfactory, or inconclusive the evidence may appear to
be.  State v. Pavao , 81 Hawai #i 142, 146, 913 P.2d 553, 557
(App. 1996).  There was testimony presented here that, even
before all the participants had been seated, Santiago yelled at
CWI and the complainant named in Count II (CWII), "I going kill
you guys.  I going blow you away.  I going bury you[;]" that
Santiago repeated these threats, getting "madder each time[,]"
that Santiago placed a partially unzipped bag on the table from
which three inches of a gun's muzzle could be seen, and that
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Santiago placed his hand on the bag in such a way that he could
have pulled the trigger through the soft fabric of the bag. 
Given this testimony, the jury may have considered Santiago's
words and actions to constitute the use of deadly force. 
Therefore, it was not error to issue an instruction defining the
use of deadly force for the jury.
b. Santiago argues that the Circuit Court's
instruction defining "dangerous instrument" was error because
"without the definition of firearm, the jury could easily have
believed the State did not need to prove [he] brandished a real
gun."  Santiago's argument is without merit.  Terroristic
Threatening in the First Degree under HRS ยง 707-716(1)(e), with
which Santiago was charged, requires proof that "a dangerous
instrument" was used.  The instruction defining dangerous
instrument was taken verbatim from the statutory definition
provided in HRS Chapter 707, the chapter also defining the
offense of Terroristic Threatening.  The term "firearm" has not
been defined for the purposes of HRS ยง 707-716(1)(e). 
Nevertheless a "firearm" is commonly understood as "a small arms
weapon, as a rifle or pistol, from which a projectile is fired by
gunpowder."  Dictionary.com, http://www.dictionary.com/browse/
firearm (last visited February 23, 2018), Merriam-Webster's
Collegiate Dictionary, 471 (11th ed.) ("a weapon from which a
shot is discharged by gunpowder"); see also State v. Mita, 124
Hawai#i 385, 290-91, 245 P.3d 458, 463-64 (2010) ("animal
nuisance" was a commonly understood term and gave defendant fair
notice of the offense charged).  The jury was instructed that the
firearm need not be loaded or operable, and there is nothing in
the instructions that implies the object in question did not need
to be a "real" firearm.  The jury's common understanding of the
meaning of "firearm" coupled with the instruction as given
adequately informed the jury that the object in question had to
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
be a "firearm" and did not imply that a "replica gun" would
suffice.
For the foregoing reasons, the May 14, 2015 Judgment of
Conviction and Probation Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of
the First Circuit is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 21, 2018.
On the briefs:
Randall K. Hironaka,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Brandon H. Ito,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Acting Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
5