NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000111
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
YINGJIA ZHANG, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 1DTA-16-00202)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Yingjia Zhang ( Zhang or Defendant)
appeals from the District Court of the First Circuit's ( District
Court)1 January 31, 2017 Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order
and Plea/Judgment ( Judgment), dismissing the charge of operating
a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant ( OVUII) pursuant
to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS ) § 291E-61(a)(1), (a)(3), and
(b)(1),2 without prejudice.
1The Honorable Lanson K. Kupau ( Judge Kupau ) issued the Judgment. 
The Honorable Linda K. C. Luke ( Judge Luke ), the Honorable James H. Ashford,
the Honorable Philip M. Doi, the Honorable Alvin K. Nishimura, the Honorable
Michael A. Marr, and the Honorable Paula Devens-Matayoshi also presided in
this case, as noted herein only when pertinent. 
2HRS § 291E-61 (Supp. 2017) provides in relevant part,
 
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Zhang raises a single point of error on appeal, arguing
that the District Court erred in dismissing the case without
prejudice, as opposed to dismissing it with prejudice.  In
support of this argument, Zhang contends that:  (1) the District
Court abused its discretion when it purportedly modified another
judge's earlier order by not hearing Zhang's pre-trial motions on
January 31, 2017; (2) there were no findings, or weighing of
Estencion  factors, supporting the dismissal without prejudice;
and (3) the District Court failed to decide Zhang's January 17,
2017 motion to dismiss.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the
relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Zhang's point of
error as follows: 
(1) We reject Zhang's contention that the District
Court modified the prior ruling of another judge.  There is no
transcript in the record of the subject hearing before Judge
Luke, which was held on November 30, 2016, but the District
2(...continued)
§ 291E-61. Operating a vehicle under the influence of
an intoxicant. (a) A person commits the offense of operating
a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the person
operates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an
amount sufficient to impair the person's normal
mental faculties or ability to care for the
person and guard against casualty; [or]
. . . .
(3) With .08 or more grams of alcohol per two
hundred ten liters of breath . . .
Defendant was charged with OVUII under subsection (b)(1) of this
statute, as a non-habitual offender, which is a petty misdemeanor.  See HRS
§ 291E-61(b)(1); HRS § 701-107(4) (2014).
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Court's order for that hearing states "firm set for evid.
motion/trial" and sets a return court date of January 31, 2017. 
On January 31, 2017, after taking a recess to review the matter
and apparently having discussed the matter with counsel, the
following exchange, and the ruling by Judge Kupau, took place:
MR. DICKENSON [for the State]:  Okay.  And, your
honor, based upon off bench conference discussions, as
State would not be able to proceed to completely
resolve the motion to suppress, or if it were to go to
trial the State does not believe that it can meet a
prima facie acquittal as Officer Atkins is not
present, State would ask for a continuance of this
matter with Rule 48 -- with the additional calculation
being March 20th, 2017.  
THE COURT:  Okay.  
MR. HOLCOMB [for Zhang]:  And we object, your honor,
noting this is the fourth time my client has flown in from
California to address this petty misdemeanor and that on
11/30 Judge Luke had set this as a firm evidentiary trial
setting. 
THE COURT:  Okay.  Thank you.  Looking at the minutes
and seeing that Judge Luke did set this as a firm hearing
and trial and the court's understanding of being a firm
setting means that the -- both State and defense must be
ready to proceed, defense is ready to proceed, we do not
have Officer Atkins who is the stopping, arresting and
implied consent form officer that would testify to all of
those matters which touch upon many of the motions set for
hearing this morning.  If the State proceeded with just the
field sobriety test officer, the State would not be able to
prove their case beyond a reasonable doubt.  In balancing
all of the factors, including that defendant has been here
four times and travelling at his own expense from out of
state, it is only fair and just that the court make the
following rulings:  that the court will dismiss this matter
without prejudice.  Any bail posted will be refunded as
prejudice -- without prejudice for a period of 30 days.  If
the State does not file -- refile within 30 days, that
prejudice will attach.  Any questions? 
 
MR. DICKENSON:  No, your honor.  
MR. HOLCOMB:  No, your honor.  
THE COURT:  Okay.  Thank you very much, sir.  Thank
you.
Judge Kupau reviewed and acknowledged Judge Luke's
order and effectively denied the State's request for a further
continuance – which arguably would have been a modification or in
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
contravention of Judge Luke's order – and then proceeded to
dismiss the case, albeit without prejudice for 30 days.  Zhang's
objection, based on having flown in from California four times,
was in response to the State's request for a continuance.  Zhang
did not argue that Judge Kupau's ruling was a modification or
violation of Judge Luke's ruling.  Moreover, although Zhang
argued earlier in the hearing that the case should be dismissed
based on Judge Luke's "firm setting," Zhang did not at any point
argue that it should be dismissed with prejudice and Zhang did
not object to the dismissal being without prejudice.  
We conclude that Judge Kupau's decision was based on
Judge Luke's earlier ruling and did not modify it.  Therefore, we
need not address Zhang's argument that the modification was an
abuse of discretion.
(2) Zhang argues, in part, that the District Court
erred in dismissing the charge without prejudice because the
District Court "made inadequate findings to justify its
decision."  Zhang submits that, in lieu of remanding for entry of
findings of fact, we should reach the merits ourselves and
dismiss the case with prejudice.  Alternatively, Zhang argues
that he is "entitled to remand to have appropriate findings
made."  We agree with the latter proposition, as the District
Court did not articulate the basis for its dismissal without
prejudice, as opposed to with prejudice.  See State v. Estencion ,
63 Haw. 264, 269, 625 P.2d 1040, 1044 (1981) (in exercising its
discretion to dismiss a criminal charge with or without prejudice
for violation of Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 48,
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
a court must consider the following factors:  "the seriousness of
the offense; the facts and the circumstances of the case which
led to the dismissal; and the impact of a reprosecution on the
administration of this chapter and on the administration of
justice."); State v. Mageo , 78 Hawai #i 33, 37-38, 889 P.2d 1092,
1096-97 (App. 1995) (a trial court has the inherent power to
dismiss with or without prejudice for failure to prosecute with
due diligence, but should issue written findings setting forth
reasons).
(3) In light of the above, we need not reach the issue
of whether the District Court erred in not ruling on Zhang's HRPP
Rule 48 motion.3 
Accordingly, the District Court's January 31, 2017
Judgment is vacated and this case is remanded for further
proceedings.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaii, April 13, 2018. #
On the briefs:
Richard L. Holcomb,
for Defendant-Appellant.Presiding Judge
Stephen K. Tsushima,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
3Upon review of the transcript of the January 31, 2017 hearing,
however, we note that it does not appear, as the State argues, that Zhang's
HRPP Rule 48 motion to dismiss was clearly withdrawn or that Zhang's right to
a speedy trial was knowingly and voluntarily waived.
5