NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000184
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MOANA KEA KLAUSMEYER-AMONG, ROBERT PALMER,
and JASON ELLIS, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
HONOLULU CITY COUNCIL, and CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU,
DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND PERMITTING, Defendants-Appellees
and 
JOHN DOES 1-5, JANE DOES 1-5, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-5,
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-5, DOE GOVERNMENT AGENCIES 1-5,
and DOE ENTITIES 1-5, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-1480)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Moana Kea Klausmeyer-Among,
 
Robert Palmer, and Jason Ellis (collectively, Plaintiffs),
 
proceeding pro se, appeal from (1) the "Order Granting Defendants
 Honolulu City Council and City and County of Honolulu Department
 of Planning and Permitting's Motion for Partial Dismissal of
 Plaintiffs' Verified Complaint Filed May 24, 2012 and for a More
 Definite Statement" entered October 31, 2012 (Dismissal Order 1),
 and (2) the "Order Granting Defendants Honolulu City Council and
 City and County of Honolulu Department of Planning and
 Permitting's Motion for Dismissal of Plaintiffs' More Definite
 Statement of Counts 4, 5, 12, and 15 of Plaintiff's Verified
 Complaint Filed May 24, 2012, Filed October 24, 2012" entered
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
February 15, 2013 (Dismissal Order 2). Both orders were entered
 
1
in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).
On appeal, Plaintiffs contend the circuit court erred,
 
under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 205A-5 (2011 Repl.) and
 
205A-6 (2011 Repl.), when it dismissed their complaints for
 failing to state a claim for which relief can be granted.
I. BACKGROUND
 
On October 4, 2011, the City and County of Honolulu
 
Department of Planning and Permitting (DPP) recommended that the
 Honolulu City Council (City Council) approve the State of Hawaii
 
2
Department of Transportation's (DOT or Applicant ) application
for Special Management Area Use Permits (SMA Permits) for the
 Farrington Highway Replacement of Makaha Bridges No. 3 and No. 3a
 Project (Makaha Bridges Project). 
On April 3, 2012, the City
 
Council approved the SMA Permits.
 
On May 24, 2012, Plaintiffs filed a "Verified Complaint
 
for Injunctive, Equitable, and Other Relief" against the City
 Council and the DPP (collectively, Defendants). Plaintiffs
 requested injunctive relief under "HRS [§] 205A-6 [p]rovisions,
 and other applicable rights to relief," in the form of
 overturning or otherwise revoking City Council Resolution No. 11­282.
3 Plaintiffs' complaint raised 15 counts. Dismissal Order 1
 
dismissed, with prejudice, all counts except counts 4, 5, 12, and
 15, for failing to state a claim upon which relief could be
 granted. The circuit court ordered Plaintiffs to provide a more
 definite statement of the non-dismissed counts.
 
Plaintiffs' "First Amended Complaint" restated counts
 
4, 5, 12, and 15 and requested an "immediate INJUNCTION barring
 applicants from proceeding in any manner to initiate condemnation
 or bring eminent domain proceedings against Plaintiffs."
 
1
 The Honorable Edwin C. Nacino presided .
 
2
 "DOT" and "Applicant" also includes R.M Towill Corporation,
Applicant's agent.
 
3
 Resolution No. 11-282 approved the SMA Permits for the Makaha
Bridges Project.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiffs also requested an "Order [requiring the] applicants to
 
release ALL data and studies in their entirety, including
 preliminary, final, changed or initial studies, during the 9 year
 design process for the Makaha Bridge Project[,]" and an order to
 remove Kili Drive from "the current FEMA designated Flood Way, or
 at minimum the portion of Kili Drive which is not privately owned
 by HRT Kili Drive LLC and uses an easement over and across the
 Defendants owned parcel to connect to Farrington Highway . . . ." 
Dismissal Order 2 dismissed the remaining counts, without
 prejudice, for failure to state a claim for which relief could be
 granted.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
"A trial court's ruling on a motion to dismiss is 
reviewed de novo." Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 
117 Hawai
'i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008).
III. DISCUSSION
 
A complaint should only be dismissed for failure to 
state a claim, per Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 
12(b)(6), if it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff can prove no set of facts in support of his or her claim that would entitle him or her to relief. See Cnty. of Kaua
'i ex rel Nakazawa v. 
Baptiste, 115 Hawai 'i 15, 24, 165 P.3d 916, 925 (2007). Our 
review is limited to the allegations of the complaint, and we assume the facts of the complaint are true. Pavsek v. Sandvold, 
127 Hawai
'i 390, 402, 279 P.3d 55, 67 (App. 2012). While a 
complaint need not provide detailed factual allegations, a plaintiff must provide more than labels and conclusions, or formulaic recitations of the elements of a cause of action, to establish the grounds for entitlement to relief. See id. at 403, 
279 P.3d at 68. Plaintiffs' complaint and amended complaint raise several allegations but fail to state a claim upon which relief may be granted. 
Count 1: "Plaintiff(s) should not have their properties
or any portions thereof subject to eminent domain or
condemnation proceedings for a 'bridge replacement'
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
project."
 
Count 1 of the Complaint alleged that Plaintiffs'
 
properties "are in immediate danger of having forced condemnation
 
or eminent domain actions instituted against them, as threatened
 by DOT." Plaintiffs fail to provide any legal authority that
 requires the City Council to refrain from approving a SMA permit
 for projects that may require state condemnation of land.
 
Count 2: "An Environmental Impact Statements (EIS) was
required by State law, but [Applicant] performed a much
less stringent Environmental Assessment (EA)."
 
The Coastal Zone Management Act, HRS Chapter 205A
 
(Chapter 205A), imposes special controls on the development of
 
real property along shoreline areas "to preserve, protect, and
 where possible, to restore the natural resources of the coastal
 zone of Hawaii." HRS § 205A-21 (2011 Repl.). Any development
 within these special management areas requires a use permit. HRS
 § 205A-28 (2011 Repl.). 
Chapter 205A authorizes counties to administer the
 
permit system and requires the counties to adopt procedures for
 issuing permits. HRS §§ 205A-23 (2011 Repl.), -26 (2011 Repl.),
 -29 (2011 Repl.). The Honolulu City Council administers the
 permit system for the City and County of Honolulu. See Sandy
 
Beach Defense Fund v. City Council of City & Cnty. of Honolulu,
 70 Haw. 361, 365, 773 P.2d 250, 254 (1989). Revised Ordinances
 of Honolulu (ROH) § 25-3.3 (1987), authorized by Chapter 205A,
 provides: "Any proposed development . . . requiring a [SMA
 Permit] shall be subject to an assessment by the agency in
 accordance with the procedural steps set forth in Chapter 343." 
Count 2 alleged the City Council and DPP failed to comply with
 HRS Chapter 343, the Hawaii Environmental Protection Act (HEPA),
 by issuing the SMA permit for the Makaha Bridges Project.
 
HRS § 343-5(a)(1) (2010 Repl.) requires an EA for
 
actions that propose the "use of state or county lands or the use
 of state or county funds[.]" HRS § 343-5(a)(3) requires an EA
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for actions that propose any use within a shoreline area. The
 
Makaha Bridges Project is an action that proposes the use of
 state funds and is located within a shoreline area.
 
An EA is an informational document prepared by either
 
the agency proposing an action or a private applicant and is used
 to evaluate the possible environmental effects of a proposed
 action. See HRS § 343-2 (2010 Repl.). A "finding of no
 
significant impact" is the "determination based on an [EA] that
 the subject action will not have a significant effect and,
 therefore, will not require the preparation of an environmental
 impact statement." Id.
 
The "accepting authority" is the "final official or
 
agency that determines the acceptability of the EIS document." 
Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) § 11-200-2, authorized by HRS
 § 343-6 (2010 Repl.). Whenever an agency proposes an action that
 uses state lands or funds, the accepting authority is the
 governor or an authorized representative. HAR § 11-200-04(A)(1),
 authorized by HRS § 343-6. The DOT, presumably as the governor's
 authorized representative, is the accepting authority, and as the
 applicant, the DOT is also the proposing agency.
4
 
HAR § 11-200-9 provides in part:
 
§11-200-9 Assessment of Agency Actions and Applicant Actions
 A.	 For agency actions, except those actions exempt from
the preparation of an environmental assessment
pursuant to section 343-5, HRS, or section 11-200-8,
the proposing agency shall:
 1. Seek, at the earliest practicable time, the
advice and input of the county agency responsible
for implementing the county's general plan for each
county in which the proposed action is to
occur, . . . as well as those citizen groups and
individuals which the proposing agency reasonably
believes to be affected;
 2. Identify the accepting authority pursuant to
section 11-200-4 and specify what statutory conditions
 
4
 We take judicial notice of the DOT's designation as "accepting
authority" and "proposing authority" from the Final EA as a matter of public
record that is easily verifiable. See Almeida v. Correa, 51 Haw. 594, 465
 
P.2d 564 (1970). EA available at:
 http://oeqc.doh.hawaii.gov/Shared%20Documents/EA_and_EIS_Online_Library/Oahu/2
010s/2011-05-23-FEA-Makaha-Bridges-3-and-3A-Replacement.pdf
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6     under section 343-5(a), HRS, require the preparation of
an environmental assessment;     
  3. Prepare an environmental assessment pursuant to
section 11-200-10 of this chapter which shall also
identify potential impacts, evaluate the potential
significance of each impact, and provide for detailed
study of significant impacts;     
     
     
     
  4. Determine, after reviewing the environmental
assessment described in paragraph (3), and considering
the significance criteria in section 11-200-12, whether
the proposed action warrants an anticipated negative
declaration or an environmental impact statement
preparation notice, provided that for an environmental
impact statement preparation notice, the proposing     
     
     
     
     
     
     agency shall inform the accepting authority of the
 proposed action[.]    
(Emphases added.)  While DPP recommended approval of the Makaha
Bridges Project SMA Permits, the City Council approved the SMA
permit, and the SMA permit process required HEPA compliance, the
DOT is ultimately responsible for the project's HEPA compliance. 
See HAR § 11-200-9(A)(4).  "When a conflict of interest may exist
because the proposing agency and the agency making the
[determination of whether an EIS is needed] are the same, the
[Office of Environmental Quality Control (OEQC)] may review the
agency's determination[.]"  HRS § 343-5(c)(5) (Supp. 2012). 
Since the DOT and OEQC are not defendants, Plaintiffs have failed
to state a claim for relief as to Count 2.
Count 3: "Large change of project design and scope, was
ordered in March 2010, at a cost of over $600,000.00 to
do additional studies, change the design, and
additional survey's [sic] and hydraulic and
hydrological studies . . . almost a year AFTER the
required Public review period had expired following the
Draft EA published in May 2009 ."
Plaintiffs contend they "called upon City Council to
order the SMA project applicants to publish updated Draft EA with
the new studies and design allowing for another Public review
period, since the project had changed so much the original Draft
EA did not satisfy the public review requirements and there was
no public review after the vast changes were made to the
project."NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The DOT, as proposing agency, is responsible for
 
publishing the draft EA, responding to public comments and
 
revising the EA as necessary. See HAR § 11-200-9(A)5-8. 
Plaintiffs provide no legal authority to support their contention
 against the DPP or City Council.
 
Count 4:
 "DPP failed to hold a hearing on the
accompanying Shoreline Setback Variance associated with
the Makaha Bridges SMA in the Waianae District as
required by ROH Chapter 25 provisions.
"
 
Plaintiffs' First Amended Complaint alleged that the
 
City violated ROH § 25-5.3(b) by failing to hold the public
 
hearing on the Shoreline Setback Variance (SSV) for the Makaha
 Bridges Project in the area of the proposed development. 
"Plaintiffs Palmer and Ellis' rights were violated by Defendant's
 [sic] as the above mentioned SSV was held on March 21, 2012 at
 the Defendants DPP Downtown Honolulu office."
 
ROH § 25-5.3 (1987 Supp.) provides:
 
Sec. 25-5.3 Public hearings.
 
(a) 	The agency . . . shall hold a public hearing on the
application for a special management area use permit
at a date set no less than 21 nor more than 60
 calendar days after the date on which the application
is accepted[.]
 
(b) 	The public hearing shall be held in the area in which
the development is proposed. 
Whenever possible, the
public hearing shall be held jointly and concurrently with
any other hearing required for the same development.
 
(Emphasis added.) The SSV and the SMA hearings were both
 
required for the Makaha Bridge Project. However, Plaintiffs fail
 to allege facts to support the contention that holding these
 hearings jointly and concurrently was possible; ROH § 25-5.3(b)
 requires such consolidation only when possible. 
Moreover, ROH § 23-1.11 addresses public hearings on
 
SSVs and does not require public hearings to be held in the area
 in which the development is proposed:
 
Sec. 23-1-1.11 Public hearings on variance applications.
 
(a) 	The director shall hold a public hearing on each
variance application, except that the director may
waive the hearing on variances for the following:
. . . .
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(b) 	The director shall give reasonable notice of the
public hearing on any variance application to the
applicant, to any person or agency that requested the
public hearing, and to abutting property owners and
any other person who requested notice.
 
Count 4 was properly dismissed because it is supported by neither 
facts nor law. See Justice v. Fuddy, 125 Hawai 'i 104, 108, 253 
P.3d 665, 669 (App. 2011), (as corrected Apr. 26, 2011) (A dismissal under HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) is warranted only if the claim is clearly without any merit; and this want of merit may consist in an absence of law to support a claim of the sort made, or of facts sufficient to make a good claim.) 
Count 5:
 "Kili Drive is an illegal berm, was never
completed, has been an illegal road for more than 40
years, and is a de facto built up berm, dividing the
FEMA AEF zoned Flood Way in Makaha Valley, and was
connected to Farrington Highway without proper
drainage
."
 
Plaintiffs contend Kili Drive is an illegal berm
 
because Land Court Order of 1951 No. 10157 "is on deeds held by
 
Defendants and the owners of Kili Drive LLC, which as an
 Encumbrance to the deeds, states: 'In Favor of Free Flowage Of
 Water Through The Natural Stream Beds'." 
The full contention is
 
difficult to discern, but appears to be: (1) Kili Drive was
 constructed on land with the preceding encumbrance; (2) Kili
 Drive violates that encumbrance by inhibiting the natural flow of
 water; (3) Kili Drive dams a federal flood way; (4) Kili Drive
 thus presents a health and safety threat to adjacent landowners;
 (5) Kili Drive never received a permit and DPP negligently
 allowed it to connect to Farrington Highway, thus creating a
 conflict of interest for the DPP in approving SMA Permits for
 Makaha Bridges Project; (6) the DPP and City Council's approval
 of the Makaha Bridges Project reinforced this "illegality."
 
Plaintiff's point to exhibits 8-11, 15, and 26 to
 
"prove the illegality of Kili Dr. from the illegal permitting
 process[.]" However, Plaintiffs fail to provide any legal
 authority showing the existence of specific legal duties owed to
 Plaintiffs by the DPP or City Council. Plaintiffs also fail,
 
8
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
despite their exhibits, to allege facts that could then show the
 
DPP or City Council violated those specific duties by approving
 the SMA Permits.
 
Count 6:
 "The DPP intentionally misrepresented a
material fact in response to Leeward District
Councilman Tom Berg's questioning about the permit
history of Kili Drive: Intentional mis-representation
of critical material facts made by DPP to Tom Berg and
City Council members
."
 
Plaintiffs contend:
 
Before the City Council voted on the resolution
11-282, Leeward District City Councilman Tom Berg questioned
the DPP Deputy Director at the public hearing as to whether
Kili Drive was properly permitted from its connection to
Farrington Highway all the way up to the Makaha Towers
Condominiums. . . . [T]he DPP Director misrepresented the
material fact that Kili Drive, was all prim and proper, when
in fact Kaena Road, or Kili Drive, under either name, was
never supposed to connect to Farrington Highway, was in
violation of the Land Use Policy, and was NEVER completed
properly, or with proper drainage or improvements.
 
Plaintiffs fail to provide any legal authority that would entitle
 
them to relief against the Defendants for the alleged
 misrepresentation.
 
Count 7: 
"City Council did not follow own procedures
re: Zoning Committee adopted minutes
."
 
"The . . . City Council had instructed the applicant
 
DOT to submit to FHWA [Federal Highway Administration] plans for
 the Bridge 3 channel design WITHOUT the objected rip rap to see
 if DOT could get federal approval for a design without the rip
 rap embankments." The relevant committee notes state: 
Committee Chair Anderson requested that the applicant
resubmit a letter and plans to the FHWA without the riprap
to deem if it [sic] a necessary component for the bridge
replacement. He further requested that copies of the
transmittal with its attachments and the response from the
FHWA be forwarded to the Committee.
 
Plaintiffs allege that the DOT failed to comply with this request
 
and the City Council proceeded as if the request had never been
 made. Assuming this allegation is true, Plaintiffs fail to
 provide any legal authority that would give rise to a cause of
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
action against the Defendants or enable a court to grant the
 
requested relief. 
Plaintiffs also contend the City Council's failure to 
enforce its own request was a denial of due process because Plaintiffs relied on the assumption that committee instructions and adopted minutes were binding on applicants. "Both the federal and state Due Process Clauses include protection from deprivation of property without due process of law. These guarantees apply when a constitutionally protected property interest is at stake. . . . A property interest will be seen to exist if discretion is limited by the procedures in question, that is, whether the procedures, if followed, require a particular outcome." Brescia v. North Shore Ohana, 115 Hawai
'i 
477, 500-01, 168 P.3d 929, 952-53 (2007) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Plaintiffs fail to point to any procedure that the City Council was legally obligated to follow and which would have required a particular outcome regarding the council's request for an alternate proposal. 
Count 8:
 "The Makaha Stream favors the North West
 
direction of the lower reaches of Makaha Valley. This
project seeks to force the Makaha Stream to the
directly opposite side of the lower valley, to the
South East side of Makaha Valley, directly against its
natural flow direction;" and Count 9: "The entire
project design and alteration of Makaha Stream go
directly against the Land Court Order No. 10157 filed
March 7, 1951."
 
In Counts 8 and 9, Plaintiffs contend the Makaha
 
Bridges Project, as approved by the City Council, violates
 
encumbrances on the underlying land:
 
The design on its face is obviously designed to
protect HRT Kili Drive LLC's embankment, which is zoned AEF
Flood Way. The rip rap on the Kaena Point side is curved
toward the center of the Makaha Stream and will greatly skew
the stream toward the AE zoned residences on the Waianae
 side of the stream. Mr. Ikaika Anderson, during City Council
Zoning and Planning Committee hearing, asked the
[Applicants], if with all the new concrete bridges being
constructed all across the State, whether they could point
to a similar curved inward rip rap design for any other
bridge? They could not produce a single example. The reason
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
is that there doesn't exist anywhere such an asinine design,
to build a 15 Million dollar longer span concrete bridge and
then block off half of the channel approaching the bridge
with rock rip rap! Plaintiffs hope this Court will ask the
same question, whether such a channel design as seen mauka
of proposed Bridge 3 exists anywhere, in ANY State, because
Plaintiffs don't believe such a design would ever be put
forth by any Bridge designer. The whole purpose of this
obviously strange design is to protect HRT Kili Drive LLC
embankment and skew the Makaha Stream toward the residences,
which is dead wrong wrong wrong, and violates the 1951 Land
Court Order, which Plaintiffs hereby invoke.
 
. . . . 
This covenant appears on the [City & County] parcel,
and the HRT Kili Drive LLC parcel, across from Plaintiffs
properties on the other side of Makaha Stream [Exhibits 22
City & County parcel TCT and Exhibit 23 HRT Kili Drive LLC
parcel Deed]
 
DOT proposes to purchase portions of the above
properties currently owned by [City & County] of Honolulu,
and HRT Kili Drive LLC, and to then alter the Makaha Stream
channel on that land, which Plaintiffs oppose, and
Plaintiffs hereby invoke and rely upon this Land Court
Order, that any alteration of the Makaha Stream channel will
be a violation of said land Court Order.
 
City Council, prior to voting to approve the project,
received testimony and was provided a copy of Land Court
Order No. 10157, filed March 7,1951; and City Council was
advised that Plaintiffs and other property home owners along
the Makaha Stream opposed any Makaha Stream alteration or
realignment and the adding of un-natural rock rip-rap
reinforced embankments along the Makaha Stream channel,
including the curved inward design, which artificially
blocks the natural flowage of Makaha Stream . . . .
 
The 1951 Land Court Order appears to create an easement
 
for the "[f]ree flowage of water through the natural stream
 
beds," benefitting the State of Hawaii and burdening the City and
 County of Honolulu. Assuming the easement encumbers land
 underlying the Makaha Bridges Project, Plaintiffs fail to provide
 any legal authority that requires the City Council to refrain
 from approving a SMA permit for projects that may require state
 condemnation of encumbered land.
  
Count 10:
 The Hawai 'i Supreme Court Decision No. 2956
issued on January 26[,] 1956 in David Orth Klausmeyer
and Marie Blackwell Klausmeyer vs. Makaha Valley FarmsLtd; Makaha Beach Co. Ltd; Waianae Village PropertiesLtd; and Capital Investments Ltd; established that onemay not engage in activities or actions on one'sproperty that could adversely over time lead to the 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
failure or undermining of another owners adjacent or
nearby property."
 
The rule of Klausmeyer v. Makaha Valley Farms, Ltd., 41
 
Haw. 287 (1956) is inapposite to the case at hand. The issue
 
presented by Klausmeyer was whether a subdivision developer, who
 sold all but one lot for residential purposes, could commercially
 excavate sand from the remaining lot. Klausmeyer, 41 Haw. at
 
292-93. The supreme court issued an injunction restraining the
 developer because the excavation would, "if continued
 indefinitely, or to an unlimited extent, deprive the petitioners
 of the features of their lots which were the inducements for the
 purchase by them of such lots[.]" Id. at 342. 
Here, the Defendants recommended and approved a state
 
project to replace two bridges. Defendants are not subdivision
 developers. Plaintiffs do not allege the Defendants'
 representations induced them into purchasing their lots.
 
Count 11:
 "City Council failed to address repeated
misrepresentations in testimony of applicants and their
consultants at public hearings, and misrepresentations
in maps/design drawings submitted by applicants." 
Plaintiffs alleged the DOT made misrepresentations to
 
the City Council during a public hearing on the SMAs and the City
 
Council ignored the misrepresentations. Plaintiffs' Count 11 is
 an unsupported conclusion, stating in its entirety: 
Constituents in the project area brought to the
attention of City Council that the applicants maps and
drawings depicting the project design showed many
misrepresentations of the Makaha Stream center, as shown on
maps submitted to DPP and to City Council. The DPP and City
Council ignored these misrepresentations of project
drawings, and did not question applicants whatsoever as to
the drawings submitted.
 
Director of DPP testified Oct. 4, 2011 the Makaha
bridges project was "not designed to address any flooding
issues" but in fact applicants seek to submit a drainage
report and new flood maps that eliminate half the flood
plain in Makaha Valley, and change the land zoning all the
way up the valley, greatly benefitting HRT Kili Drive LLC
and other large landowners to the detriment and loss of land
to Plaintiffs.
 
Plaintiffs do not allege any facts to support the conclusion that
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Defendants made or were aware of any incorrect or misleading
 
representations. Moreover, even assuming a misrepresentation was
 made, Plaintiffs fail to provide a legal authority to support
 their requested relief.
 
Count 12:
 "[Defendants] failed to apply EXISTING laws
as required by HRS 205A-2(c)(7)(A) in approving the
project resolution[.]"
 
Plaintiffs Complaint contended: 
The existing laws and policies in effect are to be enforced
and applied to SMA projects. The existing law is the Land
Court Order No, 10157, of March 7, 1951, and the Supreme
Court decision of 1956, and the current EIS requirements,
and current DPP public review policies and procedures for
holding hearings in the proper district where the
development is to take place.
 
Plaintiffs' "First Amended Complaint" asserted the same position,
 
which restates counts 4, 9, and 10. For the reasons previously
 discussed, Count 12 fails to state a claim for which relief may
 be granted.
 
Count 13: 
"Failure of DPP to disclose CONFLICT of
 
INTEREST to City Council or public."
 
Plaintiffs contend DPP had a conflict of interest that
 
it failed to disclose to the City Council during a public hearing
on the SMAs:
  
DPP failed to reveal to City Council a bias and conflict of
interest in evaluating [Applicants] project and design, in
that DPP and DOT both benefit greatly by the proposed
design, while Plaintiffs are threatened with condemnation
and flooding. The City and County of Honolulu, as owner of
the parcel that allowed the improper connection of Kili
Drive to Farrington Highway, and failed to ensure proper
drainage and engineering of said connection, also have a
conflict of interest, or bias to favor DOT and DPP in this
matter, to detriment of Plaintiffs, that was not disclosed
to constituents or Plaintiffs by City Council at the public
hearings on this project.
 
The alleged conflict of interest is unsupported by the record. 
Plaintiffs have not provided legal authority to support their
 claim that Kili Drive is illegal or illegally connects to
 Farrington Highway.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Count 14:  "Applicant DOT has throughout the entire
public review process and upon specific requests made,
refused to release Hydraulic, Hydrological, Survey, and
Drainage and Flood studies and data, thus Plaintiffs
and others have been unable to ascertain the true
 nature of the project impacts to their properties and
the area."
 
Plaintiffs fail to provide legal authority that
 
Defendants are liable for the DOT's alleged non-disclosures. 
Additionally, Plaintiffs did not allege facts sufficient to
 support their conclusion that the lack of data from such surveys
 and studies left the DPP or City Council unable to ascertain the
 true nature of the project's impact.
 
Count 15:
 "HRS Chapter 205A-29(a)(9c)(6)(C) [sic]
section violated in issuance of SMA permit by DPP and
City Council
."
 
Plaintiffs contend the City Council violated HRS
 
§ 205A-2(c)(6)(C) by accepting the Makaha Bridges Project Design
 
and granting the SMAs. 
Section 205A-2(c)(6)(C) requires the City
 
Council to "[e]nsure that developments comply with requirements
 of the Federal Flood Insurance Program [(FFIP)]."
 
Plaintiffs' "First Amended Complaint" failed to 
identify either (1) the requirements of the FFIP that were violated by the City Council or (2) conduct by the City that violated the unspecified requirements of the FFIP. Such unspecified allegations cannot provide Defendants with fair notice of what the claim is and the grounds upon which it rests. See Perry v. Planning Commission of Hawai
'i Cnty., 62 Haw. 666, 
685, 619 P.2d 95, 108 (1980) ("Modern judicial pleading has been characterized as 'simplified notice pleading.' Its function is to give opposing parties 'fair notice of what the ... claim is and the grounds upon which it rests.'") (internal quotation marks omitted). 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's 
(1) "Order Granting Defendants Honolulu City Council and City and
 
County of Honolulu Department of Planning and Permitting's Motion
 for Partial Dismissal of Plaintiffs' Verified Complaint Filed May
 24, 2012 and for a More Definite Statement" entered October 31,
 2012, and the (2) "Order Granting Defendants Honolulu City
 Council and City and County of Honolulu Department of Planning
 and Permitting's Motion for Dismissal of Plaintiffs' More
 Definite Statement of Counts 4, 5, 12, and 15 of Plaintiff's
 Verified Complaint Filed May 24, 2012, Filed October 24, 2012"
 entered February 15, 2013 are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 29, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Moana Kea Klausmeyer-Among
Robert Palmer
 Jason Ellis Plaintiffs-Appellants pro se.
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Don S. Kitaoka
 
Brad T. Saito
 Deputies Corporation Counsel,City and County of Honolulu
for Defendants-Appellees.
 
15
 