NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000828
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
TYRONE WILLIAMS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NOS. 11-1-0183 and 12-1-0814)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Tyrone Williams (Williams) appeals
 
from the Judgments of Conviction and Sentence for Burglary in the

 
First Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708­
810(1)(c) (1993) and Robbery in the Second Degree in violation of
 HRS § 708-841(1) (Supp. 2013) entered by the Circuit Court of the
 First Circuit (Circuit Court) on April 26, 2013.
1
 
On appeal, Williams argues that: (1) there was
 
insufficient evidence to sustain his robbery conviction; (2) the
 Circuit Court erred in denying his Motion to Suppress
 Identification; and (3) the Circuit Court committed plain error
 when it permitted the resident manager to identify him at trial.
 
1
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 
The State filed a felony information charging Williams with four
counts of Burglary in the First Degree in violation of HRS § 708-810(1)(c),
for separate incidents in different apartments in the same building and on the
same date for two of the counts as the incident in the instant appeal under
Cr. No. 12-1-0814. On the State's motion the Circuit Court consolidated the
 two cases. The order was entered on July 27, 2012. Williams's notice of
 appeal purports to appeal from the judgments in both Cr. Nos. 11-1-0183 and
12-1-0814, but Williams does not argue points with regard to Cr. No. 12-1­0814.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
1. There was sufficient evidence to support a
 
conviction for Robbery in the Second Degree. Williams argues
 
that the evidence was insufficient to establish that he punched
 Alexander Lamadrid (Lamadrid) "in the course of committing theft,
 'with the intent to overcome [Lamadrid's] physical resistance or
 physical power of resistance[]" under HRS § 708-841(1)(a), or
 that he threatened the use of force with the intent to compel
 acquiescence to the taking of or escaping with the property under
 HRS § 708-841(1)(b) as the theft was complete when Williams left
 the dormitory room.
2 The jury found Williams guilty of Robbery
 
in the Second Degree and answered in the affirmative to both
 interrogatories posed to them:
 
Interrogatory One: Did the jury unanimously find that the
prosecution proved beyond a reasonable doubt that
[Williams], while in the course of committing theft from
Keith Detweiler [(Detweiler)], threatened the imminent use
of force against the person of [Lamadrid]? Your answer must
 be unanimous.
 
Interrogatory Two: Did the jury unanimously find that the
prosecution proved beyond a reasonable doubt that [Williams]
while in the course of committing theft from [Detweiler,]
used of [sic] force against the person of [Lamadrid]? Your
 answer must be unanimous.
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
case was before a judge or jury. The test on appeal is not
 
2 HRS § 708-841(1), Robbery in the second degree, provides, in
pertinent part,
 
(1) A person commits the offense of robbery in the second
degree if, in the course of committing theft . . . 
(a)	 The person uses force against the person of
anyone present with the intent to overcome that
person's physical resistance or physical power
of resistance;
 
(b)	 The person threatens the imminent use of force
against the person of anyone who is present with
intent to compel acquiescence to the taking of
or escaping with the property[.]
 
"In the course of committing a theft" is defined as follows:
 
An act shall be deemed "in the course of committing a theft
. . ." if it occurs in an attempt to commit theft . . . in
the commission of theft . . . or in the flight after the
attempt or commission.
 
HRS § 708-842 (Supp. 2013).
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai 'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) 
(citation omitted). 
Taking the evidence in the light most favorable to the
 
prosecution, there was substantial evidence supporting the jury's
 
verdict. Both Detweiler and Lamadrid testified that a red
 Microsoft Zune MP3 player (player) was taken from their dormitory
 room by an intruder and that the player belonged to Detweiler. 
Some ten to fifteen minutes later, Lamadrid followed a man, that
 Detweiler recognized as the person who had just been in their
 room, walking out of their dormitory lobby.
 
After striking up a conversation with the person, later
 
identified as Williams by both Detweiler and Lamadrid, Williams
 produced the same red MP3 player out of his pocket. When
 Lamadrid snatched the player from Williams and walked away,
 Williams threatened the use of force against Lamadrid, by yelling
 after the latter, "stop, I'm going to shoot" and gestured with
 his hand under his hoodie as if he had a gun. Lamadrid stopped,
 but testified that as Williams approached him, he realized
 Williams did not have a gun and yelled, "where's your gun?" and
 Williams responded, "I don't need no gun."
 
Williams approached Lamadrid and the two engaged in a
 
yelling session, Williams yelling at Lamadrid that the latter
 stole the player from him and Lamadrid yelling back that Williams
 had stolen it first. Lamadrid placed the player in his pocket
 and stepped back, "like we're going to fight. And he's like[,]
 are we going to fight? I was like I guess so" at which point
 Williams punched Lamadrid in the face, knocking him to the
 ground.
 
By that time, the dormitory resident advisor, who saw
 
Williams punch Lamadrid and heard the two men arguing about the
 player caught up to them. Williams said, "well, you can have it"
 and ran off, heading towards the Ala Wai. Lamadrid returned the
 player to Detweiler, who confirmed it was his player after
 confirming his music was recorded on it. The police also later
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that morning returned to Detweiler headphones belonging to
 
Detweiler that the police had recovered from Williams.
 
In denying Williams's motion for judgment of acquittal,
 
the Circuit Court found that there was sufficient evidence of
 second-degree robbery under the theory that (1) Williams was
 still in the course of flight from the original theft when he
 used or threatened the use of force against Lamadrid; or (2)
 Williams was attempting to steal the MP3 player owned by
 Detweiler, which Lamadrid had taken back from Williams, when
 Williams used or threatened the use of force against Lamadrid. 
We conclude that there was sufficient evidence under the latter
 theory to support Williams's conviction for Robbery in the Second
 Degree.
 
2. The Circuit Court did not err in denying
 
Williams's motion to suppress pretrial and in-trial
 identification. Applying State v. DeCenso, 5 Haw. App. 127, 681
 P.2d 573 (1984), the Circuit Court ruled that, while the show-up
 procedure was impermissibly suggestive, when viewing the totality
 of the circumstances, the identifications by Detweiler and
 Lamadrid were reliable and worthy of presentation to and
 consideration by the jury. We agree.
 
When the defendant challenges admissibility of eyewitness
identification on the grounds of impermissibly suggestive
pre-trial identification procedure, he or she has the burden
of proof, and the court, trial or appellate, is faced with
two questions: (1) whether the procedure was impermissibly
or unnecessarily suggestive; and (2) if so, whether, upon
viewing the totality of the circumstances, such as
opportunity to view at the time of the crime, the degree of
attention, and the elapsed time, the witness's
identification is deemed sufficiently reliable so that it is
worthy of presentation to and consideration by the jury.
 
State v. Araki, 82 Hawai 'i 474, 484, 923 P.2d 891, 901 (1996) 
(quoting State v. Okumura, 78 Hawai 'i 383, 391, 894 P.2d 80, 88 
(1995)). 
The testimony presented at the hearing on the motion in
 
limine supported the Circuit Court's conclusion. Detweiler
 
observed the intruder for thirty to forty-five seconds while the
 intruder was in Detweiler's dorm room, uninvited and in the early
 hours of the morning, and Detweiler questioned him after
 Detweiler heard the intruder unzipping Detweiler's backpack. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Detweiler therefore had the opportunity and the motivation to
 
view this intruder during this unusual and startling event and
 had a second opportunity to view the person when, approximately
 five to ten minutes later, Detweiler was in the lobby waiting for
 the dormitory advisor when he saw the intruder enter the lobby
 and leave the building and told Lamadrid so. He was again able
 to recognize the intruder as the person Lamadrid confronted out
 on the street. Detweiler was able to give details regarding the
 intruder's appearance. Detweiler was "positive" about his
 identification of the intruder at the field lineup, perhaps a
 half-hour after the incident.
 
Lamadrid testified that he saw the intruder briefly in
 
his room and followed the intruder, who was wearing a hoodie, out
 into the hallway, but did not see the intruder's face. Lamadrid
 had ample opportunity to see the intruder when Lamadrid caught up
 to the latter at the bus stop, who was wearing the same clothing,
 and the latter produced Detweiler's player out of his pocket. 
When the police took Lamadrid to the field lineup, conducted a
 short time later, he was a "hundred percent" sure of his
 identification.
 
Based on the multiple opportunities and circumstances
 
under which both Detweiler and Lamadrid were able to view
 Williams, their ability to describe his appearance, and the short
 interval between the incident and the field lineup, the Circuit
 Court did not err in denying Williams's motion to suppress
 identification.
 
3. Williams argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
allowing the dormitory advisor to identify him at trial because
 she "was not present for the hearing on the motion, and the
 circuit court never determined whether viewing the totality of
 the circumstances, [her] identification of Williams was
 sufficiently reliable so that it was worthy of presentation to
 and consideration by the jury." Williams waived his challenge to
 the denial of his motion to suppress identification as to the
 dormitory advisor because he did not pursue his motion regarding
 this witness despite multiple opportunities to do so.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Notwithstanding his waiver, Williams asks this court to
 
take plain error review. Plain error review is appropriate "to
 
correct errors which seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or
 public reputation of judicial proceedings, to serve the ends of
 justice, and to prevent the denial of fundamental rights." State
 
v. Nichols, 111 Hawai
'i 327, 333, 141 P.3d 974, 980 (2006) 
(citation omitted); see State v. Fox, 70 Haw. 46, 56, 760 P.2d 670, 676 (1988) (quoting U.S. v. Atkinson, 297 U.S. 157, 160 (1936) ("the decision to take notice of plain error must turn on the facts of the particular case to correct errors that 'seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings.'")). 
Given the circumstances of this case, including the
 
eyewitnesses' identification testimony as well as the evidence of
 the discovery of the stolen items on Williams's person
 immediately after he left the premises, we decline to review for
 plain error here.
 
Therefore, the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's 
April 26, 2013 Judgments of Conviction and Sentence entered in
 Cr. Nos. 11-1-0183 and 12-1-0814 are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 21, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Taryn R. Tomasa,

Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Brandon H. Ito,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
6
 