NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NOS. CAAP-17-0000085 and CAAP-17-0000086
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE INTEREST OF HK
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 12-00193)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
In these consolidated cases,1 Appellant Father (Father)
 
and Appellant Mother (Mother) appeal from the Order Terminating
 
Parental Rights, entered on February 6, 2017, in the Family Court
 of the First Circuit (Family Court),
2 which terminated Father's
 
and Mother's parental rights to their child, HK.
 
On appeal, Father challenges Findings of Fact (FOF)
 
Nos. 11, 13, 59, 63, 79, 80, 81, 89 to 99, 101, and 106 through
 110. Father contends the Family Court erred by (1) finding there 
was clear and convincing evidence that Mother and Father were not willing and able to provide a safe family home, and they would not become willing and able to provide a safe family home within a reasonable period of time, even with the assistance of a service plan, (2) finding Petitioner-Appellee State of Hawai' i, 
Department of Human Services (DHS or State) made reasonable efforts to reunify Mother and Father with HK, and that parents were given a reasonable opportunity to succeed in remedying their 
1
 By order dated August 4, 2017, this court ordered the
consolidation of Father's appeal in CAAP-17-0000085 with Mother's appeal in
CAAP-17-0000086.
 
2
 The Honorable Steven M. Nakashima presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
issues, (3) admitting State's Exhibit 58 into evidence without
 
proper notice to Mother and Father, in violation of their right
 to a fair hearing, (4) ordering a psychologist and HK's therapist
 to assess Mother's and Father's ability to independently care for
 HK and HK's sibling, PK, after trial had commenced, in violation
 of Father's right to a fair hearing, (5) finding DHS did not
 abuse its discretion by placing HK with maternal Aunt and Uncle,
 as resource caregivers, and promising they could adopt HK, and
 (6) finding the permanent plan goal of adoption was in HK's best
 interest.
 
In her appeal, Mother challenges FOF Nos. 44, 45, 54,
 
55, 57, 58, 60, 94, 95, and 105 through 110, and Conclusions of
 Law (COL) Nos. 8 through 11. Mother contends the Family Court
 erred by (A) finding she is unwilling and unable to provide a
 safe family home within a reasonable period of time, even with
 the assistance of a service plan, (B) failing to order DHS to
 continue to provide reasonable services to address problems that
 stood in the way of reunification, (C) basing its decision to
 terminate Mother's parental rights on threatened harm from
 removing HK from placement that she had been in her entire life,
 (D) finding HK's current situation was a significant factor in
 FOF No. 45 (i) to (vii), (E) considering HK's wishes in selecting
 her placement, (F) considering the resource caregivers' ability
 to provide material comfort and economic consideration, and
 (G) failing to consider how various orders delaying the trial,
 trial duration, and delay in ruling on her Motion for Immediate
 Review, impacted its conclusion that Mother would not become
 willing and able to provide a safe family home within a
 reasonable period of time, even with the assistance of a service
 plan.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Father's and Mother's points of error as follows and
 affirm.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[T]he family court's determinations pursuant to [Hawaii
Revised Statutes (HRS)] § 587-73(a) with respect to
(1) whether a child's parent is willing and able to provide
a safe family home for the child and (2) whether it is
reasonably foreseeable that a child's parent will become
willing and able to provide a safe family home within a
reasonable period of time present mixed questions of law and
fact; thus, inasmuch as the family court's determinations in
this regard are dependant upon the facts and circumstances
of each case, they are reviewed on appeal under the "clearly
erroneous" standard. Likewise, the family court's
determination of what is or is not in a child's best
 interests is reviewed on appeal for clear error. 
Moreover, the family court is given much leeway in its
examination of the reports concerning a child's care,
custody, and welfare, and its conclusions in this regard, if
supported by the record and not clearly erroneous, must
stand on appeal.
 
In re Doe, 95 Hawai' i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001) 
(citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
Thus, in appeals concerning family court decisions to terminate
 parental rights pursuant to HRS § 587-73(a),
 
the question on appeal is whether the record contains
substantial evidence supporting the family court <s 
determinations, and appellate review is thereby limited toassessing whether those determinations are supported bycredible evidence of sufficient quality and probative value.In this regard, the testimony of a single witness, if foundby the trier of fact to have been credible, will suffice. 
Id. at 196, 20 P.3d at 629 (citations and internal quotation
 
marks omitted). 
Additionally, the family court 
possesses wide discretion in making its decisions and those
decisions will not be set aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Under the abuse of discretion standard of review, the family court <s decision will not be disturbed 
unless the family court disregarded rules or principles oflaw or practice to the substantial detriment of a partylitigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds ofreason. 
In re Doe, 77 Hawai' i 109, 115, 883 P.2d 30, 36 (1994) 
(citations, internal quotation marks, brackets, and ellipsis
 
omitted).
 
With respect to Father's appeal:3
 
(1) The Family Court did not err by finding there was
 
clear and convincing evidence that Father was not willing and
 
3
 Father lacks standing to enforce Mother's parental rights. In the
 
Interest of F Children, 120 Hawai 'i 398, 207 P.3d 148, Nos. 28882, 28883, and
28884, 2009 WL 1300933 (App. May 8, 2009) (mem) at *8 (citing In re D.S., 156
Cal. App. 4th 671, 673-74, 67 Cal. Rptr. 3d 450, 451 (2007)). Therefore, any
claim or argument that pertains to Mother's parental rights in Father's appeal
will not be considered.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
able, and it was not reasonably foreseeable that he would become
 
willing and able, to provide a safe family home for HK, even with
 the assistance of a service plan within a reasonable period of
 time, not to exceed two years from HK's entry into foster care. 
HRS § 587A-33 (Supp. 2017).
4
 
The Family Court must consider the factors stated in
 
HRS § 587A-7 (Supp. 2017)5 in determining whether a child's
 
4	 HRS § 587A-33 states in pertinent part:
 
§587A-33 Termination of parental rights hearing.
(a) At a termination of parental rights hearing, the court
shall determine whether there exists clear and convincing
evidence that:
 
(1)	 A child's parent whose rights are subject to
termination is not presently willing and able to
provide the parent's child with a safe family
home, even with the assistance of a service
plan;
 
(2)	 It is not reasonably foreseeable that the
child's parent whose rights are subject to
termination will become willing and able to
provide the child with a safe family home, even
with the assistance of a service plan, within a
reasonable period of time, which shall not
exceed two years from the child's date of entry
into foster care;
 
(3)	 The proposed permanent plan is in the best
interests of the child. In reaching this
determination, the court shall:
 
(A)	 Presume that it is in the best interests
 
of the child to be promptly and
permanently placed with responsible and
competent substitute parents and family in
a safe and secure home; and
 
(B)	 Give greater weight to the presumption
that the permanent plan is in the child's
best interest, the younger the child is
upon the child's date of entry into foster
care[.]
 
5
 HRS § 587A-7 states:
 
Safe family home factors. (a) The following factors
shall be fully considered when determining whether a child's
family is willing and able to provide the child with a safe
family home:
 
(1)	 Facts relating to the child's current situation,
which shall include:
 
(A)	 The child's age, vulnerability, and
special needs that affect the child's
attachment, growth, and development;
(continued...)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
5(...continued)
 
(B)	 The child's developmental, psychological,
medical, and dental health status and
needs, including the names of assessment
and treatment providers;
 
(C)	 The child's peer and family relationships
and bonding abilities;
 
(D)	 The child's educational status and
 setting, and the department's efforts to
maintain educational stability for the
child in out-of-home placement;
 
(E)	 The child's living situation;
 
(F)	 The child's fear of being in the family
home;
 
(G)	 The impact of out-of-home placement on the
child;
 
(H)	 Services provided to the child and family;
and
 
(I)	 The department's efforts to maintain
connections between the child and the
 child's siblings, if they are living in
different homes;
 
(2)	 The initial and any subsequent reports of harm
and threatened harm to the child;
 
(3)	 Dates and reasons for the child's out-of-home
 placement; description, appropriateness, and
location of the placement; and who has placement
responsibility;
 
(4)	 Facts regarding the alleged perpetrators of harm
to the child, the child's parents, and other
family members who are parties to the court
proceedings, which facts shall include:
 
(A)	 Birthplace and family of origin;
 
(B)	 Manner in which the alleged perpetrator of
harm was parented;
 
(C)	 Marital and relationship history; and
 
(D)	 Prior involvement in services;
 
(5)	 Results of psychiatric, psychological, or
developmental evaluations of the child, the
alleged perpetrators, and other family members
who are parties;
 
(6)	 Whether there is a history of abusive or
assaultive conduct by the child's family members
and others who have access to the family home;
 
(7)	 Whether there is a history of substance abuse by
the child's family or others who have access to
the family home;
 
(continued...)
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
family is willing and able to provide a safe family home.
 
HK was born on August 5, 2012, while Mother was
 
incarcerated in the Women's Community Correctional Center. On
 
October 6, 2012, HK entered foster care when she was two months
 old. FOF No. 49. After Mother initially refused to disclose
 Father's name, she indicated she had concerns about his ability
 to care for HK because he was caring for their other young child,
 PK, who was three years old at the time, and his teenage child
 from a prior relationship. FOF Nos. 10 and 26. On February 28,
 2013, the Family Court ordered Mother and Father to follow a
 service plan, dated October 22, 2012 (October 2012 Service
 Plan). The October 2012 Service Plan required Father to submit
 to random drug testing, participate in home based services to
 
5(...continued)
(8)	 Whether any alleged perpetrator has completed
services in relation to any history identified
in paragraphs (6) and (7), and acknowledged and
accepted responsibility for the harm to the
child;
 
(9)	 Whether any non-perpetrator who resides in the
family home has demonstrated an ability to
protect the child from further harm and to
ensure that any current protective orders are
enforced;
 
(10) Whether there is a support system available to
the child's family, including adoptive and hanai
relatives, friends, and faith-based or other
community networks;
 
(11) Attempts to locate and involve extended family,
friends, and faith-based or other community
networks;
 
(12) Whether the child's family has demonstrated an
understanding of and involvement in services
that have been recommended by the department or
court-ordered as necessary to provide a safe
family home for the child;
 
(13) Whether the child's family has resolved
identified safety issues in the family home
within a reasonable period of time; and
 
(14) The department's assessment, which shall include
the demonstrated ability of the child's family
to provide a safe family home for the child, and
recommendations.
 
(b)	 The court shall consider the likelihood that the
 current situation presented in the safe family home
factors set forth in subsection (a) will continue in
the reasonably foreseeable future.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
address parenting two children under the age of two, and
 
participate in individual counseling. A DHS Safe Family Home
 Report, dated April 2, 2013, stated Father sometimes had
 difficulty when visiting with HK while simultaneously caring for
 his two-year-old daughter. DHS's safety concern with Father was
 that he needed to engage in hands-on parenting for two children
 less than two years of age and a teenaged daughter.
 
After placement with maternal Aunt and Uncle in April
 
2013, Father stated he did not want any more visits with HK.
 
Prior to September 2015, Father had resumed visits with
 
HK. Father informed a social worker that he did not think he
 would be able to care for HK and her siblings, and he wanted
 maternal Aunt and Uncle to adopt HK. On October 30, 2013, DHS
 filed a Motion to Terminate Parental Rights. The Family Court
 defaulted Father for failing to appear at hearings from January
 2014 to June 2014.
 
Leimomi Brigoli (Brigoli), a DHS social worker,
 
testified that her safety concern with Father was his ability to
 care for HK because he was stressed about his teenage daughter's
 needs and involvement with juvenile court. In her opinion,
 Father was not willing and able to provide HK with a safe family
 home because he was occupied with his teenaged daughter. 
Brigoli also stated Father has a hard time setting boundaries and
 enforcing rules for the children. Brigoli testified it is not
 reasonably foreseeable that Father will become willing and able
 to provide HK with a safe family home, even with the assistance
 of a service plan, within a reasonable period of time, because HK
 had been in foster care for three years and Father had failed to
 engage in services and provide a safe home during that time.
 
To address DHS's safety concern, the Family Court
 
ordered Dr. Rebecca Getschmann-Padua (Dr. Getschmann-Padua), a
 psychologist, and Karin Watanabe Choi (Watanabe Choi), a licensed
 clinical social worker and private therapist, to assess the
 parents' abilities to independently care for both HK and PK
 simultaneously. Dr. Getschmann-Padua testified that Father was
 unable to parent two children because he struggles parenting one
 child, and she would not recommend he babysit both children while
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mother was at work. She stated that Father could care for either
 
HK or PK.
 
Watanabe Choi testified that Father recognized and
 
attended to HK's needs, but it would be very difficult for Father
 to parent both children because PK does not listen to him and HK
 is very reluctant to receive comfort from him.
 
Therefore, there was clear and convincing evidence that
 
Father was not willing and able to provide a safe family home,
 and it was not reasonably foreseeable that he would become
 willing and able to do so within a reasonable period of time,
 even with the assistance of a service plan.
 
Father also claims the Family Court gave undue weight
 
to HK's attachment to her resource caregivers, maternal Aunt and
 Uncle, and erroneously considered it dispositive in determining
 Mother and Father could not provide a safe family home. 
Contrary to Father's claim, that was not the sole factor under
 HRS § 587A-7 that the Family Court considered significant. The
 Family Court also found Mother was unable to care for HK while
 she was incarcerated and she did not believe Father could care
 for HK while he also cared for PK and his teenage daughter, HK
 had been placed with maternal Aunt and Uncle since she was eight
 months old and remained with them for approximately three years
 and ten months, HK identified maternal Aunt and Uncle as her
 mother and father, and HK identified Mother and Father more like
 an aunt and uncle. The Family Court found these facts
 collectively significant when it considered the safe family home
 factors under HRS § 587A-7(a)(1). The Family Court considered
 "the other two to fourteen factors" in making its decision,
 though it did not refer to them in its oral decision to terminate
 parental rights. The Family Court also referenced specific
 factors as significant in FOF No. 45(d). Therefore, Father's
 claim that the Family Court used the factor of HK's attachment as
 the sole factor or gave it undue weight when determining whether
 Mother and Father could provide a safe family home is without
 merit.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) The Family Court did not err by finding DHS made
 
reasonable efforts to reunify Father with HK. Father contends
 
DHS failed to provide him with an opportunity to demonstrate his
 abilities, he was waitlisted for services, DHS did not clearly
 explain what he needed to do to reunify with HK and kept changing
 the plan when a new social worker was assigned to the case, and
 DHS thwarted reunification by allowing only supervised visits,
 denying increased visits, and denying a transition plan.
 
Father acknowledges there was only one service plan. 
Thus, his claim that the plan kept changing lacks merit. The
 October 2012 Service Plan stated that Father's home-based
 services were to address parenting two children under the age of
 two. It plainly stated its purpose and expectations of Father to
 address DHS's safety concern by demonstrating he could parent two
 young children.
 
During a December 30, 2014 hearing, the parties agreed
 
DHS would give the parents more time to do services to achieve
 reunification because they were on a waiting list for services
 with Catholic Charities, and it was not Father's fault that they
 were on a waiting list. The Family Court then rescheduled trial
 for April 23, 2015. Therefore, Father was afforded additional
 time to complete services and the delay due to being on a waiting
 list was not held against him.
 
Father does not identify where in the record he 
requested increased visits or unsupervised visits with HK, DHS denied his request for increased visits, or DHS denied a transition plan proposed by him prior to trial. Therefore, these points of error are waived. Rule 28(b)(4) of the Hawai' i Rules 
of Appellate Procedure (HRAP). Regardless, Watanabe Choi recommended no change in visitation because DHS had not yet approved unsupervised visits and HK's anxiety was too high to alter the visitation schedule.
 The Family Court initially scheduled trial for
 
February 13, 2014 but rescheduled it several times until trial
 began on February 9, 2016. Father re-engaged in services in May
 2014 when Mother was released from prison. After Father
 completed his recommended services, Dr. Getschmann-Padua and
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Watanabe Choi assessed Father's ability to care for his children
 
and separately concluded that he could not do so after nearly
 three and a half years since HK entered foster care. Therefore,
 Father had ample time to complete services and demonstrate his
 ability to parent two young children to reunify with HK.
 
(3) The Family Court did not err by admitting State's
 
Exhibit 58, a February 8, 2016 letter from Watanabe Choi to Debra
 Yoshizumi (Yoshizumi), a DHS social worker, during trial on
 February 9, 2016. State's Exhibit 58 contained Watanabe Choi's
 response to an inquiry by Yoshimuzi regarding HK. Father claims
 it was unfair and prejudicial to admit the exhibit because he
 "did not have a chance to review the document and did not have a
 chance to consult with counsel nor adequately prepare trial
 questions for the witness that was testifying shortly thereafter,
 as it may have related to the evidence accepted by the Court."
 
DHS shall file written reports with the court:
 
No less than fifteen days before a scheduled return
hearing, periodic review hearing, permanency hearing,
or termination of parental rights hearing; provided
that additional information may be submitted to the
court up to the date of the hearing; provided that the
department or other authorized agencies make a good
cause showing that such additional information was not
available to the department or other authorized agency
before the fifteen day deadline.
 
HRS § 587A-18(2) (Supp. 2017) (emphasis added). Watanabe Choi's
 
February 8, 2016 letter was not available to DHS fifteen days
 before trial began on February 9, 2016. The information in the
 letter pertained to HK and was a direct result of an inquiry by
 DHS regarding HK Therefore, the Family Court did not err in
 admitting State's Exhibit 58 into evidence.
 
In addition, the admission did not prejudice Father. 
Only Brigoli testified on February 9, 2016, and she did not
 testify about the letter. On August 25, 2016, more than six
 months after the Family Court admitted the letter into evidence,
 Watanabe Choi testified during trial and Father's counsel cross-
examined her about the letter. On November 16, 2016, Yoshizumi
 testified but Father's counsel elected not to question her about
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the letter. Therefore, even if admission of State's Exhibit 58
 
was untimely, Father was not prejudiced by its admission.
 
(4) Father contends the Family Court erred by ordering
 
Dr. Getschmann-Padua and Watanabe Choi to perform an assessment
 of Father's parenting ability after trial commenced. Father
 claims it was not harmless error because it directly affected his
 right to a fair hearing as the Family Court relied upon the
 assessment to terminate his parental rights.
 
During a December 17, 2015 hearing, DHS stated that
 
Watanabe Choi was assessing Mother's ability to parent both
 children simultaneously. Mother's counsel requested that
 Dr. Getschmann-Padua also assess HK's relationship with Mother
 and PK. Father's counsel expressly did not take a position on
 the issue. The Family Court did not decide Mother's request
 during the December 17, 2015 hearing.
 
When trial commenced on February 9, 2016, neither
 
Dr. Getschmann-Padua nor Watanabe Choi had conducted an
 assessment. Mother's counsel again requested that
 Dr. Getschmann-Padua make an assessment. The Family Court did
 not want to proceed without assessments as to both Mother and
 Father and wanted to give Watanabe Choi and Dr. Getschmann-Padua
 sufficient time to make their assessments. Neither Mother nor
 Father objected when the Family Court ordered Dr. Getschmann-
Padua and Watanabe Choi to perform their assessments and
 rescheduled the continued trial to June 2016. Therefore,
 Father's point of error is waived. HRAP Rule 28(b)(4).
 
(5) Father contends the Family Court erred by finding
 
DHS did not abuse its discretion by placing HK with a maternal
 Aunt and Uncle, as resource caregivers, or that DHS did not
 promise maternal Aunt and Uncle that they could adopt HK. Father
 did not point to where in the record he objected to HK's
 placement with maternal Aunt and Uncle. Thus, this claim is also
 waived. HRAP Rule 28(b)(4).
 
The evidence supports a finding that DHS did not
 
promise maternal Aunt and Uncle that they could adopt HK. 
11
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Brigoli stated adoption was not discussed until sometime after
 
placement with the maternal Aunt and Uncle. Maternal Uncle
 stated that Brigoli brought up adoption of HK when they were
 trying to become resource caregivers and Father asked maternal
 Aunt and Uncle to adopt HK.
 
(6) Father claims the permanent plan goal of adoption
 
was not in HK's best interest and the goal should have been legal
 guardianship so the parents could maintain visitation.
 
HRS § 587A-32 (Supp. 2017) states in part:
 
§587A-32 Permanent plan.  (a) The permanent plan
shall:
 
(1)	 State whether the permanency goal for the child
will be achieved through adoption, legal
guardianship, or permanent custody;
 
(2)	 Establish a reasonable period of time by which
the adoption or legal guardianship shall be
finalized;
 
(3)	 Document:
 
(A)	 A compelling reason why legal guardianship
or permanent custody is in the child's
best interests if adoption is not the
goal; or
 
(B)	 A compelling reason why permanent custody
is in the child's best interests if
 adoption or legal guardianship is not the
goal[.] 
HRS § 587A-33 (Supp. 2017) states in part:
 
§587A-33 Termination of parental rights hearing.
(a) At a termination of parental rights hearing, the court
shall determine whether there exists clear and convincing
evidence that:
 
. . . .
 
(3)	 The proposed permanent plan is in the best
interests of the child. In reaching this
determination, the court shall:
 
(A)	 Presume that it is in the best interests
 
of the child to be promptly and
permanently placed with responsible and
competent substitute parents and family in
a safe and secure home; and
 
(B)	 Give greater weight to the presumption
that the permanent plan is in the child's
best interest, the younger the child is
upon the child's date of entry into foster
care[.]
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HK was approximately two days old when she entered
 
temporary foster custody because she was born while Mother was
 
incarcerated in August 2012. FOF Nos. 48 and 51. HK entered
 foster custody on October 6, 2012. FOF No. 49. Under HRS
 § 587A-33(a)(3)(B), given HK's young age upon entry into foster
 care, greater weight is given to the presumption that the
 permanent plan goal of adoption is in HK's best interest.
 
Father cites no evidence to support his claim that
 
legal guardianship with visitation rather than termination of
 parental rights is in HK's best interest. Instead, Father cites
 the Family Court's statement that when placing HK for adoption,
 DHS should include the possibility of requiring maternal Aunt and
 Uncle to enable Mother and Father to remain in HK's life. 
Father also relies upon the Order Terminating Parental Rights
 which states, "DHS shall make best efforts to ensure that parents
 continue to remain in [HK's] life, including the possibility of
 conditioning the placement of [HK] on maintaining contact between
 parents and [HK][.]" The Family Court did not state that
 adoption was not in HK's best interest. To the contrary, the
 Family Court expressly found adoption was in HK's best interest,
 and it would also be in HK's best interest if adoption could
 possibly include Mother and Father somehow remaining in HK's
 life. Whether Mother and Father ultimately are able to maintain
 contact with HK after adoption does not rebut the presumption
 that the permanent plan's goal of adoption is in HK's best
 interest. Therefore, Father's argument fails.
 
With respect to Mother's appeal:
 (A) The Family Court did not err by finding there was
 
clear and convincing evidence that Mother was not willing and
 able to provide a safe family home, even with the assistance of a
 service plan. Mother contends
 
DHS did not present any evidence of whether [Mother] cannot
adequately and safely care for HK and [PK] at the same time,
nor did the Court have such evidence to consider, and seems
to not need such evidence by focusing almost solely on where
the subject child had resided for all of her life.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Brigoli testified Mother was involved with DHS in prior
 
child protective cases due to Mother's substance abuse. Mother
 
has five older children besides HK. FOF 66. Mother did not
 raise her four oldest children; her parental rights to two of
 them have been terminated. Id. Mother had completed substance
 
abuse treatment in the past but relapsed. Mother has mental
 health problems, including ADHD, FOF 71, and a neuropsychiatric
 evaluation conducted in 2000 indicated that Mother has a deficit
 in the left frontal lobe of her brain as a result of her long­term use of crystal methamphetamines.
 
DHS's safety concern was Mother's ability to care for
 
both HK and PK, simultaneously, based on Dr. Getschmann-Padua
 reporting PK was a "handful" to care for, PK had her own health
 issues, and Mother might have difficulty meeting both children's
 needs. Brigoli stated Mother did well in programs but once she
 comes out she has historically declined and could relapse again,
 which would place HK at further risk of harm. In her opinion,
 Mother was willing but not able to provide a safe family home for
 HK, even with the assistance of a service plan, because she was
 working through her own issues and her relationship with PK. 
Brigoli believed it was not reasonably foreseeable that Mother
 would become willing and able to provide HK with a safe family
 home, even with the assistance of a service plan, within a
 reasonable period of time, because Mother had sufficient time to
 gain stability for herself and PK to reunify with HK.
 
On September 8, 2015, the Family Court continued the
 
trial to February 9, 2016, and at DHS's request, ordered Mother
 to leave transitional housing as soon as possible to demonstrate
 her willingness and ability to provide a safe family home without
 assistance. In May 2016, about three months after trial began,
 Mother moved to her own apartment.
 
Dr. Getschmann-Padua testified that based on her
 
assessment, she believed Mother could parent both children. 
Watanabe Choi testified that, based upon her observations, Mother
 did not consistently recognize when HK becomes disregulated,
 which is difficulty coping or staying calm. She also stated
 Mother sometimes did not recognize and attend to HK's needs and
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HK was not bonded with Mother. Watanabe Choi observed PK playing
 
roughly with HK but Mother was not always able to address the
 situation.
 
The Family Court found both Watanabe Choi and 
Dr. Getschmann-Padua credible, but noted that Dr. Getschmann-Padua based her assessment on her limited knowledge of HK from only 12 therapy sessions, whereas Watanabe Choi had worked with HK weekly since December 2015, and Dr. Getschmann-Padua's opinion was based in part on her belief that an adopted child will have a "hole" in her heart and will want to fill that void by eventually returning to the biological parent. FOF Nos. 114 and 115. Ultimately the Family Court credited Watanabe Choi's opinion over Dr. Getschmann-Padua's. "[A]n appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai' i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Therefore, DHS presented substantial evidence that
 
Mother could not adequately and safely care for both children at
 the same time.
 
(B) Mother contends DHS failed to provide a reasonable
 
opportunity to reunite with HK because she was ordered to leave
 transitional housing and was not provided expanded visits. 
Mother fails to demonstrate where in the record she objected to
 the Family Court's September 8, 2015 order that she leave
 transitional housing. Mother's reliance upon her Exhibits B, C,
 H, O, Q, and R to support her claim that the Family Court should
 have authorized expanded visits is misplaced because those
 exhibits were not provided to the Family Court until they were
 entered into evidence by Mother at the continued trial on June
 30, 2016. Therefore, those exhibits were not a basis to support
 expanded visits before June 30, 2016. As explained below, the
 Family Court acted reasonably by delaying its ruling on Mother's
 Motion for Immediate Review, which requested unsupervised and
 overnight visits, until it received all evidence concerning
 Mother's ability to care for two children simultaneously.
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mother further argues DHS did not intend to reunify HK
 
with her by pointing to Yoshizumi's November 16, 2016 testimony
 
that DHS did not expand visits because it did not want to make
 too many changes, and was in permanency mode. However, Yoshizumi
 explained that reunification efforts do not stop when DHS is in
 permanency mode, visits would end entirely if no effort to
 reunify was being made, and visits with HK were continuing. 
Accordingly, this point of error lacks merit.
 
(C) Contrary to Mother's claim, the Family Court did 
not terminate her parental rights based on the threatened harm of removing HK from placement with her resource caregivers. In the Petition for Foster Custody, filed on October 26, 2012, DHS identified HK as being subject to neglect because Mother was incarcerated and was unable to provide HK's immediate needs of food, clothing, shelter, and medical care. DHS also noted Mother's loss of parental rights to five out of six children, and prior drug or alcohol abuse. In deciding whether to terminate parental rights, the Family Court must determine by clear and convincing evidence that a parent is willing and able to provide a safe family home. HRS § 587A-33(a)(1). When determining whether a family is willing and able to provide a child with a safe family home, the Family Court must consider the factors stated in HRS § 587A-7(a)(1), which includes the child's "family relationships and bonding abilities," and "[t]he child's living situation." The Family Court's findings of fact are reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard and conclusions are reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard. In re Doe, 95 Hawai' i at 
190, 20 P.3d at 623. It was not erroneous for the Family Court to consider HK's removal from her placement in which she formed an attachment to her resource caregivers, pursuant to HRS § 587A­7(a)(1). The factors in HRS § 587A-7(a)(1) are not obstacles to reunification, they are the factors used to evaluate whether a child's family is willing and able to provide a safe family home. 
(D) The Family Court did not err by finding HK's living
 
conditions were a significant factor in FOF No. 45. 
Dr. Getschmann-Padua testified HK had trouble bonding with
 everyone and had only superficial bonding because she runs from
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
person to person, wanting to be with them and then not wanting to 
be with them. Watanabe Choi testified that she did not believe that HK was bonded to Mother or Father because HK would not regularly accept comfort and soothing from them. Instead, Watanabe Choi believed HK was bonded to the resource caregivers because she accepted comfort from them, was confident while resource caregivers are present, demonstrated feeling safe with the resource caregivers and otherwise did not have attachment or bonding issues. The Family Court credited Watanabe Choi's opinion over Dr. Getschmann-Padua's and this court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence. Fisher, 111 Hawai' i at 46, 137 P.3d at 
360.
 
(E) The Family Court did not consider HK's wishes in
 
selecting her placement. Mother claims FOF No. 58, which states
 HK "has been consistent in expressing her desire to remain with
 her current resource caregivers," demonstrates the Family Court
 considered the preference of a four-year-old child in choosing
 her living situation. Mother also relies upon State's Exhibit
 58, in which Watanabe Choi stated Yoshizumi wanted to know what
 HK wants.
 
Contrary to Mother's claim, in State's Exhibit 58, 
with regard to Yoshizumi's question of what HK wants, Watanabe
 Choi stated various therapy activities were designed to solicit
 information about whom HK viewed as important in her life and to
 identify whom HK feels is family. Thus, Yoshizumi and Watanabe
 Choi were not attempting to solicit HK's preference to live with
 Mother, Father, or resource caregivers to determine whether
 Mother's parental rights should be terminated or who should have
 custody of her. In addition, the Family Court did not cite HK's
 desire to remain with the resource caregivers as a safe home
 factor under HRS § 587A-7 when determining whether to terminate
 parental rights.
 
(F) Mother claims the resource caregivers' jobs and
 
financial status were considered in deciding whether to terminate
 her parental rights. Mother misquotes Yoshizumi's testimony by
 claiming she stated that resource caregivers have a "safe and
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stable home with all opportunities afforded her." In this
 
regard, Yoshizumi testified the permanent plan would provide HK
 "a safe and stable home with parents that can provide anything
 and all the opportunities that she can--that can be afforded to
 her." This testimony is pertinent to "[t]he child's living
 situation," which is one of the factors to be considered under
 HRS § 587A-7(a)(1). Moreover, Yoshizumi did not compare the
 opportunities that Mother could provide with those the resource
 caregivers could provide.
 
Mother also faults Yoshizumi for stating the resource
 
caregivers had "upstanding jobs." Yoshizumi testified that
 ordinarily DHS does not perform psychological evaluations on any
 resource caregivers unless there are doubts about their mental
 health, and DHS did not doubt the resource caregivers' mental
 health in this case because they had "upstanding jobs." The
 Family Court did not cite the resource caregivers' jobs as a safe
 home factor under HRS § 587A-7.
 
(G) Mother claims the Family Court erred by
 
rescheduling trial multiple times and conducting trial over a
 one-year period. Mother did not point to where in the record she
 objected to the Family Court rescheduling trial multiple times,
 or hearing witness testimony over a one-year period. Therefore,
 these points of error are waived. HRAP Rule 28(b)(4).
 
Mother further contends the Family Court erred by
 
denying her Motion for Immediate Review, filed June 15, 2016,
 which presented Dr. Getschmann-Padua's transition plan to allow
 Mother to reunify with HK by transitioning her into Mother's care
 immediately.
6 Mother filed her motion over four months after
 
February 9, 2016, when Brigoli testified that Mother had yet to
 leave transitional housing to allow DHS to assess her ability to
 care for two children simultaneously and the Family Court ordered
 Dr. Getschmann-Padua and Watanabe Choi to assess Mother's and
 
6
 Mother's counsel represented in her declaration in support of the
motion that Dr. Getschmann-Padua had completed her assessment of Mother's
parenting skills and bonding between Mother, PK and HK, that Mother was "very
capable of being a parent to both," that Dr. Getschmann-Padua recommended
weekly overnight visits for one month, weekend or two-night/two-day visits
during the second month, complete unification "following 8 weeks of [HK's]
gradual adjustment, to begin immediately."
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Father's abilities to care for both children simultaneously and
 
continued trial to June 27 and 30, 2016.
 
It was reasonable for the Family Court to delay ruling
 
on the June 15, 2016 Motion for Immediate Review until both Dr.
 Getschmann-Padua and Watanabe Choi could complete and testify
 about their assessments. Dr. Getschmann-Padua testified on
 June 30, 2016, and Watanabe Choi testified on August 25, 2016. 
As stated above, Dr. Getschmann-Padua believed that Mother could
 parent both children at the same time upon which she based her
 proposing the transition plan. However, even Dr. Getschmann-
Padua acknowledged Mother (1) had problems with attention and
 organization due to her own attention deficit disorder, for which
 she was under medication; (2) would need a lot of "therapeutic
 help and bonding" with HK; and (3) would need to give special
 attention to HK's need for structure due to HK's ADHD while
 making sure she gave equal attention to PK and PK's needs. 
Dr. Getschmann-Padua also conceded that the separation from her
 resource caregivers would be "extremely hard for" HK.
 
After Dr. Getschmann-Padua's testimony at the June 30,
 
2016 hearing, HK's guardian ad litem asked for the input from 
Watanabe Choi, who had already expressed in a letter that she was
 "not encouraging extended visits." At the August 25, 2016
 hearing, Watanabe Choi testified to, among other things, HK's
 strong bonding with her resource caregivers and increasing
 separation anxiety over the course of their sessions. DHS also
 submitted the July 7, 2016 Multidisciplinary Team Conference
 Report prepared by consultants from Kapiolani Child Protection
 Center in which DHS, Dr. Getschmann-Padua, Watanabe Choi, the GAL
 and the resource caregivers participated and which concluded,
 that Mother's "home is unsafe for [HK] and minimally safe with
 services under Family Supervision for [PK]." Under the
 circumstances, given the conflicting information and views on
 Dr. Getschmann-Padua's transition proposal, reservation of ruling
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
until after Watanabe Choi's testimony could be heard, was not
 
error.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights, entered on February 6, 2017, in the
 Family Court of the First Circuit, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 29, 2018. 
On the briefs:
 
Crystal M. Asano,
for Father-Appellant
 
Chief Judge
Patricia A. Brady,
for Mother-Appellant.
 
Asami M. Williams,Julio C. Herrera, and
Jay K. Goss,
Deputy Attorneys General,
for Petitioner-Appellees.
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
20
 