NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000333
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
PHILIP I. MARTIN, JR., Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(HONOLULU DIVISION)

(Case No. 1DTA-15-03897)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Philip I. Martin, Jr. (Martin)
 
appeals from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
 
Plea/Judgment, entered on April 6, 2016, by the District Court of
 the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (District Court).
1 The
 
District Court convicted Martin of one count of Operating a
 Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant, in violation of
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2016).
2
 
On appeal, Martin argues that the District Court
 
wrongly convicted him (1) based on insufficient evidence that he
 
1
 The Honorable William M. Domingo presided.
 
2
 HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) provides:
 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the person
operates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
 
(1)	 While under the influence of alcohol in an
 amount sufficient to impair the person's normal
mental faculties or ability to care for the
person and guard against casualty[.]
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3
was intoxicated at the time he operated the vehicle,  (2) based
on a clearly erroneous finding that Sergeant Robert Takamiya 
(Sgt. Takamiya) testified he was responding to a motor vehicle collision when he discovered Martin's vehicle, and (3) where Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) failed to provide 
Martin with a written report of matters Sgt. Takamiya testified to at trial, which prevented Martin from preparing an adequate defense. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs

 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Martin's points of error as follows.
1. 
Sufficient evidence supported an inference that
Martin was intoxicated at the time he drove the vehicle. 
Testimony at trial established that when the police discovered
 Martin's vehicle, it was at a street corner with its two 
passenger-side tires pushed up against the curb, had flat front
 tires, and had a damaged front bumper and driver's-side mirror. 
There were fresh skid marks behind the vehicle, and a City and
 County street sign down the road appeared to have been struck.
 
When Sgt. Takamiya first saw Martin, Martin appeared to

 
be exiting the vehicle and was halfway out. Martin admitted he
 had been driving when he hit something, and he did not know what
 he hit. Three police officers at the scene smelled the odor of
 an alcoholic beverage coming from Martin, and Sgt. Takamiya saw
 Martin swaying from side to side, using the car to hold himself
 up.
 
Sgt. Takamiya, who conducted Standardized Field
 
Sobriety Tests (SFSTs) of Martin, testified that Martin began
 performing the Walk-and-Turn test before he was told to start. 
During the same test, Martin turned and stumbled after completing
 only six of the nine steps in one direction, and while walking in
 both directions, missed all heel-to-toe connections, stepped off
 the line, and raised his arms and swung them between six and
 
3
 Martin does not contest that he was intoxicated at the time he was
 
stopped by Sgt. Takamiya; rather, he argues that there was insufficient
evidence to show that he was intoxicated at the time he operated the vehicle.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
twelve inches away from his body. The entire time Martin
 
performed the One-Leg-Stand test, he swayed and raised his arms
 to the side; and during the second portion of the test, he began
 to hop. Based on Martin's performance on the SFSTs, the sergeant
 believed Martin was unable to operate a motor vehicle.
 
In addition, Officer Higa testified that twice when he 
asked Martin to produce his driver's license, Martin offered him money. Officer Watson testified that after Martin said he had been driving the vehicle, Martin apologized. The District Court could have reasonably inferred from this evidence a consciousness of guilt on Martin's part. "[T]he mind of an alleged offender may be read from his acts, conduct and inferences fairly drawn from all the circumstances." State v. Stocker, 90 Hawai
'i 85, 
92, 976 P.2d 399, 406 (1999) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
The evidence, when considered in the light most 
favorable to the State, was sufficient to support a reasonable inference that Martin was intoxicated while operating his vehicle. See State v. Kam, 134 Hawai
'i 280, 287, 339 P.3d 1081, 
1088 (App. 2014) (Appellate courts will give due deference to the right of the trier of fact to determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw reasonable inferences from the evidence adduced). See also State v. Toyomura, 80 Hawai
'i 8, 11–12, 904 
P.2d 893, 896–97 (1995) (sufficient evidence of DUI where officers responding to motor vehicle accident did not witness accident but saw Toyomura fall over concrete barrier and exhibit other indicia of intoxication); State v. Gaston, 108 Hawai
'i 308, 
309–10, 313, 119 P.3d 616, 617–18, 621 (App. 2005) (sufficient evidence of DUI where officer, responding to car accident, saw evidence of accident and Gaston admitted to having hit a utility pole while driving and exhibited indicia of intoxication).
2. 
The District Court clearly erred in finding that

Sgt. Takamiya testified he was responding to a motor vehicle
collision when he discovered Martin's vehicle; however, the error
 
was harmless.
 The District Court's finding was clearly erroneous
 
because Sgt. Takamiya testified that he was on patrol when he
 
noticed Martin's car. Nevertheless, the error was harmless
 
3

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
because absent the finding, there was sufficient evidence to
 
support the conviction.
3. Martin presents no discernable argument regarding
his assertion that his defense was impaired by the State'sfailure to notify him of matters Sgt. Takamiya would testify to
at trial. 
Martin maintains that he "was surprised at trial" when 
Sgt. Takamiya provided details "about [Martin] getting out of the 
car, where [Martin] was standing at the time of his conversation with Sgt. Takamiya, and the condition of the car at the scene." Martin maintains that because he lacked notice of this information prior to trial, he was unable to "properly evaluate the totality of the State's case against him," "formulate a proper cross-examination," or impeach Sgt. Takamiya. Martin has not adequately described the parts of Sgt. Takamiya's testimony he allegedly lacked notice of or how he was prejudiced, and this argument is waived. See Rule 28(b)(7) of the Hawai
'i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure ("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). Alternatively, Martin has cited to no authority to support his argument that the State was required to notify him prior to trial of details in Sgt. Takamiya's testimony that were not included in a written report, and we find none. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of

 
Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, entered on
 April 6, 2016, in the District Court of the First Circuit,
 Honolulu Division, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 15, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
Mia D. Obciana,

for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Loren J. Thomas,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
4
 