NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-19-0000338
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
YIHONG ZHANG, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
HONOLULU DIVISION
(CASE NO. 1DTA-18-03258)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, C.J., and Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai#i (State) appeals
from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
Plea/Judgment ( Suppression Order), entered on March 13, 2019, in
the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division
(District Court ).1/
Over the State's objection, the District Court
consolidated a hearing on Defendant-Appellee Yihong Zhang's
(Zhang) November 16, 2018 Motion to Suppress Statements ( Motion
to Suppress) with his bench trial.  At the March 13, 2019
hearing, the court did not expressly rule on the Motion to
Suppress, but, instead, found Zhang not guilty of Operating a
Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII), in
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) ยง 291E-61(a)(1) (Supp.
2017).  The Supression Order, however, also reflects that the2/
1/  The Honorable William M. Domingo presided. 
2/  HRS ยง 291E-61(a)(1) provides: 
Operating a vehicle under the influence of an
intoxicant.  (a) A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the person
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
court granted the Motion to Suppress.3/ 
On appeal, the State contends that the District Court
erred in:  (1) consolidating the hearing on the Motion to
Suppress with trial; and (2) failing to make an explicit ruling
on the motion and to clarify specifically what was suppressed. 
The State seeks remand to the District Court for an explicit
ruling and for clarification of what was suppressed, so that the
State can determine whether there is sufficient evidence to
proceed to trial.   
Zhang concedes that the District Court erred by
consolidating the hearing with trial but contends that the
District Court's ruling was adequate for appellate review and
that double jeopardy bars retrial in this case. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve the State's points of error as follows:
(1) In State v. Chang, 144 Hawai# i 535, 556, 445 P.3d
116, 137 (2019), the Hawai#i Supreme Court overruled prior
precedent by holding that "trial courts may not consolidate a
motion to suppress hearing with a trial."  The court gave this
new rule prospective effect, stating:  "This requirement will be
effective in trials beginning after the filing date of this
opinion[,]" i.e., June 28, 2019.  Id.  Because Zhang's purported
trial occurred on March 13, 2019, the rule announced in Chang
does not apply.  Even prior to Chang, however, a trial court
could only "hear a motion to suppress contemporaneously with a
trial if both the State and the defendant agree to the
procedure[.]"  Id. at 553, 445 P.3d at 134 (referring to
conclusions in State v. Texeira, 62 Haw. 44, 609 P.2d 131 (1980),
2/  (...continued)
operates or assumes actual physical custody of a vehicle:
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an
amount sufficient to impair the person's normal
mental faculties or ability to care for the
person and guard against casualty[.]
3/  As explained infra, we view the Supression Order as a pretrial
order granting the Motion to Suppress, rather than as a judgment of acquittal.
The State's appeal is therefore proper pursuant to HRS ยง 641-13(7) (2016). 
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
and State v. Doyle, 64 Haw. 229, 638 P.2d 332 (1981)).  
Here, the parties did not agree to hold a consolidated
suppression hearing with trial, and the District Court confirmed
at the beginning of the March 13, 2019 hearing that "it will just
be motions."  After testimony and argument on the Motion to
Suppress concluded, the following discussion occurred:
THE COURT: Okay. All right.   
[(Addressing defense counsel)], you didn't put it in
your motion.  At this point you want to consolidate the
motion for trial?  Right now I'll consider what you have --
what we've seen at this point.
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Consolidate for trial? Yes, Your
Honor, we would like to do so.
THE COURT: All right. Any further argument?
[DEPUTY PROSECUTING ATTORNEY (DPA)]: Well, I would
note that we have not arraigned --
THE COURT: You waive arraignment?
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: We'll waive arraignment as well.
THE COURT: Okay.
[DPA]: The State does not waive arraignment.
THE COURT: Well, arraign him then.
[DPA]: I don't know if that's proper.  The State would
also object at this point to consolidating the motion with
the trial.
THE COURT: Okay.  It's not your call at this point;
right? 
Anything else?
[DPA]: Fine.  Nothing from the State, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Okay.
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Well, incorporating -- you know,
Your Honor, if this court is willing to incorporate the
motion into trial, this court is willing to suppress the
standard field sobriety test and everything beyond, you
know, there is simply not proof beyond a reasonable doubt
that Mr. Zhang was operating his vehicle while under the
influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair his
normal mental faculties or guard against casualty.
Um, you know, the driving observed was not that bad,
and, you know, there is indicia but, um, you know, there is
no -- no real nexus to a lot of these observations and
impairment.  So simply put, Your Honor, there's insufficient
evidence to prove the case beyond a reasonable doubt.
THE COURT: Okay. Any rebuttal?
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
[DPA]: Your Honor, with all due respect to the court,
um, the State has proceeded on these motions based on the
fact that there was not a consolidation.  Now that there --
defendant did not want to consolidate the motions with trial
and the State has elicited questions from the officer based
on that fact.
The State does have a right to now refuse
consolidation because we have gone through these motions
based on that theory.  So we would ask the court to only
rule on the motions.  That is the only thing that the State
elicited testimony on.
THE COURT: Well, there are times when we do a motion
and at the point when the motion is done that the defense
would want to consolidate. So I think it's a proper
situation.
[DPA]: But the State --
THE COURT: Anything you want to say?
[DPA]: -- would also have to agree.
THE COURT: I don't believe so.  Okay. Anything else?
[DPA]: No, Your Honor.
THE COURT: All right. So I do find that there was a
reason for the stop.  There was a reason for further
investigation as to the OVUII because of certain indicia. 
However, based on even the testimony of Officer Saul
regarding the field sobriety test and in hindsight feeling
that he should have gotten an interpreter, therefore the
weight given to the field sobriety test is -- is lessened at
this point.
So court finds that State has failed to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that Mr. Zhang was under the influence of
alcohol to a point where his normal mental faculties was
impaired or he was unable to care for himself and guard
against casualty.  So I'll find him not guilty.
From this exchange, it is evident that the State did
not agree to the District Court's purported consolidation.  
Absent such agreement, even prior to Chang, it was error for the
District Court to consolidate the Motion to Suppress with trial.   
(2) Rule 12(e) of the Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure
(HRPP) states:
(e) Ruling on motion. A motion made before trial shall be
determined before trial unless the court orders that it be
deferred for determination at the trial of the general issue
or until after verdict; provided that a motion to suppress
made before trial shall be determined before trial.  Where
factual issues are involved in determining a motion, the
court shall state its essential findings on the record.
  
(Emphasis added.)
At the outset, the parties dispute whether the District
Court ruled on the Motion to Suppress.  The State contends that
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
the court "fail[ed] to make an explicit ruling."  Zhang argues,
on the other hand, that the court "effectively denied the motion
to suppress," by indicating at the March 13, 2019 hearing that it
considered evidence of the field sobriety test, but gave the
evidence "lessened weight," in finding Zhang not guilty. 
We conclude that the District Court did not explicitly
rule on the Motion to Suppress during the March 2013 hearing, and
it is not clear from the hearing transcript whether the court
suppressed the statements that were the subject of the motion. 
However, the Supression Order expressly states:  "Mot[ion] to
Suppress - granted."  The written order controls over the oral
statements the District Court made at the March 13, 2019 hearing. 
See Kono v. Abercrombie, No. CAAP-11-0000755, 2013 WL 1758960, at
* 4 (Haw. App. April 24, 2013) (Mem. Op.) (citing numerous
cases).  It is therefore at least clear that the Motion to
Suppress was granted.
The question still remains whether in granting the
Motion to Suppress, the District Court stated its essential
findings on the record, in compliance with HRPP Rule 12(e).  The
Supression Order is lacking in that regard, so we look to the
oral statements made by the court at the March 13, 2019 hearing.
At that time, the District Court stated that "there was a reason
for the stop" of Zhang and "[t]here was a reason for further
investigation as to the OVUII because of certain indicia."  
Thus, it appears the District Court found there was reasonable
suspicion to stop Zhang and nothing was suppressed based upon
that stop and further investigation.  The District Court then
cited the arresting officer's testimony regarding the field
sobriety test and "hindsight feeling that he should have gotten
an interpreter," but indicated that such testimony went to the
weight of the evidence.  The District Court then purported to
find Zhang not guilty because the "State ha[d] failed to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Zhang was under the influence
of alcohol to a point where his normal mental faculties was
impaired or he was unable to care for himself and guard against
casualty."     
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Based on this record, it is not clear what statements
or other evidence the District Court suppressed, and on what
factual or legal basis.  A trial court violates HRPP Rule 12(e)
when it fails to state on the record the findings and conclusions
made on a motion to suppress.  State v. Rodgers, 70 Haw. 156,
156, 766 P.2d 675, 675-76 (1988).  Here, the District Court erred
in failing to state its essential findings on the record in
compliance with HRPP Rule 12(e). 
(3)The State contends that although the District
Court "found" Zhang "not guilty," jeopardy did not attach because
no witness was sworn in and no evidence was heard after the 
District Court purportedly consolidated the hearing on the Motion
to Suppress with trial, over the State's objection.  Zhang
asserts that jeopardy attached when the arresting officer was
sworn in during the hearing on the Motion to Suppress and began
his testimony.  Zhang argues there was a full trial on the
merits, the State offered no additional evidence after the
hearing, and the District Court found him not guilty. 
"In examining double jeopardy claims, two inquiries
must be made.  The first involves a determination of when
jeopardy attaches.  The second involves an examination of the
facts of the case to determine if a retrial is barred by the
double jeopardy clause."  State v. Miyazaki, 64 Haw. 611, 617,
645 P.2d 1340, 1345 (1982).  
The Hawai#i Supreme Court has explained:
"Jeopardy describes the risk that is traditionally
associated with criminal prosecution." Breed v. Jones, 421
U.S. 519, 528, 95 S.Ct. 1779, 1785, 44 L.Ed.2d 346 (1975).
In deciding "cases in which ... the Double Jeopardy Clause
has been invoked, the courts have found it useful to define
a point in criminal proceedings at which the constitutional
purposes and policies are implicated by resort to the
concept of 'attachment of jeopardy.'"  Serfass v. United
States, 420 U.S. 377, 388, 95 S.Ct. 1055, 1062, 43 L.Ed.2d
265 (1975) (citation omitted).  The Supreme Court, for
example, has concluded that "[i]n a nonjury trial, jeopardy
attaches when the court begins to hear evidence."  Id.
(citations omitted).  We have said "jeopardy does not attach
unless there is a risk of a determination of guilt."  State
v. Rodrigues, 67 Hawaii 70, 79, 679 P.2d 615, 622, cert.
denied, [469] U.S. [1078, 1078], 105 S.Ct. 580, 580, 83
L.Ed.2d 691 (1984).
State v. Ferreira, 68 Haw. 238, 241-42, 709 P.2d 607, 609-10
(1985) (original brackets omitted).  Since Ferreira, the supreme
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
court has confirmed that "[o]rdinarily, in a nonjury trial,
jeopardy attaches when the court begins to hear evidence."  State
v. Poohina, 97 Hawai#i 505, 510, 40 P.3d 907, 912 (2002) (citing
Ferreira, 68 Haw. at 242, 709 P.2d at 610).  See also State v.
Brunson, 385 S.E.2d 542, 544 (N.C. App. 1989) ("the only way that
a bench trial can begin in our judgment is by the State offering
evidence against the defendant").
Here, jeopardy did not attach because the State did not
offer any evidence, and the District Court did not begin to hear
any evidence, in a trial on the merits.  The arresting officer
was sworn in to testify for a hearing on the Motion to Suppress,
not a trial.  Zhang's argument that the officer was sworn in for
trial rests on the District Court's purported after-the-fact
consolidation of the suppression hearing with trial.  As the
supreme court noted in Chang, "[t]he parties of course remain
free to stipulate to the incorporation of testimony and evidence
introduced at the suppression hearing into the subsequent trial
should they wish to do so."  144 Hawai# i at 556 n.21, 445 P.2d at
137 n.21 (emphasis added).  Here, however, the State objected to
the consolidation of the suppression hearing with trial and did
not stipulate to the incorporation of any evidence elicited at
the hearing into any subsequent trial.  Simply put, there was no
actual trial on the merits, and the District Court therefore did
not begin to hear evidence for the purpose of determining Zhang's
guilt or innocence.  See Commonwealth v. Gonzalez, 771 N.E.2d
134, 140 (Mass. 2002) (jeopardy did not attach when defendant was
not placed at risk of conviction where judge's actions ensured
there was no trial on the facts and merits and precluded state's
appeal from suppression order).
Zhang asserts that double jeopardy protections bar a
second prosecution for the same offense after acquittal.  This,
of course, is true, but it begs the question of whether there was
an "acquittal" here for double jeopardy purposes.  See State v.
Clemente, 128 Hawai#i 449, 452, 290 P.3d 519, 522 (2012) ("[i]n
applying this [double jeopardy] protection, a critical question
becomes what constitutes an 'acquittal'"); Gonzalez, 771 N.E.2d
at 139 ("[n]ot every 'acquittal' constitutes an acquittal for
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
double jeopardy purposes").  "[W]hat constitutes an 'acquittal'
is not to be controlled by the form of the judge's action." 
United States v. Martin Linen Supply Co., 430 U.S. 564, 571
(1977).  Rather, "a defendant is acquitted only when 'the ruling
of the judge, whatever its label, actually represents a
resolution in the defendant's favor, correct or not, of some or
all of the factual elements of the offense charged.'"  Poohina,
97 Hawai# i at 509, 40 P.3d 911 (brackets omitted) (quoting State
v. Dow, 72 Haw. 56, 64, 806 P.2d 402, 406 (1991) (citing Martin
Linen Supply, 430 U.S. at 571)).  Thus, before according double
jeopardy protection based on an "acquittal," we must look beyond
the District Court's characterization of its actions to determine
the legal substance of the proceeding.
Here, absent the State's consent to consolidate the
suppression hearing with trial, the District Court conducted a
pretrial suppression hearing, not a trial.  Moreover, pursuant to
HRPP Rule 12(e), the only matter that the court resolved was "a
motion to suppress made before trial" that the court "determined
before trial." (Emphasis added.)  Again, absent the State's
consent, there was no consolidated trial and, thus, no resolution
of any of the factual elements of the offense charged.  It cannot
be that a trial court can simply declare a pretrial hearing to be
a "trial," and then based on whatever evidence that is (or is
not) adduced at the hearing, to proclaim a defendant "not
guilty," and to have that "finding" constitute an "acquittal."
See Gonzalez, 771 N.E.2d at 140 (concluding there was no
acquittal for double jeopardy purposes where "the judge announced
that the proceeding constituted a trial 'because I'm saying it
is'").  In short, here, there was no "acquittal" for double
jeopardy purposes. 
For these reasons, we vacate that portion of the
District Court's March 13, 2019 Notice of Entry of Judgment
and/or Order and Plea/Judgment purporting to find Zhang "not
guilty," and we remand this case to the District Court with
instructions to state, pursuant to HRPP Rule 12(e), its essential
findings in determining the November 16, 2018 Motion to Suppress,
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
and for further proceedings consistent with this Summary
Disposition Order.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 13, 2020.
On the briefs:
Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City & County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Alen M. Kaneshiro
for Defendant-Appellee.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
9