NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0001390
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
PNC MORTGAGE, a Division of PNC Bank, N.A.,
Successor by Merger with National City Bank,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
REIKO KONDO, NEWTOWN ESTATES COMMUNITY
ASSOCIATION, and HECTOR BALLESTEROS ENRIQUEZ,
Defendants-Appellees, 
and 
DOES 1-20, JANES DOES 1-20, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-20,
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-20, DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-20,
Defendants,
and
 
PATRICIA NAOMI PARK,
Defendant/Intervenor-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-2221)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
This case involves an alleged foreclosure rescue scheme
 
affecting certain real property located on Hoala Street in Aiea,
 
Hawai'i (the "Property"). The Property is registered land court 
property bearing Transfer Certificate of Title ("TCT") 850,908. 
Defendant-Intervenor-Appellant Patricia Naomi Park
 
("Park") appeals from the May 13, 2013 Final Judgment in Favor of
 Plaintiff PNC Mortgage, a Division of PNC Bank, N.A., Successor
 by Merger with National City Bank and Against Defendant-
Intervenor Patricia Naomi Park on All Claims Pled Against
 Plaintiff in the Complaint in Intervention, filed February 4,
 2009 ("Final Judgment") by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
("Circuit Court").1
 
On appeal, Park raises points of error that can be 
summarized as contending that the Circuit Court abused its 
discretion in (A) granting the motion for certification of the Final Judgment under Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure ("HRCP") 
Rule 54(b) filed by Plaintiff-Appellee PNC Mortgage, a Division of PNC Bank, N.A., Successor by Merger with National City Bank ("PNC"), when there were genuine issues of disputed material fact; (B) granting PNC's renewed motion for summary judgment when there were genuine issues of disputed material fact; and (C) issuing Final Judgment in favor of PNC when there were genuine issues of disputed material fact. For the reasons explained below, we affirm. 
I. Background
 
In 2003, Park's husband, Dwight Park ("Dwight")
 
conveyed his interest in the Property to Park. Subsequently, as
 
the tenant in severalty, Park refinanced the existing mortgage on
 the Property and borrowed $405,000 from BNC Mortgage, Inc.,
 secured by a new mortgage on the Property. In 2006, Park
 refinanced the mortgage from BNC Mortgage, Inc. with a new
 mortgage loan from Zone Funding in the amount of $473,900 (the
 "Zone Funding Mortgage"). According to Park, this loan was
 solicited with help from an alleged mortgage broker, Bobby Wood,
 who was Dwight's friend. The Zone Funding Mortgage had an
 adjustable interest rate which started at 11.75%. Park soon
 realized that she could not afford the interest rate on the Zone
 Funding Mortgage and later that same year sought to refinance the
 Property again. 
Park then agreed to transfer the Property to Hector
 
Ballesteros Enriquez with the assistance of Wood and upon
 Dwight's instruction. Park understood that she would be able to
 reclaim title to the Property after Dwight received a large sum
 of money from certain "business ventures" that he allegedly had
 
1/
 The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pending in China. Park executed a notarized Warranty Deed
 
transferring the Property to Enriquez on December 27, 2006, which
 resulted in the issuance of TCT 839,818 reflecting Enriquez as
 sole owner of the Property. Nothing on the TCT reflected any
 agreement about reclaiming the Property between Park and
 Enriquez, and Park never saw a written document reflecting any
 such agreement. 
As part of the transfer of the Property from Park,
 
Enriquez encumbered the Property with two new mortgages from
 Freemont Investment & Loan: a first mortgage in the amount of
 $497,600 and a second mortgage in the amount of $124,400 (the
 "Freemont Mortgages"). The proceeds from the Freemont Mortgages
 paid off the Zone Funding Mortgage in full and a surplus of
 $102,691.49 was issued from escrow in the form of a check made
 payable to Dwight. In March 2007, Enriquez conveyed the Property
 to Rieko Kondo, Wood's ex-girlfriend, and a deed was recorded in
 Land Court transferring legal title to Kondo and resulting in the
 issuance of TCT 850,908. Kondo obtained a mortgage loan on the
 Property from National City Mortgage
2 in the amount of $740,000,
 
documented by two promissory notes and secured by first and
 second mortgages on the Property (the "PNC Mortgages"). The
 proceeds from the PNC Mortgages paid off the Freemont Mortgages
 in full. Although Park and Kondo claimed that Wood served as the
 mortgage broker for this transaction, an entity called Accel
 Mortgage LLC was the broker of record.
3
 
2
/
 National City Mortgage, a Division of National City Bank initiated
the underlying circuit court action as the plaintiff. On November 6, 2009,
National City Bank merged with and into PNC Bank, a National Association. On
 December 23, 2009, the Land Court granted a petition authorizing and directing
the Assistant Registrar of the Land Court to "acccept for registration and/or
filing documents . . . executed in the name of PNC Bank, a National
Association, . . . previously filed in the name of National City Bank, a
National Banking Association, . . . ." On January 6, 2011, the Circuit Court
of the First Circuit granted PNC's motion to note name change and ordered that
PNC Mortgage, a Division of PNC Bank, N.A., Successor by Merger with National
City Bank be substituted for National City Mortgage, a Division of National
City Bank, as plaintiff in the underlying case. 
3/
 Wood and some employees of Accel Mortgage were indicted in 2009 by
the United States Government for conspiracy to commit mail fraud, wire fraud,
and making false statements on loan applications, related to various real
property sales including the Property. As the indictment and plea agreement
are included in the record of the underlying case, we take judicial notice of
documents from related criminal proceedings as matters of public record.
 
3
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On October 28, 2008, PNC initiated foreclosure
 
proceedings in the underlying action against Kondo on the first
 
PNC Mortgage. On February 4, 2009, Park intervened and filed her
 Complaint in Intervention against PNC, Kondo, Enriquez, and an
 entity known as Newtown Estates Community Association. Park
 contended that the transactions transferring the Property to
 Enriquez and thereafter to Kondo were fraudulent and were
 procured through the fraud of Wood and/or Enriquez. Park sought
 a declaration that she was "entitled to re-vesting of legal title
 and possession of the Subject Property" and requested "a
 permanent injuction against [PNC] . . . from continuing any
 foreclosure action in connection with [the] Subject Property." 
PNC filed a Motion for Summary Judgment on all claims
 
pled against it in Park's Complaint in Intervention. The Circuit
 Court denied the motion without prejudice in part because a
 declaration of Kondo, submitted by Park, raised concerns of a
 possible relationship between Wood and National City Mortgage. 
The court stated that "it is unclear whether Ms. Kondo's
 declaration is supported by credible facts or evidence at this
 time." After conducting discovery, more than one year later, PNC
 filed a renewed motion for summary judgment on all claims
 asserted against it in the Complaint in Intervention. 
On February 14, 2013, the Circuit Court issued its
 
Order Granting Plaintiff PNC Mortgage, a Division of PNC Bank,
 N.A., Successor by Merger with National City Bank's Renewed
 Motion for Summary Judgment, filed October 1, 2012. Thereafter,
 on May 13, 2013, the Circuit Court issued its Order Granting
 Plaintiff PNC Mortgage, a Division of PNC Bank, N.A., Successor
 by Merger with National City Bank's Motion for Rule 54(b)
 Certification, filed April 2, 2013 and entered the Final
 Judgment.
 
II. Standards of Review
 
HRCP Rule 54(b) Certification
 
A lower court's decision to enter an HRCP Rule 54(b)
certification is reviewed on appeal under a dual standard. 
The extent of a lower court's power to enter an HRCP Rule
54(b) certification of finality is a question of law, reviewed
de novo. However, a lower court's decision to utilize its
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
power under HRCP Rule 54(b) is reviewed under the abuse of
discretion standard.
 
Elliot Megdal & Assocs. v. Daio USA Corp., 87 Hawai' i 129, 132, 
952 P.2d 886, 889 (App. 1998) (citations omitted). 
Summary Judgment
 
The appellate court reviews "the circuit court's grant 
or denial of summary judgment de novo." Querubin v. Thronas, 107 
Hawai'i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005) (quoting Durette v. 
Aloha Plastic Recycling, Inc., 105 Hawai' i 490, 501, 100 P.3d 60, 
71 (2004)). "[W]e must view all of the evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion." Id. 
III. Discussion
 
A.	 The Circuit Court did not err in granting summary
judgment to PNC on all claims raised against it in
Park's Complaint in Intervention.
 
The essence of Park's complaint in intervention sought
 
to quiet title to the Property, claiming that PNC was party to a
 
fraud against Park, which, she contends, entitled her to
 revestment of the Property. To prevail on summary judgment
 against Park's complaint, PNC had to show that there were no
 genuine issues of material fact as to whether PNC was a bona
 fide, good-faith lender on the Property and whether its liens on
 the Property were valid as a matter of law. 
Park contends that summary judgment was improperly 
granted in the face of genuine issues of disputed material fact. Specifically, Park claims that the Circuit Court erred in failing to (1) address the genuine issues of material fact regarding title to the Property, (2) consider the ruling of the U.S. District Court for the District of Hawai' i that the "KONDO loan 
transaction with Wood was derived by illegal transactions of wire [fraud], money laundering and conspiracy[,]"(3) determine whether PNC's mortgage lien was valid at the time the lawsuit was commenced, and (4) determine whether PNC was a holder of the note and mortgage when there was no indorsement from National City to PNC. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
1.	 Title to the Property.
 
Park contends that she has the right to seek re-
vestment of legal title and possession of the Property by means
 
of her Complaint in Intervention, and that the Circuit Court
 erred in failing to resolve that issue by its order granting
 summary judgment to PNC. Although title to the Property remains
 with Kondo, the effect of the court's order is that it will, upon
 proper presentment of the issue, likely decline to revest title
 to Property in Park. Thus, the fact that neither Park nor Kondo
 affirmatively pursued resolution of Park's Complaint in
 Intervention does not preclude the court from issuing summary
 judgment in favor of PNC or, as discussed below, in holding that
 there was "no just reason for delay" in certifying the judgment
 under HRCP Rule 54(b).
 
2.	 The U.S. District Court's indictment and
 
prosecution of Wood.
 
Park appears to contend that the Circuit Court erred in
 
failing to consider the fact that Wood entered into a plea
 
agreement in which he pled guilty to conspiracy, wire fraud, and
 money laundering offenses when it granted summary judgment to PNC
 on Park's Complaint in Intervention. Nothing in the plea
 agreement, however, suggests that PNC, National City Bank, or any
 lender was a party to the alleged conspiracy or was anything
 other than a victim. In fact, PNC was explicitly declared to be
 entitled to restitution from Wood and three other defendants "in
 the amount of $740,000 less any monies recovered by PNC Bank." 
Nothing admitted to or otherwise determined in the U.S.
 
District Court action raises any genuine issue of material fact
 as to whether any contract involving Park was illegal, immoral,
 or contrary to public policy; whether Park was a victim; whether
 PNC was party to any fraud against Park; or whether PNC was
 anything but a victim. In sum, Park's evidence establishes no
 connection between the U.S. District Court proceeding and PNC's
 entitlement to summary judgment on the claims in Park's Complaint
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in Intervention.4 Thus, Park failed to establish a genuine issue
 
of material fact with regard to the effect of Wood's indictment
 
or the plea agreement entered in the U.S. District Court action.
 
3.	 Enforceability of the PNC Mortgages when the
merger of PNC and National City Bank was not noted
on the TCT.
 
Park contends that there is a genuine issue of material
 
fact as to whether PNC's mortgage lien was valid when the lawsuit
 
was commenced. Specifically, Park argues that PNC could not
 enforce the PNC Mortgages because the merger of PNC and National
 City Bank was not noted on the TCT.
 
Those arguments, however, ignore that (i) there was a
 
petition for acceptance of the name change filed and granted in
 Land Court, and (ii) HRS section 412:3-610(a) (Supp 2008)
 provides that "[a] Hawaii financial institution or federal
 financial institution resulting from a conversion, merger, or
 consolidation . . . shall be deemed to be continuing the same
 business of each . . . ." Accordingly, there is no genuine issue
 of material fact concerning PNC's right to enforce its rights
 through the National City Bank encumbrance noted on the TCT.
 
4.	 Enforceability of the PNC Mortgages when there was
allegedly no proper indorsement of the note to
PNC.
 
Park contends that there is a genuine issue of material
 
fact as to whether she may obtain the Property free and clear of
 
the PNC mortgage because there is no proper indorsement
 indicating assignment of the note from National City Bank to PNC. 
Park does not contest National City Bank's entitlement to
 initiate the foreclosure proceeding, but only PNC's entitlement
 to continue prosecuting it.
 
Park's argument again ignores the effect of HRS section
 
412:3-610(a). In addition to providing that a merger will
 
4/
 Park notes that Hawai 'i law prohibits unfair or deceptive acts or
practices in the conduct of any trade or commerce, Haw. Rev. Stat. ยง 480-2(a),
and contends, without establishing, that the transaction in this case violatedHawaii Revised Statutes chapter 480, and that the Circuit Court should,therefore, have dismissed PNC's underlying complaint. Park fails to explain,however, how any illegality associated with her contracts with Wood, Enriquez,or Kondo, bears on the enforceability of the note/mortgage between PNC andKondo. Therefore, that argument is waived. Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(7). 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
operate as a continuation of the business of each bank, the
 
statute also provides that "[n]o assignment, deed, conveyance, or
 other instrument of transfer need be executed in order for the
 resulting institution to maintain the title, rights, and powers
 held by the converting or participating institutions." Id. Park
 
fails to acknowledge or explain why this section does not apply,
 and we conclude that it does.
 
In sum, PNC established that PNC acquired its interest
 
in the Property free and clear of any alleged claims or
 encumbrances that were not noted on the TCT, that Park's claim to
 the Property was not reflected on the TCT when the PNC loans were
 made, and that there was no evidence that PNC was party to any
 fraud that may have deprived Park of the Property. Park failed
 to establish a genuine issue of material fact as to any of the
 claims raised in her Complaint in Intervention, and the Circuit
 Court therefore did not err in granting summary judgment to PNC
 on all claims raised therein.
 
B.	 The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
 
certifying judgment under HRCP Rule 54(b).
 
Park alleges that the Circuit Court erred in certifying
 
final judgment under HRCP Rule 54(b) before adjudicating her
 
claims relating to re-vestment of title, and before allowing her
 Land Court proceeding to finalize. The purpose of HRCP Rule
 54(b) certification, however, is precisely to allow for
 finalization of judgments that do not address all claims or
 parties to a litigation.
5 10 Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R.
 
Miller & Mary Kay Kane, Federal Practice and Procedure ยง 2654, at
 35 (3d ed. 1998) ("The rule attempts to strike a balance between
 the undesirability of more than one appeal in a single action and
 the need for making review available in multiple-party or
 multiple-claim situations at a time that best serves the needs of
 the litigants.")
 
Park's Complaint in Intervention presents multiple
 
claims against multiple parties, but the essence of which claims
 
5/
 The trial court may direct entry of a final judgment as to one or
more but fewer than all of the claims or parties upon an express determination
that there is no just reason for delay. Haw. R. Civ. P. 54(b).
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
an entitlement "to re-vesting of legal title and possession of
 
the Subject Property" and that PNC's mortgages were invalid liens
 on the property. Furthermore, she alleges claims against other
 parties for quiet title, identity theft, and statutory and common
 law fraud. 
Having disposed of Park's entire complaint as it
 
related to PNC by granting PNC's renewed motion for summary
 judgment in full, however, all of Park's claims in the case as
 they related to PNC had been resolved, there was no just reason
 
for delay. Haw. R. Civ. P. 54(b). To the extent that summary
 judgment in favor of PNC effectively forecloses other interests
 in the Property, Park raises no genuine issue of material fact as
 to the enforceability of PNC's mortgage lien as discussed above,
 and therefore PNC is entitled to its remedy. Accordingly, as the
 Circuit Court did not err in concluding that PNC's mortgage lien
 was enforceable, it did not abuse its discretion in certifying
 its judgment in favor of PNC as final under HRCP Rule 54(b).
 
IV. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the Final Judgment in Favor of
 
Plaintiff PNC Mortgage, a Division of PNC Bank, N.A., Successor
 
by Merger with National City Bank and Against Defendant-
Intervenor Patricia Naomi Park on All Claims Pled Against
 Plaintiff in the Complaint in Intervention, Filed February 4,
 2009, filed on May 13, 2013, in the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 31, 2018. 
On the briefs:
 
Junsuke Otsuka 
(Otsuka & Associates)
for Defendant/Intervenor-
Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Jade Lynne Ching and
Melissa M. Uhl
 (Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing)for Plaintiff-Appellee. 

Associate Judge
 
9
 