FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
---o0o---
JORGE NAJERA, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Respondent-Appellee.
NO. CAAP-14-0000509
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(S.P.P. NO. 12-1-0012(1) (CR. NO. 10-1-0026(1))
FEBRUARY 13, 2018
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND FUJISE, J., 
WITH REIFURTH, J., DISSENTING
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE
Petitioner-Appellant Jorge Najera (Najera) is a citizen
of Mexico.  He was born in Mexico, but came to Hawai# i with his
uncle when he was ten years old.  He married a United States
citizen in 1999 and became a permanent resident alien in 2001,
when he was twenty years old.  Najera and his wife have four
children.  
In 2010, Najera was charged with drug offenses,
including the main charge of attempted methamphetamineFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
trafficking in the first degree that carried significant
mandatory imprisonment.  Pursuant to a plea agreement, Najera
pleaded no contest to drug charges that enabled him to avoid
mandatory imprisonment, but still subjected him to automatic
deportation.  Najera was sentenced, served a one-year term of
incarceration, and then was placed in deportation proceedings. 
Najera filed a petition to set aside his convictions (Petition)
pursuant to Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40
(2006).  Najera asserted that he received ineffective assistance
of counsel because his trial counsel did not advise him that his
no contest pleas would subject him to automatic deportation and
that had he received this advice, he would not have pleaded no
contest.  Najera also stated that he never told his counsel that
he was not a citizen.  The Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit
(Circuit Court)1 ruled that Najera had failed to state a
colorable claim for relief and denied his petition without a
hearing.2
The question presented in this appeal is whether
Najera's failure to inform his counsel that Najera was not a
citizen absolved counsel of the obligation to advise Najera that
his no contest pleas would subject him to automatic deportation. 
We conclude that the answer to this question is "no."  We
conclude that Najera's ineffective assistance of counsel claim
raised a colorable claim for relief, and therefore, the Circuit
Court erred in denying Najera's Petition without a hearing.  We
remand the case for a hearing to determine whether the
representation provided by Najera's counsel was deficient and
whether absent counsel's alleged deficient performance, there is 
1The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.
2Because the Circuit Court denied Najera's Petition without
a hearing, we must assume the allegations in Najera's Petition
are true.  See Dan v. State . 76 Hawai #i 423, 427, 879 P.2d 528,
532 (1994).  We therefore accept the allegations in Najera's
Petition as true in analyzing whether Najera's Petition stated a
colorable claim for relief. 
2FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
a reasonable possibility that Najera would not have pleaded no
contest.
BACKGROUND
I.
Najera was born in Mexico.  He is not a United States
citizen.  In about 1991, when Najera was ten years old, he came
with his uncle to Maui from Juarez, Mexico.  When Najera was
fourteen, he was abandoned by his uncle and was placed in foster
care.  He attended high school on Maui and married a United
States citizen in 1999.  In 2001, when Najera turned twenty, he
became a permanent resident alien of the United States. 
In January 2010, the State of Hawai #i (State) charged
Najera by indictment with attempted first-degree methamphetamine
trafficking (Count 1); prohibited acts related to drug
paraphernalia (Count 2); and second-degree promoting a
detrimental drug (Count 3).  Najera's attempted first-degree
methamphetamine trafficking charge carried a mandatory
indeterminate twenty-year term of imprisonment, a mandatory
minimum term of imprisonment of between two and eight years, and
a fine of up to $2 million.  See Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 712-1240.7(3) (Supp. 2009).  The charges against Najera stemmed
from evidence obtained pursuant to the execution of search
warrants on Najera's home, truck, and person, and Najera's
consent to search another vehicle.  During these searches, the
police recovered 19.46 grams of purported crystal
methamphetamine, over 170 grams of purported marijuana
vegetation, three marijuana plants, and an assortment of drug
paraphernalia. 
A Deputy Public Defender (DPD) was appointed to
represent Najera.  The State and Najera subsequently entered into
a plea agreement, which called for: (1) Najera to plead no
contest to an amended charge of first-degree promoting a
dangerous drug instead of attempted first-degree methamphetamine
trafficking, in Count 1; (2) Najera to plead no contest as
3FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
charged to Counts 2 and 3; (3) the State to recommend a sentence
of ten years of probation; and (4) Najera to stipulate to one
year of imprisonment as a condition of probation and not to move
for sentencing under "Act 44"3 or for a deferred acceptance of
no-contest plea.  By pleading no contest to first-degree
promoting a dangerous drug instead of attempted first-degree
methamphetamine trafficking, Najera would still be exposed to a
maximum indeterminate twenty-year term of incarceration, but the
Circuit Court would have the option of sentencing Najera to
probation, rather than a mandatory indeterminate twenty-year term
of incarceration, and there would be no mandatory minimum term of
incarceration.
In May 2011, Najera pleaded no contest pursuant to the
plea agreement.  During the plea colloquy, the Circuit Court
advised Najera: "And if you're not a citizen you're possibly
looking at consequences of deportation, exclusion from admission
to the United States, or denial naturalization [sic] under the
laws of the United States.  Do you understand?"  Najera
responded: "Yes, your Honor."  The No Contest Plea form which
Najera signed also stated:
 
10. I know that, if I am not a citizen of the United
States, a conviction or a plea of guilty or no contest,
whether acceptance of my plea is deferred or not, may have
the consequences of deportation, exclusion from admission to
the United States, or denial of naturalization under the
laws of the United States.
The Circuit Court found that Najera's no contest pleas
were validly entered, accepted his pleas, and found him guilty of
the amended charge in Count 1 and guilty as charged in Counts 2
and 3.  The Circuit Court required the preparation of a
presentence investigation and report prior to sentencing. 
The presentence report contained information indicating
3Act 44 permitted the court to sentence certain defendants
to probation to undergo drug treatment and to expunge their
convictions upon the successful completion of drug treatment. 
See HRS 706-622.5 (Supp. 2009).
4FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
that Najera was not a citizen.  The report identified Najera's
birthplace as "Mexico"; the space after "US Citizen:" was left
blank on Najera's "Hawaii Criminal Justice Inquiry-Full Rap
Sheet" contained in the report; and the "Family Background"
section of the report noted that sometime prior to 2004, Najera
was arrested and taken to Los Angeles "where he awaited
deportation proceedings," but was released to the custody of the
parents of his then girlfriend (who later became his wife). 
Najera did not move to withdraw his plea after the presentence
report was prepared, and the case proceeded to sentencing.
The Circuit Court sentenced Najera on August 3, 2011. 
Consistent with the State's recommendation in the plea agreement,
the Circuit Court sentenced Najera to ten years of probation,
subject to the condition that he serve one-year in prison. 
Najera did not file a direct appeal from his judgment.
II.
After Najera completed serving his one-year term of
incarceration, he was detained by immigration authorities and
placed in deportation proceedings.  On December 10, 2012, Najera
filed his Petition pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 to set aside his
convictions.  In his Petition, Najera claimed that the DPD who
represented him in his criminal case failed to provide him with
effective assistance of counsel because counsel had failed to
warn him of the direct immigration consequences of his no contest
pleas.  In particular, Najera claimed that his counsel did not
advise him, and he did not know, that by entering his no contest
pleas, "he would be subject to automatic deportation."  Najera
alleged that if he had been advised of the immigration
consequences of his no contest pleas, he would not have pleaded
no contest and "would have instead presented [his] defenses at
trial."  
Najera stated that he "never told [his trial counsel]
that [he] was not a citizen," and he stated that the issue of his
citizenship "was never brought up" during interviews with his
5FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
counsel.  Najera explained his failure to inform his counsel
about his noncitizen status by stating that "I presumed my status
was fine because I was married and had 4 children."  Najera's
wife also submitted a declaration in which she stated that: "[M]y
husband never told [trial counsel] that he was not a citizen,
because we never thought that was an issue."   In connection with
his Petition, Najera submitted a declaration signed by his trial
counsel.  In his declaration, trial counsel stated: "At this
time, I cannot recall what I advised [Najera] with respect to his
change of plea." 
While Najera's Petition was pending in the Circuit
Court, Najera was deported to Mexico.  The Circuit Court
subsequently denied Najera's Petition without a hearing, and it
issued its "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order
Dismissing [Najera's Petition]" (Order Denying Petition) on
January 2, 2014.  The Circuit found that Najera had waived his
claim of ineffective assistance of counsel by failing to
previously raise it.  Alternatively, considering Najera's
ineffective assistance of counsel claim on the merits, the
Circuit Court found that even assuming the facts alleged in
Najera's Petition were true, Najera had failed to raise a
colorable claim for post-conviction relief.  Accordingly, the
Circuit Court denied Najera's Petition without a hearing.  This
appeal followed.
DISCUSSION
I.
On appeal, Najera contends that the Circuit Court erred
in denying his Rule 40 Petition without a hearing.  We agree.
HRPP Rule 40(f) provides, in relevant part, that "[i]f
a petition alleges facts that if proven would entitle the
petitioner to relief, the court shall grant a hearing which may
extend only to the issues raised in the petition or answer."
As a general rule, a hearing should be held on a Rule 40
petition for post-conviction relief where the petition
states a colorable claim.  To establish a colorable claim,
the allegations of the petition must show that if taken as
6FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
true the facts alleged would change the [outcome of the
case], however, a petitioner's conclusions need not be
regarded as true.
Dan v. State, 76 Hawai# i 423, 427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994)
(quoting State v. Allen , 7 Haw. App. 89, 92, 744 P.2d 789, 792
(1987)). 
A defendant raising a claim of ineffective assistance
of counsel must demonstrate that in light of all the
circumstances, counsel's performance was not objectively
reasonable, that is, was not "'within the range of competence
demanded of attorneys in criminal cases.'"  Briones v. State, 74
Haw. 442, 462, 848 P.2d 966, 976 (1993) (citation omitted).  To
establish a claim of ineffective assistance of trial counsel, the
defendant has the burden of satisfying a two-part test.  The
defendant must establish: (1) "'specific errors or omissions
reflecting [defense] counsel's lack of skill, judgment or
diligence'"; and (2) "that 'these errors or omissions resulted in
either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
meritorious defense.'"  Id. (citation, ellipsis points, and
brackets omitted). 
As explained below, especially in light of the
reasoning of the United State Supreme Court in Padilla v.
Kentucky, 559 U.S. 356 (2010), we conclude that Najera stated a
colorable claim of ineffective assistance of trial counsel and
was entitled to a hearing on that claim.  We further conclude
that Najera did not waive his claim of ineffective assistance of
counsel by failing to previously raise it.  We therefore vacate
the Circuit Court's Order Denying Petition and remand the case
for further proceedings.
II.
In Padilla, the defendant, Jose Padilla, was an alien
who had been a lawful permanent resident of the United States for
40 years.  Id. at 359.  Padilla pleaded guilty to the
transportation of a large amount of marijuana, a guilty plea
which made his deportation virtually mandatory under United
7FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
States immigration laws.  Id.  In his post-conviction proceeding,
Padilla alleged that his trial counsel not only failed to advise
him of the deportation consequence of his plea, but told him he
did not have to worry about his immigration status because he had
been in the country so long.  Id.  Padilla also alleged that he
would not have pleaded guilty, but would have insisted on going
to trial, "if he had not received incorrect advice from his
attorney."  Id.   
The Supreme Court agreed with Padilla that
"constitutionally competent counsel would have advised him that
his conviction for drug distribution made him subject to
automatic deportation."  Id. at 360.  Taking Padilla's
allegations as true, the Court had "little difficultly"
concluding that he had sufficiently alleged that his counsel was
constitutionally deficient.  Id. at 374.  The Court remanded the
case for a determination of whether Padilla had been prejudiced
by counsel's deficient performance and was entitled to relief on
his ineffective assistance of counsel claim.  Id.  at 374-75.
In explaining its conclusion that constitutionally
competent counsel would have advised Padilla that his drug
distribution conviction made him subject to automatic
deportation, the Court observed that "the landscape of federal
immigration law has changed dramatically over the last 90 years." 
Id. at 360.  While once the class of deportable offenses was
narrow and judges had broad discretionary authority to prevent
deportation, under current immigration law, deportation is
"virtually inevitable for a vast number of noncitizens convicted
of crimes."  Id.   The certainty of deportation for certain
offenses has dramatically raised the stakes of a noncitizen's
criminal conviction and the importance of accurate legal advice
regarding the immigration consequences of their criminal cases. 
Id. at 363-64.  Given the significant impact that deportation may
have on the lives of noncitizens, the Court recognized that
"deportation is an integral part -- indeed, sometimes the most
8FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
important part -- of the penalty that may be imposed on
noncitizen defendants who plead guilty to specified crimes."  Id.
at 364.
The Court acknowledged that immigration law can be
complex, and that where "the deportation consequences of a
particular plea are unclear or uncertain[,]" "a criminal defense
attorney need do no more than advise a noncitizen client that
pending criminal charges may carry a risk of adverse immigration
consequences."  Id. at 369.  However, the Supreme Court stated
that in Padilla's case, the immigration consequences of Padilla's
guilty plea were obvious because the immigration statute is
"succinct, clear, and explicit," in providing that any alien who
is convicted of any controlled substance offense, "except for the
most trivial of marijuana possession offenses," is subject to
deportation.  Id. at 368.  Thus, Padilla's counsel could easily
have determined that Padilla's plea would make his deportation
presumptively mandatory "simply from reading the text of the
statute[.]"  Id.  The Court concluded that where, as in Padilla's
case, the deportation consequence of Padilla's guilty plea was
truly clear, Padilla's counsel had a clear duty to give Padilla
"correct advice" about this consequence.  Id.  at 369.      
With respect to advice on the immigration consequences
of a plea, the Court refused to draw a distinction between
affirmative misadvice and failure to advise in evaluating
ineffective assistance of counsel claims.  The Court reasoned
that limiting ineffective assistance of counsel claims to
affirmative misadvice would invite two absurd results:
First, it would give counsel an incentive to remain silent
on matters of great importance, even when answers are
readily available.  Silence under these circumstances would
be fundamentally at odds with the critical obligation of
counsel to advise the client of "the advantages and
disadvantages of a plea agreement."  When attorneys know
that their clients face possible exile from this country and
separation from their families, they should not be
encouraged to say nothing at all.  Second, it would deny a
class of clients least able to represent themselves the most
rudimentary advice on deportation even when it is readily
available.  It is quintessentially the duty of counsel to
provide her client with available advice about an issue like
9FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
deportation and the failure to do so "clearly satisfies the
first [deficient performance] prong of the Strickland
[ineffective assistance] analysis."
Id. at 370-71 (citations and footnote omitted).   
The Court stated that the severity of deportation
underscores how critical it is for counsel to inform his or her
noncitizen client of the risk of deportation during the plea
bargaining process.  Id. at 373-74.  To satisfy its
responsibility under the Constitution to ensure that criminal
defendants, whether citizen or not, receive effective assistance
of counsel, the Court held that "counsel must inform her client
whether his plea carries the risk of deportation.  Our
longstanding Sixth Amendment precedents, the seriousness of
deportation as a consequence of a criminal plea, and the
concomitant impact of deportation on families living lawfully in
this country demand no less."  Id. at 374.
III.
Here, as in Padilla, the deportation consequence of
Najera's guilty plea to first-degree promoting a dangerous drug
was obvious under the immigration laws.  The immigration statute 
is "succinct, clear, and explicit" in providing that any alien
who is convicted of any controlled substance offense, "except for
the most trivial of marijuana possession offenses," is subject to
deportation.  Id. at 368.4  Thus, Najera's no contest plea to a
controlled substance offense for first-degree promoting a
dangerous drug that was a class A felony made it virtually
certain that he would be deported.  Under Padilla , Najera's
4The relevant immigration provision, 8 U.S.C. §
1227(a)(2)(B)(i), provides in pertinent part: 
Any alien who at any time after admission has been
convicted of a violation of (or a conspiracy or attempt
to violate) any law or regulation of a State . . .
relating to a controlled substance 
. . . , other than a single offense involving
possession for one's own use of 30 grams or less of
marijuana, is deportable.
10FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
counsel had a clear duty to give him correct advice about the
deportation consequence of his plea.
In this case, however, Najera states that he never told
his counsel that he was not a citizen.  Thus, the question
presented by this appeal is whether Najera's failure to inform
counsel that Najera was not a citizen absolved counsel of the
obligation to advise Najera that his no contest pleas would
subject him to automatic deportation.  In other words, should the
burden be on a noncitizen criminal defendant to tell counsel
about his or her immigration status, or should the burden of
asking the client about his or her citizenship status rest with
defense counsel.  We conclude that defense counsel who lacks
information about a defendant's citizenship status has the burden
of asking the defendant whether he or she is a citizen.
As the Supreme Court recognized in Padilla, "[i]t is
quintessentially the duty of counsel to provide her client with
available advice about an issue like deportation," which "is an
integral part -- indeed, sometimes the most important part -- of
the penalty that may be imposed on noncitizen defendants."  Id.
at 364, 371.  In order to effectively represent a criminal
defendant, counsel must at least gather enough information to
provide advice pertinent to the defendant's situation.  
Defendants who lack knowledge that their immigration
status is relevant to their criminal case would have no
particular reason to provide such information to counsel, unless
asked.  Placing the burden on noncitizen defendants to inform
counsel presupposes that such defendants understand that their
immigration status is relevant to the criminal proceedings.  But,
it is not clear why a criminal defendant, who is untrained in the
law and is relying on defense counsel for appropriate legal
advice, would have such an understanding.  Placing the burden on
noncitizen defendants to apprehend the significance of their
immigration status and inform defense counsel of their noncitizen
status would mean that only defendants who were aware,
11FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
independent of defense counsel, that their criminal convictions
could affect their immigration status would be assured of
receiving the type of correct deportation advice required by
Padilla.  As between defense counsel and a noncitizen defendant,
we believe defense counsel is in a better position to understand
that a criminal conviction may have serious deportation
consequences.  See ABA Standards for Criminal Justice 4-5.5(a)
(4th ed. 2015) ("Defense counsel should determine a client's
citizenship and immigration status[.]").  
We therefore side with courts that have imposed the
burden on defense counsel who lacks knowledge of the citizenship
status of a client to ask.  See Commonwealth v. Clarke, 949
N.E.2d 892, 905 (Mass. 2011), abrogated on other grounds by
Chaidez v. United States, 568 U.S. 342 (2013); People v. Picca,
947 N.Y.S.2d 120, 126, (N.Y. App. Div. 2012); People v. Chacko ,
952 N.Y.S.2d 160, 161-62 (N.Y. App. Div. 2012).5  This burden is
not a difficult one to overcome and can, for example, be
satisfied by simply including on an intake questionnaire, the
question: "Are you a United States citizen?"6  If the client
informs or even misinforms defense counsel that he or she is a
citizen, then defense counsel would be absolved of the
responsibility of providing advice to the client regarding the
deportation consequences of the client's guilty or no contest
5We note that there are courts who have reached or indicated
a different conclusion.  See Carillo v. State, 982 N.E.2d 468,
473-75 (Ind. 2013); Hernandez v. State, No. 107,069, 2013 WL
2395302, at *3 (Kan. App. May 24, 2013).  However, for the
reasons previously discussed, we believe our analysis is correct. 
6See Andres Benach et. al., How Much to Advise: What are the
Requirements of Padilla v. Kentucky, ABA Section of Litigation
Chicago Section Annual Conference April 24-26, 2013, 5 (2013),
https://www.americanbar.org/
content/dam/aba/administrative/litigation/materials/sac2013/sac_
2013/18_ world_after_padilla_v_kentucky.authcheckdam.pdf
(recommending that "[i]n each case counsel must determine the
immigration status and criminal history of the defendant.  This
can be done using a questionnaire[.]").
12FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
plea.
IV.
In this case, Najera's Petition alleged that the issue
of his citizenship was never brought up during interviews with
his trial counsel and that Najera did not tell his trial counsel
that he was not a citizen.  The Petition further alleged that (1)
trial counsel did not advise Najera, and Najera did not know,
that his no contest plea to first-degree promoting a dangerous
drug would subject him to automatic deportation; and (2) if he
had been advised of the deportation consequence of his plea, he
would not have pleaded no contest and would have insisted on
going to trial.  We conclude that Najera's Petition stated a
colorable claim of ineffective assistance of trial counsel and
that he therefore was entitled to a hearing on this claim.7
At a hearing on Najera's Petition, it will be up to the
Circuit Court, as the trier of fact, to determine the credibility
of Najera's allegations, which have been taken as true in
deciding whether Najera was entitled to a hearing.  For example,
the Circuit Court will have to determine: (1) whether trial
counsel, in fact, failed to inquire about Najera's citizenship
status and lacked knowledge that Najera was not a citizen; and
(2) what advice, if any, trial counsel gave Najera about the
deportation consequences of his no contest plea.  
In this regard, we note that trial counsel's
7The United States Supreme Court's decision in Padilla
established a new rule, and Padilla  does not apply retroactively
to convictions that had become final before Padilla was decided. 
Chaidez v. United States , 568 U.S. 342 (2012).  The State did not
argue that any new rule established in this case should not be
applied to Najera because his convictions were already final, and
we apply our analysis in this case to Najera.  See Schiro v.
Farley, 510 U.S. 222, 228-29 (1994) (concluding that a state can
waive a claim based on Teague v. Lane, 489 U.S. 288 (1989), by
failing to raise a Teague  argument).  Neither party addressed
whether a decision in Najera's favor would establish a new rule,
and we do not decide whether our decision establishes a new rule
or the extent to which it should be applied retroactively to
other cases. 
13FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
declaration does not state that he failed to inquire about
Najera's citizenship status, that he lacked knowledge that Najera
was not a citizen, or that he failed to advise Najera about the
deportation consequences of Najera's plea.  Trial counsel's
declaration simply states that "[a]t this time, I cannot recall
what I advised [Najera] with respect to his change of plea."  We
also note that Najera's presentence report, which we presume
trial counsel reviewed before Najera's sentencing, clearly
indicates that Najera was not a citizen.  At a hearing on
Najera's Petition, trial counsel can be called to testify to
obtain a more complete picture of the circumstances surrounding
his representation of Najera and whether his memory can be
refreshed through various means.  
The Circuit Court will also have to determine the
credibility of Najera's allegation that if he had been advised of
the deportation consequences of his plea, he would not have
pleaded no contest and would have insisted on going to trial.  In
this regard, we note that the evidence against Najera appeared to
be strong and Najera's plea agreement contained terms that were
very beneficial to him.  By pleading no contest to the amended
charge of first-degree promoting a dangerous drug pursuant to his
plea agreement, Najera avoided the mandatory twenty-year
indeterminate term of imprisonment required for a conviction for
attempted first-degree methamphetamine trafficking.  He also
avoided a mandatory minium term of imprisonment of between two
and eight years.  Instead, the plea agreement and his no contest
plea made it possible for him to receive a sentence of ten years
of probation with one year of imprisonment.  To satisfy his
burden of showing ineffective assistance of counsel, Najera will
be required to show that there is a reasonable possibility that
he would not have pleaded no contest and would have gone to trial
if counsel had correctly advised him of the deportation
consequences of his plea.  See State v. Richie , 88 Hawai #i 19,
39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998); Hill v. Lockhart, 474 U.S. 52, 59
(1985).
14FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
V.
In concluding that Najera had failed to state a
colorable claim for relief, the Circuit Court relied upon the
immigration advisement it provided to Najera during the change of
plea colloquy and the similar advisement contained in Najera's no
contest plea form.  These advisements informed Najera that if he
was not a citizen, then his no contest plea and conviction may
have the consequence of deportation, exclusion from admission
into the United States and denial of naturalization.  However,
Padilla provides that if it is clear under the immigration laws
that the defendant's plea will result in automatic deportation,
defense counsel has a duty to give the defendant "correct advice"
about the deportation consequences, and Padilla's counsel was
"constitutionally deficient" for failing to advise Padilla that
his plea would subject him to automatic deportation.  Padilla,
559 U.S. at 368-69, 374. 
Where it is clear that a plea will result in
deportation, the advice that a plea may result in deportation is
not correct advice and is insufficient to demonstrate
constitutionally competent representation.  See United States v.
Rodriguez-Vega, 797 F.3d 781, 785-88 (9th Cir. 2015) (holding
that where the deportation consequence of a guilty plea is
virtually certain, advice to the defendant that her guilty plea
potentially subjects her to deportation constitutes ineffective
assistance); United States v. Swaby , 855 F.3d 233, 240 (4th Cir.
2017); People v. Abdallah , 61 N.Y.S.3d 618, 620-21 (N.Y. App.
Div. 2017).  The court's obligation to provide advice to a
defendant to assure a knowing and voluntary plea is not
commensurate with defense counsel's obligation to provide
effective representation.  See State v. Paredez, 101 P.3d 799
(N.M. 2004) (holding that trial court's compliance with
immigration admonition required by rule to ensure valid guilty
pleas did not relieve counsel of his obligation to advise the
defendant that defendant's plea would result in almost certain
deportation); Rodriguez-Vega , 797 F.3d at 787; Swaby, 855 F.3d at
15FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
237-38, 240.  Indeed, Najera does not fault the Circuit Court or
challenge the adequacy of the Circuit Court's plea colloquy.8 
However, defense counsel is in a much better position than the
court to ascertain the particular circumstances of his or her
client and determine the deportation consequences of a plea.
Paredez, 101 P.3d at 803.  Accepting, as we must, the factual
allegations of Najera's Petition as being true, we conclude that
the Circuit Court erred in relying on the advisements to Najera
that his no contest plea may have deportation consequences in
ruling that Najera failed to state a colorable claim for relief
on his claim of ineffective assistance of counsel.   
VI.
The Circuit Court also ruled that Najera had waived the
right to raise his claim of ineffective assistance of counsel by
failing to previously raise it.  We conclude that the Circuit
Court erred in relying on waiver in denying Najera's Petition
without a hearing.
  HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) provides:
INAPPLICABILITY.  Rule 40 proceedings shall not be
available and relief thereunder shall not be granted where
the issues sought to be raised have been previously ruled
8At the time the Circuit Court conducted its plea colloquy
with Najera, HRS § 802E-2 (1993) provided that prior to accepting
a guilty or no contest plea to any offense punishable as a crime,
the court shall advise the defendant that:
If you are not a citizen of the United States, you are
hereby advised that conviction of the offense for which
you have been charged may have the consequences of
deportation, exclusion from admission to the United
States, or denial of naturalization pursuant to the
laws of the United States.
The Circuit Court's advisement was not a verbatim recitation of
HRS § 802E-2, but Najera does not challenge the Circuit Court's
compliance with HRS § 802E-2.  During its colloquy, the Circuit
Court did not specifically ask Najera whether he was a United
States citizen, presumably because of HRS § 802E-1 (1993), which
provides that: "It is further the intent of the legislature that
at the time of the plea no defendant shall be required to
disclose the defendant's legal status in the court."        
16FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
upon or were waived.  Except for a claim of illegal
sentence, an issue is waived if the petitioner knowingly and
understandingly failed to raise it and it could have been
raised before the trial, at the trial, on appeal, in a
habeas corpus proceeding or any other proceeding actually
conducted, or in a prior proceeding actually initiated under
this rule, and the petitioner is unable to prove the
existence of extraordinary circumstances to justify the
petitioner's failure to raise the issue.  There is a
rebuttable presumption that a failure to appeal a ruling or
to raise an issue is a knowing and understanding failure.
(Emphasis added.)  
"Where [an HRPP Rule 40] petitioner has been
represented by the same counsel both at trial and on direct
appeal, no waiver of the issue of trial counsel's performance
occurs because no realistic opportunity existed to raise the
issue on direct appeal."  Briones, 74 Haw. at 459, 848 P.2d at
975.  In addition, no waiver of a claim of ineffective assistance
of trial counsel occurs where through no apparent fault on
petitioner's part, trial counsel fails to perfect a direct
appeal.  Matsuo v. State , 70 Haw. 573, 577-78, 778 P.2d 332, 334-
35 (1989). 
Here, the record indicates that Najera was represented
by the same counsel during the trial proceedings and at least
through the time period in which to file a timely direct appeal. 
The allegations in Najera's Petition indicate that he did not
become aware of the deportation consequences of his plea, and his
trial counsel's alleged deficient performance, until he was
detained by immigration authorities upon completing his one-year
term of incarceration.  Najera's Petition was filed several
months after he was detained by immigration authorities and
placed in deportation proceedings, and the instant Petition is
his first petition under HRPP Rule 40.  Under these
circumstances, we conclude that Najera did not have a realistic
opportunity to raise his ineffective assistance of counsel claim
prior to filing the instant Petition.  The Circuit Court erred in
ruling that Najera had waived the issue of the ineffective
assistance of his trial counsel.  
CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the Order Denying
17FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Petition, and we remand the case for further proceedings
consistent with this Opinion.
On the briefs:
Gerald Johnson
for Petitioner-Appellant
Richard K. Minatoya
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Maui
for Respondent-Appellee
18