NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000935
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
WILLIAM WONG, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1P1120006489)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant William Wong (Wong) appeals from
 
the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order, filed on October 1,
2012, in the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu
 Division (district court).
1 After a bench trial, the district
 
court found Wong guilty of disorderly conduct as a petty
 misdemeanor, pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 711­1101(1)(a) and (3) (2014).
2
   
1 The Honorable Lono J. Lee presided.
 
2
 HRS § 711-1101 provides in pertinent part:
 
§711-1101 Disorderly conduct.  (1) A person commits
the offense of disorderly conduct if, with intent to cause
physical inconvenience or alarm by a member or members of
the public, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, the
person:
 
(a)	 Engages in fighting or threatening, or in
violent or tumultuous behavior[.]
 
(continued...)
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Wong argues that there was insufficient
 
evidence to support a conviction for disorderly conduct either as
 
a petty misdemeanor or a violation. Upon careful review of the
 record and the briefs submitted by the parties and having given
 due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised
 by the parties, as well as the relevant statutory and case law,
 we resolve Wong's appeal as follows. 
We review the sufficiency of evidence on appeal as
follows:
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be
considered in the strongest light for the
prosecution when the appellate court passes on
the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies
whether the case was before a judge or jury.
The test on appeal is not whether guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to
 support the conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
State v. Richie
, 88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241
(1998) (quoting State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai' i 128, 145, 938
P.2d 559, 576 (1997)). "'Substantial evidence as to everymaterial element of the offense charged is credible evidencewhich is of sufficient quality and probative value to enablea person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.'"
Id. (citation omitted).
 
State v. Kalaola, 124 Hawai 'i 43, 49, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010). 
At trial, Officer Albert Lee (Officer Lee) testified
 
that on May 25, 2012, at a little after 2 a.m., he was on patrol
 
in a commercial and light industrial area, mainly comprised of
 Ala Moana Center, bars, businesses and an apartment building. 
While stopped at a traffic light on Kapiolani Boulevard, he heard
 two loud thumping noises and people shouting. Officer Lee looked
 toward the intersection of Mahukona Street and Kona Street, the
 location from which the thumping sounds had come, and he saw a
 
2(...continued)
. . . .
 
(3) Disorderly conduct is a petty misdemeanor if it is
the defendant's intention to cause substantial harm or
 
serious inconvenience, or if the defendant persists in
disorderly conduct after reasonable warning or request to
desist. Otherwise disorderly conduct is a violation.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
vehicle alarm going off. Three men (the men), including Wong,
 
were standing about two feet away from the vehicle, shouting and
 yelling, and looking at the vehicle. 
Officer Lee turned onto Mahukona Street and drove
 
through the intersection of Mahukona and Kona Streets, where he
 saw a hotel security guard approach the men. The men walked
 slowly away from the security guard while swearing and yelling at
 the security guard and "carrying on." Officer Lee testified that
 the guard had his hands up and was telling the men to stop. 
Officer Lee later acknowledged that the security guard's back was
 to him, but it "looked like he was telling them enough already,
 just go home or keep it down, things like that. . . . [I]t looked
 like he was just trying to calm them down a little bit." 
The men slowly walked away from the security guard,
 
saying, "what you going do," "cannot do nothing," and "fuck you." 
The men were looking back toward the security guard, making
 gestures, laughing, and hitting each other. They continued
 swearing at the security guard for about one to two minutes. 
The men walked diagonally across Kona Street, toward
 
Ala Moana Center. They did not look for cars before stepping
 onto the roadway and walking in an area that was not marked with
 a cross-walk. They were already on the roadway as they were
 walking away from the security guard, "swearing and stuff."
 According to Officer Lee, Wong and the others were more than
 horsing around. Rather, "[t]hey were more like yelling, fuck
 you, you want to fight, you know, challenging, then they start
 pushing each other." Officer Lee further testified that, as Wong
 and the other men were slowly crossing Kona Street in this
 manner, a car "had to stop because they [were] in the roadway and
 the car just waited till they crossed the whole thing." 
The men walked up the ramp to the second floor of a
 
parking structure at Ala Moana Center, then down to the ground
 floor. Officer Lee either motioned or yelled for them to come
 over. Wong walked towards him, with his head down. Officer Lee
 
3
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
told Wong to sit down, that Officer Lee was going to investigate
 
him for disorderly conduct. Wong quietly complied.
 
Officer Michael Hisatake testified that when he saw
 
Wong, Wong was in the patrol car, in custody, and calm. 
Wong argues that the State failed to establish 
sufficient evidence to support his conviction for disorderly conduct as a violation. We disagree. The State adduced substantial evidence that when Wong stepped onto Kona Street without a cross-walk, without looking first, and then slowly crossed the street in a diagonal line, all while swearing at the security guard, fighting with and/or threatening his companions, and/or behaving tumultuously, he intentionally caused, or at a minimum recklessly created a risk of, physical inconvenience or alarm by a member or members of the public, in particular the car that had to stop while Wong and the other men were slowly walking in a diagonal manner across the roadway. See HRS § 711-1101; 
State v. Anthony, No. 29300, 2009 WL 2714026, 121 Hawai
'i 178, 
214 P.3d 1168, at *2 (App. Aug. 31, 2009) (SDO). 
Wong also argues that the State failed to adduce
 
sufficient evidence to support his conviction for disorderly
 conduct as a petty misdemeanor. With regard to this argument, we
 agree. The charge against Wong relating to the offense being a
 petty misdemeanor asserted that he "persisted in disorderly
 conduct after reasonable warning or request to desist."
3
 
Although there is evidence to support an inference that the
 security guard indicated for Wong to "stop," there is
 insufficient evidence to establish what conduct the security
 guard sought to stop. Moreover, Wong complied when Officer Lee
 instructed him to come and sit down so he could investigate the
 matter, and Wong was compliant while in custody. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of
 
Entry of Judgment and/or Order, filed on October 1, 2012, in the
 
3
 The State did not assert that Wong intended to cause substantial harm
or serious inconvenience. See HRS § 711-1101(3).
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division, which
 
convicted and sentenced Wong for disorderly conduct as a petty
 misdemeanor is vacated. The case is remanded to the district
 court with instructions to enter a judgment that Wong committed
 disorderly conduct as a violation.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 18, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Andrew T. Park 
(Urbanc Willard Park & Kim, LLLC)for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Brandon H. Ito 
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
5
 