 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0003838
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
NICOLAS JERMIAH BROWN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
LAHAINA DIVISION

 
(CASE NO. 2DTA-12-00424)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Nicolas Jermiah Brown (Brown)
 
appeals from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
 
Plea/Judgment for Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an
 Intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 § 291E-61(a)(1) (2007), entered by the District Court of the
 Second Circuit, Lahaina Division (District Court) on
 September 16, 2013.
1
 
Brown argues the District Court erred when it admitted
 
(1)(a) the Certificates of Analysis for the simulator solutions
 used to calibrate the Intoxilyzer, and (b) the gas chromatography
 analyses contained within the Certificates of Analysis, because
 there was insufficient foundation to establish a business record
 exception to the hearsay rule for either; (2) the May 3, 2010
 breath test result because there was insufficient foundation for
 the accuracy of the simulator solution thermometer used to
 calibrate the Intoxilyzer; and (3) the May 3, 2010 breath test
 result because it lacked sufficient foundation.
 
1
 The Honorable Kelsey Kawano presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After a careful review of the points raised and the
 
arguments raised by the parties, the record, and the applicable
 
authority, we resolve Brown's appeal as follows:
 
Brown argues, and the State concedes, that the District 
Court erred when it admitted (a) the Certificates of Analysis for the simulator solutions used to calibrate the Intoxilyzer used in the instant case, and (b) the gas chromatography analyses, because there was insufficient foundation to establish a business record exception to hearsay for either. Our review of the record supports the conclusion that the State's concession is well-founded. State v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawai
'i 354, 227 P.3d 520 
(2010); State v. Long, 98 Hawai 'i 348, 355, 48 P.3d 595, 602 
(2002). As these documents were necessary to lay the foundation for the Intoxylizer test results and we conclude that these documents were improperly admitted, we conclude that the admission of the Intoxylizer test results was also improper.
2 
However, it is necessary to consider the appropriate
 
disposition of this case. Brown was charged with OVUII under
 both HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) and (3) but convicted under HRS § 291E­61(a)(1) only, without a specific finding regarding HRS §291E­61(a)(3).
3 Brown's challenge to his conviction, as discussed
 
above, is limited to the foundation for the admission of the
 breath-alcohol test result, and not to any of the other evidence
 of his impairment due to alcohol nor to the findings of the
 
2 Our conclusion makes it unnecessary to consider Brown's remaining
point of error, that the foundation for the accuracy of the simulator solution
thermometer used to calibrate the Intoxilyzer was insufficient.
 
3	 HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) provides,
 
§291E-61 Operating a vehicle under the influence of
an intoxicant. (a) A person commits the offense of
operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if
the person operates or assumes actual physical control of a
vehicle:
 
(1)	 While under the influence of alcohol in an
 amount sufficient to impair the person's normal
mental faculties or ability to care for the
person and guard against casualty;
 
. . . .
 
(3)	 With .08 or more grams of alcohol per two
hundred ten liters of breath[.]
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
District Court in support of the District Court's verdict of
 
guilt based on HRS § 291E-61(a)(1), for driving while impaired by
 alcohol. The District Court's decision appears to find Brown
 guilty of impairment based on the testimony regarding his traffic
 stop and behavior during his performance of the field sobriety
 tests conducted by the officer.
4 However, because the District
 
4 The District Court made the following ruling:
 
So upon review of the evidence educed [sic] by the State and
upon consideration of the record as a whole, the Court finds
that the State has proven by proof beyond a reasonable doubt
that defendant did commit the offense of driving under the
influence of intoxicant by proof beyond a reasonable doubt
and adjudges the defendant guilty of the charge of driving
under the influence of an intoxicant alcohol, pursuant to
HRS 291E-61(a)(1).
 
The Court finds that the investigative stop was
initiated by the arresting officer, albeit based upon
equipment offenses of a broken or nonoperating head light
and rear brake light. Upon contact with the defendant, the
officer indicated indicia that the defendant had been
 drinking, consisting of red eyes, red facial futures [sic],
and an odor of liquor on defendant.
 
Administration of field sobriety maneuvers indicated
that the defendant was unable to complete the field sobriety
maneuvers as explained and demonstrated. This defendant
 demonstrated impaired balance and coordination and
difficulty with divided attention tests, which the officer
testified was all indicative of defendant being under the
influence. And based upon the evidence as a whole, the
Court agrees that the evidence educed [sic] did suffice to
meet the requirements of our statute for conviction of
driving under the influence of alcohol.
 
With regard to the subsequent breath tests
administered, proper foundation was educed [sic] to show
that compliance with the Department of Health regulations
Title 11, Chapter 114 were complied with, and the result was
over the legal limit. The Court did receive and did
 consider the breath test result in finding the defendant
guilty in administration of the Intoxilyzer. There was
 argument received with regard to whether or not the
Intoxilyzer breath alcohol result should be suppressed. The
 Court has denied that motion, and the Court will confirm its
ruling then.
 
The testimony educed [sic] of Jamie Becraft with
regard to the necessary accuracy testing in compliance with
Department of Health regulations was admissible. The Court
 found that Officer Jamie Becraft was qualified both as
custodian of records and as a qualified witness as set out
in our Fitzwater opinion to be able to testify as to the
procedures followed, notwithstanding the evidence that
indicated the possible concern with regard to the sample
accuracy test vials from Guth Laboratories.
 
(continued...)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Court also stated that its verdict was "based on the evidence as
 
a whole" and "based on all of the above," including its
 consideration of "the breath test result in finding defendant
 guilty," it is unclear whether the District Court would have
 found Brown guilty without consideration of the breath test
 results. 
Therefore, we vacate the September 16, 2013 Judgment
 
entered by the District Court of the Second Circuit, Lahaina
 Division and remand for determination of Brown's guilt without
 consideration of the breath test results.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 24, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
David Sereno,

for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Richard K. Minatoya,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
4(...continued)
Based on all of the above, the Court hereby enters its
judgment of conviction of the defendant. And I understand
 
that the Court will be proceeding with sentencing today.
 
4
 