NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000035
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
RONALD I. BENNETT,
Claimant-Appellee/Appellant,
v.
 
COUNTY OF MAUI, MAUI POLICE DEPARTMENT,
Employer-Appellant/Appellee, Self-Insured,
and
 
JOHN MULLEN AND COMPANY, INC.,
Insurance Adjuster-Appellant/Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. 2008-451(M)(7-08-00313))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Claimant-Appellee/Appellant Ronald I. Bennett (Bennett)
 
appeals from the December 16, 2011 "Decision and Order" of the
 
Labor and Industrial Relations Appeal Board (LIRAB) resolving
 
certain compensation issues in his workers' compensation claim in
 
favor of Employer-Appellant/Appellee County of Maui, Maui Police
 
Department (Employer) and Insurance Adjuster-Appellant/Appellee
 
John Mullen & Co.  The LIRAB concluded Bennett's neck condition
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
did not arise out of and in the course of employment and was
 
therefore not compensable.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude
 
Bennett's appeal is without merit.
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 386–85 (Supp. 2008) 
establishes a presumption that an employee's claim for workers' 
compensation is for a covered work injury. The employer has the 
initial burden of producing substantial evidence rebutting the 
presumption that the injury is work-related. Moi v. State, Dept. 
of Pub. Safety, 118 Hawai' i 239, 242, 188 P.3d 753, 756 (App. 
2008). If the initial burden of production is satisfied, the 
LIRAB must weigh the employer's evidence against the claimant's 
evidence, resolving reasonable doubts on the work-relatedness 
issue in the claimant's favor. Id. 
Bennett contends the LIRAB erroneously concluded the 
Employer met its burden of producing substantial evidence. The 
Employer relied primarily on Leonard Cupo, M.D. (Dr. Cupo), who 
conducted an independent medical evaluation (IME) of Bennett and 
provided testimony concluding Bennett's neck condition was not 
work-related. Bennett argues Dr. Cupo's testimony was not 
sufficiently specific because Dr. Cupo failed to explain the 
cause of Bennett's disc herniation and cervical radiculopathy. 
See Korsak v. Hawai' i Permanente Med. Group, 94 Hawai' i 297, 308, 
12 P.3d 1238, 1249 (2000) (stating "generalized medical opinions do not constitute substantial evidence"). 
We disagree. Dr. Cupo specifically opined that
 
Bennett's condition was attributable to the natural progression
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of a degenerative disc and joint disease and was not attributable
 
to Bennett's fall and injury on January 28, 2008. Dr. Cupo cited
 
medical records indicating Bennett had consulted Daniel Garcia,
 
M.D. (Dr. Garcia), Bennett's treating physician at the Maui
 
Medical Group, three and a half months before his fall,
 
complaining of neck pain radiating into the right and left
 
shoulders. Bennett admitted he did not comply with Dr. Garcia's
 
physical therapy referral and follow-up request. Dr. Cupo
 
testified that degenerative disc and joint disease is the most
 
common cause of neck pain, and he concluded Bennett's cervical
 
symptoms were a recurrence of the same symptoms for which he
 
consulted Dr. Garcia in October 2007.
 
Dr. Cupo also specifically considered and acknowledged
 
the possibility that a trauma such as Bennett's fall could cause
 
or aggravate a neck condition. However, he stated that disc
 
herniation presents symptoms almost immediately after the trauma
 
occurs, within a day or two at most. D. Thomas Rogers, M.D. (Dr.
 
Rogers), a neurologist consulted by Bennett, and Dr. Garcia also
 
agreed that if Bennett's fall had caused his herniated disc, he
 
should have experienced neck pain immediately after the fall.
 
The record is inconsistent as to when Bennett first
 
began experiencing any neck pain or stiffness. Dr. Cupo observed
 
that the medical records indicated Bennett did not feel neck pain
 
until some time after his fall. The emergency room records from
 
the day of the fall and notes by Robert Harvey, M.D. (Dr.
 
Harvey), an orthopedic surgeon, from Bennett's first five visits
 
(from January to March) made no mention of neck pain or injury. 
The emergency room records also stated Bennett had a full range
 
of motion in his neck, which in Dr. Cupo's opinion established
 
that Bennett had not suffered an acute neck injury from the fall.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bennett was also inconsistent about when he began
 
experiencing neck symptoms. He made no mention of any neck pain
 
in his statement to the insurance adjuster, which was recorded
 
three days after the fall. At his March 2008 visits to the Maui
 
Medical Group, he stated he began experiencing neck pain one or
 
two weeks after his fall. However, in his second statement to
 
the insurance adjuster (recorded April 17, 2008) and at the
 
hearing, he stated his neck began hurting the day after his fall.
 
Other than Bennett's testimony, the only other evidence
 
indicating Bennett experienced neck pain immediately after his
 
fall was from Dr. Harvey. Dr. Harvey provided a medical note
 
stating Bennett had reported a stiff neck and problems on his
 
right side "a few days after his injury." The LIRAB chose not to
 
credit Dr. Harvey's testimony, however, finding it implausible
 
that Dr. Harvey simply forgot to document any neck symptoms until
 
Bennett's fifth visit on March 13, 2008. The LIRAB instead found
 
Bennett did not inform Dr. Harvey of any neck injury until the
 
March 13, 2008 visit. Given the inconsistencies in the record as
 
to the onset of Bennett's symptoms and Dr. Cupo's testimony, the
 
LIRAB did not err in concluding the Employer had produced
 
substantial evidence that Bennett's neck condition was not
 
caused by his fall or his employment and was attributable to a
 
pre-existing degenerative disc disease. 
Bennett also contends Dr. Cupo's testimony is not 
sufficient to outweigh the opinions of his treating physicians, 
who linked Bennett's neck condition to his fall. However, it is 
well established that the LIRAB's determinations of credibility 
and weight are entitled to deference. Igawa v. Koa House 
Restaurant, 97 Hawai' i 402, 410, 38 P.3d 570, 578 (2001). We 
conclude the Employer produced sufficient substantial evidence 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
specifically addressing and rebutting Bennett's supporting
 
testimony. 
Although Dr. Rogers concluded Bennett's injury was
 
work-related, his conclusion was based on Bennett's
 
characterization of his injury. Dr. Rogers stated he expected
 
that a neck injury such as Bennett's would present symptoms "as
 
soon as it occurred," and Bennett had informed Dr. Rogers that he
 
began experiencing neck stiffness on the day of his fall and
 
developed numbness in his right thumb within a few days. The
 
LIRAB, however, apparently gave greater weight to the Employer's
 
evidence indicating Bennett did not experience neck pain until
 
some time after his fall. 
Dr. Rogers also theorized that Bennett's foot injury
 
could have overshadowed his neck pain, such that Bennett might
 
not have noticed injury in other parts of his body. However, Dr.
 
Rogers admitted he did not know the exact nature of the foot
 
injury and only knew that Bennett required a cast. Dr. Cupo
 
examined the records of Bennett's foot injury and disagreed with
 
Dr. Rogers, observing that the foot sprain was a minor and
 
separate injury.
 
The record contains substantial evidence rebutting
 
Bennett's supporting evidence from his other treating physicians
 
as well. Although Dr. Garcia treated Bennett's neck as a
 
workers' compensation injury, he did so for procedural reasons.
 
At his deposition, he specifically stated he could not give a
 
medical opinion as to whether the neck injury was work-related. 
Bennett also relies on Dr. Harvey's testimony that disc
 
herniation symptoms could appear over time. However, Drs.
 
Rogers, Garcia, and Cupo stated Bennett should have felt neck
 
pain immediately after his fall.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We do not pass upon the doctors' relative credibility, 
and we give due deference to the LIRAB's expertise and to its 
assessment of the weight given to the evidence and its evaluation 
of the credibility of witnesses. Igawa, 97 Hawai' i at 410, 38 
P.3d at 578. We conclude the Employer presented substantial evidence sufficient to support the LIRAB's decision and to 
"expressly, direct, and specifically" rebut the presumption of 
work-relatedness. See Korsak, 94 Hawai' i 297, 12 P.3d 1238. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the December 16, 2011
 
"Decision and Order" of the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeal
 Board is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, March 15, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Kevin H.S. Yuen 
Brianne L.O. Wong Leong(Law Office of Kevin H.S. Yuen)for Claimant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Richard B. Rost Deputy Corporation Counsel,County of Mauifor Employer-Appellee, Self-Insured. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
6
 