   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0004539 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
SETH-JOSIAH CRAVALHO, JR., Petitioner-Appellee, v.
JODY RIBAO, Respondent-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(FC-P NO. 06-1-0149)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Respondent-Appellant Jody Ribao (Ribao) appeals from an
 
August 23, 2013 Family Court of the Second Circuit (Family Court)
 
post-decree Judgment and Order on Petitioner's Motion for Sole
 
Legal and Sole Physical Custody and Other Relief (Post-Decree
 
1
Judgment).  The Family Court granted in part a motion filed by
 
Petitioner-Appellee Seth-Josiah Cravalho, Jr. (Cravalho), which
 
sought custody of the parties' child (Child). Ribao also
 
challenges the Family Court's September 26, 2013 order denying
 
Ribao's motion for reconsideration of the Post-Decree Judgment. 
Ribao raises the following points of error on appeal:
 (1) The Family Court erred when it entered the
 
Findings of Fact (FOFs) 84 and 86-90 regarding Dr. Baum's
 
testimony;
 
1
 The Honorable Keith E. Tanaka presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) The Family Court erred as a matter of law by 
omitting Hawai 'i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571-46(b)(6) from 
Conclusions of Law (COL) 7 and by failing to apply this provision 
to the facts; 
(3) The Family Court erred as a matter of law when it
 
found a material change in circumstances allowing it to consider
 
the grant of sole physical custody to Cravalho; specifically, the
 Family Court erred when it entered COLs 3, 4, and 5; and
 
(4) The Family Court abused its discretion in denying
 
Ribao's August 30, 2013 motion to reconsider the Post-Decree
 Judgment. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Ribao's points of error as follows:
 
(1)
 During the evidentiary hearing on Cravalho's post-
decree motion, Dr. Baum testified as to his opinion regarding
 Cravalho's consistency in administering Child's preventative
 asthma medicine:
 
I think the biggest problem with asthma is, because it
is a chronic relapsing condition, some people
administer the medicine as we recommend on a daily
basis as a preventive care or treatment. And other
 people's attitude more that, when it flares up, they
pay attention to it, and when they seem to be well,
they don't always give the medication; and I have some
areas of concern that Seth doesn't always give the
preventive medicine, that he'll treat her when he sees
symptoms, but not always when she seems to be well. 
He also stated: "I feel that [Ribao] follows my
 
directions about medication administration as I would like it to
 
be done; and [Cravalho] seems to have a little bit more casual
 feel for the asthma." He later elaborated on his concerns:
 
Q:	 And did [Cravalho] tell you that he was not
going to give her Flovent?
A:	 He did not tell me, no.
Q:	 And do you know -- do you have any independent
knowledge of whether or not [Cravalho]
administers Flovent to [Child]?
A:	 I don't know for certain.
 
Q:	 You don't have anything in your chart that
[Cravalho] is not administering Flovent to
[Child]; correct?
A:	 The only things that I can tell you from my
charting is there are times that she has come in
 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and she hasn't been taking the prescribed
medication or hasn't completed medication as wehad like antibiotics for her. . . . . 
Q:
 
A: And you've never had any cause to have anyconcern that . . . [Cravalho] would ignore anemergency or medical issue with regard to[Child]; correct?
No, I haven't. 
Correct. 
FOF 84 states: "Dr. Baum's impression was that Mother
 
should have custody based upon the minor child's asthma 'flare
 
ups.'" This finding was supported by substantial evidence. Dr.
 Baum testified that, based on the fact that Ribao was more
 consistent in administering Child's asthma medicine, he would
 recommend that she would be the better custodial parent for the
 purposes of asthma treatment. 
FOF 86 states: "Dr. Baum admitted that he has no
 
concerns that Father would not appropriately deal with any
 medical issues regarding the minor child." While Dr. Baum stated
 that Cravalho seemed to be less consistent about administering
 Child's asthma medicine, he also testified that he never had any
 cause to have any concern that Cravalho would ignore an emergency
 or medical issue with regard to Child. Thus, this finding was
 supported by substantial evidence.
 
FOF 87 states: "Dr. Baum also admitted he had no
 
information regarding the parties and the minor child other than
 what was reflected in his medical charts." We cannot conclude
 that this finding is clearly erroneous, as it fairly reflects Dr.
 Baum's testimony.
 
FOF 88 reads: "Neither party raised the issue of the
 
minor child's medical care with [the Guardian Ad Litem (GAL)]." 
Ribao argues that this finding is incorrect because she raised
 
the issue of medical care when she included Dr. Baum in her list
 of contacts for the GAL. However, there is no indication in the
 GAL's report or testimony that Ribao raised the issue with the
 GAL beyond providing Dr. Baum's contact information. 
FOF 89 reads: "This court has no credible evidence
 
that Father has not taken all appropriate steps to insure the
 minor child's medical needs were addressed in the past." 
3  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Although Dr. Baum testified that Cravalho seemed to be less
 
consistent about administering Child's preventative asthma
 medicine, he did not elaborate as to Child's particular needs or
 point to any incident where he felt that Child's medical needs
 were unmet, such as Child experiencing a preventable asthma
 attack, a worsened condition, or a serious attack, his level of
 concern could reasonably be characterized as low. Dr. Baum
 concluded that he never had any cause to have any concern that
 Cravalho would ignore an emergency or medical issue with regard
 to Child. Thus, this finding is not clearly erroneous.
 
FOF 90 reads: "This court has no credible evidence
 
that Father will not continue to take all appropriate steps to
 insure the minor child's medical needs are promptly addressed in
 the future." As noted above, Dr. Baum ultimately concluded that
 he never had any cause to have any concern that Cravalho would
 ignore a medical issue with regard to Child. The Family Court
 
could reasonably infer from this testimony and the totality of
 
Dr. Baum's testimony that Dr. Baum felt that Cravalho would be
 conscientious in addressing Child's medical needs. Thus, this
 finding is supported by substantial evidence and is not clearly
 erroneous.
 
We conclude that the Family Court's FOFs are grounded
 
in substantial evidence, and therefore are not clearly erroneous.
 
(2) HRS § 571-46(b) (Supp. 2014), enumerates factors
 
that must be considered in determining what constitutes the best
 interests of the child, including "[t]he physical health needs of
 the child[.]" HRS § 571-46(b)(6) (Supp. 2014). Here, the Family
 Court clearly considered this factor, as provided in its FOFs. 
The Family Court's FOFs reflect its determination that Child's
 health needs were being met and provided no basis for granting or
 denying the request to change custody. The Family Court did not
 err as a matter of law by failing to specifically identify HRS
 § 571-46(b)(6) in COL 7.
 
(3) As this court recently held:
 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion
in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus,
 
4   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
we will not disturb the family court's decisions on appeal
unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of
reason.
 
. . . .
 While the statutory language [in HRS § 571-46] grants
family courts the jurisdiction to modify a joint custody
order, our case law requires that the party seeking
modification must first make a threshold showing of material
change in circumstances. . . . Whether a substantial and
 material change has been presented is reviewed under the
right/wrong standard. 
Hollaway v. Hollaway, 133 Hawai 'i 415, 421, 329 P.3d 320, 326 
(App. 2014) (citations omitted; format altered). 
Here, the Family Court found that Ribao's "repeated
 
violations of the May 30, 2012 Stipulated [Custody] Order
 
constitutes a material change in circumstances since the entry of
 said order[.]" These repeated violations included denying
 
Cravalho visitation on approximately 61 out of 132 days, making
 
last-minute flight arrangements for Child to visit Cravalho, and
 denying Cravalho telephone access to Child. Ribao argues that
 violations of a prior court order alone do not constitute a
 material change in circumstances.
 Cravalho testified that he had only agreed to allow Child to
 relocate to Oahu with Ribao on the condition that Child spend the
 weekends with him on Maui.
 
The Family Court also found that Child's "repeated
 
absences and tardies at school while in Mother's care constitutes
 a material change in circumstances[.]" Child was absent from
 
2
school twenty-one times  and tardy to school thirty-five times
during the school year while under Ribao's care. 
There was
 
evidence that Child's attendance had since improved. However,
 the GAL testified that she believed some of Child's absences and
 tardies were a result of Ribao's work schedule and practice of
 allowing Child to stay up very late at night, implying that Child
 would likely continue to be absent or tardy while living with
 Ribao. Additionally, Cravalho testified that he and Ribao
 
2
 These absences included four consecutive days when Ribao took
Child with her to Las Vegas to help clean out Ribao's boyfriend's
grandmother's house.
 
5  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attempted without success to address the problem by changing
 
Cravalho's visitation to every other weekend in January 2013. 
The Family Court found that "the increase in acrimony
 
by Mother against Father, evidenced by the tone and amount of
 
angry text messages from Mother to Father, including her telling
 
the child that Mother does not like Father and his wife,
 constitutes a material change in circumstances[.]" 
It also appears from the record that shortly after
 
Child relocated to Oahu, Ribao's cooperation with Cravalho
 
declined. The GAL testified about the relationship between the
 
parties:
 
There's still an inability for the parties to
communicate. I did not find it so much with the dad. 
I could see in the text messages that I submitted with
my report, and they're only some of the copies,
there's -- to me, it was clear to see that dad was
just trying to stick with the Court order and trying
to reason with [Ribao]. Mom still has a lot of anger
around not being in a relationship with dad and it
shows. It very clearly shows in the text messages.
  
 
The GAL also testified that Ribao's expression of
 
dislike for Cravalho and his wife likely had a negative effect on
 
Child, because "kids have a really hard time when they're pitted
 against each other and when one parent expresses a dislike or a
 hatred of the other parent or anybody involved with that parent." 
There was ample evidence in the record that Ribao was
 
hostile and uncooperative with Cravalho, and that her
 unwillingness to work with him to follow the May 30, 2012
 Stipulated Custody Order resulted in Cravalho seeing Child less
 often than agreed upon and ordered therein. 
We conclude that, taken as a whole, these
 
circumstances, which are reflected in the Family Court's FOFs and
 COLs and supported by the record, constituted a material change
 in the circumstances that existed at the time of the entry of the
 May 30, 2012 Stipulated Custody Order and therefore warranted the
 Family Court's modification of Child's custody and visitation.
 
(4) We review the Family Court's ruling on a motion 
for reconsideration under the abuse of discretion standard. Schiller v. Schiller, 120 Hawai
'i 283, 288, 205 P.3d 548, 553 
6  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(App. 2009). "An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court
 
has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or
 principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a
 party litigant." Id. Ribao's bare assertion that the Family
 
Court abused its discretion when it denied her motion for
 reconsideration of the August 23, 2013 Post-Decree Judgment has
 no merit.
 
For these reasons, the Family Court's August 23, 2013
 
Post-Decree Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 17, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Stephen T. Hioki
for Respondent-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Elizabeth C. Melehan for Petitioner-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
7 