NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000399
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
HEATHER ROBIN RILEY, Plaintiff/Appellant,
v.
 
CLARENCE OSAKO, Defendant/Appellee,
v.
 
KRUEGER • WONG,
Real Party-in-Interest/Appellee,
 
JOHN DOES 1-5, JOHN DOE CORPORATIONS 1-5,
JOHN DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-5, ROE NON PROFIT CORPORATIONS 1-5,
and ROE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-5, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-1064(1))

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff/Appellant Heather Robin Riley (Riley) appeals
 
pro se from the "Order Granting Krueger • Wong's Motion to
 
Collect Attorney's Lien" entered on April 21, 2015 in the Circuit
 
1Court of the Second Circuit  (circuit court).
 2
Riley was a client in an attorney-client relationship
with Real Party-in-Interest/Appellee Krueger • Wong (Appellee)
 
and signed a contingent fee agreement with Appellee that
 
established Appellee's payment of fees for their services. After
 Appellee withdrew as Riley's counsel, Appellee filed a motion to
 

 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided. 
2
 Although Riley's notice of appeal and amended notice of appeal
include errors, it is apparent that Riley intended to appeal from the circuit
court's April 21, 2015 "Order Granting Krueger • Wong's Motion to Collect
Attorney's Lien."
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
collect an attorney's lien in the amount of $32,702.47 (Motion to
 
Collect), which represented Appellee's attorney's fees, general
 
excise tax, and costs that were calculated pursuant to a
 
contingent fee agreement between Riley and Appellee.
 
On appeal, Riley contends the circuit court erred in
 
granting Appellee's Motion to Collect because the amount
 Appellee's requested was unreasonable given Appellee's poor
 communication with Riley and overall mishandling of her case.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude Riley's
 appeal is without merit.
 
Under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 507-81 (2006
 
Repl. and Supp. 2011), Appellee had a right to an attorney's lien
 for the legal services they provided Riley. HRS § 507-81
 provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 507-81 Attorney's lien upon actions and judgments.
(a) An attorney has a lien upon:
 
(1) Actions, suits, and proceedings after
commencement of the action or arbitration proceeding; 
(2) Judgments, decrees, orders, settlements, andawards entered by the court or an arbitrator infavor of the client; and 
(3) Any proceeds paid in satisfaction of thejudgment, decree, order, settlement, or award. 
(b) The lien shall be for: 
(1) The fees and compensation specifically agreedupon with the client; 
(2) The reasonable value of the services of the attorney, if there is no fee agreement; 
(3) Any costs advanced by the attorney; and 
(4) Any fees or commissions taxed or allowed by thecourt. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Before granting a contractually-based award of
 
attorney's fees, the circuit court is required to consider the
 
reasonableness of the fees. See Booker v. Midpac Lumber Co., 65
 
Haw. 166, 172, 649 P.2d 376, 381 (1982) (holding, where an
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attorney was discharged without cause prior to the conclusion of
 
a personal injury case, that "a contingent fee agreement, without
 more, is not good reason for boosting an attorney's compensation
 or denying him a fee that adequately compensates him for actual
 services performed"). In general, an appellate court must
 "examine the circumstances under which the circuit court approved
 the [attorney's] fee to determine whether its exercise of
 discretion was consistent with the tenets enunciated in 
Sharp [v.
 
Hui Wahine, Inc., 49 Haw. 241, 413 P.2d 242 (1966)]." Booker, 65
 
Haw. at 170-71, 649 P.2d at 379. In Sharp, the Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court put forth the following guidelines for determining the
 reasonableness of attorney's fees when the fees are provided for
 by contract:
 
Comprehensive discussions of the numerous factors to be
considered in determining a reasonable attorney's fee are to
be found in Annotations in 143 A.L.R. 672 and 56 A.L.R.2d
 13. Canon 12 of the Canons of Professional Ethics adopted by
the American Bar Association has set up the following
guidelines to be considered in determining the real value of
the services performed by an attorney so as to be able to
fix the reasonable compensation for such services:
 
"In determining the amount of the fee, it is proper to
consider: (1) the time and labor required, the novelty
and difficulty of the questions involved and the skill
requisite properly to conduct the cause; (2) whether
the acceptance of employment in the particular case
will preclude the lawyer's appearance for others in
cases likely to arise out of the transaction, and in
which there is a reasonable expectation that otherwise
he would be employed, or will involve the loss of
other employment while employed in the particular case
or antagonisms with other clients; (3) the customary
charges of the Bar for similar services; (4) the
amount involved in the controversy and the benefits
resulting to the client from the services; (5) the
contingency or the certainty of the compensation; and
(6) the character of the employment, whether casual or
for an established and constant client. No one of
 these considerations in itself is controlling. They
are mere guides in ascertaining the real value of the
service."
 
It closes with the admonition that:

 
"In fixing fees it should never be forgotten that the
profession is a branch of the administration of justice and
not a mere money-getting trade."
 
The Canons have been adopted as governing the conduct of the
members of the Hawaii Bar by Rule 16(a) of this court.
 
Booker, 65 Haw. at 170 n.2, 649 P.2d at 379 n.2 (quoting Sharp,
 
49 Haw. at 244-45, 413 P.2d at 245-46). The considerations 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
delineated in Sharp are to be considered "mere guides in
 
ascertaining the real value of the service [rendered]." Booker,
 
65 Haw. at 172, 649 P.2d at 381. 
In sum, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court has held: 
Where the efforts of an attorney who was employed
under a contingent fee contract would have a tendency to
advance the client's claim or to enhance the possibility of
a favorable result, we would also conclude the contract and
the reasonably estimated value of the case should be
considered in fixing a reasonable attorney's fee.
 
Booker, 65 Haw. at 172, 649 P.2d at 381. "'[T]he real value of
 
the service' encompasses 'the benefits resulting to the client.'"
 Id. (quoting Sharp, 49 Haw. at 244-45, 413 P.2d at 245). 
Here, the circuit court did not state the basis for its
 
decision to grant Appellee's Motion to Collect, however, Appellee
 provided the circuit court with adequate evidence to support the
 court's decision. Appellee provided a copy of the contingent fee
 agreement, which predetermined how Riley was to compensate
 Appellee for their legal services and stated that Appellee may
 obtain a lien against any recovery in Riley's favor if Appellee
 withdrew as Riley's counsel for cause. Appellee also provided
 the circuit court with a record of expenses they accrued while
 working on Riley's case. Furthermore, a review of the record
 indicates that before Appellee withdrew as Riley's counsel,
 Appellee filed a complaint, pretrial statement, and witness list
 on Riley's behalf; filed a "Stipulated Qualified Health
 Information Protective Document and/or Order" to facilitate the
 release of Riley's medical information; facilitated settlement
 discussions with Defendant Clarence Osako (Osako); and obtained
 
two settlement offers from Osako for $60,000 and $75,000. In
 
addition, although Riley later settled with Osako for $85,000,
 Appellee only sought a lien on the last $75,000 settlement offer
 that Appellee obtained on Riley's behalf.
3 Based on the record,
 
it is apparent that Appellee's services benefitted Riley and
 aided in her ultimate settlement agreement with Osako. 
Appellee's requested fees were reasonable. 
3
 Appellee obtained a settlement offer from Osako on February 6,
2015 for $75,000. On March 18, 2015, after Appellee withdrew as Riley's
counsel, Riley received a $85,000 settlement offer from Osako.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Riley fails to establish that her dissatisfaction with
 
how Appellee handled her case materially affected the case's
 
outcome or the determination of whether Appellee's attorney's
 fees were reasonable. See Sharp, 49 Haw. at 244-45, 413 P.2d at
 
245-46. Given the circumstances of Riley's case, the circuit
 court did not abuse its discretion in granting Appellee's Motion
 to Collect. See Booker, 65 Haw. at 172, 649 P.2d at 380
 
(providing that the circuit court's determination as to the
 reasonableness of an allowance or award of attorney's fees is
 reviewed for abuse of discretion). 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order Granting Krueger •
 
Wong's Motion to Collect Attorney's Lien" entered on April 21,
 2015 in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 30, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Heather Robin Riley
Plaintiff/Appellant pro se. Presiding Judge 
James KruegerCynthia K. Wong(Krueger • Wong)for Real Party-in-Interest/Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
5
 