NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000094
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
PAUL J. SULLA, JR., an individual; PAUL J. SULLA, III,
an individual, Plaintiffs-Appellees, v.
LEONARD G. HOROWITZ, an individual, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-0173)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant pro se Leonard G. Horowitz
 
(Horowitz) appeals from the Amended Final Judgment entered on
 
January 22, 2015 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit1
 
(circuit court).
 
On appeal, Horowitz contends the circuit court:
 
(1) lacked jurisdiction;
 (2) "abused [its] discretion by neglecting [Horowitz's
 
evidence];
 
(3) "erroneously ruled that [Horowitz's] non-consensual
 
lien was 'frivolous'";
 
(4) "erroneously adjudged that [Horowitz's] non-
consensual lien was not 'provided for by statute'"; 
(5) "erroneously adjudged that [Horowitz's] non-
consensual lien had 'no basis in fact or law'";
 
1 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(6) "erred in awarding [Plaintiffs-Appellees Paul J.
 
Sulla Jr. (
Sulla) and Paul J. Sulla, III (together, Appellees)]
 
$7,894.60 . . . since the lien was not frivolous";
 
(7) erred in "awarding Appellees $7,894.60 . . . since
 
the lien was permitted by statute";
 
(8) erred in awarding punitive damages;
 
(9)
 "erred in . . . fail[ing] to follow [Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS)] § 607-14.5(b) [(Supp. 2015)]";
 
(10) "erred in . . . fail[ing] to follow HRS § 607­
14.5(c)";
 
(11) "erred in effectively depriving [Horowitz] his
 
[due process] rights";
 
(12) "erred by not sanctioning [Sulla] for concealing 
his surety interest . . . in violation of [Rules of the Circuit Courts of the State of Hawai
'i] Rule 26(b)"; 
(13) "erred by neglecting further inquiry into
 
[Horowitz's] protests concerning the same day transfer . . . of
 [Horowitz's] real property title" in violation of HRS § 414D­222(i) (2008 Repl.);
 
(14) erred in not finding documents and testimony
 
fraudulent; 
(15) erred in not finding Appellees had filed an
 
affidavit in bad faith;
 
(16) erred in not finding a violation of HRS § 480D­
3(2), (3), (6), (8), and (11) (2008 Repl.);
 
(17) erred in not finding a violation of Hawai
'i Rules 
of Professional Conduct Rules 3.1, 3.3(a)(1)-(4), and 8.4(b)(c); 
(18) erred in not finding that the eviction notices
 
posted on Horowitz's property had been forged;
 
(19) "erred in neglecting [Horowitz's] pleading for the
 
Court's compliance with Cannon 2, Rules 2.15(b) and 2.15(d)";
 
(20) "erred in granting summary judgment";
 (21) "erred by neglecting the social interests raised
 
by the disputing parties";
 
(22) "erred by neglecting [Sulla's] breach of public
 
duty, and implied contract as a lawyer conducting his business
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and personal affairs in 'bad faith' violation of his professional
 
ethics rules and laws";
 
(23) "erred by neglecting [Sulla's] racketeering
 
activities and enterprise";
 
(24) erred in not finding a violation of HRS § 651C­
8(b)(2) and (d)(1) (1993);
 
(25) erred in "neglect[ing] the fact that [Horowitz's
 
lien] . . . was placed in service to the community and law
 enforcement in compliance with HRS § 703-303(2)[(a)-(e) (2014
 Repl.)]";
 
(26) erred in "neglect[ing], that under the
 
extraordinary circumstances in this case featuring [Sulla's]
 administration of fraudulent transfers violating HRS § 651C
 (1993) provision; this law encourages [Sulla] to a lis pendens
 under the Hawaii doctrine of lis pendens . . . and . . . justice
 and due process and in voiding the unlawful transfers of
 [Horowitz's] real and personal properties";
 
(27) "neglected . . . relief in accordance with [the
 
Uniform Commercial Code] statutes . . . [and] under 42
 U.S.C. § 1988 as a citizen whistleblower participating in
 government, supporting law enforcement, and taking legal actions
 to secure justice on behalf of self and society." 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude
 Horowtiz's appeal is without merit.
A. Jurisdiction
 
Horowitz contends the circuit court lacked jurisdiction
 
to hear and determine Appellees' "Petition to Expunge Documents
 
Recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances of the State of Hawaii"
 because "Article III, Section 2 of the Constitution requires
 these matters to be adjudicated in the federal District Court in
 Honolulu[.]"
 
"The circuit courts are courts of general
 
jurisdiction." Sherman v. Sawyer, 63 Haw. 55, 57, 621 P.2d 346,
 
348 (1980) (citing State v. Villados, 55 Haw. 394, 397, 520 P.2d
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
427, 430 (1974)). "[T]he circuit court has jurisdiction over all
 
civil causes of action unless precluded by the State Constitution
 or by statute." Sherman, 63 Haw. at 58, 621 P.2d at 349. Under
 
HRS § 603-21.5 (Supp. 2015), circuit courts have jurisdiction for
 "[c]ivil actions and proceedings." Appellees brought their
 Petition pursuant to HRS § 507D-4(a) (2006 Repl.), which states,
 in pertinent part:
 
§507D-4 Contesting validity of recorded instruments;
injunctions. (a) Any party in interest in real or personal
property which is subject to a claim of nonconsensual common
law lien, who believes the claim of lien is invalid, may
file a petition in the appropriate circuit court to contest
the validity of that purported lien and to enjoin the lien
claimant from making further filings with the registrar.
 
Horowitz's contention that the circuit court lacked
 
jurisdiction is without merit.
B. Summary Judgment
 
Most of Horowitz's points of error relate to his
 
challenge to the circuit court's grant of summary judgment in
 
favor of Appellees, and therefore we address these points of
 error together and evaluate whether Appellees were entitled to
 summary judgment.
 
In their Motion for Summary Judgment (MSJ), Appellees
 
argued and met their initial burden to show that they were
 entitled to summary judgment because Horowitz filed a
 nonconsensual common law lien on Appellees' properties under HRS
 chapter 507D (2006 Repl.) ("Nonconsensual Common Law Liens and
 Frivolous Financing Statements"). A "nonconsensual common law
 lien" is defined as a lien that "(1) Is not provided for by a
 specific statute; (2) Does not depend upon, require by its terms,
 or call for the consent of the owner of the property affected for
 its existence; and (3) Is not a court-imposed equitable or
 constructive lien." HRS § 507D-2 (2006 Repl.).
 
HRS § 507D-1 (2006 Repl.) states:
 
§507D-1 Findings and purpose.  The legislature finds
that there is a problem with the recording at the land court
or the bureau of conveyances of invalid instruments which
purport to affect the property interests of various persons,
including but not limited to government officers and
employees. These instruments, which have no basis in fact
or law, have a seriously disruptive effect on property
interests and title. They appear on title searches and
other disclosures based on public records, and are costly
and time-consuming to expunge. When they so appear, they
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
may obstruct a property owner's ability to transfer title or
obtain title insurance and financing.
 
. . . .
 
The legislature finds that it is necessary and in the
best interests of the State and private parties to
legislatively provide a means to relieve this problem, and
to limit the circumstances in which nonconsensual common law
 liens shall be recognized in this State and to remedy the
filing of frivolous financing statements.
 
The statute allows a person "who believes the claim of
 
lien is invalid" to "file a petition in the appropriate circuit
 
court to contest the validity of that purported lien." HRS
 § 507D-4(a). Upon finding the lien to be invalid, the circuit
 court is empowered to "expunge the instrument purporting to
 create it, and order the lien claimant to pay actual damages,
 costs of suit, and reasonable attorneys' fees." HRS § 507D-7(a)
 (2006 Repl.). If the circuit court finds the lien to be
 frivolous, "the court may also issue appropriate injunctive
 relief against the lien claimant to preclude further filings of
 any kind with the registrar for five years[.]" HRS § 507D-7(b).
 
Appellees argued in their MSJ that 
the filing of the "Notice of Pendency of Action and
Commercial Lien" . . . was frivolous and filed with no legal
basis whatsoever, merely with the intent to harass
[Appellees] and punish them for filing a lawsuit for
defamation against [Horowitz] and to punish [Sulla] for
representing his client . . . in separate legal matters."
 
In response to Appellees' MSJ, Horowitz argued that the
 
lien was valid, based on debts owed to Horowitz by the Appellees. 
Horowitz contends he filed a lien against Appellees' property "to
 secure my damages of millions of dollars," which includes damages
 he sought in an unresolved lawsuit Horowitz filed in federal
 court against Appellees as well as payments made by Horowitz to
 Sulla's clients in unrelated cases. These claims by Horowitz did
 not authorize a notice of pendency of action or a lien against
 Appellees' property. Horowitz did not purport to have filed an
 action concerning or affecting title to the Appellees' real
 property and Horowitz was not entitled to file a lien against
 Appellees' property for prospective and hypothetical judgments
 against Appellees. See HRS § 634-51 (Supp. 2015); cf. HRS § 636­
3 (Supp. 2014) ("Any money judgment, order, or decree of a state
 court or the United States District Court for the District of
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawaii shall be a lien upon real property when a copy thereof,
 
certified as correct by a clerk of the court where it is entered,
 is recorded in the bureau of conveyances.").
 
Horowitz also argues that he had the right to place the 
lien under provisions of Hawai
'i's adoption of the Uniform 
Commercial Code (UCC)--specifically §§ 490:9-334 (2008 Repl.) and 
490:2-721 (2008 Repl.). The UCC, however, applies only to 
transactions in goods. HRS § 490:2-102 (2008 Repl.). Horowitz does not provide any evidence of a transaction between himself and Appellees upon which he may have permissibly filed a commercial lien. 
It is clear as a matter of law that the "Notice of 
Pendency of Action and Commercial Lien" Horowitz filed with the Land Court "(1) Is not provided for by a specific statute; (2) Does not depend upon, require by its terms, or call for the consent of the owner of the property affected for its existence; and (3) Is not a court-imposed equitable or constructive lien." HRS § 507D-2. The "Notice of Pendency of Action and Commercial Lien" was a nonconsensual common law lien within the meaning of HRS § 507D-2. The circuit court did not err in its conclusion that there were no genuine issues of material fact and that Appellees were entitled to judgment as a matter of law. See 
Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 56. 
C. Fees and Costs
 
Horowitz's seventh, eighth, and ninth points of error
 
relate to the monetary judgment award of $7,894.60, which
 included "$7,625 in fees and $269.60 in costs."
 
In its order granting Appellees' MSJ, the circuit court
 
found the "Notice of Pendency of Action and Commercial Lien" to
 be frivolous. Under HRS § 507D-7(a), the circuit court was
 entitled to award Appellees costs and fees and specifies that the
 prevailing party "shall be awarded costs of suit, reasonable
 attorneys' fees, and either actual damages or $5,000, whichever
 is greater."
 
Other points of error raised by Horowitz not
 
specifically addressed are equally without merit, including his
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
point that the circuit court erred in awarding punitive damages. 
No such award was made.
 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Amended Final Judgment
 
entered on January 22, 2015 in the Circuit Court of the Third
 Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 18, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Leonard G. Horowitz,
Defendant-Appellant pro se. Presiding Judge 
Paul J. Sulla, Jr.for Plaintiffs-Appellees. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
7
 