 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND   PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000310 10-FEB-2025 07:48 AM Dkt. 52 SO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000310  
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
DEUTSCHE BANK NATIONAL TRUST COMPANY AS TRUSTEE  
FOR INDYMAC INDA MORTGAGE LOAN TRUST 2007-AR1, MORTGAGE PASS-
THROUGH CERTIFICATES SERIES 2007-AR1, Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
OLANI SEWELL; HINA H.T. SEWELL, Defendants-Appellants,  
 CIT BANK, N.A.;  Defendant-Appellee, JOHN DOES 1-10;  
JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; 
DOE ENTITIES 1-10; and DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-10, Defendants  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 3CCV-20-0000447)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER   
(By: Wadsworth, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.)  
Defendants-Appellants Hina H.T. Sewell and Olani 
Sewell (collectively, the  Sewells) appeal  from the  "Findings of 
Fact, Conclusions of Law  and Order Granting Plaintiff  
[-Appellee]'s[]  Motion for Default Judgment Against CIT Bank, 
N.A. and Summary Judgment and Decree of Foreclosure Against All 1
1 Plaintiff -Appellee is Deutsche Bank National Trust Company, as 
Trustee of the IndyMac INDA Mortgage Loan Trust 2007 -AR1, Mortgage Pass -
Through Certificates, Series 2007 -AR1 Under the Pooling and Servicing 
Agreement dated January 1, 2007, herein referred to as Deutsche Bank .   
 
  
 
   
    
  
 
  
    
    
  
 
 
 
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendants on Complaint Filed December 8, 2020" ( Foreclosure 
Order), and the "Judgment on Findings of Fact , Conclusions of 
Law and Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Default Judgment 
Against CIT Bank, N.A. and Summary Judgment and Decree of 
Foreclosure Against All Defendants on Complaint Filed December 
8, 2020" (Judgment ), both filed on January 5, 2022, by the 
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit ( circuit court ). 2 
This appeal arises out of a foreclosure complaint 
(Complaint ) brought by Deutsche Bank , on December 8, 2020 , 
against the Sewells. The Complaint alleged that the Sewells had 
defaulted on a Fixed/Adjustable Rate Not e (Note) held by 
Deutsche Bank . The Note was secured by a mortgage (Mortgage ) 
that encumbered the subject property. In September 2021, 
Deutsche Bank moved for summary judgment, and for a decree of 
foreclosure. The circuit court granted Deutsche Bank's motion, 
and entered the Foreclosure Order and Judgment from which the 
Sewells presently appeal. 
On appeal, the Sewells contend that the circuit court 
abused i ts discretion by: (1) "concluding that [Deutsche Bank] 
could foreclose on the subject Property where [Deutsche Bank] 
failed to meet its initial burden of proof regarding [Deut sche 
Bank's] standing in this matter"; (2) "granting [Deutsche 
2 The Honorable Robert D.S. Kim presided. 
2   
 
  
 
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bank's] motion for summary judgment where [the Sewells] offered 
specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue as to 
whether [Deutsche Bank] actually possessed the original subject 
Note at the time [Deutsche Bank] filed suit"; (3) "granting 
[Deutsche Bank's] motion for summary judgment where [Deutsche 
Bank] failed to establish that it properly provided [the 
Sewells] with adequate notice of default"; and (4) "granting 
[Deutsche Bank's] motion for summary judgment where [Deutsche 
Bank] failed to establi sh that the original subject Note was 
properly indorsed and that [Deutsche Bank] was entitled to 
enforce the subject Note." 
Upon careful review of the record and relevant legal 
authorities , and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve the 
Sewells' contentions as follows : 
(1) We first address the Sewell s' contentions, as set 
forth in their first and second points of error, that the 
circuit court erred in granting summary judgment because 
Deutsche Bank did not meet its initial burden of establishing 
standing. We review the circuit court's grant of summary 
judgment de novo, applying the following standard, 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the 
moving party is entitled to j udgment as a matter of law. A 
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the 
3   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential 
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the 
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most 
favorable to the non -moving party. In other words, we must 
view all of the evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in 
the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion. 
Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawaiʻi  46, 55–56, 292 P.3d 1276, 1285–86 
(2013) (citation omitted).  
In Bank of Am ., N.A. v. Reyes -Toledo, the Hawaiʻi 
Supreme Court held that, 
A foreclosing plaintiff's burden to prove entitlement to 
enforce the note overlaps with the requirements of standing 
in foreclosure actions as standing is concerned with 
whether the parties have the right to bring suit. 
Typically, a plaintiff does not have standing to invoke the 
jurisdiction of the court unless the plaintiff has suffered 
an injury in fact. A mortgage is a conveyance of an 
interest in real property that is given as security for the 
payment of the note. A foreclosure action is a legal 
proceeding to gain title or force a sale of the property 
for satisfaction of a note that is in default and secured 
by a lien on the subject property. Thus, the underlying 
"injury in fact" to a foreclosing plaintiff is the 
mortgagee's failure to satisfy its obliga tion to pay the 
debt obligation to the note holder. Accordingly, in 
establishing standing, a foreclosing plaintiff must 
necessarily prove its entitlement to enforce the note as it 
is the default on the note that gives rise to the action. 
139 Hawaiʻi 361, 367 –68, 390 P.3d 1248 , 1254–55 (2017) (cleaned 
up). 
We conclude that the declarations attached to the 
Complaint and motion for summary judgment were sufficient to 
establish Deutsche Bank's possession of the original Note. 
Deutsche Bank attached attorney Steven T. Iwamura's ( Iwamura)  
"Declaration Re:  Possession Of Original Promissory Note"  to its 
Complaint  when it filed suit. In his declaration, Iwamura  
represented  under penalty of perjury that  he had "received the 
4   
 
   
 
  
    
 
  
  
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
original indorsed Note . . . on April 8, 2016 [.]" Iwamura 
further declared that he had personally reviewed the "original 
indorsed Note" on November 19, 2020 , and that the original Note 
was stored at Iwamura's Honolulu law office . 3 A redacted copy of 
the original indorsed in blank Note and the Mortgage were also 
attached to the Complaint and authenticated by Iwamura. 
Attached to Deutsche Bank 's motion for summary 
judgment was the declaration of Claribel Lopez (Lopez), an 
authorized custodian of PHH Mortgage Corp oration's4 (PHH) 
records. Lopez declared under penalty of perjury that she was 
"authorized to make this declaration regarding the [Sewells'] 
loan," "[ha d] access to and [was] familiar with PHH's books and 
records regarding the Loan," "[was] familiar with the manner in 
which PHH maintains its books and records," and had "personal 
knowledge" of the Sewells' Note and loan records "derived from 
3 Clay Chapman Iwamura Pulice & Nervell serve d as legal counsel for 
Deutsche Bank in the underlying proceeding . 
4 PHH is the authorized loan servicing agent for Deutsche Bank . 
Pursuant to Lopez's declaration, 
11. PHH maintains all day -to-day loan documents, 
records and accounting of payments on the Loan being 
foreclosed in this action. Under the terms of PHH's 
servicing arrangement, [Deutsche Bank] does not generate, 
keep, or maintain any of the day to day document s for the 
Loan. [Deutsche Bank] does not participate in the inputting 
of accounting data, saving of business records or 
communications with borrowers; rather, such functions are 
performed by PHH. [Deutsche Bank] has a passive role 
regarding the administrat ion of the Loan. PHH acts as the 
sole custodian of the business records relating to the 
servicing of the Loan. 
5   
 
  
 
 
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Lopez's] having reviewed PHH's records relating to the Loan 
and, in particular, the account history of the Loan, which is 
maintained by PHH[.]" Lopez further represented that "[Deutsche 
Bank], by and through its counsel, had possession of the 
original Note, indorsed in blank, on April 8, 2016 prior to 
December 8, 2020, the date of the filing of the Complaint." 
We conclude that Deutsche Bank satisfied its initial 
burden on summary judgment  by establishing its possession  of the 
original Note, through its counsel,  nineteen days prior to the 
date the Complaint was filed.   See  U.S. Bank Tr., N.A.  v. 
Verhagen, 149 Hawaiʻi 315, 327–28, 489 P.3d 419, 431–32 (2021) 
(holding that "U.S. Bank . . . establishe[d] the bank's 
possession of the [n]ote on the day the complaint was filed"  
where "there [was]  admissible documentary evidence showing that 
U.S. Bank possessed the [n]ote both a mere six weeks before the 
filing of the complaint and at the time of summary judgment"  in 
conjunction with other evidence presented).  
The burden then shifted to the Sewells , and the 
Sewells did not meet their burden of establishing that there is 
a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Deutsche Bank 
actually possessed the Note at the time it filed the Complaint . 
See id. at 328, 489 P.3d at 432 ("[A] defendant may counter this 
inference of possession at the time of filing with evidence 
setting forth 'specific facts showing that there is a genuine 
6   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
   
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
issue' as to whether the plaintiff actually possessed the 
subject note at the time it filed suit.") ( quoting Hawaiʻi Rules 
of Civil Procedure Rule 56(e)). 
In their joint declaration, the Sewells "deny that 
[Deutsche Bank] is the holder of the Note referenced in the 
subject Mortgage." They allege that they "did not make 
[Deutsche Bank's] Note and [they] did not execute and deliver 
said Note" because "[i]f [they] were makers of something so 
important, [they] would have made handwritten markings on the 
middle pages." 
The Sewells' bare contention that "[they] did not make 
[the] Note" does not overcome the Uniform Commercial Code 's 
(UCC) presumption that a signature on a promissory note is 
authentic. See Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 490:3 -308 
(2008). "Under the [UCC],[5] the signatures on a note are 
presumed authentic unless a party denies it in the pleadings and 
introduces evidence which would support a finding that the 
signature is forged or unauthorized." Tyrell v. Bank of Am. (In 
re Tyrell) , 528 B.R. 790, 794 ( Bankr. D. Haw. 2015) (cleaned 
up). 
We conclude that Deutsche Bank established its 
standing to bring its foreclosure action, the Sewells did not 
5 Hawaiʻi has adopted the UCC in HRS chapter 490. 
7   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
make an adequate showing that their signatures on the Note were 
not authentic, and  that  the circuit court therefore did not err 
in granting summary judgment.  
(2) The Sewells contend that Deutsche Bank failed to 
establish that it provided the Sewells with adequate notice of default.   The Mortgage provides, with regard to service of 
notice that,  
All notices given by Borrower or Lender in connection with 
this Security Instrument must be in writing. Any notice to 
Borrower in connection with this Security Instrument shall 
be deemed to have been given to Borrower when mailed by 
first class mail or when actually delivered to Borrower's 
notice address if sent by other means. Notice to any one 
Borrower shall constitute notice to all Borrowers unless 
Applicable Law expressly requires otherwise. The notice 
address shall be the Property Address unless Borrower has 
designated a substitute notice address by notice to Lender. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Lopez's declaration represents that , with respect to 
the Note : 
9. As the loan servicer, PHH acts as an agent for 
[Deutsche Bank] and is the attorney in fact for [Deutsche 
Bank]; and PHH is generally responsible for the 
administration of the [Sewells'] Loan until the Loan is 
paid in full, assigned to another creditor, or the 
servicing rights and responsibilities are transferred. PHH 
became the loan servicer for the Loan being foreclosed in 
this action on 06/01/2019. 
10. Administering the Loan includes, among other 
things, sending monthly payment statements, collecting 
monthly payments, maintaining records of payments and 
balances, collecting and paying taxes and insurance (and 
managing escrow and impound funds), remitting monies 
tendered under the subject notes to [Deutsche Bank], 
following up on loan delinquencies, home loan workouts and 
home retention programs, and other general customer service 
functions. Further, in the event of a default under the 
terms of the Loan, PHH is authorized by [Deutsche Bank] to 
enforce the terms of the Loan by retaining and supervising 
legal counsel to foreclose and pursue the other legal 
rights and remedies . . . available to [Deutsche Bank]. 
8   
 
  
    . . . . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
19. Notice was provided to Borrowers advising of 
the default under the Note and Mortgage, advising that 
failure to cure the default may result in the acceleration 
of the entire balance outstanding under the terms of the 
Note and Mortgage (the "Notice of [Default] "). My personal 
knowledge of these statements is derived from my having 
inspected a copy of the Notice of [Default] contained in 
PHH's business records regarding the Loan. A true and 
correct copy of the Notice of [Default] which I inspected 
is attached hereto as Exhibit "8". 
Exhibit "8" is the Notice of Default, dated August 4, 
2020, sent by PHH to the Sewells. The Notice of Default 
provided written notice to the Sewells of their default under 
the terms of the Note, and that failure to cure their default 
may result in the acceleration of their loan. The Notice of 
Default represents that it was sent via first -class mail to the 
address of the subject property. 
Based on the foregoing , we conclude that Deutsche Bank 
met its burden of sh owing that it provided adequate notice of 
default to the Sewells via PHH's letter . The burden then 
shifted to the Sewells, and the Sewells did not present any 
evidence to raise a genuine issue of material fact that Deutsche 
Bank had not provided adequate notice of default . 
(3) The Sewells contend that Deutsche Bank failed to 
establish that the Note was properly indorsed, and that Deutsche 
Bank failed to establish it was entitled to enforce the Note. 
The Sewells' contention lacks merit. The record reflects that 
the Note , which was indorsed in blank , was not payable to an 
9   
 
    
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
identified person. See HRS § 490:3-205(b) (2008). "When 
indorsed in blank, an instrument becomes payable to bearer and 
may be negotiated by transfer or possession alone until 
specially indorsed." Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawaiʻi at 370, 390 P.3d 
at 1257 (citation omitted) . As explained supra, Deutsche Bank 
established through Iwamura and Lopez's declarations that 
Deutsche Bank had possession of the indorsed in blank Note at 
the time it filed the Complaint and motion for summary judgment. 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the circuit 
court's Foreclosure Order and Judgment . 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, February 10 , 2025. 
Matthew K. Yoshida,  /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth  
for Defendants-Appellants.  Presiding Judge  
  
David A. Nakashima,  /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen  
for Plaintiff-Appellee.  Associate Judge  
  
 /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
 Associate Judge 
10 