
 

 

 

 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­

EDWIN GARCIA, Plaintiff-Appellant,
 
v.
 
 
BERNARD ROBINSON, M.D., Defendant-Appellee,
 
and
 
 
JOHN DOES 1-5, JANE DOES 1-5, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-5,
 
DOE LLCS 1-5, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-5,
 
DOE NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS 1-5,
 
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-5, Defendants
 
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000388
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-2338)

 
MAY 29, 2015

 
FOLEY, PRESIDING J., LEONARD AND GINOZA, JJ.
 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Edwin Garcia (Garcia) appeals from
 
 
the Judgment, entered January 2, 2013 in the Circuit Court of the
 
 
1

First Circuit  (circuit court).
 
 
On appeal, Garcia contends the circuit court erred in
 
 
granting the motion for summary judgment of Defendant-Appellee
 
 
Bernard Robinson, M.D. (Robinson) because (1) expert testimony
 
 
was not required to establish a medical tort claim for lack of
 
 
1
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
 
 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 


 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
informed consent and (2) if expert testimony was required,
 Robinson provided it in his own testimony.
I. BACKGROUND
 
On June 14, 2007, Garcia was injured at work and, as a
 
result, suffered from lower back pain due to a degenerative
 lumbar disk and spine disease at L4-5-S1. The injury is
 characterized in lay terms as "[p]inched nerves in the lower back
 causing leg pains." On February 28, 2008, Garcia signed a
 "Consent to Operation Postoperative Care, Medical Treatment,
 Anesthesia and/or Procedure" form (Consent Form), giving consent
 
to Robinson to perform a "L4-5 micro/laminectomy and foramintomy
 
with a discectomy if needed after intraoperative examination of
 the disk." The pre-printed text of the Consent Form stated that
 "I have been informed that there are many significant risks, such
 as severe loss of blood, infection, cardiac arrest and other
 consequences that can lead to death or permanent or partial
 disability, which can result from any procedure." In a space
 that stated "[a]ny additional comments may be inserted here[,]"
 Robinson handwrote that "[r]isks include allergy, hemorrhage,
 infection, technical problems, paralysis, and death." Garcia
 signed the Consent Form under a "FULL DISCLOSURE" statement that
 read
 
I AGREE THAT MY PHYSICIAN HAS INFORMED ME OF THE:
 
a)
b)  DIAGNOSIS OR PROBABLE DIAGNOSIS.

 
NATURE OF THE TREATMENT OR PROCEDURES RECOMMENDED.

 
c) RISKS OR COMPLICATIONS INVOLVED IN SUCH TREATMENT OR

PROCEDURES.
 
d) ALTERNATIVE FORMS OF TREATMENT, INCLUDING NON-TREATMENT,

AVAILABLE.
 
e) ANTICIPATED RESULTS OF TREATMENT.

 
On March 4, 2008, Robinson operated on Garcia's back.
 
As a result of the surgery, Garcia alleges that he has "increased
 low back pain, uncontrolled shaking of the left leg, and numbness
 in left foot and leg." Garcia also alleges that he suffers
 emotionally, is depressed, and has trouble sleeping.
 
On November 1, 2010, Garcia filed a Complaint, pro se,
 
against Robinson in the circuit court. The Complaint alleged
 
2
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that, before his surgery, Robinson told him that "the type of surgery had a ninety percent (90%) success rate, and [Garcia] would be 'dancing in a couple of days' after surgery." Garcia alleged that Robinson failed "to exercise the degree of care or skill or possess the degree of knowledge ordinarily exercised or possessed by others of the profession in the State of Hawaii [Hawai
'i]" and that Robinson "failed to properly inform [Garcia] 
of the risks involved with the surgery and misrepresented the lack of risk involved with the surgery." On May 18, 2011, Robinson filed an answer to Garcia's complaint. 
On March 16, 2012, Robinson filed a motion for summary
 
judgment (MSJ). In his Memorandum in Support of his MSJ,
 
Robinson argued that he was entitled to judgment as a matter of
 
law because "[Garcia had] no medical expert testimony to support
 his claims of medical negligence based upon the doctrine of
 informed consent."
 
On July 10, 2012, Gracia filed his Memorandum in
 
Opposition to Robinson's MSJ. Garcia argued that the patient-
oriented standard was the applicable standard for his failure to
 obtain informed consent claim. Garcia requested that "the motion
 for summary judgment be continued to allow this memorandum to be
 supplemented by the deposition testimony of [Robinson] and with
 additional declarations if necessary, depending upon the
 testimony of [Robinson]."
 
On July 13, 2012, Robinson filed an additional Motion
 
for Partial Summary Judgment on Garcia's informed consent claim
 (Partial MSJ), arguing that Garcia's informed consent claim was
 
not raised before the Medical Claims Conciliation Panel (MCCP)
 
and, thus, the circuit court did not have jurisdiction over the
 
claim. On August 31, 2012, Gracia filed an Memorandum in
 Opposition to Robinson's Partial MSJ and claimed that "the issue
 of lack of informed consent was part of the MCCP claim[.]" 
Garcia again alleged that Robinson had told him "there was a 90%
 success rate for the type of back surgery to be performed[,]"
 "[Garcia] would be 'dancing in a couple of days after
 surgery[,]'" and that "[Garcia] would have no pain after the
 surgery[.]" Garcia argued that he relied "upon [those]
 
3
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 









 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
representations, which were not true, in deciding to have the
 
surgery." In support of his Memorandum in Opposition to the
 Partial MSJ, Garcia attached a copy of his Consent Form, portions
 of Robinson's deposition, a copy of Garcia's admission history
 and physical prepared by Robinson on February 28, 2008, and a
 letter from Lawrence M. Shuer, M.D. stating that it was his
 belief that Robinson's care did not fall below the standard of
 care.
 
On September 11, 2012, the circuit court held a hearing
 
on the MSJ and Partial MSJ. During the hearing, the circuit
 court orally ruled that "expert testimony is not required to
 establish the duty with respect to informed consent[,]" but that
 expert testimony is required to support the question of
 materiality, namely "information regarding what a reasonable
 person objectively needs to hear from the physician to allow the
 patient to make an informed and intelligent decision regarding
 the proposed medical treatment." The circuit court noted that
 
what our appellate courts have done is to formulate an [sic]
paradigm for expert testimony on questions of materiality,
and there are four elements of this paradigm that plaintiff
is required to have medical testimony, and these four
elements are: Number one, the nature of the risks inherent
in a particular treatment; number two, the probabilities of
therapeutic success; number three[,] the frequency of the
occurrence of particular risks; and, number four, the nature
of available alternatives to treatment.
 
The circuit court ruled that although Robinson's testimony could
 
be relied upon to satisfy the elements of materiality, Robinson's
 testimony did not address all four of the elements and, thus,
 summary judgment in favor of Robinson was appropriate.
 
On October 10, 2012, the circuit court filed its "Order
 
Granting Defendant Bernard Robinson, M.D.'s Motion for Summary
 Judgment, Filed 03/16/12" and its "Order Denying Defendant
 Bernard Robinson, M.D.'s Motion for Partial Summary Judgment On
 Plaintiff's Informed Consent Claim, Filed 07/13/12." The circuit
 court entered Judgment in favor of Robinson on January 2, 2013.
 
On October 22, 2012, Garcia moved for reconsideration
 
of the circuit court's ruling, and the circuit court denied
 Garcia's motion on March 8, 2013.
 
4
 
 

 

 

 











 

 

 

 



 

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On April 5, 2013, Garcia timely filed a notice of
 
 
appeal of the circuit court's Judgment.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
The appellate court reviews "the circuit court's grant
 
or denial of summary judgment de novo." Querubin v. Thronas, 107
 
Hawai'i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005). 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, depositions,
answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with
the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to
any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material if proof of that
fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the
essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable
to the non-moving party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light most
favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Id. at 56, 109 P.3d at 697 (brackets omitted) (quoting Durette v.
 
Aloha Plastic Recycling, Inc., 105 Hawai 'i 490, 501, 100 P.3d 60, 
71 (2004)).
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has set forth the following 
burden-shifting paradigm for situations where the non-movant
 
 
bears the burden of proof at trial:
 
 
The burden is on the party moving for summary judgment
 
(moving party) to show the absence of any genuine issue as
 
to all material facts, which, under applicable principles of
 
substantive law, entitles the moving party to judgment as a 

matter of law. This burden has two components.
 
 
First, the moving party has the burden of producing
 
support for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material
 
fact exists with respect to the essential elements of the
 
claim or defense which the motion seeks to establish or
 
 
which the motion questions; and (2) based on the undisputed
 
facts, it is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of
 
law. Only when the moving party satisfies its initial
 
burden of production does the burden shift to the nonmoving
 
party to respond to the motion for summary judgment and
 
demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general
 
allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial.
 
 
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of
 
persuasion. This burden always remains with the moving
 
party and requires the moving party to convince the court
 
that no genuine issue of material fact exists and that the
 
moving party is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of
 
law.
 
 
Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawai 'i 46, 56-57, 292 P.3d 1276, 1286-87 
(2013) (quoting French v. Hawaii Pizza Hut, Inc., 105 Hawai 'i 
462, 470, 99 P.3d 1046, 1054 (2004)).
 
In sum, this court's case law indicates that a summary
judgment movant may satisfy his or her initial burden of
production by either (1) presenting evidence negating an
 
5
 
 










 

 
	 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 




 

 


 


 



 
	 

 

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
element of the non-movant's claim, or (2) demonstrating that
the non-movant will be unable to carry his or her burden of
proof at trial. Where the movant attempts to meet his or her
burden through the latter means, he or she must show not
only that the non-movant has not placed proof in the record,
but also that the movant will be unable to offer proof at
trial. Accordingly, in general, a summary judgment movant
cannot merely point to the non-moving party's lack of
evidence to support its initial burden of production if
discovery has not concluded.
 
Ralston, 129 Hawai 'i at 60-61, 292 P.3d at 1290-91 (emphasis and 
internal citations omitted).
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. 	Expert Testimony to Establish Materiality
 
Garcia argues that the circuit court erred in granting
 
Robinson's MSJ because expert testimony was not required to
 
establish a medical tort claim for lack of informed consent.
 Garcia claims the requirement that expert testimony establish the
 materiality of a risk is not a rule, but rather dicta that this
 court need not follow.
 
Generally, "[p]hysicians have an obligation to obtain 
the informed consent of their patients before administering diagnostic and treatment procedures." Barcai v. Betwee, 98 
Hawai
'i 470, 483, 50 P.3d 946, 959 (2002). Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 671-3(b) (Supp. 2014) provides what information 
a physician must share with a patient in order to receive the 
patient's informed consent to the prescribed procedure. HRS § 671-3(b) provides: 
§671-3 Informed consent.
 
. . . .
 
 
(b) The following information shall be supplied to the

patient or the patient's guardian or legal surrogate prior
to obtaining consent to a proposed medical or surgical
treatment or a diagnostic or therapeutic procedure:
 
(1) The condition to be treated;
 
(2) A description of the proposed treatment or
procedure;
 
(3) The intended and anticipated results of the
proposed treatment or procedure;
 
(4) The recognized alternative treatments or
procedures, including the option of not providing
these treatments or procedures;
 
(5) 	The recognized material risks of serious
complications or mortality associated with:
 
6
 
 

 


 


 


 











 

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(A) The proposed treatment or procedure;
 
(B) The recognized alternative treatments or
procedures; and
 
(C) Not undergoing any treatment or
procedure; and
 
(6) The recognized benefits of the recognized
alternative treatments or procedures.
 
Under Hawai 'i law, the plaintiff patient must demonstrate the 
following to establish a claim of negligent failure to obtain 
informed consent: 
(1) the physician owed a duty to disclose the risk of one or
more of the collateral injuries that the patient suffered;
(2) the physician breached that duty; (3) the patient
suffered injury; (4) the physician's breach of duty was a
cause of the patient's injury in that (a) the physician's
treatment was a substantial factor in bringing about the
patient's injury and (b) a reasonable person in the
plaintiff patient's position would not have consented to the
treatment that led to the injuries had the plaintiff patient
been properly informed; and (5) no other cause is a
superseding cause of the patient's injury.
 
Barcai, 98 Hawai 'i at 483-84, 50 P.3d at 959-60. Failure to 
obtain informed consent before rendering professional medical 
services constitutes a medical tort. HRS § 671-1 (2014 Repl.). 
"Claims for negligent failure to obtain informed 
consent typically arise when a plaintiff patient alleges that the defendant physician failed to warn the patient of a particular risk associated with the procedure and the particular risk ultimately occurred." Barcai, 98 Hawai
'i at 483, 50 P.3d at 959. 
The "patient oriented standard" is the applicable standard used to determine whether a physician owes a duty to disclose a particular piece of information to the patient. Id. at 484, 50 
P.3d at 960 (noting that the "patient oriented standard" does not require a patient to produce expert medical testimony as to a physician's duty to disclose); see Bernard v. Char, 79 Hawai
'i 
371, 381-82, 903 P.2d 676, 686-87 (App. 1995) (Bernard I) aff'd, 
Bernard v. Char, 79 Hawai 'i 362, 903 P.2d 667 (1995) (Bernard 
II). "The patient oriented standard requires a physician to disclose 'what a reasonable patient needs to hear from his or her 
physician in order to make an informed and intelligent decision regarding treatment . . . .'" Barcai, 98 Hawai
'i at 484, 50 P.3d 
7
 







 

 

 

 

 

 

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 960 (quoting Carr v. Strode, 79 Hawai 'i 475, 484, 904 P.2d 
489, 498 (1995)). 
Hawai'i courts have emphasized that, in informed 
consent cases, expert testimony is necessary to establish the materiality of alleged risks associated with treatment. Barcai, 
98 Hawai
'i at 484, 50 P.3d at 960 (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted); See Ray v. Kapiolani Med. Specialists, 125 Hawai
'i 253, 268, 259 P.3d 569, 584 (2011); Bernard I, 79 
Hawai'i at 383, 903 P.2d 676, 688, aff'd Bernard II, 79 Hawai 'i 
362, 903 P.2d 667; Carr, 79 Hawai 'i at 486, 904 P.2d at 500. See 
also HRS § 671-3(b). 
In Barcai, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court reasoned that 
expert testimony was needed because lay jurors do not normally possess the necessary information to determine the materiality of a risk. Barcai, 98 Hawai
'i at 484, 50 P.3d at 960. An expert 
must establish information pertaining to the materiality so that the jury can decide whether a reasonable person would have wanted to consider the purportedly withheld information before consenting to the treatment. Id. 
Lower courts are bound to the standard as articulated 
in Bernard I, Carr, Barcai, and Ray. See Robinson v. Ariyoshi, 
65 Haw. 641, 654, 658 P.2d 287, 298 (1982). The Hawai
'i Supreme 
Court has held that 
a statement of a superior court [is] binding on inferior
tribunals, even though technically dictum, where it "was
passed upon by the court with as great care and deliberation
as if it had been necessary to decide it, was closely
connected with the question upon which the case was decided,
and the opinion was expressed with a view to settling a
question that would in all probability have to be decided
before the litigation was ended."
 
Id. at 655, 658 P.2d at 298.
 
In Bernard I, the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) 
concluded that the patient-oriented standard applies to determine 
whether a physician satisfied his duty of disclosure regarding a course of treatment. Bernard I, 79 Hawai
'i at 383, 903 P.2d at 
688. In so holding, the ICA intentionally clarified that "[its]
 
conclusion today should not be construed to mean that expert
 testimony may be dispensed with entirely in informed consent
 cases." Id. Instead, the ICA stressed that "[e]xpert testimony
 
8
 











 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
will still be 'required to establish the nature of risks inherent
 
 
in a particular treatment, the probabilities of therapeutic
 
 
success, the frequency of the occurrence of particular risks,
 
 
[and] the nature of available alternatives to treatment[.]'" Id.
 
 
(citing Sard v. Hardy, 379 A.2d 1014, 1024 (Md. Ct. App 1977)). 
 
In Carr, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court adopted the patient-
oriented standard articulated in Bernard I and, like the ICA in
 
 
Bernard I, "strongly caution[ed]" that its adoption of the
 
 
patient-oriented standard for a physician's duty to disclose did
 
 
not in any way obviate the need for an expert to testify to the
 
 
materiality of the alleged risk asserted. Carr, 79 Hawai 'i at 
486, 904 P.2d at 500. The supreme court maintained:
 
 
We strongly caution, however, as did the ICA in Bernard [I],
that our adoption of the patient-oriented standard does notrelieve plaintiffs of their burden to provide expert medicaltestimony as to the "materiality" of the risk; to thecontrary, a plaintiff maintains the burden of adducingexpert medical testimony to establish "the nature of risksinherent in a particular treatment, the probabilities oftherapeutic success, the frequency of the occurrence ofparticular risks, and the nature of available alternativesto treatment." Bernard [I], 79 Hawai' i at 383, 903 P.2d at
688 (quotation marks, internal brackets, and citationomitted). As the Canterbury [v. Spence, 464 F.2d 772 (1972)]court noted: 
Experts are ordinarily indispensable to identify and
elucidate for the factfinder the risks of therapy and
the consequences of leaving existing maladies
untreated. They are normally needed on issues as to
the cause of any injury or disability suffered by the
patient and, where privileges are asserted, as to the
existence of any emergency claimed and the nature and
seriousness of any impact upon the patient from
risk-disclosure. Save for relative[ly] infrequent
instances where questions of this type are resolvable
wholly within the realm of ordinary human knowledge
and experience, the need for the expert is clear.
 
[Canterbury,] 464 F.2d at 791-92 (footnote omitted).
 
Carr, 79 Hawai 'i at 486, 904 P.2d at 500. 
In Ray, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court relied upon the 
expert testimony requirement for materiality determinations to
 
support its holding that alternative dosages of the same
 medication can constitute "recognized alternative treatments,"
 under HRS § 671-3(b)(4). Ray, 125 Hawai
'i at 268, 259 P.3d at 
584. The defendants in Ray argued that such a recognition would
 
"dramatically expand the physician's liability (because a patient
 could always claim, in hindsight, that the physician should have
 
9
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
disclosed the option of receiving a lower dose)[.]" Id. The 
supreme court opined that the defendants' concerns were "overstated" Id. In support of its ruling, the supreme court 
reiterated that it has held in the past that "expert testimony will ordinarily be required to establish the 'materiality' of the risks, i.e., 'the nature of risks inherent in a particular treatment, the probabilities of therapeutic success, the frequency of the occurrence of particular risks, and the nature of available alternatives to treatment.'" Id. (quoting Barcai, 
98 Hawai
'i at 484, 50 P.3d at 960). Based on that understanding, 
the supreme court ultimately maintained that "healthcare providers will not be overwhelmed by [its] holding because the plaintiff will need to show that the medical community recognizes the different dosage as an alternative treatment." Ray, 125 
Hawai
'i at 268, 259 P.3d at 584. 
The statement requiring expert testimony to establish
 
the materiality of a risk has consistently been "passed upon by
 the court with as great care and deliberation as if it had been
 necessary to decide it, was closely connected with the question
 upon which the case was decided, and the opinion was expressed
 with a view to settling a question that would in all probability
 have to be decided before the litigation was ended." See
 
Ariyoshi, 65 Haw. at 655, 658 P.2d at 298 (citation and internal
 quotation marks omitted). The circuit court did not err in
 holding that Garcia's informed consent claim required expert
 testimony to establish the materiality of the risk asserted. 
B. Robinson's Expert Testimony
 
Robinson's MSJ alleged that he was entitled to judgment
 
as a matter of law because "[Garcia had] no medical expert
 testimony to support his claims of medical negligence based upon
 the doctrine of informed consent." Garcia contends that summary
 judgment was improper because, "[a]ssuming that expert testimony
 was required to establish a prima facie claim for lack of
 informed consent in this case, that testimony was provided by
 
10
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 
 



 

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Robinson] himself."2 Garcia alleges that Robinson failed to
 
inform him that the procedure may not be beneficial. Garcia
 contends that Robinson's deposition testimony established the
 materiality of that risk because "[Robinson] admitted that he
 should have advised [Garcia] of the possibility that the surgery
 might not be beneficial[.]"
 
As noted supra, expert testimony is needed to prove the 
materiality of an alleged risk, which includes "the nature of risks inherent in a particular treatment, the probability of therapeutic success, the frequency of the occurrence of particular risks, and the nature of available alternatives to treatment." Ray, 125 Hawai
'i at 268, 259 P.3d at 584 (citation 
and internal quotation marks omitted). See HRS § 671-3(b). 
Instead of providing his own expert witness to testify to the materiality of the risk asserted, Garcia relied solely upon the deposition testimony of Robinson. See Barcai, 98 Hawai
'i at 484, 
50 P.3d at 960 (noting that "The plaintiff . . . need not necessarily provide such expert testimony; the requisite foundation can be established by the defendant's expert testimony."). During his deposition, Robinson testified that he did not include "failure of surgery to be beneficial" as a listed risk on the Consent Form because there was not enough space on the form, but noted that he discussed the possibility with Garcia before the surgery. Robinson testified that he discusses that possibility with "every single patient that [he] operate[s] on[,]" but did not testify to the materiality of the risk. 
During the September 11, 2012 hearing, Garcia's
 
counsel, Charles Brower, conceded that he did not have expert
 testimony to support at least two of the four elements of
 materiality:
 
THE COURT: . . . .
 
Mr. Brower, why don't we go through the
elements one at a time, and you tell me what is the expert
testimony that is contained in the record.
 
2
 Ralston, which was not raised in the circuit court or on appeal by
Garcia, is distinguishable in that Garcia was not precluded from offering
expert testimony. It was Garcia's position that he was not required to do so,
not that he was precluded by the granting of summary judgment.
 
11
 
 

 


 


 





 

 

 


 

 

 

 




 

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
THE COURT:  
Number three, the frequency of the
occurrence of particular risk.
 
MR. BROWER:  Well, he didn't testify as to the 

frequency, but he testified that based upon his experience,
 
but he testified that based upon his experience, that that 

[sic] is something that you need to disclose to Mr. Garcia,
 
that there's a possibility of a failure of the surgery.
 
He didn't give an exact number, but in his opinion, that's 

something that needed to be disclosed to Mr. Garcia. And 
 
 
their expert, too, put it there in his report. It is just a 

letter, but – I mean, I don't have his declaration, but
 
again he confirmed that one of the risks of surgery is that
 
it would not be beneficial and in fact the pain could get
 
worse.
 
 
THE COURT:  
Number four, the nature of available
alternatives to treatment.
 
MR. BROWER:  Well, 
that's another thing that the doctor
did not disclose to Mr. Garcia in this particular case,
which is required by the statute. Mr. Garcia said the only
thing he told him was, hey, there's a 90 percent chance of
success here and he'd be up and dancing in three days.
 
(Emphases added.) Based on the record before us, Garcia failed
 
 
to provide expert testimony to prove the materiality of the risk
 
 
asserted. Therefore, the circuit court did not err in concluding
 
 
that Robinson was entitled to judgment as a matter of law. See
 
 
Ralston, 129 Hawai 'i at 60-61, 292 P.3d at 1290-91. 
IV. CONCLUSION

 
Therefore, the Judgment, entered January 2, 2013 in the
 
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
 
On the briefs:
 
Michael P. Healy
and
 Charles H. Brower
 for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
Thomas E. Cook
 
Edquon Lee
(Lyons Brandt Cook &
Hiramatsu)
for Defendant-Appellee.
 
12
 