FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
RICK TRINQUE, Defendant-Appellee
and
 
MILES MARTINEZ, Defendant
 
NOS. CAAP-12-0001017 and CAAP-12-0001018
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 12-1-0105)
 
JANUARY 29, 2016
 
NAKAMURA, C.J., AND FOLEY, J.,
WITH GINOZA, J., CONCURRING SEPARATELY
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
Defendant-Appellee Rick Trinque (Trinque) and co-
defendant Miles Martinez (Martinez) were each charged by
 
indictment with: (1) first-degree commercial promotion of
 marijuana for possessing or cultivating one hundred or more
 marijuana plants; and (2) unlawful use of drug paraphernalia for
 using or possessing with intent to use drug paraphernalia. 
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Trinque and Martinez were arrested by the police at night in a
 
pasture where a large number of marijuana plants were being
 grown. After his arrest, Trinque made three incriminating
 statements to the police: (1) while being escorted out of the
 pasture (Statement 1); (2) outside the pasture while waiting to
 be transported to the police station (Statement 2); and (3) at
 the police station (Statement 3). The Circuit Court of the Fifth
 
1
Circuit (Circuit Court)  suppressed all three statements.
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) appeals 
from the Circuit Court's "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting [Trinque's] Motion to Suppress Statements" (Order Suppressing Statements) and the Circuit Court's "Order Denying [the State's] Motion to Determine Voluntariness of Statements" (Voluntariness Order). On appeal, the State argues that the Circuit Court erred in suppressing Statements 2 and 3. As explained below, we hold that the Circuit Court erred in suppressing Statements 2 and 3. We vacate the Circuit Court's Order Suppressing Statements and its Voluntariness Order with respect to Statements 2 and 3, and we remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this Opinion. 
BACKGROUND
 
After receiving information that marijuana was growing 
in a pasture in the K
ilauea area of Kaua 'i, the Vice Division of 
the Kaua 'i Police Department initiated an investigation. Over a 
thousand marijuana plants were apparently being cultivated in the pasture. Officer Brian Silva (Officer Silva) was the officer in charge of the investigation, and his supervisor, Officer Richard Rosa (Officer Rosa), was also involved. 
At night, while on surveillance in the pasture, Officer
 
Silva and other officers encountered Trinque and Martinez, who
 were placed under arrest. Trinque was handcuffed. It was dark,
 there was sugarcane and "grass everywhere," and the officers were
 trying to figure out how to get out of the pasture. Officer
 
1The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Silva or another officer escorting Trinque out of the pasture
 
asked Trinque how he had entered the field. Trinque responded
 that he came over the fence by the banana tree using a ladder
 that was still located by the fence and that he was caught red
 handed (Statement 1). 
After Trinque was taken from the pasture, he was
 
ordered to sit on a bench outside a residence. Officer Rosa was
 assigned to watch Trinque. Officer Rosa had never met Trinque
 before. However, Officer Rosa had previously worked on a case
 involving Trinque's daughter. Officer Rosa, who was wearing his
 badge, introduced himself to Trinque as a police officer. 
Officer Rosa informed Trinque that he was the officer who had
 worked on Trinque's daughter's case; that Trinque could talk to
 his daughter if he did not believe Officer Rosa; that Officer
 Rosa would not lie to Trinque, would not "jerk [Trinque's]
 chain," and would be completely honest with Trinque. Officer
 Rosa told Trinque not to make any statements until Trinque was
 advised of his constitutional rights.
2 In response, Trinque
 
stated, "What for? You caught us red handed, there's nothing
 left to say, times are hard and we needed the money" (Statement
 2). Officer Rosa then told Trinque "not to make anymore
 statements until we got to Lihue" (where the police station is
 located).
 
Officers Silva and Rosa transported Trinque to the
 
Lihue police station. After he was booked, Trinque was taken to
 an interview room where Officers Silva and Rosa were present. 
Officer Silva advised Trinque of his constitutional rights, using
 an advice of rights form. After he was advised of his Miranda
3
 
2Officer Rosa testified that because of the time and the conditions, he
told Trinque "not to make any statements until we got back to the Lihue
[police station] where we could advise him of his rights." When asked why the
police could not have advised Trinque of his rights at the scene, Officer Rosa
explained that "at that time we were too busy. It was dark. I just wanted to
get him to Lihue and let him sit down and read him his rights using the
forms." 
3Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966).
 
3
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rights, Trinque was asked whether he wanted to make a statement. 
In response, Trinque stated that he did not want to make a
 statement since he got caught red-handed and was going to jail
 anyway (Statement 3).
 
Trinque filed a motion to suppress all three
 
statements. The State opposed Trinque's suppression motion and
 also filed a motion to determine the voluntariness of Trinque's
 statements. The Circuit Court held an evidentiary hearing on
 both motions. The Circuit Court granted Trinque's motion to
 suppress and denied the State's motion to determine
 voluntariness. The Circuit Court entered its Order Suppressing
 Statements and its Voluntariness Order on October 30, 2012, and
 this appeal followed.
4
 
DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, the State challenges the Circuit Court's
 
suppression of Statements 2 and 3. The State does not appeal the
 Circuit Court's decision to suppress Statement 1. Therefore, for
 purposes of this appeal, we assume, as found by the Circuit
 Court, that Statement 1 was a statement made in response to
 custodial interrogation by the police that was obtained in
 violation of Trinque's Miranda rights.
 
The State argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
concluding that Statement 2 was the product of a custodial
 interrogation and in suppressing Statement 2 on that basis. It 
4In its Order Suppressing Statements, the Circuit Court made findings of
fact and conclusions of law in support of its decision to grant Trinque's
suppression motion and to suppress Statements 1, 2, and 3. The Circuit Court
 did not provide any different or independent reasons for denying the State's
motion to determine the voluntariness of Trinque's statements. The Circuit
 Court's Voluntariness Order simply states: "The Court having taken judicial
notice of the files and records herein and having heard evidence and argument
in the matter, and having GRANTED [Trinque's] Motion to Suppress Statements
hereby ORDERS that the State's Motion to Determine Voluntariness of Statements
is hereby DENIED." (Emphasis added.) Accordingly, it appears that the Circuit
Court relied on the same grounds to grant Trinque's suppression motion and to
deny the State's voluntariness motion. In deciding this appeal, we will treat
the Circuit Court's grounds for granting Trinque's suppression motion as its
basis for denying the State's motion to determine the voluntariness of
Trinque's statements.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
also argues that the Circuit Court erred in suppressing Statement
 
3 as the unlawful fruit of Statements 1 and 2. 
We conclude that Statement 2, which was made in
 
response to Officer Rosa's telling Trinque not to make any
 statements until Trinque was advised of his constitutional
 rights, was not the product of interrogation. Therefore, the
 State did not violate Trinque's Miranda rights in obtaining
 Statement 2 and the Circuit Court erred in suppressing Statement
 2 on Miranda grounds. We further conclude that the police did
 not exploit Statement 1 in obtaining Statement 2 or Statement 3,
 and therefore, Statements 2 and 3 are not subject to suppression
 as the unlawful fruit of Statement 1. Finally, because Statement
 2 was not obtained unlawfully, Statement 3 is not subject to
 suppression as the unlawful fruit of Statement 2. 
I.
 
"Voluntary confessions are not merely a proper element
 
in law enforcement, they are an unmitigated good, essential to
 society's compelling interest in finding, convicting, and
 punishing those who violate the law." Maryland v. Shatzer, 559
 
U.S. 98, 108 (2010) (internal quotation marks and citations
 omitted). 
The protection provided by both the Fifth Amendment to 
the United States Constitution and Article I, Section 10 of the Hawai
'i Constitution is directed at preventing the government 
from compelling a criminal defendant to incriminate himself or herself. The language of the two provisions is virtually identical. The Fifth Amendment provides: "No person . . . shall be compelled in any Criminal Case to be a witness against himself," while Article I, Section 10 provides: "No person shall . . . be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against oneself." (Emphases added). The Miranda requirements were judicially created as a means of safeguarding a defendant's constitutional privilege against compulsory self-incrimination. See Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291, 297 (1980). Neither the 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
constitutional provisions nor Miranda are designed to prevent the
 
government from using voluntary, non-compelled statements made by
 a defendant.
 
Miranda warnings are only required when a defendant is 
subjected to custodial interrogation. See State v. Paahana, 66 
Haw. 499, 503-04, 666 P.2d 592, 596 (1983). There is no dispute that Trinque was in custody after he was arrested, and thus the custody requirement is not at issue in this case. With respect to the interrogation requirement, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has 
held that "the ultimate question becomes whether the police officer should have known that his or her words or actions were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the person in custody." State v. Ketchum, 97 Hawai
'i 107, 119, 34 
P.3d 1006, 1018 (2001) (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). 
II.
 
The State argues that Statement 2 was not the product
 
of a custodial interrogation. We agree.
 
Trinque made Statement 2 after Officer Rosa
 
specifically told Trinque not to make any statements until
 Trinque was advised of his constitutional rights. It is
 difficult to see how telling a defendant not to make a statement
 can constitute "interrogation." Officer Rosa was not attempting
 to elicit an incriminating response -- he told Trinque not to
 make any statements. We conclude that there was no basis for the
 Circuit Court to conclude that Officer Rosa should have known
 that his words or actions in telling Trinque not to speak were
 reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response. 
The Circuit Court found that there was "no legitimate
 
reason" for Officer Rosa to inform Trinque that he had worked on
 Trinque's daughter's case and to tell Trinque that he would not
 lie to Trinque and would be completely honest with Trinque. It
 is not clear why it would be improper for Officer Rosa to provide
 this information to Trinque or why Officer Rosa's apparent
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attempt to develop rapport with Trinque should be viewed as
 
illegitimate. More importantly, such actions were not reasonably
 likely to elicit an incriminating response, especially where
 Officer Rosa specifically directed Trinque not to make any
 statements. Under these circumstances, we conclude that
 Statement 2 was not the product of any police interrogation, and
 therefore, the Circuit Court erred suppressing Statement 2 on
 Miranda grounds. See State v. Ikaika, 67 Haw. 563, 567-68, 689
 
P.2d 281, 284-85 (1985).
 
III.
 
We further conclude that: (1) Statements 2 and 3 are
 
not subject to suppression as the unlawful fruit of Statement 1;
 and (2) because Statement 2 was not obtained unlawfully,
 Statement 3 is not subject to suppression as the unlawful fruit
 of Statement 2. 
Under the "fruit of the poisonous tree" doctrine, "the 
use of evidence at trial which comes to light as a result of the exploitation of a previous illegal act of the police" is prohibited. State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai
'i 462, 475, 946 P.2d 32, 
45 (1997) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
As applied to confessions, the "fruit of the poisonous tree"
doctrine holds that where one confession or admission is
 illegally obtained and subsequently the defendant makes a
further confession, the second confession is inadmissible in
evidence as a "fruit of the poisonous tree" if it results
from an exploitation of the prior illegality. However, a
confession made subsequent to an inadmissible one is not
automatically inadmissible. Where a confession has been
 illegally obtained, the government will not be allowed to
introduce into evidence a subsequent confession unless it
first demonstrates that the latter was not obtained by
exploiting the initial illegality or that any connection
between the two had become so attenuated that the taint was
 dissipated.
 
State v. Joseph, 109 Hawai 'i 482, 499, 128 P.3d 795, 812 (2006) 
(emphasis added). 
A.
 
The record shows that Officer Rosa did not exploit
 
Statement 1 in order to obtain Statement 2. As we have
 
previously concluded, Statement 2 was not the product of
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interrogation; rather, Trinque made Statement 2 despite Officer
 
Rosa's directing Trinque not to make any statements. Under these
 circumstances, Statement 2 did not come to light as the result of
 the exploitation of Statement 1, and Statement 2 is not subject
 to suppression as the unlawful fruit of Statement 1.
 
With respect to Statement 3, because we have determined
 
that Statement 2 was not obtained unlawfully, Statement 3 is not
 subject to suppression as the unlawful fruit of Statement 2. We
 also conclude that Statement 3 was not the unlawful fruit of
 Statement 1. Trinque made Statement 3 post-Miranda, after he was
 advised of his Miranda rights and in response to being asked
 whether he wanted to make a statement. The police did not
 exploit Statement 1 in order to obtain Statement 3. Trinque was
 not being questioned about anything concerning his involvement in
 any crime when he made Statement 3. Instead, after advising
 Trinque of his Miranda rights, the police were attempting to
 determine whether he wanted to waive those rights. The
 incriminating portion of Statement 3 was Trinque's non-responsive
 reply to the question of whether he wanted to make a statement. 
Under these circumstances, we conclude that the police
 
did not exploit Statement 1 in obtaining Statement 3 and that
 Statement 3 was not the unlawful fruit of Statement 1.
 
B.
 
Trinque cites State v. Eli, 126 Hawai
'i 510, 273 P.3d 
1197 (2012), in arguing that we should affirm the Circuit Court. Eli, however, is distinguishable. 
While Eli was in custody, a police detective told Eli 
that he was under arrest for assaulting his daughter "and then 'asked [Eli] if he wanted to give a statement,' as it was 'his chance to give his side of the story.'" Eli, 126 Hawai
'i at 522, 
273 P.3d at 1208 (brackets omitted). The Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
held that the police subjected Eli to interrogation and violated Eli's Miranda rights by "asking [Eli] for his side of the story and indicating that it was his chance to give that story" before 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
advising Eli of his Miranda rights. Id. at 523, 273 P.3d at
 
1209. The court concluded that by subjecting Eli to a custodial
 
interrogation and obtaining his commitment to speak before
 Miranda warnings were given, the police rendered Eli's subsequent
 waiver of his Miranda rights invalid. Id. 
In applying the "fruit of the poisonous tree" doctrine,
 
the court held that the police exploited its Miranda violation
 and Eli's pre-Miranda statement (i.e., his agreement to make a
 statement and tell his side of the story) in obtaining Eli's
 post-Miranda statements. Id. at 524, 126 Hawaii at 1210. The
 
court ruled that "[Eli's] pre-Miranda statement was 'exploited'
 in that [Eli] 'was subsequently questioned' on the same matter he
 had agreed to talk about before being informed of his Miranda
 rights." Id. at 524-25, 273 P.3d at 1210-11. The court
 
therefore held that Eli's post-Miranda statements must be
 suppressed as the fruit of the police's Miranda violation and
 Eli's pre-Miranda statement. Id. at 525, 273 P.3d at 1211. 
Unlike in Eli, the police in this case did not ask 
Trinque to make a statement, and did not obtain Trinque's
 commitment to make a statement, about Trinque's version of the
 matter for which he had been arrested, before advising Trinque of
 his Miranda rights. The police also did not exploit or even
 refer to Statement 1 in obtaining Statements 2 and 3. The police
 did not subsequently question Trinque about any matter he had
 talked about in Statement 1, or about any matter he had agreed to
 talk about in Statement 1. In obtaining Statement 2, the police
 did not violate Trinque's Miranda rights or subject him to
 interrogation. Trinque made Statement 3 after he was advised of
 his Miranda rights, and the incriminating portion of Statement 3
 was Trinque's non-responsive answer to the post-Miranda inquiry
 regarding whether he wanted to waive his rights and make a
 statement. We conclude that Eli is distinguishable and does not
 control the decision in this case.
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we hold that the Circuit
 
Court erred in suppressing Statements 2 and 3. We vacate the
 
Order Suppressing Statements and the Voluntariness Order with
 respect to Statements 2 and 3, and we remand the case for further
 proceedings consistent with this Opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Tracy Murakami
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Kauai
for Plaintiff-Appellant
 
Jon N. Ikenaga
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellee
 
10
 