NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000334
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
MICHAEL EDWARD MILLER,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
WAIOLI CORPORATION, a Hawaii corporation;
JUDY D. WAKUMOTO, TRUSTEE; RUSSELL AKIO WATARI;
CLARENCE ELI KAONA, STATE OF HAWAII; JOSEPH A. KINOSHITA;
ELIAS DELBERT KAIPO SILVA; ISAAC KEKOA SILVA, J. WILLIAM SANBORN,
TRUSTEE OF THE J. WILLIAM SANBORN TRUST,
Defendants-Appellees
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 95-0132)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Chan, JJ.)
In this appeal arising out of a complaint to quiet
title as to an alleged easement, Plaintiff-Appellant Michael
Edward Miller (Miller) appeals from the Final Judgment filed on
March 17, 2015 (Final Judgment), entered by the Circuit Court of
the Fifth Circuit (circuit court).1  Final Judgment was entered
in favor of Defendants-Appellees Waioli Corporation (Waioli
Corp.), Judy D. Wakumoto, Trustee, Russell Akio Watari, and
Clarence Eli Kaona (collectively Defendants) and against Miller
1  The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presiding except as noted
below.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
on all claims of the Complaint filed May 4, 1995, pursuant to
Waioli Corp.'s Finding of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order
(FOFCOL) filed on October 18, 2013.2
I. BACKGROUND
This case involves an easement access to a parcel of
land owned by Miller located in Waioli, District of Hanalei,
Island and County of Kaua #i, State of Hawai# i.  Miller claims the
subject property is a portion of Royal Patent Grant No. 1953,
Apana 2, which purports to be a conveyance from Kamehameha IV to
Naweli.  The English translation of Royal Patent Grant No. 1953
indicates that the signature of the King is missing from the
document submitted by Miller.
Miller purchased the subject property from James H.
Masada by an Agreement of Sale dated April 29, 1980.  Upon
satisfaction of the Agreement of Sale, James H. Masada deeded the
parcel to Miller through a Warranty Deed dated June 1, 1989.  The
property description, attached as Exhibit A to the Warranty Deed,
expressly stated that the property lacked access to any road or
public highway.  The same day that the Warranty Deed was
recorded, Miller executed a Quitclaim Deed conveying title to the
property to himself and two others.  Through various conveyances
since then, title is now held solely by Miller.
Defendants are the owners of the properties that lead
up to and adjoin Miller's property over which he seeks an
easement, including Waioli Corp. a non-profit corporation
established for museum and land preservation purposes, for the
benefit of the people of Kaua #i and owner of multiple parcels of
land in Waioli Valley.
On May 4, 1995, Miller filed a complaint claiming an
easement for access from Kuhio Highway, the closest government
road, to his property.  The specific route that Miller requested
2  Final Judgment was also entered as to claims between Miller and the
State of Hawai #i, Joseph A. Kinoshita, Elias Delbert Kaipo Silva, Isaac Keokoa
Silva, and J. William Sanborn, Trustee of the J. William Sanborn Trust. 
However, the points of error on appeal raised by Miller do not impact the
entry of Final Judgment as to these parties.   
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
accesses Kuhio Highway from an existing government road.  The
route then runs between taro patches owned by private individuals
and ends at an irrigation ditch, where the remainder of the route
passes through government land.  Additionally, there are two
other route options for Miller to access his property, both of
which Miller was not amenable to.  The circuit court was
uncertain whether all owners along the other route options were
named as Defendants.
On October 9, 1996, the circuit court3 entered its
Order on Motion to Dismiss or For Stay, staying the proceeding
until Miller received an easement from the State of Hawai# i.  On
May 21, 2010, the State of Hawai# i and Miller entered into a
settlement agreement in which the State agreed to provide Miller
access across State lands surrounding Miller's property in the
event that the circuit court granted an easement across the
private lands, removing the circuit court stay and allowing the
case to proceed to trial.
Miller filed a Motion for Summary Judgment on
August 20, 2012, arguing an entitlement to an easement based on
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 7-1 and by implied grant or
reservation.  The circuit court denied the Motion for Summary
Judgment on October 8, 2012.  Miller then filed a Motion for
Partial Summary Judgment on February 1, 2013, seeking a
determination of the legal issue as to whether his property is
entitled to access under HRS § 7-1 without a determination as to
the scope of the easement.  The circuit court denied the Motion
for Partial Summary Judgment and entered its order on March 18,
2013.
The parties proceeded to trial on Miller's claim for
entitlement to an easement.  Following a jury-waived trial, the
circuit court entered its FOFCOL on October 18, 2013 holding that
Miller was not entitled to the requested easement for ingress or
egress or utilities from Kuhio Highway to his property.  Final
3  The Honorable Clifford Nakea presiding. 
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Judgment was entered on March 17, 2015.
II. POINTS OF ERROR
On appeal, Miller appears to primarily contend that the
circuit court erred when it held that Miller was not entitled to
his requested easement for ingress and egress or utilities from
Kuhio Highway to Miller's property pursuant to HRS § 7-1 or based
on an implied grant of easement.  Miller challenges the following
conclusions of law issued by the circuit court:
1. Plaintiff failed to prove by a preponderance of the
evidence that Miller's lot and the lands over which
Plaintiff seeks an easement were owned by common owners.
2. Plaintiff failed to prove by a preponderance of the
evidence that he is the owner of the Miller lot because the
signature of the King is missing from the Royal Patent Grant
No. 1953 and therefore, there may not be a chain of paper
title to Plaintiff.
3. The fact that the Miller lot and the lands over which
Plaintiff seeks an easement may have been part of the public
domain does not confer a right of way by necessity over
Defendants' property.
4. Plaintiff is not entitled to an easement over Defendants
Hideo Watari's and Russell Watari's Land Court property.
5. Plaintiff waived his right to an easement when he took
title to the Miller lot knowing that it did not access [sic]
to a government road.
6. The Miller lot is not a kuleana and therefore not entitle
[sic] to an easement under HRS § 7-1.
Additionally, Miller challenges the following findings of fact
issued by the circuit court:
37. The route that Plaintiff is requesting is the shortest
but the other options are not more difficult or expensive or
less intrusive on the owners of the servient lots over which
an easement may be located. 
. . . .
39. Plaintiff has failed to provide a description of the
location of the easement requested in Exhibit "A" which
describes the location of the requested easement with
sufficient detail.
. . . . 
41. There is no credible testimony that any other member of
the Pa family accessed property past Defendant Watari's
property in Waioli Valley for farming or any other purpose.  
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
A.  Conclusions of Law
[The appellate] court reviews the trial court's COLs de
novo.  A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and is
freely reviewable for its correctness.  Moreover, a COL that
is supported by the trial court's FOFs and that reflects an
application of the correct rule of law will not be
overturned.
Bhakta v. Cnty. of Maui, 109 Hawai #i 198, 208, 124 P.3d 943, 953
(2005) (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets in
original omitted).
B.  Findings of Fact
[The appellate] court reviews the trial court's FOFs under
the clearly erroneous standard.  Ueoka v. Szymanski,  107
Hawai#i 386, 393, 114 P.3d 892, 899 (2005) (citations
omitted). 
An FOF is clearly erroneous when, despite evidence to
support the finding, the appellate court is left with
the definite and firm conviction in reviewing the
entire evidence that a mistake has been committed.  An
FOF is also clearly erroneous when the record lacks
substantial evidence to support the finding.  We have
defined substantial evidence as credible evidence
which is of sufficient quality and probative value to
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a
conclusion. 
Bremer v. Weeks,  104 Hawai #i 43, 51, 85 P.3d 150, 158
(2004) (quoting Beneficial Hawai #i, Inc. v. Kida,  96
Hawai#i 289, 305, 30 P.3d 895, 911 (2001)).
Bhakta, 109 Hawai# i at 208, 124 P.3d at 953 (brackets in original
omitted).
C. Summary Judgment
The appellate court reviews "the circuit court's grant
or denial of summary judgment de novo."  Querubin v. Thronas, 107
Hawai#i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005) (quoting Durette v.
Aloha Plastic Recycling, Inc., 105 Hawai #i 490, 501, 100 P.3d 60,
71 (2004)).
IV. DISCUSSION
A.  Easement Access under HRS § 7-1
Miller contends that the circuit court erred in its
conclusion of law that the subject property is not kuleana and
therefore, he is not entitled to an easement under HRS § 7-1.
Miller argues that access rights under HRS § 7-1 can be asserted
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
by both kuleana owners and owners of ancient tenancies, including
Grants and Royal Patent Grants.  He bases his contention on the
proposition as set forth in Rogers v. Pedro , 3 Haw. App. 136,
139, 642 P.2d 549, 551-52 (1982), that "[i]n order to establish
entitlement to an easement by necessity under HRS § 7-1, it must
be clearly established that the landlocked parcel is an ancient
tenancy or kuleana whose origin is traceable to the Great
Mahele."  (Emphasis added).
Waioli Corp. argues that kuleana awards, and not
government grants such as those made at the time of the subject
parcel, are entitled to a right-of-way under HRS § 7-1.   Waioli
Corp. explains that Royal Patent Grants and Land Commission
Awards of kuleana title are two distinct land holdings as they
are different in origin and purpose and therefore should be
treated differently.
To understand the distinction between the land
holdings, we first examine the transition period from the
traditional Hawaiian land tenure system to a more western
structure of property ownership.  The ancient Hawaiian system of
land tenure was explained by the Supreme Court of the Territory
of Hawai# i in Territory v. Bishop Trust Co. , 41 Haw. 358, 361-62
(Haw. Terr. 1956):
The unit of land was the ahupuaa, usually running from the
mountains to the sea.  Within the ahupuaa were a number of
subdivisions, each of which was called an ili.  This
division was for the convenience of the chief, administered
by a konohiki  or agent appointed by the chief.  (It is only
in the later statutes that the chiefs or landlords are
referred to as konohikis .)  It had no existence separate
from that of the ahupuaa, except the so-called ili ku or
independent ili, although the independent ili paid tribute
to the king.  There were also kuleanas , meaning a tract of
land within the larger tract.  The term kuleana originally
referred to a right of property in any business or other
matter but afterwards was applied to the land holding of the
tenant or hoaaina residing in the ahupuaa.
In order to transition from the traditional Hawaiian
land tenure to a more western system of landholding, the Board of
Commissioners to Quiet Land Titles (Land Commission) was
established in 1845 to investigate, and settle all land claims of
private individuals and was empowered to make Land Commission
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Awards.  Omerod v. Heirs of Kaheananui , 116 Hawai# i 239, 247, 172
P.3d 983, 991 (2007) (citing Makila Land Co., LLC v. Kapu, 114
Hawai#i 56, 58, 156 P.3d 482, 484 (App. 2006)).  "In 1847, the
King together with the Privy Council determined that a land
mahele, or division, was necessary for the prosperity of the
Kingdom."  State by Kobayashi v. Zimring , 58 Haw. 106, 112, 566
P.2d 725, 730 (1977).  The rules adopted to guide such a division
were, in part, "(1) that the King shall retain all his private
lands as individual property and (2) that of the remaining lands,
one-third was to be set aside for the Government, one-third to
the chiefs and konohiki, and one-third for the tenants."  Id.  
The Great Mahele was started in 1848, with the chiefs
and konohiki to be the first to settle their interests by
agreement with the King.  Id.  After the agreements with the
chiefs and the konohiki were completed, the remaining lands were
divided between the King and the Government.  Id.
All lands of the king, the government, and the konohiki  were
awarded subject to the rights of native tenants.  In 1850,
the enactment of further principles or the Kuleana Act
empowered the Land Commission to award fee simple title to
native tenants for their plots of land or kuleana . . . .
The awards were limited to the amount of land actually
cultivated, plus small houselots distinct from the
cultivated lands.  When the Land Commission confirmed an
individual's land claim, it issued an award of that land to
the claimant.  Generally, upon payment of a commutation tax
to the government, the minister of the interior conveyed
complete title in the form of a royal patent.
Kapu, 114 Hawai #i at 58-59, 156 P.3d at 484-85 (citing Melody
Kapilialoha MacKenzie ed., Native Hawaiian Rights Handbook 151
(1991)).  Royal Patents were issued upon Land Commission Awards
by The Minister of Interior upon payment of commutation by the
awardee to the government.  Zimring , 58 Haw. at 111, 566 P.2d at
730.  However, payment of commutation was not required to secure
title to kuleana land on the presumption that commutation had
already been paid by the konohiki of the ahupuaa.  Melody
Kapilialoha MacKenzie ed., Native Hawaiian Rights Handbook 151
(1991).  "The awarding of these kuleanas  to the native tenants
completed the mahele, or division, of the lands within the
Islands into Crown Lands, Government Lands, Konohiki Lands, and
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Kuleana Lands."  Jon. J. Chinen, The Great Mahele: Hawaii's Land
Division of 1848  31 (1958).  Subsequently, the Land Commission
dissolved in March of 1855.  Id. at 13.
Grants and Royal Patent Grants were available to both
non-native Hawaiians and native Hawaiians.  Grants and Royal
Patent Grants were issued by the government "to provide landless
citizens with land and to obtain revenues for public
expenditures."  Zimring, 58 Haw. at 114, 566 P.2d at 731.
Following the division of the lands into Crown, Government,
and Konohiki Lands, from time to time portions of the
Government Lands were sold as a means of obtaining revenue
to meet the increasing costs of the Government.  Purchasers
of these lands were issued documents called "Grants" or
"Royal Patent Grants."  These differed from the Royal
Patents issued upon Land Commission Awards.  It was not
necessary for the recipients of the Royal Patent Grants to
obtain an award for their land from the Land Commission.
Jon. J. Chinen, The Great Mahele: Hawaii's Land Division of 1848  
27 (1958). 
Section 7 of the Kuleana Act is the only section that
remains and is essentially unchanged in the form of HRS § 7-1,
which provides:
Where the landlords have obtained, or may hereafter obtain,
allodial titles to their lands, the people on each of their
lands shall not be deprived of the right to take firewood,
house-timber, aho cord, thatch, or ki leaf, from the land on
which they live, for their own private use, but they shall
not have a right to take such articles to sell for profit.
The people shall also have a right to drinking water, and
running water, and the right of way.  The springs of water,
running water, and roads shall be free to all, on all lands
granted in fee simple; . . .
"The term 'landlord' appears to be a loose translation of
'konohiki' from the Hawaiian language versions of these acts. 
The word 'konohiki' is defined as '[h]eadman of an ahupua #a land
division under the chief."  Pub. Access Shoreline Hawaii v.
Hawai#i County Planning Comm'n, 79 Hawai #i 425, 438 n.22, 903 P.2d
1246, 1259 n.22 (1995).
"The legislative history of this section shows that it
was intended to be the sole and exclusive measure of the rights
of the hoaainas as against the Konohikis of the land within which
the kuleanas were situated . . ."  McBryde Sugar Co., Ltd. v.
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Robinson, 55 Haw. 260, 287, 517 P.2d 26, 41 (1973).  "[T]he King
had expressed concern that 'a little bit of land, even with
allodial title, if they (the hoaainas) were cut off from all
other privileges, would be of very little value.' Privy Council
Minutes (July 13, 1850)."  Id.   The Legislature expressed concern
that "many difficulties and complaints have arisen from the bad
feeling existing on account of the konohikis forbidding the
tenants on the lands enjoying the benefits that have been by law
given them."  Oni v. Meek , 2 Haw. 87, 95 (Haw. Kingdom 1858).
Therefore, it appears that the purpose of HRS § 7-1 was to
protect the rights of the native tenants on the ahupua #a and #ili
of the konohiki, a right that was not available to all owners of
Grants carved from government lands.
Hawai#i case law involving access easements awarded
pursuant to HRS § 7-1 have considered such rights in regards to
Royal Patents issued upon Land Commission Awards of kuleana lands
rather than Grants or Royal Patent Grants issued without Land
Commission Awards. See Bremer v. Weeks , 104 Hawai #i 43, 85 P.3d
150 (2004)(discussing kuleana right-of-way access pursuant to HRS
§ 7-1 based on ancient or historical use and necessity); Palama
v. Sheehan, 50 Haw. 298, 440 P.2d 95 (1968)(holding that kuleana
owners were entitled to right-of-way based on ancient Hawaiian
rights or reasonable necessity); Henry v. Ahlo, 9 Haw. 490 (Haw.
Rep. 1894) (holding that landlocked kuleana parcel owner was
entitled to an easement by necessity over adjacent land to the
nearest government road); Rogers, 3 Haw. App. 136, 642 P.2d 549
(confirming access to a landlocked Molokai kuleana described as
Apana 1 of Land Commission Award 329-Z and known as Parcel 53
across parcels covered by Grant 474 to the government road);
Santos v. Perreira , 2 Haw. App. 387, 390, 633 P.2d 1118, 1122
(1981) (holding that plaintiffs' theory of right-of-way pursuant
to HRS § 7-1 was inapplicable because land at issue was not
kuleana); Haiku Plantations Ass'n v. Lono , 1 Haw. App. 263, 618
P.2d 312 (1980) (holding that the right of access to a landlocked
kuleana parcel does not include the right to park vehicles along
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
an easement).
In this case, Royal Patent Grant 1953 was not a claim
for kuleana land confirmed by the Land Commission, but rather a
grant issued by King Kamehameha IV in 1856, one year after the
Land Commission had been dissolved.  As such, Miller was required
to establish that Royal Patent Grant 1953 was the type of grant
which was afforded the privileges under HRS § 7-1.  Miller failed
to provide evidentiary support tracing Royal Patent Grant 1953 to
the Great Mahele.  See Rogers , 3 Haw. App. at 139, 642 P.2d at
551-52.  Miller did not set forth a chain of title to the subject
property from the time of its origin to the present that
established an entitlement to native tenants' rights.  Further,
Miller failed to provide any documentation demonstrating that an
express reservation was contained in the original grants of the
Defendants' properties entitling Miller to an easement by express
reservation.  See Id.
Based on the foregoing, in consideration of the
transition from a traditional land tenure system to a more
western structure of property ownership, the purpose and origin
of HRS § 7-1, the application of kuleana access rights pursuant
to HRS § 7-1 in case law, the laws in effect at the time the
Royal Patent Grant was made, and the evidence provided by Miller,
we conclude that Miller failed to prove a right-of-way access
pursuant to HRS § 7-1 based on necessity or ancient historical
use.  Accordingly, the circuit court did not err in its holding
that Miller was not entitled to the subject easement based on its
conclusion that Miller's lot is not kuleana and therefore is not
entitled to an easement under HRS § 7-1.
Miller contends that the circuit court erred in denying
his Motion for Partial Summary Judgment as to Issue of
Entitlement of Easement under HRS § 7-1 filed February 1, 2013,
however, since we determine that access rights under HRS § 7-1 do
not extend to Miller's property, we affirm the circuit court's
order denying Miller's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment
entered on March 18, 2013.
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B. Implied Grant of Easement
Miller contends that common ownership and conveyance of
his parcel and defendants' parcels created an implied grant of
easement by necessity.  Miller challenges the circuit court's
conclusions of law #1 and #2.  In order to establish an easement
by necessity based on an implied grant, the claimant must first
show "an original unity of ownership of the parcels which later
become the dominant and servient parcels."  Malulani Group, Ltd.
v. Kaupo Ranch, Ltd., 133 Hawai #i 425, 428, 329 P.3d 330, 333
(2014).  Thus, an easement cannot exist where there is no common
ownership of the two parcels prior to the severance of the
landlocked parcel.4
In Malulani , this court determined whether the Kingdom
of Hawai# i's previous ownership of the subject properties could
satisfy the unity of ownership requirement for an implied
easement claim.  The Malulani court held that the requirement can
be satisfied by prior government ownership when the government
impliedly granted an easement, "i.e. at the time of severance,
the government conveyed the quasi-dominant parcel which would
benefit from the claimed easement and retained the quasi-servient
parcel over which the implied easement is claimed."  Malulani ,
133 Hawai# i at 433, 329 P.3d at 338.  We apply the rule of
Malulani to this case, notwithstanding the fact that the Malulani
disposition was entered subsequent to the outcome of the instant
proceeding in circuit court.  Bank of Hawaii v. Davis Radio Sales
& Service, Inc., 6 Haw. App. 469, 477, 727 P.2d 419, 425 (1986)
("When there is a change in the law by court decision between the
time of the trial court ruling and the time of appeal, the
appellate court applies the law prevailing at the time of the
appellate disposition.") (internal quotations omitted).
Accordingly, Miller would have to establish that the Kingdom of
4  If the unity of ownership requirement is satisfied, the focus then
shifts to the intent of the parties at the time the properties were severed
"as shown by all the facts and circumstances under which the conveyance was
made."  Henmi Apartments, Inc. v. Sawyer , 3 Haw. App. 555, 559, 655 P.2d 881,
885 (1982).   
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Hawai#i had originally held unity of ownership and at the time it
had conveyed the parcel that Miller eventually came to own, it
had retained the parcels that the Defendants eventually came to
own.
Miller argues that the Government of Hawai# i, as common
grantor, conveyed the subject property with an implied grant of
an easement.  Miller claims that the lands covered by Royal
Patent Grant No. 1953 and the lands over which he seeks an
easement to his property were lots commonly owned by Kamehameha
III and IV and were part of the Government lands of Waioli.
Regardless of whether Miller's assertions are accurate, Miller
failed to establish that at the time the subject property and the
Defendants' properties were severed, the Government conveyed
Miller's property, the quasi-dominant property which would
benefit from the claimed easement, and retained the Defendants'
properties, the quasi-servient property over which the easement
is claimed.  Without evidence as to the Government's conveyance
of the subject property and Defendants' properties, Miller's
claim that prior government ownership of properties satisfies the
unity of ownership requirement for implying an easement fails.
We therefore conclude that the circuit court did not err in its
holding that Miller was not entitled to his requested easement
based on an implied grant of easement by necessity.
Miller challenges the circuit court's conclusion of law
#2.  However, his contentions are not supported by any
discernible argument and fails to state any alleged error
committed by the circuit court.  Therefore, this contention is
deemed waived.  See Kakinami v. Kakinami, 127 Hawai‘i 126, 144
n.16, 276 P.3d 695, 713 n.16 (2012) (citing In re Guardianship of
Carlsmith, 113 Hawai‘i 236, 246, 151 P.3d 717, 727 (2007) (noting
that this court may “disregard a particular contention if the
appellant makes no discernible argument in support of that
position”) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted))
Finally, Miller contends that the circuit court erred
in holding that it did not have jurisdiction over land court
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
property as set forth in its conclusion of law stating that
"[p]laintiff is not entitled to an easement over Defendant Hideo
Watari's and Russell Watari's Land Court property."  We do not
read the circuit court's conclusion of law #4 as a ruling that it
lacked jurisdiction over the Wataris' property.  Instead this
conclusion of law is consistent with its determination that
Miller was not entitled to the specific easement he requested.
Miller's challenge to conclusion of law #4 does not entitle him
to any relief.
Based on the foregoing, we need not address Miller's
remaining issues on appeal.
V. CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated above, we conclude that based on
the evidence presented at trial, Miller is not entitled to the
specific easement he requests pursuant to HRS § 7-1 or an express
or implied grant of easement.  Whether Miller is entitled to an
alternative route pursuant to other grounds is not an issue on
appeal and therefore, we decline to address it.  Therefore, the
Final Judgment entered on March 17, 2015 is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 27, 2018.
On the briefs:
Joe P. Moss,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Michael W. Gibson,
Francis P. Hogan and
Clara Park,
(Ashford & Wriston),
for Defendant-Appellee.
Joinder on the answering
brief:
Joseph N. Kobayashi,
for Judy D. Wakumoto, Trustee,
Russell Ako Watari and 
Clarence Eli Kaona,
Defendants-Appellees.  Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
13