FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
LIANA KEALOHILANI MARTINEZ, fka L.A. LIANA BECKWITH,
aka LEE ANN MATHIS, aka LEE ANN CHOPRA, aka LEE ANN NOVICK,
aka LEE ROBINSON NOVICK, aka LIANE NOVICH BECKWITH,
aka LIANA KEALOHILANI VAN WYE, Respondent-Appellent-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I BOARD OF NURSING, Petitioner-Appellee-Appellee
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000121
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-1125)

 
JANUARY 11, 2016,
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING J., FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
Respondent-Appellant-Appellant Liana Kealohilani

 
Martinez, fka L.A. Liana Beckwith, aka Lee Ann Mathis, aka Lee
 
Ann Chopra, aka Lee Ann Novick, aka Lee Robinson Novick, aka
 Liane Novich Beckwith, aka Liana Kealohilani Van Wye (Martinez)
 
appeals from the "Order Affirming Board of Nursing's Final Order"
 
(Order) and "Judgment," both entered on February 17, 2015 in the
 
1
Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided. 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The points of error asserted in Martinez's opening
 
brief are summarized as follows:2
 
(1) the Petitioner-Appellee-Appellee Department of
 
Commerce and Consumer Affairs, Regulated Industries Complaints
 
Office (DCCA) failed to provide adequate notice of the charges
 
against Martinez;
 
(2) the circuit court erred in deferring to the
 
"Board's Final Order" (Final Order), entered by Petitioner-
Appellee-Appellee Board of Nursing (Board) on April 4, 2014,
 
because the Final Order was based on an incorrect interpretation
 
of Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) § 16-89-60(5) (2013);
 
(3) the hearing officer erred in sustaining the DCCA's
 
objection to Martinez's testimony regarding past disclosures to
 the Board and in granting the DCCA's motion to quash her subpoena
 duces tecum; and
 
(4) the DCCA improperly submitted to the Board evidence
 
of a 2005 complaint against Martinez, which alleged that she
 failed to report necessary information to the Board.
I. BACKGROUND
 
This is a secondary appeal from the circuit court's
 
review of the Board's Final Order, which affirmed the Board's
 finding that Martinez violated Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 457-12(a)(6) (2013 Repl.).
3
 
Martinez was licensed by the Board as a registered
 
2 For clarity, we have consolidated those points of error that raise
duplicative arguments.
 
3	 HRS § 457-12(a)(6) provides:
 
§ 457-12 Discipline; grounds; proceedings; hearings.
(a) In addition to any other actions authorized by law, the
board shall have the power to deny, revoke, limit, or
suspend any license to practice nursing as a registered
nurse or as a licensed practical nurse applied for or issued
by the board in accordance with this chapter, and to fine or
to otherwise discipline a licensee for any cause authorized
by law, including but not limited to the following:
 
. . . .
 
(6) 	Unprofessional conduct as defined by the board
in accordance with its own rules[.]
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
nurse in Hawai 'i on June 8, 2004. In her June 25, 2004 
"Application for License (Without Examination) -- Nurse" (2004 
Application), which was submitted to the Board, Martinez listed 
Utah, Georgia, and New York in the section of the application 
requiring the applicant to identify "Other State Licenses." Martinez also marked "NO" in the box next to the question: 
5) "Are you presently being investigated or is any
disciplinary action pending against you? 
If "YES", specify all states where action was or may be 
imposed. Arrange to have certified documents from each 
state in which disciplinary action or investigation 
occurred or is pending against you sent directly to the 
Board."
 
(Format altered.) 
On June 4, 2009, Martinez's employer AB Staffing 
Solutions (AB Staffing) reported Martinez to the Board for 
"fraudulent activity." In its letter to the Board, AB Staffing 
claimed that when Martinez applied for employment with the company in 2008, she reported on her application (AB Staffing
Application) that she was licensed to practice nursing in Hawai
'i 
but did not indicate that she was licensed to practice in other 
states, nor did she indicate whether she had disciplinary actions taken against her nursing licenses. AB Staffing reported that it later discovered that Martinez was licensed to practice in several other states and had disciplinary actions taken against her in New York, Pennsylvania, and Washington. 
On June 30, 2010, the DCCA filed a petition for
 
disciplinary action against Martinez (Petition). The Petition
 
4
, -12(a)(8)
 alleged that Martinez violated HRS § 457-12(a)(6) 
5
(2013 Repl.), and -12(a)(11)  (Supp. 2015), when she failed to
4 The DCCA's Petition mistakenly cites to HRS § 457-12(6) instead of
HRS § 457-12(a)(6).
 
5
 HRS § 457-12(a)(8) and HRS § 457-12(a)(11) provide:
 
§ 457-12 Discipline; grounds; proceedings; hearings.
(a) In addition to any other actions authorized by law, the
board shall have the power to deny, revoke, limit, or
suspend any license to practice nursing as a registered
nurse or as a licensed practical nurse applied for or issued
by the board in accordance with this chapter, and to fine or
(continued...)
 
3
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
disclose in her 2004 Application that she had disciplinary
 
actions taken against her in other states and when she failed to
 disclose in her AB Staffing Application that she was licensed to
 practice in other states.
 
On December 6, 2010, the DCCA filed an amended petition
 
(Amended Petition), which withdrew the allegations pertaining to
 
Martinez's 2004 Application. Instead, the Amended Petition
 
6
alleged Martinez violated HRS § 457-12(a)(6)  when she failed to
disclose on her AB Staffing Application that she was licensed to

 
practice in other states and that she had disciplinary actions
 
taken against her other nursing licenses in those states. The
 Amended Petition also included allegations that Martinez had her
 license suspended in New York, Pennsylvania, and Washington.
 
On February 12, 2013, the Board's hearing officer held

 
an administrative hearing on the Amended Petition. At the
 hearing, the hearing officer had an opportunity to rule on
 Martinez's subpoena duces tecum, which sought reports and files
 relating to a 2005 "Request for Investigation" (2005 Complaint).
7
 
Martinez alleges that the 2005 Complaint initiated a 2006 DCCA
 investigation into the following allegations against her: 
Fraud or deceit in procuring or attempting to procure a
 
5(...continued)
to otherwise discipline a licensee for any cause authorized

by law, including but not limited to the following:
 
. . . . 
(8) 	Revocation, suspension, limitation, or other
disciplinary action by another state of a
nursing license for reasons as provided in this
section;
 
. . . .
 
(11) 	Submitting to or filing with the board any
notice, statement, or other document required
under this chapter, which is false or untrue or
contains any material misstatement of fact,
including a false attestation of compliance with
continuing competency requirements[.]
 
6
 Again, the DCCA's Amended Petition mistakenly cites to HRS § 457­
12(6) instead of HRS § 457-12(a)(6).
 
7
 Martinez's opening brief alleges that the 2005 Complaint was made
by her former employer, the Queen's Medical Center.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
license to practice nursing as a registered nurse;
unprofessional conduct; . . . submitting to or filing with
the board any notice, statement or document required under
this [HRS chapter 457], which is false or untrue or contains
any material misstatement of fact[;]
 
and
 
Failure to report to board any disciplinary action taken
against the licensee in another jurisdiction within thirty
days after the disciplinary actions becomes final.
Disciplined in Washington state, New York, Pennsylvania for
false verification that she [was] successfully granted [an]
MSN [Master of Science in Nursing degree] and passed the
Adult Nurse Practitioner Examination to qualify for APRN
[advanced practice registered nurse] license with
prescriptive authority.
 
Martinez's subpoena duces tecum sought "[r]eports, correspondence
 
and files" relating to the DCCA's investigation.
 
The DCCA orally moved to quash Martinez's subpoena
 
duces tectum on the grounds that the evidence requested was not
 relevant to the proceedings before the hearing officer. The DCCA
 argued that the requested evidence pertained to a closed DCCA
 case where the DCCA investigated allegations that Martinez
 "failed to notify the [Board] of her prior disciplinary actions
 in her application . . . ." The DCCA maintained that the
 evidence was not relevant to the proceedings before the hearing
 officer because "there is no allegation regarding [Martinez]
 failing to disclose anything, any disciplinary action to the
 [Board] in her application for the [Board]."
 
In response, Martinez argued that the evidence was
 
relevant to show that, although a complaint was filed in 2005 and
 an investigation started against Martinez in 2006, "[n]othing
 ever came of that hearing or never [sic] came of those
 allegations, and yet the same allegations are being brought up
 today in 2009 . . . based on [Martinez's application to] AB
 Staffing." The hearing officer agreed with the DCCA, however,
 and ruled that the evidence was not relevant to the DCCA's
 charges against Martinez.
 
On March 12, 2013, the Board's hearing officer issued
 
its "Hearings Officer's Findings of Fact, Conclusion of Law, and
 Recommended Order" (FOF/COL/Order), which concluded that Martinez
 
violated HRS §§ 457-12(a)(6) and -12(a)(8). The FOF/COL/Order
 
5
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
also recommended dismissal of the HRS § 457-12(a)(11) charge
 
against Martinez, finding that the
 
[2004 Application] . . . appears to require disclosure of
prior disciplinary actions only when the applicant's license
had been subject to disciplinary action by the Hawaii Board.
. . or the applicant was presently the subject of an
investigation or disciplinary action . . . , neither of
which has been established here.
 
(Footnote omitted.)
 
On March 14, 2013, the hearings officer amended its
 
FOF/COL/Order in its "Hearings Officer's Amended Recommended
 
Order" (Amended Order) to exclude its previous finding that
 
Martinez violated HRS § 457-12(a)(8) and its recommendation to
 
dismiss the HRS § 457-12(a)(11) charge. Instead, the Amended
 Order determined:
 
The evidence proved that [Martinez] engaged in
unprofessional conduct when she failed to report to the
Board the disciplinary actions taken against her nursing
licenses in New York, Pennsylvania, and Washington, and by
wrongfully taking a controlled medication from her
employer's premises as determined by the New York licensing
authority, in violation of HRS §457-12(a)(6).
[8]
 
8 The Amended Order quoted HAR § 16-89-60(5) and -(7)(D)(2013) in
the section entitled, "Conclusions of Law." Although not expressly stated, it
can be reasonably inferred that the hearing officer included these
administrative rules in its order to provide legal support for its
determination that Martinez violated HRS § 457-12(a)(6). HAR § 16-89-60
provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 16-89-60 Types of unprofessional conduct. The types
of unprofessional conduct covered in this provision shall
include, but are not limited to, the following:
 
. . . . 
(5)	 Failing to report to the board any revocation,
suspension, or other disciplinary actions
against the applicant or licensee by another
state or jurisdiction of the United States for
any act or omission which would constitute
unprofessional conduct;
 
. . . .
 
(7)	 Engaging in any act inconsistent with the
practice of nursing as defined in section 457-2,
HRS, for that of a licensed practical nurse or a
registered nurse including:
 
. . . . 
(D)	 Unauthorized use or removal of drugs,
supplies, or property from a patient or

(continued...)
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The hearings officer "recommend[ed] that the Board find and
 
conclude that the preponderance of the evidence established that
 [Martinez] violated HRS § 457-12(a)(6)."
 
On April 12, 2013, the DCCA filed "[DCCA's] Statement
 
in Support of Hearings Officer's [FOF/COL/Order] and [Amended
 Order] Filed on March 14, 2013" (Statement in Support). The DCCA
 
attached the 2005 Complaint to its Statement in Support. On
 
March 27, 2013, Martinez submitted her written "Exceptions to
 Hearings Officer's [FOF/COL/Order] and [Amended Order]."
 
On April 4, 2014, the Board issued its Final Order, 
"adopt[ing] the Hearings Officer's recommended decision as the Board's Final Order." The Board concluded that Martinez violated HRS § 457-12(a)(6). The Board ordered, inter alia, that Martinez's license to practice nursing in Hawai
'i be suspended 
for three years and that she complete education courses to be determined by the Board. 
On May 6, 2014, Martinez appealed the Board's Final
 
Order to the circuit court. The circuit court held an oral
 argument on November 21, 2014. On February 17, 2015, the circuit
 court entered its Order, affirming the Board's Final Order.
 
On March 5, 2015, Martinez filed a notice of appeal to
 
this court.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
Review of a decision made by the circuit court upon
its review of an agency's decision is a secondary appeal.
The standard of review is one in which [the appellate] court
must determine whether the circuit court was right or wrong
in its decision, applying the standards set forth in HRS
§ 91-14(g) [(2012 Repl.)] to the agency's decision.
 
HRS § 91-14, entitled "Judicial review of contested
cases," provides in relevant part: 
(g)	 Upon review of the record the court may affirm the
decision of the agency or remand the case with
instructions for further proceedings; or it may
reverse or modify the decision and order if the
 
8(...continued)
 
health care facility, institution or other

work place location, or diverting or
attempting to divert drugs or controlled
substances for unauthorized use or
 appropriating money, supplies, or
equipment[.] 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
substantial rights of the petitioners may have been
prejudiced because the administrative findings,
conclusions, decisions, or orders are: 
(1)	 In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or 
(2)	 In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction
of the agency; or 
(3)	 Made upon unlawful procedure; or 
(4)	 Affected by other error of law; or 
(5)	 Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative,
and substantial evidence on the whole record; or 
(6)	 Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by abuse of
discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of
discretion.
 
Under HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law are reviewable
under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions regarding
procedural defects under subsection (3); findings of fact
under subsection (5); and an agency's exercise of discretion
under subsection (6).
 
United Pub. Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO, v. Hanneman, 106 
Hawai'i 359, 363, 105 P.3d 236, 240 (2005) (format altered) 
(citing Paul's Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Befitel, 104 Hawai 'i 412, 
416, 91 P.3d 494, 498 (2004)). 
"An agency's conclusions of law are reviewed de novo, 
while an agency's factual findings are reviewed for clear error[.]" Del Monte Fresh Produce (Hawaii), Inc. v. Int'l 
Longshore & Warehouse Union, Local 142, AFL-CIO, 112 Hawai
'i 489, 
499, 146 P.3d 1066, 1076 (2006) (citations omitted). A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when "(1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding or determination, or (2) despite substantial evidence to support the finding or determination, the appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made." Id. (internal 
quotations omitted) (quoting In re Water Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai
'i 97, 119, 9 P.3d 409, 431 (2000)). "Substantial 
evidence is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Del Monte, 112 Hawai
'i at 499, 146 P.3d 
at 1076 (internal quotations omitted) (quoting In re Water Use Permit, 94 Hawai
'i at 119, 9 P.3d at 431)). 
8
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
Martinez contends the Amended Pleading provided
 
insufficient notice of the DCCA's charges against her. "Modern
 
judicial pleading has been characterized as simplified notice
 pleading. Its function is to give opposing parties fair notice
 of what the claim is and the grounds upon which it rests." Perry
 
v. Planning Comm'n of Hawaii Cty., 62 Haw. 666, 685, 619 P.2d 95, 108 (1980) (internal quotation marks and ellipses omitted) (quoting Conley v. Gibson, 355 U.S. 41, 47 (1957)); see Adams v. Dole Food Co., Inc., 132 Hawai
'i 478, 488, 323 P.3d 122, 132 
(App. 2014) ("Hawaii's rules of notice pleading require that a complaint set forth a short and plain statement of the claim that provides defendant with fair notice of what the plaintiff's claim is and the grounds upon which the claim rests." (quoting Tokuhisa v. Cutter Mgmt. Co, 122 Hawai
'i 181, 192, 223 P.3d 246, 257 (App. 
2009))). The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has suggested, however, that 
pleadings in administrative proceedings may be subject to a more lenient standard. See Perry, 62 Haw. at 685-86, 619 P.2d at 108. 
In Perry, applicants sought a special permit to use 
approximately sixty-five acres of land in Puna, Hawai
'i for 
"quarrying purposes." Id. at 669, 619 P.2d at 99. Because the 
subject land was within an "agricultural" district, the applicant was required to receive approval from both the County of Hawai
'i 
Planning Commission (Planning Commission) and the State Land Use 
Commission (LUC). Id. The Planning Commission approved the 
permit, but limited the "quarry facilities and equipment to a 
portable crusher, a portable office and toilet, and a small storage building[.]" Id. at 671, 619 P.2d at 100. The LUC then 
approved the special permit without further modification. Id. at 
672, 619 P.2d at 101. 
Owners of the property adjoining the proposed quarry
 
site then appealed the Planning Commission and LUC's decision to
 the circuit court, arguing, inter alia, that "the granted permit
 exceeded the scope of the application[.]" Id. The circuit
 
court, siding with the owners, concluded "[t]hat the inclusion of
 screening and crushing operations and a cement batching plant as
 
9
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
approved uses under the special permit approved by the [LUC] was
 
beyond the scope of the original application."9 Id. at 684, 619
 
P.2d at 107.
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court was tasked with determining 
the applicable standard in administrative pleadings. In formulating its opinion, the supreme court acknowledged the position in other jurisdictions that pleadings in administrative proceedings are subject to a more lenient standard than pleadings before a court. Id. at 685-86, 619 P.2d at 108. The supreme 
court cited to an Illinois appellate court case that held the function of written charges, in the context of an employee discharge proceeding before an administrative agency, was to "simply apprise the accused of the charges against him with reasonable certainty so to enable him to intelligently prepare his defense." Id. (quoting Hall v. Lyons, 389 N.E.2d 1309, 1314 
(Ill. Ct. App. 1979)). The supreme court noted further that "[f]ederal courts tend to follow an even less formal approach to administrative pleadings" than the standard articulated in the Illinois case and cited to a federal opinion that determined: 
Pleadings in administrative proceedings are not judged by
the standards applied to an indictment at common law. It is
sufficient if the respondent "understood the issue" and "was
afforded full opportunity" to justify its conduct during the
course of the litigation. Thus, "the question on review is
not the adequacy of the pleading but is the fairness of the
whole procedure."
 
Perry, 62 Haw. at 685-86, 619 P.2d at 108 (ellipses omitted)
 
(quoting Aloha Airlines, Inc. v. Civil Aeronautics Bd., 598 F.2d
 250, 262 (D.C. Cir. 1979)).
 
Noting that the evidence in the record revealed an
 
"awareness that the proposed use extended beyond the extraction
 of rock from the earth[,]" the supreme court in Perry ultimately
 
9
 The Hawai' i Supreme Court noted a discrepancy between the circuit
court's determination and the permit's actual breadth. Perry, 62 Haw. at 684, 
619 P.2d at 107. The pertinent permit condition read, "8. That facilities be
limited to: (a) portable crusher, (b) portable office and toilet, and (c)small storage building." Id. Given that the permit did not include language
pertaining to a "cement batching plant," as the circuit court's decisionsuggested, the supreme court confined its decision "to whether the inclusionof screening and crushing operations within the scope of the permitted usevitiated the permit." Id. at 684-85, 619 P.2d at 107. 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
concluded that the circuit court's holding (i.e., that the permit
 
allowing the screening and crushing of rock was outside the scope
 of the quarry application) was "contrary to prevailing principles
 of administrative law that regard such formalism with disfavor." 
Perry, 62 Haw. at 685-86, 619 P.2d at 107-08. The supreme court
 held that its "review of the record indicate[d] [the owners] were
 apprised of what was being sought, they were provided full
 opportunity to be heard in opposition, and the procedures were
 essentially fair." Id. at 686, 619 P.2d at 108. The supreme
 
court reversed the circuit court's ruling and held that
 applicant's application did not offend administrative pleading
 standards. Id. 
Unlike the facts in Perry, the DCCA's Amended Petition 
failed to sufficiently satisfy Hawai
'i's administrative pleading 
requirements. The DCCA's Amended Petition alleged that Martinez violated HRS § 457-12(6) when she failed to list on her AB Staffing Application that she was licensed to practice nursing in other states and when she failed to answer the portion of the application that asked whether she ever had disciplinary action taken against her license. Notably, the Amended Petition did not include any allegations pertaining to Martinez's failure to report information to the Board. Nevertheless, instead of limiting its findings to Martinez's disclosures to her former employer, AB Staffing, the hearing officer's FOF/COL/Order and Amended Order found that Martinez violated HRS § 457-12(6) "when she failed to report to the Board the disciplinary actions taken against her nursing licenses in New York, Pennsylvania, and Washington[.]" The hearing officer's decision was then adopted by the Board and affirmed by the circuit court. 
Given that Martinez was found to have violated HRS §
 
457-12(a)(6) based on facts not alleged in the DCCA's Amended
 Petition, Martinez could not have intelligently prepared a
 defense because she was not apprised of the charges being brought
 against her. Further compounding the inadequacy of the DCCA's
 Amended Petition and the unfairness of the administrative
 procedural history as a whole, the DCCA's original Petition had
 
11
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
included allegations of Martinez's failure to report to the
 
Board, which were subsequently removed from the Amended Petition. 
Moreover, at the hearing before the hearing officer,
 
the DCCA specifically maintained it was not bringing charges
 against Martinez for failing to disclose information to the
 Board. The DCCA announced its position when arguing in
 opposition to Martinez's subpoena duces tecum, which sought the
 results of a 2006 DCCA investigation into previous allegations
 that Martinez failed to report necessary information to the
 Board. During the hearing, the DCCA orally moved to quash the
 subpoena duces tecum on relevancy grounds, arguing that the
 results of an investigation were irrelevant to the issue at
 hand—-whether Martinez failed to report information to her former
 employer, AB Staffing. In support of its motion to quash, the
 DCCA conceded that "there [was] no allegation regarding
 [Martinez] failing to disclose anything, any disciplinary action
 to the [Board] in her application for the [Board]."
 
Thus, unlike the facts in Perry, nothing in the record 
indicates that Martinez was aware, or should have been aware, that the DCCA was bringing charges against her for allegedly failing to report information to the Board. In conclusion, a review of the record indicates that the Board's procedure was far from fair and, therefore, the Amended Petition failed to satisfy Hawai
'i's administrative pleading standard.10 
10 Our holding that the Amended Petition violated Hawai' i's 
administrative pleading standard is limited to the Board's finding that
Martinez violated HRS § 457-12(a)(6) when she failed to report necessaryinformation to the Board. See HAR § 16-89-60(5) (providing that
"unprofessional conduct" includes failing to report to the Board anyrevocation, suspension, or disciplinary actions against applicant by anotherstate). To the extent that the Amended Petition contained allegations thatMartinez removed controlled medication from her employer's premises in NewYork, we hold that the Board's finding that Martinez violated HRS § 457­12(a)(6) by "wrongfully taking controlled medication from her employer'spremises as determined by the New York licensing authority" was not outsidethe scope of the Amended Petition. See HAR § 16-89-60(7)(D) (providing that
"unprofessional conduct" includes the "[u]nauthorized use or removal of drugs,supplies, or property from a patient or health care facility, institution orother work place location[.]). 
Furthermore, because we hold that the Amended Petition failed in
part to satisfy Hawai' i's administrative pleading requirements and because
Martinez presents no argument on appeal that would affect the Board's finding
(continued...)
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Therefore, the "Order Affirming Board of Nursing's
 
Final Order" and "Judgment," both entered on February 17, 2015 in
 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, are vacated and this case
 is remanded to the Board of Nursing for proceedings consistent
 with this Opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Lorrin A. Kau
 
for Respondent-Appellant-
Appellant.
 
Diane R. Corn
 
for Petitioner-Appellee-
Appellee.
 
10(...continued)
that she violated HAR § 16-89-60(7)(D), we need not address Martinez's

remaining points of error.
 
13
 