NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000069
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
IKAIKA REED, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 12-1-0899)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Ikaika Reed (Reed) appeals from the
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment of Conviction)
 
entered on January 11, 2013, by the Circuit Court of the First
 
1
Circuit (Circuit Court).  Following a two-day jury trial, Reed
 
was convicted of Assault in the First Degree, in violation of
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (
HRS) § 707-710 (1993).
 
The sole issue raised in this appeal involves whether
 
the Circuit Court abused its discretion in denying Reed's motion
 for withdrawal and substitution of counsel.
 I. RELEVANT FACTS
 
On June 14, 2012, Reed was indicted on one count of
 
first degree assault. On July 5, 2012, the Office of the Public
 Defender was appointed as his counsel.
 
On August 1, 2012, Reed's counsel orally moved to
 
continue the trial because counsel had not yet received a
 
1
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
transcript of the grand jury proceedings. The State did not
 
object and informed the court that not all of the discovery had
 been turned over yet. Trial was continued to the week of October
 1, 2012.
 
On September 25, 2012, Reed filed a (second) motion to
 
continue trial week. Counsel's declaration stated the following
 grounds: 
b. On September 19, 2012, I learned that one of the
defense's percipient witnesses, Chris Medeiros, wasmurdered the week before; 
c. On September 20, 2012, the State provided notice andcontact information for at least two (2) additionalwitnesses. At that time, the State also disclosedadditional statements from the complaining witnessesthat were not previously known and that contradict hisprior statements; 
d. On September 24, 2012, the State provided contactinformation for a third new witness; 
e. I recently received information for additional defensewitnesses that I have not had the opportunity toconfirm or disclose to the State; and 
f. I need additional time to investigate this case, toobtain additional evidence, and to locate andinterview witnesses[.] 
The State declared that it was ready to proceed, but
 
was agreeable to Reed's request. A second (two-week) continuance
 
was granted, resetting trial to the week of October 15, 2012 and
 scheduling an October 10, 2012 trial call.
 
At the October 10, 2012 trial call, Reed's public
 
defender requested a continuance on behalf of Mr. Reed, stating,
 "he tells me he's still in the process of obtaining witness
 information for himself" and "Mr. Reed informs me that he's also
 in the process of potentially retaining other counsel." After
 further discussion concerning one of the potential witnesses, the
 Circuit Court denied the motion to continue on the grounds that
 "there's been sufficient time to inform these witnesses." The
 court did not address the issue of new counsel. Trial was set
 for October 15, 2012.
 
2
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On the morning of October 15, 2012, after the case was
 
called and the State entered its appearance, the proceeding
 
began:
 
MR. TING:  And good morning, Your Honor. Ikaika Reed
 
is present with counsel, deputy public defender Henry Ting.
Well, I believe Mr. Kimoto is here as well. After
 
speaking with Mr. Reed this morning, it's my understanding
that he has retained Mr. Kimoto to represent him, so at this
time I'm orally moving to withdraw.
 
THE COURT:
 Should I grant this motion, will new
counsel be ready to pick a jury this morning and to proceed
to trial?
 
MR. KIMOTO:  May I speak, Your Honor?
 
THE COURT: Yes, you may.
 
MR. KIMOTO:  Thank you.
 
THE COURT: And could you just state your name for the
record.
 
MR. KIMOTO: Oh, yes. Clayton Kimoto, Your Honor. Mr.
 
Ikaika Reed was in conversation with me, and I told him that
I'd represent him, but it was contingent of course upon the
Court granting a continuance. I am not ready to proceed to
trial at this time, Your Honor, because I have not had a
chance to interview him. I believe just in my conversation
with Mr. Reed, there are a number of witnesses that he
intends to call for his case, and I have not had a chance to
interview any of them.
 
THE COURT: When were you contacted?
 
MR. KIMOTO:  I was first contacted -- pardon me, Your
Honor, if I may look at my notes. It was sometime last week,
Your Honor, it was just before -- the day before last week's
trial call, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT:  Okay, the Court is prepared to rule. This
 
issue has been already been addressed by the appellate
court. I believe there's a case in which under identical
 circumstances the defendant had sought to replace counsel on
the eve of trial, and the Court –
 
At this point, with the Circuit Court obviously poised
 
to deny Reed's request to allow substitution of privately-
retained counsel, the deputy public defender interjected:
 
MR. TING:  I'm sorry for interrupting, Your Honor. I
believe that Mr. Reed did want to speak to the Court as
well, if the Court wants to entertain Mr. Reed.
 
THE DEFENDANT:  The reason for my withdrawing my
counsel is because the first time we went continue the case,
he was on vacation, he couldn't talk to my witnesses,
nothing. So he went continue that one, and the next one he
went continue'em, he end up calling my witnesses two days
before trial call just last week. And I told him that I have
like ten more witnesses, and he no even call. I call his
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
phone, everything, he no return my call, then he return'em
like what, five days later. He get -- he has three more
witnesses -- them have three more witnesses. He contacted
 him, he didn't even tell me they had three more witnesses.
Just like he's misrepresenting me all this time. That's how
I feel, that's why I like withdraw. All I ask is for one
fair trial, Your Honor.
 
After a brief interaction with appointed counsel
 
regarding whether he wanted to respond to Reed's statements
 
regarding his diligence, the Circuit Court denied Reed's request:
 
THE COURT: Again, I'm not going to -- well, the case I
was talking about, let me address the first issue regarding
whether new counsel is ready to proceed. The appellate
court's already addressed that issue, and they've left it in
the discretion of the Court, and Court looks with disfavor
on the replacement of counsel and motion to withdraw on the
eve of trial, as it may be at times and I think in this case
it can be considered as a dilatory tactic.
However, the courts have allowed withdrawal when new
counsel is ready to proceed to trial; however, that's not
the case here. And I had indicated on more than one occasion
 that the Court wanted to start this case. Because Mr. Reed
 has several cases, the Court wanted to start trying these
cases, so the record was clear and it's clear to all the
parties that the Court was going to proceed with these
cases, so I'm going to deny the motion to withdraw as
counsel.
 
We have a jury ready to proceed, we'll take a recess
and bring in the jury. 
The Court will stand in recess.
 
After a short recess, jury selection commenced. 
Thereafter, Reed was tried; found guilty; sentenced to a ten-year
 
term of incarceration, with a mandatory minimum term of three
 years and four months; and ordered to pay $367.95 in restitution.
 II. POINT OF ERROR
 
Reed raises a single point of error, contending that:
 
The circuit court abused its discretion in denying
Reed's motion for withdrawal and substitution of counsel,
thereby infringing upon his constitutional right to
privately retained counsel of his choice.
 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court recently reiterated that: 
the right to counsel of choice is qualified, and can be
outweighed by countervailing governmental interests. But in
 light of the right to counsel, and in the absence of
countervailing considerations, a criminal defendant should
have his, her, or its choice of privately retained counsel.
. . . Whether a change in counsel should be permitted . . .
rests in the sound discretion of the trial court.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Cramer, 129 Hawai 'i 296, 300, 299 P.3d 756, 760 (2013) 
(citing State v. Maddagan, 95 Hawai 'i 177, 180, 19 P.3d 1289, 
1292 (2001)). 
In addition, although the court denied substitution of
 
counsel before a continuance was actually requested (or directly
 
ruled on), we bear in mind that "a motion for continuance is
 addressed to the sound discretion of the trial court, and the
 court's ruling will not be disturbed on appeal absent a showing
 of abuse of that discretion." Id.
 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
Reed contends that he was denied his right to 
privately-retained counsel of his choice under the Hawai
'i 
Constitution and that the Circuit Court therefore abused its discretion in denying his motion for substitution of counsel. The State contends that, under the circumstances of this case, Reed's right to private counsel was "outweighed by the government's interest in orderly administration of justice." 
Article I, section 14 of the Hawai
'i Constitution 
provides, in relevant part: "In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right . . . to have the assistance of counsel for the accused's defense." In Maddagan, the supreme court interpreted this right to encompass a defendant's right to privately-retained counsel of his or her choice. 95 Hawai
'i at 
180, 19 P.3d at 1292. Maddagan also recognized that a 
defendant's right to counsel of choice is "qualified" and "can be outweighed by countervailing government interests." Id. 
(citation omitted). In Cramer, the supreme court examined the countervailing government interests that should be balanced against the right to counsel of choice. 129 Hawai
'i at 301-02, 
299 P.3d at 761-62. 
In Cramer
, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court cited a California 
case for identifying the following factors for consideration: 
[T]he trial court should have considered:
(1)
 length of the continuance;
(2) whether there was a dilatory motive for the continuance;
(3) whether the prosecution knew of the motions beforehand
and whether the prosecution objected;
(4) whether the delay would have inconvenienced the
prosecution or its witnesses; 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(5) whether current court-appointed counsel was prepared to
proceed;
(6) whether the defendant had already retained private
counsel; and
(7) whether the continuance would interfere with the
efficient administration of justice[.]
 
Id. at 301, 299 P.3d at 761 (citation omitted; format altered). 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court also cited a Wisconsin case that 
considered the following factors: "the length of the delay
 requested, whether competent counsel was presently available and
 prepared to try the case, whether prior continuances have been
 requested and received by the defendant, the inconvenience to the
 parties, witnesses and the court, and whether the delay was for
 legitimate reasons or whether its purpose was dilatory." Id. at
 302, 299 P.3d at 762 (citation omitted).
 
In looking at the case before it, the Cramer court
 
ruled as follows:
 
[T]he circuit court merely considered one factor-­
timeliness of the request--in making its determination to
deny the motion for substitution and a continuance. The
 record does not reflect that the circuit court considered,
for example, the length of the delay requested, the impact
of the delay on the prosecution, witnesses or the court, and
whether the delay was for a dilatory purpose.
 
Consideration of those other factors supports the
conclusion that the circuit court abused its discretion in
 denying the motion for substitution and a continuance. The
 State took no position on the request and there was no
apparent prejudice to the State. The record does not
 establish that the circuit court would have been
 inconvenienced by the request, particularly given that it
subsequently ordered a one-week continuance of the
sentencing hearing. The record also does not establish that
 there were witnesses present at the initial hearing who
would be inconvenienced by a continuance. Furthermore,
there had been only one prior continuance in the proceeding,
which was a stipulated continuance of the trial from
September 16, 2010 to November 4, 2010. Under the
 circumstances, the court's summary denial of the motion for
substitution and a continuance as untimely was an abuse of
discretion.
 
Id. at 302, 299 P.3d at 762.
 
In the case before us, a number of the factors
 
identified in Cramer were before the Circuit Court, although not
 
all were recited in the court's ruling. 
In the first instance,
 
the Circuit Court appeared focused on when Reed retained new
 counsel and whether privately-retained counsel was ready to
 proceed with trial that day. The court was informed that private
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel had been contacted prior to the final trial call. 
However, no motion was filed seeking substitution of counsel, and
 a continuance, in the days between the trial call and the first
 day of trial. Thus, on the day of trial, when Reed's oral motion
 was presented, a jury pool was waiting, and witnesses had been
 subpoenaed to appear at trial. Newly-retained counsel was given
 an opportunity to clarify the length of the requested
 continuance, but was noncommittal, stating he had not yet
 interviewed Reed or Reed's witnesses.
 
The Circuit Court also allowed Reed to articulate his
 
concerns about the diligence of his appointed counsel in
 responding to his calls and in interviewing and securing defense
 witnesses. Court-appointed counsel appeared to be ready for
 trial. Based on the timing of the motion on the day of trial,
 and the court's observation that Reed had several other cases
 pending (one of which had been continued at the prior week's
 trial call), the Circuit Court concluded that Reed's request was
 a "dilatory tactic." 
Like the prosecution in Cramer, the State did not take
 
a position on Reed's motion, and the record does not show any
 specific prejudice to the State. In addition, there were two
 prior, relatively brief, continuances; the first continuance was
 related to discovery from the State that had not been completed,
 and the second continuance was due to various reasons (listed
 above), including the death of a defense witness and previously
 undisclosed State witnesses. Nevertheless, witnesses were ready,
 a jury pool was waiting, appointed counsel was ready to go, and
 in the trial court's assessment, Reed's request was a dilatory
 tactic.
 
In light of Cramer's reiteration that the decision is
 
left to the sound discretion of the trial court, and on the
 record of this case, although there are factors supporting as
 well as weighing against Reed's request, we cannot conclude that
 the Circuit Court's assessment that Reed's request was made for
 dilatory purposes was clearly wrong. Accordingly, the Circuit 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Court's denial of the motion for substitution was not an abuse of
 
discretion.
 V.	 CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's January 11, 2013
 
Judgment of Conviction is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, April 25, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Summer M.M. Kupau
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Sonja P. McCullenDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8
 