NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided. 
2§ 707-732 Sexual assault in the third degree. 
(1) A person commits the offense of sexual assault in
the third degree if:
. . . . 
(c) The person knowingly engages in sexual contact
with a  person who is at least fourteen years
old but less than sixteen years old or causes
the minor to have sexual contact with the
person; provided that:
(i) The person is not less than five years
older  than the minor; and
(ii) The person is not legally married to the
minor[.]NO. CAAP-14-0000933
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KEITH T. MATSUMOTO, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 12-1-0918)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Keith T. Matsumoto (Matsumoto)
appeals from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's (Circuit
Court)1 June 27, 2014 Judgment of Conviction and Probation
Sentence, adjudicating Matsumoto guilty of the offense of Sexual
Assault in the Third Degree, a violation of Hawaii Revised
Statutes (HRS) § 707-732(1)(c)(2014).2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2On appeal, Matsumoto maintains that the Circuit Court
erred by (1) failing to suppress Matsumoto's post-polygraph
statements and subsequently refusing to admit evidence that a
detective's "deliberate falsehood" induced Matsumoto's post-
polygraph statements; (2) providing prejudicial jury instructions
on "sexual and intimate parts" and the importance of "context"; 
(3) abusing its discretion by providing the jury with redacted
transcripts; and (4) denying Matsumoto's motion for judgment of
acquittal.
After careful consideration of the points raised and
the arguments made by the parties, the record, and the applicable
authority, we resolve Matsumoto's issues as follows and affirm.
A. Polygraph Evidence.  
1.  Motion to Suppress Post-polygraph Statements.
We review the voluntariness of a confession de novo.
State v. Kelekolio , 74 Haw. 479, 502, 849 P.2d 58, 62 (1993). 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has held that deliberate, intrinsic
falsehoods, i.e., regarding the facts of the offense, will be
considered along with other circumstances surrounding the
defendant's statement in evaluating whether that statement was
voluntarily given.  On the other hand, deliberate, extrinsic
falsehoods, i.e., not regarding the facts of the crime or which
contain incentives to speak or misrepresent relevant law, are per
se coercive and do not require additional inquiry into the
voluntariness of the defendant's statement.  Kelekolio , 74 Haw.
at 511, 849 P.2d at 73. 
Matsumoto alleges that the Circuit Court erred in
denying his motion to suppress his post-polygraph statements
because "they were illegally obtained by polygraph operator Det.
Allan Kuaana's (Det. Kuaana) use of extrinsic falsehoods" and
thus were the product of coercion.  Matsumoto primarily relies
upon Kelekolio and maintains that two statements made by
Det. Kuaana were extrinsic falsehoods, qualifying for per se
coercive status.  The first, the statement that Matsumoto "did
not pass" the polygraph examination was, according to Matsumoto,
a deliberate falsehood, misled him into thinking he failed theNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3In his report, Det. Kuaana described his remark as follows:
I explained the facts of the case as I knew them to be to
the subject.  I then explained the importance to tell the
truth so that whenever a "reasonable person" were to review
the facts of the case, that person would be able understand
the subject['s] account of the incident.
3test when the results were, in fact, inconclusive, and
"constituted an extrinsic falsehood as it was not intrinsic to
the facts of the offense."   The other was Det. Kuaana's remark
that it was important to tell the truth3 which, in Matsumoto's
view, implied that if he changed the version of events he had
related up to that point, he would gain a benefit, when in fact,
the State could still charge him regardless of what he said.  In
combination, Matsumoto argues, these statements implied that
Matsumoto would benefit from a change in what he told the police
and "constituted a 'promise of more favorable treatment in the
event of a confession' that constitutes an "extrinsic falsehood'"
under Kelekolio .
First of all, Det. Kuaana's report to Matsumoto that
the latter "did not pass" the polygraph test was not, strictly
speaking, a misrepresentation, as Matsumoto's score was
"inconclusive," meaning that he did not score well enough to
"pass" nor did he score well enough to fail.
Secondly, the remarks Matsumoto challenges are
regarding matters intrinsic to the charged offense, as they
relate to the strength of the evidence against Matsumoto in this
case.  See Sheriff, Washoe County v. Bessey, 914 P.2d 618, 620-22
(Nev. 1996) (applying  Kelekolio  intrinsic/extrinsic analysis to
false representation that test results of the scene were positive
for defendant's semen).  
Finally, other jurisdictions evaluating actual
misrepresentations of polygraph results have not held them
coercive per se, and have ruled the resulting statements
voluntary.  See Finke v. State , 468 A.2d 353, 374 (Md. Ct. Spec. 
App. 1983) ("'It is clear, however, that the use of [the
polygraph] procedure . . . would not as a matter of law require
the exclusion of a confession so obtained. . . .'" (citations and
brackets omitted)); State v. Graham , 733 S.E.2d 100, 105 (N.C.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4Ct. App. 2012) ("deception is not dispositive where a confession
is otherwise voluntary. . . .  'False statements by officers
concerning evidence, as contrasted with threats or promises, have
been tolerated in confession cases generally, because such
statements do not affect the reliability of the confession.'"
(citation omitted)); People v. Serrano, 14 A.D.3d 874 (N.Y. App.
Div. 2005) (where police questioned defendant for 12 hours and
informed him that he failed a polygraph examination, "'[s]uch
police stratagems do not compel a conclusion of involuntariness
unless there is a showing that the deception was "so
fundamentally unfair as to deny due process"' or that it was
'accompanied by a promise or threat that could induce a false
confession.'").
Thus, we analyze the totality of the circumstances
surrounding Matsumoto's post-polygraph statements for
voluntariness.  As the Circuit Court found, and Matsumoto does
not dispute, Matsumoto appeared to be comfortable during his
post-polygraph interview with Det. Kim McCumsey (Det. McCumsey).  
Matsumoto did not ask for any medication, and his "attitude about
his achiness and taking medication seems casual and his demeanor
does not indicate that he was unable to proceed with the
interview due to his physical condition."  In addition, Matsumoto
is a well-educated individual, holding an undergraduate degree in
civil and urban engineering and a graduate degree in business
administration, holds positions of responsibility, and is the
state coordinator for the sport of wrestling for the Hawaii High
School Athletic Association.
Matsumoto waived his Miranda rights before and agreed
on several occasions during his first interview with
Det. McCumsey to take the polygraph examination and waived his
Miranda rights before the polygraph examination was conducted and
again before his post-polygraph interview with Det. McCumsey. 
During his post-polygraph interview with Det. McCumsey, Matsumoto
seems alert and responsive to Det. McCumsey's questions, does not
appear to be sleep deprived, nor does he request medication or
medical attention or complain of any pain or physical condition.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4Det. Kuaana described Matsumoto's reaction as follows:
He, basically, sat in his chair.  I know I notated [sic] in
my report what he had done.  But he was really – no any sort
of denial.  He just kind of sat there, from what I recall
was kind of just nodding his head up and down.  He told me
that if he did touch the girl that he doesn't remember doing
it.
5Finally in this regard, it is far from clear that
hearing he did not pass the polygraph exam caused Matsumoto to
make his post-polygraph statements.  Matsumoto did not appear to
be shocked or upset by the revelation that he did not pass the
polygraph test.4  Det. Kuaana testified that Matsumoto's
admission that he did grab Minor's buttock came after
Det. Kuaana, confronted and told Matsumoto, "I know you did this. 
There's no doubt."  Furthermore, Matsumoto later told Det.
McCumsey that while he did not remember the encounter during the
first interview with her, his memory was jogged when Det. Kuaana
showed him a diagram of the gym, stating that it "made the world
of difference."  Matsumoto also testified at trial that when the
detective mentioned Minor bending over it "spurred [his] memory."
Based on the totality of the circumstances, we agree
with the Circuit Court that Matsumoto's post-polygraph statements
were voluntary.
2.Exclusion of evidence that Matsumoto's post-polygraph
statements were induced by Det. Kuaana's assessment
that Matsumoto did not pass the polygraph examination.
Matsumoto concedes that evidence of polygraph results
and the refusal or willingness to submit to a polygraph
examination are inadmissible in this jurisdiction.  State v.
Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 357, 615 P.2d 101, 109 (1980) ( citing State
v. Chang, 46 Haw. 22, 31, 374 P.2d 5, 11 (1962);  State v. Lewis, 
No. 30528, 2013 WL 6762403 at *12 (App. Dec. 23, 2013) (mem.). 
In addition, the United States Supreme Court has sustained a per
se rule of exclusion.  U.S. v. Scheffer, 523 U.S. 303 (1998) ( per
se rule against the admission of polygraph evidence in a military
court did not violate the defendant's Fifth and Sixth Amendment
rights to present a defense).  However, Matsumoto argues that
such evidence should be admissible "to provide the context and
explanation" of his post-polygraph statements and consequentlyNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5In this context, Matsumoto also argues that Det. Kuaana "gave
Matsumoto the impression that it would benefit him to change his previous
statement and instead 'tell the truth.'"  However, Matsumoto did not assert
this basis in support of his motion in limine before the trial court and does
not now elaborate on this assertion or otherwise explain how Det. Kuaana gave
this impression to him.  Therefore, we decline to address this argument.
6Matsumoto testified,
I was told, Well, I need to do more processing; But you
failed; But you didn't pass, again, which, again, confused
me even more.  Because I'm, like, Okay.  Well, how can you
conclude that I didn't pass if you're telling me you still
need to process the results further.
Q. So at that point you kept expecting Detective Kuaana
to explain to you why he said you didn't pass?
A. [No audible response.)
Q. And did that ever come?
A No.
6that the Circuit Court "abused its discretion in precluding the
defense from adducing evidence that Matsumoto's post-polygraph
statements were induced by Det. Kuaana's deliberate falsehood
that Matsumoto had 'not passed' the polygraph exam."5
Although not clear from Matsumoto's argument, we infer
that Matsumoto sought admission not only of Det. Kuaana's
representation that Matsumoto "did not pass" the examination but
also Det. Kuaana's opinion that Matsumoto's polygraph score was,
in fact, "inconclusive" because the former would not be relevant
to his coercion through misrepresentation argument without
knowing the latter.  However, Hawai #i case law does not provide
for such an exception to the prohibition against polygraph
results.
Moreover, as previously discussed, the record does not
support Matsumoto's argument that the revelation he "did not
pass" "rocked his world" and caused him to make incriminating
admissions.  Det. Kuaana testified that there were no obvious
signs of such a response when he gave Matsumoto the news.  
Matsumoto testified at the hearing on the motion to suppress that
he was "bothered" and "didn't understand why" he did not pass, 
and that he had some doubts about the results at the time,6 but
did not testify that he voiced these concerns to Det. Kuaana. 
Matsumoto testified at trial to other reasons for his post-NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7polygraph statements, such as being shown a diagram of the gym
where the offense occurred, and hearing the detective describe
the incident as when Minor was "bending over."
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its
discretion by excluding Matsumoto's polygraph examination results
at trial.
B.Jury Instruction regarding "sexual and intimate parts" and
"context."
Matsumoto challenges the Circuit Court's jury
instructions on the terms "sexual intimate parts" and "context."  
Matsumoto contends they were "prejudicially erroneous and
misleading" because "the jury was required to consider whether
the buttocks constituted a 'sexual or intimate' part in the
context in which it occurred[,]" and that the "court's
instructions were misleading because they specifically instructed
the jury that the 'buttocks' were 'intimate parts.'" 
Consequently, Matsumoto claims "the jury could have believed that
the buttocks were an 'intimate part' as a matter of law
regardless of context."
The challenged jury instruction read:
"Sexual contact" means any touching, other than acts
of "sexual penetration," of the sexual or other intimate
parts of a person not married to the actor, or of the sexual
or other intimate parts of the actor by the person, whether
directly or through the clothing or other material intended
to cover the sexual or other intimate parts.
"Sexual parts" means the sex organs.
"Intimate parts" means the buttocks and those parts of
the body typically associated with sexual relations.
In considering whether the part of the body touched is
a "sexual or other intimate part," you must consider the
context in which the contact occurred.
"When jury instructions or the omission thereof are at issue on
appeal, the standard of review is whether, when read and
considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially
insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading."  State v.
Walton, 133 Hawai #i 66, 83, 324 P.3d 876, 893 (2014) (quoting
Kobashigawa v. Silva , 129 Hawai #i 313, 320, 300 P.3d 579, 586
(2013)).  In State v. Silver, 125 Hawai# i 1, 249 P.3d 1141NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
8(2011), the Supreme Court of Hawai #i concluded that "the
legislature intended the buttocks to be an 'intimate part' for
purposes of 'sexual contact' as that phrase is defined in section
707-700[,]" but also noted that a "body part which might be
intimate in one context, might not be in another[.]"  Silver, 125
Hawai#i at 7, 249 P.3d at 1147 (brackets omitted).  The
instruction conveys this concept; it defines "intimate parts" as
including the buttocks but also requires the jury to "consider
the context in which the contact occurred."  Matsumoto's argument
hinges on the supposition that the jury followed the first part
but ignored the latter and fails to provide any evidence in
support of this assumption.  However, the jury is presumed to
follow the court's instructions.  State v. Kassebeer, 118 Hawai #i
493, 512, 193 P.3d 409, 428 (2008).  Matsumoto's argument is
without merit.
C.Presentation of Matsumoto's Redacted Statements to the Jury.  
Matsumoto argues the Circuit Court erred in providing
to the jury redacted rather than "clean" copies of the
transcripts of his statements.  Citing primarily to State v.
Tucker, 10 Haw. App. 43, 861 P.2d 24 (1993), he maintains that
"there is the distinct possibility that the jury would speculate
as to the redactions, especially when the redactions are
obvious."  For the reasons stated below, reject this argument.  
Tucker is inapposite.  That case involved a trial for
the murder of co-defendants' six-month old son for failing to
provide medical care.  The jury was presented with statements
given by both defendants implicating the other, but neither
testified at trial, implicating their rights to confrontation
under the Sixth Amendment of the United States Constitution and
Article I, Section 14 of the Hawai
#i State Constitution.  Tucker,
10 Haw. App. at 59, 861 P.2d at 32.  Both defendants argued that
the manner in which the transcripts had been redacted, either by
omitting whole pages or merely replacing names with neutral
pronouns was deficient, as their "existence was still apparent
and obvious from the context."  Tucker, 10 Haw. App. at 66-69,NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
9861 P.2d at 35-36.  This court adopted a "case-by-case approach"
and agreed with both defendants. 
Here, Matsumoto's right to confrontation is not at
issue as Minor and the percipient witness who contacted the
police testified and were cross-examined.  Rather, Matsumoto
speculates that because there were obvious redactions in the
transcript of his statements given to the jury, those redactions
invited the jury to speculate about the matters redacted.  The
one example Matsumoto cites does not support his speculation and,
in any event, the trial court instructed the jury not to
speculate on the contents of any redaction of the transcripts.  
Without more, we presume the jury adhered to the Circuit Court's
instructions.  Kassebeer , 118 Hawai #i at 512, 193 P.3d at 428. 
D.Sufficiency of the evidence.
Again relying on  Silver, Matsumoto alleges the Circuit
Court erred in denying his motion for judgment of acquittal,
because there was "no substantial evidence to support Matsumoto's
conviction where his congratulatory pat on [Minor's] butt did not
constitute the touching of a sexual or intimate part in the
context in which it occurred[,]" i.e., a school-age wrestling
tournament.
While the Silver court acknowledged that "a body part
which might be intimate in one context, might not be in
another[,]"  Silver, 125 Hawai# i at 7, 249 P.3d at 1147, 
it did not categorically foreclose inclusion of buttock-touching
merely because it occurred in a sports or parental care context. 
Indeed, such an interpretation would run counter to the broad
definition of sexual contact that the court had just endorsed. 
Silver, 125 Hawai# i at 6-7, 249 P.3d at 1146-47. 
In the instant case, Minor testified that on June 9,
2012, at a sporting event in which she participated, Matsumoto
touched her in a way that made her feel uncomfortable.  Minor
further testified that Matsumoto touched her two times.  The
first was when he "touched (Minor's buttocks) but like on
accident."  She testified she felt Matsumoto's hand "slide by my
butt."  Minor also stated she felt this first physical contactNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
10was an accident, but clarified that the first physical contact,
was not a "good job" pat on the buttocks common in sports,
because she had yet to participate in the wrestling tournament.
In the second incident, Matsumoto came up behind her
while she was talking to a referee and massaged her shoulders; 
when she tried to leave, he "slap/grabbed" her buttocks.  To
illustrate the event, Minor, with the deputy prosecutor standing
in the place of Minor, demonstrated Matsumoto's actions for the
jury: 
Q Okay.  So you were sitting down, and you said you
stood back up?
A Yes.
Q And then what happened?
A Then he came up like this, and he walked --
THE COURT: Go ahead.
[Deputy Prosecutor] MS. VIDINHA: Okay. Your
Honor, I want the record to reflect that [Minor] wrapped her
arms around my waist area, and she kind of connected them in
front a little bit, and then they slid them up to right
below my breast, and she slid them down to by my hips.
BY MS. VIDINHA:
Q Is that --
A Yes.
Q Okay.  And then what --
THE COURT:  And that the witness was in the --
parallel to your back with the -- both arms wrapped around
the -- going from the back to the front of Ms. Vidinha.
MS. VIDINHA:  Thank you, your Honor. 
BY MS. VIDINHA:
Q Okay.  So first he slid up, and then he slid down to
by your hip area. And then did you do something at this
point?
A Yeah.  I tried to get down and walk away.
Q So you kinda tried to get down, you kinda bent down
and walked away?
A Yeah.
. . . .
BY MS. VIDINHA:
Q Okay.  And as you walked away, did something else
happen?  Did he touch you as you -- NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
11A Yes.
Q Okay.  What did -- how did he touch you when you
walked away? And you can just kinda show --
A He just like slap/grabbed. Like lightly grabbed but slapped.
MS. VIDINHA:  Okay.  Let the record reflect that
the witness is using both hands, your Honor, and coming up
in a sweeping up motion ending at her waist area or her hip
area, then she's doing a little moving in of her fingers.
BY MS. VIDINHA:
Q Am I describing it correctly, [Minor]?
A Yes.
THE COURT:  In a squeezing motion? 
THE WITNESS:  Yes.
MS. VIDINHA:  In a squeezing motion, your Honor.
THE COURT:  Very well. The record shall so note.
Following this event, Minor told her father what had occurred.
Radford High School wrestling coach and official
William Ullom (Ullom) also testified he witnessed Minor "being
inappropriately touched."  Ullom also demonstrated the touching
he witnessed:
Q [Deputy Prosecutor]:  So I'm just going to try and
articulate your hand motions that you did.  So your hands
came in front of you?
A  Yeah.  Came from the back to the front, back down the
sides of the back.
Q So you saw him first touch her butt – 
A Uh-huh.
Q -- and then bring his arms around to the front of her?
A Uh-huh.
Q To her torso area?
A More toward the groin.
Q Down toward the groin you say his hands go?
A Uh-huh.
Q And then back toward the butt area again?
A Uh-huh.
Q And we're saying the butt area, but did you actually
see his hand touch her butt?
A Uh-huh.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
12This testimony supports the notion that, despite the
event occurring at a sporting event, the touching was not in a
sporting context, that is, as encouragement or appreciation for
performance in the sporting event.  Minor testified that she was
not wrestling at the time but coaching another player.  More
importantly, both Minor and Ullom testified that the touching was
more than a swat on the buttocks but consisted of squeezing and
moving his hands to the front of Minor's body.  Based on this
testimony, when viewed in the strongest light for the
prosecution,  State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai# i 149, 157-58, 166
P.3d 322, 331-32 (2007), there was substantial evidence such that
a reasonable juror could have found Matsumoto guilty of Sexual
Assault in the Third Degree.
Based on the foregoing, the June 27, 2014 Judgment of
Conviction and Probation Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of
the First Circuit is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, August 29, 2017.
On the briefs:
David M. Hayakawa,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Stephen K. Tsushima,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge