NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-14-0000920
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
SHIGEZO HAWAII, INC., a Hawai 'i Corporation,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
SOY TO THE WORLD INCORPORATED, a Hawai 'i Corporation;
INOC CORPORATION, a Hawai 'i Corporation, dba SOY TO THE WORLD;
EMI YAMADA, dba HANA SOY; MUNEHIRO YAMADA; YUJI IWATA;
YOSHIHIRO WATANABE; FUJIYA HONPO, INC., a Hawai 'i Corporation;
ADAMAYS, LLC; Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-20; JANE DOES 1-20; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-20;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-20; DOE GOVERNMENT ENTITIES 1-20,
Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-2586)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
This appeal arises out of a business dispute, debt
 
collection attempts, and the alleged fraudulent transfer of
 
business assets, including tofu making machinery. 
I. 
Munehiro Yamada (Munehiro) was a tofu artisan, who
 
controlled INOC Corporation (INOC), which did business under the
 trade name "Soy to the World." Soy to the World manufactured and
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sold tofu. In 2006, Munehiro met Kazuhiro Maruko (Maruko), who
 
was the president of Shigezo Hawaii, Inc. (Shigezo). Munehiro
 and Maruko discussed an agreement to establish a business
 relationship between INOC and Shigezo. Shigezo transmitted
 $50,000.00 to INOC, but no formal agreement was reached.
 
In May 2007, Shigezo sued Munehiro and INOC in a prior
 
lawsuit, Civil No. 07-1-0977, for the $50,000.00 and other
 relief. On October 7, 2008, judgment in the amount of
 $141,865.40 was entered in Civil No. 07-1-0977 in favor of
 Shigezo and against INOC and Munehiro. The judgment was entered
 by default as a discovery sanction.
1
 
After Shigezo filed its lawsuit in Civil No. 07-1-0977,
 
but prior to the entry of the judgment, Munehiro and INOC
 relocated the business and its tofu making machinery to the
 premises of Fujiya Honpo, Inc. (Fujiya). Munehiro and INOC
 obtained a loan of $40,000.00 from Yuji Iwata (Iwata), Director
 of Fujiya, and Yoshihiro Watanabe (Watanabe), and the tofu making
 machinery was used as collateral for the loan.
 
In October 2008, Shigezo attempted to collect its

 
judgment against Munehiro and INOC and obtained a writ of
 execution for property, including tofu making machinery, owned by
 Munehiro and INOC. Shigezo was unable to levy on the tofu making
 machinery because on October 27, 2008, Iwata and Watanabe claimed
 a right of co-ownership to the tofu making machinery, which was
 then located within Fujiya's factory.
 
On December 15, 2008, Shigezo filed the complaint in 
the instant case, Civil No. 08-1-2586, against INOC, Munehiro, Munehiro's wife, Emi Yamada (Emi), Soy to the World Incorporated, Iwata, Fujiya, and Watanabe, alleging various causes of actions including violations of the Hawai
'i Uniform Fraudulent Transfer 
Act (HUFTA), Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 651C, contempt 
1Additional details regarding the circumstances surrounding the entry of
this judgment are not contained in the record on appeal.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of court, civil conspiracy, and interference with judicial
 
process. 
On July 31, 2011, Munehiro filed a petition under 
Chapter 7 of the United States Bankruptcy Code in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the District of Hawai
'i (Bankruptcy 
Court). Shigezo removed the instant case to the Bankruptcy Court and filed a supplemental complaint to assert that its claims against Munehiro were not dischargeable under sections 523(a)(2)(A), (a)(4), and (a)(6) of the Bankruptcy Code. After holding a trial in the adversary proceeding over Shigezo's supplemental complaint, the Bankruptcy Court issued Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law and ruled that Shigezo's claims against Munehiro were dischargeable in bankruptcy. The Bankruptcy Court remanded Shigezo's claims against all other defendants in this case to the Circuit Court. 
2
The Circuit Court  subsequently held a bench trial on
Shigezo's claims against the remaining defendants.3 As part of
 
the trial, the parties stipulated to the admission into evidence
 of the Bankruptcy Court's Findings of Fact and Conclusion of
 Law.
4 As to Shigezo's HUFTA claims, the Circuit Court concluded
 
that Shigezo had proven that the transfer of the tofu making
 machinery by Munehiro and INOC was fraudulent pursuant to HRS 
§ 651C-4(a)(1) (1993). The Circuit Court, however, ruled that
 the transfer was not voidable under the HUFTA because Shigezo had
 failed to submit sufficient evidence to prove that the transferee
 of the machinery (1) had not provided reasonably equivalent value
 for the transfer and (2) had acted in bad faith. The Circuit
 
2The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 
3After Munehiro's bankruptcy discharge and prior to the trial in the
Circuit Court, Shigezo withdrew its claims against Munehiro without prejudice.
Also prior to trial, default was entered against ADAMAYS, LLC, which had been
certified as a Doe Defendant, and Watanabe.
 
4Shigezo stipulated to the admission into evidence of the Bankruptcy
Court's Findings of Fact and Conclusion of Law subject to its reservation of
objections on the grounds of relevancy and prejudice.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court further ruled that Shigezo had failed to present competent
 
evidence of its damages on its HUFTA claims and awarded nominal
 damages in the amount of $1.00 to Shigezo against INOC. As to
 Shigezo's non-HUFTA claims, the Circuit Court concluded, among
 other things, that Shigezo failed to establish its claims for
 contempt, civil conspiracy, interference with judicial process,
 joint liability for Shigezo's unsatisfied judgment, constructive
 trust, disgorgement of profits, and punitive damages.
5 The
 
Circuit Court entered its Judgment on June 3, 2014. 
II. 
On appeal, Shigezo contends that the Circuit Court
 
erred in: (1) "dismissing" Shigezo's HUFTA claims in Counts I
 through IV after it concluded that Munehiro and INOC had engaged
 in a fraudulent transfer of the tofu making machinery; (2)
 entering findings of fact and conclusions of law that were
 inconsistent with the Bankruptcy Court's findings and
 conclusions; (3) stating that there was no evidence of the value
 of the property conveyed; (4) dismissing Shigezo's claims of
 civil conspiracy and interference with judicial process; and (5)
 allowing the defendants to raise collateral estoppel and res
 judicata defenses. 
As explained below, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 
erred in placing the burden of proof on Shigezo to demonstrate
 that the transferee of the tofu making machinery had not provided
 reasonably equivalent value for the transfer and had acted in bad
 faith. Shigezo demonstrated his prima facie entitlement to the
 remedy of avoidance of the transfer by establishing under HRS 
§ 651C-4(a)(1) that the transfer was fraudulent. See HRS § 651C­
7(a) (1993). HRS § 651C-8(a) (1993) provides the transferee with
 a defense to the voiding of a fraudulent transfer if the
 transferee can show that he or she took the property in good
 
5Prior to trial, Shigezo voluntarily withdrew its claims for appointment
of a receiver and for an injunction. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
faith and for a reasonably equivalent value. However, under HRS
 
§ 651C-8(a), it was the burden of the transferee of the tofu
 making machinery to prove that the transfer was not voidable; it
 was not Shigezo's burden to disprove the elements of the
 transferee's defense. In light of the Circuit Court's error, we
 vacate the Circuit Court's Judgment with respect to Counts I
 through IV to the extent that it rendered judgment and awarded
 nominal damages on Shigezo's HUFTA claims. We affirm the Circuit
 Court's Judgment in all other respects.
 
III.
 
We dispose of the arguments raised by Shigezo on appeal
 
as follows.
 
A.
 
Shigezo argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
"dismissing" Shigezo's HUFTA claims set forth in Counts I through
 IV after concluding that Munehiro and INOC had engaged in a
 fraudulent transfer of the tofu making machinery. The Circuit
 Court did not dismiss Shigezo's HUFTA claims, but rather ruled
 that the transfer was not voidable. Although Shigezo refers to
 the dismissal of its HUFTA claims, the gist of Shigezo's argument
 is that the Circuit Court erred in ruling that Munehiro and
 INOC's fraudulent transfer of the tofu making machinery was not
 voidable. We conclude that the Circuit Court erred in allocating
 the burden of proof in deciding whether Shigezo was entitled to
 an avoidance of the transfer, and therefore, the Circuit Court's
 ruling that the transfer was not voidable cannot stand.
 
In its complaint, Shigezo asserted violations of the
 
HUFTA pursuant to HRS § 651C-4(a)(1) (Count I), HRS § 651C­4(a)(2) (Count II), HRS § 651C-5(a) (Count III), and HRS § 651C­5(b) (Count IV).
6 At trial before the Circuit Court, the parties
 
6HRS §§ 651C-4(a) and 651C-5 (1993) provide in relevant part:
 
[§ 651C-4] Transfers fraudulent as to present and future
creditors. (a) A transfer made or obligation incurred by a debtor
is fraudulent as to a creditor, whether the creditor's claim arose
(continued...)
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
stipulated to the admission into evidence of the Bankruptcy
 
Court's Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law. The Circuit
 Court adopted the Bankruptcy Court's finding that:
 
After Shigezo filed its suit, and continuing after Shigezo
took the judgment,[7] [Munehiro] took steps which he intended
to hinder, delay, or defeat Shigezo's attempts to collect
its claims. He caused his then wife, Emi Yamada, to form a
series of companies to conduct a tofu business. He moved
 the tofu machine to a business location owned by an
acquaintance and took steps to block Shigezo's attempt to
levy on the machine.
 
The Circuit Court also adopted the Bankruptcy Court's finding
 
that Munehiro controlled INOC. Based on these findings, the
 
6(...continued)
before or after the transfer was made or the obligation was
incurred, if the debtor made the transfer or incurred the
obligation:
 
(1)	 With actual intent to hinder, delay, or defraud any
creditor of the debtor; or
 
(2)	 Without receiving a reasonably equivalent value in
exchange for the transfer or obligation, and the
debtor:
 
(A)	 Was engaged or was about to engage in a business
or a transaction for which the remaining assets
of the debtor were unreasonably small in
relation to the business or transaction; . . .
 
. . . .
 
[§ 651C-5] Transfers fraudulent as to present creditors.
 
(a) A transfer made or obligation incurred by a debtor is
fraudulent as to a creditor whose claim arose before the transfer
 was made or the obligation was incurred if the debtor made the
transfer or incurred the obligation without receiving a reasonably
equivalent value in exchange for the transfer or obligation and
the debtor was insolvent at that time or the debtor becomes
 insolvent as a result of the transfer or obligation.
 
(b) A transfer made by a debtor is fraudulent as to a
creditor whose claim arose before the transfer was made if the
 transfer was made to an insider for other than a present,
reasonably equivalent value, the debtor was insolvent at that
time, and the insider had reasonable cause to believe that the
debtor was insolvent.
 
7The Bankruptcy Court's finding adopted by the Circuit Court clearly
referred to Shigezo's prior May 2007 lawsuit in Civil No. 07-1-0977 and the
judgment entered in that lawsuit. However, the Circuit Court misidentified
the lawsuit referenced in this Bankruptcy Court finding as Civil No. 08-1­2586. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit Court determined that "as to judgment debtors Defendant
 
[Munehiro] and Defendant INOC, the 'transfer' of the tofu making
 machinery was fraudulent pursuant to HRS § 651C-4(a)(1)." 
A creditor who establishes that a transfer was 
fraudulent pursuant to HRS § 651C-4(a)(1) may obtain "[a]voidance of the transfer . . . to the extent necessary to satisfy the creditor's claim[.]" HRS § 651C-7(a)(1). This remedy, however, is subject to a transferee's right to assert a defense to the voiding of the transfer by showing that the transferee took in good faith and for a reasonably equivalent value. HRS § 651C-8, entitled "Defenses, liability, and protection of transferee[,]" provides, in relevant part, that "[a] transfer . . . is not voidable under section 651C-4(a)(1) against a person who took in good faith and for a reasonably equivalent value or against any subsequent transferee . . . ." HRS § 651C-8(a). The transferee asserting this defense has the burden of proving that he or she took in good faith and for a reasonably equivalent value. See 
Schmidt v. HSC, Inc., 136 Hawai
'i 158, 167, 358 P.3d 727, 736 
(App. 2015) ("[A] transferee's 'good faith' may, when combined with 'reasonably equivalent value,' provide a defense and protection of the transferee from the voiding of a transfer otherwise proven to be fraudulent pursuant to HRS § 651C-4(a)(1) [.]"); In re Agricultural Research and Technology Group, Inc., 916 F.2d 528, 535-36, 539 (9th Cir. 1990) (construing HRS § 651C-8 as imposing the burden of proof on the transferee of showing good faith); Uniform Fraudulent Transfer Act of 1984 § 8 cmt. (1) ("The person who invokes this defense [in subsection (a)] carries the burden of establishing good faith and the reasonable equivalence of the consideration exchanged.").
8 
8
Hawai'i's HRS Chapter 651C was modeled after the Uniform Fraudulent
Transfer Act of 1984, see S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 372 in 1985 Senate Journal,
at 1051, and the language of HRS § 651C-8(a) is virtually identical to thelanguage of the corresponding Section 8(a) of the Uniform Fraudulent TransferAct of 1984. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Here, although the Circuit Court determined that
 
Munehiro and INOC's transfer of the tofu making machinery was
 
fraudulent pursuant to HRS § 651C-4(a)(1), the Circuit Court
 further ruled that the transfer was not voidable. The Circuit
 Court concluded: "[Shigezo] failed to submit sufficient, credible
 evidence that this transfer was NOT for a 'reasonably equivalent
 value' and was done in bad faith. Therefore, the transfer is not
 voidable for purposes of [Shigezo's HUFTA] claims." In reaching
 this conclusion, the Circuit Court clearly failed to place the
 burden on Iwata, the transferee of the tofu making machinery, to
 prove that he had taken the transferred property in good faith
 and for a reasonably equivalent value, and instead placed the
 burden on Shigezo to disprove the elements of the transferee's
 defense under HRS § 651C-8(a). In doing so, the Circuit Court
 erred.
 
The Circuit Court's error was integral to its ruling
 
that the transfer of the tofu making machinery was not voidable
 for purposes of Shigezo's HUFTA claims. It may also have
 affected the Circuit Court's decision to only award nominal
 damages to Shigezo on its HUFTA claims. Accordingly, we vacate
 the Circuit Court's Judgment with respect to Count I through IV
 to the extent that it entered judgment and awarded nominal
 damages on Shigezo's HUFTA claims and remand the case for further
 proceedings.
 
B.
 
Shigezo contends that the Circuit Court erred in
 
entering findings of fact and conclusions of law that were
 inconsistent with the Bankruptcy Court's findings and
 conclusions. While Shigezo's argument is confusing, it appears
 that Shigezo is questioning the Circuit Court's ruling that the
 transfer of the tofu making machinery was not voidable and its
 award of nominal damages despite its conclusion that Munehiro and
 INOC's transfer of the machinery was fraudulent pursuant to HRS 
§ 651C-4(a)(1). Since we are vacating the Circuit Court's
 Judgment as to the HUFTA claims and remanding for further
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
proceedings, we need not resolve Shigezo's contentions on this
 
point of error.
 
C.
 
Shigezo argues that the Circuit Court erred in stating 
that there was no evidence of the value of the property conveyed. Shigezo further argues that it submitted Maruko's declaration and testimony as evidence of the value of the tofu making machinery and that the Circuit Court was required to accept Maruko's valuation. We reject Shigezo's contention that the Circuit Court was required to accept Maruko's valuation of the machinery. As the trier of fact, the Circuit Court was entitled to reject Maruko's valuation based on its assessment of the credibility and weight of the evidence. State v. Kam, 134 Hawai
'i 280, 287, 339 
P.3d 1081, 1088 (App. 2014) ("Matters of credibility and the weight of the evidence and the inferences to be drawn are for the fact finder. Appellate courts will give due deference to the right of the trier of fact to determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw reasonable inferences from the evidence adduced." (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets omitted)); Porter v. Hu, 116 Hawai
'i 42, 59-60, 169 P.3d 994, 
1011-12 (App. 2007). ("It is for the trial judge as fact-finder to assess the credibility of witnesses and to resolve all questions of fact; the judge may accept or reject any witness's testimony in whole or in part." (citation and block quote formatting omitted)). 
The Circuit Court adopted the Bankruptcy Court's
 
finding that "there was no evidence of the current value of the
 machine" in support of its ruling that the transfer was not
 voidable because Shigezo had failed to disprove the elements of
 the transferee's HRS § 651C-8(a) defense. The Circuit Court's
 adoption of the Bankruptcy Court's finding that there was "no
 evidence" of the current value of the tofu making machine (at the
 time of transfer) appears somewhat inconsistent with the Circuit
 Court's additional adoption of Iwata's testimony that he accepted
 the tofu making machinery as collateral for loaning or advancing
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
$40,000.00 to Munehiro/INOC and that he and Watanabe asserted co-
ownership of this machinery when Munehiro/INOC was unable to
 repay the $40,000.00. However, since we are remanding the case
 due to the Circuit Court's misapplication of the burden of proof
 on the transferee's HRS § 651C-8(a) defense, we need not resolve
 Shigezo's claim that the Circuit Court erred in stating that
 there was no evidence of the value of the property conveyed. On
 remand, the Circuit Court can clarify or modify its "no evidence"
 finding.
 
D.

 
Shigezo argues that the Circuit Court erred in 
dismissing Shigezo's claims of civil conspiracy and interference with judicial process. We disagree. Shigezo had the burden of proving these claims, and it was the Circuit Court's province, as the trier of fact, to evaluate the credibility and weight of the evidence. Kam, 134 Hawai
'i at 287, 339 P.3d at 1088; Porter, 116 
Hawai'i at 59-60, 169 P.3d at 1011-12. The Circuit Court 
concluded that Shigezo failed to present sufficient evidence to prove its conspiracy claim and failed to plead facts sufficient to support a claim of interference with judicial process.
9 Based 
on our review of the record, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in dismissing these claims. 
E.
 
The Circuit Court did not rely on collateral estoppel
 
or res judicata in rendering its decision. Accordingly, we need
 not decide Shigezo's claim that the Circuit Court erred in
 allowing the defendants to raise collateral estoppel and res
 judicata defenses.
 
9In support of its claim of interference with judicial process, Shigezo
cites 18 U.S.C. § 1501, a federal criminal statute which makes it a crime to
assault or willfully obstruct someone serving process of any court or
magistrate judge of the United States. This statute does not provide
supporting authority for Shigezo's claim of interference with judicial
process.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV.
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the Circuit Court's
 
June 3, 2014, Judgment with respect to Counts I through IV of
 
Shigezo's complaint to the extent that it entered judgment and
 awarded nominal damages on Shigezo's HUFTA claims. We affirm the
 Judgment in all other respects. We remand the case for further
 proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 31, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Junsuke Otsuka

 
Otsuka & Associates, LLLC
for Plaintiff-Appellant
 
Grant K. Kidani

 
for Defendants-Appellees
Soy to the World, Inc.,
Emi Yamada, Yuji Iwata & Fujiya Honpo, Inc.
 
Craig K. Furusho
for Defendant-Appellee
INOC Corp.
 
11
 