NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000451
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JORETHA M. WILLIAMS, also known as JORETHA MARIE WILLIAMS,
Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 15-1-1143)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Joretha M. Williams, also known as 
Joretha Marie Williams (Williams) appeals from the May 13, 2015, 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered by the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).
1 Williams was convicted of 
Violation of a Temporary Restraining Order (TRO), in violation of Hawai
'i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 586-4 (Supp. 2016). 
Williams appeals her conviction for lack of sufficient
 
2
 evidence, based on her argument that the prosecution failed to 
present sufficient evidence that (1) she "contacted" the
 complaining witness (Complainant) or (2) she intentionally or
 knowingly approached within 100 feet of Complainant or 100 yards
 from his workplace because there was no evidence that she knew
 Complainant was working for the "Star Beachboys" business.
 
1
 The Honorable Jeffrey P. Crabtree presided over the consolidated
trials in FC-CR No. 15-1-1143--the instant case--and FC-CR No.15-1-1361, also
involving Williams, but in which she was acquitted.
 
2
 Williams also argues that the evidence was insufficient that she
violated the part of the TRO requiring her to appear for a hearing on
February 20, 2015. However because the prosecution did not rely on this basis
at trial, we decline to address it as unnecessary to our decision.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After a careful review of the point on appeal, the
 
arguments made by the parties, the record, and the applicable
 
authority, we resolve Williams's appeal as follows and affirm.
 
1. In State v. Batson:
 
'[s]ubstantial evidence' as to every material element of the
offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient
quality and probative value to enable a [person] of
reasonable caution to support a conclusion. And as trier of
 fact, the trial judge is free to make all reasonable and
rational inferences under the facts in evidence, including
circumstantial evidence.
 
73 Haw. 236, 248-49, 831 P.2d 924, 931 (1992) (citations
 
omitted).
 Complainant obtained a TRO against Williams that,
 
among other things, provided that she (1) not contact the
 Complainant, (2) not approach or come within 100 feet of the
 Complainant, and (3) not visit or approach within 100 yards of
 any place where the Complainant works. Substantial evidence that
 Williams intentionally or knowingly violated any one of the these
 provisions of the TRO would provide sufficient evidence to
 support her conviction. Complainant testified that Williams got
 about a foot away from his face, and was being very loud and
 saying obscenities which lasted for ten or fifteen seconds. 
Complainant also testified that "she, you know, was hindering my,
 you know, my going about towards the other stand and started
 yelling at me, and I tried to go around her and she just would -­you know, she'd move whichever direction I'd move and continued
 to yell at me." That Complainant did not testify to the specific
 words used by Williams does not negate the fair implication from
 his testimony that, at a minimum, he heard words he could
 identify as obscenities.
 
When viewed in the light most favorable to the
 
prosecution, there was sufficient evidence to prove that Williams
 intentionally or knowingly violated the TRO by approaching or
 coming within 100 feet of the Complainant. The prosecution
 introduced evidence that Williams was served with the TRO, that
 the TRO was read verbatim to her, and that she signed the TRO. 
The prosecution also introduced evidence that Williams approached
 the Complainant and yelled obscenities at him from about a foot
 away from his face.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Assuming, arguendo that Williams is correct that some 
kind of communication was necessary to violate the "no contact" 
prohibition of the TRO, the Family Court was free to accept Complainant's testimony, and the fair inferences therefrom as credible and as showing that Williams contacted the Complainant. State v. Mattiello, 90 Hawai
'i 255, 259, 978 P.2d 693, 697 (1999) 
("It is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact.") (citations and brackets omitted). There was substantial evidence that Williams "contacted" Complainant. 
2. Although Williams concedes that the evidence
 
established she was "in the vicinity" of both Complainant and the
 Star Beachboys' concession stands, she argues that there was
 insufficient evidence to support her conviction because the
 evidence was insufficient to establish that she intentionally or
 knowingly approached within 100 yards of Complainant's place of
 work.
 
As to Complainant's place of work, in addition to
 
Complainant's testimony that Williams approached him while he was
 working at the Star Beachboys' concessions, Williams also
 testified that she "walked down to where he would be working," on
 February 19, 2015. Thus, there was substantial evidence that
 Williams knew where Complainant's place of work was.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the May 13, 2015,
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered by the Family Court
 of the First Circuit.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 22, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
James M. Yuda,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Brandon H. Ito,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
3

 