NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000199
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
In the Interest of K Children
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 13-00072)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
The Department of Human Services (DHS) filed a "Motion
 
to Establish a Permanent Plan" (Permanent Plan Motion) with
 
respect to five children of Mother-Appellant (Mother) and Father­Cross-Appellant (Father). The goal of the proposed permanent
 plan was to establish a legal guardianship of the five children
 without termination of parental rights, with the anticipated
 legal guardians being the children's maternal grandparents. When
 trial on DHS's Permanent Plan Motion began in January 2016 before
 
the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court),1
 the five
children ranged in age from seventeen to ten. During the trial,
 DHS requested that the Permanent Plan Motion be continued as to
 the oldest child (Oldest Child) and proceed as to the other four
 children (Four Younger Children).
 
After three days of trial, the Family Court, on March
 
8, 2016, issued its "Orders Concerning Child Protective Act"
 
1The Honorable Steven M. Nakashima presided.
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Permanent Plan Order). The Permanent Plan Order granted DHS's
 
Permanent Plan Motion as to the Four Younger Children, continued
 foster custody for the Four Younger Children, and set the matter
 for a contested guardianship hearing regarding the Four Younger
 Children. The Family Court continued the Permanent Plan Motion
 as to Oldest Child. Mother appeals and Father cross-appeals from
 the Permanent Plan Order. We affirm.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
The three oldest children were placed with their
 
maternal grandparents by Mother and Father in about 2004 and
 lived with maternal grandparents since that time. When DHS's
 
involvement in this case began in early 2013, the two youngest
 
children were living with Mother and Father, who were homeless. 
On March 29, 2013, DHS received a report of threat and abuse and
 threat of neglect to the two youngest children by Father. The
 complainant provided information that on March 28, 2013, a child
 reported that Mother ran away from Father because he had beaten
 and raped her and that "beating and raping are ongoing toward
 [M]other." The child further reported that Father is a chronic
 drug user; that Father does not feed them but takes them to other
 people's homes so they can be fed; that Father has threatened to
 hit them; and that Father screams in their ears that they are
 liars. DHS received information that Father had attempted to
 withdraw the two youngest children from school and that the two
 youngest children had attempted to run away from Father but were
 unsuccessful. 
DHS interviewed Mother who reported that Father is
 
using drugs and they have a history of domestic violence with
 each other. The two youngest children reported a fear towards
 Father due to the history of domestic violence between their
 parents. Mother told DHS that she filed a temporary restraining
 order (TRO) against Father and would be protective of her
 children. However, a short time later, DHS learned that Mother
 
had dissolved the TRO against Father. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On April 24, 2013, DHS filed a petition for temporary
 
foster custody of all five children. Mother and Father
 
stipulated to foster custody. The two youngest children were
 placed in the foster custody of their maternal grandparents along
 with the three oldest children, who were already living with
 maternal grandparents. On January 20, 2015, DHS filed its
 Permanent Plan Motion, which sought legal guardianship for all
 five children until they became adults, with no request for
 termination of parental rights. DHS apparently also later filed
 a petition for appointment of maternal grandparents as co-
guardians of all five children. The hearing on the Permanent
 Plan Motion was continued several times, including continuances
 granted at the request of Mother and Father. In September 2015,
 Oldest Child apparently attempted to commit suicide by hanging
 herself while residing with maternal grandparents. On October
 22, 2015, Father filed a motion for an immediate review hearing
 to review the appropriateness of the children's placement with
 maternal grandparents. At a hearing on the motion held on
 December 3, 2015, DHS offered to attempt to place Oldest Child
 with Father, which Oldest Child had requested, and Father
 withdrew his motion for an immediate review hearing as to the
 Four Younger Children. The Family Court denied the request for
 reunification of Father with Oldest Child because Father's recent
 drug tests were positive for cannabis use, and the Family Court
 wanted evidence that Father could remain drug free. 
II. 
On January 13, and 14, 2016, and February 11, 2016, the
 
Family Court held a trial on DHS's Permanent Plan Motion. At the
 beginning of the trial, DHS moved to continue the Permanent Plan
 Motion as to Oldest Child, which the Family Court subsequently
 granted. The trial proceeded on the Permanent Plan Motion as to
 the Four Younger Children. On March 7, 2016, after the
 conclusion of trial, the Family Court orally granted DHS's
 Permanent Plan Motion as to the Four Younger Children. It 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appears that maternal grandfather passed away shortly after the
 
Family Court's oral ruling.
 
On March 8, 2016, the Family Court issued its Permanent
 
Plan Order, which granted DHS's Permanent Plan Motion as to the
 Four Younger Children, ordered that the foster custody of the
 Four Younger Children be continued, and scheduled a contested
 hearing on the petition for guardianship with respect to the Four
 Younger Children.
 
III.
 
On June 28, 2016, the Family Court issued "Findings of
 
Fact and Conclusions of Law" in support of its Permanent Plan
 Order.
 
A.
 
The Family Court made the following factual findings
 
based on the evidence presented at trial.
 
1.
 
Mother and Father have a long history of domestic
 
violence and a dysfunctional relationship that negatively
 affected their ability to provide a safe family home for their
 children. In April 2013, the Family Court placed the children in
 foster custody after DHS received information that in March 2013,
 Father was beating and raping Mother. In September 2013, Father
 was arrested for allegedly barricading Mother inside his room at
 a clean and sober house, and he spent four nights in jail. In
 October 2013, Mother filed a TRO petition against Father,
 alleging that Father choked Mother until she almost blacked out. 
Later in October 2013, Father and Mother were involved in a
 domestic violence altercation which resulted in Father going to
 jail for five days. In September 2015, while Mother and Father
 
were homeless and living in a car, "Father threatened to bury
 
Mother in the ground so that no one would find her, fastened her
 seatbelt, and entwined his legs with hers so she could not
 leave." Mother and Father have a pattern of filing TROs against
 each other, then dissolving or refusing to enforce the TROs and
 voluntarily having contact with each other.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Despite drug treatment, Father has not been able to
 
maintain a clean and sober lifestyle. He has repeatedly tested
 
positive for marijuana use, and he was unable to avoid such use
 even when Father was aware that DHS was considering the
 possibility of allowing placement of Oldest Child with him. In
 addition to incidents of domestic violence, Father made
 threatening statements to a DHS case manager, stating that what
 she was saying to Father was going to make him have to shoot all
 the social workers. Father also often declined offered visits
 with the children because he was not willing to go where his
 children were to accommodate their schedules.
 
Mother has failed to demonstrate that she can be
 
protective of the children. Despite the ongoing domestic
 violence and safety issues presented by her relationship with
 Father, Mother has not been able to stay apart from Father and
 has continued to remain in contact with Father and at times has
 resided with him. Mother has not been consistent with her visits
 with the children, and she does not appear to want to be a parent
 on a full-time basis.
 
2. 
Mother and Father have allowed the three oldest
 
children to live with maternal grandparents for ten years. 
Mother and Father were homeless when the two youngest children 
were living with them, prior to the Family Court awarding DHS
 foster custody over all five children in April 2013 and DHS
 placing the children with their maternal grandparents. At the
 start of trial, the children had been in foster care for two
 years and nine months. The Four Younger Children have told the
 Family Court that while they love their parents and want to
 maintain contact with their parents, they do not feel safe living
 with either or both parents, and they want to remain with their
 maternal grandparents. 
The Family Court found that Father and Mother have had
 
more than enough time to show that they are able to provide a
 safe family home for their children, but have failed to make this
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
showing and have also failed to show that they would be able to
 
provide a safe family home within a reasonable period of time. 
The Family Court also found that the children have waited long
 enough and need to know they have a long-term home where they can
 be safe and have a stable home. The Family Court noted that the
 goal of the proposed permanent plan was co-guardianship of the
 Four Younger Children with the maternal grandparents. The Family
 Court further found that although maternal grandfather
 (Grandfather) had recently passed away several weeks after its
 oral granting of the Permanent Plan Motion, a guardianship with
 maternal grandmother (Grandmother) alone would still be
 appropriate.
 
The Family Court found that adoption of the Four
 
Younger Children was not in their best interest because, among
 other things, they clearly know who their parents are and want to
 have contact with their parents, even though they do not want to
 live with their parents and feel safe and secure in the home of
 Grandmother. The Four Younger Children's Guardian Ad Litem
 agreed that the proposed permanent plan with the ultimate goal of
 guardianship was in the best interest of the Four Younger
 Children.
 
B.
 
The Family Court concluded that Father and Mother are
 
not presently willing and able, and it is not reasonably
 foreseeable that within a reasonable period of time Father and
 Mother will become willing and able, to provide the Four Younger
 Children with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a
 service plan. The Family Court further concluded that the
 proposed permanent plan with the ultimate goal of guardianship is
 in the best interest of the Four Younger Children.
 
STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
We apply the following standards in reviewing decisions
 
of the family court: 
Generally, the "family court possesses wide discretion
in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion." 
. . . .
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The family court's [findings of fact] are reviewed on
appeal under the "clearly erroneous" standard. A [finding
of fact] "is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks
substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) despite
substantial evidence in support of the finding, the
appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm
conviction that a mistake has been made." "'Substantial
 evidence' is credible evidence which is of sufficient
 quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable
caution to support a conclusion." 
On the other hand, the family court's [conclusions of
law] are reviewed on appeal de novo, under the right/wrong
standard. . . . 
However, the family court's determinations . . . with
respect to (1) whether a child's parent is willing and able
to provide a safe family home for the child and (2) whether
it is reasonably foreseeable that a child's parent will
become willing and able to provide a safe family home within
a reasonable period of time present mixed questions of law
and fact; thus, inasmuch as the family court's
determinations in this regard are dependant upon the facts
and circumstances of each case, they are reviewed on appeal
under the "clearly erroneous" standard. Likewise, the
family court's determination of what is or is not in a
child's best interests is reviewed on appeal for clear
error. 
Moreover, the family court "is given much leeway in
its examination of the reports concerning a child's care,
custody, and welfare, and its conclusions in this regard, if
supported by the record and not clearly erroneous, must
stand on appeal."
 
In re Jane Doe, 95 Hawai 'i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001) 
(citations, brackets, and ellipsis points omitted).
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
On appeal, Father challenges the Family Court's
 
determinations that: (1) he is not presently willing and able to
 
provide the Four Younger Children with a safe family home, even
 with the assistance of a service plan; (2) it is not reasonably
 foreseeable that he will become willing and able to provide the
 Four Younger Children with a safe family home, even with the
 assistance of a service plan, within a reasonable period of time;
 and (3) the permanent plan is in the best interest of the Four
 Younger Children. We conclude that there was substantial 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
evidence to support the Family Court's challenged determinations,
 
which were not clearly erroneous, and that the Family Court did
 not err in entering its Permanent Plan Order.
 
There was substantial evidence to support the Family
 
Court's determinations that Father was not presently able to
 provide, and would not within a reasonable period of time become
 able to provide, the Four Younger Children with a safe family
 home. While Father questions Grandmother's ability to care for
 the Four Younger Children in light of Grandfather's death, the
 Family Court specifically acknowledged Grandfather's death and
 found that guardianship would be appropriate with Grandmother
 alone. Although Father presented some contrary evidence, there
 was substantial evidence to support the Family Court's
 determination that the permanent plan was in the best interests
 of the Four Younger Children, and this determination was not
 clearly erroneous. Father has not shown that the Family Court
 erred in entering the Permanent Plan Order.
 
II.
 
On appeal, Mother contends: (1) there was insufficient
 
evidence to support the Family Court's determination that the
 permanent plan with the goal of legal guardianship was in the
 best interest of the Four Younger Children; (2) the permanent
 plan did not comply with the requirements of Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) § 587A-32(b)(2) (Supp. 2015) that a permanent plan
 be updated to describe proposed revisions and reasons for the
 revisions; and (3) the Family Court erred in qualifying case
 manager Kelly Hemphill (Hemphill) as an expert in the field of
 child protective and child welfare services. We disagree.
 
A.
 
Mother contends that the Family Court erred in making
 
determinations regarding parental fitness because the Permanent
 Plan Motion did not seek termination of parental rights. 
However, whether Mother was a fit parent was relevant to whether
 the permanent plan with a goal of legal guardianship was in the 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
best interest of the Four Younger Children. We therefore
 
conclude that the Family Court did not err in making
 determinations regarding Mother's parental fitness in deciding
 the Permanent Plan Motion. 
Mother also argues that Oldest Child's attempted
 
suicide raised questions about whether the permanent plan and the
 current placement of the Four Younger Children with Grandmother
 was in the Four Younger Children's best interest. The Family
 Court heard evidence about Oldest Child's situation, including
 evidence about her attempted suicide, in considering the
 Permanent Plan Motion. Based on the evidence presented, we
 cannot say that the Family Court clearly erred in determining
 that the permanent plan was in the best interest of the Four
 Younger Children.
 
B.
 
Mother contends that DHS violated HRS § 587A-32(b)(2)
 
by not updating the permanent plan, which was prepared in
 December 2014, for each periodic review or permanency hearing to
 describe proposed revisions to the goal of the plan and reasons
 for the revisions. Hemphill acknowledged that the permanent plan
 was not updated as it should have been, but testified that the
 goal of the permanent plan for the Four Younger Children had not
 changed since it was drafted. After considering things that
 occurred after the permanent plan was filed, Hemphill testified
 that she recommended that the Family Court proceed with the
 permanent plan as to the Four Younger Children. The Family Court
 considered the validity of the permanent plan in light of events
 that had occurred after the plan was filed and concluded that the
 permanent plan was in the best interest of the Four Younger
 Children. We conclude that the failure of DHS to update the
 permanent plan with revisions does not provide a basis to
 overturn the Family Court's decision.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C.
 
Mother argues that the Family Court erred in qualifying
 
Hemphill, the permanency case manager in this case, as an expert
 
in the field of child protective and child welfare services. We
 disagree.
 
Hemphill was hired by DHS in July 2014, and the instant
 
case was the first case for DHS that she worked on as a
 permanency case manager. However, Hemphill earned an
 undergraduate degree in Psychology in 2004 and an associate's
 degree in Human Services. Before being hired by DHS, Hemphill
 worked as an investigator with Child Welfare Services in Texas
 and also was a family strengthening services worker, which
 involved case management for families involved with Child
 Protective Services. She was hired by DHS as a Human Services
 Professional III and works as a permanency case manager, doing
 the same work as persons hired by DHS with a degree in Social
 Work. As a permanency case manager with DHS, she provides case
 management to families with children in foster care, including
 referrals for needed services, assessments for continuing safety
 concerns, monthly visits to the parents and children in her
 cases, and reports to the court. 
We conclude that Hemphill had sufficient education and 
experience to qualify as an expert and to provide expert testimony on the matters about which she was questioned. We therefore conclude that the Family Court did not abuse its discretion in qualifying Hemphill as an expert. See Barbee v. 
Queen's Medical Center, 119 Hawai
'i 136, 152, 194 P.3d 1098, 1114 
(App. 2008) ("Whether a witness qualifies as an expert is a matter addressed to the sound discretion of the trial court, and such determination will not be overturned unless there is a clear abuse of discretion." (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted)). 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Family Court's
 
Permanent Plan Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, December 23, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Thomas A. K. Haia
 
for Father-Appellee/
Cross-Appellant Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Tae Chin Kim
 
for Appellant-Mother
 
Gay M. Tanaka
Julio Herrera
 Deputy Attorneys General
Department of the Attorney General for Appellee DHS
 
11
 