Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-17-0000079 31-JAN-2024 07:51 AM Dkt. 73 SO 
NO. CAAP-17-0000079 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
O
F THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
BOB McDERMOTT and UTUFAASILI McDERMOTT, parents of
S. and B., minor children, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v. 
WARREN HARUKI, in his capacity as CHAIRMAN OF THE
BOARD OF EDUCATION, STATE OF HAWAI# I; KEITH HAYASHI,
in his capacity as the SUPERINTENDENT OF THE DEPARTMENT
OF EDUCATION, STATE OF 
HAWAI#I; GOVERNOR JOSH GREEN, M.D.,
Defendants-Appellees,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE GOVERNMENTAL
ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 16-1-1908-10 (ECN)) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.) 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Bob McDermott and Utufaasili 
McDermott (the  McDermotts) appeal from the Final Judgment Re: 
Order Granting Defendants' Motion to Dismiss Complaint 
(Judgment), entered pursuant to the Order Granting Defendants' 
Motion to Dismiss Complaint (Order of Dismissal), both entered on January 18, 2017, in favor of Defendants-Appellees Warren Haruki, 
in his capacity as Chairperson of the Board of Education, State of 
Hawai#i (BOE), Keith Hayashi, in his capacity as 
Superintendent of the Department of Education, State of Hawai# i   
 (DOE), and Governor Josh Green, M.D. (Governor Green) 
(collectively the State),1 in the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit (Circuit Court).2 
The McDermotts raise six points of error on appeal, 
contending that the Circuit Court erred in dismissing their 
Complaint because the court: (1) erred in concluding that the complaint failed to allege a violation of a constitutionally protected rights; (2) erred in concluding that the Complaint sought remedies that violate the separation of powers doctrine; (3) erred in applying the "rational basis" test, rather than the "heightened judicial scrutiny" test; (4) erred when it did not allow the McDermotts to proceed with their claims against the State for alleged violations of state health laws and regulations, DOE requirements for school construction costs under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 302A-1607(a) (1) (Supp. 2016), 
equitable expenditures, etc.; (5) erred when it did not allow the 
McDermotts to proceed with their claims against the State for failure to address the inadequate facilities at Campbell High School, in violation of HRS § 302A-1312 (Supp. 2016); and (6) erred when it did not allow the McDermotts to proceed with their claim against the State for violating its responsibility to provide school lunches under HRS § 302A-404 (2007). 
1  The Complaint filed on October 12, 2016, originally named Lance
Mizumoto in his capacity as the Chairman of the BOE, State of Hawai #i, Kathryn
S. Matayoshi, in her capacity as the Superintendent of the DOE, State of
Hawai #i, and Governor David Y. Ige as parties to the instant case. As 
Mizumoto, Matayoshi, and Ige no longer hold their respective public offices,their successors, Warren Haruki, Keith Hayashi, and Governor Green, areautomatically substituted as parties in the instant appeal pursuant to Hawai #i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP) Rule 43(c)(1). 
2 The Honorable Edwin C. Nacino presided. 
2  
 Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve the McDermotts' points of error as follows:
 3
(1 & 3) The McDermotts argue, inter alia, that the 
Hawai#i State Constitution guarantees a fundamental right to 
education, and thus any action by the State that infringes upon such right requires strict scrutiny by a reviewing court.   The 
McDermotts rely on article X, sections 14
 and 3 of the Hawai# i 6 5
3 It appears that the McDermotts no longer have children attending
Campbell High School. However, upon review, it further appears that even if
the case were moot as to the McDermotts, one or more exceptions to the
mootness doctrine would apply here. See generally Hamilton ex rel. Lethem v. 
Lethem
, 119 Hawai #i 1, 193 P.3d 839 (2008). 
4 As conceded by the McDermotts in their opening brief, the right to
an education is not protected by the United States Constitution. See San 
Antonio Indep. Sch. Dist. v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1, 35 (1973). 
5 Article X, § 1 of the Hawai #i Constitution provides: 
Section 1.  The State shall provide for the establishment,
support and control of a statewide system of public schools free
from sectarian control, a state university, public libraries andsuch other educational institutions as may be deemed desirable,including physical facilities therefor. There shall be nodiscrimination in public educational institutions because of race,religion, sex or ancestry; nor shall public funds be appropriatedfor the support or benefit of any sectarian or nonsectarianprivate educational institution, except that proceeds of specialpurpose revenue bonds authorized or issued under section 12 ofArticle VII may be appropriated to finance or assist: 
1. Not-for-profit corporations that provide early
childhood education and care facilities serving the generalpublic; and 
2. Not-for-profit private nonsectarian and sectarian
elementary schools, secondary schools, colleges anduniversities. 
6 Article X, § 3 of the Hawai #i Constitution provides: 
Section 3.  The board of education shall have the 
power, as provided by law, to formulate statewideeducational policy and appoint the superintendent ofeducation as the chief executive officer of the publicschool system. 
3 Constitution. It is clear that article X, sections 1 and 3 of 
our state constitution requires the State to provide for a statewide public school system, including physical facilities therefor, and establishes a state Board of Education with the power to formulate statewide educational policy and to appoint a superintendent to administer the Hawai# i public school system. 
Haw. Const. art. X, §§ 1, 3. 
In this appeal challenging the Order of Dismissal, we 
view the allegations of the Complaint to be true. See Kealoha v. 
Machado, 131 Hawai# i 62, 74, 315 P.3d 213, 225 (2013). 
Upon review, we conclude that the McDermotts allege no 
facts that would support a finding that the State has failed to satisfy the requirements set forth in article X, sections 1 and 3 of the 
Hawai#i Constitution. 
There are no constitutionally protected fundamental 
rights implicated in the instant case, and the McDermotts do not allege that they are members of a suspect class. 
Therefore, we 
further conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in dismissing the case based on a failure to allege a violation of any constitutionally protected rights or for applying "rational review" in its Order of Dismissal. See Nagle v. Bd. of Educ., 63 
Haw. 389, 393, 629 P.2d 109, 112, (1981) ("Where 'suspect' classifications or fundamental rights are not at issue, this court has traditionally employed the rational basis test." (citation omitted)). 
(2) The McDermotts argue that the Circuit Court erred 
in determining that the political question doctrine bars the 
4 McDermotts from challenging the State's budgetary and funding 
decisions and the Legislature's determination of funds appropriated for renovations to Campbell High School. 
The McDermotts' Complaint is largely based on their 
allegation that Campbell High School's facilities and extracurricular programs are inadequate to accommodate the overcrowded student population such that it violates their children's constitutional rights. Central to their Complaint, however, is the McDermotts' discontent with the Legislature's decision not to immediately appropriate $35 million to Campbell High School that they assert the (former) Governor had proposed would be used to fund the construction of a new building to alleviate the school's overcrowded conditions. The McDermotts further allege that the DOE, BOE, and Governor had breached their respective duties in failing "to establish the priorities for the construction of a new high school versus the need to rehabilitate and add buildings to existing overcrowded high schools." 
"[T]he nonjusticiability of a political question is 
primarily a function of the separation of powers." Bd. of Educ. 
of Haw. v. Waihee, 70 Haw. 253, 262, 768 P.2d 1279, 1285 (1989) (quoting Baker v. Carr
, 369 U.S. 186, 210 (1962)). In 
determining whether the political question doctrine should apply, the 
Hawai#i Supreme Court has adopted the six-part test set forth 
by the United States Supreme Court in 
Baker. Nelson v. Hawaiian 
Homes Com'n.
, 127 Hawai#i 185, 194, 277 P.3d 279, 288 (2012). 
The test states: 
Prominent on the surface of any case held to involve a
political question is found: (1) a textually demonstrable 
5 constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate 
political department; or (2) a lack of judiciallydiscoverable and manageable standards for resolving it; or(3) the impossibility of deciding without an initial policydetermination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial discretion;or (4) the impossibility of a court's undertakingindependent resolution without expressing lack of respectdue coordinate branches of government; or (5) an unusual
need for unquestioning adherence to a political decision
already made; or (6) the potentiality of embarrassment frommultifarious pronouncements by various departments on onequestion. 
Id. (quoting Trs. of Off. of Hawaiian Affs. v. Yamasaki, 69 Haw. 
154, 170, 737 P.2d 446, 455 (1987)). 
Upon careful consideration of, inter alia, the Baker 
test and the McDermotts' arguments concerning justiciability, we conclude that the McDermotts' allegations pertaining to the State's budgetary and funding decisions to administer our public school system, and the Legislature's appropriation of funds to carry out such decisions, have clearly been committed to those respective branches of government, and cannot be considered judicial fare. See Yamasaki, 69 Haw. at 173-75, 737 P.2d at 457-
58 (dismissing consolidated lawsuits as nonjusticiable under the political question doctrine as any decision by the court would intrude in an area committed to the legislature). Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in dismissing the instant case based on the separation of powers doctrine and issues of nonjusticiable political questions. 
(4-6) The McDermotts argue that they are entitled to 
relief based on various alternative theories, contending that the Complaint raises factual allegations that implicate violations of various state statutes and the Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR), 
which they contend would cure any purported constitutional and/or 
justiciability defects in the Complaint. 
6 The McDermotts argue that the State violated HAR § 11-
11-9 (repealed 2018), which set forth the minimum number of 
sanitary facilities that shall be provided in schools. We conclude that the Circuit Court's dismissal of such claims was correct under the doctrine of exhaustion of administrative remedies, as the Department of Health's rules expressly provided an administrative process for resolving such claims, and nothing on the record indicates that the McDermotts have pursued such procedures. See Kellberg v. Yuen, 131 Hawai# i 513, 527, 319 P.3d 
432, 446 (2014) ("where a claim is cognizable in the first instance by an administrative agency alone, judicial review of agency action will not be available unless the party affected has taken advantage of all the corrective procedures provided for in the administrative process." (citation, internal quotation marks and brackets omitted)). 
The McDermotts argue that the State violated HRS 
§ 302A-404, which provides that "[s]chool meals shall be made available under the school meals program in every school where the students are required to eat meals at school." (Emphasis added). We conclude, inter alia, that the Complaint makes no factual allegations that would implicate a violation of the statute. 
We further conclude that the McDermotts make no factual 
allegations that would implicate a violation of HRS § 302A-1312. HRS § 302A-1312(a) requires the DOE to report its six-year program and financial plan for school repair and maintenance of public school facilities in the State of 
Hawai#i to the 
7 legislature, and provides the criteria for the content of such 
reports. HRS § 302A-1312(b) requires the DOE to develop and maintain a facilities physical analysis report and a facilities financial analysis report for each public school. The McDermotts do not allege that the DOE has failed to produce these reports, or that the content of the reports fail to comply with the statutory criteria required under HRS §§ 302A-1312(a) and (b). Instead, the McDermotts contend that the State's history of inaction to address the inadequate facilities alleged in their Complaint renders such reports "worthless and merely 'band-aid' solutions at best." We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in rejecting the McDermott's claims for relief pursuant to HRS § 302A-1312. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's January 18, 2017 
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i
 , January 31, 2024.  
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Acting Chief Judge
John S. Carroll and Robert K. Matsumoto, /s/ Karen T. Nakasone
for Plaintiffs-Appellants. Associate Judge 
Kaliko#onalani D. Fernandes, /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Deputy Solicitor General, Associate Judge
Department of the Attorney
General,
(Kimberly T. Guidry, former
Deputy Solicitor General on
the answering brief) 
8 